 At the beginning the stadium contained a rural scene including the model of Glastonbury Tor , a model village and a water wheel , replete with live animals ( removed shortly before the ceremony began ) , and actors portraying working villagers , football and cricket players . This represented the ancient and mythical past . Youth choirs began a cappella performances of the informal anthems of the four nations of the UK : " Jerusalem " ( for England , sung by a live choir in the stadium and beginning with a solo from 11 @-@ year @-@ old Humphrey Keeper ) , " Danny Boy " ( from the Giant 's Causeway in Northern Ireland ) , " Flower of Scotland " ( from Edinburgh Castle in Scotland ) , and " Bread of Heaven " ( from <unk> Beach in Wales – sung in English ) . These were inter @-@ cut with footage of notable Rugby Union Home Nations ' tries and England 's winning drop goal from the 2003 Rugby World Cup Final and live shots from the stadium . During the singing the cast mimed various rural activities ; this section of the performance was billed as " a reminder and a promise of a once and future better life " . 
 As the last choir performance concluded , vintage London General Omnibus Company stagecoaches entered , carrying businessmen and early industrialists in Victorian dress and top hats , led by Kenneth Branagh as Brunel . The 50 men stepped down from the carriages and surveyed the land approvingly . After walking onto the Glastonbury Tor , Brunel delivered Caliban 's " Be not afeard " speech , reflecting Boyle 's introduction to the ceremony in the programme and signifying an aspiration of new industry or a new era in Britain . This anticipated the next section of the ceremony . 
 = = = Pandemonium ( 21 : 09 – 21 : 25 ) = = = 
 This section encapsulated British economic and social development from rural economy through Industrial Revolution to the 1960s . 
 Proceedings were suddenly interrupted by a loud shout , recorded by volunteers during the rehearsals , followed by drumming ( the pre @-@ recorded drumming amplified by 965 cast members drumming on inverted household buckets and bins ) and Underworld 's " And I Will Kiss " , led by Evelyn Glennie . The three @-@ tonne oak tree on top of the Glastonbury Tor lifted , and industrial workers emerged from both the Tor 's brightly lit interior and the entrances to the stadium , to swell the cast to a total of 2 @,@ 500 volunteers . So began what Boyle had called the " biggest scene change in theatre history " and something he had been advised against attempting . As the cast rolled away the grass and other rural props , seven smoking chimney stacks with accompanying steeplejacks rose from the ground , along with other industrial machinery : five beam engines , six looms , a crucible and a water wheel ( one of the few items left from the rural scene ) . Boyle said that this section celebrated the " tremendous potential " afforded by the advancements of the Victorian era . It also included a minute 's silence in remembrance of the loss of life of both World Wars , featuring British ' Tommies ' and shots of poppies , during which the names of the Accrington Pals were shown on the stadium screens . <unk> , members of the audience stood in respect during this segment . 
 Volunteers paraded around the stadium representing some of the groups that had changed the face of Britain : the woman 's suffrage movement , the Jarrow Crusade , the first Caribbean immigrants arriving in 1948 on board the Empire Windrush , a 1970s DJ float , the Nostalgia Steel Band , and The Beatles as they appeared on the cover of Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band . Also included were real @-@ life Chelsea Pensioners , the <unk> Colliery Band , and a group of Pearly Kings and Queens . 
 Workers began casting an iron ring . As the noise level and tension built , driven by the relentless rhythm of the music and the drumming , participants mimed repetitive mechanical movements associated with industrial processes such as weaving . Four glowing orange rings gradually began to be carried high above the stadium toward its centre on overhead wires , and then the ring seemingly being cast and forged in the arena began to lift . The five rings converged , still glowing and accompanied by steam and firework effects to give the impression that they were of hot metal . When the five rings formed the Olympic symbol above the stadium , they ignited and rained fire in silver and gold . The image of the Olympic rings in flame became the iconic image of the ceremony , reproduced in newspapers and web stories around the world . 
 = = = Happy and Glorious ( 21 : 25 – 21 : 35 ) = = = 
 A short film directed by Boyle and produced by the BBC , called Happy and Glorious ( after a line in the national anthem ) , featured the character James Bond , played by the current Bond actor Daniel Craig , entering the front gate of Buckingham Palace in a London black cab . His entrance ( accompanied by an arrangement of Handel 's ' The Arrival of the Queen of Sheba ' ) is noticed by Brazilian children ( a nod to Rio de Janeiro , the next summer Games host city ) in the throne room . Bond escorted Queen Elizabeth II ( who played herself , acknowledging Bond with the words , " Good evening , Mr Bond " ) out of the building and into a waiting AgustaWestland <unk> helicopter . The helicopter flew across London , above the cheers of a crowd on The Mall , past Nelson 's Column , doubling back to the Palace of Westminster with an animated Winston Churchill statue in Parliament Square , and then along the Thames past the London Eye , St Paul 's Cathedral , the financial district City of London ( with 30 St Mary Axe in the background ) , and then passed through Tower Bridge , accompanied by the Dambusters March . The film finished with Bond and the Queen apparently jumping from a helicopter live above the stadium accompanied by the James Bond Theme . The Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh , along with Rogge , were then introduced to the audience . The Queen was wearing the same dress as in the film , as if she had just arrived with James Bond . 
 For the scenes with the helicopter , the Queen was doubled by actress Julia McKenzie , and for the parachute jump by BASE jumper and stuntman Gary Connery wearing a dress , hat , jewellery and with a handbag . Bond was played by Mark Sutton . The helicopter had flown to the stadium from Stapleford Aerodrome in Essex , piloted by Marc Wolff . 
 The Union Flag was then raised by members of Her Majesty 's Armed Forces , while the first and third verses of the national anthem were performed a cappella by the Kaos Signing Choir for Deaf and Hearing Children . 
 = = = Second to the right , and straight on till morning ( 21 : 35 – 21 : 47 ) = = = 
 The first part of this sequence celebrated the National Health Service ( " the institution which more than any other unites our nation " , according to the programme ) , which had been founded in the year of the previous London Games in 1948 . Music was by Mike Oldfield . 600 dancers , all of whom were NHS staff , along with 1 @,@ 200 volunteers recruited from British hospitals , entered along with children on 320 hospital beds , some of which functioned as trampolines . They started a short jive routine . Watching from the tor were specially invited hospital staff and nine child patients from Great Ormond Street Hospital . The blankets on the beds illuminated , then the beds were arranged to depict a child 's face with a smile and a tear ( Great Ormond Street Hospital Children 's Charity logo ) and the acronym ' GOSH ' , then changed into the initials ' NHS ' , turning into the shape of a crescent moon as the children were hushed to sleep and read a book by a nurse . 
 The sequence then moved on to celebrate British children 's literature . J. K. Rowling began by reading from J. M. Barrie 's Peter Pan ( whose copyright was given to Great Ormond Street Hospital ) . The Child Catcher appeared amongst the children , followed by large puppet representations of some villains from children 's literature : the Queen of Hearts , Captain Hook , Cruella de Vil and Lord Voldemort . Minutes later , 32 women playing Mary Poppins descended on flying umbrellas , as the villains deflated and the actors resumed dancing . The music for this sequence included partially rearranged sections from Tubular Bells ( with a giant set of tubular bells at the rear of the stage ) , Tubular Bells III and , after the villains had been driven away by the Mary Poppins characters , In <unk> <unk> . During this performance the children in pyjamas jumped up and down on their brightly lit beds , creating a memorable image amid the darkness of the stadium . 
 The sequence concluded with a pale , gigantic baby 's head and a rippling sheet as its body , in the centre of the arena , celebrating the Scottish pioneers of obstetric ultrasound imaging . 
 = = = Interlude ( 21 : 47 – 21 : 52 ) = = = 
 Simon Rattle was then introduced to conduct the London Symphony Orchestra in a performance of Vangelis 's " Chariots of Fire " , as a tribute to the British film industry . Rowan Atkinson appeared , as a Mr. Bean @-@ like character , ( but not actually Bean , according to both Atkinson and Danny Boyle ) comically playing a repeated note on a synthesizer . He then lapsed into a filmed dream sequence in which he joined the runners from the film Chariots of Fire , beating them in their iconic run along West Sands at St Andrews by riding in a car , rejoining the race and tripping the front runner . 
 = = = Frankie and June say ... thanks Tim ( 21 : 52 – 22 : 09 ) = = = 
 This sequence celebrated British popular music and culture , paying homage to each decade since the 1960s . To the accompaniment of the BBC newsreel theme ' Girls in Grey ' and the theme song from The Archers , a young mother and son arrive in a Mini Cooper at a full @-@ size replica of a modern British house . The 1987 " don 't worry about a hurricane " weather forecast by Michael Fish was shown on the big screens as rain suddenly poured on the house , followed by " Push the Button " , by Sugababes . In the centre of the arena the sides of another house , three times larger , were used as screens to show clips from various British TV programmes , music videos and films , including A Matter of Life and Death ( June is named for its protagonist ) , as well as Gregory 's Girl , Kes , The Snowman , The Wicker Man , Four Weddings and a Funeral , Spanish TV show <unk> <unk> <unk> , and Boyle 's own Trainspotting . A large group of dancers , centred around Frankie and June ( 19 @-@ year @-@ old Henrique Costa and 18 @-@ year @-@ old Jasmine <unk> ) on a night out , performed to an assortment of British popular songs arranged broadly chronologically , beginning with " Going Underground " by The Jam , suggesting their ride on the London Underground . During this track images of the Underground were projected onto the house and former London Mayor Ken Livingstone was briefly seen . Throughout the sequence cast members were seen texting each other or placing social networking status updates on the Internet . Frankie and June first notice each other as a snippet from " Wonderful Tonight " by Eric Clapton plays , but when Frankie saw that June had dropped her phone on the Tube , he set off to return it ( communicating using last number redial to her sister 's phone ) . 
 An extended dance sequence followed , with songs including " My Generation " by The Who , " ( I Can 't Get No ) Satisfaction " by the Rolling Stones , " My Boy Lollipop " sung by Millie Small , " All Day and All of the Night " by the Kinks , " She Loves You " by the Beatles ( with footage of the band performing the song ) , " Trampled Under Foot " by Led Zeppelin , " Starman " by David Bowie , " Bohemian Rhapsody " by Queen ( during which the sound of the TARDIS from Doctor Who could be heard ) , " Pretty Vacant " by the Sex Pistols ( during which dancers on power jumpers wearing large heads with Mohawk hairstyles performed a pogo dance , and the lyrics to the song were spelled out in LED lights around the stadium ) , " Blue Monday " by New Order , " Relax " by Frankie Goes to Hollywood ( during which Frankie , asked by June for his name , replied by revealing one of the band 's " Frankie say ... " T @-@ shirts ) , " Back to Life ( However Do You Want Me ) " by Soul II Soul , " Step On " by Happy Mondays , " Sweet Dreams ( Are Made of This ) " by Eurythmics , " Firestarter " by The Prodigy , and " Born Slippy <unk> " by Underworld , ending with the cast singing " I 'm Forever Blowing Bubbles " as Frankie and June walked towards each other . A sequence from the film Four Weddings and a Funeral was projected behind them ; when they kissed , a montage of memorable kisses from film and real life was shown ( including the lesbian kiss from Brookside , which in some countries , including Saudi Arabia , then became the first lesbian kiss ever shown on pre @-@ watershed television ) . , while Song 2 by Blur was played . A live performance of " <unk> " by Dizzee Rascal followed , along with a further sequence in which all the cast ( and Britain 's Got Talent fame dancing duo Signature ) attend a party at June 's house whilst Amy Winehouse 's " Valerie " , Muse 's " Uprising " , and Tinie Tempah 's " Pass Out " played . 
 At the close the larger house was raised to reveal Tim Berners @-@ Lee working at a NeXT Computer , like the one on which he invented the World Wide Web . He tweeted ' This is for everyone ' , instantly spelled out in LED lights around the stadium . The programme explained " Music connects us with each other and with the most important moments in our lives . One of the things that makes those connections possible is the World Wide Web " . Boyle wanted to honour Berners @-@ Lee for making the World Wide Web free and available to everyone ( hence the tweet ) , rather than making a commercial profit from it . 
 = = = Abide with Me ( 22 : 09 – 22 : 20 ) = = = 
 A filmed sequence showed extracts from the torch relay around the UK , to the music " I Heard Wonders " by David Holmes . This then cut live to show David Beckham driving a dramatically illuminated motor boat down the River Thames and under Tower Bridge , to fireworks and the sound of London air raid sirens , while footballer Jade Bailey held on to the torch in the boat . This section had been rehearsed on 24 July 2012 when the close @-@ up shots were pre @-@ recorded , and was directed by Stephen Daldry . 
 There was then a tribute to " .. friends and family of those in the stadium who cannot be here tonight " , including the victims of the ' 7 / 7 ' 2005 London bombings ( on the day after London had been awarded the Games ) . Photos of people who had died were displayed on screens as a memorial , accompanied by an excerpt from Brian Eno 's ambient work " An Ending ( Ascent ) " . 
 The hymn " Abide with Me " was then sung by Emeli Sandé while a group of dancers choreographed by and including Akram Khan performed a contemporary dance on the theme of mortality . 
 = = = Welcome ( 22 : 20 – 00 : 00 ) = = = 
 The Parade of Nations of athletes ( drawn from the 10 @,@ 490 competing ) and officials from 204 nations ( and also the " Independent Olympic Athletes " ) was led , according to custom , by the Greek team , followed by other competing countries in alphabetical order , and finally the host nation Great Britain . Each of the 205 teams entered the stadium led by their flagbearer , accompanied by a child volunteer carrying a copper petal ( later revealed to be part of the cauldron ) and a young woman carrying a sign with the country 's name in English ( and wearing a dress made from fabric printed with photos of people who had applied to be Olympic volunteers ) . 
 The parade was accompanied by mainly British popular songs , including " <unk> " by Chemical Brothers , " West End Girls " by Pet Shop Boys , " The Hindu Times " by Oasis , " Rolling in the Deep " by Adele , " Stayin ' Alive " by the Bee Gees and both " Where the Streets Have No Name " and " Beautiful Day " by Irish band U2 , with Great Britain entering to David Bowie 's song " " Heroes " " . This soundtrack was assembled by DJ and producer High Contrast . 
 Music with a fast rhythm of 120 bpm was used in an attempt to keep the teams walking quickly around the stadium , and this was reinforced by the drummers in the stadium ; nevertheless the parade part of the programme took 1 hour 40 minutes to complete , compared to the 1 hour 29 minutes estimated in the official media guide . Once all of the athletes were inside the stadium , 7 billion small pieces of paper were dropped from a Westland helicopter , each piece representing one person on Earth . 
 Each nation 's flag was planted on the Glastonbury Tor . 
 = = = Bike a.m. ( 00 : 00 – 00 : 07 BST 28 July ) = = = 
 Once the athletes had gathered in the centre of the stadium , the Arctic Monkeys performed " I Bet You Look Good on the Dancefloor " and The Beatles ' " Come Together " , the latter whilst 75 cyclists circled the stadium with wings lit by LEDs representing Doves of Peace . Doves were traditionally released at Olympic opening ceremonies , although real birds have not been used since 1992 . A single dove cyclist , his beak painted yellow in honour of Bradley Wiggins , appeared to fly out of the stadium . 
 = = = Let the Games Begin ( 00 : 07 – 00 : 24 ) = = = 
 The formal part of the ceremony was introduced by Sebastian Coe , speaking from the Glastonbury Tor surrounded by flags of the participating nations , who welcomed the watching world to London . He expressed pride in being British and part of the Olympic movement , and said that the Olympics " brings together the people of the world ... to celebrate what is best about mankind " . He continued to speak of the " truth and drama " of sport , and then thanked Britain for " making all this possible " . Rogge responded by thanking London , stating that it was the third time that London had held the Games , the first time in 1908 at short notice when Rome was unable to do so ( after a volcanic eruption ) , and secondly in 1948 three years after the end of World War II . Rogge thanked the thousands of volunteers , to huge cheers . He announced that for the first time in Olympic history , every team had female participants . Rogge acknowledged the important role that the UK had played as " the birthplace of modern sport " , codifying the " fair play " ethos of sport , and in building sport into the school curriculum . He enjoined the athletes to play fairly and be drug @-@ free , according to the values of Baron de <unk> , reminding them that they were role models who would " inspire a generation " . After expressing these sentiments again briefly in French , he invited the Queen to open the Games . 
 The Queen declared the competition officially open , immediately followed by a trumpet fanfare based on a theme from Tubular Bells by Mike Oldfield and then a fireworks display . The 2012 ceremony was the second time the Queen had opened an Olympic Games , the first being the 1976 Summer Olympics in Montreal in her capacity as Queen of Canada . 
 The Olympic Flag was carried by eight people chosen from around the world as symbols of the Olympic values : Ban Ki @-@ moon ( as UN general secretary ) , Sally Becker ( for courage ) , Doreen Lawrence ( chosen for her " tireless thirst for justice " ) , Haile Gebrselassie ( for his " fight against poverty " ) , <unk> <unk> ( as " a great peacemaker " ) , Shami Chakrabarti ( for " her integrity " ) , Daniel Barenboim ( for bringing " harmony in place of discord " ) , and Marina Silva ( as UN Champion of the Earth ) . The flag paused in front of Muhammad Ali ( invited to represent ' respect , confidence , conviction , dedication , generosity and spiritual strength ' ) , who held it for a few moments . Ali , who had lit the flame at the 1996 Atlanta Games , was accompanied by his wife Lonnie and appeared frail . The flag was received by a colour guard of Her Majesty 's Armed Forces and hoisted to the Olympic Hymn , performed by the LSO and the <unk> Colliery Band . The Olympic Oaths were taken by taekwondo athlete Sarah Stevenson on behalf of the athletes , by British AIBA Referee Mik <unk> on behalf of the officials , and by Eric Farrell on behalf of the coaches . 
 = = = There Is a Light That Never Goes Out ( 00 : 24 – 00 : 38 ) = = = 
 This section was named after a song by The Smiths . The motorboat driven by David Beckham arrived with the Olympic Flame via the Limehouse Cut and the Lee Navigation . Steve Redgrave lit his torch from that on the boat , and carried it into the stadium through an honour guard of 500 of the construction workers who had built the Olympic Park . He passed the flame on to a team of seven young people , each nominated by a famous British Olympian to convey the 2012 Games ' aim to ' inspire a generation ' . Six of the team were athletes , and the seventh was a volunteer young ambassador . 
 The teenagers made a lap of the stadium taking turns to carry the torch , while Alex Trimble , lead singer of Two Door Cinema Club , performed ' Caliban 's Dream ' with the <unk> Choir , Only Men Aloud , Elizabeth Roberts , and Esme Smith . This had been written especially for the ceremony by Rick Smith of Underworld . 
 Each young athlete was greeted by their nominating Olympian and presented with their own torch , which was then lit from the Olympic flame . They jogged through a corridor formed between the assembled athletes to the centre of the stadium , where the 204 copper petals ( each inscribed with the name of the team it accompanied during the parade ) were now seen in a circular formation attached to long pipes ( the petals were to accompany each team home after the competition , as a souvenir ) . The young athletes lit some of the petals , and when the flame had spread to all of them , the pipes rose slowly from the floor of the stadium and converged to form the cauldron . The cauldron lighters were ( nominator in brackets ) : 
 Callum Airlie ( Shirley Robertson ) 
 Jordan <unk> ( Duncan Goodhew ) 
 Desiree Henry ( Daley Thompson ) 
 Katie Kirk ( Mary Peters ) 
 Cameron MacRitchie ( Steve Redgrave ) 
 Aidan Reynolds ( Lynn Davies ) 
 Adelle Tracey ( Kelly Holmes ) 
 The cauldron designed by Thomas Heatherwick was described as " one of the best @-@ kept secrets of the opening ceremony " : until this point , neither its design and location nor who would light it had been revealed . 
 This section of the ceremony was witnessed by 260 of Britain 's greatest Olympians , including six medal winners from 1948 . 
 = = = And in the end ( 00 : 38 – 00 : 46 ) = = = 
 A flurry of spectacular fireworks accompanied by Pink Floyd 's song " Eclipse " , was supported by images of memorable Olympic victories on the big screens , and the LED pixels were used to show Jesse Owens running . The climax of this section was a live view from one of the balloons launched three and a half hours earlier , of the Olympic rings 34 kilometres ( 21 mi ) above the Earth . The stadium was then lit up by searchlights piercing the smoke ( another iconic London image ) of the fireworks , the Orbit tower was illuminated , and Paul McCartney and his band performed the entirety of " The End " , and then " Hey Jude " , with its chorus sung by the audience to close the ceremony at 00 : 46 BST . 
 = = Music = = 
 The eclectic range of music was chosen to showcase almost exclusively British music with pieces representing the UK 's four nations . The programme included classical works by British composers such as Hubert Parry , and performances by UK choirs and orchestras . The focus was mainly on music of the 1960s onwards , causing one Chinese journalist to ask " Will this be the most rock and roll opening ceremony ever ? " . 
 Rick Smith and Underworld composed pieces especially for the ceremony , including ' And I Will Kiss ' performed by Evelyn Glennie and drummers during the ' Pandemonium ' section , and ' Caliban 's Dream ' heard during the lighting of the cauldron . Underworld 's original pieces were favourably reviewed . Writing in The Guardian , Michael Hann said " Underworld ... had a bit of a triumph : the builds and fades they learned in the world of dance music lent the sometimes overwhelming visual spectacle a sense of structure " . 
 Musical motifs were used to bind the whole programme together : for example , the ' whistling ' theme first heard during the minute 's silence embedded within " And I Will Kiss " returned frequently — behind the fury as the ring was being forged , emerging triumphant as the five rings came together , and again later as the main theme of ' Caliban 's Dream ' as the flame paraded the stadium with the young athletes . 
 Bells were a theme of the opening day of the Olympics , starting at <unk> with artist Martin Creed 's Work No. 1197 : All the Bells , when bells were rung across the UK including 40 strikes of Big Ben . " The sound of bells is the sound of England " , Boyle had told volunteers during rehearsal . Much of the music for the ceremony contained ' bell ' references , linking to the large bell forged for the ceremony and evoking bells as " the sound of freedom and peace " . Modified sequences based on the traditional British eight @-@ bell peal underlay ' And I Will Kiss ' and carried through into the Tubular Bells / NHS section , with handbells and a tolling large bell featured on ' Caliban 's Dream ' and at key points in the ceremony . A handbell chime also played after the close as the stadium emptied . 
 Boyle approached many of the artists personally , to see if they would be interested in performing , and he also flew to Barbados for an hour @-@ long meeting with Mike Oldfield . A few turned him down , including Elvis Costello and David Bowie , and a well @-@ known group Boyle has not named " wanted £ 20 @,@ 000 and would not budge " , and so were not used . Artists performing at the ceremony were paid a nominal £ 1 fee to ensure their contracts were legally binding . Welsh drum and bass DJ High Contrast mixed and sequenced the music for the athletes ' parade . 
 The pre @-@ recorded soundtrack Isles of Wonder was released for download on iTunes at midnight of 28 July 2012 with the 2 @-@ disc CD released on 2 August . Within two days the download album had topped the iTunes album charts in Britain , France , Belgium and Spain , and reached No. 5 in the United States , as well as being at No. 5 in the British album charts . Rick Smith 's concluding comment in the CD cover notes was " The isle is full of noises . The soundtrack writes itself . " 
 = = Technical aspects = = 
 The main loading of the stadium started on 10 May and took place during ten weeks of what was the wettest summer for a hundred years , posing considerable challenges . Dismantling the staging took just 60 hours . 
 The infield staging area was 2 @.@ 5 metres high , and had to accommodate elements to be revealed during the ceremony , such as the chimneys and beam engines from ' Pandemonium ' , and the cauldron . To ensure that it remained secret , the cauldron was installed and tested at night . 
 The stadium was rigged with a one million watt sound system and more than 500 speakers . Some 15 @,@ 000 square metres ( 3 @.@ 7 acres ) of staging and 12 @,@ 956 props were used , as well as 7 @,@ 346 square metres ( 1 @.@ 815 acres ) of turf including crops . 
 70 @,@ 799 25 centimetre ( 10 inch ) pixel panels were placed around the stadium , including between every seat . Each panel connected to a central computer and was fitted with nine full @-@ colour LED pixels by Tait Technology . These enabled the audience to participate in broadcasting images during the performance , such as of a 1960s go @-@ go dancer , a London Underground train , and a representation of the birth of the internet . The audience was also able to wave with the paddles to create a twinkling effect . These animations were designed by 59 Productions and the video animations were produced by Chinese animation company Crystal CG . The 2D to 3D transformation and mapping of video content onto the LED panels was performed by <unk> Media media server consoles . 
 Technical director Piers Shepperd masterminded the complex change from rural to industrial during ' Pandemonium ' . The seven inflatable chimneys were made by <unk> , and varied in height ( three were 22 @-@ metre ( 72 ft ) , two were 23 @-@ metre ( 75 ft ) and two were 30 @-@ metre ( 98 ft ) high ) . They were made with soft fabric , the outer layer of which had a printed brick pattern . Each contained four industrial fans at the base to inflate them , and a smoke machine near the mouth , and were hoisted into the air from the overhead rigs . Life @-@ size beam engines were constructed onstage by teams of stage hands and members of the Volunteer Staging Team . At the climax of the ' Pandemonium ' , in the Olympic ring forging scene , amber lights lit in sequence created the illusion of a 30 @-@ metre ( 98 ft ) molten steel river , with pyrotechnic smoke and dry ice as the steam . The original grass floor surface had been removed to reveal a giant stylised map of London . 
 Working alongside the professional crew were over 800 volunteers ; some were production arts students from British drama schools . Many volunteers had been working on the Olympic and Paralympic ceremonies since early 2012 at the Three Mills Studios and Dagenham rehearsal sites , before moving to the Olympic Stadium on 16 June . 
 The thousands of cast were cued and co @-@ ordinated by verbal directions received through earphones ( ' in @-@ ear monitors ' ) , and adjustments were made during the performance : for example during Pandemonium extra volunteers were directed to make sure all the turf was cleared from the arena on time . The earphones also carried a continuous electronic metronomic four @-@ beat to keep all performers walking and moving in time with the music . 
 In July 2013 it was revealed that on the morning of the ceremony , Britain 's surveillance headquarters GCHQ had detected a credible cyber attack threat that would have killed the lighting system in the stadium . Counter @-@ measures were taken , and in the afternoon contingency plans were discussed with government ministers at a meeting in the Cabinet Office briefing room . However , this attack never materialised . 
 = = Ceremony key team = = 
 = = TV coverage = = 
 The BBC 's coverage started at 19 : 00 and continued uninterrupted until 00 : 50 . The BBC audience averaged about 24 @.@ 46 million viewers and peaked at approximately 26 @.@ 9 million . This was the largest average audience for any broadcast since 1996 and one of the top 20 most @-@ watched UK television broadcasts of all time . David Stringer of Associated Press described the coverage as " a success ... so far , the BBC 's ambitious – and technically tricky – Olympic plan has worked almost without a flaw . " Euan Ferguson of The Observer commented that " Coverage of the Olympics so far ... has been near perfect . " However , Clive James was critical of the build @-@ up programme . Commentators for the BBC were Gary Lineker , Gabby Logan , Huw Edwards , Hazel Irvine and Trevor Nelson , the latter criticised by Andy Dawson of the Daily Mirror as floundering " like a ventriloquist 's dummy pumped full of low @-@ grade ketamine " . Private talks were held between Boyle and BBC commentators in the run @-@ up to the ceremony . Boyle was unhappy with a voiceover being imposed on the ceremony , which he wanted viewers to be able to enjoy without commentary . The BBC offered several options including ' no commentary ' coverage for both its TV and online transmissions . 
 Nearly 41 million US viewers watched NBC 's coverage of the event . Criticism was levelled at its decision to tape @-@ delay this broadcast , and not make a live version available even to cable and web users . There were frequent interruptions by commercial breaks . Many US viewers looked for other ways to watch ( such as the live BBC feed ) , despite both NBC and the IOC vowing to crack down on unauthorised streams . More significant criticism was levelled at NBC for cutting to a Ryan Seacrest interview with Michael Phelps during the ' memorial wall ' tribute including commemoration of the victims of the 7 / 7 London bombings , which was seen as disrespectful and insensitive . An NBC spokesman said the network had left out that segment because its programming was " tailored for the US audience " . There was also criticism of commentators Matt Lauer and Meredith Vieira for suggesting that the Queen had actually jumped out of a helicopter . Vieira and Lauer admitted to not knowing that Tim Berners @-@ Lee was the inventor of the World Wide Web , as she commented " If you haven 't heard of him , we haven 't either " , before co @-@ host Matt Lauer told the audience to Google him . These failings were picked up on Twitter during the broadcast with the hashtag # <unk> . Commentary by Bob Costas and Lauer during the Parade of Nations was also criticised for their negative opinions about some countries ' political environments and for leaving out information about the athletes , which was seen as " smug American elitism " . It was noted that they spoke about some countries with " outright condescension " . 
 The ceremony was recorded by three separate broadcasters : the BBC , the Olympic Broadcasting Services ( directed by the Finnish state broadcaster YLE on behalf of the OBS ) , and by independent production company Done and Dusted , hired by LOCOG and working under Boyle 's direction . This was the first time that an independent production company had been used for an Olympic ceremony . This situation led to some tension , as Boyle wanted more artistic control and felt he was getting no co @-@ operation from the OBS . He criticised the OBS coverage during his commentary for the BBC DVD . In addition , the BBC filmed some of the pre @-@ recorded parts of the ceremony . The filming was directed for television by Hamish Hamilton , who described it as " easily the most difficult job of my life " . 
 The BBC released footage of the entire ceremony on 29 October 2012 , edited by Danny Boyle and with background extras , filling more than one disc of a five DVD or Blu @-@ ray disc set , which also contained more than seven hours of sporting highlights as well as the complete closing ceremony . A ' BBC commentary @-@ free ' option for the opening ceremony is available on the DVD , as well as a commentary track by Danny Boyle and Frank Cottrell Boyce . In contrast the NBC DVD only has highlights of the opening ceremony . 
 = = Reviews = = 
 The Times described the ceremony as " a masterpiece " , with The Daily Telegraph saying it was " brilliant , breathtaking , bonkers and utterly British " . The BBC 's chief sports writer Tom Fordyce called it " eccentric " and " tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek " , saying " no @-@ one expected ... it would be quite so gloriously daft , so cynicism @-@ <unk> charming and , well , so much pinch @-@ yourself fun . " Two weeks after the ceremony Jonathan Freedland of The Guardian wrote that " Boyle 's spectacular , so beautifully executed and ingeniously conceived it lingers in the mind even as the closing draws near , stood apart from its predecessors thanks not only to its humour and eccentricity , but also because it had something to say . " Writing in The Observer , Jackie Kay commented that " it seemed that Boyle had invented a new kind of opening ceremony , a concept ceremony , one that embraces big ideas as passionately as it does technical flamboyancy " . The Stage said that " Danny Boyle 's spectacular and moving Olympics Opening Ceremony was undoubtedly the theatrical highlight of 2012 " . 
 Although praise came from across the political spectrum , a few on the British political right were unhappy . Daily Mail columnist Rick Dewsbury was critical of the Grime music and portrayal of the NHS and of mixed @-@ race families . Aidan Burley , a Conservative MP , denounced the ceremony on Twitter as " <unk> multicultural crap " . Burley 's comments were dismissed by many fellow Conservatives , including David Cameron and Boris Johnson . 
 Foreign reaction was overwhelmingly positive . The New York Times said the ceremony was " hilariously quirky ... a wild jumble of the celebratory and the fanciful ; the conventional and the eccentric ; and the frankly off @-@ the @-@ wall . " Forbes called it Boyle 's " love song to Britain " , while Sports Illustrated noted its political aspects , calling it " a celebration of protest and dissent " . The Sydney Morning Herald said it was " an unforgettable start ... at once subversive and sublime " and The Times of India said " London presented a vibrant picture of Great Britain 's rich heritage and culture . " The Chinese news agency Xinhua described the ceremony as " dazzling " and an " eccentric and exuberant celebration of British history , art and culture " . Chinese artist Ai Weiwei praised the ceremony for its " human touch " , saying " In London , they really turned the ceremony into a party ... such a density of information about events and stories and literature and music ; about folktales and movies . " 
 Russian President Putin said the ceremony was " wonderful and unforgettable " . Dmitry Medvedev said " It was an exceptional spectacle , very well prepared and quite rich ... it succeeded in creating a very British atmosphere ... they managed to find the right language ... to communicate . " Panos Samaras of Greece 's NET said " it was more like a big musical , a rock opera ... than an Olympics ceremony " . French sports newspaper L 'Équipe wrote that it " took the classic from such events and had fun with them " whilst Le Parisien said it " was magnificent , inventive and offbeat drawing heavily on the roots of British identity " . Germany 's Die Welt hailed it as " spectacular , glitzy but also provoking and moving " . 
 Chinese news CCTV @-@ 4 said the ceremony was a " stunning feast for the eyes " . South Korea 's Yonhap said it was " by turns dramatic , imaginative , humorous and solemn " and " weaved the story of the country 's past , present and future " . Singapore 's Straits Times said it was a " grand show " noteworthy for both " scale " and " authenticity " . The Australian Daily praised a " glorious pandemonium devoted to London 's thriving , chaotic energy ... deliberately revelling in the chaos of Britain 's free society and popular culture " . France 's Le Figaro said it reflected " the best contributions that Britain has given to the world ... its sense of humour , its music , and of course sport " . The Canadian Broadcasting Corporation said it was a " rocking , rollicking , sometimes quiet and brooding ceremony . " Qatar 's The Peninsula said London did a " spectacular job " making the ceremony a " memorable event " . 
 In an end of the year review , British magazine Q said " It could all have been so different . As the London 2012 Summer Olympics approached , the tide of scepticism seemed almost irreversible . There was the heavy @-@ handed sponsorship , the draconian security , the ticketing problems , the ballooning budget , and the lurking fear that the Opening Ceremony might be , in director Danny Boyle 's pungent description , ' shite ' . It took less than four hours on the night of Friday 27 July to turn the whole country around . Not only was the ceremony demonstrably not shite , it was the most surprising , moving , spectacular cultural event this country had ever seen ... modern Britain , in all its berserk , multi @-@ faceted glory . " 
 The writer of the ceremony , Frank Cottrell Boyce , said : " People around us thought it might need defending , so I was told to do press the next morning . I was completely surprised [ by the positive response ] . A lot of people were surprised . But I don 't think Danny was surprised . Danny never blinked . At no point did he show any feeling that it was going to be anything but amazing . And he was right . " 
 = = Awards and accolades = = 
 Won the ' Beyond Theatre ' award at the Evening Standard Theatre Awards , November 2012 . A ' roar of delight ' went up from the audience when it was announced that the creative team had won the award . 
 Won the " Theatre Event of the Year " at the <unk> theatre awards , February 2013 . This was decided by public vote . Boyle accepted the award along with some of the volunteer performers . 
 Won the " NME Award for Music Moment of the Year " at the NME Awards in February 2013 . 
 Won the prestigious Judges ' Award for Danny Boyle at the Royal Television Society Awards , March 2013 . The ceremony was described as " the most surprising , dazzling , original night of television of the year " . 
 Won the Award in Design Craft and Innovation at the Royal Television Society Awards , March 2013 , which went to the production team . 
 Won the Best Director ( Multi @-@ Camera ) award at the BAFTA Television Craft Awards , which went to Hamish Hamilton and Tapani <unk> , April 2013 . 
 Nominated The ceremony was one of the nominations for the Radio Times Audience Award at the BAFTA Television Awards , held in London on 12 May 2013 . The production team was also nominated for the Television Sport and Live Events 2013 Award . 
 The ceremony was nominated in five categories at the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards , 22 September 2013 in Los Angeles : 
 Won Outstanding Art Direction for Variety or Nonfiction Programming . The nominees were Mark Tildesley ( Production Designer ) , <unk> Anne Larlarb ( Production Designer ) and Danny Boyle ( Art Director ) . 
 Nominated Outstanding Picture Editing for Short @-@ Form Segments and Variety Specials . Sascha Dhillon ( Editor ) was nominated for the " Happy and Glorious " segment . 
 Nominated Outstanding Lighting Design / Lighting Direction for a Variety Special . The nominees were Patrick Woodroffe ( Lighting Designer ) , Adam Bassett ( Lighting Director ) , Al Gurdon ( Director of Photography ) and Tim Routledge ( Moving Light Programmer ) . 
 Nominated Outstanding Special Class Programs - 2013 . 
 Nominated Outstanding Directing for a Variety Special . The nominees were Hamish Hamilton ( director of the overall televising ) and Bucky <unk> ( director of the NBC coverage ) . 
 In December 2012 the culture critic of The Guardian picked the ceremony as " best art event of the year " . A British public survey by Samsung voted it the second most inspiring television moment of all time , second only to the 1969 moon landing . A Digital Spy survey of more than 25 @,@ 000 overwhelmingly voted the ceremony as the entertainment highlight of 2012 . 
 The ceremony was the second most @-@ mentioned entertainment event on the internet in 2012 , with just over 6 million mentions , coming second to the Grammy Awards . The BBC reported that it was the most requested item from 2012 on its iPlayer on @-@ demand service , with 3 @.@ 3 million requests . 
 Boyle was offered a knighthood in late 2012 , but turned it down , saying " I 'm very proud to be an equal citizen and I think that 's what the Opening Ceremony was actually about . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The ceremony was identified by some commentators as precipitating a new mood in the United Kingdom : it " had barely finished before it had become a byword for a new approach , not only to British culture but to Britishness itself . Politicians would soon be referring to it , using it as shorthand for a new kind of patriotism that does not lament a vanished Britain but loves the country that has changed . Boyle 's ceremony was hailed from ( almost ) all sides ... for providing a nation that had grown used to mocking its myriad flaws with a new , <unk> positive view of itself ... It was , perhaps , this lack of cynicism that people responded to ... So used to British irony and detachment , it felt refreshing to witness an unembarrassed , positive case for this country . Boyle himself says this was the most important thing he took away from the Olympic experience : " How important it is to believe in something . You might make a fool of yourself and people will go , ' How can you believe in that , you stupid idiot ? ' But if you believe in something , you carry people with you . " 
 Business leaders also took inspiration from the event , admiring its risk @-@ taking and creative freedom , as well as the trust placed in and loyalty inspired from the workers and volunteers . In February 2013 the BBC 's Head of Drama Ben Stephenson told an audience of writers , commissioners and producers that he " wanted them to seek inspiration from the opening ceremony of the London Olympics " which , he said , " had scale and brilliance and , above all , had succeeded not in spite of its Britishness but because of its Britishness , delighting viewers here and around the world by rooting itself in the authentic stories and spirit of these islands . " Steve Coogan told Frank Cottrell Boyce that he felt it was " like the emperor 's new clothes in reverse ... it made irony and postmodernism feel tired and past its sell @-@ by date " , and Russell T Davies told Boyce : " It changed my idea of the possible . " 
 Reviewing the 2014 Winter Olympics opening ceremony at Sochi , Russia , Owen Gibson of The Guardian observed that with his ' complex , intimate snapshot of " who we were , who we are and who we wish to be " ' , Boyle ' rewrote the rule book for opening ceremonies ' . 
 = Conspiracy ( Star Trek : The Next Generation ) = 
 " Conspiracy " is the 25th episode of the syndicated American science fiction television series Star Trek : The Next Generation , originally aired on May 9 , 1988 , in the United States . The premise was conceived by the show 's creator Gene Roddenberry in a single sentence overview titled " The Assassins " , being expanded into a thirty page story by Robert Sabaroff . From this , the teleplay was produced by Tracy Tormé and the episode directed by Cliff Bole . 
 Set in the 24th century , the series follows the adventures of the crew of the Starfleet starship USS Enterprise @-@ D. Following a meeting with a fellow Captain , the strange behavior of high @-@ ranking officers leads Jean @-@ Luc Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) and the crew of the Enterprise to uncover a conspiracy of senior Starfleet officers possessed by <unk> aliens who are preparing to invade the United Federation of Planets . 
 Numerous make @-@ up effects were created by make @-@ up supervisor Michael Westmore , including an exploding head using raw meat . There were concerns by producers that some of the effects were too graphic , but after a viewing by a staff member 's son , they decided to broadcast it uncut . The episode has subsequently been included in some best episode lists of the series , and won one of three Primetime Emmy Awards for The Next Generation 's first season . Controversial when originally broadcast , it was initially banned from broadcast in the United Kingdom , and required a warning before airing in Canada . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While the Enterprise is en route to Pacifica on a scientific mission , Captain Picard ( Patrick Stewart ) receives a highly confidential message from an old friend , Captain Walker Keel ( Jonathan Farwell ) of the USS Horatio . Keel refuses to discuss his concerns , even though the frequency he is using is supposed to be a secure channel , and insists on a face @-@ to @-@ face meeting . Once they arrive at <unk> B for this secret meeting , the crew discover the Horatio and two other Federation ships already present . Picard beams alone to the surface and is met by Captain Keel and the other captains . Keel reports strange orders from Starfleet headquarters and what he implies are suspicious deaths of Starfleet officers , and expresses concern of a conspiracy . Picard refuses to accept this without proof , but Keel warns him to remain wary . When the captain returns to the Enterprise , he is challenged by Counselor Troi ( Marina Sirtis ) about keeping his contact with Keel secret . Picard is skeptical about the conspiracy , but says that he trusts his old friend completely . The Enterprise resumes its previous journey . Picard has Commander Data ( Brent Spiner ) review all orders issued by Starfleet Command in the past six months . While the ship is still on its way to Pacifica , a disturbance is detected in nearby space . Upon investigating this , the Enterprise discovers a mass of debris that surely must be the shattered remains of the Horatio . Data completes his study and finds several strange orders from the senior levels of Starfleet . Picard informs his senior staff of the conspiracy theory , and orders the Enterprise to Earth . 
 As it approaches Earth , the Enterprise receives no response from Starfleet Command . Eventually , a transmission is received from a trio of Starfleet admirals : Savar ( Henry Darrow ) , Arron ( Ray Reinhardt ) and Admiral Quinn ( Ward Costello ) , who recently made an inspection of the Enterprise ( in " Coming Of Age " ) . They are surprised by the Enterprise 's presence , but invite Captain Picard and Commander Riker ( Jonathan Frakes ) to dinner . Quinn requests to beam aboard the Enterprise for a tour . Captain Picard recalls being warned by Quinn about some kind of threat to Starfleet when he was last aboard . Upon the admiral 's arrival , Picard discusses matters with him and comes to believe that he is an impostor , or under some sort of alien influence . After warning Riker of his concerns and asking him to watch Quinn , the captain beams down to Starfleet headquarters to attend the dinner . On arrival , Picard is greeted by the other two Admirals who are accompanied by Quinn 's assistant , Lt. Commander Remmick ( Robert Schenkkan ) . Meanwhile , Riker visits Quinn 's quarters on the Enterprise and questions him about what he has in the small box he brought with him . Quinn tells Riker of a superior life form within the box . Riker attempts to leave but Quinn throws Riker across the room . A security team arrives to subdue Quinn , who is able to withstand a great amount of phaser @-@ fire before he collapses . The ship 's chief medical officer , Dr. Crusher ( Gates McFadden ) , finds a small protrusion on the back of his neck . She discovers that a bug @-@ like parasite has latched itself onto Quinn 's brain and is controlling him . Dr. Crusher warns Picard of this incident when he contacts the ship in private . He is advised that the infected person can only be stopped by a phaser set to ' kill ' : the captain points out that he is unarmed . He then has no choice but to go in to dinner with his three superiors . 
 A bowl of living larvae is served at the meal , to Picard 's disgust . He attempts to leave , only to find Riker blocking his way . The commander appears to be controlled by the parasite Quinn brought to the Enterprise . When the others see a prosthetic protrusion on the back of Riker 's neck , he is accepted as one of them and allowed to dine . They reveal that the parasites are seeking to take over Starfleet , using humanoids as hosts . When he is about to put a handful of the larvae in his mouth , Riker suddenly produces a phaser and fires on one of the Admirals . Picard picks up a fallen weapon and the two Enterprise officers subdue the infected , causing parasites to leave the hosts and flee . One of the parasites <unk> under a closed door and Picard and Riker follow it . They find Remmick ingesting the parasite to join several others inside him . Picard and Riker fire upon Remmick , destroying his body but freeing a giant parasite ; the two continue to fire until it is destroyed . 
 Later , Dr. Crusher reports that the other parasites , including the one in Quinn , have shriveled up as they are unable to survive without the creature that was inside Remmick . As they help to settle matters with Starfleet headquarters , they find that before Remmick was killed , he had sent a signal to a distant quadrant of the galaxy . The signal is thought to be a homing beacon . 
 = = Production = = 
 Gene Roddenberry originated the idea for the episode in a single @-@ sentence proposal entitled " The Assassins " . Robert Sabaroff expanded this idea to thirty pages , but his version was seen as too expensive . Tracy Tormé was then given the job of rewriting it , but some producers thought the new version was too dark until Roddenberry saw it and endorsed the new version . In one of the original versions , it was a faction within Starfleet who were conspirators rather than alien parasites , but Roddenberry did not like showing Starfleet itself in such a dark manner . The premise was based on the Iran – Contra affair . 
 The director of the episode , Cliff Bole , was a school friend of makeup supervisor Michael Westmore . The scene with Remmick at the end of the episode was added in post @-@ production , as it was originally scripted to have Riker and Picard come face to face with a full @-@ sized mother creature . The part where the parasite enters Remmick 's throat reportedly took many takes because the bulging effect was made by Westmore blowing into air bladders under a false neck , and Bole kept trying to make Westmore <unk> from the exertion . The parasites themselves were created by Makeup & Effects Laboratories from a design by Rick Sternbach . A mold of Paul Newman 's face was filled with raw meat and then blown up to create the effect used when Picard and Riker fire on Remmick , but both Rick Berman and Peter Lauritson were concerned that it was too graphic . Dan Curry invited his six @-@ year @-@ old son to watch the episode in order to test how children would react to it ; the boy reportedly liked it so much that he suggested the creation of a Remmick action figure whose head would blow up by pressing a button . This resulted in Berman deciding to air the episode uncut with the full sequence included . 
 Several props and effects seen in the episode were reproduced from the Star Trek movies , including the shots of Earth and Spacedock One and the painting used of Starfleet Command . The doors to the room where dinner is served were later reused from season 2 onwards on the set for Ten @-@ Forward . The episode also features two first appearances ; the Ambassador class starship was mentioned for the first time ( the Horatio was a member of this class , as was the Enterprise @-@ C ) and it also marks the first time that a Bolian had been seen on Star Trek , the species having been named after the episode 's director . Although the parasites never appeared again on screen in any Star Trek series , they reappear in the Deep Space Nine relaunch novels , where they are revealed to be mutated Trill symbiotes . 
 = = Reception and home media release = = 
 " Conspiracy " aired in broadcast syndication within the United States during the week commencing May 13 , 1988 . It received Nielsen ratings of 9 @.@ 4 , reflecting the percentage of all households watching the episode during its timeslot . This was a decrease of 0 @.@ 3 ratings points from the previous episode , " We 'll Always Have Paris " and was less than the 10 @.@ 2 rating received by the following episode , " The Neutral Zone " . Due to the nature of the content , a warning was aired before " Conspiracy " was screened in Canada . It was initially banned by the BBC in the United Kingdom , but was later aired on BBC Two in an edited form . The episode was nominated alongside " Coming of Age " for Best Makeup at the 40th Primetime Emmy Awards , winning the award , one of three Emmys won by the show that year . 
 Several reviewers re @-@ watched Star Trek : The Next Generation after the end of the series . Keith DeCandido for Tor.com described the episode as " a nasty episode that doesn 't quite cohere into the level of nasty it could " , but that the series " doesn ’ t do horror / action all that often , and it serves as a good change of pace if nothing else " . He gave " Conspiracy " a score of four out of ten . Zack Handlen , who reviewed the episode for the A.V. Club , thought that while " Conspiracy " was a " hard episode to forget " , it was not quite as good as he remembered and did not quite " fit " with the rest of the season . He thought that certain parts of the plot were " idiotic " , and the Admirals reminded him of a " Bond villain convention " . He gave the episode an overall grade of B , writing , " fingers crossed that next time we encounter a danger this sinister , the writers know how to handle it " . 
 " Conspiracy " was included as an honorable mention in a list of the best episodes of Star Trek : The Next Generation by Mike Antonucci of the San Jose Mercury News . It was also included in a list of the best and worst episodes by Scott Thill at Wired magazine as one of the best , describing the reactions to the episode as " polarizing " , and suggesting that " Conspiracy " might be worthy of becoming a plot in a future film by J. J. Abrams . Total Film also suggested the episode as a potential plot for the film that would become Star Trek Into Darkness , and described it as " easily one of the greatest episodes of Star Trek : The Next Generation " . In 2012 , David Brown of Radio Times called " Conspiracy " " a definite high point " in the first season and included it on a list of The Next Generation 's greatest moments . 
 The episode was released on VHS cassette in the U.S. on May 26 , 1993 . The episode was later included on the Star Trek : The Next Generation season one DVD box set , released in March 2002 . " Conspiracy " was released as part of the season one Blu @-@ ray set on July 24 , 2012 . 
 = Wipeout 3 = 
 Wipeout 3 ( stylised as <unk> in Europe and Japan , and as <unk> 3 in North America ) is a futuristic racing video game developed by Psygnosis and published by Sony Computer Entertainment exclusively for the PlayStation . The title is the fourth game in the Wipeout series , and was released in Europe and North America in September 1999 . Players control extremely fast anti @-@ gravity ships and use weapons to force other contenders out of the race . The game was re @-@ released in Europe as Wipeout 3 : Special Edition in August 2000 , which contained additional tracks and content . 
 Psygnosis hired design studio The Designers Republic to create a simple colour scheme and design for in @-@ game menus and race courses , to create what a Psygnosis staff member called " a believable future " . The game is one of the few PlayStation titles to run in high @-@ resolution mode , offering crisper graphics and visuals . Wipeout 3 's soundtrack is composed of electronica tracks selected by DJ Sasha and features contributions by Orbital and The Chemical Brothers . 
 The game was positively received on release ; critics lauded the graphics , music , and minimalist design elements . The high level of Class , perceived lack of new content and courses , and lack of new game features were seen as the game 's primary faults . Despite generally good press , the game was a financial disappointment . Wipeout 3 was the last title in the series to appear on the PlayStation ; the next entry , Wipeout Fusion , was released exclusively for the PlayStation 2 platform in 2002 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Wipeout 3 is a racing game that retains the same basic elements of its predecessors , and introduces players to the <unk> Anti @-@ Gravity Race League . Set in 2116 , Players control futuristic anti @-@ gravity ships owned by racing corporations and pilot them on eight circuits ( plus four hidden prototype tracks ) . Each craft is equipped with an energy shield that absorbs damage sustained on the track ; if the shield is disabled , the player 's craft can be knocked out of the race . Shields are regenerated in a pit lane that is set apart from the main course . The less time spent in the pit lane , the less the shield will regenerate . 
 In addition to shields , each racing craft contains air brakes for navigating tight corners , as well as " Hyperthrust " option . Players can activate Hyperthrust to increase their speed , but Using Hyperthrust drains energy from the shields , making the craft more vulnerable . 
 Scattered across each raceway are weapon grids that bestow random power @-@ ups or items . Wipeout 3 adds new weapons in addition to the five retained from previous games . Several weapons are defensive ; for example , the gravity shield protects the craft from attacks and collisions for a time period . Offensive weapons are also available ; craft can use rockets , Multi @-@ Missiles and mines to disable competitors . Players can use an auto @-@ pilot power @-@ up to safely coast through difficult turns . 
 The default game mode awards medals to the top three finishing hovercraft . Each contestant must reach checkpoints on the course within a certain amount of time , or be ejected from the race . Winning consecutive gold medals unlocks New Tracks and Team . Wipeout 3 features several other game modes , including challenges to complete courses in a set time . In the " Eliminator " mode , players gain points for destroying competitors and finishing laps . The " Tournament " mode has players compete on several tracks , with points being awarded on race placement . Players can engage in two @-@ player racing via a split @-@ screen option . 
 = = Development = = 
 In developing the next entry in the Wipeout series , developer Psygnosis retained many of the developers of the original game to preserve the distinctive racing experience of earlier games . At the same time , Psygnosis sought to make the game more accessible to new players of the fast @-@ paced racer , and kept early courses easier for these players ; the difficulty was adjusted for later courses so that experts still experienced a challenge . Wipeout 3 was the first Wipeout game to take advantage of PlayStation controllers with analogue sticks , used to offer smoother control of the player 's craft . 
 Psygnosis turned to the graphic design studio The Designers Republic to assist in development . The Designers Republic , known for its underground techno album covers , provided " visual candy " to Wipeout 3 's graphics , designing the game 's icons , billboards , color schemes , and custom typefaces . The look and feel of the futuristic courses was bounded by a desire to retain a believable sensibility ; Wipeout 3 lead artist Nicky Westcott said that " [ Psygnosis ] tried to make it look like a believable future , instead of making the sky toxic orange with 10 moons flying around and the world gone mad . It 's very low @-@ key [ and ] a lot more refined . " 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Wipeout 3 , continuing the tradition set by the first game , contains electronica offerings from various artists , including The Chemical Brothers , Orbital , and the Propellerheads . Psygnosis ' development manager , Enda Carey , focused on bringing together music early in the game 's development cycle , instead of as an afterthought or last @-@ minute addition to the game . Unlike previous soundtracks , Psygnosis selected a single music director , DJ Sasha , who worked with artists to create a cohesive soundtrack . Sasha included several of his own tracks made specifically for the game . The game disc is a Mixed Mode CD that allows Wipeout 3 's soundtrack to be played in a standard compact disc player . To promote Wipeout 3 and its game music , Psygnosis sponsored a Global Underground tour for Sasha . Game pods featuring Wipeout 3 were placed at parties and venues , accompanied by a tie @-@ in marketing campaign . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Overall , critical reception of Wipeout 3 was positive ; the game has an aggregate average of 87 % based on 29 reviews at Game Rankings , and a metascore of 89 at Metacritic . IGN named Wipeout 3 the most accessible game of the series , and in 2007 the title was named the 92nd best game by the site . Despite generally positive reviews of the game , Wipeout 3 was not a commercial success . 
 The fast @-@ paced gameplay and graphics were singled out as strong features of the game . Jack Schofield of The Guardian was surprised by the level of detail , stating that the " graphics are better than you 'd expect the [ PlayStation ] to deliver " . Both GamePro and Game Revolution reviewers praised the new game features , specifically the new weapons and ability to challenge friends via splitscreen . The Designer Republic 's style was consistently praised as helping to make the racing locales seem real , though David Goldfarb of the magazine International Design stated that the " techno @-@ meets @-@ <unk> @-@ art visuals " had been executed better in previous entries of the series . Wipeout 3 's soundtrack and sound effects were also lauded . 
 A major fault reviewers found with Wipeout 3 was the steep learning curve of the game . David Canter of The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune described the difficulty progression as " ludicrous " , with the tournament game mode going from " easy as pie to tough as nails " . Though the use of the analogue stick was positively noted as helping to increase control over the onscreen craft , GamePro found that proper handling required large amounts of patience and practice . 
 Reviewers who gave Wipeout 3 lower marks noted a sense of disappointment that the series broke little new ground . Stuart Miles of The Times admitted Wipeout 3 was a good game , but felt that he had been expecting much more from the sequel : " It 's as if the programmers have concerned themselves more with the overall look and feel , rather than further developing the existing gameplay . " Alistair Wallace of Gamasutra , in a retrospective on Wipeout 2097 , remembered that " I enjoyed [ Wipeout 3 ] because it was more of the same and I loved it , but I think the series ran out of its innovation . Doing loop the loops isn 't a big deal really . " GameSpot summed up its review of the game by judging Wipeout 3 an excellent racer , but not able to beat Wipeout 2097 as the best futuristic racing game of all time . 
 = = Re @-@ release and sequel = = 
 A special edition of Wipeout 3 was released exclusively in Europe on 14 July 2000 . Wipeout 3 Special Edition featured many minor changes to gameplay , such as different craft physics , auto @-@ loading of saves and AI bugfixes . In addition , eight courses from previous Wipeout titles ( three from Wipeout and five from Wipeout 2097 ) plus two hidden prototype circuits previously only available in the Japanese version of Wipeout 3 , were added giving total of 22 tracks . Special Edition also allowed for four @-@ person multiplayer , using two televisions and two PlayStation consoles . Wipeout 3 was the last game in the series made for the PlayStation . The next entry in the Wipeout series , entitled Wipeout Fusion , was released in 2002 exclusively for the PlayStation 2 . The game introduced new tracks , ships , and weaponry , as well as enhanced artificial intelligence . 
 = Dan McGann = 
 Dennis Lawrence " Dan " McGann ( July 15 , 1871 – December 13 , 1910 ) , also known as Cap McGann , was a professional baseball player who played first base in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) from 1896 to 1908 . He was a member of the NL pennant @-@ winning Brooklyn Superbas in 1899 and New York Giants in 1904 and 1905 . He was also a member of the 1905 World Series champions . 
 After beginning his professional career in minor league baseball in 1895 , McGann played in MLB for the Boston Beaneaters ( 1896 ) , Baltimore Orioles ( 1898 ) , Brooklyn Superbas ( 1899 ) , Washington Senators ( 1899 ) , and St. Louis Cardinals ( 1900 – 1901 ) of the National League ( NL ) before jumping to the rival American League to play for the Baltimore Orioles in 1902 . He returned to the NL , playing for the New York Giants ( 1902 – 1907 ) and Boston Doves ( 1908 ) . In 1909 – 10 , he played for the Milwaukee Brewers in the American Association . 
 McGann had a troubled personal life . He suffered from depression , and several members of his family committed suicide . After the 1910 season , with rumors of McGann signing with another minor league team , McGann committed suicide with a firearm . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career ( 1891 – 1897 ) = = = 
 McGann began his professional baseball career in minor league baseball with a team representing his hometown , Shelbyville , Kentucky , in 1891 . He also played for Kentucky teams representing Harrodsburg in 1892 , Lexington in 1893 , and Maysville in 1894 . McGann played for the Norfolk Clams / Crows of the Class @-@ B Virginia State League in 1895 and the Lynchburg Hill Climbers of the Class @-@ B Virginia League in 1896 . He initially played all positions except for pitcher , catcher , and first baseman . 
 In August 1896 , the Boston Beaneaters of the National League ( NL ) purchased McGann from Lynchburg to fill in for injured second baseman Bobby Lowe . McGann batted .322 with the Beaneaters , hitting for power , but he committed 21 errors in 43 games . The Beaneaters released him following the completion of the season . McGann played the 1897 season with the Toronto Canucks of the Class @-@ A Eastern League . He moved to first base and batted .354 , leading the Eastern League with 20 triples . 
 = = = Major League Baseball ( 1898 – 1908 ) = = = 
 The Washington Senators of the NL purchased McGann , Butts Wagner , Bob McHale and Cooney Snyder from Toronto for $ 8 @,@ 500 ( $ 241 @,@ 774 in current dollar terms ) on September 22 , 1897 . The Senators traded McGann with Gene DeMontreville and Doc <unk> to the Baltimore Orioles of the NL for Doc Amole , Jack Doyle and Heinie Reitz that December . He played one season with the Orioles , in which he batted .301 with 106 runs batted in ( RBI ) in 1898 , good for fifth place in the NL . 
 When Orioles manager Ned Hanlon was hired to manage the Brooklyn Superbas during the 1899 season , receiving an ownership stake in the team to do so , he assigned several of his star players , including McGann , Joe McGinnity , Joe Kelley , Hughie Jennings and Willie Keeler to the Superbas . McGann finished second on the team in RBIs with 106 , behind Kelley . 
 McGann batted .243 for the Superbas through July 14 , 1899 , when they traded him with Aleck Smith to the Senators for Deacon McGuire . For the Senators , McGann batted .343 during the rest of the 1899 season . Short on money , the Senators sold McGann and Gus Weyhing to the St. Louis Cardinals for $ 5 @,@ 000 ( $ 142 @,@ 220 in current dollar terms ) on March 9 , 1900 . McGann left the Cardinals before the end of 1901 season , for unknown reasons . The Cardinals replaced McGann with Bill Richardson . 
 With the formation of the American League ( AL ) as a competitor to the NL , McGann joined many fellow NL players who jumped to the AL . Following Cardinals teammate John McGraw , who became player @-@ manager of the Baltimore Orioles of the AL before the 1901 season , McGann signed with the Orioles . 
 However , the Orioles struggled with debt . Joe Kelley , star player for the Orioles and son @-@ in @-@ law of part @-@ owner John Mahon , reported that the team owed as much as $ 12 @,@ 000 ( $ 328 @,@ 200 in current dollar terms ) . Unable to afford that debt , Mahon purchased shares of the team from Kelley and John McGraw . With this , Mahon became the majority shareholder , owning 201 of the team 's 400 shares . On July 17 , 1902 , Mahon sold his interest in the Orioles to Andrew Freedman , principal owner of the Giants , and John T. Brush , principal owner of the Cincinnati Reds , also of the NL . That day , Freedman released McGann , McGraw , Cy Seymour , Roger Bresnahan , Joe Kelley , Joe McGinnity , and Jack Cronin from their contracts with Orioles . Freedman signed McGann , Bresnahan , McGinnity and Cronin to the Giants , joining McGraw , who had signed with the Giants ten days earlier . Brush signed Seymour and Kelley to the Reds . 
 With the Giants , McGraw installed McGann at first base , moving Christy Mathewson to pitcher . McGann stole 36 bases in the 1903 season . After the season , McGann and some of his Giants teammates threatened to quit the team due to the treatment of Brush , now the Giants owner , for allegedly going back on a promise to provide the Giants with a monetary bonus for having the Giants finish in the top three of the NL and a share of the gate receipts from exhibition games , in which they were paid $ 56 @.@ 35 ( $ 1 @,@ 484 in current dollar terms ) , though Brush allegedly had made over $ 200 @,@ 000 ( $ 5 @,@ 267 @,@ 407 in current dollar terms ) . McGann and Jack Warner were rumored to join McGinnity in an outlaw league in California . 
 McGann stole 42 bases in 1904 , finishing fourth in the NL . He stole five bases on May 27 , 1904 , setting an NL record . McGann 's record stood until Davey Lopes stole five bases in a game in 1974 , and Otis Nixon stole six in a game in 1991 . McGann led the team with a .286 batting average and six home runs that season . Though the Giants won the NL pennant in 1904 , they refused to compete in the 1904 World Series . Brush and McGraw refused to face the AL champion Boston Pilgrims , following their altercations with Johnson . 
 McGann developed a reputation as a fighter in 1905 . On April 21 , 1905 , in a game against the Philadelphia Phillies , McGann punched catcher Fred Abbott after McGann was thrown out at home plate . Abbott hit McGann in the back with the ball , resulting in both players being ejected from the game . McGann batted .299 with 14 triples in 1905 as the Giants won NL pennant for the second consecutive year . Competing in the 1905 World Series , a series the Giants won over the Philadelphia Athletics in five games , McGann contributed with his bat and glove . Although McGann batted .235 in the series , he recorded four RBIs on three hits in a Game Three victory . 
 McGann was briefly suspended by NL president Harry Pulliam for fighting on May 16 , 1906 . McGann finished first in the NL fielding percentage at first base from 1903 through 1906 . He also served as Giants ' team captain . Despite this , rumors began to circulate that the Giants were looking to trade McGann , which the team denied . 
 Before the 1907 season , a report surfaced that the Giants would shift Mike Donlin from the outfield to first base , in order to replace McGann . Donlin denied the claim . McGann suffered a broken wrist when he was hit by a pitch thrown by Andy Coakley of the Cincinnati Reds during spring training in 1907 . 
 McGann returned to the Giants out of shape midway through the 1907 season , although he did bat .298 that season . That winter , trade rumours began to swirl that the Giants would trade him to the Reds . Instead , the Giants traded McGann to the Boston Doves with Frank Bowerman , George Browne , Bill Dahlen and Cecil Ferguson for Al Bridwell , Tom Needham and Fred Tenney on December 13 , 1907 . Tenney , also a first baseman , was designated as McGann 's replacement at first . When a reporter asked McGraw about McGann and Tenney , pointing out that both first basemen were 36 years old , McGraw replied that Tenney had taken better care of himself . 
 Despite discussion of appointing McGann player @-@ manager of the Doves , the role was assigned to Kelley . Agreeing to terms with George Dovey , president of the Doves , McGann played 135 games during the 1908 season , but batted only .240 . During an April 1908 game between the Doves and the Giants , McGraw insulted McGann as slow , referring to him as a " damned ice wagon " , noting " that 's how the Giants lost a lot of games last season " . After the game , McGann went to the Giants ' hotel , waited for McGraw to return from the theatre , and fought him in a billiard room . Dovey released McGann from the Doves after the 1908 season . 
 = = = Later career ( 1909 – 1910 ) = = = 
 McGann signed with the Milwaukee Brewers of the Class @-@ A American Association for the 1909 season . He played for Milwaukee in 1909 and 1910 , batting only .225 in 1910 , his career low . There were reports McGann might sign with the Oakland Oaks of the Pacific Coast League or a team in Louisville , Kentucky , near his Shelbyville home in 1911 . McGann 's career was ended , however , by his death in December 1910 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 McGann invested in real estate and financial holdings near his Shelbyville home during his career . At the time of his death , his property was assessed to be worth approximately $ 40 @,@ 000 ( $ 1 @,@ 015 @,@ 857 in current dollar terms ) . 
 = = Family = = 
 McGann suffered from severe clinical depression , a condition which ran throughout his family . One of McGann 's sisters committed suicide in 1890 after their mother died . On New Year 's Eve in 1907 , one of McGann 's brothers died as a result of an accidental shooting . In 1909 , another of McGann 's brothers committed suicide . 
 = = Death = = 
 On December 13 , 1910 , McGann committed suicide by shooting himself in the heart at a Louisville hotel . At the time of his death , he was 39 years old , and reportedly had been " in the best of health and humor " when last seen . McGann was survived by two sisters , who , despite the family history of suicide , believed their brother had been murdered , as a diamond ring valued at $ 800 ( $ 20 @,@ 317 in current dollar terms ) McGann had been seen wearing was missing . 
 = Planet of the Dead = 
 " Planet of the Dead " is the second of five special episodes of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who broadcast between Christmas 2008 and New Years Day 2010 . It was simultaneously broadcast on BBC One and BBC HD on 11 April 2009 . The specials served as lead actor David Tennant 's denouement as the Tenth Doctor . He is joined in the episode by actress Michelle Ryan , who plays Lady Christina de Souza , a one @-@ off companion to the Doctor . The episode was co @-@ written by Russell T Davies and Gareth Roberts , the first writing partnership since the show 's revival in 2005 . 
 The episode depicts Christina fleeing the police from a museum robbery by boarding a bus that accidentally travels from London to the desert planet of San Helios , trapping her , the Doctor , and several passengers on board the damaged vehicle . After the bus driver dies trying to return to Earth , the Unified Intelligence Taskforce , headed by Captain Erisa Magambo ( Noma Dumezweni ) and scientific advisor Malcolm Taylor ( Lee Evans ) , attempt to return the bus while preventing a race of metallic stingray aliens from posing a threat to Earth . At the end of the episode , one of the passengers delivers a warning to the Doctor which foreshadows the remaining three specials . 
 " Planet of the Dead " was the first Doctor Who episode to be filmed in high definition , after a positive reaction to the visual quality of spin @-@ off series Torchwood and the financial viability of HDTV convinced the production team to switch formats . To ensure that the desert scenes looked as realistic as possible , the production team filmed in Dubai for three days , sending several props , including a 1980 double @-@ decker Bristol VR bus , to the United Arab Emirates for filming . After the bus was unintentionally damaged in Dubai by a shipping container , Davies rewrote the script to explain the damage in the narrative . 
 The audience gave the episode an Appreciation Index of 88 — considered excellent . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A young , beautiful , thrill @-@ seeking burglar , Lady Christina de Souza , steals a gold chalice once belonging to King Æthelstan from a London museum and narrowly evades the police by hopping on a 200 bus . The Doctor , who is tracking down a wormhole , joins her shortly before the bus suddenly passes through the wormhole and arrives on the desert planet of San Helios . The Doctor shows the passengers the wormhole and deduces the bus protected them like a Faraday cage . The bus driver tries to go through despite the Doctor 's warnings . Seeing the driver 's skeleton coming out on the other side of the wormhole , the police call in UNIT , commanded by Captain Erisa Magambo and aided by scientific adviser Malcolm Taylor . The Doctor manages to contact UNIT on a passenger 's mobile phone and talks to Malcolm , who impresses him with his understanding of the wormhole . 
 The Doctor and Christina quickly get to know the handful of other passengers on the bus : Angela , Barclay , Nathan , Lou and Carmen , who has low @-@ level psychic abilities . The Doctor and Christina decide to scout the planet , spotting an approaching storm , while Nathan and Barclay try to fix the bus . The Doctor and Christina encounter a couple of Tritovores , a species resembling anthropomorphic flies , who take them to their wrecked spaceship . 
 The Tritovores explain that they were making a routine goods collection with San Helios when they crashed , and that the planet very recently housed a hundred billion inhabitants and a thriving ecosystem . At the request of the Doctor , the Tritovores send a probe to investigate approaching cloud and discover a large swarm of stingray @-@ like aliens who create wormholes by flying at terrific speed around planets , and are protected by their metal exoskeletons . They destroy the ecosystems of all the planets they visit as their biological imperative . The Doctor suspects that Earth may be the stingrays ' next target due to the wormhole they passed through before , and makes to hasten their return to Earth . 
 Christina uses her burglary skills to retrieve a crystal that powers the spaceship , together with the clamps attached to it . During this the Doctor discovers and recognizes the stolen gold chalice in her backpack , telling her that he knows she must have stolen it , but while he disapproves of the theft , he admits to her that it would be hypocritical to be too harsh on her about it , because , after all , he stole his TARDIS from his own people back in the day . Meanwhile , Christina accidentally awakens several stingrays that had caused the ship to crash in the first place , costing the life of the two Tritovores . Captain Magambo , who has also worked out that the earth is threatened , and that the wormhole is growing in size , orders Malcolm to close the wormhole but he refuses even at gunpoint to sacrifice the Doctor . 
 The Doctor throws away the crystal and attaches the clamps to the bus 's wheels and steering wheel . He finds the systems are incompatible and convinces Christina to let him use gold from the chalice of Æthelstan to connect the bus to the spaceship technology . The Doctor reveals that the clamps are anti @-@ gravity clamps . This allows the bus to fly through the wormhole , with the stingrays in hot pursuit . Taylor closes the wormhole but three of the stingrays manage to pass through it . After UNIT shoots down the stingrays and the passengers have been debriefed , Christina pleads with the Doctor to let her travel with him , but he refuses because he has no wish to lose another companion . 
 The characters part ways again . The Doctor recommends that UNIT hire Barclay and Nathan . Christina is arrested by the police for the theft and Carmen has a premonition that visibly unnerves the Doctor : 
 You be careful , because your song is ending , sir . It is returning , it is returning through the dark . And then Doctor ... oh , but then ... he will knock four times . 
 As a final act of kindness , the Doctor uses his sonic screwdriver to release Christina from her handcuffs , allowing her to escape in the bus . The pair part on good terms as she flies away and the Doctor leaves in his TARDIS . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and casting = = = 
 Russell T Davies co @-@ wrote the episode with Gareth Roberts , the first writing partnership for the show since its 2005 revival . " Planet of the Dead " was a departure from Roberts ' usual stories — Roberts had previously only written pseudo @-@ historical stories — and instead consisted of wild science fiction elements from his literary career and teenage imagination . The episode had no clear concept — such as Shakespeare and witches in " The Shakespeare Code " or Agatha Christie and a murder mystery in " The Unicorn and the Wasp " — and instead was a deliberate " clash [ of concepts ] with many disparate elements " . Roberts explained he was cautious to ensure that each element had to " feel precise and defined ... like we meant that " , citing the serial Arc of Infinity as an example where such control was not enforced . The episode includes a common feature of Davies ' writing in that there is no clear antagonist : the Tritovore are eventually sympathetic to the protagonists and the stingrays are only following their biological imperative . 
 Unlike the Christmas specials , the theme of Easter was not emphasised in the story ; the episode only contained a " fleeting mention " of the holiday instead of " robot bunnies carrying baskets full of deadly egg bombs " . The episode 's tone word — " joyous " — was influenced by Davies ' realisation that " every story since ' The Fires of Pompeii ' [ had ] a bittersweet quality " and his subsequent desire to avoid the recurring theme . The starting point for the story was Roberts ' first novel The Highest Science . Davies liked the image of a train on a desert planet and rewrote the train as a bus . Davies nevertheless emphasised it was not an " adaptation as such " because tangential elements were constantly being conceived and added . 
 Michelle Ryan 's casting as Lady Christina de Souza was confirmed by the BBC on 23 January 2009 and attracted media attention owing to Ryan 's recent relatively high @-@ profile roles in EastEnders , Jekyll , Bionic Woman and Merlin . Ryan stated that she is " a huge fan of Doctor Who and [ was ] very excited to be joining David Tennant and the Doctor Who team . " Davies commented that " Michelle is one of the most sought after young actors in the country " and that they were " delighted to announce that she [ would ] be joining the team . " Ryan described her casting as a " real honour " , noting that she " love [ s ] the character " . 
 Ryan was rumoured to be in line for a role as full @-@ time companion to the incoming Eleventh Doctor ( Matt Smith ) and her casting in " Planet of the Dead " , combined with her previous working history with incoming Executive Producer Steven Moffat - the two working together on Jekyll , fuelled speculation that she might return to Doctor Who accompanying the Eleventh Doctor in Series 5 . Ryan herself has said that she is open for a return to the character , however , stating that she is a commitment <unk> at the moment and with regards to her character she views her as " someone who is around for this one @-@ time adventure " . " It had been reported that Ryan auditioned to replace Billie Piper in the companion role when her character , Rose Tyler , left in 2006 , but was unsuccessful . Ryan subsequently stated that this was false . 
 Ryan was interviewed by BBC News about her role as Lady Christina . Ryan praised her colleagues and the " family atmosphere " on set and described Doctor Who as " really something special to do " . On 9 April 2009 , Ryan guested on Steve Wright in the Afternoon on BBC Radio 2 and on The Justin Lee Collins Show on ITV2 to promote " Planet of the Dead " . After a showing of a trailer for the episode on The Justin Lee Collins Show , Ryan described the " fantastic " time she had filming in Cardiff and in Dubai . 
 Ryan 's character Lady Christina de Souza is an adrenaline junkie and thief . Christina is a typical Doctor Who companion , Davies electing to draw parallels from the Time Lady Romana rather than new series companion Rose Tyler . Roberts described her as an " adventuress " who is " upper class and glam , suited and booted , and extremely intelligent " which the Doctor could relate to because they both rejected their heritages . The episode 's director James Strong described the character as reverting to a traditional romantic @-@ based companionship — rather than the platonic companionship of Donna Noble ( Catherine Tate ) in the fourth series — while still being a unique companion : 
 It 's back to basics : she 's probably more of a traditional , romantic kind of Thomas Crown Affair kind of heroine , if you like . [ ... ] It echoes to me of Rose , in that there may be a good old fashioned romantic connection between them . She 's young , she 's beautiful , she 's sexy , but whereas Rose was a very ordinary , normal girl , Lady Christina is a lady , she comes from a very privileged , very elite background . She 's different to any of the companions we 've ever had in that she doesn 't particularly want to get caught up with the Doctor . She 's got her own thing going on , so she 's very much a match for the Doctor and very much an equal . Often in an adventure the Doctor will take control and everyone will do what he says . She 's very much in control – the two of them are in a sparring way , battling against each other to get through this adventure . 
 Comedian Lee Evans plays Professor Malcolm Taylor , a UNIT scientist devoted to his predecessor , the Doctor . Davies created Evans ' character to serve as a foil for Noma Dumezweni 's pragmatic character Captain Erisa Magambo , who previously appeared in the episode " Turn Left " . Roberts noted after writing the episode that Evans ' character had unintentionally become a " loving " caricature of Doctor Who fandom . 
 The episode was influenced by several works : Davies described " Planet of the Dead " as " a great big adventure , a little bit Indiana Jones , a little bit Flight of the Phoenix , a little bit Pitch Black . " ; the relationship between the Doctor and Christina was influenced by 1960s films such as Charade and Topkapi , which included Cary Grant and Audrey Hepburn " being witty and sophisticated together , and then running for their lives " ; and the Tritovore were influenced by 1950s and 1970s science fiction B @-@ movies such as The Fly and Davies ' habit of including aliens that were recognisable to the audience as animals from Earth , such as the Judoon . Carmen 's warning evoked memories of the Ood 's warning to the Doctor and Donna in the fourth series episode " Planet of the Ood " . Tennant explained the prophecy meant that the Doctor 's " card [ had become ] marked " and the three specials would thus be darker — characterising " Planet of the Dead " as the " last time the Doctor gets to have any fun " — and that the subject of the prophecy was not the obvious answer : 
 David Tennant 
 Really , from this moment on , the Doctor 's card is marked . Because when we come back in " The Waters of Mars " , it 's all become a little bit darker . 
 Julie Gardner 
 And as we know , David , he really does knock four times . 
 Tennant 
 Yeah , absolutely , and if you think you 've figured out what that means , you 're wrong ! 
 Gardner 
 But when you do figure it out , it 's a sad day . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Pre @-@ production on the four specials started on 20 November 2008 — four days before scheduled — because the episode 's overseas filming in Dubai required the extra planning time . Two weeks later , the production team was on a recce for the special and the final draft of the script was completed . The production team examined overseas locations to film the episode because they wanted the scenery to feel " real " and thought that they would be unable to film on a Welsh beach in winter . After examining countries such as Morocco and Tunisia , the production team decided to film in Dubai because the area was more amicable to the filming industry and viable filming locations were nearer to urban areas than other locations . 
 Production began on 19 January in Wales . The special was the first Doctor Who episode to be filmed in high @-@ definition television resolution . The move to HD had previously been resisted for two major reasons : when the show was revived in 2005 , high @-@ definition television had not been adopted by an adequate portion of the audience to be financially viable ; and special effects were considerably more expensive to create in high @-@ definition than in standard @-@ definition . " Planet of the Dead " was used as a switch to HD because of the show 's reduced schedule in 2009 and because the filming crew had become experienced with the equipment while they were filming Torchwood . 
 Filming began at the National Museum Cardiff , which doubled for the history museum depicted in the episode 's first scene . To portray the tunnel the bus travelled into , the Queen 's Gate Tunnel of the A4232 road in Butetown was closed for four nights to accommodate filming . The last major piece of filming in Wales took place in the closed Mir ( formerly <unk> ) steelworks in Newport , which doubled almost unaltered for the Tritovore spaceship . Scenes set in London 's Oxford Street were filmed at St Mary Street , Cardiff . Filming took place at the peak of the February 2009 Great Britain snowfall , where the sub @-@ zero temperatures slowed filming and had a visible effect on the cast . To accommodate for the adverse conditions , Davies included a line in the script that specified that the Tritovore spaceship cooled as external temperatures increase . 
 Filming in Dubai took place in mid @-@ February 2009 . Two weeks previously , one of the two 1980 Bristol VR double @-@ decker buses bought for filming had been substantially damaged when a crane accidentally dropped a container in Dubai City Port . After an emergency discussion by the production team , they agreed that the damage was unintentionally artistic and decided to include the damaged bus in the episode ; instead of shipping the spare bus from Cardiff — which would have delayed the already hurried filming schedule — the production team decided to partially reconstruct the bus in Dubai , damage the spare bus in Cardiff to match the bus in Dubai , and rewrite part of the script to accommodate and mention the damage to the bus . James Strong recalled the reaction of the production team to the damage to the bus in an issue of Doctor Who Magazine : 
 One morning in the first week of February , I was leaving my flat when Julie Gardner phoned . She said , " there 's been a little accident with the bus [ ... ] it 's a disaster ; the bus is fucked . " When I got into the office , I was handed a photograph — and my initial reaction was absolute horror . We called an emergency meeting . Russell came in [ ... ] and we discussed our options . We had bought an identical London bus to film on in Cardiff , so could we send that out to Dubai ? We could have got it out in time if it 'd left Cardiff , literally , the next day , but we 'd have had to find a third bus , an exact replica , to film on in Cardiff a week later . It had taken us a month to find the one we had . It was even mooted that we 'd have to forget Dubai and opt for a beach in the UK . But Russell 's response was " Okay , let 's embrace it . Let 's say that the bus was damaged on its way to the alien planet . [ ... ] He wove it into the narrative . We 're not trying to hide the damage at all . In fact , we show it off , enhancing it with special effects , smoke and sparks . It works rather marvellously . That London bus , damaged and smoking , in the middle of the desert — yeah , it looks incredible , especially in gorgeous hi @-@ def . 
 The damaged bus was not the only problem to filming in Dubai : the first of the three days was afflicted by a sandstorm which left most of the footage shot unusable . The production team then struggled to complete three days of filming in two days ; the last day was compared to " filming Lawrence of Arabia " . To complete the episode 's filming , interior scenes in the bus were filmed in a studio in Wales . To disguise the fact they were using a <unk> , a 360 @-@ degree background image , Strong utilised often @-@ avoided techniques such as muddied windows and lens flares ; the latter also served to create a warmer environment for the viewer . After filming ended , editing and post @-@ processing took place until two days before transmission , leaving the BBC to resort to using an unfinished copy to market the episode . 
 = = = 200th story = = = 
 " Planet of the Dead " was advertised as Doctor Who 's 200th story . Writer Russell T Davies admitted that the designation was arbitrary and debatable , based upon how fans counted the unfinished serial Shada , the season @-@ long fourteen @-@ part serial The Trial of a Time Lord , and the third series finale consisting of " Utopia " , " The Sound of Drums " and " Last of the Time Lords " . Davies personally disagreed about counting The Trial of a Time Lord as one serial — arguing that it " felt like four stories " to him — and grouping " Utopia " with its following episodes , but agreed that it was only an opinion which did not override any others . Gareth Roberts inserted a reference to the landmark — specifically , the bus number is 200 — and Davies emailed the show 's publicity team to advertise the special as such . Doctor Who Magazine 's editor Tom Spilsbury acknowledged the controversy in the magazine 's <unk> issue , which ran a reader survey of all 200 stories . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 Overnight figures estimated that the special was watched by 8 @.@ 41 million people , a 39 @.@ 6 % share of the audience . An additional 184 @,@ 000 watched the programme on BBC HD , the channel 's highest rating at that time . The initial showing had an Appreciation Index of 88 : considered excellent . A BBC One repeat , two days later , gained an overnight figure of 1 @.@ 8 million viewers . The special was therefore the second most watched programme of the day , beaten only by the premiere of the new series of Britain 's Got Talent . The final viewing figure for the initial broadcast was 9 @.@ 54 million viewers on BBC One and 200 @,@ 000 viewers on BBC HD , making it the fifth most watched programme of the week and the most watched programme aired on BBC HD at that time . Including repeats in the following week and viewings on the BBC iPlayer , 13 @.@ 89 million viewers watched the episode in total . 
 The episode received average critical reviews . Simon Brew of science fiction blog Den of Geek said the episode was " by turns ambitious and predictable " but " still quite entertaining " . The first part of the review mentioned an objection from his wife that the bus trapped in the sand " [ looked ] really fake " , despite the episode being actually filmed in Dubai , and then mentioned Brew 's appreciation of the concept of people stranded in the desert and concluded that " made a fair fist of it " . Brew positively reviewed Michelle Ryan 's performance — comparing her performance to be on par to her role in Bionic Woman rather than her role as Zoe Slater in EastEnders — and Lee Evans ' performance as Malcolm Taylor , calling him the highlight of the episode because of his dialogue . He closed his review by saying that " ' Planet of the Dead ' was passable enough " : he thought it " never really gelled " for him ; but he thought it was overall entertaining and was excited for the remaining three specials as a result of Carmen 's prophecy . 
 Charlie Jane Anders of io9 " mostly loved ' Planet Of The Dead ' " , commenting that it was a standard Russell T Davies script : 
 <unk> was pretty much everything you 've come to expect from Russell T. Davies ' Who : crazy adventures , slightly cartoony characters , clever dialogue , moments of sheer silly fun , a childlike solemnity , a miraculous save , bombastic music , and one woman who 's held up as being the most special person ever . 
 It didn 't hurt that <unk> had all the elements of a cracking good story : The Doctor and friends trapped on an alien planet , on the other side of the universe , with no easy way to get home . Alien creatures who might be hostile . A deadly swarm coming to tear our heroes apart . And UNIT on the other side of the wormhole , trying to come to grips with this almost unimaginable threat . 
 She compared it to two previous episodes , " The Impossible Planet " and " Midnight " , both of which she enjoyed . She criticised three aspects of the episode : Lady Christina , who was the " first [ Russell T Davies ] heroine who actually filled [ her ] with revulsion " , leaving her hoping that the character would be killed off @-@ screen , Malcolm 's reluctance to close the wormhole and the implausibility of only three stingrays travelling through it . She thought that the episode was " a pretty solid adventure with a cool set of monsters " . 
 Ben Rawson @-@ Jones of entertainment website Digital Spy gave the episode two stars out of five . He characterised the episode as being " as hollow as a big chocolate Easter egg " because it was " lacking in the enthralling drama and compelling characterisation that has been the lynchpin of the Russell T Davies era " . His main criticism was towards Ryan 's character , describing the romantic tension between Christina and the Doctor as " feeling forced " and arguing that Ryan was " utterly unconvincing " as Christina . Conversely , he was appreciative of Strong 's direction and the UNIT subplot . Specifically , he approved of Evans ' performance , noting that " the fact that Malcolm names a unit of measurement after himself is both inspired and hilarious " . His review ended by describing the episode as " lifeless for much of the hour " and expressing his hope that the ambiguous entity from Carmen 's premonition would " hurry up " . 
 Orlando Parfitt of IGN gave the episode a 7 @.@ 1 ( Good ) rating out of ten . Parfitt called it a " straightforward story " that did not elevate to the level of excitement typically seen in Doctor Who until the episode 's climax , instead describing the majority of the story as being " taken up with Tennant and Ryan standing in the desert , swapping flirtatious banter in between proclaiming how dire their situation is " , and criticised the writing of the part of the episode where the bus was on San Helios , claiming that plot devices such as the Tritovore or Taylor being held at gunpoint and ordered to close the wormhole as " feel [ ing ] forced and unnaturally shoe @-@ horned into the script " . His praise of the episode went to Ryan and Evans : although he thought of Christina as a " shameless Lara Croft ripoff " , he said that the character " still proves a sexy and wise @-@ cracking counterpart to the Doctor " ; and Evans ' acting alongside Dumezweni highlighted his " undeniably great comic acting " as opposed to his " love @-@ it @-@ or @-@ hate @-@ it " stand @-@ up comedy . The last paragraph of his review focused on the climax , which he thought was " a cracker [ that ] just @-@ about makes up for the previously plodding plot " , and described the entire episode as having " enough enjoyable moments " to entertain fans before the transmission of " The Waters of Mars " . 
 " Planet of the Dead " was nominated for the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation , Short Form , but lost to " The Waters of Mars " . 
 = = = International broadcast = = = 
 The special aired in Canada in July on Space , and in the US on BBC America on 26 July 2009 . In Australia , the Special aired 31 May 2009 , on ABC1 . In South Africa , the Special aired on 18 October 2010 , on BBC Entertainment . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Selected pieces of score from this special , as composed by Murray Gold , were included in the specials soundtrack on 4 October 2010 , released by Silva Screen Records . 
 = = = Filming locations = = = 
 = Tropical Storm Haishen ( 2008 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Haishen was the twentieth officially recognized tropical storm of the 2008 Pacific typhoon season . The tropical depression that was to become Tropical Storm Haishen formed late on November 14 , as a minor tropical depression to the south of the Ogasawara Islands , however the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) did not start issuing advisories on it until early the next day . As the JMA were starting to issue advisories on the minor tropical depression , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) reported that it was not expected to become a significant tropical cyclone within 24 hours as they <unk> the depression as subtropical . During that afternoon the JMA upgraded the depression to a full tropical depression while the JTWC issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert on the developing depression as it had become Tropical . That evening , the JMA reported that the depression had become a tropical storm and named it as Haishen while the JTWC designated Haishen as Tropical Depression 25W . Early on November 16 , the JTWC upgraded the depression to a tropical storm and then both the JMA and the JTWC declared it had reached its peak intensity with winds of 75 km / h ( 45 mph ) . At this time , the JTWC reported that there were signs in satellite imagery that Haishen had started its extratropical transition and then issued their final advisory 12 hours later . The JMA continued to issue advisories on Haishen for another 24 hours , when they declared that Haishen had become an extratropical low . The extratropical low then raced across the Pacific Ocean and crossed the International Dateline later that day . There were no casualties or Impact reported from Haishen as it remained out to sea throughout its life . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On November 14 , the JMA reported that a minor tropical depression had formed 490 km ( 300 mi ) to the southeast of Iwo To , despite the JTWC noting the tropical cyclone formation was unlikely within the next 24 hours due to lack of deep convection . Later that day , the JMA designated the low as a full tropical depression while later that afternoon as deep convection persisted along the eastern portion of a low level circulation center , indicating the storm developed a fully warm tropical core . Despite increased vertical wind shear , the JTWC issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert on the system . During that evening the JMA upgraded the depression to a tropical storm and named it Haishen whilst , the JTWC designated Haishen as Tropical Depression 25W while it was located 900 km ( 560 mi ) to the east of Iwo To . Early on November 16 , Haishen attained its peak intensity of 75 km / h ( 45 mph ) . Traveling along the north portion of a subtropical ridge to the southeast of the system , dry air began to take toll on the system . The JTWC then issued their final warning later that day as they thought that Haishen was rapidly taking on extratropical characteristics as it had lost most of its deep convection . However , the JMA kept issuing advisories on Haishen for another 24 hours before following suit . The extratropical low of Haishen accelerated towards the International Dateline and crossed into the central Pacific later that day . As an extratropical low , the system briefly reintensified . 
 = = Preparations , impact and naming = = 
 As Haishen remained out over open waters for the duration of its existence , there was no impact on any land @-@ masses . 
 The name Haishen was submitted to the World Meteorological Organisation 's Typhoon Committee by the People 's Republic of China and was one of the original names submitted for use from January 1 , 2000 . The name Haishen is Chinese for the God of the sea and was last used in the 2002 Pacific typhoon season . 
 = Louis Riel ( comics ) = 
 Louis Riel is a historical biography in comics by Canadian cartoonist Chester Brown , published as a book in 2003 after <unk> in 1999 – 2003 . The story deals with Métis rebel leader Louis Riel 's antagonistic relationship with the newly established Canadian government . It begins shortly before the 1869 Red River Rebellion , and ends with Riel 's 1885 hanging for high treason . The book explores Riel 's possible schizophrenia — he believed God had named him Prophet of the New World , destined to lead the Métis people to freedom . 
 The work is noted for its emotional disengagement , its intentionally flat dialogue , and a minimalist drawing style inspired by that of Harold Gray 's comic strip Little Orphan Annie . Unusual for comics of the time , it includes a full scholarly apparatus : a foreword , index , bibliography , and end notes . The lengthy , hand @-@ lettered appendix provides insight into Brown 's creative process and biases and highlights where he changed historical facts to create a more engaging story , such as incorporating a conspiracy theory not widely accepted by historians . Brown became interested in the issue of property rights while researching the book , which led to a public change in his politics from anarchism to libertarianism . 
 Although Brown intended it to be published only in book form , his publisher had him first serialize Louis Riel as a comic book , which lasted ten issues . The series was the first comic book to receive a grant from the Canada Council for the Arts . It won a favourable critical reception and three Harvey Awards . The serialization sold poorly , but the book version was a surprise bestseller . Its success played a major part in gaining shelf space for serious graphic novels in mainstream North American bookstores . 
 = = Overview = = 
 Subtitled " A Comic @-@ Strip Biography " , Louis Riel looks at Métis rebel leader Louis Riel and his leadership in the Red River and North @-@ West rebellions . It does not attempt a complete retelling of Riel 's life — it omits long periods and ignores many aspects of his personality . Instead the focus is on his " antagonistic relationship with the Canadian government " from 1869 to 1885 . The story comprises 241 pages of the 271 @-@ page book , and is supplemented with a complete scholarly apparatus : a foreword , bibliography , index , map section and extensive end notes . It has strong historiographical elements , detailing in the appendix the research done and choices made by the author in developing a story . 
 Brown grew up in the Canadian province of Quebec , where the majority speaks French , and where Riel is often considered a martyr . However Brown , who grew up speaking only English , said he was largely ignorant of Riel 's story until he read Maggie <unk> ' 1994 biography Louis Riel : A Life of Revolution . Many of Brown 's favourite topics are entwined in Louis Riel : anti @-@ authoritarianism , outsider religion , insanity , and accuracy and objectivity in nonfiction . A central incident in the book is an eight @-@ panel sequence in which Riel has a revelatory experience on a hilltop in Washington , D.C. He experiences visions and talks to God , who declares him Prophet of the New World and instructs him to lead his people to freedom . On the cover of the book , however , we see Riel standing alone in the wilderness , staring into the sky , leaving open the question of whether what he witnessed was real . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1995 , Brown published the anti @-@ psychiatry comics essay " My Mom was a Schizophrenic " , in which he examines society 's role in mental illness , and questions the medical profession 's accepted beliefs about it . The six @-@ page strip came with two pages of end notes gathered from his research . Brown enjoyed this project and thought he would like to take on another in which he could " cram a lot of research into a comic strip " . When he came across <unk> ' biography of Riel , he had been working on the experimental Underwater series , a project on which he felt he had lost his way . His father died in late 1997 , and he decided he did not " want to waste [ his ] time with projects that weren 't working out " . In 1998 , he turned his attention to Riel , putting the unpopular Underwater series on hold . 
 While researching , Brown came across two books by political scientist Tom Flanagan : Louis " David " Riel : " Prophet of the New World " ( 1996 ) and Louis Riel and the Rebellion : 1885 Reconsidered ( 2000 ) . Brown found " Prophet of the New World " particularly intriguing as it dealt with Riel 's religious ideas while reevaluating his alleged diagnosis of mental illness , two topics Brown had especial interest in , as he had previously made " eccentric " adaptations of the Gospel , and comics dealing with his mother 's schizophrenia . He also came across books by researcher Don McLean and historian Douglas N. Sprague that advanced the conspiracy theory that the 1885 North @-@ West Rebellion was deliberately provoked by Prime Minister John A. Macdonald to gain support for the building of the transcontinental railway . 
 Brown had gained a reputation for improvised storytelling by the time he began work on Louis Riel . With Underwater , he had intended to write a script , but in the end chose to improvise . He found the results unsatisfactory , and decided to write a full script beforehand for his next project . The script for Louis Riel came to over 200 pages . 
 Brown 's was not the first depiction of the Métis leader in comics . James Simpkins , a Canadian cartoonist best known for Jasper the Bear , made a mildly anti @-@ Riel two @-@ page strip in 1967 , and Pierre Dupuis produced a French @-@ language two @-@ page summary in 1979 . A 23 @-@ page pro @-@ Riel strip appeared in Canadian History Comic Book No. 2 : Rebellion in 1972 . In 1980 , Italian artist Hugo Pratt created a character called Jesuit Joe who was supposed to have descended from Riel . Publishing house Les Éditions des Plaines published two books on Riel : Robert <unk> 's 58 @-@ page Louis Riel en bande dessinée ( " Louis Riel in Comics " ) in 1990 , and Zoran and <unk> 's Louis Riel , le père du Manitoba ( " Louis Riel , the Father of Manitoba " ) in 1996 , both in French . Riel also played a secondary role in the 1995 comic album Le <unk> des Bois @-@ <unk> ( " The Twilight of Bois @-@ <unk> " ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The government of the new Dominion of Canada ( established 1867 ) , under Prime Minister John A. Macdonald , has made a deal with the Hudson 's Bay Company to purchase Rupert 's Land — vast tracts of land in northern North America . The French @-@ speaking Métis — people who are half Native , half white , and inhabit parts of Rupert 's Land — dispute that their land can be sold to the Canadians without their consent . In the Red River settlement , the Métis , led by Louis Riel , dodge political <unk> on the part of Lieutenant Governor William McDougall and some of the English @-@ speaking settlers , while seizing Fort Garry . After an armed standoff at English @-@ speaking settler John Schultz 's home , the Métis declare a provisional government and vote Riel their president , with an even number of French and English representatives . Schultz escapes from prison and rounds up a number of men with the intention of freeing the prisoners from Fort Garry , but when Riel lets the prisoners go , Schultz 's men set out for home . On the way , a number of them pass Fort Garry , where they are captured and imprisoned . One of the prisoners , Thomas Scott , relentlessly quarrels with the guards , showering them with racial epithets . Eventually , the provisional government convicts him of treason and executes him by firing squad . The remaining prisoners are released , and the provisional government enters into negotiations with Ottawa , which results in the founding of the province of Manitoba . They are unable to get an amnesty for the execution of Scott , however . The Canadian army arrives , ostensibly to keep the peace . Riel flees to the U.S. , and the anglophone population assumes governance . 
 Schultz takes control of Manitoba , and the government of Ontario offers a cash reward for Riel 's capture , dead or alive . Macdonald secretly sends Riel money to disappear , as his death would lose him votes in Quebec but allowing him to live would cost him votes in English Canada . Riel flees from town to town in the U.S. as bounty hunters try to track him down . In 1873 , he returns to the Manitoba and wins a seat in the federal Parliament in a by @-@ election . He fears actually sitting in parliament because there is still a bounty on his head , and continues to live in hiding . In 1874 , he wins his seat again . Schultz wins a seat in the settlement as well , however , and Alexander Mackenzie has become Prime Minister , running on promises not to grant the rebels an amnesty . Riel is expelled from Parliament for failing to sit , but wins his seat again in the next by @-@ election . The frustrated government finally extends an amnesty to the rebels — all except Riel , whose amnesty is conditional on a five @-@ year banishment from Canada . During his exile , he has a visionary experience on a hilltop in Washington , D.C. , in which God names him David , the Prophet of the New World , and tells him to lead the Métis to freedom . In 1876 , Riel is secretly committed by a friend to a lunatic asylum near Montréal under a false name . 
 Over the next several years , the Métis , unhappy with the Canadian government 's handling of their land rights , move farther west across the Prairies . There as well , they see their petitions to the government repeatedly ignored and their rights trampled on . Finally , after being ignored for too long , the Métis search for Riel in Montana , in the hope that his return will force the Canadians to take their claims seriously . He is reluctant at first , as he has started a family and settled down as a schoolmaster . In the hopes that he will get money from the Canadian government for his tenure administering the Red River settlement ( by this time known as Winnipeg ) , he moves his family to Batoche ( now in Saskatchewan ) in mid @-@ 1884 . Macdonald has returned to the prime ministership and conspires with George Stephen , president of the financially burdened Canadian Pacific Railway , to use the situation to gain support for finishing the railway . By inciting a violent revolt amongst the Métis , the government can justify funding the railway to move troops to the Prairies . The Métis under Riel respond with arms as intended . Riel declares " Rome has fallen ! " and breaks from the Catholic Church . He breathes the Holy Spirit into his followers , thereafter known as the <unk> . Tensions build until the bloodshed at the Battle of Duck Lake , where Riel and his followers drive back the North @-@ West Mounted Police . Macdonald takes this as a cue to send two thousand troops to the area . At the Battle of Fish Creek , the outnumbered Métis manage to drive back the Canadians , but at the Battle of Batoche , while Riel is increasingly immersed in religious activities , the Métis finally suffer defeat . In the hope that his trial will provide an opportunity to get the Métis ' story to the public , Riel surrenders instead of fleeing . 
 In July 1885 , Riel is put on trial in Regina for his role as leader in the North @-@ West Rebellion . Against his will , Riel 's lawyer tries unsuccessfully to defend him on grounds of insanity . He is found guilty of high treason . Though the jury pleads for mercy , he is sentenced to hang . In response to the pleas of <unk> to pardon Riel , Macdonald responds , " He shall hang though every dog in Quebec bark in his favour " . After reconciling himself with the Church , Riel is hanged in Regina on 16 November 1885 . In the aftermath , the remaining rebels receive a pardon , Macdonald and Stephen continue in their success , and Riel 's wife dies . 
 = = Primary characters = = 
 = = = Louis Riel = = = 
 Riel ( 1844 – 85 ) was a French @-@ speaking Métis politician from a devoutly Catholic background . He founded and named the Province of Manitoba ( a Cree word meaning " the god that speaks " ) . He led the two Métis rebellions against the Canadian government : the Red River Rebellion of 1869 – 70 and the North @-@ West Rebellion of 1885 . Following the latter , he was hanged for high treason . Riel remains an ambiguous and controversial figure in Canadian history , and Brown 's depiction maintains that ambiguity . 
 Riel is depicted as charismatic . He is Montréal @-@ educated and speaks English , which makes him a natural leader to the Métis , though his leadership is flawed — he ignores the military advice of his peers in battle , placing his faith in God that the Métis will defeat the Canadians . Brown depicts him as having a messianic complex and possibly having schizophrenia . He is unsure of himself , averse to bloodshed , and easily convinced to flee to the U.S. to avoid capture . 
 = = = John A. Macdonald = = = 
 Macdonald ( 1815 – 91 ) was the first Prime Minister of Canada , in office 1867 – 73 , and again 1878 – 91 . Brown depicts the Prime Minister in the role of scheming villain and caricatures his features in an absurd manner , giving him an extremely oversized nose and showing him as a drunk . He is a man of ambitions and will not let anyone stand in the way of his legacy . In the appendix , however , Brown discloses that he does not see Macdonald as the villain he has portrayed in the book . Brown 's distrust of big government leads him to push the conspiracy theory side of the story to Macdonald 's detriment , but , in the end , he states that he " would rather have lived in a state run by John A. Macdonald than one run by Louis Riel " . 
 = = Style = = 
 " My ... one goal was to make the artwork look as much as the artwork in Little Orphan Annie as possible , I was trying to draw like Harold Gray " 
 Louis Riel is noted for its emotional restraint , and intentionally flat and expository dialogue . To critic Rich Kreiner the book " has been rigorously scrubbed of staged drama and crowd @-@ pleasing effects " . It avoids manipulation of the reader by invoking sympathy or sentiment . Brown takes a distanced approach and relies faithfully on his source material — he focuses on the concrete and corporeal and eschews techniques of speculation such as thought balloons . This includes his presentation of Riel 's mystical experiences , which Brown presents plainly and without interpretation of its reality or lack thereof . 
 The book makes frequent deliberate use of silent panels , focused on imagery with the narrative moved forward by the characters ' actions . Riel 's " despairs over the decisions he makes " are expressed through pictures , as Brown had come to believe that historical comics had been too " narration @-@ heavy " . He wanted Louis Riel " to show what the medium is capable of " , and made use of greater panel @-@ to @-@ panel continuity . While the grid of panels gives a feeling of page symmetry , the pages are not composed as a unit — scenes change anywhere on the page with little regard to page layout . 
 Printed on yellowish paper , each page conforms strictly to a rhythmic six @-@ panel grid , in contrast to the free placement of panels that characterized Brown 's autobiographical period . Tone and mood are set by the composition of the panels , as during Riel 's trial when all tonal variation is dropped , and the white figures are placed against a heavy black background , which emphasizes the claustrophobic atmosphere . 
 Brown makes the language barriers that separate the characters visual by having Riel drop the letter " h " in his dialogue ( e.g. " over t 'e last several days " ) and by putting French @-@ language dialogue in ⟨ chevron brackets ⟩ and Cree language dialogue in ⟨ ⟨ double @-@ chevrons ⟩ ⟩ . He shows Riel , who was an educated and sophisticated speaker of French , struggling with English . These touches emphasize that English was not yet a dominant language in the regions in which the story unfolds . Brown uses consistent semantics in his speech balloons ; the size and weight of the dialogue varies according to speech patterns , and sound effects vary according to how close they are to the reader . 
 Brown 's drawing style had always changed from project to project . He frequently cited Harold Gray of Little Orphan Annie as the primary influence on the drawing style of Louis Riel — restrained artwork which avoids extreme closeups , and blank @-@ eyed characters with large bodies , small heads , and oversized noses . Gray 's drawing and compositional style was well suited to the subject of Louis Riel . Gray often used his strip as a public platform for politics , and Louis Riel was also very public and outward @-@ looking . This approach is in great contrast to the inward @-@ looking comics Brown had previously been known for — notably his autobiographical work . His cross @-@ hatching style was reminiscent of the editorial cartoonists of Riel 's time . Gray 's outdoor scenes were inspired by the Illinois plains of Gray 's youth , terrain similar to that of Manitoba and Saskatchewan . 
 Brown also acknowledges significant debts to Jack Jackson 's historical comics , Hergé 's The Adventures of Tintin , and the extremely exaggerated style of Larry Gonick 's Cartoon History of the Universe . He says he referred to Jack Hamm 's How to Draw Animals when drawing the horses that appear frequently throughout the book , which were rendered running with their legs splayed , as an artist may have depicted them in the days before the influence of Eadweard Muybridge 's photographs of bodies in motion . Brown drew each of the 1325 panels separately on watercolour paper on a block of wood he placed on his lap in lieu of a drawing table , which allowed him seamlessly to rearrange , insert , and delete panels as he saw fit . The drawings were finished using both a thin ink brush ( no larger than size 0 ) and dip pen with a Hunt 102 nib and black ink . 
 = = = Appendices = = = 
 When he began Louis Riel , Brown had increasingly been making use of notes and appendices in his work , beginning with his researching and annotating the 1994 comics essay , " My Mom was a Schizophrenic " . He added appendices to the 1998 collection of short strips , The Little Man , and the 2002 reprinting of I Never Liked You . In Louis Riel , the appendix totalled 23 pages , along with a bibliography and an index . Alan Moore 's use of extensive end notes in his and Eddie Campbell 's From Hell , another fictional reconstruction of a historical event , influenced Brown 's appendices . In the comics essay " Dance of the Gull <unk> " which closes the From Hell appendices , Moore metaphorically reveals to the reader the myriad choices he could have made from the available historical evidence when putting together his version of the Jack the Ripper story . 
 Allowing him to " tell the best story and tell the truth " , Brown 's notes were self @-@ reflexive , and drew attention to the artistic choices he made when putting together the book . Brown makes explicit the inaccuracies in the book , as when he realized his drawings of William McDougall did not match up with descriptions of him by biographers as a " portly " and " heavily built man " . Brown chose not to redraw McDougall 's scenes , deciding he " could live with that level of inaccuracy " . He also admits that he deliberately changed some of the historical details , as when he has Prime Minister Macdonald in talks with the Hudson 's Bay Company in London — Macdonald was not in London at that time and did not directly participate in the negotiations . In other instances , Brown noted where he paid special care to historical details : the dialogue of Riel 's trial comes directly from court transcripts . Brown makes clear in his notes the amount of research undertaken for the book , emphasizing both its authenticity and his desire to show the different aspects of Riel 's ambiguous story . Many of his changes were made for space considerations , as he intended to limit the book to about two hundred pages . 
 The notes range from nearly insignificant details to major discrepancies and deliberate distortions . They have a self @-@ deprecatory tone that is common in North American comics , tracing its roots to the awkwardly self @-@ aware underground comix of the 1960s and 1970s . They also reveal Brown 's process in shaping the story from conflicting sources . He acknowledges some of the more capricious details . He explains he was not committed to the conspiracy theory he presented , but included it in order to present Macdonald in a certain light : " [ V ] <unk> are fun in a story " , he said , and he was " trying to tell this tale in an engaging manner " . He also included a " Major @-@ General Thomas Bland Strange " in an 1885 meeting at which the general was not actually present . Brown explains that he included Strange because he was amused by the Major @-@ General 's name . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Brown originally meant Louis Riel to be published in book form , but his publisher , Chris Oliveros , convinced him to serialize it first . Drawn and Quarterly published the ten comic @-@ book instalments from 1999 until 2003 . Brown was granted CA $ 6000 by the Canadian Council for the Arts in 2001 to assist in its completion . The full volume appeared in hardcover in 2003 and softcover in 2006 . The book sold out its first printing in two months , went through multiple printings , and had sold fifty thousand copies by the beginning of 2011 . The original serialization sold poorly , which made the book 's success a surprise . 
 The comic book and the collection both came with an extensive appendix , and the collection came with a bibliography and an index , all hand @-@ lettered by Brown . The collection 's appendix came to 22 pages . 
 In the original serialization , as the series progressed the influence of Harold Gray became stronger . The characters ' heads became smaller while their bodies and hands grew larger , with Riel appearing " like the Hulk in a wool suit " after his hilltop religious revelation . Brown redrew many of the earlier drawings to make them consistent with the later ones in the collected edition . He added backgrounds , redrew , added or deleted panels to improve page rhythms or make chapter divisions cleaner , and reshaped or <unk> word <unk> . Dialogue remained intact for the most part , although the slur " frog " for the French @-@ speaking Métis was replaced with " half @-@ breed " . 
 In 2012 , Drawn and Quarterly first began offering comics in e @-@ book format , prompted in part by Brown . His Louis Riel and Paying for It were the first two books made available , though Brown is a print @-@ lover who professes little interest in e @-@ books , or computers in general . The non @-@ exclusive deal was made with Toronto @-@ based Kobo Inc . A tenth @-@ anniversary edition in 2013 included sketches and other supplemental material . 
 French and Italian editions appeared in 2004 — the Italian from Coconino Press and the French from the Belgian publisher Casterman . To appeal to francophones in Europe , where Riel is not well known , Casterman had the book titled Louis Riel : l <unk> ( " Louis Riel : Rebel " ) . The Montreal @-@ based publisher La Pastèque obtained the rights to the book and re @-@ released it as Louis Riel with a different cover in 2012 . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Though not the first work of biography in comics , Louis Riel was the first completed of its length and depth . The book sold well , and became the first graphic novel to reach Canada 's non @-@ fiction bestseller list . A critical and commercial success , it was especially popular with libraries and schools . Comics academic Jeet Heer states that it has perhaps sold more copies in Canada than any other graphic novel . Publishers Weekly called it " a strong contender for the best graphic novel ever " , Time magazine included it in its annual Best Comix list in 2003 , and , in 2009 , the Toronto Star placed it on its list of the ten best books of " The Century So Far " . It is regularly cited as being at the forefront of a trend in historical graphic novels , along with Art Spiegelman 's Maus and Marjane Satrapi 's Persepolis . 
 Especially in Canada , Louis Riel brought Brown out of the fringes into the mainstream , and also attracted more serious attention to graphic novels . It was the first work of comics to receive a grant from the Canada Council for the Arts ( although Brown 's libertarian politics have led him to condemn the government for handing out grants ) , and helped pave the way for the Council 's special category for graphic novels . The book was optioned for a movie by Bruce McDonald and another film director , though the project never started filming . 
 Researching Riel had a significant impact on Brown 's thinking . When he started the book , he considered himself an anarchist . His intention was to write an anti @-@ government book , and had a bias in Riel 's favour — despite what Brown considered Riel 's own political conservatism — as Riel opposed the government . Over the course of drawing the book , he came to sympathize more with Macdonald . His reading led him in 1998 to The Noblest Triumph : Property and Prosperity Through the Ages by Tom Bethell , which led him change his own politics to favour libertarianism . He later ran for parliament as representative of the Libertarian Party of Canada , to the dismay of his friends . At one point , after Brown had started drawing the book , he tried to rewrite the script to reflect his changed perspective , but found it too difficult and stayed with the original script . He revealed his new beliefs only in the appendix . 
 Reviewer Dennis Duffy commended Brown 's research , but stated Brown " often cheats " in assigning forethought to Macdonalds action unattested in historical documents . Critic Rich Kreiner found that Brown 's disengaged approach to Louis Riel invited a reader @-@ response approach to reading it . As an example , it was the impetus for an in @-@ depth , three @-@ part interview conducted by Dave Sim in the pages of his comic book Cerebus , which Sim uses as an opportunity to apply his own <unk> views to an interpretation of events in Brown 's book . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 The Montreal @-@ based <unk> <unk> using puppetry <unk> the book as Louis Riel : A Comic @-@ Strip Stage Play . It was set to début in early 2016 . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 = = = = Journals and magazines = = = = 
 = = = = Newspapers = = = = 
 = = = = Web = = = = 
 = Threes = 
 Threes ! is an indie puzzle video game by Sirvo , an independent development team consisting of game designer Asher Vollmer , illustrator Greg Wohlwend , and composer Jimmy Hinson . The game was released on February 6 , 2014 , for iOS devices and later ported to Android , Xbox One , and Windows Phone . In Threes , the player slides numbered tiles on a grid to combine addends and multiples of three . The game ends when there are no moves left on the grid and the tiles are counted for a final score . 
 The basic game was prototyped in a single night , but the team spent over half a year iterating through variations on the idea with visual themes such as sushi and chess . By the end of the game 's 14 @-@ month development , the team returned to the game 's simple principles and numbers theme . 
 The game received what video game review score aggregator Metacritic described as " universal acclaim " . Reviewers found the game " charming " and " addictive " and compared it to Drop7 , Stickets , and Triple Town . Eurogamer and TouchArcade awarded the game perfect scores , with the latter calling Threes " about as close as it gets to a perfect mobile game " . Other developers released similar games and clones within weeks of the game 's launch . Apple Inc. named Threes the best iPhone game of 2014 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The player slides numbered tiles on a four @-@ by @-@ four grid to combine addends and multiples of three . For example , ones and twos merge to become a single " three " tile , two threes merge into " six " , and two sixes merge into " 12 " . <unk> the screen up , down , left , or right moves all of the tiles on the grid in that direction and adds a new tile to the grid in the same direction . The color of the incoming tile is shown onscreen . Players can preview moves by sliding the grid without letting go . Each kind of number tile has its own personality , and new kinds of number tiles are introduced with a screen full of confetti when first unlocked . 
 Games of Threes typically last several minutes and end when no moves remain on the grid ( usually when gridlocked with a single high number tile and many low number tiles ) . When a game is finished , there is no " game over " screen , but players receive a final score based on the rarity of the tiles ( rather than the tile number values ) . The object of the game is to earn a high score . Outside of the game , players can review their scores and set Game Center challenges . 
 = = Development = = 
 Threes was conceived by game designer Asher Vollmer , who worked on the game with artist Greg Wohlwend and composer Jimmy Hinson . The three , as Sirvo LLC , had previously collaborated on the 2012 iOS word game Puzzlejuice . Wohlwend had worked on games including Ridiculous Fishing and Hundreds . Threes development began before Ridiculous Fishing 's March 2013 release . Vollmer presented an idea similar to the final product in its simplicity : pair tiles as multiples of three . Vollmer considered Drop7 an inspiration for the game , and played it for two years before making his game . The first Threes prototype was written in a single night . With Wohlwend , the two @-@ man development team spent at least half a year of the game 's 14 @-@ month development iterating on this main idea . 
 Some of the iterations included new numberless visual themes and new game mechanics such as a monster who ate tiles and a wall that blocked certain movements . Early Threes designs had no inclination towards minimalism : the pair felt that the game needed to appear more complex so as to interest players . Wohlwend sent Vollmer designs including sushi @-@ themed tiles that paired fish and rice , a chess theme that paired chess pieces , themes about animals , broccoli and cheese soup , military insignia , hydrogen atoms , and textile patterns . Their test audiences were confused by the close to two dozen themes tested in total . Vollmer commented that these ideas made the game feel " unwieldy and unnatural " and that he always preferred the game when the changes were reverted . They received a " wake @-@ up call " from fellow game designer Zach Gage , who encouraged them to return from their foray into complexity . The final game returned to its original theme of numbers . Speaking in retrospect , Wohlwend said the game " always wanted to be simple " . He noted that players " think math " upon seeing the game 's numbers , though the game is more about " spatial relationships " and just happens to have a " number theme " . 
 When returning to the fundamental and original game concept — pairing tiles as multiples of three — the developers felt their experiments informed their final game development decisions . The theme of individual tile personalities extended to the final version , as tiles have faces and express emotions when paired . For example , the 384 tile has a pirate personality with a large tooth and a pirate eyepatch . Wohlwend has said that the number tiles grow in character with their size . The idea for character faces beneath the cards remained from previous theme iterations , and the character voices were provided by indie game developers . Of the development process , Wohlwend called it " tough and frustrating and sometimes hard to see if it was worth it " . Vollmer credited thatgamecompany for teaching him applicable lessons of restraint during his time there . 
 The game was released by Sirvo for iOS on February 6 , 2014 , and ported by indie developer Hidden Variable Studios for Android on March 12 , 2014 . The team chose to release for iOS first due to the small team 's difficulty testing across Android platforms . Hidden Variable also developed an Xbox One version , which was originally announced at Microsoft 's E3 2014 press conference , and released on December 5 , 2014 . The release supports the console 's " snap mode " ( to play in the corner of the screen while the player watches something else ) as well as online leaderboards and a " night mode " darker palette option . A free Windows Phone version was released on April 27 , 2015 , and a free web browser version in December 2015 . The browser release does not include advertisements , unlike the free smartphone releases . In a post @-@ release infographic , Sirvo wrote that the average game length was 20 minutes , even though they designed the game 's sessions to not last longer than 10 minutes . They also reported that 93 percent of players in China used unlicensed copies of the game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received what video game review score aggregator Metacritic described as " universal acclaim " , with a 92 % rating based on 19 reviews . Eurogamer and TouchArcade awarded the game perfect scores , with the latter calling Threes " about as close as it gets to a perfect mobile game " . It was an honorable mention in the 2014 Independent Games Festival 's Excellence in Design category . The game reached the top of the Apple App Store paid app sales chart shortly after its release . Re / code reported that it " dominated " the chart in the following weeks and became one of the 25 highest grossing apps on the App Store . It later won a 2014 Apple Design Award and was named Apple 's best iPhone game of 2014 . Reviewers found the game " charming " and " addictive " . They compared the game with the luck of Drop7 , the challenge of Stickets , and the " match @-@ by @-@ combining " mechanics in Triple Town . Reviewers also praised the simplicity of the tutorial and noted how their attention on combining large number tiles contrasted with their need to watch the board 's movements as a whole . 
 Ben Kuchera of Polygon wrote that the game was " a brilliant little puzzler " and commented on the difficulty of designing such an accessible minimalist game . Dan Ryckert of Game Informer noted that the game had all of the qualities of a successful mobile game : accessibility of short game sessions , easy to learn and tough to master gameplay , room to make and try strategies , and gameplay mechanics suited for touchscreens . He added that his progressive play strategy adaptations for higher scores made the game joyful . Ars Technica 's Kyle Orland wrote that he expects the game to join Drop7 and Super Hexagon on his phone for the rest of his life and Crypt of the <unk> designer Ryan Clark called Threes the best iOS game he had ever played . 
 Mark Sorrell of Eurogamer compared the game 's " profoundly and offensively banal " aesthetic to a " hipster restaurant " with good food but a smug ambiance , citing the soundtrack 's " whimsy " and the art style 's similarity to iOS game <unk> . He praised the game 's mechanics . TouchArcade compared the game 's scaffolding mechanics to the turn @-@ based roguelike <unk> , and The Verge 's Andrew Webster compared the game 's addictive mechanics to Sudoku and its style to <unk> and Spelltower . Nick Statt of CNET thought the game had Tetris 's beauty and Dots 's visual appeal . He cited the game as an example of " flow " design principles at work , where the game is designed for players to enter a state of focus and self @-@ awareness . Re / code 's Eric Johnson called the game a descendant of Sudoku , Dots , and Rush Hour . Pocket Gamer 's Mark Brown thought the game 's randomness kept its gameplay interesting and <unk> creator Nicola <unk> wrote an artificial intelligence to play the game . 
 Edge wrote that the game " can feel a little insubstantial " in its lack of gameplay variety , though its " charm and craft " will make players return . They wrote that the soundtrack is cheerful and memorable with an " indie romcom feel " . TouchArcade added that the soundtrack " fits the game perfectly " and recommended playing the game with sound activated so as to hear the tiles ' personalities . CNET thought the music became repetitive , but that the tile voices were " a little creepy " without the soundtrack . Garrett Martin of Paste wrote that he heard the influence of Jon Brion and alluded to Paul Thomas Anderson 's early films . Comparing Threes to Hundreds as the " quirky American cousin " to Hundreds 's " European art film " , Martin found Threes more whimsical in nature and extended Ian Bogost 's statements in The Atlantic about video games as " haute couture ... design objects " to Threes . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Outside developers released clones of Threes within weeks of its release , including a browser @-@ based version , an " unofficial sort @-@ of @-@ knockoff " Android app ( Fives ) , and another iPhone game , 1024 , which advertised itself as " No need to pay for Threes " and was later ported to a browser version . A later clone of 1024 , the fast @-@ paced browser game 2048 , became popular online and spawned " dozens of parodies " . Journalists , including those at the Los Angeles Times , did not acknowledge the game 's connection to Threes . The Threes team was " puzzled " by the popularity of these releases , especially those that did not credit their game for the idea . They criticized 2048 's game design and compared the game as the Commander Keen to their Super Mario Bros. in a 45 @,@ 000 @-@ word post outlining their full 14 @-@ month development process . Gamasutra 's Leigh Alexander described the situation as a " unique tragedy " . 
 = Bungie = 
 Bungie , Inc. is an American video game developer located in Bellevue , Washington , United States . The company was established in May 1991 as Bungie Software Products Corporation by University of Chicago undergraduate student Alex Seropian , who later brought in programmer Jason Jones after publishing Jones ' game Minotaur : The Labyrinths of Crete . Originally based in Chicago , Illinois , the company concentrated primarily on Macintosh games during its early years and created two very successful video game franchises called Marathon and Myth . A West Coast offshoot produced the PC and console title Oni . 
 Microsoft acquired Bungie in 2000 ; the project it was working on was repurposed into a launch title for Microsoft 's Xbox console , called Halo : Combat Evolved . Halo became the Xbox 's " killer application " , selling millions of copies and spawning a billion dollar franchise . On October 5 , 2007 , Bungie announced that it had split from Microsoft and become a privately held independent company , Bungie LLC ( Microsoft retained ownership of the Halo franchise IP ) . 
 Among Bungie 's side projects are Bungie.net , the company 's official website , which includes company information , forums , and statistics @-@ tracking and integration with many of its games . Bungie.net also serves as the platform from which Bungie sells company @-@ related merchandise out of the Bungie Store and runs other projects , including Bungie Aerospace , its charitable organization , the Bungie Foundation , a podcast , and online publications about game topics . The company is known for its informal and dedicated workplace culture , and recently signed a ten @-@ year publishing deal with Activision . Their first project together was the 2014 first @-@ person shooter , Destiny . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding = = = 
 In the early 1990s , Alex Seropian was pursuing a mathematics degree at the University of Chicago , as the university did not offer undergraduate degrees in computer science . Seropian 's first video game was a Pong clone called Gnop ! ( Pong spelled backwards ) . Seropian released Gnop ! free of charge , though a few players paid Seropian for the source code . Living at home shortly before graduation , his father 's wishes for him to get a job convinced Seropian to start his own game company instead . Seropian founded Bungie in 1991 to publish Operation : Desert Storm . Seropian culled funding from friends and family , assembling the game boxes and writing the disks himself . Operation : Desert Storm sold 2 @,@ 500 copies , and Seropian looked for another game to publish . 
 Seropian met programmer Jason Jones in an artificial intelligence course at the University of Chicago . Jones was a longtime programmer who was porting a game he wrote , called Minotaur , from an Apple II to the Apple Macintosh platform . Jones recalled , " I didn 't really know [ Alex ] in the class . I think he actually thought I was a dick because I had a fancy computer . " Seropian and Jones partnered to release the role @-@ playing video game as Minotaur : The Labyrinths of Crete in 1992 ; while Jones finished the coding , Seropian handled design and publicity . The game relied on a then @-@ uncommon internet modems and AppleTalk connections for play and sold around 2 @,@ 500 copies , but it developed a devoted following . 
 The team focused on the Macintosh platform , not Windows @-@ based personal computers , because the Mac market was more open and Jones had been raised on the platform . While Jones was responsible for many of the creative and technical aspects , Seropian was a businessman and marketer . " What I liked about [ Seropian ] was that he never wasted any money , " Jones recalled . With no money to hire other personnel , the two assembled Minotaur boxes by hand in Seropian 's apartment . While the pair remained low on funds — Seropian 's wife was largely supporting him — the modest success of Minotaur gave the duo enough money to develop another project . 
 Inspired by the shooter game Wolfenstein 3D , Jones wrote a 3D game engine for the Mac . Bungie 's next game was intended to be a 3D port of Minotaur , but Jones and Seropian found that Minotaur 's top @-@ down perspective gameplay did not translate well to the 3D perspective , and did not want to rely on modems . Instead , they developed a new storyline for the first @-@ person shooter that became Pathways into Darkness , released in 1993 . Jones did all the coding , with his friend Colin Brent creating the game 's art . The game was a critical and commercial success , winning awards including Inside Mac Games ' " Adventure Game of the Year " and Macworld 's " Best Role @-@ Playing Game . " 
 Pathways beat sales expectations and became Bungie 's first commercial success . Bungie moved from a one @-@ bedroom apartment to a studio in Chicago 's South Side on South Halsted Street ; Seropian and Jones 's first full @-@ time employee , Doug <unk> , joined in May 1994 to provide support for Pathways , but became Bungie 's public relations person , honing Bungie 's often sophomoric sense of humor and irreverence . Bungie composer Martin O 'Donnell remembered that the studio 's location , a former girl 's school next to a crack house , " smelled like a frat house after a really long weekend " and reminded staff of a locale from the Silent Hill horror video games . 
 = = = Marathon , Myth and Oni = = = 
 Bungie 's next project began as a sequel to Pathways into Darkness , but evolved into a futuristic first person shooter called Marathon . Not only did it introduce the rocket jumping mechanic to gamers for the first time ( then known as " hopping " ) , it was the first control system where players could use the mouse to look up and down as well as pan side @-@ to @-@ side . Pathways had taught Bungie the importance of story in a game , and Marathon featured computer terminals where players could choose to learn more about the game 's fiction . The studio became what one employee termed " your stereotypical vision of a small computer @-@ game company — eating a lot of pizza , drinking a lot of Coke " while the development team worked 14 hours every day for nearly six months . 
 After showing the game at the Macworld Expo , Bungie was mobbed with interest and orders for the game . The game was not finished until December 14 , 1994 ; Jones and a few other employees spent a day at a warehouse assembling boxes so that some of the orders could be filled before Christmas . The game was a critical and commercial success , and is regarded as a relatively unknown but important part of gaming history . It served as the Mac alternative to DOS PC @-@ only games like Doom and System Shock . The game 's volume of orders was unprecedented for the studio , who found that its old method of mail or phone orders could not scale to the demand and hired another company to handle the tens of thousands of orders . Marathon also brought Bungie attention from press outside the small Mac gaming market . 
 The first game 's success led to a sequel , Marathon 2 : Durandal . The series introduced several elements , including cooperative mode , which made their way to later Bungie games . The game was released November 24 , 1995 , and outsold its predecessor . When Bungie announced its intention to port the game to the Windows 95 operating system , however , many Mac players felt betrayed , and Bungie received a flood of negative mail . Seropian saw the value of moving into new markets and partnering with larger supply chains , although he lamented the difficult terms and " <unk> " contracts distributors provided . The game released on Windows 95 in September 1996 . 
 Marathon Infinity was released the following year . 
 After Marathon , Bungie moved away from first @-@ person shooters to release a strategy game , Myth : The Fallen Lords . The games stressed tactical unit management as opposed to the resource gathering model of other combat strategy titles . The Myth games won several awards and spawned a large and active online community . Myth : The Fallen Lords was the first Bungie game to be released simultaneously for both Mac and Windows platforms . 
 The success of Myth enabled Bungie to change Chicago offices and establish a San Jose , California based branch of the studio , Bungie West , in 1997 . Bungie West 's first and only game would be Oni , an action title for the Mac , PC and PlayStation 2 . 
 = = = Halo and buyout = = = 
 In 1999 , Bungie announced its next product , Halo , originally intended to be a third @-@ person shooter game for Windows and Macintosh . Halo 's public unveiling occurred at the Macworld Expo 1999 keynote address by Apple 's then @-@ interim @-@ CEO Steve Jobs ( after a closed @-@ door screening at E3 in 1999 ) . 
 On June 19 , 2000 , soon after Halo 's preview at Electronic Entertainment Expo 2000 , Microsoft announced that it had acquired Bungie Software and that Bungie would become a part of the Microsoft Game Division under the name Bungie Studios . Halo would be developed as an exclusive , first @-@ person shooter title for the Xbox . The reasons for Bungie accepting Microsoft 's offer were varied . Jones stated that " I don 't remember the details exactly , it was all a blur . We 'd been talking to people for years and years — before we even published Marathon , Activision made a serious offer . But the chance to work on Xbox — the chance to work with a company that took the games seriously . Before that we worried that we 'd get bought by someone who just wanted Mac ports or didn 't have a clue . " Martin O 'Donnell , who had joined Bungie as an employee only ten days before the merger was announced , remembers that the stability of the Xbox as a development platform was not the only benefit . Around the same time , it was discovered that Asian versions of Myth II could entirely erase a player 's hard drive ; the glitch led to a massive recall of the games right before they shipped , which cost Bungie nearly one million dollars . O 'Donnell stated in a Bungie podcast that this recall created some financial uncertainty , although accepting the offer was not something " Bungie had to do . " Seropian and Jones had refused to accept Microsoft 's offer until the entire studio agreed to the buyout . 
 As a result of the buyout , the rights to Myth and Oni were transferred to Take @-@ Two Interactive as part of the three @-@ way deal between Microsoft , Bungie and Take @-@ Two ; most of the original Oni developers were able to continue working on Oni until its release in 2001 . Halo : Combat Evolved , meanwhile , went on to become a critically acclaimed hit , selling more than 6 @.@ 5 million copies , and becoming the Xbox 's flagship franchise . 
 Halo 's success led to Bungie creating two sequels . Halo 2 was released on November 9 , 2004 , making more than $ 125 million on release day and setting a record in the entertainment industry . Halo 3 , the final installment in the original Halo trilogy , was released on September 25 , 2007 and surpassed Halo 2 's records , making $ 170 million in its first twenty @-@ four hours of release . 
 = = = Independent company = = = 
 On October 1 , 2007 , Microsoft and Bungie announced that Bungie was splitting off from its parent and becoming a privately held limited liability company named Bungie , LLC . As outlined in a deal between the two , Microsoft would retain a minority stake and continue to partner with Bungie on publishing and marketing both Halo and future projects , with the Halo intellectual property belonging to Microsoft . 
 While Bungie planned on revealing a new game at E3 2008 , Bungie studio head Harold Ryan announced that the unveiling was canceled . Almost three months later , Bungie announced that the new game was a prequel and expansion to Halo 3 titled Halo 3 : Recon . The next month , Bungie changed game 's title from Halo 3 : Recon to Halo 3 : ODST . At E3 2009 , Bungie and Microsoft revealed the company was developing another Halo @-@ related game , Halo : Reach , for release in 2010 . Reach was the last game in the Halo franchise to be developed by Bungie . 
 Bungie continued expanding , though it did not commit to details about new projects and ship dates . The company grew from roughly 120 employees in May 2008 to 165 in June 2009 , outgrowing the studio Microsoft developed . Ryan helped redesign a former multiplex movie theater in Bellevue into new Bungie offices , with 80 @,@ 000 square feet ( 7 @,@ 400 m2 ) replacing the 41 @,@ 000 square feet ( 3 @,@ 800 m2 ) the company occupied previously . 
 On April 29 , 2010 , Bungie announced that it was entering into a 10 @-@ year publishing agreement with publisher Activision Blizzard . Under Bungie 's agreement with Activision , new intellectual property developed by Bungie will be owned by Bungie , not Activision , in a deal similar to the EA ( Electronic Arts ) Partners Program . 
 On June 30 , 2011 , Bungie announced the " Bungie Aerospace " project ( Slogan " Per <unk> ad astra " meaning " <unk> to the stars " . ) The project is intended to provide independent game developers with publishing , resources , and support , including access to the Bungie.net platform . On November 18 , 2011 , Bungie Aerospace published its first game , Crimson : Steam Pirates , for iOS , developed by startup video game developer Harebrained Schemes . In addition to publishing and distributing Crimson , Bungie Aerospace also provided players with statistical support and a dedicated discussion forum on Bungie.net. 
 On February 17 , 2013 , Bungie announced Destiny , which launched for the PlayStation 3 , PlayStation 4 , Xbox 360 , and Xbox One platforms on September 9 , 2014 . 
 On January 27 , 2016 , Ryan stepped down as president and Pete Parsons , who had been the company 's chief operating officer and executive producer since 2002 , became its chief executive officer . 
 = = Bungie.net = = 
 Bungie.net serves as the main official portal for interaction between company staff and the community surrounding Bungie 's games . When Bungie was bought by Microsoft , the site was originally seen as in competition with Microsoft 's own Xbox.com site , but community management eventually won out as the bigger concern . The site has been redesigned several times . 
 During Bungie 's involvement with the Halo franchise , the site recorded statistics for each game played . This information included statistics on each player in the game , and a map of the game level showing where kills occurred , called " <unk> . " On January 31 , 2012 , Bungie announced that , as of March 31 , 2012 , Bungie.net would no longer update Halo game statistics and Halo player service records , host new user @-@ generated Halo content , or operate Halo 's " Bungie Pro " service . Bungie 's cessation of these services on March 31 completed the transition process of all data for Halo games being managed by 343 Industries . Currently , Bungie.net records player 's statistics for their game franchise Destiny . In addition to the collection of data and the management of Destiny player 's accounts , the website serves as a form of communication between Bungie and the community . 
 While Bungie had long provided places for fans to congregate and talk about games , as well as releasing new information and screenshots over Bungie.net , it historically had made less effort and been less successful at providing access to the inside workings of Bungie and its staff . As part of a move to become more familiar with fans , Bungie recruited recognized and respected voices from the fan community , including writers Luke Smith , Eric Osborne , and others . The developer hosts a podcast where staff members are interviewed in a round @-@ table , informal atmosphere . 
 Bungie also has an iOS and Google Play application that allows stat @-@ tracking for their game Destiny on the go . 
 = = Culture = = 
 Martin O 'Donnell described Bungie 's workplace culture as " a slightly irreverent attitude , and not corporate , bureaucratic or business @-@ focused " ; artist Shi Kai Wang noted that when he walked into Bungie for an interview , " I realized that I was the one who was over @-@ dressed , [ and ] I knew this was the place I wanted to work . " Frank O 'Connor comically noted that at a <unk> conference , the Bungie team was told to wear business casual , to which O 'Connor replied " We [ Bungie ] don 't do business casual . " 
 This informal , creative culture was one of the reasons Microsoft was interested in acquiring Bungie , although game designer Jordan Weisman said that Microsoft came close to destroying the company 's development culture , as it had with the now @-@ defunct FASA Studio . Studio head Harold Ryan emphasized that even when Bungie was bought by Microsoft , the team was still independent : 
 One of the first things [ Microsoft ] tried after acquiring Bungie , after first attempting to fully assimilate them , was to move Bungie into a standard Microsoft building with the rest of the game group . But unlike the rest of the teams they 'd brought in previously , Bungie didn 't move into Microsoft corporate offices – we tore all of the walls out of that section of the building and sat in a big open environment . Luckily Alex and Jason [ Seropian and Jones , Bungie 's founders ] were pretty steadfast at the time about staying somewhat separate and isolated . 
 Microsoft eventually moved the studio to Kirkland , Washington . Despite the move , financial analyst Roger Ehrenberg declared the Bungie @-@ Microsoft marriage " doomed to fail " due to these fundamental differences . Bungie also pointed out that it was tired of new intellectual property being cast aside to work on the Halo franchise . Edge described the typical Bungie employee as " simultaneously irreverent and passionately loyal ; fiercely self @-@ critical ; full of excitement at the company 's achievements , no matter how obscure ; [ and ] recruited from its devoted fanbase . " 
 The Bungie workplace is highly informal , with new and old staff willing to challenge each other on topics , such as fundamental game elements . Staff are able to publicly criticize their own games and each other . Fostering studio cooperation and competition , Bungie holds events such as the " Bungie Pentathlon " , in which staff square off in teams playing games such as Halo , <unk> , Dance Dance Revolution , and Rock Band . Bungie also faced off against professional eSports teams and other game studios in Halo during " <unk> " , with the results of the multiplayer matches being posted on Bungie.net. 
 Bungie 's staff and fans , known as the " Seventh Column , " have banded together for charity and other causes . After Hurricane Katrina , Bungie was one of several game companies to announce its intention to help those affected by the hurricane , with Bungie donating the proceeds of special T @-@ shirts to the American Red Cross ; after the 2010 Haiti earthquake , Bungie sold " Be a Hero " T @-@ shirts and donated money to the Red Cross for every Halo 3 or ODST player on Xbox Live who wore a special heart @-@ shaped emblem . Other charity work Bungie has done included auctioning off a painting of " Mister Chief " by Frank O 'Connor , a Halo 2 soda machine from Bungie 's offices , and collaborating with Child 's Play auctions . In 2011 , Bungie formed a nonprofit organization , named Bungie Foundation . 
 = = Developed games = = 
 = = Related companies = = 
 Many of Bungie 's employees have left the company to form their own studios . Double <unk> was a short @-@ lived company composed of several former Bungie team members , founded by Greg Kirkpatrick . Seropian left to form Wideload Games , creator of Stubbs the Zombie in " Rebel Without a Pulse " . Other companies include Giant Bite , founded by Hamilton Chu ( former lead producer of Bungie Studios ) and Michal Evans ( former Bungie programmer ) , and Certain Affinity , founded by Max Hoberman ( the multiplayer design lead for Halo 2 and Halo 3 ) ; Certain Affinity 's team included former Bungie employees David Bowman and Chad Armstrong ( who later returned to Bungie ) . The company collaborated with Bungie in releasing the last two downloadable maps for Halo 2 and the downloadable Defiant Map Pack for Halo : Reach . 343 Industries , a game studio formed by Microsoft to manage the Halo series following the launch of Halo : Reach , also includes a few former Bungie employees , including former Community Manager Frank O 'Connor . In 2015 , long time ex @-@ Bungie employee Marty O 'Donnell started a new game studio known as <unk> Games . 
 = 1987 Giro d 'Italia = 
 The 1987 Giro d 'Italia was a cycling competition and the 70th edition of the race , one of cycling 's Grand Tours . It began on 21 May with a 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) prologue in San Remo , and concluded on 13 June with a 32 km ( 19 @.@ 9 mi ) individual time trial in Saint @-@ Vincent . A total of 180 riders from 20 teams entered the 22 @-@ stage , 3 @,@ 915 km ( 2 @,@ 433 mi ) -long race , which was won by Irishman Stephen Roche of the Carrera Jeans – Vagabond team . Second and third places were taken by British rider Robert Millar and Dutchman Erik Breukink , respectively . It was the second time in the history of the Giro that the podium was occupied solely by non @-@ Italian riders . Roche 's victory in the 1987 Giro was his first step in completing the Triple Crown of Cycling – winning the Giro d 'Italia , the Tour de France , and the World Championship road race in one calendar year – becoming the second rider ever to do so . 
 Roche 's teammate and defending champion Roberto Visentini took the first race leader 's maglia rosa ( English : pink jersey ) after winning the opening prologue , only to lose it to Breukink the following stage . Roche took the overall lead after his team , Carrera Jeans – Vagabond , won the stage three team time trial . Visentini regained the lead for a two @-@ day period after the stage 13 individual time trial . The fifteenth stage of the 1987 Giro has been recognized as an iconic event in the history of the race because Roche rode ahead of teammate Visentini , despite orders from the team management , and took the race lead . Roche successfully defended the overall lead from attacks by Visentini and other general classification contenders until the event 's finish in Saint @-@ Vincent . 
 Stephen Roche became the first Irishman to win the Giro d 'Italia . In addition to the general classification , Roche also won the combination classification . In the other race classifications , Johan van der Velde of Gis Gelati – Jollyscarpe won the points classification , Robert Millar of Panasonic – Isostar took the mountains classification green jersey , and Selca – Conti 's Roberto Conti completed the Giro as the best neo @-@ professional in the general classification , finishing fifteenth overall . Panasonic – Isostar finished as the winners of the team classification , which ranks each of the twenty teams contesting the race by lowest cumulative time . 
 = = Teams = = 
 A total of 20 teams were invited to participate in the 1987 Giro d 'Italia . Each team sent a squad of nine riders , which meant that the race started with a peloton of 180 cyclists . The presentation of the teams – where each team 's roster and manager are introduced in front of the media and local dignitaries – took place on 20 May , outside the Casino of San Remo . From the riders that began this edition , 133 completed the race . 
 The teams entering the race were : 
 = = Pre @-@ race favorites = = 
 Reigning champion Roberto Visentini returned to the race in 1987 to defend his crown , despite not winning many races in his spring campaign . Francesco Moser , who won in 1984 and finished in the top three in 1985 and 1986 , did not participate because of a head trauma and bruises sustained in a crash in the weeks prior to the race . Spanish sports newspaper El Mundo Deportivo and Gian Paolo Ormezzano from Italy 's La Stampa named several other riders as contenders for the overall classification , such as Giuseppe Saronni , then @-@ world champion Moreno Argentin , Stephen Roche , and Robert Millar . Since Toshiba – Look team leader Greg LeMond did not participate in the race due to injuries sustained in a hunting accident , El Mundo Deportivo believed Jean @-@ François Bernard to be a dark horse . L 'Unità writer Gino Sala believed Roche , Saronni , and Visentini were the top three challengers for the overall crown , while Ormezzano considered that Argentin , Guido Bontempi , Urs Freuler , and Paolo Rosola all had a great chance to win a stage in the race . Mario Fossati of La Repubblica also thought that Bernard , Bontempi , and Phil Anderson could take a stage win . 
 There was a strong belief that the race would be a battle between Carrera Jeans – Vagabond teammates Visentini and Roche . El Mundo Deportivo stated that Visentini had the edge in the time trial discipline and sprinting , while Roche had the advantage in climbing mountains . However , unlike Visentini , Roche came into the race in great shape after winning the Tour de Romandie and placing second in the Liège – Bastogne – Liège and the Critérium International . Cycling expert and author Bill McGann thought that the race would be disputed between Visentini and Gianbattista Baronchelli . 
 = = Route and stages = = 
 The route for the 1987 edition of the Giro d 'Italia was revealed to the public on television by head organizer Vincenzo Torriani on 21 February 1987 . Covering a total of 3 @,@ 915 km ( 2 @,@ 433 mi ) , it included five time trials ( four individual and one for teams ) , and thirteen stages with categorized climbs that awarded mountains classification points . Five of these thirteen stages had summit finishes : stage 1a , to San Romolo ; stage 6 , to Monte Terminillo ; stage 15 , to <unk> ; stage 19 , to <unk> ; and stage 21 , to Pila . Another stage with a mountain @-@ top finish was stage 13 , which consisted of a climbing time trial to San Marino . The organizers chose to include one rest day between stages 10 and 11 . When compared to the previous edition , the race had the same amount of stages – although one stage consisted of two half @-@ stages – but was 56 @.@ 4 km ( 35 mi ) longer and contained an additional individual time trial . The sixteenth stage , which ran from <unk> to <unk> , was named the queen stage for its five categorized climbs . 
 Race director Torriani was happy with the success the 1985 Giro d 'Italia had when passing through the Aosta Valley and chose to include this mountainous region , which lies adjacent to the Rhône @-@ Alpes , in the 1987 route . With the Giro 's return to the valley , La Stampa and the regional cycling federation director , <unk> Ferrero , speculated that the stages taking place in this region would be critical in deciding the general classification . Carlo <unk> , a climbing champion of Aosta Valley , believed it to be a well @-@ constructed , technical race route . The time trial in San Marino , the sixth stage with the finish atop Monte Terminillo , and the stages including the Dolomites were seen by L 'Unità writer Gino Sala as stages that would heavily influence the general classification . In addition , he said that the route was suited to well @-@ rounded , strong , and durable riders . 
 = = Race overview = = 
 The Giro began with a 4 km ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) prologue through the streets of San Remo . The returning winner of the Giro , Roberto Visentini , won the prologue by two tenths of a second over the Canadian rider Steve Bauer . The next race day held two stages : a 31 km ( 19 @.@ 3 mi ) stage with a summit finish , followed by a downhill individual time trial . Panasonic – Isostar 's Erik Breukink took the climbing half @-@ stage win with a solo attack . His performance earned him the race leader 's maglia rosa ( English : pink jersey ) , which he kept until the third stage . Stephen Roche won the time trial half @-@ stage with a three @-@ second margin over Del Tongo 's Lech Piasecki . Johan van der Velde formed a lead group with about 30 km ( 18 @.@ 6 mi ) to go in the second stage , but as he posed a threat to the race lead , he was not given a large advantage and was subsequently caught by the chasing peloton 7 km ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) from the finish . The main field remained intact for the remaining kilometers and the race geared up for a sprint finish won by Moreno Argentin . 
 The third stage was a lengthy team time trial that stretched for 43 km ( 26 @.@ 7 mi ) between Lerici and Camaiore . Carrera Jeans – Vagabond beat out the Del Tongo squad by fifty @-@ four seconds to win the leg . In addition to the stage victory , Carrera Jeans – Vagabond 's Roche took the overall lead . As the leading group approached the fourth stage finish line , Argentin sprinted away with 800 m ( 2 @,@ 625 ft ) to go and created a two @-@ second gap between himself and the rider in second place that was enough to earn him a second stage win . The fifth stage was relatively flat and was used to set up the race to enter the Apennine Mountains the following day . The leg culminated in a mass sprint that was won by Panasonic – Isostar 's Belgian rider Eddy Planckaert , after overcoming Paolo Rosola in the closing meters . 
 Roche defended his race lead until stage thirteen , a 46 km ( 28 @.@ 6 mi ) climbing individual time trial to Monte <unk> in San Marino , where he lost the pink jersey to his teammate and stage winner Visentini . Roche claimed his performance in the stage was hampered due to injuries sustained from a crash in the tenth stage . At 260 km ( 161 @.@ 6 mi ) , the fourteenth stage was the longest of the race . It was won in a mass sprint by <unk> Fanini 's Paolo Cimini , who overtook Rosola in the final meters . 
 The fifteenth stage saw the race enter the Dolomites and traverse three major climbs within the mountain chain . On the descent of the Monte Rest , Roche formed a leading group with two other riders after speeding away from the race leader 's group . Despite orders from his team management , Roche continued with the move . The Carrera Jeans @-@ Vagabond pack chased after the Roche group to protect the advantage of Roche 's teammate and race leader Visentini . Roche crossed the finish line in twelfth place , fifty @-@ six seconds after the stage winner van der Velde , which allowed him to don again the pink jersey by five seconds over Tony Rominger . Roche 's actions , taking the race lead away from Visentini and disobeying team commands , gained him the hatred of the Italian <unk> fans . 
 The sixteenth leg of the race included five categorized climbs before concluding in the municipality of <unk> . On the descent of the Pordoi Pass , van der Velde broke away and caught up to the leader on the road before winning his second consecutive stage . Meanwhile , behind van der Velde , Visentini tried several times to attack Roche on the slopes of the Passo Fedaia ; however , Roche marked all of his moves and the two raced to the finish in the same group . Stage 17 , the race 's final day in the Dolomites , was marred by poor weather . A breakaway group of three was given a significant gap as the main general classification contenders rode behind in a collective group . Atala Ofmega 's Italian rider Marco Vitali out @-@ sprinted his two fellow breakaway members to win his first Grand Tour stage win . 
 As the eighteenth stage began , the peloton felt they deserved a rest day after three difficult stages in the Dolomites and collectively rode at a non @-@ aggressive pace for over three @-@ quarters of the stage . Riders began to attack and form breakaway groups with about 30 km ( 18 @.@ 6 mi ) to go ; however , the sprinters ' teams reeled in all attacks and prepared for a sprint finish that was eventually won by Giuseppe Calcaterra , making it the second consecutive stage win for Atala @-@ Ofmega . During the nineteenth stage , Jean @-@ François Bernard launched an attack after the leading group finished the climb of the San Marco Pass . Three riders joined Bernard before the start of the final climb in <unk> , but Bernard dropped them early on in the climb and rode the final 18 km ( 11 @.@ 2 mi ) alone to win the stage . Millar and Marino Lejarreta managed to gain over thirty seconds on Roche after they attacked on the final climb . Despite a crash within the final kilometer of stage twenty , the main field managed to hold a bunch sprint that was won by Rosola . 
 In the twenty @-@ first leg , the general classification contenders were a part of the same leading group until the final climb to the summit finish in Pila . Lejarreta attacked 12 km ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) from the finish and only seven other riders were able to mark , including Millar and Roche . Over 6 km ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) later , the Spaniard attacked again and only Roche and Millar remained with him . Despite further attacks by Lejarreta , the group rode together up to the finish . With over 300 m ( 984 @.@ 3 ft ) to go , Millar unleashed a sprint that won him the stage . Millar 's performance on the stay brought him to second place overall . The final stage of the 1987 Giro d 'Italia was a 32 km ( 19 @.@ 9 mi ) individual time trial . Visentini , who had crashed in the previous stage , did not start and abandoned the race . Roche beat out the second @-@ place finisher , Dietrich Thurau , by fourteen seconds to win the day and the overall race itself . In doing so , Roche became the first Irishman to win the Giro d 'Italia . The other podium positions were filled by non @-@ Italian riders for the second time in the history of the race . 
 Four riders achieved multiple stage victories : Argentin ( stages 2 , 4 , and 7 ) , Rosola ( stages 8 , 10 , and 20 ) , Visentini ( prologue and stage 13 ) , and Roche ( stages 1b and 22 ) . Stage wins were achieved by seven of the twenty competing squads , five of which won multiple stages . Gewiss @-@ Bianchi collected a total of six stage wins through two riders , Argentin and Rosola . Carrera Jeans @-@ Vagabond achieved the same feat with individual stage wins from Bontempi ( stage 12 ) , Roche and Visentini ( two wins each ) , and a team time trial win ( stage 3 ) . Panasonic – Isostar amassed a total of three stage victories through Breukink ( stage 1a ) , Planckaert ( stage 5 ) , and Millar ( stage 21 ) . Atala @-@ Ofmega also secured three stage wins , through Freuler ( stage 9 ) , Vitali ( stage 17 ) , and Calcaterra ( stage 18 ) . Gis Gelati – Jollyscarpe won two stages with van der Velde ( stages 15 and 16 ) . Fagor – MBK also collected two stage successes , with Jean @-@ Claude Bagot ( stage 6 ) and Robert Forest ( stage 11 ) . <unk> – Fanini and Toshiba – Look both won a single stage at the Giro , the first through Cimini ( stage 14 ) , and the second through Bernard ( stage 19 ) . 
 = = Classification leadership = = 
 Four different jerseys were worn during the 1987 Giro d 'Italia . The leader of the general classification – calculated by adding the stage finish times of each rider , and allowing time bonuses for the first three finishers on mass @-@ start stages – wore a pink jersey . The time bonuses for the 1987 Giro were twenty seconds for the first place , fifteen seconds for the second place , ten seconds for the third place , and five seconds for the fourth place on the stage . This classification is the most important of the race , and its winner is considered to be the winner of the Giro . 
 For the points classification , which awarded a purple ( or cyclamen ) jersey to its leader , cyclists were given points for finishing a stage in the top 15 ; additional points could also be won in intermediate sprints . The green jersey was awarded to the mountains classification leader . In this ranking , points were won by reaching the summit of a climb ahead of other cyclists . Each climb was ranked as either first , second or third category , with more points available for higher category climbs . The Cima Coppi , the race 's highest point of elevation , awarded more points than the other first category climbs . The Cima Coppi for this edition of the Giro was the Passo Pordoi , and the first rider to cross it was Fagor – MBK 's Jean @-@ Claude Bagot . The white jersey was worn by the leader of young rider classification , a ranking decided the same way as the general classification , but considering only neo @-@ professional cyclists ( in their first three years of professional racing ) . Although no jersey was awarded , there was also one classification for the teams , in which the stage finish times of the best three cyclists per team were added ; the leading team was the one with the lowest total time . 
 = = Final standings = = 
 = = = General classification = = = 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Upon completing the final stage , Roche told the media that by winning the final time trial he felt he silenced any critics who doubted whether he should have won the race . In addition , Roche announced his intention to compete in the Tour de France in July . He won the Tour with a margin of forty seconds over the second @-@ place finisher and thus became the fifth rider to win the Giro and Tour in the same year . In September , Roche won the men 's road race at the 1987 UCI Road World Championships and became the second rider to achieve the Triple Crown of Cycling , which consists of winning two Grand Tour races and the men 's road race at the UCI Road World Championships in a calendar year . For his career successes in the Giro d 'Italia , Roche was inducted into the race 's Hall of Fame in 2014 . After dropping out of the 1987 edition of the Giro , Visentini did not win any further stages or classifications in major races , and retired from cycling in 1990 , at the age of 33 . 
 La Repubblica stated that the Italian riders had the second worst performance in the history of the Giro after 1972 , since none finished inside the top four and many famous Italian cyclists failed to complete the race . Mario Fossati , of La Repubblica , thought that van der Velde and Bernard performed very strongly , along with Argentin , whom he said was operating on " alternating current " . Fossati also said that Cimini and Calcaterra could have promising careers , based on their efforts during the race . 
 The 1987 Giro has become famous for the series of events involving teammates Roche and Visentini . Many writers highlight the fifteenth stage as the defining moment of the race . The Corriere delle Alpi and cycling book author Bill McGann even named it as one of the most famous in the Giro d 'Italia and cycling history . On that day , Roche – who was second in the general classification and over two minutes behind race leader Visentini – attacked the lead , despite orders from his team to stop . Upon completing the stage , Visentini told the press that either Roche or himself would not start the following day , while Roche independently held a press conference from his hotel and answered questions . Carrera Jeans @-@ Vagabond manager David <unk> ordered Roche and Visentini to stay silent . The following day , many Italian newspapers called Roche a betrayer or cheat for his actions . Despite Visentini 's statement , both riders started the sixteenth stage after receiving orders from Carrera company boss Tito <unk> . In the days that followed , Italian fans threw things and spat at Roche , which led him to receive police protection until the race 's conclusion . Looking back on the incident , Roche claimed that he just descended the mountain quicker than Visentini and did nothing wrong , while Visentini maintained that Roche attacked him when he should have been aiding him . Visentini accused Roche of dashing the team 's morale and strategy , but some critics believed that Roche 's actions were acceptable because he was the stronger rider . 
 = Hurricane Allison ( 1995 ) = 
 Hurricane Allison was the first named storm and first hurricane of the 1995 Atlantic hurricane season . It was an early season hurricane that delivered heavy rains and caused minor damage , primarily across Cuba , Florida and Georgia . 
 The storm developed on June 2 , less than 48 hours after the official start of the hurricane season . It strengthened into a tropical storm early on June 3 and into a hurricane on June 4 in the Gulf of Mexico . It would make landfall in the Big Bend area of Florida on June 5 before tracking northward as an extratropical system . One death was reported in Cuba . Allison 's early formation heralded the start of what would eventually become a very active 1995 hurricane season . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The origins of the system can be traced to a tropical wave that moved across the eastern Caribbean Sea in the last week of May . The wave gradually organized itself as it entered the western Caribbean Sea on June 1 . The circulation continued to close up on June 2 and that evening it was declared Tropical Depression One while east of Honduras . 
 The depression was in an unusually low @-@ shear environment for early June as it began tracking northward , which allowed the system to strengthen into Tropical Storm Allison on the morning of June 3 as it tracked into the Yucatan Channel . Despite the fact that westerly wind shear began to increase , the warm water allowed Allison to gradually strengthen more that afternoon and evening . Late that evening , while between the Yucatan Peninsula and Cuba , Allison developed a circular central dense overcast and became a high @-@ end tropical storm . As the storm emerged into the Gulf of Mexico , the warm waters allowed Allison to strengthen further and it was upgraded to a hurricane on the morning of June 4 while travelling almost due north . 
 Allison remained somewhat disorganized , as no eye was ever visible , even when Reconnaissance flights confirmed that it was at hurricane intensity . The storm maintained itself as a minimal hurricane throughout the day on June 4 before it began to turn to the northeast , in response to southwesterly shear . Late that evening , the storm began to weaken , dropping back to tropical storm intensity as it approached the Florida Big Bend area . The intensity leveled off on June 5 until it made landfall that morning . Allison made its first landfall at about 10 : 00 am EDT ( 1400 UTC ) near Alligator Point , Florida as a high @-@ end tropical storm with 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) winds . It briefly re @-@ emerged over Apalachee Bay and made another landfall near St. Marks , Florida about one hour later with 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) winds . Operationally , Allison was considered a hurricane until it made landfall , and was considered the earliest hurricane landfall in the United States for a while . 
 After making its final Florida landfall , Allison rapidly weakened . Tropical storm force winds continued over the eastern Florida Panhandle until late that afternoon , as the storm moved northward into Georgia . It weakened to a tropical depression on the evening of June 5 over southern Georgia . Early on June 6 , Allison began to transition into an extratropical storm as it interacted with a warm front to the northeast while tracking across the Carolinas . The remnant low emerged into the Atlantic Ocean off the coast of Cape Hatteras that evening . It then raced across the western Atlantic , crossing the easternmost part of Nova Scotia on June 8 and Newfoundland on June 9 . It continued northward across the Labrador Sea , dissipating on June 11 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Winds to tropical storm @-@ force were reported throughout the western part of Cuba , with a peak gust of 64 mph ( 102 km / h ) in Havana . Heavy rainfall of up to 18 inches ( 450 mm ) was also reported in the area . 32 houses were damaged or destroyed due to flooding that resulted . One person was killed in western Cuba and three others were injured . The overall economic loss as a result of the storm was reported to have fairly minor . 
 In Florida , Allison 's winds knocked down power lines , leaving 48 @,@ 000 residents without power or telephone services . Along the 150 @-@ mile ( 240 km ) stretch of Florida 's Big Bend , 65 seaside homes were flooded and there was extensive beach erosion as a result of the storm surge . Three hotels and a restaurant were damaged . In Apalachicola , three fishing boats were swamped ; the storm closed a bridge linking Apalachicola with St. George Island . The highest storm surge in Florida was about 6 to 8 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 5 m ) in Wakulla and Dixie Counties , and 2 to 6 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 to 1 @.@ 8 m ) to the east . A tornado spawned by Allison touched down at Jacksonville Beach , causing minor damage when it downed power lines and flipped over vehicles . Minor crop damage was also reported . There were no deaths reported as a result of Allison in Florida . Damage was estimated at $ 860 @,@ 000 ( 1995 USD ) in Florida , primarily as a result of the storm surge . 
 Most of the damage in Georgia was as a result of several tornadoes related to Allison . The most significant of the tornadoes touched down in the town of St. Marys . An elementary school was destroyed and significant damage was also reported to several buildings at the Kings Bay Naval Submarine Base . Several other tornadoes also touched down but damage from them was minimal . Damage from the tornado was estimated at $ 800 @,@ 000 ( 1995 USD ) . 
 = Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu = 
 Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu ( English : The Jasmine Vine in Seethamma 's Courtyard ) is a 2013 Indian Telugu @-@ language drama film written and directed by Srikanth Addala . It was produced by Dil Raju 's Sri Venkateswara Creations , and features Daggubati Venkatesh , Mahesh Babu , Anjali and Samantha Ruth Prabhu in the lead roles , while Prakash Raj , Jayasudha , Rao Ramesh , Tanikella Bharani and Rohini Hattangadi play supporting roles . 
 The film focuses on a simple , middle @-@ class family in the village of Relangi whose head is a Good Samaritan with a positive outlook on life . Although his two sons have completed their education , they are unemployed . Their cousin , Seetha , lives with the family and loves the elder son . The younger son falls in love with Geetha , the daughter of Seetha 's paternal uncle . Amid a conflict between the elder son and Geetha 's father , the Good Samaritan teaches his sons and Geetha 's father the value of spreading love in life ; this is the film 's centrepiece . 
 In addition to directing the film , Addala worked on the script for three years after the release of his directorial debut , Kotha Bangaru <unk> ( 2008 ) . He wrote the screenplay , and Ganesh Patro wrote the film 's dialogue . Mickey J Meyer and Mani Sharma composed the soundtrack and score , respectively . Marthand K. Venkatesh edited the film and K. V. Guhan was its cinematographer . Production began on 6 October 2011 in Hyderabad ; principal photography began on 18 January 2012 in Vishakhapatnam , and finished on 24 December . In addition to Hyderabad , scenes were filmed in coastal Andhra Pradesh , Tamil Nadu and Kerala . 
 Considered the first star @-@ studded Telugu film in the last twenty or thirty years , Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu was released worldwide on 11 January 2013 to critical praise . The film was commercially successful , earning a distributor share of ₹ 550 million on a budget of ₹ 500 million , and was the second @-@ highest @-@ grossing Telugu film of the year ( after Attarintiki Daredi ) . It was dubbed in Tamil as Anandam <unk> by Viji Creations in 2013 . The film was one of twenty Telugu entries at the 61st National Film Awards . It received seven nominations at the 61st Filmfare Awards South and eleven nominations at the 3rd South Indian International Movie Awards , winning two awards at each : Best Actor Male — Telugu ( Mahesh ) and Best Playback Singer Female — Telugu ( Chithra ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A kindhearted man , known as " Relangi <unk> " ( " Relangi Uncle " ) by his family , lives in the village of the same name . His middle @-@ class family consists of his wife , mother , niece Seetha and three children : two sons ( Peddodu , " the elder " and Chinnodu , " the younger " ) and a daughter , Chinni . Peddodu is an introvert , who lives life on his own terms and is unsociable . Although Seetha wants to marry him , her love is apparently unrequited . Chinnodu is extrovert , who falls in love with Geetha , the daughter of Seetha 's paternal uncle who is jealous of Chinnodu 's father and denigrates his family 's economic status . Although the family is close @-@ knit , the brothers do not communicate well with each other . 
 Geetha 's sister recommends a marriage for Chinni to a relative of her in @-@ laws . At the wedding , Peddodu and Geetha 's father argue in the backyard about the latter 's sarcasm , increasing tensions further . Several days later , the brothers plan to leave for Hyderabad to find work . Geetha invites Chinnodu for lunch without informing him that her whole family will be there . Chinnodu and Geetha 's father argue , again over the latter 's sarcasm . When Geetha tries to calm the former , Peddodu is upset after knowing about their love affair . He abruptly leaves Relangi and Chinnodu , dejected , stays behind . This affects his relationship with Geetha , whose father has found her a husband . Although Seetha is also pressured to marry a man suggested by Geetha 's father , Peddodu and distant relative Kondala Rao convince the bridegroom to reject the proposal . 
 Relangi Uncle is injured in an accident in an attempt to save a young man . His condition stabilises , and the young man turns out to be the son of Peddodu 's former boss ' brother . The former employer apologises for his past misbehaviour , and offers Peddodu another job ; the gulf between the brothers widens . 
 Peddodu , Chinnodu and their family visit Bhadrachalam Temple for Rama Navami , the annual <unk> of Rama and Sita , and meet Geetha 's family there . The guest of honour , an MLA , asks Relangi Uncle to participate in the procession . Geetha 's father is surprised by this , and an electrical problem then arises . With help from volunteers and the police the brothers save the day , setting aside their differences and rescuing Geetha 's family . Relangi Uncle praises the brothers for their courage , telling them about them the importance of family , love and brotherhood . This changes their attitude and that of Geetha 's father , who is eavesdropping on the conversation . 
 Seetha is overjoyed to see the brothers reunited , and for the first time , Peddodu calls her by name instead of " Hey ! " and " Oy ! " . They are married , and Chinnodu and Geetha 's wedding is planned after her father reconciles with Relangi Uncle 's family . The brothers send gold bangles to their grandmother , evidence that they have found work . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 After the release of his directorial debut , Kotha Bangaru <unk> ( 2008 ) , Srikanth Addala worked for three years on Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu 's script . After Vedam 's release , in June 2010 Dil Raju began planning a film directed by Addala and featuring Daggubati Venkatesh and Pawan Kalyan as the male leads . Scripting began , and the film 's title was announced in September . When the project stalled , Addala approached Mahesh Babu with its script in June 2011 . 
 Mahesh agreed to act in the film after Addala met him to read the script during pre @-@ production for Dookudu ( 2011 ) . He and Venkatesh cited the script 's emotional depth and realistic approach as the reason they signed for the film . Addala approached Ganesh Patro in Chennai to write the film 's dialogue . Patro used the dialect spoken in the Godavari region of Andhra Pradesh , edited by Addala . It was his final project as a dialogue writer before his death in January 2015 . K. V. Guhan , who worked on the previous Mahesh films Athadu and Dookudu , was signed as Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu 's cinematographer . 
 Mickey J Meyer , who worked with Addala on the director 's debut , composed the film 's soundtrack and Mani Sharma composed its score . Sharma had composed the score for Raju 's 2011 production , Oh My Friend , whose soundtrack was composed by Rahul Raj . Although production began in Hyderabad on the eve of Vijayadasami ( 6 October 2011 ) with a launch ceremony , Venkatesh and Mahesh did not attend due to previous film commitments . " Simple but beautiful " was announced as the film 's advertising slogan in June 2012 . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu is considered the first Telugu star @-@ studded film in the last two or three decades . After listening to Addala 's narration , Venkatesh felt that they could work more on the film 's script and the director agreed . The actor agreed to the film because he considered it a safe bet which would appeal to a family audience . Raju was interested in casting Mahesh as the lead for two reasons : the film , revolving around two brothers , required two popular actors as the leads and the producer again wanted to work with the actor after Murari ( 2001 ) , <unk> Donga ( 2002 ) , Okkadu ( 2003 ) and Athadu ( 2005 ) . Guhan told The Hindu that Venkatesh 's and Mahesh 's unnamed characters would simply be called Peddodu and Chinnodu , respectively . 
 Samantha Ruth Prabhu was signed to play Mahesh 's love interest in the film , and Raju asked her to allow 40 days for shooting . After Trisha Krishnan , Sneha , <unk> Chawla and Anushka Shetty were considered for the other female lead , Amala Paul was signed in mid @-@ December 2011 . After a photo shoot and the beginning of principal photography , Paul left the project in late January 2012 and Raju replaced her with Anjali . 
 Prakash Raj was cast in a principal role as the brothers ' father . When he failed to join the film unit in <unk> , it was rumoured that he had walked out of the film due to differences with Raju but Raju denied the reports . Jayasudha and Rohini Hattangadi were signed for supporting roles , and Hattangadi said that she would play the brothers ' grandmother . Rao Ramesh played Samantha 's father in the film . 
 Miss Dabur <unk> 2011 second runner @-@ up <unk> <unk> was signed for a supporting role in her acting debut , and <unk> was cast as Mahesh 's sister in the film . Ramaprabha , Tanikella Bharani , Kota Srinivasa Rao , Brahmanandam and <unk> Prasad later joined the film 's supporting cast . Traditional and formal costumes were supplied by the clothing chain Kalamandir . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began on 18 January 2012 in Vishakhapatnam , where several of Venkatesh 's scenes were filmed near the Andhra University campus and on the Ramakrishna Mission Beach . The next shooting schedule began in <unk> , Tamil Nadu , on 6 February 2012 and filming continued in Hyderabad during March . In <unk> a crowd disrupted shooting , and the film 's crew chose an undisclosed location to resume . Samantha joined the film unit on 28 March . After shooting was disrupted three times in Hyderabad by crowds , Mahesh suggested that Raju move production to Chennai ( where several wedding scenes were filmed at a coconut plantation ) . Rain increased production costs . 
 Part of the song " Yem <unk> " was shot at the Sabarmati Riverfront in mid @-@ April , the riverfront 's first appearance in a Telugu film . In addition to the riverfront , scenes were filmed over a fifteen @-@ day schedule in shopping malls and gardens around Ahmedabad . Addala chose the city for its developing infrastructure , friendly people and climatic similarity to Hyderabad . On 31 May 2012 , Raju told the media that 35 percent of Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu 's filming was completed and the next shooting schedule would begin at Ramoji Film City . A house set worth ₹ 10 million was built at the studio under the supervision of A. S. Prakash . Venkatesh and Anjali began a four @-@ day shooting schedule at Ahobilam on 4 July . After several key scenes were filmed in Relangi , near <unk> , a new schedule began in Bhadrachalam on 16 July . 
 Filming was delayed when Samantha became ill , resuming on 19 August after her recovery . By mid @-@ September , the producers had filmed for nearly 80 working days . Wedding and other crucial scenes were filmed in Chennai . By then the shooting of five songs was completed , with work on two more songs and detail work pending . Raju planned two shooting schedules : one from 28 September to 12 October , and the other from 15 November to the end of the month . Filming continued on 2 October 2012 at Ramanaidu Studios . The film 's climactic scenes were shot in mid @-@ November 2012 on a custom @-@ built Bhadrachalam Temple set at Ramoji Film City , and the dialogue was wrapped up on 17 November . 
 A song featuring Mahesh and Samantha was shot in <unk> , Pune , in early December , and scenes following Chinni 's wedding were filmed in Dwaraka Tirumala . Another song featuring Venkatesh and Anjali was shot in Kerala under the supervision of Prem Rakshith ; its completion marked the end of principal photography on 24 December . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 On 6 October 2012 , a pooja commemorated the beginning of the film 's dubbing . Post @-@ production was planned simultaneously for a December 2012 release . On 23 October , Samantha began dubbing her role in the film . This was the first time she dubbed for herself in a Telugu film ; her roles had previously been dubbed by the singer Chinmayi . Mahesh began dubbing his role on 10 December ; Venkatesh had completed most of his dubbing work by then , with only a few reels remaining . 
 In mid @-@ December , Samantha said that she had dubbed 40 percent of her role and the producers would decide if her voice would be retained ; Chinmayi and Dubbing Janaki were later chosen to dub for Prabhu and Hattangadi . Mahesh finished dubbing his role by early January 2013 , and post @-@ production ended on 3 January . The first copy of the film was sent to the Central Board of Film Certification on 7 January , and it received a U certificate the following day . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Raju said in early October 2011 that Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu would be a family drama ; its title focuses on the family system in India , a part of the Indian ideology of one world family . According to Addala , " Seethamma " stands for the goddess Sita , " Vakitlo " for India and " Sirimalle Chettu " for the Indian family . The mentality of a person who does not smile at a fellow human but preaches the need for change in society and improvement in human relations was the basis of the film 's script . The director tells the story of two brothers of different ages who are not expressive , showing them safeguarding their identities but having a deep love and respect for each other . 
 Addala travelled to Yanam and other places in East Godavari district to study the mentality and behaviour of the local people . He noticed that about 80 percent of the families had good fathers , and their sons ( who were struggling to find jobs and establish themselves ) reconciled easily after small disagreements . Addala decided to convey in the film that life would be easier if small problems can be corrected . Most of the characters , except Seetha , are drawn from real life ; Mahesh 's character represents youth , and Venkatesh and Prakash Raj 's characters exemplify an elder brother and a middle @-@ class father . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu 's soundtrack was composed by Mickey J Meyer , with lyrics by Anantha Sreeram and Sirivennela Sitaramasastri . Aditya Music acquired its marketing rights in early August 2012 , and the soundtrack was released at an event at Ramanaidu Studios in Nanakramguda , Hyderabad , on 16 December . A critical and commercial success , it was certified triple platinum at a 20 January 2013 ceremony at Shilpakala Vedika in Hyderabad . 
 = = Release = = 
 In late April 2012 the producers planned a worldwide release on 28 September , three weeks before the release of Cameraman Gangatho Rambabu . Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu 's release was expected to be postponed because of a filming delay after Samantha had an adverse drug reaction . Raju later announced that the film would be released on 21 December for Christmas , but due to production delays its release was postponed to 11 January 2013 for the three @-@ day Sankranthi holiday . At Mahesh 's suggestion a statewide premiere was planned a day before the general theatrical release , with the producers hoping to earn ₹ 10 million from the premiere . 
 Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu was released on 101 screens ( considered a record ) in the United States and on eight screens in Canada . The film was released in New York , New Jersey , the San Francisco Bay Area and Los Angeles . Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu was the first South Indian film to be released in Manhattan , premiering on 10 January 2013 at the Times Square AMC Empire 25 theatre . The film opened worldwide on 1 @,@ 500 screens . In Hyderabad and Secunderabad , it was released on 85 screens and the cities ' eight multiplexes scheduled 100 shows per day ; tickets for the first week sold out in one day . Raju scheduled screenings for women only on 14 , 15 and 16 January . 
 A Tamil remake proved cost @-@ prohibitive , leading to an announcement of the Tamil @-@ dubbed version Anandam <unk> in early October 2013 . Viji Creations acquired the dubbing rights and P. <unk> wrote the dialogue for the dubbed version . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 The film 's first @-@ look teaser was released on 31 May 2012 . Within a day of its release the teaser attracted 227 @,@ 319 views on YouTube , and 9 @,@ 416 members shared it on Facebook . First @-@ look posters saying " Happy birthday to my brother Mahesh Babu " , signed by Venkatesh , were released on 8 August . Publicist B. A. Raju announced that another teaser would be released on 12 December , the day before Venkatesh 's birthday , since the producers of Businessman ( 2012 ) had released a first @-@ look poster featuring Mahesh on 11 November 2011 . The film 's theatrical trailer was released on 13 December . Red Label and Mega Mart entered into a co @-@ branding partnership for the film . 
 = = = Pre @-@ release revenue = = = 
 Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu 's television broadcast rights were sold for ₹ 85 million to an undisclosed channel in early June 2012 . Theatrical distribution rights for Krishna district were sold for ₹ 27 @.@ 5 million in late October 2012 . Vintage Creations and <unk> Films acquired the theatrical distribution rights for East Godavari and Nellore districts for ₹ 28 @.@ 3 million and ₹ 18 @.@ 5 million , respectively . 14 Reels Entertainment , in association with FICUS , acquired the film 's overseas theatrical distribution rights in late November 2012 . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu 's Indian VCD , DVD and Blu @-@ ray discs were marketed by Aditya Videos . Overseas DVD and Blu @-@ ray discs were released in June 2013 by Bhavani Videos , and global television broadcast rights were acquired by MAA TV . After its global television premiere , Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu registered a TRP rating of 20 @.@ 00 , the second highest rating ever for a Telugu film after Magadheera ( 2009 ) which registered 22 @.@ 00 . It retained that spot until the global television premiere of Baahubali : The Beginning ( 2015 ) and <unk> ( 2015 ) . They registered the TRP ratings of 21 @.@ 84 and 21 @.@ 24 respectively , pushing Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu to the fourth spot . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu received generally @-@ positive reviews . Sangeetha Devi Dundoo of The Hindu called the film a " delightful family drama with its celebration of family bonds , love and marriage laced with laughter " , and Addala " wants to leave his audience with a thought , wants them to reflect on their relationships and overlook skirmishes that can sour family bonds " . Dundoo cited Guhan 's cinematography as one of the film 's highlights , and praised its performances . Mahalakshmi Prabhakaran of Daily News and Analysis called the film a " heartwarming watch that has its emotions and underlying message in the right place " . Calling Guhan 's cinematography and its music wonderful , Prabhakaran also praised the film 's cast . 
 According to IANS , " It is very unlikely to point out a single dull moment in this crowd @-@ pleasing , tear @-@ jerking healthy family entertainer that presents a story akin to every household " . The reviewer added that the film " may or may not inspire one and all , but it will definitely send everybody back home with a smile " . Shekhar of Oneindia Entertainment called the film a " good family entertainer " , adding that the audience would immerse themselves in the film and " feel like they are watching some real life sequences from in and around their house " . IndiaGlitz called the film a " heart @-@ tugging family entertainer " : " If Mahesh Babu seems to be the most important star , be it in terms of the screen time or the number of lines he gets to speak , it is Venkatesh who takes a lion 's share in <unk> 's story . It is around Peddodu that Srikanth Addala weaves a drama full of modest emotional highs and lilting moments " . 
 Karthik Pasupulate of The Times of India gave Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu 3 @.@ 5 out of five stars , calling it a " good old fashioned family drama sans the usual masala " and adding that it is " pleasant , well intended , and has some tender moments as well , but does it pack enough entertainment value " . Pasupulate praised the performances , calling them understated like the rest of the film . Sify gave the film 3 @.@ 25 out of five stars : " Seethamma <unk> Sirimalle Chettu definitely makes you moist @-@ eyed as you walk out from the theatre but it runs on a flimsy story . It is a film that reinforces the great Indian family values and is also a manipulative film like most Sooraj Barjatya 's films . " The reviewer praised the film 's climax , adding that Mahesh 's performance , the score , cinematography and its later scenes overshadowed its flaws . 
 Radhika Rajamani of Rediff gave the film three out of five stars : " While it cruises along smoothly , delving into relationships within the family , without too many conflicts or twists and turns , one feels an emotional disconnect sometimes because society has changed so much from what is portrayed on screen " . She added , " The storyline is realistic , in that it is all about the happenings in a middle class home , but it 's more about situations and doesn 't develop as a story . So if you want to see a non @-@ violent , family values kind of film , this one is for you . It 's just that it seems a little out of date . " B. V. S. Prakash of Deccan Chronicle gave the film 2 @.@ 5 out of five stars , calling it a " <unk> " and its scenes repetitive and tedious . Prakash praised the performances , however , especially those of Venkatesh and Mahesh . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu earned ₹ 98 @.@ 1 million on its first day at the AP @-@ Nizam box office — according to trade analyst Trinath , probably the best @-@ ever opening for a star @-@ studded Telugu film . Taran Adarsh called the film 's opening " mindblowing " as it earned US $ 205 @,@ 347 ( ₹ 11 @.@ 3 million ) at 62 locations on its Thursday previews in the United States . It earned $ 338 @,@ 228 on Friday , bringing its two @-@ day total to $ 552 @,@ 041 — the most successful opening for a Telugu film in the U.S. Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu netted ₹ 250 @.@ 1 million in four days at the global box office , the most successful opening in Mahesh and Venkatesh 's careers . The film grossed $ 1 @,@ 262 @,@ 100 ( ₹ 68 @.@ 7 million ) from reported screens in its first four @-@ day weekend in the United States , affecting other films ( such as Naayak and Matru Ki Bijlee Ka Mandola ) and surpassing the US lifetime earnings of Gabbar Singh ( 2012 ) . The film 's earnings declined 25 percent on its fifth day , and its five @-@ day total nett was ₹ 286 @.@ 6 million . Earning about ₹ 350 million in its first week , Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu broke box @-@ office records in several parts of the world . The film 's earnings declined 50 percent over its second weekend , with a ten @-@ day global box @-@ office nett of ₹ 450 million . In its second U.S. weekend the film earned $ 203 @,@ 160 ( ₹ 10 @.@ 9 million ) , bringing its ten @-@ day U.S. total to $ 1 @,@ 548 @,@ 709 ( ₹ 83 @.@ 1 million ) and setting a record for a Telugu film in that country . 
 By the end of its second week , Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu netted ₹ 510 million at the global box office . In the film 's third weekend it was affected by <unk> , earning about ₹ 1 @.@ 93 million from 20 screens in the United States . It completed its 50 @-@ day run on 3 March in 25 theatres . Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu netted ₹ 387 @.@ 5 million at the AP / Nizam box office during its run , earning a distributor share of ₹ 550 million at the global box office and declared a commercial success . It was the second @-@ highest @-@ grossing Telugu film of the year , after Attarintiki Daredi . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu was one of twenty Telugu film entries for the 61st National Film Awards . The film received seven nominations at the 61st Filmfare Awards South , including Best Telugu film , Best Director — Telugu and Best Actor — Telugu . It won two awards : Best Actor — Telugu ( Mahesh ) and Best Female Playback Singer — Telugu ( Chithra for " Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu " ) . 
 The film received eleven nominations at the 3rd South Indian International Movie Awards , where Venkatesh and Babu were nominated for Best Actor — Telugu and Anjali and Jayasudha were nominated for Best Supporting Actor Female — Telugu . It won two awards , again for Best Actor — Telugu ( Mahesh ) and Best Female Playback Singer — Telugu ( Chithra for " Seethamma Vakitlo Sirimalle Chettu " ) . Mahesh also received the " Best Actor for the Year 2013 " award at the 2015 TSR – TV9 National Film Awards . 
 = Third Test , 1948 Ashes series = 
 The Third Test of the 1948 Ashes series was one of five Tests in a cricket series between teams representing Australia and England . The match was played at Old Trafford in Manchester from 8 – 13 July , with a rest day on 11 July . The match was drawn after the whole of the fourth day and the first half of the fifth day was washed out due to rain ; England had the upper hand before the weather intervened . The draw maintained Australia 's 2 – 0 lead in the series , which was established through victories in the first two Tests . As Australia were the holders of The Ashes , the draw meant that England could do no better than level the series 2 – 2 by winning the last two Tests , and thus Australia retained The Ashes . 
 The Test started amid controversy following the omission of leading England batsman Len Hutton for performing poorly in the previous match . Having largely failed — apart from brief periods — to challenge Australia in the first two Tests , the hosts had made four changes to their team in an attempt to find a combination that could threaten the visitors ' supremacy . Australia made their first change for the series , ending the Test career of veteran batsman Bill Brown after two poor matches . England captain Norman Yardley won the toss and elected to bat , but his team were quickly in trouble , with Denis Compton forced from the field after being bloodied in the head by a Ray Lindwall bouncer . At this stage , the hosts were at 33 / 2 with an injured player , and they batted defensively for a period to try and regroup . Having received treatment , Compton returned with England in difficulty at 119 / 5 midway through the day and proceeded to score 145 not out , aided by several dropped catches , helping England to recover to 363 all out on the second afternoon . England could have been in an even stronger position , but Compton and seamer Alec Bedser were involved in a mix @-@ up , resulting in the latter being run out and ending a 121 @-@ run partnership . Lindwall was the most successful bowler , taking 4 / 99 . During the England innings , Australian opener Sid Barnes , who had gained much attention throughout the season for fielding at point @-@ blank range in front of the batsman on strike , was hit in the ribs by a Dick Pollard pull shot and had to be carried from the ground and hospitalised . In reply , Australia batted steadily to be 126 / 3 by the end of the second day , but then fell to be 172 / 6 — effectively seven wickets down with Barnes unable to bat after collapsing again — before evading the follow on by reaching 221 . Australia scored slowly through the innings , finding the hosts ' bowlers difficult to negotiate ; Bedser took 4 / 81 and Pollard 3 / 53 . 
 England began their second innings and were strongly placed on 174 / 3 at the end of the third day , an overall lead of 316 with seven wickets in hand . They had been aided by several dropped chances against Cyril Washbrook , who reached 85 by the close of play . However , rain meant that no play was possible on the fourth day and England did not have the opportunity to capitalise on their favourable position and set Australia a high runchase . Yardley declared on the final morning , but play did not start until mid @-@ afternoon due to continuing inclement weather . The Australian batsman thereafter played for a draw ; they batted slowly and reached 92 / 1 when stumps were drawn , not making an attempt to chase the 317 for victory . Arthur Morris made 54 not out , his second half @-@ century of the match to go with his 51 in the first innings , registering Australia 's top @-@ score on both occasions . Despite the fact that 30 % of the playing time was lost to rain , the match still managed to set a record for the highest attendance at a Test match in England , surpassing the mark set in the previous Test . 
 = = Background = = 
 Led by Donald Bradman , Australia had proceeded through the first two months of their 1948 England tour undefeated . After winning 10 of the 12 games before the Tests , eight of these by an innings , they won the First Test by eight wickets . Before the Second Test , they defeated Northamptonshire by an innings before drawing with Yorkshire . Bradman 's men then crushed England by 409 runs in the Second Test at Lord 's . Between Tests , they defeated Surrey by ten wickets and crushed Gloucestershire by an innings and 363 runs , having amassed 774 / 7 declared , their highest score of the season , and the second highest ever by an Australian team in England . 
 When the teams reconvened at Old Trafford for the Third Test , leading English batsman Len Hutton had been dropped . The reason was said to be Hutton 's struggles with Lindwall 's short @-@ pitched bowling in the previous Test , during which he scored 20 and 13 . Observers noticed Hutton backing away from the fast bowlers . The English selectors believed such a sight would have a negative effect on the rest of the side — which was not in good batting form — as it was a poor example from a key player . According to journalist and retired Australian Test leg spinner Bill O 'Reilly , Hutton 's second innings at Lord 's had been the worst of his career and gave the impression he had been scared of the Australian pace attack . The omission generated considerable controversy , and pleased the Australians , who felt Hutton was England 's best batsman , and thought he had been treated poorly by the selectors . Former Australian batsman Jack Fingleton pointed out that while Hutton had batted erratically and appeared uncomfortable in the previous Test , he also had a strong track record against the tourists , having made 52 and 64 for the Marylebone Cricket Club against Australia in the lead @-@ up matches , and 94 , 76 and 122 retired ill in his last three Test innings during the previous Ashes series of 1946 – 47 . O 'Reilly regarded Hutton 's omission as punitive and vindictive . He said if Hutton needed to be shielded from the new ball attack , then England should have reshuffled their batting order to place their beleaguered opener down the order . O 'Reilly said that as Hutton had a large range of attacking strokes , he was not a stereotypical , defensive opener who was mainly used to wear down the opening bowlers , and could be used in the middle order as an aggressor . 
 Hutton 's opening position was taken by debutant George Emmett , who made 43 and nine for Gloucestershire in Australia 's preceding tour match . In that match , two of Australia 's leading pacemen , Keith Miller and Bill Johnston , did not bowl . Despite scoring 76 and 92 in the preceding match against Warwickshire , Emmett was not having a prolific season ; he ended the summer with an average of 36 @.@ 11 . 
 England made three further changes . Spinner Jack Young and paceman Dick Pollard replaced the spin pair of Doug Wright and Jim Laker in the bowling department , meaning England would only play one slow bowler . Wright and Laker had struggled to penetrate the Australian batting lineup in the Second Test , taking match figures of 2 / 123 and 2 / 128 respectively . In contrast , Pollard had taken match figures of 4 / 85 for Lancashire in a match against Australia earlier in the season , and had taken 27 wickets in four county matches in the past fortnight . The selection was seen as being influenced by the fact the Test was being staged at Lancashire 's home ground , where Pollard was familiar with the conditions , and the Australians had a high regard for him . In the month since being dropped for the Second Test in favour of Wright , after taking 1 / 107 in the First Test , Young had returned to play for Middlesex , taking 27 wickets in five matches . Alec Coxon , the Yorkshire allrounder who made his Test debut in the previous match at Lord 's and opened the bowling , taking match figures of 3 / 172 and scoring 19 and a duck , was replaced by Jack Crapp , a debutant batsman . Crapp had scored 100 not out and 32 for Gloucestershire in the preceding match against the tourists . It was only the third century scored against Australia during the tour , and was part of a season in which Crapp had made four centuries and six half @-@ centuries in 16 matches thus far . Coxon 's omission was believed to have been caused more by off @-@ field events than sporting merit . There was a story that he punched Denis Compton — whom he disliked and considered self @-@ important — in the dressing room , but Coxon always denied this . However , there was certainly an altercation and Coxon was never selected again . O 'Reilly interpreted the omission of the Yorkshiremen Hutton and Coxon at the expense of the Gloucestershire pair of Crapp and Emmett as symptoms of a regional bias in the English selection panel . He pointed out that only one of the four selectors — England captain Norman Yardley , who was also from Yorkshire — was from the north of the country . 
 Australia dropped Bill Brown , who had scored 73 runs at a batting average of 24 @.@ 33 in three Test innings during the season . Brown was Australia 's reserve opener , but Bradman opted to play him out of position in the middle @-@ order , instead of using a specialist . Brown had also struggled in his unfamiliar position in the matches against Worcestershire and the Marylebone Cricket Club , scoring 25 and 26 . According to O 'Reilly , Brown had appeared out of place in the middle @-@ order because he was used to the opener 's classical role of defending against and wearing down the opening bowlers , rather than attacking . He was replaced by the all rounder Sam Loxton , who had hammered an unbeaten 159 — including several sixes — against Gloucestershire , and that innings was particularly noted for his quick footwork , which he used to charge and attack the off spin of Tom Goddard . 
 = = Scorecard = = 
 = = = England innings = = = 
 = = = Australia innings = = = 
 = = 8 July : Day One = = 
 The match started amid clear weather , a far cry from the previous Ashes Test at the ground in 1938 , which was abandoned without a ball being bowled due to continuous rain for several days . The outfield was also smooth and green , a contrast to its state during World War II , when it was left cratered by German bombing raids . Yardley won the toss and elected to bat . 
 The change in England 's opening pair did not result in an improvement on the scoreboard . A run out was narrowly avoided following a mix @-@ up on the first ball , and Cyril Washbrook and Emmett appeared to be uncomfortable on a surface that offered early assistance to the bowlers . The Australians themselves started with Ray Lindwall and Bill Johnston taking the new ball , but Bradman had misjudged the breeze and had to swap his bowlers ' ends . For this purpose , Loxton bowled a solitary over . He was erratic in his length and bowled three long hops outside leg stump at the debutant Emmett , who ignored the opportunity to attack and let the balls pass . At the other end , Washbrook also played watchfully and avoided any horizontal bat shots , apart from a missed cut against Johnston 's bowling . Overall however , the English openers appeared comfortable in the first half hour of play . 
 With 22 runs on the board after half an hour of play , Washbrook played around a yorker from Johnston and was bowled , much to the disappointment of his Lancashire home crowd . Johnston had been bowling from over the wicket , and his left @-@ arm deliveries had generally been swinging back into the right @-@ handed Washbrook . However , the opening batsman did not detect Johnston 's variation ball , which was released from wide of the crease and angled across more sharply without curling back in . Washbrook played inside the line of the ball , which hit his stumps . Australia nearly had two wickets in the same over as the new batsman Bill Edrich struggled . He played loosely outside the off stump to the first ball but did not get an edge , and on the third delivery he faced from Johnston , Edrich survived again . Receiving a ball on middle and leg stump , he tried to defend it straight back down the pitch , rather than the conventional stroke to the leg side , and managed to edge the ball past the slips for four . 
 Six runs after the fall of Washbrook , the diminutive Emmett fended a rising ball from Lindwall to Sid Barnes at short leg , leaving England 28 / 2 . Surprised by Lindwall 's bouncer , Emmett took his eyes from the ball and fended with one hand on the horizontally @-@ held bat , while ducking his head down below his arms . The ball bounced slowly off the pitch and after hitting Emmett 's bat , rebounded gently up in the air for Barnes to collect . In Australia 's match against Gloucestershire immediately preceding the Test , Lindwall bowled a bouncer to Emmett , who hesitantly parried it away for a single . Lindwall did not deliver any more bouncers to Emmett during the match , and O 'Reilly thought the paceman was quietly waiting until the Tests to expose his opponent 's weakness against the short ball . O 'Reilly concluded that Australia 's pace duo " had again disposed of the English opening batsmen with the minimum amount of effort " . 
 Edrich eschewed attacking strokeplay as he and Denis Compton attempted to establish themselves . He was hurried by the pace of Lindwall and Johnston , making many last @-@ moment movements to either hit the ball or withdraw from a shot . 
 Lindwall bowled a series of short balls . One hit Compton on the arm and the batsman attempted to hook another bouncer , but edged it into his face . Upon hearing the umpire 's call of no ball while the ball was travelling towards him , and knowing he was immune from dismissal , Compton decided to change his stroke . Having initially positioned himself to deflect the ball into the leg side , he then attempted to hook the ball , but could not readjust quickly enough . The velocity of the ball was such that it rebounded from his head and flew more than halfway to the boundary before landing . This forced Compton to leave the field with a bloodied eyebrow with the score at 33 / 2 . After a ten @-@ minute delay , Crapp strode to the centre for his debut innings , and he got off the mark from his first ball , gliding Lindwall past gully for a single . Lindwall then struck Edrich on the hand with another short ball , provoking angry heckling from spectators who compared him to Harold Larwood , a 1930s paceman who targeted batsmen with Bodyline , a strategy of intimidatory bowling . Edrich and Crapp then engaged in grim defensive play , resulting in one 25 @-@ minute period during which only one run was added , as England reached lunch with their total on 57 / 2 . Edrich had made 14 from 90 minutes of batting , while Crapp had made 11 in 60 minutes . One of the motives of batting slowly without taking risks was to ensure the innings lasted long enough that it would still be in progress by the time Compton recovered from his concussion , so he could resume batting . Edrich appeared to be lacking in confidence due to his recent run of low scores , and thus hesitant to play with any attacking intent , whereas Crapp was usually circumspect . For a series of accurate overs from Ernie Toshack , Crapp repeatedly defended a sequence of deliveries to Arthur Morris at silly point . Toshack 's first five overs were all maidens . 
 Upon the resumption , Crapp began to accelerate , hitting a six — which flew directly back over the bowler 's head and over the sightscreen — and three driven boundaries from the off spin of Ian Johnson . This was a stark contrast to Johnson 's first ten overs before lunch , which had yielded only seven runs . Crapp was eager to use his feet to get to the pitch of Johnson 's deliveries , and subsequently dealt with the spin fairly comfortably , whereas many of his compatriots stood in their crease and found matters much more difficult . He then hit Toshack to Barnes at short leg , but the catch was dropped . However , Crapp did not capitalise as Toshack conceded only eight runs in a sequence of eight overs . Australia took the new ball with the score at 87 and Lindwall trapped Crapp — who did not offer a shot — leg before wicket for 37 ; the batsman misjudged the line of a straight ball and thought it had pitched and struck his leg outside off stump . Tom Dollery came in and took a single to get off the mark but then missed a Johnston yorker and was bowled . This dismissal mirrored that of Washbrook 's in that Dollery failed to detect Johnston 's variation ball , and thus played for swing when there was none . England had lost two wickets for one run to be 97 / 4 . Captain Norman Yardley came in and played the fast bowling of Lindwall and Johnston with relative ease , retreating onto the back foot to allow himself more time to play his shots . Edrich was struck on the hand and Yardley edged to Keith Miller in the slips cordon on the half @-@ volley . 
 After 170 minutes of slow batting , Edrich gloved a rising Lindwall delivery and was caught behind by wicket @-@ keeper Don Tallon . At 119 / 5 , Compton returned to the field , his head wound having been stitched to stop the bleeding . He and Yardley played carefully until the tea break , and only the England captain offered a chance ; Barnes was unable to complete the reflex catch at short leg from the bowling of Toshack . After the resumption of play , Yardley on @-@ drove Lindwall for a four , but lofted Ernie Toshack , who had been bowling leg theory , into the packed on @-@ side where he was caught by Johnson at forward square leg . Toshack 's defensive bowling had caused the English skipper to lose patience and his departure for 22 left the score on 141 / 6 . 
 This brought wicket @-@ keeper Godfrey Evans to the crease and exposed the hosts ' lower @-@ order . The last of the specialist batsmen , Compton nearly departed soon after when he leaned forward to a leg @-@ side delivery from Johnson 's off spin . He overbalanced and stumbled forwards , and Tallon removed the bails . There were no television replays to assist the umpires in those days , and although the attempted stumping appeared close to the naked eye , the benefit of the doubt was given to the batsman and the appeal rejected . Compton made use of this and attacked Toshack successfully , forcing Bradman to make a bowling change . In fading light , Compton combined with the gloveman to add 75 runs for the seventh wicket in 70 minutes , before Lindwall removed Evans — who attempted a wild slash — to leave England 216 / 7 . Compton reached stumps on 64 , accompanied by Alec Bedser , who was on four , as England ended the day at 231 / 7 . Compton had been dropped one @-@ handed on 50 by Tallon , before being missed on 64 by the wicket @-@ keeper from the bowling of Johnston just before stumps . 
 = = 9 July : Day Two = = 
 England resumed on the second day at 231 / 7 amid dark skies and the threat of rain ; Australia was unable to break through despite taking the new ball . Bedser stubbornly defied the Australians , playing with a straight bat and stretching forward onto the front foot to block the ball . Tallon dropped Compton for the third time , off the bowling of Johnston when the batsman was on 73 . Lindwall bowled well below his top pace in the morning session and the batsmen slowly accumulated their runs . Bedser was the more defensive of the two Englishmen , and Compton drove Toshack past mid on for a four to register his second century of the series , after 235 minutes of batting . Lindwall then beat Compton in each of his last three overs before lunch , but the Englishman survived . England reached lunch at 323 / 7 having added 92 runs without losing a wicket . Compton was on 123 and Bedser on 37 , having brought up their century partnership . Five minutes were lost in the morning session when a stray dog invaded the playing arena and evaded policemen and a number of Australian fielders who attempted to catch it . 
 Immediately subsequent to the resumption , Compton took two boundaries from Lindwall 's first over and another from Johnston 's subsequent over . He then hit a ball into the covers and Bradman and Loxton collided in an attempt to prevent a run . Compton called Bedser through for a run on the misfield , but Loxton recovered and threw the ball to the wicket @-@ keeper 's end with Bedser a long way short of the crease . It ended an innings of 145 minutes , in which Bedser scored 37 and featured in a 121 @-@ run partnership with Compton . According to O 'Reilly , it was the only mistake Compton made in his innings . The stand fell five runs short of England 's highest Test partnership for the eighth wicket against Australia , a mark set by Patsy Hendren and Harold Larwood . 
 Pollard came to the crease and soon pulled a ball from Johnson into the ribs of Barnes , who was standing at short leg . Barnes stood closer than virtually all in that position , with one foot on the edge of the cut strip and he was unable to evade the ball . Barnes " dropped like a fallen tree " , and had to be carried from the ground by four policemen and taken to hospital for an examination . Throughout the season , Barnes had received a mixed reception for his tactics ; it was agreed they had a negative effect on the batsman , and there was a debate as to whether it was in the spirit of the rules . Compton hit two fours and Bradman responded by putting all of his men on the boundary to offer Compton a single so Pollard would be on strike and could be attacked . The Australia skipper then brought his men in close during the latter part of the over to prevent Compton from taking a single and regaining the strike for the following over . Compton was unable to farm the strike as he desired . 
 Toshack then bowled Pollard and Bradman caught Young from Johnston 's bowling as England were dismissed for 363 . Compton was unbeaten on 145 after 324 minutes of batting , having struck 16 fours . Lindwall took 4 / 99 and Johnston 3 / 67 . Miller did not bowl , so the four remaining frontline bowlers sent down no less than 38 overs each . 
 Australia came out to bat halfway through the middle session . Having dropped Brown , Barnes 's injury left Australia with only Arthur Morris as a specialist opener . Johnson was thus deployed as Australia 's makeshift second opener . He had never opened at Test level , but had once batted at No. 3 when used as a nightwatchman after the fall of the first wicket late on a day 's play . He was unable to make an impact — Bedser removed him for one , caught by Evans at chest height off the inside edge from a ball that reared from the pitch . It was a difficult catch as Evans was standing up to the stumps and he had little time to react to the ball 's change of direction . O 'Reilly criticised the use of Johnson as an opener , as vice @-@ captain Lindsay Hassett had transformed himself into a defensive batsman with little backlift and a guarded approach . Johnson 's dismissal brought Bradman in to face the new ball . The Australian captain thus had to face Bedser , who had already dismissed him three times in the Tests with a new ball , and Pollard , who had troubled him in the match against Lancashire . Pollard then trapped Bradman lbw with an off cutter that struck the Australian captain on the back foot for seven to leave Australia in trouble at 13 / 2 . This provoked a strong cheer from the crowd in support of Pollard , the Lancashire local . Australia were pinned down as Pollard bowled 17 consecutive overs from his long run , aiming for leg stump to stifle the scoring . He was partnered by Bedser , who bowled unchanged for 90 minutes . 
 Morris and vice @-@ captain Lindsay Hassett rebuilt the innings , adding 69 for the third wicket in 101 minutes . They played sedately without trying to take risks . Hassett fell after being beaten in flight by Young . Aiming to break Young 's restrictive leg side bowling , Hassett charged down the pitch and lofted a drive for four . However , in attempting a similar lofted drive over cover , he mishit the ball , which was caught by Washbrook at wide mid @-@ off . Miller joined Morris and they took the score to 126 / 3 at stumps , with their personal tallies on 23 and 48 respectively . The run rate picked up in the last 50 minutes of the day as the pair added 44 runs ; Miller was the more attacking of the Australian duo during this time . 
 = = 10 July : Day Three = = 
 On the third morning , the players were greeted by sunshine , and a large Saturday crowd had arrived from afar to watch proceedings ; as a result , the gates were closed by 9 : 00 in the morning with the ground already filled . The large gallery again encroached on the playing arena , which was not fenced . In the first hour , Australia struggled against the new ball . Miller was beaten three times in one over by Bedser before Pollard trapped him for 31 , after Australia had added only nine runs in the first hour . Four runs later , Bedser removed Morris for 51 , leaving Australia 139 / 5 . It had been a slow morning for Morris , who took 21 minutes to add to his overnight total and reached his half @-@ century 45 minutes into the day 's play , having added only four runs to his overnight score . At the same time , Barnes had come out to bat upon Miller 's dismissal , despite having collapsed while practising in the nets due to the aftereffects of his rib injury . He batted after refusing to stay in hospital and returning to the ground in spite of his bruised and discoloured ribs . He made a painful single in 25 minutes of batting before the injury became too much and he had to be taken from the ground with the assistance of Bradman among others , before being sent to hospital to be put under observation . Barnes would eventually miss two and a half weeks of cricket . Tallon and Loxton added a further 33 before the former was caught behind from Edrich with the score at 172 / 6 . Lindwall came into bat with Australia facing the prospect of the follow on . He received five consecutive bouncers from Edrich , one of which hit him in the hand and caused visible pain , evoking cheers from the home crowd . Loxton and Lindwall added a further 36 before the former was bowled by Pollard , leaving Australia 208 / 7 , still five runs behind the follow @-@ on mark . Johnston helped Lindwall advance Australia beyond the follow @-@ on before Bedser removed both . Johnston was reprieved in his brief innings when he edged a delivery from Pollard in the direction of Edrich at first slip , but Evans dived across , trying to catch the ball in his right hand . The wicket @-@ keeper could not hold on to the ball at full stretch , and the resulting deflection further to the right wrong @-@ footed Edrich , who was moving the other way , and it went past him . From second slip , Crapp dived left behind Edrich but the ball landed a few centimetres beyond his fingers . However , in the next over Bedser , Johnston edged the ball in the same manner and Crapp caught the ball easily . Lindwall was the last man out for 23 , while Toshack was unbeaten without scoring . Australia were thus bowled out for 221 , giving England a lead of 142 runs . Bedser and Pollard were the most successful bowlers , taking 4 / 81 and 3 / 53 respectively . 
 At the start of England 's second innings , Washbrook took a single from Lindwall , who then removed Emmett for a duck . The paceman pitched an outswinger on the off stump and Emmett edged it to wicket @-@ keeper Tallon , who took it in his right hand while taking a dive . 
 Emmett 's departure brought Lindwall 's tormentor Edrich to the crease . Bradman advised his speedster not to bowl any bouncers at Edrich , fearing such actions would be interpreted as retaliation and provoke a negative media and crowd reaction . After not bowling in the first innings , Miller came on and immediately broke through Washbrook 's defences , only to see the ball graze the stumps without dislodging the bails . Washbrook then drove Lindwall for four before Miller bounced him in the next over . After two Miller outswingers had evaded the outside edge of Washbrook , the batsman appeared unsettled . One bouncer was hit over square leg in an uncontrolled manner for a four , and another flew in the air , narrowly evading Loxton at fine leg . Lindwall followed Miller 's lead towards Washbrook and was no balled by umpire Davies for dragging his foot beyond the line . Following a disagreement , Davies threw Lindwall his jumper , but the matter faded away and the bowler was not no balled again after discussing the matter with Bradman . 
 Lindwall then bounced Washbrook again and this time the England opener went for the hook shot . The ball flew high in the air straight towards Hassett at fine leg , who dropped the catch on his third juggled attempt . Having received a life on 21 , Washbrook settled down as Loxton replaced Lindwall , while Johnson replaced Miller . Washbrook scored on both sides of the wicket and reached 50 in only 70 minutes as England proceeded to 80 / 1 . Lindwall returned for a new spell and almost hit Washbrook in the head . After tea , Edrich hit Miller for four . Although Lindwall did not retaliate for the bouncers he received in the first innings , Miller did so with four consecutive short balls , earning the ire of the crowd . Miller struck Edrich on the body before Bradman intervened , ordered him to stop , and apologised to Edrich . Edrich and Washbrook settled and put together a 124 @-@ run partnership in only 138 minutes , England 's largest of the series to that point . Edrich hit a four to long on , followed by a lofted off drive for six from the bowling of Toshack , generating momentum in their favour . However , Washbrook called Edrich through for a quick single soon after . The batsmen hesitated and after both Englishmen had paused in the middle of their run , Morris threw down Edrich 's stumps from cover , ending the partnership at 125 / 2 . Edrich had struck eight boundaries and a six in his 53 . 
 Toshack then removed Compton for a duck , caught in the slips by Miller , leaving England three wickets down with the score still on 125 . Crapp joined Washbrook and helped see off the new ball , stopping Australia 's fightback as England reached 174 by the close without further loss . Washbrook was unbeaten on 85 and Crapp 19 . England were 316 runs in front with two days of play remaining and seven wickets in hand . Their position was aided by the Australian fielders , who dropped Washbrook twice more . The Lancastrian was on 78 when he again hooked Lindwall to long leg and was again dropped by Hassett . The Australian vice @-@ captain responded by borrowing a helmet from a nearby policeman to signify his need for protection from the ball , much to the amusement of the crowd . After adding two more runs , Washbrook was dropped in the slips cordon by Johnson from the bowling of Toshack . At the end of the day 's play , Washbrook purchased a drink for Hassett in gratitude for the dropped catches . 
 = = 13 July : Day Five = = 
 The rest day was followed by the fourth day , which was abandoned due to persistent rain . Despite this , 21 @,@ 000 spectators came in anticipation of the weather clearing so that some play would be possible . However , a northeasterly depression from the Faroe Islands brought ongoing precipitation and prevented any play . 
 Yardley declared at the start of the fifth day after a pitch inspection , leaving Australia a victory target of 317 , but the rain kept falling and the entire first session was abandoned . The umpires had decided to start play half an hour later than normal , but this was not possible and they helped the ground staff to clean up the wet surface . Bradman chose to use the light roller and play was supposed to begin as soon as the lunch break ended . 
 Further delay meant play began after the tea break , and the pitch played very slowly because of the excess moisture , which also caused there to be little bounce in the surface . With Australia not looking to chase the runs because the time available was not reasonable , Yardley often had seven men in close catching positions . In the first half hour , Australia showed little attacking intent and scored only six runs . Young replaced Pollard and Johnson immediately swept him for four , before edging the next ball to Crapp , who completed the catch . Johnson fell for six to leave Australia at 10 / 1 . 
 Bradman came in and played his first 11 balls from Young without scoring , while Morris hit two streaky shots for four from Bedser . Yardley used the spin of Young and Compton for an hour , while Morris and Bradman made little effort to score . For 105 minutes , Morris stayed at one end and Bradman at the other ; neither looked to rotate the strike with singles . Bradman only played eight balls from Morris 's main end , and at one point was so startled by his partner 's desire for a single that he sent him back . The tourists thereafter batted in an unhurried and defensive manner to ensure a draw , which was sealed by a series of periodic rain interruptions . They ended on 92 / 1 from 61 overs , a run rate of 1 @.@ 50 , with 35 maidens . It was the slowest innings run rate to date in the series . Morris finished unbeaten on 54 , his fourth consecutive half @-@ century of the series . O 'Reilly criticised the approach taken by the Australians in the closing stages of the match , attributing it to Bradman 's orders . He said the pitch was made so tame by the heavy rain that they could have played in a natural and attractive manner to entertain the spectators , rather than defending carefully . He said Bradman 's " unwillingness to take a risk or to accept the challenging call of some particular phase of the game is one of the greatest flaws " in his leadership . 
 The attendance of 133 @,@ 740 exceeded the previous record for a Test in England , which was set in the preceding match at Lord 's even though more than 30 % of the playing time had been lost . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After being aided by rain while in a disadvantageous position during the Third Test , the Australians had only one tour match — a victory over Middlesex — to prepare for the next Test at Headingley . Barnes was unable to recover from his injury in this short space of time , and was replaced by Neil Harvey . Instead of opting to use reserve opener Brown to replace Barnes , Australia played Hassett out of position to partner Morris , while Harvey took a middle @-@ order slot . 
 For England 's part , Washbrook 's second innings half @-@ century at Old Trafford , aided by multiple dropped catches , was regarded as a major factor in his retention for the Headingley match , having scored only 63 runs in the first five innings of the series . He was reunited with Hutton , whose controversial exile lasted only one Test before Emmett was dropped . Dollery , who had made only 38 in three innings in the Second and Third Tests , was replaced by all @-@ rounder Ken Cranston . Despite being productive in domestic matches during the season , Cranston had struggled in his previous outings against the tourists . In two matches against Australia , he had managed only 47 runs in three innings and a total of 2 / 109 . 
 Washbrook and Hutton put on 168 for the first wicket , the first time England had put on more than 42 for opening stand , as the hosts went on to make 496 , their highest score for the series . Despite this , Australia 's batsmen set a world record by chasing down 404 on the final day to win by seven wickets and take a series @-@ winning 3 – 0 lead . 
 Following the historic win at Headingley , Australia had five tour matches before the final Test . They won three while two ended in rain @-@ curtailed draws . During this period , Barnes returned to action after recuperating from his rib injury . Australia then completed the series in style with a convincing innings victory in the Fifth Test at The Oval to complete a 4 – 0 result . The Fifth Test was the last international match , and the tourists only had seven further matches to negotiate in order to fulfil Bradman 's aim of going through the tour undefeated . Apart from two matches against the South of England and Leveson @-@ Gower 's XI , which were washed out after Australia had secured first innings leads of more than 200 , Bradman 's men had little difficulty , winning the remaining five fixtures by an innings . They thus became the first touring Test team to complete an English season undefeated , earning themselves the sobriquet The Invincibles . 
 = Architecture of Norway = 
 The architecture of Norway has evolved in response to changing economic conditions , technological advances , demographic fluctuations and cultural shifts . While outside architectural influences are apparent in much of Norwegian architecture , they have often been adapted to meet Norwegian climatic conditions , including : harsh winters , high winds and , in coastal areas , salt spray . 
 Norway 's architectural trends are also seen to parallel political and societal changes in Norway over the centuries . Prior to the Viking Age , wooden structures developed into a sophisticated craft evident in the elegant and effective construction of the Viking longships . Following that , the ascent of Christianity introduced Romanesque architecture in cathedrals and churches , with characteristically slightly pointed arches , barrel vaults , cruciform piers supporting vaults , and groin vaults ; in large part as a result of religious influence from England . 
 During the Middle Ages , the geography dictated a dispersed economy and population . As a result , the traditional Norwegian farm culture remained strong , and Norway differed from most European countries in never adopting feudalism . This , combined with the ready availability of wood as a building material , ensured that relatively few examples of the Baroque , Renaissance , and Rococo architecture styles so often built by the ruling classes elsewhere in Europe , were constructed in Norway . 
 Instead , these factors resulted in distinctive traditions in Norwegian vernacular architecture , which have been preserved in existing farms in the many Norwegian open @-@ air museums that showcase buildings from the Middle Ages through to the 19th century ; prominent examples include the Norsk <unk> in Oslo and Maihaugen in Lillehammer , as well as extant buildings still in service on farms such as those in the <unk> valley . 
 In the 20th century , Norwegian architecture has been characterized by its connection with Norwegian social policy on the one hand , and innovation on the other . Norwegian architects have been recognized for their work , both within Norway — where architecture has been considered an expression of social policy — and outside Norway , in several innovative projects . 
 = = History = = 
 Construction in Norway has always been characterized by the need to shelter people , animals , and property from harsh weather , including predictably cold winters and frost , heavy precipitation in certain areas , wind and storms ; and to make the most of scarce building resources . Until modern times , transportation infrastructure was also primitive , and builders largely had to rely on locally available materials . 
 = = = Pre @-@ historic times = = = 
 The earliest traces of human habitation in Norway are dated to about 9000 BC , in mountainous regions near Store <unk> in contemporary Rogaland , where excavations have found portable dwellings most likely kept by nomadic reindeer hunters . Traces of such tents have also been found other places along the western coast ; at <unk> near <unk> in Hordaland archeological evidence indicates that tents in use at about 6500 BC were of similar design to those still in use by the Sami nomads 
 Over time , such tents became semi @-@ permanent through the introduction of a simple foundation . Traces of these can be found at the Vega archipelago , an area that is now a UNESCO World Heritage Site . 
 The first permanent dwellings were probably built between 3000 and 2000 BC , with the introduction of agriculture to Norway . Available evidence indicates that wood was the most used building material for these structures . Iron Age dwellings typically combined shelter for animals and humans in long houses in order to preserve heat . Remains of structures from the Stone Age through the Bronze Age and the Iron Age have been excavated at <unk> in <unk> , near Stavanger and several other locations . Most prehistoric long houses had pairs of roof @-@ bearing posts dividing the interior into three naves , and walls of palisades , wattle and daub or turf . Similar buildings have been excavated all over Northwestern Europe . 
 = = = Viking and medieval eras = = = 
 Two distinctive timber building traditions found their confluence in Norwegian architecture . One was the practice of log building with horizontal logs notched at the corners , a technique thought to have been imported from the peoples to the east of Scandinavia . The other was the stave building tradition ( typically found in stave churches ) , possibly based on improvements on the prehistoric long houses that had roof @-@ bearing posts dug into the ground . Although there is scant archaeological evidence of actual buildings from the earliest permanent structures , finds of Viking ships ( e.g. , the Oseberg ship ) suggest significant mastery of woodworking and engineering . In the Lofoten archipelago in Northern Norway , a Viking chieftain 's holding has been reconstructed at the <unk> Viking Museum . 
 Not counting the 28 remaining stave churches , at least 250 wooden houses predating the Black Death in 1350 are preserved more or less intact in Norway . Most of these are log houses , some with added stave @-@ built galleries or porches . 
 As the political power in Norway was consolidated and had to contend with external threats , larger structures were built in accordance with military technology at the time . Fortresses , bridges , and ultimately churches and manors were built with stone and masonry . These structures followed the European styles of their time . 
 = = = = Stave churches = = = = 
 Possibly more than 1000 stave churches were built in Norway during the Middle Ages , most of them during the 12th and 13th centuries . Until the beginning of the 19th century , as many as 150 stave churches still existed . Many were destroyed as part of a religious movement that favored simple , puritan lines , and today only 28 remain , though a large number were documented and recorded by measured drawings before they were demolished . 
 The stave churches owe their longevity to architectural innovations that protected these large , complex wooden structures against water rot , precipitation , wind , and extreme temperatures . Most important was the introduction of massive sills underneath the staves ( posts ) to prevent them from rotting . Over the two centuries of stave church construction , this building type evolved to an advanced art and science . After the Reformation , however , no new stave churches were built . New churches were mainly of stone or horizontal log buildings with notched corners . Most old stave churches disappeared because of redundancy , neglect or deterioration , or because they were too small to accommodate larger congregations , and too impractical according to later standards . 
 = = = = Romanesque architecture = = = = 
 The first stone churches in Norway were Romanesque , built under the influence of Anglo @-@ Saxon missionaries , particularly bishop Nicholas Breakspear . Later churches were influenced by Continental architecture . Examples include the churches at <unk> , <unk> , and elsewhere . Many of these churches have either been lost or rebuilt in the Gothic style , but numerous examples still exist , notably the Trondenes <unk> <unk> Troms . 
 = = = = Gothic architecture = = = = 
 Several churches that were originally built as Romanesque structures were modified or extended during the Gothic period . Among these are the cathedral of Hamar , now in ruins , the Stavanger Cathedral , and the renowned Nidaros Cathedral , one of the most important pilgrim destinations in medieval Europe . 
 = = = Under Danish rule = = = 
 In the late Middle Ages , the Norwegian state was severely weakened . In 1389 Norway entered into a personal union with Denmark and Sweden in the Kalmar Union . As the kings resided in Denmark , Norway was gradually reduced to a provincial status , and after the Reformation most of its separate institutions were abolished . The Danish government in Copenhagen regarded Norway as a backward province to be exploited , but not worthy of investment in monumental architecture . Hence , ambitious Renaissance architecture is unusual in Norway compared to other European countries . 
 Fortresses , such as Akershus in Oslo , <unk> in Vardø , <unk> in Tønsberg , the <unk> in Trondheim and Bergenhus with the Rosenkrantz Tower in Bergen were built in stone in accordance with standards for defensive fortifications of their time . Many of these were modernized and rebuilt through the years . 
 The Hanseatic League also built unique commercial buildings at Bryggen in Bergen , starting in the 16th century . They were log buildings combining native and German traditions . 
 = = = = Renaissance architecture = = = = 
 After the Black Death , monumental construction in Norway came to a standstill , except for vernacular building , only to be resumed in the 16th and 17th centuries under Danish administration . There are few examples of Renaissance architecture in Norway , the most prominent being the Rosenkrantz Tower in Bergen , Barony <unk> in Hardanger , and the contemporary Austråt manor near Trondheim , and parts of Akershus Fortress . 
 Christian IV undertook a number of projects in Norway that were largely based on Renaissance architecture He established mining operations in Kongsberg and Røros , now a World Heritage Site . After a devastating fire in 1624 , the town of Oslo was moved to a new location and rebuilt as a fortified city with an orthogonal layout surrounded by ramparts , and renamed Christiania . King Christian also founded the trading city of Kristiansand , naming it after himself . 
 = = = = Baroque architecture = = = = 
 As Norway became a strategic part of the Danish @-@ Norwegian kingdom , Danish kings built fortifications along borders and the seacoast . Over time , many of the fortifications at border areas and ports were modernized in line with Baroque military practice . 
 Although most residences were built according to local vernacular traditions , some manors ( such as Austråt and <unk> ) exhibit the influence of Baroque architecture . Only the city of Christiania ( Oslo ) had a building code that prohibited wooden houses , and a number of large town houses modeled after Continental building types were constructed . Some large churches were constructed with brick walls , notably in Bergen , Christiania , Røros and Kongsberg . 
 Probably the most famous Baroque structure in Norway is <unk> , the Royal residence in Trondheim , a residential building that is one of the largest wooden structure in Northern Europe . 
 = = = = Rococo architecture = = = = 
 Rococo provided a brief but significant interlude in Norway , appearing primarily in the decorative arts , and mainly in interiors , furniture and luxury articles such as table silver , glass and stoneware . In some country districts folk artists produced the distinctly Norwegian craft of decorative painting , rosemaling , and related wood carving style . In polite architecture , a few wooden town houses and manors show rococo influence , notably in Trondheim and Bergen , <unk> Manor in Bergen being the most significant . 
 In towns and central country districts during the 18th century , log walls were increasingly covered by weatherboards , a fashion made possible by sawmill technology . These buildings were better insulated and better protected against the harsh climate . But the main reason for the rapid adoption of this custom was the more fashionable appearance of boarded walls , which were more suitable than bare log walls as a background to details and ornaments borrowed from classical architecture . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 The Napoleonic Wars led to the separation of Norway and Denmark . Norway was restored in 1814 as an autonomous kingdom in a personal union with Sweden . The two states had separate institutions , except for the king and the foreign service . Regained statehood required new public buildings , mainly in the capital of Christiania . During the following century , the country experienced an impressive growth in wealth and population , resulting in a need for new infrastructure and buildings . 
 = = = = Neo @-@ classicism = = = = 
 At the dawn of the 19th century , less than a handful of academically trained architects were active in Norway , most of them military officers having studied civil engineering . The market for architects was limited in a sparsely inhabited country with no capital city , no court and no important government institutions . Architecture was of interest mainly to a limited group of wealthy merchants and landowners . However , toward the close of the previous century , this group saw a remarkable increase in prosperity . Large fortunes were made by a few , who then sought to surround themselves with buildings and gardens appropriate to their social position . Well connected internationally , these people were acquainted with the latest trends in architecture . Neoclassical structures were much in demand . 
 Architect Carl Frederik Stanley ( 1769 – 1805 ) , educated in Copenhagen , spent some years in Norway around the turn of the 19th century . He did minor works for wealthy patrons in and around Oslo , but his major achievement was the renovation of the only seat of higher education in Christiania , the Oslo <unk> , completed in 1800 . He added a classical portico to the front of an older structure , and a semi @-@ circular auditorium that was sequestered by Parliament in 1814 as a temporary place to assemble , now preserved at Norsk <unk> as a national monument . 
 Christian Collett ( 1771 – 1833 ) , a graduate of the Mining Academy at Kongsberg , designed the splendid <unk> manor , built between 1802 and 1807 by sawmill owner Niels <unk> . This is one of the few brick houses in Norway , boasting a <unk> layout , a central cupola , and a classical colonnade . Collett designed several other manors and town houses . 
 The same period saw the erection of a large number of splendid neo @-@ <unk> houses in and around all towns along the coast , notably in Halden , Oslo , Drammen , Arendal , Bergen and Trondheim , mainly wooden buildings dressed up as stone architecture . By far the largest private house in Norway is the Jarlsberg manor , renovated 1812 @-@ 1814 by the Danish architect <unk> for count Herman Wedel @-@ Jarlsberg . 
 Christiania , promoted to the status of a capital city in 1814 , had practically no buildings suitable for the many new government institutions . An ambitious building program was initiated , but realised very slowly because of a strained economy . The first major undertaking was the Royal Palace , designed by Hans Linstow and built between 1824 and 1848 . Linstow also planned Karl Johans gate , the avenue connecting the Palace and the city , with a monumental square halfway to be surrounded by buildings for the University , the Parliament ( Storting ) and other institutions . But only the University buildings were realised according to this plan . Christian Heinrich Grosch , one of the first fully educated architects in Norway , designed the original building for the Oslo Stock Exchange ( 1826 – 1828 ) , the local branch of the Bank of Norway ( 1828 ) , Christiania Theatre ( 1836 – 1837 ) , and the first campus for the University of Oslo ( 1841 – 1856 ) . For the University buildings , he sought the assistance of the renowned German architect Karl Friedrich Schinkel . 
 The German architectural influence persisted in Norway , and many wooden buildings followed the principles of Neoclassicism . 
 = = = = Romanticism and historicism = = = = 
 Norwegian romantic nationalism also had an influence on Norwegian architecture from around 1840 . Following the German lead , many classicist architects designed red @-@ brick buildings in a revival of medieval styles . Romanesque and Gothic examples were considered eminently suitable for churches , public institutions and factories . Linstow was the first Norwegian architect to be inspired by the Middle Ages in his proposal of 1837 for a square to be surrounded by public building , bisected by an avenue between Christiania and the new Royal Palace . On the north side , planned buildings for the University were to be " composed in some Medieval or Florentine style " , with exposed brick @-@ work . His classicist colleague Grosch was the first to convert to historicism and realize a number of red @-@ brick buildings , after his 1838 visit to Berlin , where he met the famous architect Karl Friedrich Schinkel . The first major historicist work by Grosch was the neo @-@ romanesque Bazaars and the adjacent <unk> near the Oslo Cathedral , begun in 1840 and extended in several stages until 1859 . Other architects followed , notably Heinrich Ernst Schirmer with the <unk> ( penitentiary ) ( 1844 – 1851 ) , the Gaustad Hospital ( 1844 – 1855 ) and the Railway Station ( 1854 ) ( with von Hanno ) . Also in Oslo , the German architect Alexis de <unk> ( 1799 @-@ 1853 ) designed <unk> , the first neo @-@ gothic church , completed by von Hanno in 1858 . 
 Most urban apartment buildings and villas continued to be built in the classical tradition , with plastered brick walls . The repertoire of historic styles was expanded in Homansbyen , Oslo 's first residential development of detached villas , planned by Georg Andreas Bull . He designed most of the early villas built from 1858 until 1862 in a variety of styles , ranging from medieval to classicist and exotic . 
 From around 1840 , architects started to design wooden buildings in a new style , the so @-@ called Swiss chalet style . The style and its name originated in Germany , where Swiss popular culture was much admired by the romanticists . Elements such as projecting roofs , verandas and emphasis on gables were inspired from Alpine vernacular buildings . But the style may more correctly be termed historicism in wood , a term introduced by Jens Christian <unk> . A number of residential , institutional , and commercial buildings were built in this style , characterized by ornate , projecting details . Railway stations and churches , designed by trained architects , were distributed all in rural districts and helped to make this style popular and to keep it alive in the vernacular tradition long after it went out of fashion among architects . 
 The Swiss chalet style evolved into a Scandinavian variation , known in Norway as the " dragon style ” , which combined motifs from Viking and medieval art with vernacular elements from the more recent past . The most renowned practitioner of this style was the architect Holm Hansen Munthe , who designed a number of tourist resorts , exhibition pavilions and churches in the 1880s and 1890s . These caught the eye of the German emperor Wilhelm II , who visited Norway annually . He commissioned Munthe to design his " <unk> " near Potsdam and a hunting lodge with at " stave church " in <unk> in East Prussia . These last buildings were destroyed during World War II . 
 Architects abandoned both the " Swiss " and the " dragon " styles shortly after 1900 , but elements of the " Swiss style " survived in vernacular buildings for some decades . In the recent past , producers of pre @-@ fabricated family homes have increasingly reintroduced motifs from the " Swiss " style in their repertoire . 
 = = = Vernacular Architecture = = = 
 Until the 20th century , most Norwegians lived and worked in buildings that were designed and built according to vernacular building traditions , what in Norwegian is known as <unk> . These practices varied somewhat by region and climatic conditions and evolved over time , but were largely based on use of wood and other locally available resources . 
 Since the Middle Ages , most dwellings were log houses with notched corners , carefully crafted to ensure protection against the elements . Centrally placed open @-@ hearth fires with smoke vents in the roofs gave way to stone stoves and chimneys in early modern times . Specialized buildings became commonplace , organized around farmyards or <unk> . The introduction of exterior boarding ( weatherboarding ) in the 18th century improved housing standards considerably and gave rise to larger houses . 
 Building practices along the coast also included boathouses , fishing cottages , piers , etc . Here , houses for livestock and people were typically built up from the actual shoreline . A typical medium @-@ sized farm in the inland of Norway would include a dwelling house ( <unk> ) , hay barn ( <unk> ) , livestock barn ( <unk> ) , one or more food storage houses ( <unk> ) , a stable , and occasionally separate houses for poultry , pigs , etc . Houses that had separate heat sources , e.g. , washing houses ( <unk> ) and smithies were usually kept separate from the other houses to prevent fires . <unk> were typically separate , small structures . If the farm housed craftsmen , there would also be separate houses for carpentry , wheel making , shoemaking , etc . 
 In Eastern inland Norway and Trøndelag , the houses around a tun were typically organized in a square ( <unk> ) ; in Gudbrandsdal , there was a distinction between <unk> ( inner tun ) and <unk> ( outer tun ) . The configuration of houses also depended on whether the farm was situated on a hill or in flatter terrain . 
 Depending upon the size and economic well @-@ being of the farm , there might also be a feast hall ( <unk> ) , a house for the retired farmers ( <unk> ) , farm hands ' dormitory ( <unk> ) , carriage house ( <unk> ) , and even distillery ( <unk> ) . Smaller , poorer farms might combine barns and dwelling houses , have simpler storage areas , and use the facilities of other farms for activities they could not afford to build houses for . 
 Building traditions varied by region and type of structure . Food storage houses - <unk> - were usually built on stilts in ways that made it difficult for mice and rats , but not cats , to get in . Exterior cladding varied by region , often to take into account local climate conditions . Roofs were often covered with birch bark and sod . 
 Many places in Norway farms also maintained mountain farms ( <unk> / <unk> ) , where cows , goats , and sheep would put out to pasture during the summer months . These would typically include a small dwelling house and a dairy for making and storing cheese , sour cream , etc . 
 Modern Norwegian farms often maintain many building traditions but no longer need the many and varied buildings of the past . However , many of the traditions have been carried on in more recently built vacation cabins in the mountains and along the coast . 
 = = = 20th @-@ century architecture = = = 
 The German influence brought into Norway by neo @-@ classicism abated when Norway gained full independence in 1905 . A new generation of Norwegian architects educated in Sweden took the lead in developing a distinctly national architecture , endeavouring to break the German historicist tradition . However , German modernism and town planning continued to influence early 20th @-@ century architecture . As the Norwegian Institute of Technology was founded in 1910 and began to teach architecture in Trondheim , there also emerged a distinctly Norwegian collegium of architects that has contributed to a Norwegian regional architecture , discussed by the art historian Sigfried <unk> . 
 = = = = Art nouveau architecture = = = = 
 The Jugendstil , a variant of Art Nouveau , had a certain influence on much of the new construction in Norway around the turn of the 20th century . The city of Ålesund , after burning to the ground in 1904 , was rebuilt almost entirely in this style and continues to be a prominent example , along with Riga and Brussels . Trondheim also has numerous art nouveau buildings . In the capital Oslo , few art nouveau buildings were erected , due to a local economic crisis and a stagnant building trade during the first decade of the century . However , some public buildings were constructed in this style , such as the Historical Museum and the Government office building . In Bergen , the main theatre Den Nationale Scene is a monumental example . 
 = = = = Mass residential architecture = = = = 
 Changing demographics and a growing social awareness led to increased political and architectural interest in providing cost @-@ effective , sanitary , and comfortable residential space to the growing urban population in general and the working class in particular . This was known as <unk> ( " the housing cause " ) in Norwegian popular culture and continues to play a role to this day . 
 Architecture became a tool for and manifestation of social policy , with architects and politicians determining just what features were adequate for the intended residents of housing projects . As late as in 1922 , there were many who felt that working @-@ class families had no need for their own bath ; apartments and small houses only included a small kitchen and one or two rooms . 
 Before World War II , a number of cooperative investment projects known as " <unk> <unk> " ( roughly " our own homes " ) resulted in a handful of developments , but after the war these gave way to cooperative organizations that were formed to finance and build large @-@ scale residential complexes . The <unk> Oslo <unk> og <unk> , known as <unk> — built its first complex Etterstad in Oslo , but there were similar initiatives throughout the country . These co @-@ ops set standards for housing , hired architects to design solutions , and contracted to have them built . Entire sections , known as <unk> - or " satellite cities " - were built in the outskirts of major cities . The first of these - Lambertseter - introduced an entirely new phenomenon in the eastern areas of Oslo such as in Groruddalen , but similar areas also emerged in Bergen , Trondheim , and other cities . The apex of this trend was reached in 1966 with the massive buildings in <unk> . 
 This era — which had spent most of its force by the mid @-@ 1970s — led to an increased awareness of the physical and emotional needs of city dwellers . Some of the issues under debate were . 
 Kitchen - traditional Norwegian homes combined the family room and kitchen , but in early apartment buildings , small , so @-@ called " laboratory kitchens " were popular . Over time , eat @-@ in @-@ kitchens took their place . 
 Natural <unk> apartment buildings were oriented to provide sunlight to the residents , ideally orienting the kitchen toward the east to get the morning light and the living room to the west for evening light . 
 <unk> separate sleeping quarters for parents and children , and among children led to larger apartments over time . Similarly , most buildings had a limited number of apartments adjoining each staircase . 
 Alienation - monolithic , homogenous apartment complexes reinforced what some characterized as " social democracy 's hell . " 
 The perceived shortcomings of the mass housing movement led to efforts to create cost @-@ effective housing solutions that were more varied , more integrated with natural surroundings , and above all more customized to families ' needs . In 1973 , the Parliament of Norway recommended a shift toward small residential houses rather than large apartment buildings . The Norwegian State Housing Bank ( <unk> ) provided citizens with the ability to fund construction of their homes , and an entire construction industry formed to build these needs . 
 As a result of the pioneering efforts by Olav <unk> and others , archaic and otherwise unnecessary restrictions were relaxed , improving opportunities for more Norwegians to build housing to suit their individual needs and preferences . Norwegians often undertake home improvement projects on their own , and many have built most of their own homes . 
 = = = = Functionalism = = = = 
 In the late 1920s , Modernism ( or the International style ) was taken up by Scandinavian architects . In Scandinavia this architectural trend was called Functionalism ( or colloquially in Sweden and Norway " <unk> " ) . Modernism found many adherents among young architects , especially in Norway . Its definite breakthrough was the Stockholm Exhibition in 1930 , after which the majority of architects all over Scandinavia converted to the modern movement . Nowhere else did Modernism become so firmly established as the mainstream trend in architecture . It maintained its dominant position until about 1940 . 
 A number of landmark structures , particularly in Oslo , were built in the functionalist style , the first one being the Skansen restaurant ( 1925 – 1927 ) by Lars Backer , demolished in 1970 . Backer also designed the restaurant at Ekeberg , opened in 1929 . The art gallery <unk> Hus by <unk> <unk> and Herman Munthe @-@ Kaas ( 1930 ) still shows influence from the preceding classicist trend of the 1920s . <unk> bath ( 1934 ) is one of several public seaside bath facilities in Norway , by André Peters . A year before , <unk> Bad was designed by Ole Lind <unk> ( 1891 @-@ 1979 ) and Eivind <unk> ( 1893 <unk> ) . Other great names of Norwegian functionalist architecture are Ove Bang , Fridtjof Reppen , Nicolai Beer ( 1885 @-@ 1950 ) and Per Grieg ( 1897 @-@ 1962 ) . 
 = = = = Reconstruction architecture = = = = 
 Following the scorched earth tactics of retreating Wehrmacht troops , large areas in Northern Norway needed to be rebuilt . In 1945 , there was an overwhelming need for housing . An architectural competition produced several designs for simple , cost @-@ effective , and rapidly assembled housing . The resulting houses were Spartan and broke with building standards , but met an immediate need for shelter . 
 The Museum of Reconstruction in Hammerfest is dedicated to the reconstruction . 
 = = = = Government @-@ sponsored architecture = = = = 
 As Norway gained full independence in 1905 , the national government determined to establish institutions consistent with the newly formed state 's ambitions as a modern society . The first prime minister made it a priority to modernize the Royal Palace in Oslo , building among other things , some of the country 's first water toilets , providing hot and cold water , and granting the Royal Family 's wish of providing a common apartment for the king , queen , and their son . 
 In the early years , such public works were limited to structures needed for the national government 's own administrative needs , but an increasing number of large @-@ scale projects were conceived , designed , and completed since 1905 to meet various needs , such as : 
 Public health and welfare , including : 
 Hospital complexes and <unk> facilities , e.g. , Rikshospitalet , <unk> University Hospital , Gaustad Hospital , etc . 
 <unk> , later vacated in favor of other solutions that in turn required their own architecture . 
 <unk> , also vacated as the public health problem of tuberculosis was solved 
 Temporary and provisional housing for the indigent , asylum seekers , and homeless . 
 Sports and recreation facilities . Social policy in Norway both at the national and local level has emphasized the connection between athletics at the mass and elite levels , and athletic centers have typically been built both to accommodate spectators , participants , and training . As an example , the Holmenkollen ski jump has been rebuilt several times , the Bislett Stadion was rebuilt in 2004 @-@ 2005 , and virtually every municipality has built year @-@ round facilities . 
 Centers for cultural expression . Some of the most ambitious and controversial structures have been those dedicated to performing arts , art museums , and any combination of such activities . Since many of these have been built in cities with an architectural legacy , their designs have sought — more or less successfully — to complement the urban landscape by giving it a modern element . Examples include the Henie @-@ Onstad Art Centre ( by Jon <unk> and Sven Erik <unk> ) , Chateau Neuf by Lund & <unk> , the " barn " at <unk> by Sverre Fehn , and the Grieg Hall ( by Knud Munk ) . 
 Churches . The Norwegian State Church , holding the legacy of nearly one thousand years of Norwegian church architecture , commissioned new churches that covered a wide range of architectural styles , including entirely new designs ( e.g. the Arctic Cathedral by Jan Inge <unk> ) to new casts of traditional designs ( e.g. , <unk> church , by Roar Jacobsen and Ulf <unk> . ) 
 Transportation infrastructure , including bridges , tunnels , and most notably transit centers for rail , sea , and air transportation . Oslo airport ( by the <unk> consortium at Gardermoen ) was Norway 's largest construction project ever . 
 The architectural designs of these projects have reflected not only the style currents of their time , but the societal debate over the purpose they were intended to serve . Nationalistic ambitions early on gave way to austere designs based on functionalism , and then to designs that emphasized human and ecological needs . To a great extent , Norwegian architects have found the opportunity to develop their signature styles through these projects , and thereby also a Norwegian architectural dialect . 
 Many of the projects have been controversial , and the resulting creative tension has probably served to advance the state of architectural arts in Norway . National and local governments and governmental institutions will continue to be among the largest customers of architects in coming years . 
 = = Contemporary themes = = 
 A number of trends influence contemporary architecture in Norway , among them : 
 Growing public and private affluence . Buildings have a wider range of purpose , and are expected to meet increasingly complex demands . For example , the new opera building ( designed by Snøhetta ) in Oslo reflects an ambition not just to build a vibrant cultural center , but also to create a new architectural icon in the Oslofjord . 
 Aesthetics as a factor of well @-@ being . From the early austere principle that form should strictly follow function , there is a growing sensibility that aesthetics affect the physical and emotional health of those who use a building or structure . Norwegian laws concerning occupational health have for several decades emphasized access to daylight and fresh air , and it may also be that harsh climatic conditions create an added imperative for uplifting aesthetics . 
 Environmental concerns . In addition to concerns about air and water pollution , Norwegian architectural design has also emphasized integration with the natural landscape . More recently , architects have also worked with engineers to make the most out of scarce resources , e.g. , energy , water , etc . 
 Demographic diversity . Norwegian demographics have undergone significant changes the last few decades , resulting in new religious buildings 
 Norwegian building traditions . While it may be too much to speak of a renaissance in traditional Norwegian architecture , more and more urban planning is affected by the need to preserve or restore these traditions . Examples include plans to renew the center of Oppdal and recent work at the Oslo neighborhood of Grünerløkka . 
 A number of architectural prizes are awarded in Norway , including <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> , Statens <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> , Betongtavlen , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 <unk> , Arne ( 2006 ) . Norges <unk> ( in Norwegian Bokmål ) . Oslo : <unk> . ISBN 978 @-@ 82 @-@ <unk> @-@ 127 @-@ 6 . 
 <unk> , Ulf ( 2005 ) . <unk> års <unk> - <unk> og <unk> , 1905 @-@ 2005 ( in Norwegian ) . Oslo : Pax <unk> . ISBN 82 @-@ 530 @-@ 2758 @-@ 3 . 
 Brekke , Nils Georg ; Per Jonas <unk> ; Siri <unk> <unk> ( 2003 ) . Norsk <unk> - frå <unk> og <unk> til 21 @.@ <unk> ( in Norwegian Nynorsk ) . Oslo : Det Norske <unk> . ISBN 82 @-@ 521 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 . 
 ( Norwegian ) <unk> , Odd ( 1979 ) . <unk> i Norge . En <unk> <unk> ( in Norwegian Bokmål ) . Oslo : Gyldendal . ISBN 82 @-@ 05 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Bjørn Myhre , Bjarne <unk> , Per <unk> : <unk> <unk> <unk> 2000 år . <unk> og <unk> fra <unk> til 19 @.@ <unk> . <unk> <unk> <unk> 7 , Stavanger 
 Eilert Sundt : Om <unk> på <unk> i Norge . 1862 . 
 Christian Norberg @-@ Schulz : Modern Norwegian Architecture . 1986 . Oslo . Scandinavian University Press . ISBN 82 @-@ 00 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 Christian Norberg @-@ Schulz : <unk> . 1995 . Oslo . Gyldendal . ISBN 82 @-@ 05 @-@ <unk> @-@ 3 
 Ole Daniel Bruun : <unk> i Oslo . 1999 . Oslo . <unk> . ISBN 978 @-@ 82 @-@ 573 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 
 = Toronto Raptors = 
 The Toronto Raptors are a Canadian professional basketball team based in Toronto , Ontario . The Raptors compete in the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) , as a member of the league 's Eastern Conference Atlantic Division . The team was established in 1995 , along with the Vancouver Grizzlies , as part of the NBA 's expansion into Canada . When the Grizzlies relocated to Memphis , Tennessee to become the Memphis Grizzlies in 2001 , the Raptors became the only Canadian @-@ based team in the NBA . They originally played their home games at the SkyDome ( since renamed Rogers Centre in 2005 ) , before moving eastward along Bremner Boulevard to the Air Canada Centre in 1999 . 
 Like most expansion teams , the Raptors struggled in their early years , but after the acquisition of Vince Carter through a draft day trade in 1998 , the team set league @-@ attendance records and made the NBA playoffs in 2000 , 2001 , and 2002 . Carter was instrumental in leading the team to a then @-@ franchise high 47 wins and their first playoff series win in 2001 , where they advanced to the Eastern Conference semifinals . During the 2002 – 03 and 2003 – 04 seasons , they failed to make significant progress and he was traded in 2004 to the New Jersey Nets . 
 After Carter left , Chris Bosh emerged as the team leader . In 2006 – 07 , Bryan Colangelo 's first full season as President and General Manager , a combination of Bosh , 2006 first overall NBA draft pick Andrea Bargnani and a revamp of the roster helped the Raptors qualify for their first playoff berth in five years , capturing the Atlantic Division title with 47 wins . In the 2007 – 08 season , they advanced to the playoffs again , but failed to make the playoffs in each of the next five seasons . In a bid to persuade Bosh to stay , Colangelo overhauled the team roster for the 2009 – 10 season , but Bosh signed with the Miami Heat in July 2010 , ushering in yet another era of rebuilding for the Raptors . 
 After Masai Ujiri was brought in as the new General Manager in 2013 , he traded Bargnani to the New York Knicks . With a backcourt led by Kyle Lowry and DeMar DeRozan , the Raptors returned to the playoffs , won their second Atlantic Division title , and won a then @-@ franchise record 48 games in the 2013 – 14 season . However , they failed for a fourth consecutive time to advance beyond the first round of the playoffs . In the 2014 – 15 season , they won a then @-@ franchise record 49 games , but failed for a second consecutive year to advance past the first round of the playoffs , getting swept by the Washington Wizards , 4 – 0 . In the 2015 – 16 season , they won a franchise record 56 games , finishing in second place in the conference for the first time in franchise history . In the playoffs , they won their first playoff series since 2001 by defeating both the Indiana Pacers and Miami Heat , advancing to the Conference Finals for the first time against the Cleveland Cavaliers , only for the Raptors to lose to the eventual NBA champions in six games . 
 = = Franchise history = = 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 The Toronto Raptors were established on November 4 , 1993 , when the NBA , as part of its expansion into Canada , awarded its 28th franchise to a group headed by Toronto businessman John Bitove for a then @-@ record expansion fee of $ 125 million US . Bitove and Allan Slaight of Slaight Communications each owned 44 % , with the Bank of Nova Scotia ( 10 % ) , David Peterson ( 1 % ) , and Phil Granovsky ( 1 % ) being minority partners . <unk> on NBA games in Ontario nearly cost Toronto the expansion franchise , due to strict league rules at the time that prohibited gambling . However , an agreement was reached whereby the provincial lottery corporation agreed to stop offering wagering on all NBA games in exchange for a donation by the Raptors of $ 5 million in its first three years and $ 1 million annually afterwards to its charitable foundation to compensate the provincial lottery corporation for its loss of revenue . The Raptors , along with the Vancouver Grizzlies , played their first game in 1995 , and were the first NBA teams based in Canada since the 1946 – 47 Toronto Huskies , though the Buffalo Braves had played a total of 16 regular season games at Maple Leaf Gardens in Toronto from 1971 to 1975 . 
 Initial sentiment was in favour of reviving the Huskies nickname , but team management realized it would be nearly impossible to design a logo that did not substantially resemble that of the Minnesota Timberwolves . As a result , a nationwide contest was held to help name the team and develop their colours and logo . Over 2 @,@ 000 entries were narrowed down to ten prospects : Beavers , Bobcats , Dragons , Grizzlies , Hogs , Raptors , Scorpions , T @-@ Rex , Tarantulas , and Terriers . The final selection — Toronto Raptors — was unveiled on Canadian national television on May 15 , 1994 : the choice was influenced by the popularity of the 1993 film adaption of the 1990 science fiction novel Jurassic Park by Michael Crichton . The name " Raptor " is a common informal name for the velociraptor , a swift medium @-@ sized dromaeosaurid theropod dinosaur . On May 24 , 1994 , the team 's logo and first General Manager , Isiah Thomas were revealed at a press conference . As part of the deal , Thomas received an option to purchase part of the team , reportedly for under market value . He would purchase 4 @.@ 5 % in May 1995 and a further 4 @.@ 5 % in December 1995 , half each from Bitove and Slaight , decreasing their share to 39 @.@ 5 % . The team 's colours of bright red , purple , black , and silver were also revealed ; " Naismith " silver was chosen as an ode to Canadian James Naismith , the inventor of basketball . The team originally competed in the Central Division , and before the inaugural season began , sales of Raptors merchandise ranked seventh in the league , marking a successful return of professional basketball to Canada . 
 As General Manager , Isiah Thomas quickly staffed the management positions with his own personnel , naming long @-@ time Detroit Pistons assistant Brendan Malone as the Raptors ' head coach . The team 's roster was then filled as a result of an expansion draft in 1995 . Following a coin flip , Toronto was given first choice and selected Chicago Bulls point guard and three @-@ point specialist B. J. Armstrong . Armstrong refused to report for training and Thomas promptly traded him to the Golden State Warriors for power forwards Carlos Rogers and Victor Alexander . Thomas then selected a wide range of players in the expansion draft , including veterans Jerome Kersey , Willie Anderson and his former Pistons teammate John Salley . 
 Subsequent to the expansion draft , the Raptors landed the seventh pick in the NBA draft lottery , behind their fellow 1995 expansion club , the Vancouver Grizzlies . Thomas selected Damon Stoudamire , a point guard out of Arizona , around whom the franchise would seek to construct its near future . Yet , the selection of Stoudamire was met with boos from fans at the 1995 NBA draft at SkyDome in Toronto , many of whom wanted Ed O 'Bannon of UCLA , an NCAA Final Four Most Valuable Player . 
 = = = 1995 – 99 : Struggles of a new franchise = = = 
 In the team 's first official NBA game , Alvin Robertson scored the first NBA points in Raptors history , while Stoudamire recorded 10 points and 10 assists in a 94 – 79 victory over the New Jersey Nets . The Raptors concluded their inaugural season with a 21 – 61 win – loss record , although they were one of the few teams to defeat the Chicago Bulls , who set a then all @-@ time NBA best 72 – 10 win – loss regular season record . With averages of 19 @.@ 0 points and 9 @.@ 3 assists per game , Stoudamire also won the 1995 – 96 Rookie of the Year Award . 
 In November of the 1996 – 97 season , Bitove sold his ownership interest in the team to Slaight for $ 65 million after Slaight had activated a shotgun clause in their partnership agreement , giving Slaight 79 % control of the team , and remaining minority partner of the Bank of Nova Scotia ( 10 % ) , Thomas ( 9 % ) Peterson ( 1 % ) and Granovsky ( 1 % ) . Slaight subsequently acquired the 1 % which had been owned by both Peterson and Granovsky , who had died a year earlier . The team improved on its win record by nine games . They selected centre Marcus Camby with the second overall pick in the 1996 NBA draft . By the end of the season , Camby earned a berth on the NBA 's All @-@ Rookie Team while Stoudamire continued to play well , averaging 20 @.@ 2 points and 8 @.@ 8 assists per game . As in the previous season , the Raptors were one of only 11 teams to topple the eventual 1997 Champions , the Chicago Bulls . The Raptors also defeated the Houston Rockets , Utah Jazz and Miami Heat , all of whom were eventual Conference finalists . However , the Raptors struggled against teams who were not of championship calibre , including three losses to the 15 – 67 Boston Celtics . 
 In the 1997 – 98 season , the team suffered numerous injuries and slid into a 17 @-@ game losing streak . After Thomas ' attempts to execute a letter of intent with Slaight to purchase the team failed , he resigned his position with the team in November and sold his 9 % stake in the team to Slaight . This left Slaight with 90 % and the Bank of Nova Scotia with 10 % . Thomas was replaced by Glen Grunwald as GM . With Thomas gone , Stoudamire immediately sought a trade . On February 13 , 1998 , he was shipped to the Portland Trail Blazers along with Walt Williams and Carlos Rogers for Kenny Anderson , Alvin Williams , Gary Trent , two first @-@ round draft choices , a second @-@ round draft choice and cash . Anderson refused to report to Toronto and was traded to the Celtics with <unk> Tabak and Popeye Jones for Chauncey Billups , Dee Brown , Roy Rogers and John Thomas . When the trading deadline was over , the Raptors became the youngest team in the league with an average age of 24 @.@ 6 . They had five rookies on their roster , including the 18 @-@ year @-@ old Tracy McGrady , who at the time was the youngest player in the NBA . The inexperienced Raptors struggled throughout the season and their regular season record regressed to 16 – 66 . 
 On February 12 , 1998 , Maple Leaf Gardens Ltd . , the owners of the Toronto Maple Leafs , purchased 100 % of the Raptors and the arena the team was building , Air Canada Centre , from Slaight and the Bank of Nova Scotia . MLSE paid a reported $ 467 million , made up of $ 179 million for the team and $ 288 million for the arena . During the 1998 NBA draft , in what became a defining move for the franchise , Grunwald traded the team 's 4th overall pick Antawn Jamison to the Golden State Warriors for Vince Carter , who was selected 5th overall . To bring further credibility to the Raptors , Grunwald traded Marcus Camby to the New York Knicks for Charles Oakley , a veteran with playoff experience . Kevin Willis , another veteran acquired from the trade , solidified the centre position , while the coaching staff temporarily rotated Brown , Williams and Doug Christie to play point guard . Both Christie and Williams became talented players in their own right ; Christie developed into one of the elite defenders in the NBA , while Williams improved his play on the offensive end . New coach Butch Carter was also credited with much of the team 's turnaround during the lockout shortened 1998 – 99 season . Although the team did not make the playoffs , many were optimistic with the impressive performances of Rookie of the Year Carter and a much improved McGrady . 
 = = = 1999 – 2002 : The Vince Carter era = = = 
 During the 1999 NBA draft , believing that the Raptors still lacked a strong frontcourt presence , Grunwald traded first @-@ round draft pick Jonathan Bender for power forward Antonio Davis of the Indiana Pacers . Davis quickly entered the Raptors starting lineup and he would develop into an All @-@ Star in the coming years . Conversely , Bender would only play 9 seasons and would be out of the league by age 29 . In the backcourt , Carter , Christie and Dell Curry played at the shooting guard position and Alvin Williams and Muggsy <unk> at point guard . The rotation of Davis , Oakley and Willis in the frontcourt and Carter 's and McGrady 's improvement helped the team make its first ever playoff appearance , fulfilling a promise Carter had made to fans in the previous season . Lacking significant post @-@ season experience , Toronto was defeated 3 – 0 by the New York Knicks in the first round . Nonetheless , team improvements and the rise of Carter — who emphatically won the 2000 NBA Slam Dunk Contest — attracted many fans around Toronto , many of whom were previously not basketball fans . The season was also the first full year played at the Air Canada Centre , after having played four years at the cavernous SkyDome , which was better suited to baseball and Canadian football . Overall , the Raptors concluded the season with a 45 – 37 record . 
 Still , playoff failures and Butch Carter 's media altercations surrounding Camby led Grunwald to replace Carter prior to the 2000 – 01 season with Lenny Wilkens , a Hall of Fame coach and player with more than 30 years of coaching experience . The team roster was also largely revamped , including the signing of veteran playmaker Mark Jackson on a four @-@ year contract . When Alvin Williams later emerged as a clutch performer , Jackson was traded to allow Williams more playing time . In the 2000 off @-@ season , free agent McGrady opted to leave the Raptors in a sign @-@ and @-@ trade deal worth $ 67 @.@ 5 million over six years , while giving a conditional draft pick as part of the agreement to the Orlando Magic , for a first @-@ round draft pick . 
 As predicted by analysts , the team easily secured a berth in the 2001 NBA playoffs with a franchise high 47 wins . The Raptors won their first ever playoff series as they defeated New York 3 – 2 , advancing to the Eastern Conference Semifinals for the first time in franchise history . Wilkens was praised for having Williams defend shooting guard Allan Houston and Carter defend small forward Latrell Sprewell , the two major Knicks offensive threats . The series with Philadelphia 76ers was a landmark for the Raptors in terms of performance and entertainment value . The Sixers relied on Allen Iverson and Dikembe Mutombo for their respective offensive and defensive abilities , along with steady help from Aaron McKie . Toronto was the more balanced team with Carter , Alvin Williams and Davis providing much of the offensive game and Chris Childs and Jerome Williams on defence . The series came down to the last few seconds of Game 7 , when Carter 's potential series @-@ winning shot rolled off the rim . Carter was later widely criticized for attending his graduation ceremony at the University of North Carolina on the morning of Game 7 , as he scored only 20 points on 6 @-@ for @-@ 18 shooting , after a 39 @-@ point performance in Game 6 . Despite the loss , the season is generally considered a watermark for the franchise , given the Raptors ' franchise high of 47 wins and advancing beyond the first round of the playoffs . 
 The relocation of the Vancouver Grizzlies to Memphis , Tennessee in 2001 , as the Memphis Grizzlies , left Toronto as the NBA 's only Canadian team . In the summer of 2001 , long @-@ term contracts were given to Alvin Williams , Jerome Williams and Davis , while former NBA MVP centre Hakeem Olajuwon was signed to provide Carter with good support . The Raptors appeared to be on their way to another competitive season , with a 29 – 21 record going into the All @-@ Star break and with Carter the top vote @-@ getter for the All @-@ Star game for the third consecutive year . Carter then suffered a bout of patellar tendinitis ( also known as " jumper 's knee " ) forcing him to miss the All @-@ Star game and the rest of the season , and without their franchise player , Toronto lost 13 consecutive games . However , they were able to win 12 of their last 14 games , clinching a playoff spot on the last day of the regular season . The comeback featured some of the Raptors ' best defence of the season , along with inspired performances by Davis and Keon Clark . 
 Despite Toronto 's improved defensive performances , Carter 's offence was sorely missed in the first @-@ round series against the second @-@ seeded Detroit Pistons . In the first game , Detroit overwhelmed Toronto 83 – 65 , largely due to Ben Wallace 's strong performance of 19 points , 20 rebounds , 3 blocks and 3 steals . Detroit also won Game 2 , but Toronto won the next two games at home to force a deciding and tightly contested Game 5 in Detroit . With 10 @.@ 7 seconds left in the game , and the Raptors down 85 – 82 with possession of the ball , Childs raced down the court and shot a three @-@ pointer that missed badly , apparently trying to draw a foul on the play , instead of passing to a wide @-@ open Curry . In a post @-@ game locker room interview , Childs repeatedly insisted that the Raptors had been down four points , not three . The Raptors ' late @-@ season surge was thus marred by a disappointing playoff exit ; the Olajuwon experiment was also a bust , with the 39 @-@ year @-@ old averaging career lows in minutes , points and rebounds . Furthermore , Childs , Clark , and Curry left the team , ensuring a new @-@ look team for the next season . 
 = = = 2002 – 06 : Another period of struggle = = = 
 The 2002 – 03 season began with the same optimism that the Raptors exhibited in three consecutive playoff seasons , although it faded early . Carter , while voted as a starter in the 2003 All @-@ Star Game , suffered a knee injury , while Davis expressed disinterest in Toronto , and Wilkens ' laissez @-@ faire attitude created a team that lacked the motivation and spirit of the previous years ' teams . The team was ravaged with injuries , losing an NBA record number of player games due to injury . Furthermore , the Raptors recorded the dubious honour of being the only team in NBA history to not dress 12 players for a single game in a season . Wilkens was criticized heavily by the Toronto media for his inability to clamp down on his players when necessary , especially given this was the year that Wilkens overtook Bill Fitch for the most losses by an NBA coach , with his loss total getting dangerously close to his win total . The Raptors ended the season with a 24 – 58 record and Wilkens was fired . This turned out to be a blessing in disguise , when the Raptors were given the 4th overall pick in the 2003 NBA draft and brought another star to Toronto in Chris Bosh . 
 Canadian country singer Shania Twain helped launch the new red Raptors alternate road uniform at the start of the 2003 – 04 season , and the jerseys made their debut in a 90 – 87 season @-@ opening victory on October 29 , 2003 against the defending Conference Champion New Jersey Nets . Davis and Jerome Williams were traded early in the season for Jalen Rose and <unk> Marshall . After 50 games , Toronto was 25 – 25 and in a position to make the playoffs , but injuries to key players sent the Raptors plummeting down the standings . Rose , Carter , and Alvin Williams all suffered injuries as the Raptors struggled to a record of 8 – 24 in their remaining games . The notable individual season performances were Carter 's 22 @.@ 5 ppg , Marshall 's 10 @.@ 7 rpg and rookie Bosh , a 6 – 10 forward @-@ centre who averaged 11 @.@ 5 ppg and 7 @.@ 4 rpg and was named to the NBA All @-@ Rookie Team . Williams ' knee injury turned out to be career @-@ ending . 
 For the 2004 – 05 season , the team moved into the Atlantic Division and the Raptors decided to revamp the team . Raptors President and CEO of Maple Leaf Sports & Entertainment Richard Peddie fired Grunwald on April 1 , 2004 , after the team ended the season three games short of the eighth and final playoff spot in the previous season . Head coach Kevin O 'Neill and his four assistant coaches were also dismissed immediately after Grunwald 's termination . Toronto interim manager Jack McCloskey said : " While the blame for that certainly does not rest on O 'Neill and his staff alone , we need a change . " Rob Babcock was named General Manager on June 7 , 2004 , alongside the appointments of Wayne Embry as senior advisor and Alex English as director of player development . Sam Mitchell , a former NBA forward and assistant coach of the Milwaukee Bucks was hired as new head coach of the Raptors . 
 Babcock 's first move as GM was drafting centre Rafael Araújo — selected eighth overall — in the 2004 NBA draft , in a move that was criticized by fans and analysts , considering highly touted swingman Andre Iguodala was drafted with the next pick . Babcock signed point guard Rafer Alston to a five @-@ year deal . After Vince Carter 's annual charity game , Babcock implicitly revealed to the media that Carter 's agent had asked for a trade confirming Carter was discontent . The Toronto Sun reported that Carter felt he was being misled by the Raptors ' hierarchy during the General Manager search and had concluded that as long as the managerial structure at Maple Leaf Sports and Entertainment Ltd. remained intact , the Raptors would never be an elite team . Carter was finally traded mid @-@ season , ending his six @-@ year tenure . Toronto received Alonzo Mourning , forwards Eric Williams and Aaron Williams and two mid @-@ to @-@ late future first round picks from the New Jersey Nets . Mourning chose not to report to Toronto , forcing Babcock to buy out the remainder of his contract at a reported $ 10 million , leaving him free to sign with the Miami Heat . Eric and Aaron Williams were supposed to add defensive toughness and rebounding , but were generally under @-@ utilized for the entire season . Analysts had predicted Babcock got the bad end of the deal , and the trade eventually cost him his job . 
 Carter 's departure heralded a new era for Toronto . Bosh stepped up to the role of franchise player and performed well in his sophomore campaign , ranking tenth in the league in defensive rebounds . In contrast to Bosh 's emergence , Araújo struggled to keep a spot in the line @-@ up , and became unpopular with fans and local media . Although the ACC was often well @-@ attended due to the Raptors ' 22 – 19 home record , their inability to win on the road ( 11 – 30 ) and poor defensive record made Mitchell 's first year as head coach unimpressive . Additionally , Mitchell had problems dealing with Alston , who openly expressed his unhappiness with Mitchell in a post @-@ game interview . Later in the season , Alston was suspended two games for " conduct detrimental to the team " for reportedly walking out of a scrimmage during practice . Notwithstanding the unrest , in their first season competing in the Atlantic Division , Toronto maintained the same regular season record of 33 – 49 as the previous season . 
 The Raptors continued to rebuild during the 2005 NBA draft , selecting Charlie Villanueva , Joey Graham , Roko <unk> and Uroš <unk> , with Villanueva 's selection being very controversial amongst basketball pundits and Raptors fans alike . The Raptors started their training camp by trading Alston to the Houston Rockets for Mike James , and signing free agent José Calderón as a back @-@ up for James . Despite the infusion of new players , Toronto 's overall 2005 – 06 season was a disappointment ; they set a franchise record by losing their first nine games and 15 out of their first 16 games . With losses mounting and media scrutiny intensifying , the Raptors hired ex @-@ Purdue coach Gene <unk> as an assistant off the bench to help develop the young Raptors team , as well as establish a defensive persona for the team . On January 15 , 2006 , the Raptors set a franchise points record in a 129 – 103 win over the Knicks when Villanueva hit a three @-@ pointer late in the game , but less than a week later , the Raptors gave up an 18 @-@ point lead against the Los Angeles Lakers , and allowed Lakers star Kobe Bryant to score 81 points , the second highest single @-@ game total in NBA history . With media scrutiny intensifying once more and the Raptors entrenched at the bottom of the league in defensive field goal percentage , Toronto fired Babcock . 
 The 2005 – 06 season was not a total disaster . Villanueva 's play impressed both fans and former critics as he came in second in NBA Rookie of the Year and recorded 48 points in an overtime loss to Milwaukee Bucks , the most points scored by any rookie in franchise history and the most by a rookie in the NBA since 1997 . Bosh was also named a reserve forward for the Eastern All @-@ Star Team in the 2006 game , becoming the third Raptor after Vince Carter and Antonio Davis to appear in an All @-@ Star Game . On February 27 , 2006 , the team named Bryan Colangelo , the 2004 – 05 NBA Executive of the Year , the President and General Manager of the Raptors . Known for his success in transforming a lottery Phoenix team into a 62 @-@ win offensive juggernaut , his hiring gave hope to many fans . Still , Toronto ended the season weakly when Bosh suffered a season @-@ ending thumb injury . The Raptors lost ten in a row after Bosh 's injury and finished the season with the fifth worst record ( 27 – 55 ) in the NBA . 
 = = = 2006 – 10 : The rise of Chris Bosh = = = 
 The 2006 – 07 season represented a watershed year for the Raptors franchise . The roster was overhauled , including the selection of 2006 NBA draft number one pick Andrea Bargnani , the acquisition of point guard T. J. Ford in exchange for Villanueva , and the signing of shooting guard Anthony Parker and small forward Jorge Garbajosa . Bosh was given a three @-@ year contract extension , while Maurizio Gherardini of Benetton Treviso was hired as the club 's vice @-@ president and assistant general manager . 
 The first half of the season produced mixed results as Toronto struggled towards the .500 mark . After the All @-@ Star break , Bargnani continued to work on his defence and shooting ( averaging 14 @.@ 3 points per game ( ppg ) and 3 @.@ 9 rebounds per game ( rpg ) in 12 games for the month of February 2007 ) , and he was selected as the Eastern Conference Rookie of the Month for the second straight time on March 1 , 2007 . Bargnani became the third Raptor ever to win the award twice , joining Vince Carter and Damon Stoudamire . Toronto ended the regular season with a 47 – 35 record , securing the third seed in the Eastern Conference for the 2007 NBA Playoffs along with the Atlantic Division title , as well as <unk> advantage for the first time in franchise history . Bosh was voted to start in the 2007 NBA All @-@ Star Game . The Raptors were also praised for their improved defence , ball @-@ sharing and tremendous team chemistry . Colangelo , Gherardini and Mitchell were credited with Toronto 's turnaround this season , which was one of the best in NBA history in terms of league standing and defensive ranking . Mitchell was subsequently named the 2006 – 07 NBA Coach of the Year , the first coach in Raptors history to receive the honour , while Colangelo was named 2006 – 07 Executive of the Year . On April 24 , 2007 , the Raptors won their first playoff game in five seasons , with an 89 – 83 victory over the New Jersey Nets , but lost the series 4 – 2 . The series was notable for pitting ex @-@ Raptor Vince Carter against his former team . The Nets took home court advantage in Game 1 , holding off a late Raptors rally in the fourth quarter . The Raptors pulled away in another tight game to even the series at one game apiece . When the series shifted to New Jersey , the Nets took charge of the series , winning games 3 and 4 in routs . New Jersey had a chance to win the series in game 5 in Toronto , but the Raptors took a 20 @-@ point lead after one quarter . Still , New Jersey managed to chip away , and had a chance to win the game , but <unk> <unk> 's three @-@ pointer missed at the buzzer . Needing to win in New Jersey to force a game 7 , Toronto held a one @-@ point lead with under a minute to play in game 6 , but Richard Jefferson hit a layup with eight seconds left to play . Toronto attempted to try for the game @-@ winning shot , but Jefferson intercepted a pass to seal the series for the Nets . 
 Several changes to the roster were made before the 2007 – 08 campaign as Toronto sought to reproduce the same form as the previous campaign . Most notably , the Raptors acquired Carlos Delfino in a trade with Detroit for two second round draft picks , and signed Jamario Moon and three @-@ point specialist Jason Kapono as free agents . On the other hand , veteran swingman Morris Peterson joined the New Orleans Hornets . Despite being defending division champions , the Raptors were widely tipped as outside contenders for the division and conference titles . However , Toronto quickly fell behind Boston in the division , as Bargnani 's inability to play well consistently , along with injuries to Garbajosa ( 75 games ) , Bosh ( 15 games ) and Ford ( 31 games ) , derailed the possibility of a smooth campaign as the Raptors finished 41 @-@ 41 , six fewer wins than the previous season , but still good enough for a playoff spot as the 6th seed . They were pitted against Dwight Howard and the resurgent Orlando Magic . In Game 1 , Dwight Howard gave the Magic their first playoff win since 2003 as they practically led the entire game . Howard would put up a 29 – 20 in Game 2 , as Hedo Türkoğlu scored the final four go @-@ ahead points to give the Magic a 2 – 0 lead . The Raptors would respond with a strong Game 3 victory keyed by great point guard play from Ford and José Calderon . However , Jameer Nelson , Rashard Lewis and Keith <unk> keyed strong three point shooting in Game 4 and overcame Bosh 's 39 points and 15 rebounds to bring the Magic out of Toronto with a 3 – 1 lead . Howard would finish off the series in Game 5 as impressively as he started – 21 points , 21 rebounds , 3 blocks . Whereas the preceding season was considered a success , the 2007 – 08 campaign was considered a disappointment . Weaknesses in Toronto 's game — rebounding , defence , and a lack of a swingman — were brought into sharp focus during the playoffs , and changes were expected to be made to the roster . 
 As it turned out , a blockbuster trade was agreed in principle before the 2008 – 09 campaign : six @-@ time All @-@ Star Jermaine O 'Neal was acquired from the Indiana Pacers in exchange for Ford ( who had become expendable with the emergence of Calderón ) , Rasho <unk> , Maceo Baston , and Roy Hibbert , the 17th pick in the 2008 NBA draft , giving the Raptors a potential boost in the frontcourt . Meanwhile , Bargnani , who had spent the summer working on his interior game , was projected to come off the bench . The Raptors also introduced a black alternate road jersey for the season similar to the earlier purple design that was dropped a few seasons ago . It had a maple leaf featured on the back neck of the jersey , symbolizing the Raptors as " Canada 's team " . Despite the introduction of O 'Neal , who brought home the rebounds and the blocks , and a much improved Bargnani , the Raptors were too inconsistent . Following an 8 – 9 start to the season , Mitchell was fired and replaced by long @-@ time assistant Jay Triano . Triano tweaked with the starting line @-@ up to no avail as the Raptors fell to 21 – 34 prior to the All @-@ Star break . O 'Neal and Moon were then traded to Miami for Shawn Marion and Marcus Banks , but with the losses mounting , the Raptors soon fell out of the playoffs picture , and were eliminated from contention with seven games of the regular season remaining . The Raptors eventually finished with a 33 – 49 record and headed into the next season with a potential overhaul of the core : Marion could become a free agent ; Bosh could become one after 2009 – 10 ; Parker would soon turn 35 ; and Bargnani had his breakthrough season . On May 12 , 2009 , Triano was given a three @-@ year term for the position of head coach . 
 The inevitable roster shakeup for the 2009 – 10 season began when Kapono was traded to the Philadelphia 76ers for the aggressive veteran forward Reggie Evans . Toronto then drafted DeMar DeRozan with the ninth pick , enabling them to fill a spot on the wings . This was followed by the signing of free agent Hedo Türkoğlu , which in turn led to a sign @-@ and @-@ trade agreement involving four teams , with Toronto landing wing players <unk> George ( later traded for Marco Belinelli ) and Antoine Wright , while releasing Marion , Kris Humphries and Nathan <unk> . Around the same time , Parker headed for the Cleveland Cavaliers , while Indiana point guard Jarrett Jack was added and Nesterovič brought back to provide cover for the big men . Finally , Delfino and <unk> were moved to the Milwaukee Bucks for Amir Johnson and Sonny Weems . It became increasingly clear that Colangelo , in securing a credible nucleus for the future , was doing this to persuade Bosh to stay beyond 2010 . While the Raptors were off to a sluggish start , they picked up the pace around the All @-@ Star break , reaching a season @-@ high seven games above .500 and standing fifth in the Eastern Conference . Bosh was recording career @-@ highs in ppg and rpg . However , a season @-@ ending injury to Bosh after the break coincided with Toronto 's descent down the standings from the fifth seed to the eighth , and they ultimately relinquished their spot to Chicago a few games before the regular season ended . 
 = = = 2010 – 13 : Rebuilding = = = 
 Before the 2010 – 11 season began , there was much anticipation around the league over the fates of an elite pack of free agents , featuring the likes of Bosh , Dwyane Wade , LeBron James , and Amar 'e Stoudemire . Bosh and James eventually chose to converge in Miami with Wade , and the sign @-@ and @-@ trade transaction that ensued resulted in the Raptors receiving two first @-@ round draft picks and a trade exception from Miami . Prior to this , Toronto had drafted Ed Davis , also a left @-@ handed power forward like Bosh . After Bosh left , Colangelo sought to trade Calderón , Evans and the disenchanted Türkoğlu for Tyson Chandler , Leandro Barbosa , and Boris Diaw , but the trade involving Chandler collapsed at the last minute , as Chandler was traded to the Dallas Mavericks instead . Belinelli was then traded to New Orleans Hornets for Julian Wright , and 13 games into the season , Jack , David Andersen , and Marcus Banks to New Orleans for Peja Stojaković and Jerryd Bayless . Bosh 's first return to Toronto was received to a chorus of boos , but not as nearly as harsh as what former Raptors Tracy McGrady and Vince Carter received upon their respective returns . Without Bosh , Toronto as a team regressed and were only able to secure 22 wins in the regular season . 
 Dwane Casey , an assistant coach with the Mavericks , was hired as the new head coach of Toronto before the 2011 – 12 season . The Raptors used their number five pick to select Jonas Valančiūnas , a centre from Lithuania in the 2011 NBA draft . The season was shortened by 16 regular season games due to the 2011 NBA lockout , and the Raptors finished the season with a 23 – 43 record . During the 2012 off @-@ season , Colangelo tried to lure Canadian free agent and two @-@ time MVP Steve Nash , who had become a free agent after playing for the Phoenix Suns , to play for the Raptors . When Nash joined the Los Angeles Lakers instead , the Raptors acquired point guard Kyle Lowry from the Houston Rockets for a future first round pick . Lowry , combined with Valančiūnas and the 8th pick in the 2012 draft Terrence Ross , represented the next phase of the re @-@ building process . On January 30 , 2013 , the Raptors acquired Memphis Grizzlies star Rudy Gay and centre Hamed <unk> as well as Pistons player Austin Daye in a three @-@ way deal that sent Calderón to the Detroit Pistons and Davis , along with Pistons veteran Tayshaun Prince and a 2nd round pick to the Grizzlies . <unk> was later traded , along with a second round pick , to Phoenix in exchange for guard Sebastian Telfair . The 2012 – 13 season was the first season since 2009 – 10 that the Raptors finished the season with a winning home record ( 21 – 20 ) , despite their overall losing record ( 34 – 48 ) . 
 = = = 2013 – present : DeRozan and Lowry era = = = 
 During the 2013 off @-@ season , new General Manager Masai Ujiri traded Bargnani to the New York Knicks for Marcus Camby , Steve Novak , Quentin Richardson , a future first round draft pick , and two future second round picks ; Camby and Richardson were both waived shortly after the trade . The Raptors also added Tyler Hansbrough , D. J. Augustin , Dwight Buycks , and Austin Daye via free agency . On December 9 , 2013 , the Raptors traded Rudy Gay , Quincy <unk> , and Aaron Gray to the Sacramento Kings for John Salmons , Greivis Vásquez , Patrick Patterson , and Chuck Hayes , and waived Augustin . During the 2013 – 14 season , the Raptors were 6 – 12 before the Rudy Gay trade ; after the trade , they went on a 10 – 3 run as they maintained their lead in the division , and rose above the .500 mark for the first time in almost three years . 
 The Raptors entered the All @-@ Star break with a 28 – 24 record , and DeRozan was also selected to play in the All @-@ Star game , being only the fourth ever Raptor to do so . On March 28 , 2014 , the Raptors clinched a playoff berth for the first time since 2008 after beating the Boston Celtics 105 – 103 . On April 11 , 2014 , the Raptors lost to the New York Knicks 108 – 100 , but since division rival Brooklyn lost to the Atlanta Hawks the same night , the Raptors became Atlantic Division champions for the first time since 2007 . They finished the regular season with a franchise @-@ high 48 wins ( .585 ) , going 42 – 22 ( <unk> ) after the Rudy Gay trade , the third @-@ best record in the Eastern Conference . The Raptors faced the Brooklyn Nets in the first round of the playoffs for the first time since 2007 , when the Nets where located in New Jersey . Toronto nearly advanced to the next round , but Paul Pierce blocked a potential game @-@ winner by Lowry in Game 7 . 
 During the 2014 – 15 season , the Raptors were off to their best start in franchise history : a then @-@ Eastern Conference leading 24 – 8 record by the end of 2014 . On March 27 , 2015 , the Raptors clinched the Atlantic division title with a 94 – 83 win over the Los Angeles Lakers . This was the second consecutive year that the Raptors clinched the Atlantic Division title . On April 11 , 2015 , the Raptors beat the Miami Heat , Toronto 's first road win over the Heat since November 19 , 2008 , ending a ten @-@ game slide on Miami 's home floor . The win was Toronto 's 48th of the season and 22nd on the road , both tying franchise records . Four days later , the Toronto Raptors broke their franchise record with their 49th win of the season . After the 2014 – 15 season , Louis Williams won the NBA Sixth Man of the Year Award , becoming the first ever Raptor to do so . The Raptors faced the Washington Wizards in the first round of the 2015 playoffs , and lost four straight games as the Wizards swept the Raptors . 
 On June 25 , 2015 , the Raptors selected Delon Wright with their first round pick in the 2015 NBA draft , along with Norman Powell in the second round . On June 29 , the Raptors announced their new NBA D @-@ League team , the Mississauga @-@ based Raptors 905 , which began play in the 2015 – 2016 season . The Raptors added <unk> Carroll , Cory Joseph , <unk> <unk> , and Luis Scola via free agency . 
 The Raptors opened a new practice facility , the BioSteel Centre in Exhibition Place , on February 10 , 2016 . The Raptors hosted the 2016 NBA All @-@ Star Game on February 14 , 2016 and its associated weekend for the first time in its history . With a 105 – 97 win at home against the Atlanta Hawks on March 30 , 2016 , the Raptors attained their first ever 50 @-@ win season . The following day the Raptors clinched the Atlantic Division title for the third consecutive season as a result of a Boston Celtics loss against the Portland Trail Blazers . The 56 – 26 record became the best Raptors regular season ever , fourth overall in the league and second only to the Cleveland Cavaliers in the Eastern Conference . Entering the 2016 playoffs as the East 's second seed , the Raptors were pushed to seven games by the Indiana Pacers , but managed to win their first playoff series in 15 years . Another seven @-@ game series against the Miami Heat ensued , which Toronto also won . The Raptors , who were one of the four teams that never reached the NBA Conference Finals in their histories , appeared in the third round for the first time in their twenty @-@ first season , facing the Cleveland Cavaliers , in which they ultimately lost the series 4 – 2 . The Cavaliers would then advance to the NBA Finals and became champions . 
 = = Logos and uniforms = = 
 = = = Logos = = = 
 On December 19 , 2014 , the Toronto Raptors unveiled a new primary logo , which the team described as " a circular shield with a ball torn by the unmistakable attack of a Raptor " . 
 = = = Uniforms = = = 
 Occasionally , the Raptors would wear the Toronto Huskies throwback jersey during retro nights , given that the Huskies are the unofficial predecessor of the Raptors and the Raptors are among the newest NBA teams . 
 = = = = 2015 redesign = = = = 
 On August 3 , 2015 , the Toronto Raptors unveiled four new uniforms . The uniforms were released in partnership with 2K Sports ' NBA 2K16 video game . The team said in a press release the new uniform designs were intended to pay tribute to the city of Toronto and to Canada as a whole , noting that the Raptors were the sole Canadian club in the NBA . The main colours would remain centred on Canada 's national colours of red and white , whereas black and silver will continue to be used for trim on the home white and red road uniform . The uniforms themselves underwent changes . Most notably , the chevrons on the side panels now point up , which the team said aligns with its current slogan of " We The North " . Since being introduced as a uniform accent in 1999 , the chevrons had pointed downward , the team said . In addition , at the waist @-@ level hem of the jersey is an upside @-@ down tag with the team 's " We The North " slogan . The team said the slogan on the tag will be visible to players when they tuck in their jersey . Additionally , the shorts now feature a maple leaf logo on the front of the waistband , and the letter " T " is now on the sides of the shorts , with the Raptors ' basketball claw logo below it . This is a reference to the city of Toronto 's " T @-@ Dot " nickname . 
 = = Arenas = = 
 BioSteel Centre ( Practice facility : 2016 – present ) 
 = = Personnel = = 
