 = = = Current roster = = = 
 = = = Retained draft rights = = = 
 The Raptors hold the draft rights to the following unsigned draft picks who have been playing outside the NBA . A drafted player , either an international draftee or a college draftee who is not signed by the team that drafted him , is allowed to sign with any non @-@ NBA team . In this case , the team retains the player 's draft rights in the NBA until one year after the player 's contract with the non @-@ NBA team ends . This list includes draft rights that were acquired from trades with other teams . 
 = = = Management = = = 
 General managers 
 1995 – March 1998 : Isiah Thomas 
 March 1998 – April 2004 : Glen Grunwald 
 April 2004 – June 2004 ( Interim ) : Jack McCloskey 
 June 2004 – January 2006 : Rob Babcock 
 January 2006 – February 2006 ( Interim ) : Wayne Embry 
 February 2006 – May 2013 : Bryan Colangelo 
 May 2013 – present : Masai Ujiri 
 Owners 
 1995 – 1998 : John Bitove , Allan Slaight , Isiah Thomas 
 1998 – present : Maple Leaf Sports & Entertainment 
 Head coaches 
 Notes : 
 a A running total of the number of coaches of the Raptors and thus any coach who has two or more separate terms as head coach is only counted once 
 b Spent entire coaching career with the Raptors while in the NBA 
 c Elected into the Basketball Hall of Fame as a coach 
 = = = Basketball Hall of Famers = = = 
 Notes : 
 1 In total , Wilkens was inducted into the Hall of Fame three times – as player , as coach and as a member of the 1992 Olympic team . 
 = = = FIBA Hall of Famers = = = 
 = = Awards and records = = 
 Since their inception in 1995 , the Raptors have made the playoffs eight times ( 2000 , 2001 , 2002 , 2007 , 2008 , 2014 , 2015 and 2016 ) , advancing past the first round twice ( 2001 and 2016 ) . The Raptors have won the Atlantic Division four times ( 2007 , 2014 , 2015 and 2016 ) , and the franchise record number of wins in the regular season is 56 ( 2016 ) . Five Raptors have been selected to play in the All @-@ Star game : Vince Carter , Antonio Davis , Chris Bosh , DeMar DeRozan and Kyle Lowry . 
 = = Broadcasters = = 
 Raptors games are primarily broadcast on television by TSN and Sportsnet . Through MLSE , the Raptors also operate the Canadian version of NBA TV ( formerly known as Raptors NBA TV ) , which airs reruns of Raptors telecasts along with other news and analysis programs focusing on the team and the rest of the NBA . 
 = = <unk> and marketing = = 
 The Raptors have enjoyed a consistent fanbase throughout their history . The Toronto Raptors set NBA attendance records in their 2000 , 2001 , 2002 seasons when they made the playoffs . Attendance dipped slightly between 2003 and 2006 . This improved during the 2006 – 07 regular season to an average of 18 @,@ 258 fans ( 13th in the league ) , 92 @.@ 2 % of capacity at the ACC . Following the success of the 2006 – 07 season , Toronto became one of the league leaders in season ticket sales for the 2007 – 08 season . Their television ratings , however , are considerably lower than other more established Toronto sports teams and most other sporting events shown on Canadian television . 
 Another successful run starting in 2013 – 14 led to a spike in the Raptors ' support . For the 2014 – 15 season , the team sold out the 12 @,@ 500 season tickets , the first time it occurred since 2011 . Public watchings of the Raptors games , particularly during the playoffs , started being held at Maple Leaf Square , which the fans nicknamed " Jurassic Park " . MLSE decided to endorse this practice by setting up concession stands and branded sponsorships at the square , along with increased security . At times , footage from the square is broadcast to the Raptors locker room . The victorious Game 7 against the Indiana Pacers on the 2016 playoffs was the most watched Raptors broadcast ever , as well as the biggest television audience in Canada that day , averaging 1 @.@ 53 million viewers with a peak of 2 @.@ 63 million . 
 The value of the Raptors franchise has risen over the years . In 1998 , the franchise was bought for US $ 125 million . With the continued popularity of the Raptors , the value of the franchise doubled from US $ 148 million in 2000 to $ 297 million in 2004 . The value of the franchise grew again from $ 315 million in 2006 to $ 373 million in 2007 , and $ 400 million in 2008 . By 2016 , Forbes estimated the Raptors were worth $ 920 million . 
 On game day , the fans are usually entertained by the Raptor mascot , the Raptors Dance Pak , and the 4 <unk> Raptors <unk> during pre @-@ game , time @-@ outs , and intervals . During the 2013 – 14 season , a new " Drake Zone " was created in the lower bowl . Limited edition shirts were given away to fans sitting in the Drake Zone . <unk> are sometimes bundled with tickets to encourage attendance . Further , whenever Toronto scores more than 100 points in a home game and wins , fans can redeem their ticket for a cheese or pepperoni pizza slice at standalone Pizza Pizza locations throughout Ontario for the business day after the game that was played . This is part of a promotion made by the Raptors ' official pizza sponsor . 
 = = = " We The North " re @-@ branding = = = 
 In the lead @-@ up to the team 's 20th anniversary season in 2015 , and its hosting of the 2016 All @-@ Star Game , the Raptors began the process of re @-@ branding itself . On September 30 , 2013 , Toronto @-@ based rapper Drake was announced as the new " global ambassador " for the Toronto Raptors , thereby joining the executive committee of his hometown 's NBA team . In April 2014 , the Raptors unveiled a new imaging campaign developed by the agency Sid Lee , " We The North " , built around a manifesto that was meant to embrace the team 's trait of being an " outsider " from the " north side " , and the accompanying feelings of players and fans . 
 The " We The North " campaign was originally to be launched during the 2015 – 16 season ; however , the launch was hastened so it would be ready in time for the 2014 playoffs , taking into account the poor performance of Canada 's other pro sports teams at the time . An introductory commercial was quickly filmed , which featured the manifesto as narration , scenes of local basketball players in various outdoor locations around the city , and ended with a scene displaying a black , waving flag with the motto written on it . The campaign was immediately embraced by fans during the playoffs and following season ; the launch commercial was viewed over 500 @,@ 000 times in the two days following its release , " We The North " -branded shirts and flags became a common sight at games , while Ryerson University sports marketing professor Cheri <unk> compared the campaign to Molson 's former " I Am Canadian " alcohol advertising campaign in how it resonated with the country . 
 On December 19 , 2014 , the Raptors soft @-@ launched a new logo also designed by Sid Lee , which features a basketball with claw marks . The new logo was officially implemented during the 2015 – 2016 season . The logo 's introduction was marred by a disorganized launch , which saw a black and white version initially shown before the eventual unveiling of colored versions later in the day , mixed reviews for the design itself , with some ( especially on the black and white version ) comparing it to that of the Brooklyn Nets , and despite teasing merchandise with the new logo , not releasing any until at least mid @-@ 2015 . There were also alleged tensions between MLSE staff and Drake surrounding the new design — in particular , the performer had pushed for the team to change its primary colour from red to gold ( a colour seen in one of the official variants of the logo unveiled that day ) . In a response on Twitter , Drake distanced himself from the " execution " of the new logo . 
 = = Rivalries = = 
 = = = New Jersey / Brooklyn Nets = = = 
 The New Jersey / Brooklyn Nets and the Raptors have been minor rivals since the trade of Vince Carter to the Nets during the 2004 – 05 season . The rivalry began to heat up as the two teams faced each other in the opening round of the 2007 NBA Playoffs , with the Nets winning the series 4 – 2 after a go @-@ ahead shot by Richard Jefferson with 8 seconds left in Game 6 ensuring 98 – 97 defeat for the Raptors . The rivalry was rekindled during the 2013 – 14 season when the Nets and Raptors battled for the Atlantic Division . The Raptors won the division final but then they found themselves facing the Nets in the opening round of the 2014 NBA Playoffs . Prior to Game 1 of the series , Raptors GM Masai Ujiri spoke at a Raptors rally outside Air Canada Centre 's Maple Leaf Square . During the rally , Ujiri yelled " Fuck Brooklyn ! " which found its way quickly onto social media platforms within minutes . Masai was fined $ 25 @,@ 000 by the NBA for the quote and later apologized for the excessive language . The hard fought series lasted seven games , and was decided in the final seconds when Paul Pierce blocked Kyle Lowry 's shot giving the Nets the 104 – 103 victory . 
 = = = New York Knicks = = = 
 The New York Knicks and the Raptors had a playoff rivalry in 2000 and 2001 . The Raptors made their first @-@ ever playoff appearance during the 1999 – 2000 season , in which they were swept by the Knicks in the first round 3 – 0 . The following season , the Raptors redeemed themselves , defeating the Knicks in the first round 3 – 2 ; this effectively ended the Knicks ' run as perennial NBA championship contenders , which began in the early 1990s . 
 = = Community service = = 
 The Raptors Foundation was the charitable arm of the Raptors , dedicated to assisting Ontario 's registered charities that support programs and sports initiatives for at @-@ risk children and youth . The Foundation strove to lift spirits and change lives for young people by supporting local and provincial organizations that provide recreational , educational and other youth @-@ oriented activities . Through its community ties and with the help of its corporate partners , donors , Raptors players and volunteers , the Foundation has successfully raised more than $ 14 million between 1995 and 2007 , and reached out to thousands of other charities . The Raptors Foundation was one of three parts of the Raptors ' community service program . The other projects are Raptors Community Relations and Raptors Basketball Development , both of which focus on providing basketball development programs . The Toronto Raptors lead the NBA for amount of money donated to the community . In 2009 , the Raptors Foundation merged with the other charitable arms of MLSE 's other sports franchises to form the Team Up Foundation . 
 = Caesar ( cocktail ) = 
 A Caesar or Bloody Caesar is a cocktail created and primarily consumed in Canada . It typically contains vodka , Clamato ( a proprietary blend of tomato juice and clam broth ) , hot sauce and Worcestershire sauce , and is served with ice in a large , celery salt @-@ rimmed glass , typically garnished with a stalk of celery and wedge of lime . What distinguishes it from a Bloody Mary is the inclusion of clam broth . The cocktail may also be contrasted with the <unk> , which has similar flavouring ingredients but uses beer instead of vodka . 
 It was invented in Calgary , Alberta in 1969 by restaurateur Walter Chell to celebrate the opening of a new Italian restaurant in the city . It quickly became a popular mixed drink within Canada where over 350 million Caesars are consumed annually and it has inspired numerous variants . However , the drink remains virtually unknown elsewhere . 
 = = Origin = = 
 The Caesar was invented in 1969 by restaurant manager Walter Chell of the Calgary Inn ( today the Westin Hotel ) in Calgary , Alberta , Canada . He devised the cocktail after being tasked to create a signature drink for the Calgary Inn 's new Italian restaurant . He mixed vodka with clam and tomato juice , Worcestershire sauce , and other spices , creating a drink similar to a Bloody Mary but with a uniquely spicy flavour . 
 Chell said his inspiration came from Italy . He recalled that in Venice , they served Spaghetti alle <unk> , spaghetti with tomato sauce and clams . He reasoned that the mixture of clams and tomato sauce would make a good drink , and mashed clams to form a " nectar " that he mixed with other ingredients . 
 According to Chell 's granddaughter , his Italian ancestry led him to call the drink a " Caesar " . The longer name of " Bloody Caesar " is said to differentiate the drink from the Bloody Mary , but Chell said it was a regular patron at the bar who served as the inspiration . During the three months he spent working to perfect the drink , he had customers sample it and offer feedback . One regular customer , an Englishman , who often ordered the drink said one day " Walter , that 's a damn good bloody Caesar " . 
 = = Popularity = = 
 Chell said the drink was an immediate hit with the restaurant 's patrons , claiming it " took off like a rocket " . Within five years of its introduction , the Caesar had become Calgary 's most popular mixed drink . It spread throughout Western Canada , then to the east . Coinciding with its 40th anniversary , a petition was launched in 2009 in the hopes of having the Caesar named the nation 's official mixed drink . In Calgary , Mayor Dave Bronconnier celebrated the drink 's anniversary by declaring May 13 , 2009 as Caesar Day in the city . 
 The Mott 's company was independently developing Clamato , a mixture of clam and tomato juices , at the same time the Caesar was invented . Sales of Clamato were initially slow : Mott 's sold only 500 cases of Clamato in 1970 , but sales consistently increased after the company 's distributors discovered Chell 's drink . By 1994 , 70 % of Mott 's Clamato sales in Canada were made to mix Caesars , while half of all Clamato sales were made in Western Canada . Motts claims that the Caesar is the most popular mixed drink in Canada , estimating that over 350 million Caesars are consumed every year . 
 Outside Canada , the Caesar is virtually unknown . In the United States , it is typically only available at bars along the Canadian border . Elsewhere , bartenders will frequently offer a Bloody Mary in its place . In Europe , the drink can be found wherever there are higher concentrations of Canadians . The drink 's anonymity outside Canada has come in spite of concerted marketing efforts . Producers of clam @-@ tomato juices have speculated that their beverages have been hampered by what they describe as the " clam barrier " . They have found that consumers in the United States fear that there is too much clam in the beverages . 
 The Caesar is popular as a hangover " cure " , though its effectiveness has been questioned . A study by the University of Toronto released in 1985 showed that drinking a Caesar when taking aspirin could help protect a person 's stomach from the damage aspirin causes . 
 = = Preparation and variants = = 
 Basic preparation of a Caesar follows the " one , two , three , four " rule . The recipe calls for 1 – 1 ½ oz of vodka , two dashes of hot sauce , three dashes of salt and pepper , four dashes of Worcestershire sauce and topped with 4 – 6 oz of Clamato and served with ice . The ingredients are poured into a glass rimmed with celery salt or a mixture of salt and pepper and garnished with a celery stalk and lime . The Caesar is an unusual drink in that it can be mixed in bulk and stored for a period of time before drinking . 
 Though it was not one of Chell 's original ingredients , Tabasco sauce is a frequent addition , as is horseradish . Vodka is occasionally replaced with gin , tequila or rum , though the Clamato may not be substituted . A variant that replaces vodka with beer is commonly called a " Red Eye " , and one without alcohol is a " Virgin Caesar " . The Toronto Institute of <unk> operates a " Caesar School " in various locations across Canada that teaches bartenders how to mix several variants of the drink . 
 Mott 's holds an annual " Best Caesar in Town " competition as part of the Prince Edward Island International Shellfish Festival . Contests held across Canada to celebrate the cocktail 's 40th anniversary in 2009 encouraged variants that featured the glass rimmed with Tim Hortons coffee grinds , Caesars with maple syrup and Caesars with bacon @-@ infused vodka . 
 = Joey Barton = 
 Joseph Anthony " Joey " Barton ( / <unk> <unk> / ; born 2 September 1982 ) is an English professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for Scottish Premiership club Rangers . He has made 240 appearances in the Premier League , including 130 for Manchester City . 
 Barton was born and raised in Huyton , Merseyside . He began his football career with Manchester City in 2002 after working his way through their youth system . His appearances in the senior side gradually increased over the following five years and he made more than 150 for the club . He earned his first cap for the England national team in February 2007 , despite his criticism of some of the team 's players . He then joined Newcastle United for a fee of £ 5 @.@ 8 million in July 2007 . After four years with the club , he joined Queens Park Rangers in August 2011 , from where he was loaned to Marseille in 2012 . He returned from his loan spell the following season , and helped QPR to promotion to the Premier League via the Championship play @-@ offs . However , QPR were relegated again , and Barton was released at the end of the season . He signed a one @-@ year deal to play for Burnley in 2015 , helping them win promotion to the Premier League , but left to join Rangers in May 2016 . 
 Barton 's career and life have been marked by numerous controversial incidents and disciplinary problems and he has been convicted twice on charges of violence . On 20 May 2008 he was sentenced to six months ' imprisonment for common assault and affray during an incident in Liverpool City Centre . Barton served 77 days of this prison term , being released on 28 July 2008 . On 1 July 2008 he was also given a four @-@ month suspended sentence after admitting assault occasioning actual bodily harm on former teammate Ousmane Dabo during a training @-@ ground dispute on 1 May 2007 . This incident effectively ended his Manchester City career . Barton has been charged with violent conduct three times by The Football Association : for the assault on Dabo , for punching Morten Gamst Pedersen in the stomach and for attacking three players on the final day of the 2011 – 12 season . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in Huyton , Merseyside , Barton is the oldest of four brothers . His parents separated when he was 14 years old and consequently he lived with his father at his grandmother 's house on a different estate . He has said that his grandmother 's influence helped him to avoid getting caught up in a recreational drug culture and attributes his work ethic to his father . His father , also named Joseph , worked as a roofer and played football semi @-@ professionally for Northwich Victoria . Barton enjoyed physical education at his school , St Thomas Becket , which he represented in various sports and was a talented Rugby League prospect . He left school with ten GCSEs . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Barton pursued his dreams of becoming a professional footballer by joining Everton 's youth system , but played for Liverpool when he was 14 . He underwent trials at Nottingham Forest , but was rejected when it was decided he was too small to become a footballer . Barton said his rejection by clubs only made him more determined to succeed as a footballer and prove his detractors wrong . He made his first appearance for the club 's under @-@ 17s team in 1999 and played regularly at Academy level for three years . His first reserve team appearance came at the end of the 2000 – 01 season , in his final year as a trainee . Uncertain about Barton 's future prospects , the club planned to release him , but reconsidered and gave him his first professional contract in the close season . Over the next two years , he successfully made the transition from the under @-@ 19s to regular reserve football . He was promoted to the first @-@ team squad in the 2002 – 03 season . 
 = = = Manchester City = = = 
 Barton would have made his debut for the City first @-@ team in November 2002 against Middlesbrough , had he not lost his shirt after leaving it on the substitutes bench at half @-@ time . He eventually made his first @-@ team debut for the club against Bolton Wanderers on 5 April 2003 . His first senior goal came two weeks later in a 2 – 0 win over Tottenham Hotspur on Good Friday . He ended the 2002 – 03 season with a run of seven consecutive starts . 
 After impressing in his first season at City , Barton was offered a new one @-@ year contract at the club by manager Kevin Keegan , which he signed in April 2003 . He featured in the first @-@ team more regularly during the 2003 – 04 season and , following a second Premiership goal , was rewarded with a call @-@ up to the England U21 squad for their 2004 European Championship qualifiers against Macedonia and Portugal . 
 An FA Cup match against Tottenham saw Barton receive the first red card of his career in unusual circumstances : at half @-@ time , with his club 3 – 0 down , he argued with the referee and was sent off although the match was not in progress . In the second half , despite playing with 10 men , Barton 's team @-@ mates achieved an unlikely 4 – 3 victory . Barton left the City of Manchester Stadium in anger on 17 April , after not being named in the team to play Southampton . However he featured regularly in the 2003 – 04 season , which he completed with 39 appearances and one goal . His displays impressed City 's supporters , and at the end of the 2003 – 04 season he was awarded with the club 's Young Player of the Year award . 
 Barton sparked a ten @-@ man brawl in a friendly match against Doncaster Rovers on 25 July 2004 after " hacking " at an opposition player . Although he signed a new contract on 22 September 2004 , which would keep him at City until 2007 , the club considered sacking Barton in December 2004 after an incident at their Christmas party . He <unk> out a lit cigar in youth player Jamie Tandy 's eye , after he had caught Tandy attempting to set fire to his shirt . Barton subsequently apologised for his actions and was fined six weeks ' wages ( £ 60 @,@ 000 ) . 
 In May 2005 Barton broke a 35 @-@ year @-@ old pedestrian 's leg while driving his car through Liverpool city centre at 2 am . In the summer of 2005 , Barton was sent home from a pre @-@ season tournament in Thailand after assaulting a 15 @-@ year @-@ old Everton supporter who had provoked Barton by verbally abusing him and kicking his shin . Barton had to be restrained from attacking the boy further by teammate Richard Dunne . Barton underwent anger management therapy at the order of City manager Stuart Pearce and paid £ 120 @,@ 000 in club fines . In the autumn of 2005 , Barton began a seven @-@ day programme of behavioural management at the Sporting Chance clinic , a charity set up to help troubled sportsmen and women . 
 Barton handed in a written transfer request in January 2006 , which the club rejected . The following day , they also rejected a verbal offer for Barton from Middlesbrough , with Stuart Pearce asserting that a deal could still be made to keep him at the club . During the following week , Barton admitted that he was " a little bit impetuous " in making such a request and agreed to begin negotiations on a new contract at City . He was rewarded with a new four @-@ year deal , which he signed on 25 July , ending speculation about his future . 
 Barton 's behaviour appeared to improve after his participation at the Sporting Chance clinic . However , on 30 September 2006 , television cameras captured Barton exposing his backside to Everton fans , following City 's injury @-@ time equaliser in a game at Goodison Park . Barton had received abuse from Everton supporters throughout the match and the gesture has since been described as " light @-@ hearted " and " inoffensive " by people involved in football . Merseyside Police looked into the incident , but announced in October that no further action would be taken , although Barton was fined £ 2 @,@ 000 for bringing the game into disrepute and warned about his future conduct by The Football Association . 
 In December 2006 , Barton received the second red card of his career , for a late two @-@ footed tackle on Bolton Wanderers player Abdoulaye Faye . 
 Barton 's agent Willie McKay revealed in January 2007 that if any team offered at least £ 5 @.@ 5 million for Barton , it would trigger a release clause in his contract that would mean City would have to allow Barton to talk to the interested club . This reportedly prompted Everton manager David Moyes to make an inquiry to City about Barton 's availability . However , the next day Barton said " People are trying to unsettle me but I 'm happy to stay here " . 
 Barton was arrested on suspicion of assault and criminal damage after an alleged argument with a taxi driver in Liverpool while going to his hotel after a match on 13 March 2007 . He was cleared of this charge in May 2008 . 
 Barton displayed his outspokenness once again on 22 April 2007 when he publicly criticised City 's performances during the 2006 – 07 season , and described some of the players the club had signed as " substandard " . Following his comments , City 's manager Stuart Pearce banned him from speaking to the media . 
 Barton was fined £ 100 @,@ 000 and suspended by City until the end of the 2006 – 07 season on 1 May 2007 , following an incident during training when he assaulted his team mate Ousmane Dabo . Dabo said that he had been hit several times , was left unconscious and had to go to hospital after suffering injuries to his head , including a suspected detached retina . Dabo requested that the police press charges against Barton , and as a result , Barton was arrested and questioned by Greater Manchester Police . This altercation effectively ended Barton 's time at City , although he later cited a " relationship breakdown " with Stuart Pearce as the main reason he left the club . Barton was bailed until August and was later charged with assault , to which he initially pleaded not guilty . He later changed this to a guilty plea and on 1 July 2008 was sentenced to a four @-@ month suspended prison sentence plus 200 hours of community service and ordered to pay £ 3 @,@ 000 compensation and Dabo 's court costs . Barton was also charged with violent conduct by the FA . Barton pleaded guilty and on 1 September 2008 was banned for six games with a further six game ban suspended for two years and fined £ 25 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Newcastle United = = = 
 Following offers from Newcastle United and West Ham United , Barton joined Newcastle on 14 June 2007 for a fee of £ 5 @.@ 8 million . The contract negotiations had become protracted after Manchester City refused to pay Barton a fee of £ 300 @,@ 000 to which he was reported to be entitled if he left the club without submitting a request for transfer . Newcastle United consequently raised their initial offer of £ 5 @.@ 5 million to £ 5 @.@ 8 , in effect compensating Manchester City for the £ 300 @,@ 000 discrepancy . He said that his desire to win trophies helped him to make the decision , along with his admiration for manager Sam Allardyce . Barton made his Newcastle debut in a friendly against Hartlepool United on 17 July 2007 . Four days later , he was ruled out for six to seven weeks after fracturing the fifth metatarsal bone in his left foot during a friendly match with Carlisle United . He was ruled out for a further month in October 2007 . He eventually made his Premier League debut for Newcastle on 22 October 2007 , coming on as a second @-@ half substitute in a 3 – 1 win over Tottenham . During his first Tyne – Wear derby for Newcastle against Sunderland , Barton appeared to raise his foot dangerously in a challenge with Sunderland 's Dickson Etuhu , leading to the News of the World running with the headline " Ban Him " . However the FA were unable to charge Barton for the incident because match official Martin Atkinson had seen the act take place in the match , and had taken no action . FIFA regulations dictate that a retrospective charge for violent conduct can be made only if the match official did not notice the incident . Barton later apologised for the tackle . Early in December , he called for Newcastle fans to give the team more time after their abuse of manager Sam Allardyce , calling them " vicious " . He later played this down , saying his comments had been misrepresented . 
 On 27 December 2007 , Barton was arrested on suspicion of assault in the Church Street area of Liverpool city centre following an incident which took place at 5 : 30 am . He was remanded in custody on 28 December since the offence was committed whilst he was on bail for two prior offences ; the presiding magistrate noted " I also have to consider the safety of the public – you lashed out indiscriminately " . CCTV showed Barton punching a man twenty times , causing him to lose consciousness , and attacking a teenager , breaking some of his teeth . On 20 May 2008 , he was sentenced to six months in jail after pleading guilty for his part in the December 2007 assault . Barton 's cousin , Nadine Wilson and his brother Andrew Barton also pleaded guilty to their part in the assaults and received suspended sentences . Barton admitted to being an alcoholic and claimed he wanted to achieve " total abstinence " in order to improve his behaviour . He served 77 days of his prison term , being released on 28 July 2008 . 
 Barton 's subsequent conviction , a four @-@ month suspended sentence for the earlier assault on Ousmane Dabo at Manchester City was handed out while serving this sentence . He returned to playing action on 30 August 2008 , six days before his FA hearing , as a second @-@ half substitute during Newcastle 's 3 – 0 defeat to Arsenal . He came on to a chorus of boos from the Arsenal supporters . Shortly into this return game , Barton was involved in an incident with Samir Nasri , putting in a strong tackle , for which the referee did not give a foul . The tackle , though hard , was legal . Minutes later , Nasri deliberately clipped Barton while tracking back , for which he was booked . At the end of the game , Newcastle manager Kevin Keegan was involved in an altercation with Nasri and Arsenal captain William Gallas , in regards to the incident . 
 It was a brief stint back in the playing squad , with Barton banned for six games , with a further suspended six @-@ game ban , for his assault on Dabo . After serving his ban , he played 75 minutes in a reserve game and said he wanted to transform his image to become a role model , before he returned to action in the Tyne – Wear derby on 25 October . He was booed by Sunderland fans and had missiles thrown at him as he warmed up , as Newcastle lost 2 – 1 . Without him , Newcastle had not recorded a league victory since the second game of the season , but Barton scored a penalty in his second game back to lift the club out of the relegation zone . The suspended six @-@ game ban was nearly brought into action when Barton appeared to flick Aston Villa striker Gabriel Agbonlahor in the club 's next game , but the FA decided not to punish Barton . However , further allegations that Barton had made a racist remark to Agbonlahor were cause enough for the FA to reconsider this decision . The remarks remain unfounded and ' professional lip @-@ readers ' claimed he said nothing racist . In Newcastle 's 2 – 2 draw with Wigan on 15 November 2008 , Barton was injured after a tackle from Lee Cattermole . It was later confirmed that Barton would be out for two months with a medial ligament injury . Returning to the first team at the end of January , he played only twice before again breaking his metatarsal , during a 2 – 1 defeat to his old club Manchester City . 
 In his first appearance in over three months on 3 May 2009 , Barton was sent off late in a 3 – 0 loss to Liverpool at Anfield for a sliding challenge on Xabi Alonso . The red card ruled Barton out of Newcastle 's remaining three games of the season , with the club in danger of relegation from the Premier League . Newcastle manager Alan Shearer raised doubts about Barton 's future at the club , saying " I think it would be wrong to discuss his future now , but I 'm not very happy . " On 5 May , Newcastle United announced the suspension of Barton indefinitely , and Barton was told to stay away from the club . As a result , Barton 's future at Newcastle United was put in doubt . The club suspension was widely reportedly to have resulted not directly from the red card , but from a dressing room confrontation with Shearer and assistant manager Iain Dowie following the game . Shearer said he made a mistake putting Barton back into the team , and that his tackle was " a coward 's tackle " , to which Barton replied that he was " the best player at the club " , and Shearer had to play him . Shearer said that Barton was not that he was " shit " . Barton replied that Shearer was " a shit manager with shit tactics " . When Dowie intervened , Barton called him " a prick " . Barton was reportedly transfer listed , with former manager Sam Allardyce reported to have been interested in taking Barton to Blackburn Rovers . Barton 's counsellor has said that Barton " would love to work with Alan Shearer again " and " feels very much that he owes the club and the fans . " 
 Barton stayed on with Newcastle United after they were relegated to the Championship , playing six out of Newcastle 's opening eight league games , but suffered an injury to his foot in a 3 – 1 win against Plymouth Argyle on 19 September . He returned in April for Newcastle , playing all nine of Newcastle 's remaining league fixtures and scoring his only goal of the campaign from a free kick in a win over Peterborough United . Due to the form of Danny Guthrie and Kevin Nolan , Barton had to play left wing when he returned . 
 Barton started his new club season 2010 – 11 as a first team regular , playing against Manchester United on the opening day . On Barton 's and Newcastle 's second game , he scored against Aston Villa in a 6 – 0 victory for Newcastle . Immediately , after the game Barton removed a moustache which he had pledged to not shave until Newcastle United had won a game in the new season . On 10 November , in a 2 – 1 defeat to Blackburn , Barton again acted violently , punching Morten Gamst Pedersen in the chest . He was not punished during the game as the officials did not see the incident , but after reviewing the evidence , the FA again charged Barton with violent conduct . Barton apologised , accepted the charge , and was banned for three matches . Barton courted controversy once again during Newcastle 's 3 – 1 win over Liverpool on 11 December 2010 , when he appeared to direct homophobic remarks and a lewd gesture at Fernando Torres . Barton scored two penalties against Arsenal on 5 February 2011 as Newcastle came from a 4 – 0 deficit to draw 4 – 4 . He was involved in an altercation with Abou Diaby which led to a straight red card for Diaby . Diaby took offence to Barton 's strong challenge and retaliated by grabbing Barton by the neck and shoving him to the ground . 
 On 25 May 2011 , Barton 's agent Willie McKay confirmed that his client would not be signing a new contract at St James ' Park after contract talks broke down between the club and player . Barton was officially transfer listed by Newcastle on 1 August 2011 , and it was also stated that he could leave for free with his current contract yet to expire . Barton was set to leave Newcastle following his teammate Kevin Nolan , who had earlier joined West Ham United , but Barton insisted on not moving . Joey Barton also criticised the Newcastle board after it was decided he could leave the club on a free transfer . With Newcastle continuing to decline the offer of a new contract , after he refused an earlier offer , on 24 August 2011 , Barton was given permission to talk to QPR . Thanking the Newcastle fans , he left on 26 August 2011 . 
 A week before his signing with QPR , Barton was involved in an altercation with Gervinho of Arsenal , which resulted in Gervinho being sent off on his debut . Then , Alex Song stamped on Barton , for which Song received a three @-@ match ban . Barton later revealed he was on a verge of joining Arsenal but his incident with Gervinho ended his hopes of a move to the Emirates and instead , he joined Queens Park Rangers . 
 = = = Queens Park Rangers = = = 
 On 26 August 2011 , Barton moved to Queens Park Rangers , signing a four @-@ year deal on a free transfer . He was handed the captain 's armband by manager Neil Warnock on his debut with the club , which was a 0 – 0 draw with former club Newcastle . On 17 September , he scored his first goal for QPR during a 3 – 0 win against Wolverhampton Wanderers . Following his goal , Barton was involved in a physical confrontation with Wolves player Karl Henry . Henry and Barton had a previous physical confrontation in August 2010 when Barton was still at Newcastle . Barton accused Henry of " trying to hurt people " . Henry responded by calling Barton 's behaviour " embarrassing " . 
 On 2 January 2012 , Barton scored the opening goal in QPR 's game against Norwich City , his second for the club . However , he was given a straight red card after head @-@ butting Norwich midfielder Bradley Johnson , Barton 's first dismissal since May 2009 . With QPR down to ten men they went on to lose the game 2 – 1 . When Warnock was replaced as manager by Mark Hughes in January 2012 , Hughes confirmed that Barton would remain captain . Barton 's performance in QPR 's 3 – 2 home victory against Liverpool saw him booed by the QPR fans , who promptly cheered when he was substituted just after the hour mark . Barton admitted that his performance was " awful " and the " worst I 've ever played in my career " but also criticised the QPR fans for not sticking with the team in their battle against relegation . After being dropped for the club 's next game , an away defeat to Sunderland , he returned to the line @-@ up for the home game against Arsenal . Barton led QPR to a 2 – 1 victory and he was cheered by the supporters and praised by Hughes , who described his performance as " top @-@ class " . Barton 's third goal for the club came in a 3 – 0 victory at home to Swansea on 11 April 2011 . 
 On 13 May , on the final day of the season , with QPR requiring at least a draw in their match away at Manchester City or for Bolton Wanderers to not win in order to guarantee Premier League safety , Barton was sent off in the 55th minute for violent misconduct after elbowing Carlos Tevez in the face . Immediately after being shown a red card , he kicked Sergio Agüero in the back of the knee and attempted to head @-@ butt Vincent Kompany . Barton had to be dragged from the pitch by former team @-@ mate Micah Richards as he rowed with Manchester City players and staff and attempted to square @-@ off with striker Mario Balotelli . QPR went on to concede two late goals and lose the match 3 – 2 , but avoided relegation due to Bolton 's draw at Stoke City . Barton commented after the game saying that he was trying to " take [ one ] of their players with me . " The FA responded by issuing two charges of violent conduct against him , for the kick and the attempted head @-@ butt , the initial foul already carrying with it a charge of violent conduct . Barton accepted the charge for kicking Agüero but denied the charge for attempting to head @-@ butt Kompany . QPR also began an internal investigation into his behaviour , amid speculation that he will be stripped of the captaincy and fined and possibly shown the door by the club either by being sold , released on a free transfer or having his contract terminated for gross misconduct . 
 On 23 May , Barton attended an FA hearing . <unk> him for all three accounts of violent conduct , Barton was handed a twelve @-@ match ban and fined £ 75 @,@ 000 . On 25 June , QPR announced the results of their internal investigation . Barton was stripped of the captaincy and fined six weeks ' wages , believed to be around £ 500 @,@ 000 . Barton was also removed from the club 's pre @-@ season tour of Asia and in a statement , the club said that they had " also reached agreement with Barton that if he seriously breaches the club 's disciplinary procedures again , the club reserves the right to terminate his contract " . Barton responded by saying that " My behaviour was wrong and I accept the punishment that has been imposed upon me as a result . " 
 On 31 July 2012 , Barton played 45 minutes of a friendly match for League Two side Fleetwood Town in the club 's 4 – 0 win over Kilmarnock . He had been training with Fleetwood after being left out of Queens Park Rangers ' tour of Malaysia . Fleetwood attempted to sign Barton on a six @-@ month loan , but the deal was turned down by QPR . 
 Ahead of the 2012 @-@ 13 Premier League season , Barton was not given a squad number by QPR . Towards the end of the season , however , chairman Tony Fernandes identified the loss of Barton as a factor in the club 's poor performance and relegation from the Premier League , saying " We missed Joey . We needed a workhorse midfielder and we tried to get Scott Parker . We missed a real leader . " 
 = = = = Marseille ( loan ) = = = = 
 Barton completed a season long loan move to Marseille on 31 August 2012 . In September , the LFP confirmed that Barton 's twelve @-@ match ban would be upheld in French football , restricting Barton to UEFA Europa League football for the first four months of the season . On 20 September , Barton made his debut for the club in an away trip to Fenerbahçe in a UEFA Europa League tie , a match that ended 2 – 2 . Barton scored his first goal for Marseille on 8 November in the 2 – 2 draw with Borussia Mönchengladbach in Germany , netting directly from a corner kick in the 54th minute . 
 Barton told ESPN that he would not return to Queens Park Rangers after the loan spell , and he also said that he only joined the club for money because his partner was expecting a child . Following the comments , on 25 November 2012 , he made his league debut in a 1 – 0 home win against Lille . In his third league appearance on 2 December , Barton provided the assists for both Souleymane <unk> 's and André Ayew 's goals as Marseille defeated Brest 2 – 1 to remain two points behind leaders Lyon . 
 On 6 May 2013 , Barton was given a two @-@ match suspended ban for describing Thiago Silva of Paris Saint @-@ Germain as looking like an " overweight <unk> " on Twitter . Laurent <unk> , the President of the French Football Federation 's National Council of Ethics said that Barton was punished only for making " inappropriate " remarks , and escaped a more severe punishment because his lawyers proved his lack of homophobic intent by showing the committee Barton 's appearance in the BBC Three documentary on homophobia in football . 
 = = = = Return to Queens Park Rangers = = = = 
 Barton returned to QPR for the 2013 – 14 Football League Championship season . During a match at Burnley in October , a plastic bottle thrown from the stands hit Barton on the head . He was sent off in QPR 's 1 – 0 home defeat to Leicester City on 21 December 2013 , receiving two yellow cards in quick succession for fouling and then throwing the ball in dissent at Gary Taylor @-@ Fletcher . On 21 February 2015 , Barton received the ninth red card of his career in the 32nd minute of a game against Hull City after swinging at Tom <unk> 's groin following a foul by Darnell Furlong . Chris Ramsey suggested that Barton , who would miss the club 's next three home matches as a result , would return to anger management therapy following the incident . In May 2015 , Queens Park Rangers announced the release of Barton in the summer of 2015 . 
 On 10 August 2015 , following his release from Queens Park Rangers , West Ham United were reportedly confident of signing Barton . Two days later , their co @-@ chairman David Gold confirmed that the deal was off after reported protests from some fans unhappy at the prospect of Barton turning out for the Hammers . 
 = = = Burnley = = = 
 On 27 August 2015 , Barton joined Championship side Burnley on a one @-@ year deal . On 17 April 2016 , he was named in the Championship PFA Team of the Year . 
 = = = Rangers = = = 
 On 24 May 2016 , Barton joined Scottish Premiership team Rangers on a two @-@ year deal . He made his first appearance for the club as a substitute in Rangers 2 @-@ 0 victory over Annan Athletic in the League Cup on 19 July . 
 = = International career = = 
 Barton represented the England under @-@ 21 team and was part of the squad for their 2004 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Championship qualifiers against Macedonia and Portugal , scoring once against Portugal . 
 Following impressive form at club level , Barton received his first call @-@ up to the full England squad on 2 February 2007 for a friendly match against Spain , despite his recent criticism of certain members of the England squad for releasing autobiographies after an unimpressive 2006 FIFA World Cup . He had suggested such players had " cashed in " on the national team 's lack of success . 
 Barton later received support over his comments and Steven Gerrard , one of the players whom Barton had criticised , praised him for his honesty . However , Frank Lampard , who had also released an autobiography following the tournament , publicly stated his disapproval . Barton made his international debut on 7 February 2007 , replacing Lampard in the 78th minute of the 0 – 1 defeat to Spain at Old Trafford . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Early in his career , Barton mainly played a defensive role , with a game based on tackling and tracking back to shield the defence . As his career has progressed , he has begun to incorporate a more attacking approach to his play , which has resulted in a greater number of goals and assists and his six goals from midfield made him Manchester City 's leading scorer in the 2006 – 07 season , ahead of strikers Georgios Samaras , Bernardo <unk> , Émile <unk> and Darius Vassell . 
 Barton has been described as having a good work ethic and the ability to carry the ball and retain possession for the team . He has been praised for having a good passing range . This aspect of his game has shown improvement since the 2005 – 06 season , when he began to favour simpler passes over more ambitious ones , and his relatively high pass completion rate can be attributed to this change . Barton 's passes have often proved to be crucial ; in the past he has led the way in his team 's assists . 
 Barton has been described as the dirtiest player in the Premier League , a style reflected in the high number of fouls he has committed during his career . He received 39 bookings and three red cards during his time at Manchester City . This physical approach was occasionally criticised by Kevin Keegan as excessive . Opta statistics rated Barton as the tenth best tackler in the Premier League for the 2004 – 05 season . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Barton 's brother Michael Barton was sentenced to life imprisonment ( with a tariff of 17 years ) for his involvement in the racially motivated murder of Anthony Walker in 2005 . Joey made a public appeal to his brother to come forward and help with the police investigation following the attack , and also made a series of calls to Michael , enquiring about his involvement in the incident . 
 On 28 December 2011 , Barton became a father . His partner Georgia McNeil gave birth to a son , named Cassius . On 6 June 2014 , McNeil gave birth to the couple 's second child , a daughter named Pietà . 
 = = = Interests = = = 
 He is a good friend of the boxer Ricky Hatton and has supported him in some of his fights , and has trained with him . He is also a friend of former Oasis band member Noel Gallagher . Barton co @-@ owns a race horse called ' Crying Lightning ' ( named after the Arctic Monkeys song ) with fellow footballer Claudio Pizarro . In January 2011 , the horse competed at the Nad Al Sheba Racecourse in Dubai . He is also notable for his love of Manchester band The Smiths , citing Morrissey as an idol of his . 
 = = = Charity = = = 
 Barton is a patron of the Tamsin <unk> Fund , a charity set up to support people who have addiction problems and no financial support . Tony Adams , who had been impressed with Barton 's attitude during his involvement in the Sporting Chance clinic , appointed him to this role . He is a part of the ' Get Hooked on Fishing ' campaign , designed to keep children out of trouble by encouraging them to take up fishing . He has also taken part in a celebrity cricket match for charity to help fund a new children 's rehabilitation unit at a hospital in Manchester . In 2011 he began writing a regular column in The Big Issue , a street newspaper sold by the homeless and vulnerably housed . 
 = = = Views = = = 
 Barton is a prominent user of Twitter , with over two million followers as for April 2013 . Commenting on figures from Friedrich Nietzsche and George Orwell to Isambard Kingdom Brunel and Morrissey , his eclectic tweets have resulted in him being described by the BBC as " a philosophical sportsman to rival Eric Cantona in his heyday " . Others in the media have criticised this description with Paul Hayward , chief sports writer for The Daily Telegraph writing that Barton " manages to be patronised [ by the media ] and held up as some kind of exemplar all at once ... he is skilled at tricking us into watching him veer between the extremes of thinker and thug . Either this is a repudiation of societal hypocrisy or , more likely , indicative of a sociopathic tendency . " Ellie Mae O 'Hagan of The Guardian commented that " the problem , I think , is not the belief that Barton is a reformed character , but the notion that one cannot possibly be a philosopher and violent at the same time : that quoting philosophy should automatically be taken as a sign of reformation ... In my mind , this all boils down to class snobbery . It is automatically assumed that Barton has violent tendencies because he 's a working @-@ class man who has chosen to play football for a living . So when he shows signs of intelligence , it 's treated as a sign of reform : intellect is the preserve of the gentlemanly middle @-@ classes . " 
 On 29 May 2014 , Barton appeared on the BBC 's Question Time discussion programme where , referring to the UK Independence Party ( UKIP ) , he said " If I 'm somewhere and there was four really ugly girls , I 'm thinking she 's not the worst – that 's all UKIP are , " . Barton 's comments were criticised as sexist by an audience member and he later apologised on air . The Independent newspaper deemed that despite the comments , Barton had produced a " strong performance " on the programme . 
 In a television programme broadcast on BBC Three on 30 January 2012 , Barton stated his beliefs in support of gay rights , in discussion with presenter Amal Fashanu , niece of Justin Fashanu , England 's only openly gay footballer . He described lack of any openly gay players in English professional football as " a subject that 's quite close to my heart " , as his uncle is gay . He stated his belief that there would be an openly gay player " within the next 10 years " and expressed his fear that " certain managers ... will discriminate against people " but that he feels " more fool them , and their lack of social awareness and intelligence " and wants his generation 's legacy to " help not only change the game for the better , and change the teams that they played in , but also change the culture and change the society and the football clubs that they played at . 
 In an article written in The Independent in February 2015 , Barton stated that : " If I were Prime Minister I would privatise religion . All public money would be withdrawn from religion . Taxpayers money will cease to sponsor religion in any and every form . " He said that the Church of England should be disestablished . In April of that year , he was appointed an honorary associate of the National Secular Society . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of match played 20 July 2016 . 
 = = = International = = = 
 As of match played 7 February 2007 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Newcastle United 
 Football League Championship : 2009 – 10 
 Queens Park Rangers 
 Football League Championship play @-@ offs : 2013 – 14 
 Burnley 
 Football League Championship : 2015 – 16 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 Football League Championship PFA Team of the Year : 2015 – 16 
 Burnley Player of the Year : 2015 – 16 
 = Little Things ( One Direction song ) = 
 " Little Things " is a song by English @-@ Irish boy band One Direction from their second studio album , Take Me Home ( 2012 ) . It was released by Syco Music on 3 December 2012 , as the record 's second single . The song was written by Fiona Bevan and Ed Sheeran , and produced by Jake Gosling . Bevan brought the song to Sheeran 's attention while he was in studio with the group in 2012 , resulting in the band recording it . " Little Things " is a mid @-@ tempo pop and folk ballad about the insistence that flaws are what make a person unique . 
 The track received mixed to negative reviews from contemporary music critics , many of whom felt that the song is not tailored to them . The song became the group 's second number @-@ one hit in the United Kingdom , while reaching the top ten in Australia , Ireland , and New Zealand . In addition , it attained top forty positions in Belgium ( Wallonia ) , Canada , Denmark , Sweden , Switzerland , and the United States . The single has been certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies . 
 Directed by Vaughan Arnell , the accompanying music video was shot in black @-@ and @-@ white and consists of a simplistic concept — One Direction recording the song . Upon release , it received positive reviews from reviewers , who noted that it was a perfect accompaniment for the song . The band performed the track on both the UK and US versions of The X Factor and during their 3 major <unk> tours : Take Me Home Tour ( 2013 ) , Where We Are Tour ( 2014 ) and On the Road Again Tour ( 2015 ) . 
 = = Background and conception = = 
 " Little Things " was written by British singer @-@ songwriters Ed Sheeran and Fiona Bevan , and produced by Jake Gosling . In February 2012 , One Direction expressed interest in working with Sheeran for their second studio album . In June 2012 , Sheeran disclosed that One Direction would be recording two of his songs . In October 2012 , Sheeran acknowledged Bevan 's songwriting credit in an interview with British radio network Capital FM : " The great thing about it is I wrote that song with a girl called Fiona Bevan when I was 17 and we lost the song . I 've kept in touch with Fiona , we 've done gigs and stuff and about two months ago she sent me the tune and was like , ' Oh , do you remember this ? ' I was like , ' Yeah , I do remember that ' , and I was in the studio with the One Direction boys at the time and I was playing it and they were like , ' We really like that ' . It 's got one of my favourite lines that I 've ever written in a song . " On 15 October 2012 , Louis Tomlinson confirmed via social networking website Twitter that " Little Things " would serve as the second single of their second studio album Take Me Home . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Little Things " is a mid @-@ tempo pop and folk ballad which runs for 3 : 39 ( 3 minutes , 39 seconds ) . Written in the key of G major , the beat is set in common time and moves at a moderate 110 beats per minute . One Direction 's vocal range in the song span from the note of A3 to D5 . Instrumentation includes guitar strings , piano lines and vocals . The song utilises an acoustic guitar riff and a rotation of lead vocals . The song 's lyrics revolve around the insistence that flaws are what make a person unique . In a September 2012 interview with MTV News , Sheeran quipped that the song " is about the best things about someone , kind of like the things you wouldn 't expect . " He described " Little Things " as an " appreciation song , " and concluded : " Seventeen @-@ year @-@ old Ed just wrote a lot of love songs " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Little Things " received mixed to negative reviews from music critics . Grady Smith for Entertainment Weekly described its lyricism as " terribly misguided " for One Direction 's target audience . Melinda Newman of HitFix , polarised by its lyrical content , wrote that women want men to pretend their flaws do not exist and not see them . Both Kate Wills of The Independent and Rolling Stone writer Jon Dolan criticised the lyrical content as jarring . Although Bill Lamb of About.com shared Smith 's sentiment , he favoured Gosling 's " beautiful " production of the song and the group 's " top notch " vocal performance . Al Fox of BBC Music , who noted a " pursuit for credibility " , felt that One Direction were " handing in their identity " with " Little Things " . Jon Caramanica of The New York Times dismissed Sheeran 's songwriting as " unusually lumpy in the hands of such a polished group " . In contrast , Alexis Petridis for The Guardian described the track as " noticeably more sophisticated lyrically and emotionally than anything else on the album . " The Boston Globe editor Sarah Rodman selected the " essential " song as the album 's " best " attribute , and Matt Collar from AllMusic considered the ballad " an air of maturity to One Direction 's admittedly squeaky @-@ fresh sound . " Robert Copsey of Digital Spy felt that " Little Things " can be interpreted as " minor signs of growth " for the boy band . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Little Things " made its Irish Singles Chart debut at number two in the week ending 15 November 2012 , marking One Direction 's fifth top @-@ ten hit in Ireland . The track debuted at number one on the UK Singles Chart on 18 November 2012 , becoming One Direction 's second number @-@ one hit in the United Kingdom . Their second studio album Take Me Home and the single both debuted simultaneously at number one in the UK , making One Direction the youngest act in British chart history to achieve the feat . In addition , the song became a top forty hit in Belgium ( Wallonia ) , Denmark , Sweden , and Switzerland . It became their third song to attain a top @-@ forty position in both Sweden and Belgium ( Wallonia ) . Elsewhere in Europe , the song charted in lower regions on the singles charts of Austria , Belgium ( Flanders ) , France , Germany , and Slovakia . 
 The single bowed at number nine on the Australian Singles Chart of 25 November 2012 , marking its peak position and the group 's fourth top ten hit in Australia . It held that position for a second week and has been certified triple platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) , denoting shipments of 210 @,@ 000 copies . The track made its New Zealand Singles Chart debut at number two on 19 November 2012 , denoting its highest charting position and the quintet 's third top five appearance in New Zealand . " Little Things " has received a gold certification from the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) , indicating sales of 7 @,@ 500 copies . 
 The ballad became One Direction 's fourth top forty hit on the Canadian Hot 100 , peaking at number 20 . In the week ending 18 November 2012 , " Little Things " debuted on the United States Billboard Hot 100 at number 41 , selling 91 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . As a result of an " end @-@ of @-@ year download rush " in the week ending 30 December 2012 , the single 's weekly sales rose 189 % from the previous week to 153 @,@ 000 copies sold . The sales rise signified a new peak of number 33 on the Hot 100 by the single 's seventh charting week . The track marks the boy band 's fourth top forty hit on the Hot 100 and also attained positions on the Pop Songs and Hot 100 Airplay charts , peaking at numbers 19 and 61 , respectively . " Little Things " had sold 502 @,@ 000 copies in the United States by 7 January 2013 . The single was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on 9 May 2013 , denoting shipments of 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Little Things " was shot entirely in black @-@ and @-@ white and directed by Vaughan Arnell , who had previously directed the band 's music video for their previous single " Live While We 're Young " . Tomlinson disclosed via social networking website Twitter that an accompanying music video for " Little Things " was in production on 15 October 2012 . Band member Zayn Malik confirmed that they had finished filming the video the following day . On each of the five days preceding the video 's premiere , One Direction posted a teaser trailer of the video online . Each teaser showed footage from the video and behind the scenes , and one member of the band announcing how many days were left until the video premiere . The official video was uploaded to their Vevo account on YouTube on 2 November 2012 . 
 The music video consists of a simplistic concept — a One Direction recording session . In a November 2012 interview with MTV News , Arnell said he did not want to make it about anything more than that , " When I first heard the track , the mix on it was so simple and so pure and you could hear all the qualities of the voices on the track , I just wanted to come up with something that when the viewer watched it , it was almost like sitting there listening to the boys sing the track . " Arnell subsequently developed the idea of a recording studio setting , thinking that it was " the most pure way to do it " . He wanted to make the music video as " <unk> as possible " without " any other <unk> or effects in the way of it . " While Arnell conceded that music video may seem like a simple concept , the shoot itself took over twelve hours to complete and said that it was " one of the hardest things I 've ever done . " The group performed it " over and over again because I was just trying to get different shots , different angles , different qualities . " As for the decision to shoot the video in black @-@ and @-@ white , Arnell felt it best captured the essence of the ballad . He also noted that was his intention to give the music video the feeling as if One Direction are singing it right to you , " It 's purely about the clarity of it . When you sit there watching it , it 's almost like these little bits of eye contact [ and ] you really feel like the guys are singing it to you . " 
 Upon release , ' # <unk> ' became the number @-@ one trending topic worldwide on social networking website Twitter . Following the release of the music video for " Little Things " and its accompanying teaser videos , One Direction posted a 138 % increase in Vevo plays and a 159 % increase in Facebook reaction in the United States . As a result of the video schedule , the group topped Billboard 's Social 50 chart for the first time in their 52nd week on the chart , rising 10 @-@ 1 from the previous week . Jocelyn Vena of MTV News characterised it as a straightforward video , which has a " quiet tone " that " complements the ballad 's sentimental lyrics . " Sam Lanksy for Idolator called it " sweet and subdued " and noted that the video is a significant transition from the " over @-@ the @-@ top <unk> " of their " Live While We 're Young " video , writing that the contrast " is nice — even if the ultimate effect is a little sleepy . " A reviewer of The Huffington Post favoured " the low @-@ key , laid @-@ back " approach to the video and concluded that the " intimate feel of the video perfectly accompanies the songs ' sweet lyrics " . An editor for Capital FM highlighted sequences in which the boy band " share individual emotionally charged scenes . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 One Direction performed " Little Things " and " Live While We 're Young " on The X Factor USA ( 8 November ) , and " Little Things " on The X Factor UK ( 11 November ) . The band performed the song along with " What Makes You Beautiful " , " Live While We 're Young " , and " Kiss You " on The Today Show at the Rockefeller Center ( 13 November ) , to a record crowd estimated at 15 @,@ 000 . They performed " Live While We 're Young " and " Little Things " on the BBC 's Children in Need 2012 telethon ( 16 November ) . In addition , they performed " Little Things " on British television series Surprise , Surprise ( 18 November - Recorded 21 October ) , at the 2012 Royal Variety Performance ( 19 November ) , in the presence of Queen Elizabeth II , and on The X Factor Australia ( 20 November ) . " Little Things " was included on the set list of the group 's headlining sold @-@ out show at Madison Square Garden ( 3 December ) . They also performed 3 major concert tours : Take Me Home Tour ( 2013 ) , Where We Are Tour ( 2014 ) & On the Road Again Tour ( 2015 ) . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Ed Sheeran — writing 
 Fiona Bevan — writing 
 Tommy Culm — backing vocals 
 Jake Gosling — production 
 Chris Leonard — guitar 
 Credits adapted from Take Me Home 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Suillellus amygdalinus = 
 Suillellus amygdalinus ( formerly Boletus amygdalinus ) is a fungus of the bolete family found in western North America . The fruit bodies , or mushrooms , are characterized by their thick , red to brown caps , red pores , and the strong bluing reaction observed when the mushroom tissue is injured or cut . The cap can reach diameters of up to 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) and the stipe 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) long by 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick at maturity . This mushroom has been found in manzanita and madrone woodlands of central California north to southern Oregon . Although the edibility of the mushroom is not known with certainty , it may be poisonous , and is not recommended for consumption . Other similar red @-@ pored , bluing boletes from North America , including Rubroboletus <unk> , Boletus luridiformis , and B. subvelutipes , can be distinguished from S. amygdalinus either by the color of the cap , the degree of reticulation ( a network of raised ridges ) on the stipe , or by location . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first named Boletus <unk> by Harry D. Thiers in 1965 , based on specimens he found in Napa County , California , on 23 November 1963 . In 1975 , Thiers changed the name to Boletus amygdalinus ( a nomen nudum ) as he discovered that the epithet had already been used for a different bolete found in Yunnan , China , published in 1948 . The fungus was transferred to Suillellus in 2014 after molecular phylogenetics demonstrated that S. amygdalinus was in a lineage distinct from Boletus . 
 In Latin , <unk> means relating to or resembling an almond . 
 = = Description = = 
 Suillellus amygdalinus is a large solid mushroom with a convex to somewhat flattened , irregular cap that can reach diameters of 6 to 10 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 to 3 @.@ 9 in ) at maturity . The surface of the cap is dry , and matted with fibers ; the cap color of young specimens is red , but the mushrooms typically change to more brownish tones as they mature . The margin of the cap starts out curved inwards ( incurved ) and gradually becomes curved downwards ( decurved ) with age . The pores on the underside of the cap are 0 @.@ 5 to 1 mm ( 0 @.@ 02 to 0 @.@ 04 in ) wide , angular , and red or red @-@ orange , while the tubes are 1 to 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 0 @.@ 6 in ) deep . 
 The stipe lacks a netted pattern ( reticulation ) and is yellow in color but is often covered by red hairs , especially near the base . The stipe is either equal in width throughout , or thicker in the middle ; it reaches dimensions of 5 – 9 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) long by 1 – 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick . The base of the stipe is typically bent . The flesh is 1 to 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 0 @.@ 8 in ) thick , and yellow in color , but like all parts of the mushroom , will stain blue immediately upon bruising or cutting . Both the odor and taste of the fruit bodies are mild . 
 Although the edibility of S. amygdalinus is not known with certainty , authorities often recommend to avoid consuming blue @-@ staining , red @-@ pored boletes , as several are poisonous . The species was implicated in one group of poisonings in California in 1996 – 97 , but because of the nature of the symptoms experienced , there was probably more than one type of mushroom consumed . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 Suillellus amygdalinus produces a dark olive @-@ brown spore print . The spores are thick @-@ walled , smooth , and ellipsoid to somewhat spindle @-@ shaped , with dimensions of 11 @.@ 2 – 16 by 5 @.@ 2 – 8 µm . They become dark ochraceous when stained with Melzer 's reagent , and , because of the occasional presence of two large vacuoles , may appear as if they are two @-@ celled . The basidia ( the spore @-@ bearing cells ) are club @-@ shaped , contain numerous vacuoles , and measure 30 – 35 by 9 – 11 µm . Cystidia are present on sides of the tubes , and they measure 45 – 54 by 10 – 12 µm . Clamp connections are not present in the hyphae of S. amygdalinus . 
 Various chemical color tests can be used to help identify fruit bodies suspected to be S. amygdalinus . A drop of dilute potassium hydroxide ( KOH ) will turn the cap flesh dingy orange , while it turns the cap cuticle red , or darker . Ammonia ( as ammonium hydroxide , NH4OH ) produces a dingy yellow on the flesh , and brown on the cap . Iron sulphate ( FeSO4 ) produces either no change to a pale grey color with both the flesh and the cuticle . Hydrochloric acid ( HCl ) causes the flesh to turn orange or pink , but has no color reaction with the cuticle . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 There are several other red @-@ pored , bluing boletes that could be confused with S. amygdalinus . The poisonous European species Rubroboletus satanas and its North American counterpart R. <unk> have lighter colored caps and a reticulate pattern on the stipe . B. subvelutipes is a highly variable species from eastern North America that includes red in its range of cap colors , and has a fuzzy coating of hairs near the base of its stipe ; it may represent a group of species . Another similar species is B. luridiformis , found in North America and Northern Europe under both broadleaf trees and conifers . Unlike S. amygdalinus , however , B. luridiformis has a dark brown to nearly blackish @-@ brown cap , and a yellow stipe with a dense covering of red <unk> ( dots ) . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Suillellus amygdalinus mushrooms grow on the ground in groups , or scattered about . The fungus has been reported from low @-@ elevation hardwood forests composed of live oak , manzanita and madrone in California , and Oregon . Fruiting occurs after the onset of autumn rains , usually between the October and January . The mushroom can be difficult to spot , as its cap is similar in coloring to the leaves of the madrone tree with which it is associated , and because the mushroom is frequently buried under leaves . 
 = Mario Balotelli = 
 Mario Balotelli Barwuah ( Italian pronunciation : [ <unk> <unk> ] ; born Mario Barwuah ; 12 August 1990 ) is an Italian professional footballer who plays as a striker for Premier League club Liverpool and the Italy national team . 
 He started his professional football career at Lumezzane and played for the first team twice before having an unsuccessful trial at Barcelona , and subsequently joining Internazionale in 2007 . Inter manager Roberto Mancini brought Balotelli into the first team , but when Mancini left , Balotelli 's disciplinary record fell away . He had a strained relationship with new manager José Mourinho and was suspended from Inter 's first team in January 2009 after a number of disciplinary problems . 
 With doubts over his career at Inter , former coach Roberto Mancini had since moved to Manchester City and decided to give Balotelli a fresh chance at a new club . He joined Manchester City in August 2010 , where his performances and off @-@ field activities continued to be enigmatic and unpredictable . Balotelli eventually fell out of favour with Mancini after a " training ground bust up " between the two in January 2013 . His departure from City and return to Italy with A.C. Milan followed several weeks later . After 18 months at Milan , he returned to the Premier League with Liverpool , going back on loan after an unsuccessful season . 
 Balotelli earned his first cap for Italy in a friendly match against the Ivory Coast on 10 August 2010 . He has since amassed over 30 caps and represented his country at UEFA Euro 2012 , the 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup , and the 2014 FIFA World Cup ; he helped the national side reach the final of Euro 2012 , and also won a bronze medal at the Confederations Cup . Along with Antonio Cassano , he is Italy 's top @-@ scorer in the UEFA European Championships , with 3 goals . He is also Italy 's top scorer in the FIFA Confederations Cup , alongside Giuseppe Rossi and Daniele De Rossi , with 2 goals . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Mario Balotelli was born in Palermo , Sicily as the son of Ghanaian immigrants . The family moved to <unk> Mella in the province of Brescia , Lombardy , when he was two . 
 In 1993 , when he was three , Balotelli was placed in foster care to the Balotelli family when his own family was unable to pay for his health care needs . His foster parents are Silvia , the Jewish daughter of Holocaust survivors , and Francesco Balotelli . They lived in the town of <unk> , Brescia , in northern Italy . 
 At first , he stayed at the <unk> during the weekdays , and returned to his biological parents on weekends . He later was permanently fostered by the <unk> full @-@ time , and adopted their surname . In June 2012 , he dedicated his goals that put Italy in the final of the Euro 2012 football championships to his foster mother Silvia . Balotelli had to wait until his 18th birthday to request Italian citizenship , as his foster family had not adopted him . He officially gained citizenship in <unk> on 13 August 2008 . After the ceremony he released the following statement : 
 I am Italian , I feel Italian , I will forever play with the Italian national team . 
 Mario Balotelli 
 Mario has three biological siblings : Abigail , Enoch , and Angel Barwuah . Enoch Barwuah , two years younger than Balotelli , is also a professional footballer . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Lumezzane = = = 
 Balotelli began his career at Lumezzane . At the age of 15 he was promoted to the first team , making his first team debut in a Serie C1 league match against Padova on 2 April 2006 . 
 = = = Internazionale = = = 
 Having had an unsuccessful trial with Barcelona at the age of 15 , Balotelli was signed by Internazionale in 2006 on loan with a pre @-@ set price of € 150 @,@ 000 to co @-@ own the player . In June 2007 Inter exercised the option and purchased another half for additional € 190 @,@ 000 . On 8 November 2007 , as part of Sheffield F.C. ' s 150th anniversary celebrations , Balotelli featured in a friendly between the two sides at Sheffield United 's Bramall Lane . The game finished 5 – 2 to Inter , with Balotelli scoring twice . He made his first team and Serie A debut on 16 December 2007 , replacing David <unk> in a 2 – 0 win against Cagliari . Three days later he was featured in the starting lineup in a Coppa Italia match against Reggina , scoring two goals in a 4 – 1 win . Balotelli gained national attention after he scored two goals against Juventus in the return leg of the Coppa Italia quarter @-@ finals , being instrumental in a 3 – 2 away win for Inter . His first Serie A goal then came in April 2008 in a 2 – 0 away win against Atalanta . Inter went on to win the 2007 – 08 Serie A. Balotelli was a substitute in the 2008 Supercoppa Italiana final against Roma . He came on as a replacement for Luís Figo , scoring in the 83rd minute . Inter went on to win the final 6 – 5 on penalties after the match ended 2 – 2 . 
 In November 2008 , Balotelli became the youngest Inter player ( at 18 years and 85 days ) to score in the Champions League when he scored a goal in a 3 – 3 draw against Cypriot side Anorthosis Famagusta , beating the previous record set by Obafemi Martins ( at 18 years and 145 days ) . In an April 2009 match with Juventus where he scored Inter 's only goal in a 1 – 1 draw , Balotelli was racially abused by Juventus fans throughout the game . This led Inter owner Massimo Moratti to say that he would have pulled the team off the pitch had he been present . The racist chants were also condemned by Juventus chairman Giovanni <unk> Gigli and Juventus were given a one @-@ game home @-@ fan ban because of the incident . Inter won Serie A for the fourth time in a row . 
 In his second season with Inter , Balotelli had a number of disciplinary problems , most notably involving head coach José Mourinho who excluded him from the first team in the second half of January 2009 . Earlier that season Mourinho had accused Balotelli of showing a lack of effort in training , stating " as far as I 'm concerned , a young boy like him cannot allow himself to train less than people like Figo , Córdoba , and Zanetti . " Balotelli continued to be the subject of racist chants throughout the season , becoming the focus of Juventus fans even during games not involving Inter , leading to Juventus being fined twice and the club ultimately punished with a partial stadium closure . 
 Balotelli 's disciplinary problems , and his difficult relationship with Mourinho , continued in the 2009 – 10 season . In November Inter drew 1 – 1 against Roma and Mourinho criticized his players , even going as far as saying that Balotelli " came close to a zero rating " . Balotelli had another negative encounter with Juventus fans in the heated Derby d 'Italia encounter in an away match against Juventus on 5 December 2009 , which Inter lost 2 – 1 . When he was elbowed by Juventus midfielder Felipe Melo in the shoulder , Balotelli fell theatrically onto the pitch , for which he was booked , while Melo was sent off for a second yellow card . The incident sparked an altercation between Balotelli 's teammate Thiago Motta and Juventus goalkeeper Gianluigi Buffon . The tension between Balotelli and Mourinho reached its peak on the eve of the UEFA Champions League second leg against Chelsea after the young striker was not called @-@ up , following an altercation with his manager . Despite Inter 's 1 – 0 win at Stamford Bridge , London , Balotelli was criticized by several senior players including captain Javier Zanetti and veteran defender Marco Materazzi , as well as by his own agent . In March 2010 he came under heavy criticism from fans after he publicly sported an A.C. Milan ( Inter 's cross @-@ town rivals ) jersey on the Italian show <unk> la <unk> . 
 Balotelli released a statement of apology in Inter 's's official website that read : 
 " I am sorry for the situation that has been created recently . I am the first person who has suffered because I adore football and I want to play , and now I am waiting in silence so I can return to being useful to my team . I want to put the past behind me , look to the future and concentrate on the upcoming commitments and make myself ready . " 
 Mario Balotelli 
 After a falling @-@ out with Mourinho , Balotelli was recalled for Inter 's April 2010 match against Bologna , and he marked his return with a goal in their 3 – 0 win . He again caused controversy in the Champions League semi @-@ final against Barcelona on 20 April 2010 as he threw his jersey on the ground after the final whistle , in response to Inter fans who had booed him for his poor performance . He admitted three years later that the incident was the only regret in his life . Disgruntled fans confronted and tried to attack Balotelli after the game . His behavior on the pitch brought disapproval from his teammates , with Zanetti publicly saying " Mario needs to focus on doing what he can do on the pitch , he can 't allow himself to behave like this . " Amid these controversies with his club and manager , many Premier League teams , including Manchester United and Manchester City , indicated that they were interested in signing Balotelli in July 2010 . 
 = = = Manchester City = = = 
 = = = = 2010 – 11 = = = = 
 After weeks of speculation , Inter reached an agreement for Balotelli 's transfer to Manchester City on 12 August 2010 for € 21 @.@ 8 million . At Manchester City Balotelli reunited with his former boss , Roberto Mancini , who said , " His style of play will suit the Premier League , and because he is still so young there is a big chance for him to improve . He is a strong and exciting player , and City fans will enjoy watching him . " Balotelli exchanged squad number with teammate Greg Cunningham so that he could continue to wear the number 45 shirt . 
 On 19 August 2010 Balotelli came on as a substitute to score in his debut against <unk> Timișoara in a 1 – 0 away win in the Europa League , but during the match injured the lateral meniscus in his right knee and on 8 September underwent surgery that sidelined him until October . Balotelli eventually made his Premier League debut on 24 October as a substitute in a 3 – 0 home defeat to Arsenal and made his first Premier League on 30 October in a 2 – 1 away defeat to Wolverhampton Wanderers . Balotelli scored his first and second Premier League goals on 7 November in a 2 – 0 away win to West Brom . In the same game Balotelli received a red card for violent conduct as the result of a clash with <unk> <unk> , which his manager Roberto Mancini described as unfair . Balotelli scored the first two of City 's three goals in the 3 – 0 win over FC Red Bull Salzburg in Manchester City 's Europa League group stage match . 
 On 21 December 2010 Balotelli won the Golden Boy Award , saying that only one of the past winners was slightly better than he was – Lionel Messi . He also claimed not to know of Arsenal 's Jack Wilshere , the player he narrowly beat to the award . On 28 December 2010 Balotelli scored his first Premier League hat @-@ trick in a 4 – 0 win over Aston Villa . Despite this success Balotelli still had disciplinary problems , and in March 2011 he was sent off in the second @-@ leg of Manchester City 's Europa League draw with Dynamo Kyiv . On 14 May 2011 Balotelli was man of the match in the 2011 FA Cup Final as Manchester City defeated Stoke City 1 – 0 to win their first trophy in thirty @-@ five years . 
 = = = = 2011 – 12 = = = = 
 Balotelli scored his first goal of the 2011 – 12 campaign in a 2 – 0 League Cup win against Birmingham City . He followed this up with the opening goal against Everton three days later . On 1 October 2011 he scored his third goal in as many games in a 4 – 0 win away to Blackburn Rovers . Balotelli scored the opening two goals and forced the dismissal of Jonny Evans as City beat Manchester United 6 – 1 at Old Trafford on 23 October 2011 in what would prove to be a decisive game in helping win Manchester City the league title . Balotelli made his Champions League debut for City on 2 November 2011 , in the second leg against Villarreal . He scored on a penalty shot near the end of the first half , his first Champions League goal for City and his seventh goal overall in the season . On 27 November , Balotelli came on as a 65th @-@ minute substitute against Liverpool and was sent off after receiving two yellow cards . Balotelli scored using his right shoulder in City 's 5 – 1 win over Norwich City on 3 December . He put City 1 – 0 up against Chelsea at Stamford Bridge after just two minutes on 12 December , although Chelsea rallied to win 2 – 1 . 
 On 22 January 2012 , Balotelli came on as a substitute during a match against Tottenham Hotspur . He appeared to stamp on Scott Parker during the match against Tottenham , but , already booked , did not get a second yellow from referee Howard Webb , who did not see the incident . Balotelli subsequently scored his first goal of 2012 , an injury @-@ time penalty which secured a 3 – 2 win for City . He was charged for violent conduct for the kick against Scott Parker and was suspended for four matches , three for violent conduct and one for his second sending off . On 25 February , he scored his tenth league goal of the season in a 3 – 0 home win against Blackburn Rovers . He scored again the following game in a 2 – 0 win against Bolton Wanderers . On 31 March , Balotelli scored twice as City drew 3 – 3 at home against Sunderland . However , Balotelli was criticized for his actions in the match after squabbling with Aleksandar Kolarov over a free kick . Roberto Mancini claimed after the game that he had considered substituting Balotelli just five minutes into the match . On 8 April 2012 , Balotelli received his fourth red card of the season , after receiving his second yellow card during the match for a tackle against Bacary Sagna during City 's 1 – 0 loss to Arsenal in April 2012 . He was banned for three games ( one for the two yellow cards and two for the previous two red cards in the same season ) . After the Arsenal match , Mancini appeared to have finally lost his patience with Balotelli , suggesting that Balotelli would not play any part in the remainder of City 's season and be sold by the club . Despite this , Balotelli did make an appearance as a late substitute in the last game of the season , a title @-@ deciding match against Queens Park Rangers . Balotelli provided the assist to striker Sergio Agüero , who scored in the 94th minute to give City their first league title since 1968 . 
 = = = = 2012 – 13 = = = = 
 In December 2012 , Balotelli decided to fight against Manchester City 's decision to fine him two weeks ' wages for his poor disciplinary record the previous season by taking his club to a Premier League tribunal . Balotelli missed 11 games domestically and in Europe last season because of suspensions . With less than a day remaining to the start of the hearing , Balotelli dropped his tribunal action and accepted the fine . 
 = = = A.C. Milan = = = 
 = = = = 2012 – 13 = = = = 
 On 29 January 2013 , A.C. Milan 's organising director Umberto <unk> announced that the team had agreed a deal to sign Balotelli from Manchester City on a four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half year deal rumoured to be worth € 20 million plus bonuses and add @-@ ons . Manchester City 's then manager Roberto Mancini suggested he had sanctioned Balotelli 's sale to Milan for the good of the player , describing the forward as " like another one of my children " and saying Balotelli could become one of the best players in the world when restored to Serie A. On 31 January 2013 , the Serie A giants completed the signing , and Balotelli was awarded the number 45 shirt , the same number he wore for Inter Milan and Manchester City . Milan 's vice @-@ president , Adriano Galliani , said " Balotelli in Rossoneri is a dream that has been realized . It is a transfer that everyone wanted : club , president and fans . " Balotelli received a warm reception when he returned to Milan . His arrival saw some fans scuffling with police and one policeman was taken to hospital with head injuries . It was stated that Silvio Berlusconi 's signing of Balotelli would help him gain extra votes in the 2013 Italian general election . 
 On 3 February 2013 , Balotelli made his debut for Milan and scored two goals , including a last minute penalty to earn a 2 – 1 victory over Udinese . The win lifted Milan to fourth in the table , ahead of Inter Milan on goal difference . In the next two matches , Balotelli scored two goals , including 30 yards ( 27 m ) free @-@ kick against Parma . With that goal , he equaled Oliver <unk> 's record of four goals in first three matches for Milan . In his fifth appearance Balotelli appeared as a substitute against Genoa and scored his fifth goal for his new club . In the match against Palermo , Balotelli continued his impressive scoring streak with two more goals , one from a penalty and another from an M <unk> Niang cross . 
 On the final day of the season , Balotelli scored his twelfth goal in thirteen games for Milan as the team beat Siena to qualify for the 2013 – 14 Champions League . 
 = = = = 2013 – 14 = = = = 
 On 22 September 2013 , Balotelli missed a penalty in a competitive match for the first time in 22 attempts as a professional ; the kick was saved by Pepe Reina as Milan lost 2 – 1 to Napoli . During a match against Catania on 1 December , Balotelli accused opponent Nicolás <unk> of racially abusing him , but there was insufficient evidence for any action to be taken . The following week , Balotelli scored two goals in a 2 – 2 draw with Livorno , including a sensational 30 @-@ yard direct free kick that was clocked at a speed of 109 km / h . 
 = = = Liverpool = = = 
 = = = = 2014 – 15 = = = = 
 In August 2014 , Balotelli joined Liverpool for a fee of £ 16 million , to replace the outbound Luis Suárez . He made his Liverpool debut in a league game away to Tottenham Hotspur on the 31st of August , a game Liverpool won 3 – 0 . Balotelli scored his first Liverpool goal on 16 September , opening a 2 – 1 Anfield victory against <unk> <unk> in the group stage of the UEFA Champions League . In a match in the same competition on 22 October against Real Madrid , Balotelli was criticised by manager Brendan Rodgers for swapping shirts with opponent Pepe at half time , saying " It 's something that doesn 't happen here and shouldn 't happen here . " 
 On 18 December 2014 , he was suspended for one match and fined £ 25 @,@ 000 for posting an image on social media which appeared to contain anti @-@ Semitic and racist references . 
 Balotelli 's first Premier League goal for Liverpool came on his 13th appearance , on 10 February 2015 , an 83rd @-@ minute winner in a 3 – 2 victory over Tottenham Hotspur at Anfield , nine minutes after replacing Daniel Sturridge . He scored just 4 goals in 28 appearances and at season 's end he was adjudged by many to be among the worst signings of the season . 
 = = = = Return to Milan ( loan ) = = = = 
 On 27 August 2015 , Balotelli returned to A.C. Milan on season @-@ long loan deal . On 22 September 2015 , Balotelli scored his first goal after returning to Milan on his third appearance to open the scoring in the 5th minute from a free kick at 25 yards out against Udinese in a 3 – 2 away win . However , a week later he suffered a groin injury in a 1 – 0 defeat to Genoa on 27 September , requiring surgery and ruling him out for three months . He returned to action , coming on as a substitute on 17 January 2016 in a 2 – 0 home win over Fiorentina ; before scoring the lone goal from the penalty spot nine days later during the first semi final leg of the Coppa Italia against Alessandria , as he helped Milan reach the final of the tournament . On 1 May , he had his penalty saved in a 3 – 3 home draw against Frosinone , for which he was mocked by opponent Mirko Gori . Balotelli finished the season with only one goal in 20 league appearances , as Milan finished the season in seventh place , once again failing to qualify for Europe following their 1 – 0 defeat to Juventus in the 2016 Coppa Italia final . 
 = = International career = = 
 Balotelli was unable to answer call @-@ ups to the Italian national under @-@ 15 and under @-@ 17 teams as he was still considered to be a Ghanaian immigrant . 
 On 7 August 2007 , five days before his seventeenth birthday , Balotelli received his first senior International call @-@ up for Ghana from their coach Claude Le Roy for a friendly against Senegal at the New Den stadium in London , England , on 21 August 2007 . He declined the offer citing once again his willingness to play for Italy when he became eligible . He also stated his willingness to represent Italy at international level once he acquired an Italian passport . 
 Italy U @-@ 21 coach Pierluigi <unk> stated his intention to call up Balotelli once he obtained Italian citizenship . On 13 August 2008 Balotelli was finally given Italian citizenship . 
 This is even more exciting than making my debut in Serie A. The best birthday present I could receive now would be a call to join the Italy squad , although I 'd be happy to play for the Under 21 team . 
 Mario Balotelli 
 <unk> called him to join the Italy national under @-@ 21 football team <unk> on 29 August for the matches against Greece and Croatia . In his debut on 5 September 2008 he scored his first international goal in a 1 – 1 draw with the Greek U @-@ 21 's . 
 Balotelli was named in the final 23 @-@ man squad for the 2009 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Football Championships and scored the opening goal against the hosts Sweden in the 23rd minute . Barely 15 minutes later he was shown a red card for retaliating against a Swedish midfielder Pontus <unk> . Italy were eliminated by eventual champions Germany in the semi @-@ finals , following a 1 @-@ 0 defeat . 
 On 10 August 2010 , Balotelli made his first appearance for the Italian senior team , as part of the squad announced by new head coach Cesare Prandelli , in a friendly match against Côte d 'Ivoire – Italy 's first match after the 2010 World Cup . In that match he started alongside debutant <unk> and striker Antonio Cassano in a 1 – 0 loss . On 11 November 2011 , Balotelli scored his first senior international goal in a 2 – 0 win against Poland at Stadion <unk> in Wrocław , Poland , also setting up Italy 's second goal of the match . 
 = = = UEFA Euro 2012 = = = 
 Before the tournament in Poland and Ukraine , Balotelli was interviewed by a newspaper about racism amongst fans in the host countries . During the interview , Balotelli reiterated his threat to walk off the pitch if any of the opposition fans racially abused him in any way , and said that he would ' kill ' anyone that threw a banana at him . He spoke about his increasing fears that black players would be targeted by racists and that he refused to accept racism in any form , talking of his past experience of racism in football notably during his time playing in Serie A for Inter Milan . During the build @-@ up to the competition Manchester City 's manager Roberto Mancini had repeatedly defended Balotelli , but he and footballer Daniele De Rossi believed that Mario would need to grow up and mature if he was going to become the centrepiece of future Italian success . 
 On 10 June 2012 , Balotelli also became the first black player to appear for Italy in a major tournament ( Euro or World Cup ) in a 1 – 1 draw against Spain , Italy 's first match of Euro 2012 . Italy and Spain later played each other for the second time in the tournament in the Ukraine 's capital city of Kiev . During the 1 – 1 draw Balotelli failed to make an impact , he was substituted off during the 56th minute after missing multiple chances ; specifically a one on one with Spanish goalkeeper and captain Iker Casillas just minutes before being subbed off . His replacement was Antonio Di Natale . The 34 @-@ year @-@ old managed to secure his 11th international goal and put Italy ahead within his time on the pitch . With Balotelli continuing his run of poor form for his nation , fans and critics began calling for Di Natale to replace the " immature and unpredictable striker . " 
 Later in the tournament , on 18 June 2012 , Mario Balotelli scored his first goal in a major international tournament in a 2 – 0 victory against the Republic of Ireland . When he attempted to celebrate this goal , he was immediately halted by teammate Leonardo <unk> , who covered Balotelli 's mouth with his hand for fear that the striker would say something to " get in trouble . " Balotelli had been dropped to the bench by Cesare Prandelli prior to the game due to his lack of ability shown in his previous group games , so when he was subbed on against Ireland fans didn 't expect him to have much of an impact , and his celebration of his goal may have originally been directed towards the naysayers who believe he is bad for the team . Balotelli went on to start against England in the quarter @-@ finals , his performance was described as wasteful but his effort was rated highly in a game where he missed multiple chances . He scored the first penalty taken in the shootout against his Manchester City teammate Joe Hart . On 28 June , Balotelli scored twice within the first 40 minutes in Italy 's semi @-@ final clash with Germany , as the Azzurri won 2 – 1 and progressed to the Euro 2012 final against European and World champions Spain . After scoring the second goal in that semi @-@ final , he ripped off his shirt and stood motionless as he flexed his muscles , developing a famous celebration . Going into the final Balotelli said that , Manchester City 's title success meant that failure in the Euros would not signal a personal failure this season . He also said that he was unfazed by the pressure he supposedly has on his shoulders going into the final , with new high expectations of him from his home supporters after his amazing performance against Germany . 
 During the tournament , Balotelli was subject to a case of racial abuse during the game against Croatia , which led UEFA to fine the Croatian Football Federation € 80 @,@ 000 . Italy were defeated 4 – 0 in the final by defending champions Spain . Despite the heavy defeat , Balotelli was named as part of the Euro 2012 Team of the Tournament due to his performances . With 3 goals , Balotelli finished the tournament as the joint top scorer along with 5 other players , although the Golden Boot ultimately went to Fernando Torres , due to his assist in the Euro 2012 final . 
 = = = 2014 FIFA World Cup qualifying = = = 
 After establishing himself in the side at Euro 2012 , Balotelli remained the first choice striker for Italy 's 2014 World Cup qualifying campaign . 
 On 21 March 2013 , he scored a long range equaliser in a friendly match against Brazil at the Stade de Genève . Five days later he scored both goals as Italy defeated Malta in a World Cup qualifier , continuing his prolific scoring streak for both club and country since signing for A.C. Milan . 
 On 7 June 2013 , Balotelli was sent @-@ off in a 0 – 0 draw with the Czech Republic in Prague . On 10 September 2013 , Balotelli scored the winning goal in a World Cup qualifying match against the Czech Republic in Turin , which allowed Italy to clinch the first place spot in their qualifying group , and ultimately achieve their objective of qualifying for the 2014 World Cup . Balotelli finished the 2014 World Cup qualifying campaign as Italy 's top scorer , with 5 goals , and he was also the top scorer of his qualifying group , helping Italy to win their group undefeated and qualify for the upcoming World Cup . 
 = = = 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup = = = 
 On 3 June 2013 , he was named in Italy 's squad for the 2013 Confederations Cup . In Italy 's opening match on 16 June , Balotelli scored a late @-@ winner , helping Italy to beat Mexico 2 – 1 . In Italy 's next group match with Japan , Balotelli scored a penalty to make it 3 – 2 after being 2 – 0 down in the first half . Italy went on to win the match 4 – 3 , which allowed them to participate in the semi @-@ finals of the Confederations Cup for the first time in their history . In Italy 's final group match against hosts and eventual champions Brazil , Balotelli set up Emanuele <unk> 's equaliser with a back @-@ heel , although Italy eventually lost the match 4 – 2 . Prior to the semi @-@ final , Balotelli suffered a thigh injury , preventing him from playing in the remainder of the tournament . Italy finished the tournament in third place after defeating Uruguay in a play @-@ off . 
 = = = 2014 FIFA World Cup = = = 
 On 1 June 2014 , Balotelli was selected in Italy 's squad for the 2014 FIFA World Cup . In Italy 's opening match of the tournament , he scored the team 's winning goal in a 2 – 1 defeat of England on 14 June . After the match against England , Balotelli says playing in the World Cup for the first time was " a wonderful sensation to experience " and dedicated the goal to his future wife . Italy lost their next two matches , however , and were eliminated in the first round , finishing third in their group , while Prandelli stepped down from his position as Italy 's manager . 
 = = = Conte era = = = 
 Under Italy 's new manager Antonio Conte , Balotelli only received one call @-@ up in November 2014 , but was unable to make a single appearance for Italy due to injury . After a negative season with Milan , he was left out of Conte 's 23 @-@ man squad for UEFA Euro 2016 . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Agile , quick and powerful , Balotelli is credited with pace , strength , and technical ability , but criticized for a perceived poor and immature attitude at times . Balotelli is also a set @-@ piece specialist due to his powerful shot , and is regarded by teammates and the media as a promising but undisciplined player . He is regarded as one of the best penalty kick takers in world football , a view backed by his former Manchester City goalkeeping team @-@ mate Joe Hart . Balotelli missed his first competitive penalty against Napoli on 22 September 2013 when it was saved by Pepe Reina . 
 In his two years at Manchester City , he received four red cards – against West Bromwich Albion ( November 2010 ) , Dynamo Kyiv ( March 2011 ) , Liverpool ( November 2011 ) and Arsenal ( April 2012 ) . He also in this time served suspensions for other incidents such as the supposed stamp on Scott Parker . 
 = = Personality and public image = = 
 Balotelli is nicknamed Super Mario after the Italian video game character Mario from the iconic Nintendo series . 
 Balotelli has been given a reputation by the media for being a difficult character and taking part in questionable and often amusing activities . He was once described by Jose Mourinho as " unmanageable . " In June 2010 , Balotelli and a group of friends fired air pistols in the open in Milan 's Piazza della Repubblica . Although denying that he is " crazy " as his mentor Roberto Mancini frequently claims , Balotelli has admitted that he " sometimes does strange things " . In 2010 , he was photographed in the company of two noted Mafia mobsters . Since joining Manchester City , Balotelli has gained a cult following . Manchester City supporters regularly sang a song with lyrics which made reference to his activities . Musician Tinchy Stryder recorded a song in Balotelli 's honour , Mario Balotelli . 
 Balotelli has been the subject of numerous newspaper stories since joining Manchester City ; some have been confirmed as true while others have turned out to be erroneous . Within days of joining Manchester City , Balotelli was involved in a car crash . It was reported that Balotelli was carrying £ 5 @,@ 000 cash at the time – and that when a police officer asked why he had such a large sum of cash Balotelli replied : " Because I am rich " . Off @-@ field activities involving Balotelli have included driving into a women 's prison in Italy to " have a look round " , and throwing darts at a youth team player during a training ground ' prank ' – all of which have been confirmed to be true . Balotelli has also been subjected to tabloid rumours about him confronting a bully in a school after querying why a young Manchester City fan was not attending classes , and giving £ 1 @,@ 000 to a homeless man on the streets of Manchester . Both of these reports turned out to be false . 
 Video footage before City 's Europa League clash with Dynamo Kiev in March 2011 showed Balotelli requiring assistance to put on a training bib , an incident which teammate Edin Džeko was seen mimicking the following week in the warm up before City 's game at Chelsea . In September 2011 , Balotelli was reportedly seen using his iPad whilst on the substitutes ' bench for Italy during their game with the Faroe Islands , although he denied this on a visit to a prison later that week . 
 Balotelli celebrated his goal against Manchester United in October 2011 by unveiling a shirt with the words : " Why always me ? " on it – a celebration which seemingly disputes the accuracy of newspaper reports . The day before the match , Balotelli and his friends set Balotelli 's house on fire when a firework was let off in it , and later that week Balotelli was unveiled as Greater Manchester 's ambassador for firework safety . On 5 November 2011 , at the annual fireworks display at Edenbridge , Kent , a 12 metre tall bonfire effigy of Balotelli was unveiled – complete with a Super Mario hat , and a house in the right hand and a ' Giant TNT ' firework in his left , which were reference to his recent incident . In December 2011 , Balotelli broke a 48 @-@ hour curfew before City 's game against Chelsea to go to a curry house , although he " was not drinking alcohol , signed autographs , posed for pictures with fellow diners and was involved in a mock sword @-@ fight using rolling pins " . The club launched an internal investigation . In March 2012 , when Inter Milan ( Balotelli 's former club ) held a press conference for their new manager Andrea <unk> , Balotelli gatecrashed the event . In December 2012 , Balotelli was due to take Manchester City to a Premier League tribunal to protest against a fine of two weeks ' wages over his poor disciplinary record , but eventually dropped his tribunal action a day before the hearing . 
 On 1 December 2014 , Balotelli was accused of racism and antisemitism for posting an image on Instagram of the video game character Mario . The image promoted anti @-@ racism by telling others to be like the character , attributing him qualities stereotypically associated with different ethnicities , ending the idea that he " jumps like a black man and grabs coins like a jew " . In response to criticisms , he wrote : " My Mom is jewish so all of u shut up please " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 2012 , Balotelli featured in GQ where he and British musician Tinie Tempah were named as the best and second @-@ best dressed men in the world respectively . Balotelli also appeared on the cover of the November 2012 edition of Time Magazine . 
 Balotelli is a fan of mixed martial arts , as he has stated in the past that he would love to compete in the sport professionally if he were not a footballer . 
 Balotelli owns several cars , including a Range Rover <unk> , Ferrari 458 Spider , Bentley Continental GT , Maserati GT , and Audi R8 V10 . 
 In January 2013 , Balotelli 's net worth was estimated to be US $ 40 million , up from US $ 25 million in January 2012 . Balotelli bought a £ 3 million mansion in the United Kingdom . 
 Balotelli no longer drinks alcohol . 
 In July 2012 , Balotelli 's former girlfriend Raffaella Fico claimed that she was pregnant with his child , while Balotelli responded by claiming that he would only assume paternal responsibilities upon a positive paternity test . Fico 's daughter Pia was born on 5 December 2012 . Later in December 2012 , Fico accused Balotelli of being " irresponsible " and " not interested " in her newborn daughter . In response , Balotelli threatened to take legal action against Fico to defend his reputation against what he considered false accusations . In February 2014 , Balotelli finally acknowledged paternity of his daughter Pia following a positive DNA test . 
 In March 2013 , Balotelli became engaged to wed his Belgian girlfriend , Fanny <unk> . They split in September 2014 . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of match played on 21 May 2016 
 = = = International = = = 
 As of match played on 24 June 2014 . 
 = = = = International goals = = = = 
 Scores and results list Italy 's goal tally first . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Internazionale 
 Serie A ( 3 ) : 2007 – 08 , 2008 – 09 , 2009 – 10 
 Coppa Italia ( 1 ) : 2009 – 10 
 Supercoppa Italiana ( 1 ) : 2008 
 UEFA Champions League ( 1 ) : 2009 – 10 
 Manchester City 
 Premier League ( 1 ) : 2011 – 12 
 FA Cup ( 1 ) : 2010 – 11 
 FA Community Shield ( 1 ) : 2012 
 = = = International = = = 
 UEFA European Football Championship Runner up : 2012 
 FIFA Confederations Cup Third place : 2013 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 Coppa Italia Top Goalscorer ( 1 ) : 2007 – 08 
 Golden Boy Award ( 1 ) : 2010 
 FA Cup Final Man of the Match ( 1 ) : 2011 
 UEFA Euro Team of the Tournament ( 1 ) : 2012 
 UEFA European Championship Co @-@ Top Goalscorer ( 1 ) : 2012 
 Serie A Team of the Year ( 1 ) : 2012 – 13 
 = Ninian Edwards = 
 Ninian Edwards ( March 17 , 1775 – July 20 , 1833 ) was a founding political figure of the state of Illinois . He served as the only governor of the Illinois Territory from 1809 to 1818 , as one of the first two United States Senators from Illinois from 1818 to 1824 , and as the third Governor of Illinois from 1826 to 1830 . In a time and place where personal coalitions were more influential than parties , Edwards led one of the two main factions in frontier Illinois politics . 
 Born in Maryland , Edwards began his political career in Kentucky , where he served as a legislator and judge . He rose to the position of Chief Justice of the Kentucky Court of Appeals in 1808 , at the time Kentucky 's highest court . In 1809 , U.S. President James Madison appointed him to govern the newly created Illinois Territory . He held that post for three terms , overseeing the territory 's transition first to democratic " second grade " government , and then to statehood in 1818 . On its second day in session , the Illinois General Assembly elected Edwards to the U.S. Senate , where conflict with rivals damaged him politically . 
 Edwards won an unlikely 1826 election to become Governor of Illinois . Conflict with the legislature over state bank regulations marked Edwards ' administration , as did the pursuit of Indian removal . As governor or territorial governor he twice sent Illinois militia against Native Americans , in the War of 1812 and the Winnebago War , and signed treaties for the cession of Native American land . Edwards returned to private life when his term ended in 1830 and died of cholera two years later . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Ninian Edwards was born in 1775 to the prominent Edwards family in Montgomery County , Maryland . His mother , Margaret Beall Edwards , was from another prominent local family . His father Benjamin Edwards served in the Maryland House of Delegates , in Maryland 's state ratifying convention for the U.S. Constitution , and in the United States House of Representatives , filling a vacant seat for two months . Ninian was educated by private tutors , one of whom was the future U.S. Attorney General William Wirt . He attended Dickinson College from 1790 to 1792 but did not graduate , leaving college to study law . His son Ninian Wirt Edwards wrote later that Edwards spent some of his time at Dickinson reading medicine , a field to which he devoted considerable time in his later years . 
 In 1794 , at the age of 19 , Edwards moved to Nelson County , Kentucky to manage some family land . He showed a great aptitude for business and leadership and was soon elected to a seat in the Kentucky House of Representatives , before he was even eligible to vote . In 1802 he was awarded the rank of major in the militia . In 1803 he moved to Russellville , Kentucky , and won a succession of public offices : circuit court judge in 1803 , presidential elector in 1804 ( voting for Thomas Jefferson ) , and judge and finally chief justice of the Kentucky Court of Appeals , which at the time was Kentucky 's highest court . He joined the high court in 1806 and won the leadership position in 1808 . 
 A well @-@ educated landowning aristocrat , Edwards deliberately cultivated the image of the natural leader . Thomas Ford writes that he continued to dress like an 18th @-@ century gentleman long after such fashions had gone out of style , and that his public speaking was marked by showy eloquence . Edwards consciously positioned himself in the select class of men who dominated Kentucky and , later , Illinois politics . In 1803 in Russellville , Edwards married Elvira Lane , a relative from Maryland . 
 = = Territorial governorship = = 
 The Illinois Territory was created in 1809 . It included all of what today is the state of Wisconsin , as well as parts of Minnesota and Michigan . Its population was almost entirely concentrated in the south , in the region later known as Egypt . President James Madison first appointed Kentucky politician John Boyle as its governor . Boyle collected his salary for the position for 21 days but then resigned to take Edwards ' job as Kentucky Chief Justice , while friends in Washington helped secure Edwards ' appointment as territorial governor . In the meantime , Territorial Secretary Nathaniel Pope , a cousin of Edwards , had to assume the powers of acting governor , creating Illinois ' first counties and appointing officials to form the new government . Only 34 years old at the time of his appointment , Ninian Edwards is the youngest man ever to govern Illinois as either a state or a territory . 
 Edwards settled in the American Bottom on land he received as a grant upon his appointment as governor . He named his new farm <unk> , after his wife . Along with his family , Edwards brought a number of slaves , whom he did not free even though the Northwest Ordinance of 1787 had made slavery illegal in the territory . An 1803 " Law Concerning Servants " had been promulgated for the Indiana Territory by then @-@ Governor William Henry Harrison that maintained the status of people brought into the territory " under contract to serve another in any trade or occupation . " The law , which remained in force in the Illinois territory , permitted slavery to persist for decades under the guise of indentured servitude . Most of Illinois ' early governors were slaveowners , and Edwards was no exception . Later , he may have made extra income by renting some of his " indentured servants " out for labor in Missouri . 
 The new territorial governor was sworn in on June 11 , 1809 . At first Edwards tried to avoid partisanship but soon found that faction was an inevitable result of his power to appoint officials and distribute government jobs . Although the First Party System continued to define national politics , the Federalist and Republican Parties never took hold in frontier Illinois . Rather , factional loyalties were created by personality , personal bonds such as kinship and militia service , and especially the distribution of patronage . In the early territorial years , two rival factions grew up around Edwards and Judge Jesse B. Thomas . These two factions formed Illinois ' political landscape during its time as a territory and for its first several years of statehood . 
 = = = Democratic government = = = 
 Throughout Edwards ' three terms as governor , he showed a willingness to surrender his own considerable powers in order to expand participatory government in the Illinois Territory . Before 1812 , while Illinois had a first @-@ grade territorial status , Edwards had vast powers to appoint county and local officials ; however , he made it his practice to consider local opinion as much as he could when making appointments , often giving weight to petitions signed by local residents . He attempted to do the same for militia officers for a time , letting the men of a unit elect their leaders , but he soon abandoned this policy as impractical . 
 In 1812 , Edwards successfully persuaded Congress to modify a provision of the 1787 Ordinance limiting voting rights to freeholders of 50 acres ( 20 ha ) of land . Due to long @-@ running disputes over fraudulently sold lands , very few Illinois frontiersmen could qualify . At Edwards ' urging , Congress granted the Illinois Territory universal white male suffrage , making it the most democratic U.S. territory at the time . In April , Edwards held a referendum on moving to second @-@ grade government , allowing the people of Illinois to elect a legislature and a non @-@ voting delegate to Congress . The referendum passed , and elections were held in October that sent Shadrach Bond to Washington as Illinois ' first congressional delegate . 
 = = = War of 1812 = = = 
 Edwards had not been governor long when Illinois became the scene of fighting during the War of 1812 . Relations between Illinois settlers and Native Americans worsened throughout the territory during 1810 and 1811 . By June 1811 , Governor Edwards ordered the construction of a series of blockhouses and called out three companies of militia . 
 The declaration of war and the Battle of Fort Dearborn in 1812 convinced Edwards that Potawatomi and Kickapoo in the territory were preparing to launch a major attack on the southern settlements . In his capacity as commander in chief , Edwards gathered 350 mounted rangers and volunteers near Edwardsville and personally led an expedition north to Peoria . After burning two Kickapoo villages on the Sangamon River along the way , the militia advanced on Peoria itself . All told , the short campaign burned several villages and inflicted dozens of casualties before returning . The attack angered both the Peoria villagers and the U.S. government because it had been carried out against Native Americans loyal to Black Partridge and <unk> , two leaders who had not joined Tecumseh 's War and were considered friendly to U.S. interests . A second attack under Captain Thomas Craig killed a large number of French settlers from Peoria as well as Potawatomi . In 1813 , Illinois and Missouri militia joined a force of United States infantry under Benjamin Howard to drive all Native American villagers away from Peoria and establish Fort Clark . 
 Edwards ' actions alienated those Native Americans friendly to the U.S. in the region . Ninian Edwards , having lost the confidence of the Madison administration , waited out the war in Kentucky . However , he was reappointed to a second and then a third term as territorial governor in 1812 and 1815 , and he was also named one of the three U.S. negotiators of the Treaties of Portage des Sioux in 1815 . 
 = = = Second and third terms = = = 
 During his nine years as territorial governor , Edwards made a good deal of money through several profitable ventures , including farming , land speculation , and investment in sawmills , grist mills , and stores . 
 Edwards ' political rivalry with Jesse B. Thomas continued for the rest of his time as governor . Edwards , along with much of the legislature , criticized the territory 's judges for their inactivity . Among their complaints were that the judges did not hold court often enough and spent too much time absent from the territory . The legislature passed a bill in 1814 to reform the territory 's judicial system . The judges refused to acknowledge the act , claiming that they were outside the jurisdiction of the legislature . In 1815 the issue was resolved by Congress , which passed a law supporting Edwards and the legislature . 
 In December 1817 , Edwards , responding to a movement for statehood led by his ally Daniel Pope Cook , recommended to the legislature that Illinois apply for admission to the Union . He also recommended that a census first be taken of the territory , a standard practice , but the legislature rejected this . Legislators , particularly those opposed to slavery , feared that any delay would allow Missouri to apply for statehood before Illinois , and that since Missouri was a slave state , this would cause so much turmoil in Congress that it would delay Illinois ' admission even longer . 
 In order to emphasize to Congress that Illinois would be a free state , the legislature passed in January 1818 a bill that would both abolish Illinois ' " indentured servant " system of de facto slavery , and prohibit Illinois ' future Constitution from reinstating it . Governor Edwards issued his only veto to send the bill back to the legislature , and it was never revised . He made his objections on constitutional grounds , but he also had a conflict of interest as the owner of several slaves himself . 
 During Edwards ' terms as territorial governor , Illinois ' population more than tripled , from 12 @,@ 282 in 1810 to 40 @,@ 258 in 1818 ( a census was finally conducted later that year ) . The population did not meet the 60 @,@ 000 threshold the Northwest Ordinance required for a new state , but both <unk> and Congress expected continued growth . 
 = = Senate career = = 
 Illinois quickly proceeded along the steps to statehood . Its constitution was finished in August 1818 ; elections were held in September ; and in October , the first General Assembly met in Kaskaskia . On October 6 , Ninian Edwards stepped down , and Shadrach Bond was inaugurated as Illinois ' first governor . The following day the new state legislature voted for Illinois ' two members of the U.S. Senate . Edwards was quickly chosen on the first ballot ; his rival Thomas was only elected after the fourth . Edwards and Thomas then drew straws to determine their respective terms : Thomas was placed in Class II of the Senate and could serve until 1823 , while Edwards was placed in Class III and had to face reelection in February 1819 . Edwards and Thomas still had to wait for Congress to formally ratify Illinois ' constitution and admission to the Union , which it did on November 25 . On December 3 the two Senators were finally seated , leaving Edwards with a mere three months in his first term . 
 Edwards ' re @-@ election was more difficult . In four months he had lost the temporary support of Thomas ' allies in the General Assembly who had voted for him in 1818 . He narrowly defeated Thomas partisan Michael Jones by a vote of 23 – 19 . This may have been due to the influence of the powerful Secretary of State Elias Kane , a Thomas ally . 
 Like most members of Congress during the Era of Good Feelings , Senator Edwards sat as a member of the Democratic @-@ Republican Party . As his second term drew on , he joined the Adams @-@ Clay faction that would develop into the National Republicans after Edwards left office . Edwards voted for the Missouri Compromise in 1820 , a bill that Thomas sponsored . He voted against a law reducing prices for federal land , which made both Edwards and Representative Daniel Pope Cook targets of criticism at home . On May 6 , 1821 , Cook married Edwards ' daughter Julia . 
 Ninian Edwards caused trouble for himself when he wrote several articles in the Washington Republican under the pseudonym " A.B. " that attacked U.S. Treasury Secretary William H. Crawford . Edwards alleged that Crawford had known of the impending failure of Illinois ' Bank of Edwardsville in 1821 , but had not withdrawn federal money from it . Edwards found that none of Crawford 's rivals were willing to support his charges , and he was unable to produce corroborating evidence . He resigned his Senate seat on March 4 , 1824 , to take a job he wanted as the first United States Minister to Mexico . While en route to his new position , Edwards was called back to Washington to testify before a special House committee concerning the " A.B. Plot " . Unable to substantiate his claims , Edwards resigned his diplomatic post , to be replaced by Joel Roberts Poinsett . 
 Back in Illinois , Edwards settled in Belleville , a town whose site he had once owned before selling off its lots at a profit . 
 = = State governorship = = 
 = = = Election of 1826 = = = 
 When he returned to Illinois , Edwards appeared to be a discredited politician . He no longer had a loyal coalition in the General Assembly to re @-@ elect him to the U.S. Senate . His actions in the " A.B. Plot " had made him lose favor with President Adams ; therefore he could not expect another federal appointment . In addition , supporters of Andrew Jackson were becoming a force in Illinois politics . Illinois frontier voters so admired Jackson that soon , for the first time , they would give their support to a national party , the Democrats . Ninian Edwards never criticized Jackson , but as an Adams @-@ Clay Republican Senator he was not part of Jackson 's growing coalition . Jacksonians deeply resented Edwards ' ally Cook , who had voted against Jackson when the presidential election of 1824 was decided in the House of Representatives . 
 However , when he ran for governor in 1826 , Edwards had the good fortune to enter a three @-@ way race that split the Jacksonians between state Senator Thomas Sloo and Lieutenant Governor Adolphus Hubbard . As a campaign issue , Edwards focused on Illinois ' dire financial situation , blaming Sloo and Hubbard and other legislators for it . Edwards won 49 @.@ 5 percent of the vote to Sloo 's 46 percent , with the rest going to Hubbard . 
 = = = Administration = = = 
 Edwards ' gubernatorial term was another period of rapid growth for Illinois . In the decade from 1820 to 1830 , the population again nearly tripled from 55 @,@ 211 to 157 @,@ 445 . During this era , Illinois was the fastest @-@ growing territory in the world . 
 Edwards ' administration was hampered by his conflict with the legislature , primarily over the struggling Bank of Illinois . The bank had been established in 1821 , and from the beginning it had been underfunded , its notes had badly depreciated , and it had helped put the state deeply in debt . In his inaugural address Edwards <unk> attacked bank officials and politicians alike , accusing them of fraud and perjury . From that point , Edwards had a poor relationship with the General Assembly . During his term the Assembly did eventually pass a bank regulation bill , but it also passed a measure to relieve debtors despite Edwards ' objections that the state could not afford it . 
 In 1827 Illinois established its first penitentiary , at Alton . That same year , the state received a federal land grant to build the Illinois and Michigan Canal , though work did not begin for several years . 
 Also in 1827 , Edwards ordered the Illinois militia to join another war against Native Americans in northern Illinois . The Winnebago War , fought between white settlers and members of the Ho @-@ Chunk tribe , broke out in Wisconsin ( then part of the Michigan Territory ) but spread to the lead @-@ mining region around Galena . Edwards dispatched the militia and ordered 600 more men to be recruited in Sangamon County . The show of force convinced the Ho @-@ Chunk to surrender . 
 After the war , Edwards urged the federal government to remove the remaining Native Americans from northern Illinois , claiming that their presence violated " the rights of a sovereign and independent state " , and hinting that he might dispatch the militia again to force them out . The federal government applied diplomatic pressure , and on July 29 , 1829 , the Potawatomi , Ottawa , and Ojibwe ceded 3 @,@ 000 square miles ( 7 @,@ 800 km2 ) of northern land to the State of Illinois ; the Winnebago made a cession in August . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Under the 1818 constitution , governors were limited to a single term . When Edwards ' ended on December 6 , 1830 , he returned to private life . He ran for the U.S. House of Representatives in 1832 and lost . Edwards devoted himself to charitable medical work in Belleville , giving free care to local residents . A cholera epidemic came through the area in 1833 , carried by Winfield Scott 's troops during the Black Hawk War . Edwards stayed in the town to care for his patients and caught the disease , dying on July 20 . Ninian Edwards was interred in Belleville , but he was later moved to Springfield 's Oak Ridge Cemetery . 
 = = Family = = 
 Three of Edwards ' sons and one son @-@ in @-@ law followed him into politics . Ninian Wirt Edwards ( 1809 – 1889 ) , named for his father and his father 's childhood tutor William Wirt , served as Illinois Attorney General , in the General Assembly , and as Illinois ' first Superintendent of Public Instruction . He was married to Elizabeth Porter Todd , a sister of Mary Todd Lincoln . Their daughter Julia Cook Edwards married Edward Lewis Baker , editor of the Illinois State Journal and son of Congressman David Jewett Baker . 
 Another son , Albert Gallatin Edwards ( 1812 – 1892 ) , was an assistant secretary of the U.S. Treasury under President Abraham Lincoln . In 1887 he founded the brokerage firm A. G. Edwards in Saint Louis , Missouri . A third son , Benjamin S. Edwards ( 1818 – 1886 ) , established a successful law practice in Springfield , Illinois and served as a judge in Illinois ' Thirteenth Circuit . Ninian Edwards ' daughter , Julia Edwards Cook , married Congressman Daniel Pope Cook . Their son , John Pope Cook , was a mayor of Springfield and a general in the Union Army during the American Civil War . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Edwards County , Illinois was named for him , as is the St. Louis , Missouri Metro @-@ East area city of Edwardsville , Illinois . Both were named for him during his time as territorial governor . The territorial legislature named Edwards County , while Edwardsville was named by its founder , Thomas Kirkpatrick . The Edwards Trace , pioneer Central Illinois trail , was named for Ninian Edwards and his War of 1812 campaign . 
 = Getty Foundation = 
 The Getty Foundation , based in Los Angeles , California at the Getty Center , awards grants for " the understanding and preservation of the visual arts " . In the past , it funded the Getty Leadership Institute for " current and future museum leaders " , which is now at Claremont Graduate University . Its budget for 2006 @-@ 07 was $ 27 @.@ 8 million . It is part of the J. Paul Getty Trust . 
 = = Grants = = 
 The Foundation was originally called the " Getty Grant Program , " which began in 1984 under the direction of Deborah Marrow . The J. Paul Getty Trust can spend up to 0 @.@ 75 % of its endowment on gifts and grants ; by 1990 the Getty Grant Program ( then based in Santa Monica ) had made 530 grants totaling $ 20 million to " art historians , conservators and art museums in 18 countries " . Among notable grants of the Program were grants to partially fund the publication of books , for example to " provide for additional illustrations or allow a book 's purchase price to be lowered " . Some books " published with the assistance of the Getty Grant Program " were : 
 Hamburger , Jeffrey F. The Rothschild canticles : art and mysticism in Flanders and the Rhineland circa 1300 . New Haven : Yale University Press , 1990 . ISBN 0 @-@ 300 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 Nesbit , Molly , and Eugène <unk> . <unk> 's seven albums . New Haven : Yale University Press , 1992 . ISBN 0 @-@ 300 @-@ <unk> @-@ 2 
 Jones , Amelia , and Laura Cottingham . Sexual politics : Judy Chicago 's Dinner Party in feminist art history . [ Los Angeles , CA ] : UCLA at the Armand Hammer Museum of Art and Cultural Center in association with University of California Press , Berkeley , 1996 . ISBN 0 @-@ 520 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 
 In 1998 , the Program granted $ 750 @,@ 000 for electronic cataloging to art museums in the Los Angeles area . The program awarded $ 180 @,@ 000 in 1999 to the National Gallery in Prague to digitize images of works of art in its collections . In 2005 , the program awarded the University of California , Los Angeles and to the Museum of Fine Arts , Houston almost $ 400 @,@ 000 to " support the documentation and preservation of Latino and Latin American art " . 
 The name of the Getty Grant Program was changed to " Getty Foundation " in 2005 to " better reflect [ ] the expanded scope of the Getty 's grant @-@ making over the past two decades and reaffirm [ ] its commitment to philanthropy going forward " . Grants made by the Foundation include funding the Multicultural Undergraduate Internship Program , begun in 1993 , " seeks to increase staff diversity within visual arts organizations " in Los Angeles County . Between 2002 and 2007 , the Foundation expended over $ 13 @.@ 5 million to fund " plans to care for , maintain , and preserve ... historic resources " at 86 United States colleges and universities . In 2006 , the Foundation committed $ 3 @.@ 5 million to restore an 80 by 100 foot " America Tropical " mural on Olvera Street in Los Angeles that was painted by David Alfaro Siqueiros . In 2006 , in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina , the Foundation announced a $ 2 million fund " to aid New Orleans 's visual arts organizations " . 
 As of June 2008 , the Foundation has four priorities for grants : 
 " Strengthening art history as a global discipline " 
 " Promoting the interdisciplinary practice of conservation " 
 " Increasing access to museum and archival collections " 
 " Developing current and future professionals and leaders " 
 In the summer of 2011 , the foundation is funding Multicultural Undergraduate Internships at 70 Los Angeles @-@ area museums and visual arts organizations . The internships seek to attract into museum and visual arts organizations students from historically underrepresented groups : people of African American , Asian , Latino / Hispanic , Native American , and Pacific Islander descent . 
 A major Getty initiative for 2011 @-@ 12 is Pacific Standard Time : Art in LA 1945 @-@ 1980 , is an unprecedented collaboration that brings together more than sixty cultural institutions from across Southern California for six months beginning October 2011 to tell the story of the birth of the L.A. art scene . 
 = = Getty Leadership Institute at Claremont Graduate University = = 
 The Foundation also sponsors the Getty Leadership Institute ( GLI ) . The major GLI program is the Museum Leadership Institute ( MLI ) , formerly known as the Museum Management Institute , which " has served close to 1 @,@ 000 museum professionals from the United States and 30 countries worldwide " . It offers a three @-@ week curriculum for " museum directors and senior executive team members " , with instruction in areas such as " strategy , marketing , management and finance " . Most of the attendees work in art museums ; among the executives who attended the MLI were the directors of the Frick Collection , San Francisco Museum of Modern Art , Van Gogh Museum , and Winnipeg Art Gallery . 
 In addition to the MLI , GLI offers other professional development programs , convenes meetings involving non @-@ profit agencies , and hosts an online forum . The GLI began in 1979 with a headquarters in New York City and classes taught at the University of California Berkeley . From 1999 to 2009 , the program was headquartered at the Getty Center in Los Angeles , California , and in 2004 , classes moved from Berkeley to the Getty Center . In 2010 , the GLI affiliated with Claremont Graduate University in Claremont , California and was renamed The Getty Leadership Institute at Claremont Graduate University . After the transfer , the foundation supports the GLI with a three @-@ year , $ 2 @.@ 2 million grant , but the program is headquartered on the Claremont campus . Claremont is funding GLI 's indirect costs . Although the transfer took effect on January 2 , 2010 , the 2010 MLI was held at the Getty Center . The 2011 MLI will be held on the Claremont campus . 
 = = Senior staff = = 
 The Foundation 's senior staff includes : 
 Joan Weinstein , Interim Director 
 Associate Director , Grants Administration : Rebecca Martin 
 Program Officer : Angie Kim 
 Senior Program Officer : Nancy <unk> 
 Program Officer : Antoine M. <unk> 
 Head , Leadership Institute : Philip M. <unk> 
 Principal Project Specialist : Kathleen Johnson 
 Deborah Marrow , who was Foundation Director , now serves as interim president and CEO of the J. Paul Getty Trust . 
 = = Employees and budget = = 
 During the period July 2006 - June 2007 , the Foundation had approximately 30 full @-@ time and part @-@ time employees , and a budget of $ 27 @.@ 8 million . 
 = = Foundation with similar name = = 
 The Getty Foundation should not be confused with the " Ann and Gordon Getty Foundation , " which is based in San Francisco , California , and which awards grants largely " to promote the fields of music , the opera , and the symphony " . 
 = Jokhang = 
 The Jokhang ( Tibetan : <unk> ་ <unk> ། , Chinese : <unk> ) , also known as the <unk> Monastery , <unk> , Jokhang Temple , Jokhang Monastery and Zuglagkang ( Tibetan : <unk> ་ <unk> ་ <unk> <unk> ། , Wylie : <unk> @-@ lag @-@ khang , <unk> : Zuglagkang or <unk> ) , is a Buddhist temple in Barkhor Square in Lhasa , the capital city of Tibet . Tibetans , in general , consider this temple as the most sacred and important temple in Tibet . The temple is currently maintained by the Gelug school , but they accept worshipers from all sects of Buddhism . The temple 's architectural style is a mixture of Indian vihara design , Tibetan and Nepalese design . 
 The Jokhang was founded during the reign of King Songtsen Gampo . According to tradition , the temple was built for the king 's two brides : Princess Wencheng of the Chinese Tang dynasty and Princess Bhrikuti of Nepal . Both are said to have brought important Buddhist statues and images from China and Nepal to Tibet , which were housed here , as part of their dowries . The oldest part of the temple was built in 652 . In the next 900 years the temple was enlarged several times with the last renovation done in 1610 by the Fifth Dalai Lama . Following the death of Gampo , the image in <unk> Lake temple was moved to the Jokhang temple for security reasons . When King <unk> <unk> ruled from 755 to 797 , the Buddha image of the Jokhang temple was hidden , as the king 's minister was hostile to the spread of Buddhism in Tibet . During the late ninth and early tenth centuries , the Jokhang and Ramoche temples were said to have been used as stables . In 1049 Atisha , a renowned teacher of Buddhism from Bengal taught in Jokhang . 
 Around the 14th century , the temple was associated with the Vajrasana in India . In the 18th century the Qianlong Emperor of the Qing dynasty , following the Gorkha @-@ Tibetan war in 1792 , did not allow the Nepalese to visit this temple and it became an exclusive place of worship for the Tibetans . During the Chinese development of Lhasa , the Barkhor Square in front of the temple was encroached . During the Cultural Revolution , Red Guards attacked the Jokhang temple in 1966 and for a decade there was no worship . Renovation of the Jokhang took place from 1972 to 1980 . In 2000 , the Jokhang became a UNESCO World Heritage Site as an extension of the Potala Palace ( a World Heritage Site since 1994 ) . Many Nepalese artists have worked on the temple 's design and construction . 
 = = Location = = 
 The temple , considered the " spiritual heart of the city " and the most sacred in Tibet , is at the center of an ancient network of Buddhist temples in Lhasa . It is the focal point of commercial activity in the city , with a maze of streets radiating from it . The Jokhang is 1 @,@ 000 metres ( 3 @,@ 300 ft ) east of the Potala Palace . Barkhor , the market square in central Lhasa , has a walkway for pilgrims to walk around the temple ( which takes about 20 minutes ) . Barkhor Square is marked by four stone <unk> ( incense burners ) , two of which are in front of the temple and two in the rear . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Rasa <unk> <unk> ( " House of Mysteries " or " House of Religious Science " ) was the Jokhang 's ancient name . When King Songtsen built the temple his capital city was known as Rasa ( " Goats " ) , since goats were used to move earth during its construction . After the king 's death , Rasa became known as Lhasa ( Place of the Gods ) ; the temple was called Jokhang — " Temple of the Lord " — derived from Jowo Shakyamuni Buddha , its primary image . The <unk> 's Chinese name is Dazhao ; it is also known as Zuglagkang , <unk> Monastery and <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 Tibetans viewed their country as a living entity controlled by <unk> ma ( pronounced " <unk> " ) , a wild demoness who opposed the propagation of Buddhism in the country . To thwart her evil intentions , King Songtsen Gampo ( the first king of a unified Tibet ) developed a plan to build twelve temples across the country . The temples were built in three stages . In the first stage central Tibet was covered with four temples , known as the " four horns " ( ru bzhi ) . Four more temples , ( <unk> <unk> ) , were built in the outer areas in the second stage ; the last four , the yang <unk> , were built on the country 's frontiers . The <unk> temple was finally built in the heart of the <unk> ma , ensuring her subjugation . 
 To forge ties with neighboring Nepal , Songtsen Gampo sent envoys to King <unk> seeking his daughter 's hand in marriage and the king accepted . His daughter , Bhrikuti , came to Tibet as the king 's Nepalese wife ( <unk> ; <unk> in Tibetan ) . The image of Akshobhya Buddha ( or <unk> ) , which she had brought as part of her dowry , was deified in a temple in the middle of a lake known as Ramoche . 
 Gampo , wishing to obtain a second wife from China , sent his ambassador to Emperor Taizong ( 627 – 650 ) of the Tang dynasty for one of his daughters . Taizong rejected the king 's proposal , considering Tibetans " barbarians " , and announced the marriage of one of his daughters to the king of <unk> , a Hun . This infuriated Gampo , who mounted attacks on tribal areas affiliated with the Tang dynasty and then attacked the Tang city of <unk> . Telling the emperor that he would escalate his aggression unless the emperor agreed to his proposal , Gampo sent a conciliatory gift of a gold @-@ studded " suit of armour " with another request for marriage . Taizong conceded , giving Princess Wencheng to the Tibetan king . When Wencheng went to Tibet in 640 as the Chinese wife of the king ( known as <unk> in Tibet ) , she brought an image of Sakyamuni Buddha as a young prince . The image was deified in a temple originally named <unk> , which became the Jokhang . The temple became the holiest shrine in Tibet and the image , known as Jowo Rinpoche , has become the country 's most @-@ revered idol . 
 The oldest part of the temple was built in 652 by Songtsen Gampo . To find a location for the temple , the king reportedly tossed his hat ( a ring in another version ) ahead of him with a promise to build a temple where the hat landed . It landed in a lake , where a white stupa ( memorial monument ) suddenly emerged over which the temple was built . In another version of the legend , Queen Bhrikuti founded the temple to install the statue she had brought and Queen Wencheng selected the site according to Chinese geomancy and feng shui . The lake was filled , leaving a small pond now visible as a well fed by the ancient lake , and a temple was built on the filled area . Over the next nine centuries , the temple was enlarged ; its last renovation was carried out in 1610 by the Fifth Dalai Lama . 
 The temple 's design and construction are attributed to Nepalese craftsmen . After Songtsen Gampo 's death , Queen Wencheng reportedly moved the statue of Jowo from the Ramoche temple to the Jokhang temple to secure it from Chinese attack . The part of the temple known as the Chapel was the hiding place of the Jowo Sakyamuni . 
 During the reign of King <unk> <unk> from 755 to 797 , Buddhists were persecuted because the king 's minister , <unk> <unk> ( a devotee of Bon ) , was hostile to Buddhism . During this time the image of <unk> Buddha in the Jokhang temple was hidden underground , reportedly 200 people failed to locate it . The images in the Jokhang and Ramoche temples were moved to <unk> in Ngari , and the monks were persecuted and driven from Jokhang . During the anti @-@ Buddhist activity of the late ninth and early tenth centuries , the Jokhang and Ramoche temples were said to be used as stables . In 1049 Atisha , a renowned teacher of Buddhism from Bengal who taught in Jokhang and died in 1054 , found the " Royal Testament of the Pillar " ( <unk> ' <unk> ka <unk> ma ) in a pillar at Jokhang ; the document was said to be the testament of Songtsen Gampo . 
 Beginning in about the 14th century , the temple was associated with the Vajrasana in India . It is said that the image of Buddha deified in the Jokhang is the 12 @-@ year @-@ old Buddha earlier located in the Bodh Gaya Temple in India , indicating " historical and ritual " links between India and Tibet . Tibetans call Jokhang the " Vajrasana of Tibet " ( Bod <unk> <unk> rDo rje <unk> ) , the " second Vajrasana " ( rDo rje <unk> pal } and " <unk> , the navel of the land of snow " ( Gangs can sa yi <unk> ba rDo rje <unk> ) . 
 After the occupation of Nepal by the Gorkhas in 1769 , during the Gorkha @-@ Tibetan war in 1792 the Qianlong Emperor of the Qing dynasty drove the Gorkhas from Tibet and the Tibetans were isolated from their neighbors . The period , lasting for more than a century , has been called " the Dark Age of Tibet " . Pilgrimages outside the country were forbidden for Tibetans , and the Qianlong Emperor suggested that it would be equally effective to worship the Jowo Buddha at the Jokhang . 
 In Chinese development of Lhasa , Barkhor Square was encroached when the walkway around the temple was destroyed . An inner walkway was converted into a plaza , leaving only a short walkway as a pilgrimage route . In the square , religious objects related to the pilgrimage are sold . 
 During the Cultural Revolution , Red Guards attacked the Jokhang in 1966 and for a decade there was no worship in Tibetan monasteries . Renovation of the Jokhang began in 1972 , and was mostly complete by 1980 . After this and the end of persecution , the temple was re @-@ consecrated . It is now visited by a large number of Tibetans , who come to worship Jowo in the temple 's inner sanctum . During the Revolution , the temple was spared destruction and was reportedly boarded up until 1979 . At that time , portions of the Jokhang reportedly housed pigs , a slaughterhouse and Chinese army barracks . Soldiers burned historic Tibetan scriptures . For a time , it was a hotel . 
 Two flagstone <unk> ( inscribed pillars ) outside the temple , flanking its north and south entrances , are worshiped by Tibetans . The first monument , a March 1794 edict known as the " Forever Following Tablet " in Chinese , records advice on hygiene to prevent smallpox ; some has been chiseled out by Tibetans who believed that the stone itself had curative powers . The second , far older , pillar is 5 @.@ 5 metres ( 18 ft ) high with a crown in the shape of a palace and an inscription dated 821 or 822 . The tablet has a number of names ; " Number One Tablet in Asia " , " Lhasa Alliance Tablet " , " Changing Alliance Tablet " , " Uncle and Nephew Alliance Tablet " and the " Tang Dynasty @-@ Tubo Peace Alliance Tablet " . ) Its inscription , in Tibetan and Chinese , is a treaty between the Tibetan king <unk> and the Chinese emperor delineating the boundary between their countries . Both inscriptions were enclosed by brick walls when Barkhor Square was developed in 1985 . The Sino @-@ Tibetan treaty reads , " Tibet and China shall abide by the frontiers of which they are now in occupation . All to the east is the country of Great China ; and all to the west is , without question , the country of Great Tibet . Henceforth on neither side shall there be waging of war nor seizing of territory . If any person incurs suspicion he shall be arrested ; his business shall be inquired into and he shall be escorted back " . 
 According to the Dalai Lama , among the many images in the temple was an image of <unk> , made of clay in the temple , within which the small wooden statue of the Buddha brought from Nepal was hidden . The image was in the temple for 1300 years , and when Songtsen Gampo died his soul was believed to have entered the small wooden statue . During the Cultural Revolution , the clay image was smashed and the smaller Buddha was given by a Tibetan to the Dalai Lama . 
 In 2000 , the Jokhang became a UNESCO World Heritage Site as an extension of the Potala Palace ( a World Heritage Site since 1994 ) to facilitate conservation efforts . The temple is listed in the first group of State Cultural Protection Relic Units , and has been categorized as a 4A @-@ level tourist site . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The Jokhang temple covers an area of 2 @.@ 51 hectares ( 6 @.@ 2 acres ) . When it was built during the seventh century , it had eight rooms on two floors to house scriptures and sculptures of the Buddha . The temple had brick @-@ lined floors , columns and door frames and carvings made of wood . During the Tubo period , there was conflict between followers of Buddhism and the indigenous Bon religion . Changes in dynastic rule affected the Jokhang Monastery ; after 1409 , during the Ming dynasty , many improvements were made to the temple . The second and third floors of the Buddha Hall and the annex buildings were built during the 11th century . The main hall is the four @-@ story Buddha Hall . 
 The temple has an east @-@ west orientation , facing Nepal to the west in honour of Princess Bhrikuti . Additionally , the monastery 's main gate faces west . The Jokhang is aligned along an axis , beginning with an arch gate and followed by the Buddha Hall , an enclosed passage , a cloister , <unk> and a hostel for the lamas ( monks ) . Inside the entrance are four " Guardian Kings " ( <unk> ) , two on each side . The main shrine is on the ground floor . On the first floor are murals , residences for the monks and a private room for the Dalai Lama , and there are residences for the monks and chapels on all four sides of the shrine . The temple is made of wood and stone . Its architecture features the Tibetan Buddhist style , with influences from China , Indian vihara design and Nepal . The roof is covered with gilded bronze tiles , figurines and decorated pavilions . 
 The central Buddha Hall is tall , with a large , paved courtyard . A porch leads to the open courtyard , which is two concentric circles with two temples : one in the outer circle and another in the inner circle . The outer circle has a circular path , with a number of large prayer wheels ( <unk> ) ; this path leads to the main shrine , which is surrounded by chapels . Only one of the temple murals remains , depicting the arrival of Queen Wencheng and an image of the Buddha . The image , brought by the king 's Nepalese wife and initially kept at Ramoche , was moved to Jokhang and kept in the rear center of the inner temple . This Buddha has remained on a platform since the eighth century ; on a number of occasions , it was moved for safekeeping . The image , amidst those of the king and his two consorts , has been gilded several times . In the main hall on the ground floor is a gilded bronze statue of Jowo Sakyamuni , 1 @.@ 5 metres ( 4 ft 11 in ) tall , representing the Buddha at age twelve . The image has a bejeweled crown , cover around its shoulder , a diamond on its forehead and wears a pearl @-@ studded garment . The Buddha is seated in a lotus position on a three @-@ tiered lotus throne , with his left hand on his lap and his right hand touching the earth . A number of chapels surround the Jowo <unk> , dedicated to gods and <unk> . The most important bodhisattva here is the Avalokiteshwara , the patron saint of Tibet , with a thousand eyes and a thousand arms . Flanking the main hall are halls for Amitabha ( the Buddha of the past ) and <unk> ( the Buddha of the future ) . Incarnations of Sakyamuni are enshrined on either side of a central axis , and the Buddha 's warrior guard is in the middle of the halls on the left side . 
 In addition to the main hall and its adjoining halls , on both sides of the Buddha Hall are dozens of 20 @-@ square @-@ metre ( 220 sq ft ) chapels . The Prince of Dharma chapel is on the third floor , including sculptures of Songtsen Gampo , Princess Wencheng , Princess Bhrikuti , Gar <unk> ( the Tabo minister ) and <unk> <unk> , the inventor of Tibetan script . The halls are surrounded by enclosed walkways . 
 Decorations of winged apsaras , human and animal figurines , flowers and grasses are carved on the superstructure . Images of sphinxes with a variety of expressions are carved below the roof . 
 The temple complex has more than 3 @,@ 000 images of the Buddha and other deities ( including an 85 @-@ foot ( 26 m ) image of the Buddha ) and historical figures , in addition to manuscripts and other objects . The temple walls are decorated with religious and historical murals . 
 On the rooftop and roof ridges are iconic statues of golden deer flanking a Dharma wheel , victory flags and monstrous fish . The temple interior is a dark labyrinth of chapels , illuminated by votive candles and filled with incense . Although portions of the temple has been rebuilt , original elements remain . The wooden beams and rafters have been shown by carbon dating to be original , and the <unk> door frames , columns and finials dating to the seventh and eighth centuries were brought from the Kathmandu Valley of Nepal . 
 In addition to walking around the temple and spinning prayer wheels , pilgrims prostrate themselves before approaching the main deity ; some crawl a considerable distance to the main shrine . The prayer chanted during this worship is " Om mani <unk> hum " ( Hail to the jewel in the lotus ) . Pilgrims queue on both sides of the platform to place a ceremonial scarf ( <unk> ) around the Buddha 's neck or touch the image 's knee . A walled enclosure in front of the Jokhang , near the Tang Dynasty @-@ Tubo Peace Alliance Tablet , contains the stump of a willow known as the " Tang <unk> Willow " or the " Princess Willow " . The willow was reportedly planted by Princess Wencheng . 
 = = Buddhist scriptures and sculptures = = 
 The Jokhang has a sizable , significant collection of cultural artifacts , including Tang @-@ dynasty bronze sculptures and finely @-@ sculpted figures in different shapes from the Ming dynasty . Among hundreds of thangkas , two notable paintings of <unk> and <unk> date to the reign of the Yongle Emperor ; both are embroidered on silk and well @-@ preserved . The collection also has 54 boxes of Tripiṭaka printed in red , 108 carved sandalwood boxes with sutras and a vase ( a gift from the Qianlong Emperor ) used to select the Dalai Lama and the Panchen Lama . 
 = Christmas in the post @-@ war United States = 
 Christmas in the United States during the post @-@ War years ( 1946 – 1964 ) reflected a period of peace , productivity , and prosperity . Americans staged sumptuous Christmases and enjoyed a variety of holiday foods unknown to previous generations . Several films , foods , toys , and television programs of the era have become American Christmas traditions . 
 Once reliant upon Germany for its ornaments , toys , and even its Christmas customs , America became self @-@ sufficient in the post @-@ War years with Christmas ornaments and toys being manufactured in the United States that were considerably less expensive than their German counterparts . American Christmas customs and traditions such as visits to department store Santas and letter writing to Santa at the North Pole remained intact during America 's post @-@ War years , but the era generated contributions that have endured to become traditions . 
 NORAD 's tracking of Santa 's sleigh on Christmas Eve , for example , was initiated in 1955 and has become an annual tradition . The stop motion animated film , Rudolph the Red @-@ Nosed Reindeer remains an annual telecast on American television — almost fifty years after its debut , and Dr. Seuss 's The Grinch Who Stole Christmas of 1957 has become a literary Christmas classic . 
 Several Christmas firsts mark the post @-@ War era that include the first White House Christmas card , the first Christmas postage stamp , the first opera composed for television ( Amahl and the Night Visitors ) , the first Christmas Day basketball game , and the first Elvis Presley Christmas album . The era saw the production and manufacture of toys that have become classics such as Candy Land , Mr. Potato Head , and Barbie . 
 = = Christmas trees = = 
 = = = Types = = = 
 During the post @-@ War years , Americans could select their Christmas trees from a variety of offerings . Natural trees had become the preferred choice in America when Christmas tree farms began supplying them to large metropolitan areas in the 1920s . Artificial trees of bristles , aluminum trees , and flocked trees became alternatives to real trees during the post @-@ War period . 
 = = = = Natural = = = = 
 In 1900 , only one in five American families had a [ Christmas tree ] . While America never lacked for real trees , the time and expense of retrieving them from the wild was significant . Early in the twentieth century , however , Christmas tree farms began supplying large metropolitan areas with real trees . In the 1920s , real trees became commonplace , supplanting artificial trees in American homes . 
 = = = = Artificial = = = = 
 Artificial trees made of goose feathers were in use in American homes since the 1880s . In the 1930s , however , The Addis Brush Company , an American toilet bowl brush manufacturer , began making artificial trees of green @-@ dyed bristles and then supplied the British ( who suffered a dearth of wild trees ) with thousands of artificial trees in the post @-@ War years . Americans took little interest in the Addis artificial trees and remained loyal to real trees . 
 = = = = Aluminum = = = = 
 In 1950 , the Addis Brush Company patented an aluminum Christmas tree , the Silver Pine , that came with a floodlight and a rotating color wheel . Modern Coatings , Inc. of Chicago manufactured aluminum trees in 1958 , and The Aluminum Specialty Company of Manitowoc , Wisconsin manufactured more than a million aluminum trees between 1959 and 1969 . The trees , including the company 's flagship product the " <unk> " , retailed for $ 25 . 
 The aluminum tree spectacle could be enhanced with a rotating Christmas tree stand . The futuristic , Space Age look of the trees made them especially suited to the streamlined home decor of the period . Sales of aluminum trees declined after being treated satirically in the 1965 animated Christmas television special , A Charlie Brown Christmas . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 In the 1960s , flocked Christmas trees in purple , gold , pink , and even black became popular . The trees ' branches were coated in a chemically @-@ created , flame retardant substance resembling snow . Sophisticated style <unk> suggested developing a new Christmas tree theme every year and buying color coordinated ornaments . Natural trees would return to favor in the 1970s when country arts and crafts became popular . 
 = = = Decorations = = = 
 The post @-@ War period saw changes in the production of Christmas tree ornaments . Shiny Brite and other ornament companies began mass @-@ producing inexpensive glass ornaments . Bubble lights were introduced during the period , and inexpensive , lit @-@ from @-@ within tree toppers were another option for the tree . 
 = = = = Toppers and stands = = = = 
 In the post @-@ War years , translucent , molded plastic , electrified , lit @-@ from @-@ within tree toppers in the shape of angels and stars became popular . Although Santa Claus and other Christmas icons were introduced as electrified toppers , the star and the angel of the Victorian era remained the preferred motif . Glass spire ornaments were also popular as toppers . 
 The first decorated water reservoir tree stands appeared on the American market in the 1940s . Tin Christmas tree stands decorated with lithographed holiday icons manufactured by National Outfit Manufacturers Association were produced in the 1950s and have become collectibles of the era . 
 = = = = Lights = = = = 
 Bubble lights , a type of incandescent novelty light , were invented by Carl Otis in 1935 , who then sold the patents to the NOMA ( National Outfit Manufacturer 's Association ) Electric Corporation . NOMA launched the novelty lights on the Christmas market in 1946 when war shortages ended . Bubble lights became hugely popular . Their main feature was a sealed glass tube with a colored bubbling liquid inside . 
 Other companies followed with their own bubble light versions and other lighting novelties . In 1946 , Sylvania introduced fluorescent pastel lights . In 1955 , NOMA manufactured flashing lights . In 1958 , GE launched Lighted Ice Bulbs , blue bulbs covered with ' ice ' crystals . Fairy Lights were imported from Europe in 1950 and eventually morphed into the inexpensive mini @-@ lights popular in the last decades of the 20th century . 
 = = = = Ornaments = = = = 
 German glass ornaments were introduced to America by Frank Woolworth in the 1880s but such ornaments were produced under labor @-@ intensive conditions and were expensive , with few Americans being able to afford more than one or two ornaments per year . On the eve of World War II , however , American companies began manufacturing inexpensive , mass @-@ produced ornaments that made it possible for almost any American to have an extensive collection of Christmas ornaments for little cost within moments . With a few modifications , Corning Glass 's light bulb machine could spit out 2 @,@ 000 blank glass ornaments a minute that were then bought by ornament companies to be decorated , packaged and sold by the dozen . 
 = = = = = Shiny Brite = = = = = 
 Max Eckhardt 's Shiny Brite company manufactured colorful glass ornaments in a variety of sizes and shapes through the era . Packed in boxes by the dozen or half dozen , glimpses of the ornaments could be caught through the cellophane windows of the boxes ' covers . The reds and greens of the past were supplemented with turquoise , chartreuse , orange , purple , and other vibrant colors . 
 <unk> bands of mica decorated some balls while others were silk screened with seasonal motifs such as snowy scenes , sleigh rides , <unk> , and <unk> . Some balls featured silvery <unk> on their surfaces that reflected the surrounding light . In the early 1950s , clear glass balls appeared decorated with bands of color or glittering sparkles . Molded plastic Santa Clauses , angels , snowmen , and other holiday icons were inexpensive , mass @-@ produced , and readily available . 
 = = = Outdoor lighting = = = 
 McAdenville , North Carolina claims the distinction of being the first community to use outdoor Christmas lights . The Library of Congress notes that " the tradition of decorating evergreen trees with Christmas lights dates back to 1956 when the McAdenville Men 's Club conceived of the idea of decorating a few trees around the McAdenville Community Center . " 
 While the Rockefeller Center Christmas Tree has had " lights " since 1931 , the Rockefeller Tree did not have real electric lights until 1956 . Philadelphia 's Christmas Light Show and Disney 's Christmas Tree also began in 1956 . Though GE sponsored community lighting competitions during the 1920s , it was not until the mid @-@ 1950s that outdoor Christmas lighting was adopted by most Americans . Strings of lights gradually began adorning mantles and doorways inside houses , and trimming the rafters , roof lines , and porch railings outside . 
 = = = National Christmas Tree = = = 
 The tradition of having a National Christmas Tree in Washington , D.C. began in 1923 when a 48 @-@ foot Balsam Fir from Vermont was placed in the Ellipse outside the White House . On Christmas Eve , President Calvin Coolidge lit the 2 @,@ 500 red , white and green electric bulbs on the tree . 
 In 1941 , President Franklin Delano Roosevelt had the tree moved from the Ellipse to the White House grounds , where it remained until 1954 when it was returned to the Ellipse . In 1946 , the lighting ceremony became a televised event , though not with widespread telecast . From 1948 to 1951 , President Harry S. Truman signalled the lighting of the tree by remote control from his Independence , Missouri home , but in 1952 , he stayed at the White House for the lighting ceremony . In 1953 , the ceremony was widely telecast and President Dwight David Eisenhower 's address was radio broadcast through the Voice of America in thirty @-@ four languages . 
 In 1954 , businessmen in the Washington , D.C. area became involved and greatly expanded the program with the Christmas Pageant of Peace . The Pageant centered around the lighting of the Christmas tree , and included various elements such as a life @-@ sized reproduction of the nativity scene . Every year from 1954 to 1972 , a tree was cut and brought to the White House from a different US state and installed at the Ellipse . The ceremony of the tree lighting was then followed by Christmas presentations through the holiday season . 
 = = Santa Claus = = 
 Rituals surrounding Santa Claus such as department store visits to the " jolly old elf " , and letter writing to his North Pole workshop remained intact during the post @-@ War era . New to the mix was Santa 's Workshop ( one of the first theme parks in the US ) , and NORAD 's tracking of Santa 's sleigh via radar on Christmas Eve . In Cleveland , Ohio , a costumed character called Mr. Jingeling entertained shoppers annually at Halle 's Department Store during the season . 
 = = = Santa 's Workshop = = = 
 In 1949 , one of the first theme parks in the United States , Santa 's Workshop , was constructed near Whiteface Mountain in New York State . The park was designed by Arto Monaco , of Upper Jay , New York , and built by the site 's owner Harold Fortune , of Lake Placid , New York . The idea for the park originated in a story that Lake Placid businessman Julian Reiss told his daughter about a baby bear who visits Santa Claus 's workshop at the North Pole . 
 The park features tame deer , storybook characters , and similar attractions . Single day attendance at the park peaked at 14 @,@ 000 on September 2 , 1951 . On December 16 , 1953 , the U.S. Postal Service awarded North Pole , New York status as a " Rural Postal Station " . In the same year , the park 's Santa Claus and his reindeer participated in the Pageant of Peace in Washington , D.C. as well as Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade in New York City . The Nativity Pageant was introduced at the park in 1954 . 
 = = = NORAD tracking of Santa 's journey = = = 
 In 1955 , an advertisement encouraging children to call Santa Claus over a special telephone number was printed in Colorado Springs , Colorado . Due to an error , the phone number that was printed was that of the Continental Air Defense ( <unk> ) . Colonel Harry Shoup was on duty on Christmas Eve 1955 and took many calls from children inquiring about Santa . He told his operators to give a current location for Santa Claus to any child who called in . Three years later , the North American Aerospace Defense Command ( NORAD ) was formed and the NORAD Tracks Santa service continued . 
 = = = Mr. Jingeling = = = 
 Mr. Jingeling , the Keeper of the Keys to Santa 's Workshop , was created in 1956 as a radio spokesman to promote the toys sold at Halle 's Department Store in Cleveland , Ohio . Mr. Jingeling was immediately popular and became an annual fixture at Halle 's where he prowled the seventh floor toy department entertaining shoppers . The costumed character was first played by Max Ellis , a Cleveland Play House actor , and then by Earl W. Keyes , a television producer and director , who remained with the role for many years . In addition to his department store duties , Mr. Jingeling appeared on a local children 's television program telling stories , singing songs , and reminding viewers to visit Halle 's . 
 = = Toys = = 
 The post @-@ War Christmas toy extravaganza had its seed in Clement Clarke Moore 's A Visit from St. Nicholas . There , Saint Nicholas is depicted not as the thin , somewhat forbidding , charity dispensing character of European lore but as a dimpled , " jolly old elf " whose stomach shakes like " a bowlful of jelly " when he laughs , and who enters a dwelling through the chimney with a pack of toys on his back . 
 In the nineteenth century , Germany was the toy making capitol of the world , but high importation costs made German toys relatively expensive in America . Toy costs were lowered when German <unk> began mass @-@ producing toys under the direction of Frank Woolworth and shipping their products to Woolworth 's warehouses for packaging and distribution . 
 With the loss of German toys on the American market during World War I , toy manufacturing in the United States began in earnest . The Great Depression was a temporary setback but WWII proved a catalyst . In the aftermath of the war , American couples were eager to settle down , have kids , and lavish the sumptuous Christmases they never had on their offspring . 
 The post @-@ War years saw the creation of toys that are still in production today and include Candy Land , Cootie , the hula hoop , Barbie , and Etch A Sketch . 
 Television cultivated the American Christmas toy extravaganza . Manufacturers sidestepped the parent in selling a toy and went directly to the child . Mr. Potato Head was the first toy advertised on television and retail sales topped $ 4 million in the toy 's first year . Play @-@ Doh 's sales skyrocketed after being advertised on influential children 's television programs such as Ding Dong School and Captain Kangaroo . 
 = = Christmas cards = = 
 The first White House Christmas card was sent during the administration of Dwight David Eisenhower in 1953 . President Eisenhower was an amateur artist and personally consulted with the head of Hallmark Cards on the project . Over the course of two terms , the Eisenhower White House issued 38 different cards and prints with many of them bearing the President 's own artwork . The tradition was continued during the Kennedy years with Jacqueline Kennedy 's artwork featured on a 1963 card issued to raise funds for a national performing arts center . 
 Early in the post @-@ War years , cards exhibited traditional sentiments and art that reassured war weary Americans . As the 1960s neared , however , sophisticated , adult @-@ oriented cards called " Slim Jims " began appearing on the market . The cards displayed Santas driving fin @-@ tailed convertibles and beatniks delivering greetings in <unk> lingo . The highly stylized cards remained popular well into the 1960s , poking fun at fads and world events . Family photo cards and newsletters ( meticulously handwritten or typed by busy moms ) became commonplace during the 1960s as well . 
 Hallmark brought African American culture to greeting cards in the 1960s as well as contemporary cultural images such as elves sporting Beatle haircuts and psychedelic Christmas trees in <unk> colors . " Happy Christmas " replaced " Merry Christmas " here and there after clergymen decided the traditional greeting was associated with inebriation . In 1961 , 50 billion Christmas cards were mailed by Americans , and , in 1962 , America 's first Christmas postage stamp was issued — causing a mild firestorm by those who felt the stamp violated separation of church and state . 
 = = Foods = = 
 Mamie Eisenhower 's Million @-@ Dollar Fudge Recipe was a favorite holiday treat of the Eisenhower White House years. and first appeared in Who Says We Can 't Cook ? , a spiral @-@ bound collection of recipes published in 1955 by the Women 's National Press Club of Washington , D.C. Mamie 's husband Ike named the recipe . 
 1955 saw the culinary debut of Green Bean Casserole , a dish that remains a holiday favorite in America . Its ingredients include green beans , cream of mushroom soup , and , as a topping , French 's Fried Onions . The casserole was created by Campbell Soup Company in order to promote its cream soups . French 's reports that 50 % of all French 's Fried Onions consumption occurs over Thanksgiving , Christmas , and Easter . 
 Cookie cutting and decorating reached its cultural zenith during the boomer years with Christmas cookie cutouts of reindeer , trees , stars , and bells providing sustenance for kids and dads . Moms packed their favorite home baked cookies into Tupperware containers and carried them to cookie swap parties with friends and neighbors . Red plastic cutters replaced tin cutters during the war years when metal was scarce and can be found today at garage sales and flea markets . 
 A snack hit of the 1955 holiday season was Chex Party Mix , a combination of Wheat Chex , Rice Chex , and Corn Chex , nuts , pretzels and a dressing of melted butter , Worcestershire sauce , and onion and garlic powders . The treat remains a popular holiday snack . 
 = = Teenagers = = 
 = = = Gifts = = = 
 Gifts for teens in the post @-@ War years included face powder , radios , telephones , and cars . In the early 1950s , Angel Face powder was advertised as " the perfect girl @-@ to @-@ girl " Christmas gift . The first transistor radios hit the market just before Christmas 1954 and were a luxury item at US $ 49 @.@ 95 ( $ 322 in 2000 values ) . A leather case and earphone cost an additional $ 11 @.@ 45 ( $ 73 ) . By the end of the decade however , prices dropped so quickly that an 8 @-@ transistor radio could be had for less than $ 10 . 
 Another gift in demand was the streamlined , oval @-@ shaped Princess telephone introduced in the early 1960s . The phone came in a variety of colors , including pink , turquoise , and cream . When one of Mattel 's Barbie doll outfits included a Princess phone as an accessory , a fashion trend was born . By 1963 , many Baby Boomers had reached driver 's license age and , for the first time , middle @-@ class families <unk> on cars for their offspring . 
 = = = Films and music = = = 
 Twentieth Century Fox 's 1956 Christmas offering was The Girl Can 't Help It , a musical film originally intended as a vehicle for sex symbol Jayne Mansfield , with the subplot being a satire of teenagers and rock ‘ n ’ roll music . The unintended result was the " most potent " celebration of rock music ever captured on film . 
 In December 1961 , Disney Studios released Babes in Toyland , a film version of Victor Herbert 's 1903 operetta starring teen heartthrobs Annette Funicello and Tommy Sands . Though new songs with jazzy tempi were incorporated into the film and one critic was delighted with the film 's colorful numbers , Babes in Toyland was neither a success nor a complete box office flop . Its gigantic toy soldiers became members of the Disneyland and Walt Disney World Christmas Parades . 
 Two rockabilly / rock and roll style songs of the late 1950s became hugely popular . " Jingle Bell Rock " , written by Joe Beal and Jim Boothe , was recorded by Bobby Helms in 1957 . The song is regarded as the first rock and roll Christmas song , and has hit the Billboard charts a record six times since its original release . It is second in popularity only to " White Christmas , " with 120 million copies sold . " Jingle Bell Rock " hit # 6 in its first year , despite having been released only two days before Christmas . 
 " Rockin ' Around the Christmas Tree " , written by Johnny Marks and recorded by Brenda Lee in 1958 for Decca Records , was another rockabilly / rock and roll flavored Christmas tune . While it was neglected in its first two seasons , the song hit # 16 on the Billboard pop chart during the Christmas season of 1960 . Eight million copies were sold over thirty years . 
 = = Music = = 
 Elvis ' Christmas Album was released in October 1957 , the first of only two Christmas albums Elvis recorded . The album featured eight Christmas songs , and four gospel songs . " Santa Claus Is Back In Town " and " Santa Bring My Baby Back ( to Me ) " were both commissioned expressly for the album . Elvis ' reading of Ernest Tubb 's 1949 hit , " Blue Christmas " made the tune a holiday staple . 
 His version of " White Christmas " brought calls from the song 's composer Irving Berlin to have the song , and the entire album , banned from radio airplay . Berlin thought Elvis 's rendition a " profane parody of his cherished yuletide standard " . Most US radio stations ignored Berlin 's request , though at least one DJ was fired for playing a tune from the album . As of 2007 , Elvis ' Christmas Album is the top @-@ selling holiday release of all time with 9 million in sales , according to the RIAA . 
 " Rudolph the Red @-@ Nosed Reindeer " was composed in 1948 by Johnny Marks after a 1939 poem by Robert L. May who created Rudolph as part of his employment with Montgomery Ward . The song tells the story of a reindeer whose shiny red nose guides Santa 's sleigh through the fog on Christmas Eve . Gene Autry 's 1949 recording remained at # 1 for a week and brought the song widespread fame . Only " White Christmas " has sold more copies . 
 Autry had another hit in 1950 with " Frosty the Snowman " , written by Jack Rollins and Steve Nelson as a direct attempt to create a success in the vein of " Rudolph The Red @-@ Nosed Reindeer " . The song tells the story of a magical snowman who has playful adventures with children . In 1963 , " Frosty " hit its highest position ever at # 13 in a version by The Ronettes . 
 Spike Jones 's rendition of " All I Want for Christmas Is My Two Front Teeth " hit # 1 on the pop charts in 1951 . The tune was composed in December 1944 by elementary school music teacher Don Gardner when he noticed most of his students were missing their front " baby " teeth . Inspired , he dashed off the song in thirty minutes . In Spike Jones ' original hit recording , a grownup pretends to be a lisping kid who cannot whistle . Nat King Cole also covered the tune . 
 " The Little Drummer Boy " , based on an ancient Czech folksong , was written by Katherine K. Davis in 1957 . The song tells the apocryphal story of a poor young boy who , unable to afford a gift for the infant Jesus , plays his drum with Mary 's approval . The baby smiles at the boy in gratitude . The 1958 version by the Harry Simeone Chorale is the standard , and hit the unparalleled record of placing in the Top 40 for five straight Christmases in a row . Simeone recorded the song in a Greenwich Village cathedral to give it a hushed respect . Its highest position on both the US and UK charts was # 13 . 
 " Silver Bells " was composed by Jay Livingston and Ray Evans , introduced by Bob Hope and Marilyn Maxwell in the film , The Lemon Drop Kid and recorded by Bing Crosby and Carol Richards in 1952 . The song was inspired by Salvation Army <unk> and is one of the very few songs about Christmas in the city . The song was originally called " <unk> Bell " , but Livingston 's wife reminded him that " tinkle " had another association . " It was something you did in the bathroom , " Evans recalled years after the song 's composition , " but that 's a woman 's word and I 'd never thought of it . " " Silver Bells " ranks # 13 on ASCAP 's list of most @-@ played holiday songs . 
 " I Saw Mommy Kissing Santa Claus " was written and composed by Tommie Connor in 1952 and originally recorded by thirteen @-@ year @-@ old Jimmy Boyd . The song reached # 1 on the Billboard charts in 1952 , and on the Cash Box Magazine chart at the beginning of the following year . Boyd 's record was condemned by the Roman Catholic Church in Boston on the grounds it mixed sex with Christmas . Boyd was widely photographed meeting with the Archdiocese to explain the song . 
 " Santa Baby " was written by Joan Javits and Philip Springer in 1953 . The song is a tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek look at a Christmas list of a woman who wants the most extravagant gifts for the holiday . " Santa Baby " was originally sung and recorded by Eartha Kitt and became a huge hit at # 4 in 1953 . 
 Jackson 5 Christmas Album was the only holiday album released by Motown family quintet The Jackson 5 . Released in October 1970 , the album showcased the brothers ' harmonies and vocals . Lead singer Michael Jackson is prominently featured on the album tracks . Included on the Christmas Album is the Jackson 5 's hit single version of " Santa Claus Is Coming to Town " . Rendered with a pop @-@ soul feel , the Jackson 5 's versions of " I Saw Mommy Kissing Santa Claus " and " Santa Claus Is Coming to Town " remain frequent radio requests during the holiday season . 
 The album spent all four weeks at the number one position on Billboard magazine 's special Christmas Albums chart that the magazine published in December 1970 , making it the best @-@ selling holiday album of that year . It has sold over 3 @.@ 5 million copies worldwide . [ 2 ] In 2003 , Universal Motown re @-@ released the album with " Little Christmas Tree " ( from A Motown Christmas ) . In 2009 , this configuration was released as Ultimate Christmas Collection with Christmas messages , remixes , and a Christmas medley , and again as Merry Christmas Jackson <unk> http : / / <unk> / album / <unk> [ edit ] 
 = = Literature = = 
 In 1957 , Dr. Seuss 's How the Grinch Stole Christmas ! was published by Random House . The tale 's rhyming verse accompanies illustrations by the author , and follows a disagreeable character called the Grinch and his attempts to thwart the arrival of Christmas by stealing the gifts , trims , and other trappings of the holiday from the happy Whos of <unk> . In spite of his attempts , Christmas arrives all the same . 
 The Grinch realizes then that Christmas is something more than its trappings . The book criticizes the commercialization of Christmas and satirizes those who exploit the holiday . The tale was adapted into a 1966 short animated film for television with a screenplay by Seuss and narration by Boris Karloff . Later adaptations include a Broadway musical and a feature film in 2000 starring Jim Carrey . 
 At 100 years of age in 1960 , Grandma Moses illustrated Clement Clark Moore 's Christmas poem , A Visit from Saint Nicholas as The Night Before Christmas for Random House . The book was published after her death in 1961 . 
 = = Film = = 
 The years immediately following WWII saw the release of two of the most popular Christmas films in US history : It 's a Wonderful Life ( 1946 ) and Miracle on 34th Street ( 1947 ) . Moviefone listed the two movies as number two and three respectively in their " 25 Best Christmas Movies of All Time " . The Times of London , in a similar ranking , had the two in tenth and eight respectively , while placing fourth 1942 's Holiday Inn , the movie that launched Bing Crosby 's White Christmas . Particularly Frank Capra 's It 's a Wonderful Life , starring James Stewart has been called " a testament to the family values of small @-@ town America just after WWII . " 
 Santa Claus Conquers the Martians ( 1964 ) regularly appears on lists of the worst films ever made . Paul Jacobson , the film 's producer and a former unit manager for the television program , Howdy Doody , described his film as a " Yuletide science fiction fantasy " , and with the best of intentions , hoped to bring something to movie theaters at a time of the year when there was a paucity of children 's entertainment other than the annual Disney feature . 
 In Jacobson 's film , Martians kidnap Santa Claus in a plan to bring fun to their listless , TV @-@ obsessed children . Once on Mars , Santa mass @-@ produces toys using a computerized machine , foils a <unk> saboteur , and generates fun for all . Santa Claus Conquers the Martians has been novelized , adapted to musical stagings , and has taken its place as a holiday cult classic . Child actress Pia <unk> played one of the Martian children and years later commented , " It was very well done , considering it was shot twenty years ago - gimme a break - and really is very entertaining . It 's become a Christmas classic , really . " 
 = = Television = = 
 Christmas television is predominantly secular and focuses on the ethical message of generosity through gift giving and Santa Claus , or the psychological message of home , nostalgia and childhood , or both . The theological message of the holiday — the Incarnation — is rarely encountered in Christmas television . Such a message would be inaccessible to many Americans . 
 In 1949 , Gian Carlo Menotti was commissioned by NBC 's Opera Theatre to write an opera for television . After a year and a half of delay , he set to work , completing Amahl and the Night Visitors five days before its scheduled airing on Christmas Eve 1951 at 9 : 30 to 10 : 30 p.m .. Menotti 's work was inspired by Hieronymous Bosch 's painting , The Adoration of the Magi . The composer himself appeared on @-@ screen to introduce the opera and give the background of the events leading up to its composition . He also brought director Kirk Browning and conductor Thomas <unk> on @-@ camera to thank them . 
 An estimated five million viewers tuned in — to this day , the largest audience for a televised opera in America . Skeptic Olin Downes declared in a New York Times front page review that " television , operatically speaking , has come of age " and Newsweek called the telecast , " the best production of opera yet seen on TV . " 
 The opera 's appeal lay not only in its story about a crippled shepherd boy healed on the first Christmas Eve but in its wedding of opera and the limitations of television . The broad effects of theater were eschewed and instead an intimacy appropriate to the television studio and home viewing was cultivated . The production starred Chet Allen as Amahl and Rosemary Kuhlmann as his mother . Kuhlmann reprised her role annually for many years . 
 In 1953 , Amahl was <unk> . The opera claims the distinctions of being the first opera written for television , the first presentation of the <unk> Hallmark Hall of Fame , and the first Christmas television special to become an annual tradition . The opera was telecast on NBC from 1951 to 1966 with many of the original cast and crew participating . 
 On December 18 , 1962 , NBC aired the first animated Christmas special created specifically for television , Mister Magoo 's Christmas Carol . Based on Dickens ' novelette , A Christmas Carol , the animated special featured a score by Broadway duo Jule Styne and Bob Merrill . 
 On December 6 , 1964 , NBC aired Rudolph the Red – Nosed Reindeer , a stop motion animated special produced by Rankin / Bass . The special was based on a 1949 song by Johnny Marks , which was based in turn on a 1939 poem by Robert L. May . The program has aired every year since 1964 , making it the longest @-@ running Christmas television special . 
 = = Christmas clubs = = 
 Christmas clubs were savings programs first offered by banks in 1909 . The concept was simple : bank customers deposited a set amount of money each week into a special savings account , and received the money at a later date for Christmas shopping . 
 One radio program episode used Christmas clubs as a background . The December 23 , 1949 episode of Life of Riley saw the show 's protagonist Chester Riley attempting to withdraw his US $ 2 Christmas club money but discovering his account has accumulated a variety of fees including one for the passbook , another for early withdrawal , and yet another for the bank 's mailed reminders . The luckless Riley owes the bank 25 cents . 
 = Josef Wurmheller = 
 Josef " Sepp " Wurmheller ( 4 May 1917 – 22 June 1944 ) was a German Luftwaffe pilot during World War II , a fighter ace credited with 102 enemy aircraft shot down in over 300 combat missions . He claimed the majority of his aerial victories over the Western Front , and nine over the Eastern Front . Of his 93 victories over the Western Allies , at least 18 – 20 were four @-@ engined bombers and 56 were against Supermarine Spitfire fighters . 
 Born in <unk> , Wurmheller was a glider pilot in his youth , and volunteered for military service in the Luftwaffe of the Third Reich in 1937 . Following flight training he was posted to Jagdgeschwader 53 ( JG 53 — 53rd Fighter Wing ) in 1939 . He claimed his first aerial victory on the Western Front on 30 September 1939 , a phase of World War II dubbed the Phoney War . He then served as a flight instructor before returning to JG 53 for the Battle of Britain . In June 1941 he participated in Operation Barbarossa , the German invasion of the Soviet Union . He was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross on 4 September 1941 after 32 victories . Following another tour as fighter pilot instructor , he was posted to Jagdgeschwader 2 " Richthofen " ( JG 2 — 2nd Fighter Wing ) operating on the Channel Front . Wurmheller claimed seven aerial victories during the Dieppe Raid on 19 August 1942 and after his 67th victory was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves on 1 October 1942 . 
 In April 1943 , Wurmheller was appointed Staffelkapitän ( squadron leader ) of 9 . Staffel ( 9th squadron ) of JG 2 " Richthofen " . On 8 June 1944 , two days after the Allied Invasion of Normandy , he was given command of III . Gruppe ( 3rd group ) of JG 2 " Richthofen " . He and his wingman were killed in a mid @-@ air collision during combat near Alençon , France on 22 June 1944 . Wurmheller was posthumously promoted to Major ( major ) and was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords on 24 October 1944 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Wurmheller was born on 4 May 1917 in <unk> in the Kingdom of Bavaria , a federated state of the German Empire . After growing up on his uncle 's farm at <unk> , he spent four years working as a miner like his father . He was also an enthusiastic glider pilot and in 1937 he volunteered for military service in the Luftwaffe . Following training as a fighter pilot , Wurmheller , holding the rank of Unteroffizier ( sergeant ) , was posted to 2 . Staffel ( 2nd squadron ) of Jagdgeschwader 53 ( JG 53 — 53rd Fighter Wing ) in 1939 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 World War II in Europe began on Friday , 1 September 1939 , when German forces invaded Poland . On 30 September , elements of I. Gruppe ( 1st group ) of JG 53 encountered a formation of five Royal Air Force ( RAF ) Fairey Battle single @-@ engined bombers in the vicinity of Saarbrücken during the early Phoney War period . Wurmheller claimed his first victory during this encounter . The Fairey Battle <unk> , of No. 150 Squadron flown by Squadron Leader William MacDonald , was on an aerial reconnaissance mission in the area from <unk> to Saarbrücken and crash @-@ landed at <unk> @-@ sur @-@ Coole . For this victory , Wurmheller received the Iron Cross 2nd Class ( Eisernes Kreuz 2 . Klasse ) on 19 October 1939 . He was posted to the Jagdfliegerschule ( fighter pilot school ) at Werneuchen as an instructor in November 1939 . 
 = = = Battle of Britain and Eastern Front = = = 
 Following a tour as an instructor at the Luftwaffe fighter pilot school , Wurmheller returned to 5 . Staffel of JG 53 in June 1940 . During the Battle of Britain , he flew combat missions as a fighter pilot and as a fighter @-@ bomber pilot . He claimed four further victories in this campaign and was awarded the Iron Cross 1st Class ( Eisernes Kreuz 1 . Klasse ) on 16 October 1940 . He was shot down three times himself by RAF fighters and each time had to bail out . On the third occasion , he was shot down in Messerschmitt Bf 109 E @-@ 4 ( Werknummer <unk> — factory number ) at approximately 5 : 10 pm on 23 November over the English Channel and had to swim for four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half hours before he was rescued by a <unk> ( E @-@ boat ) of the Kriegsmarine ( Navy ) . Hospitalized until March 1941 , he returned to combat duty and claimed two Supermarine Spitfires shot down on 7 May 1941 , his 9th and 10th victories . 
 Wurmheller 's unit was subsequently transferred to the Eastern Front in preparation for Operation Barbarossa , the German invasion of the Soviet Union , which began on 22 June 1941 . During Barbarossa he was deployed in the southern sector of the German advance . He added nine victories — eight bombers and one Polikarpov I @-@ 16 " Rata " fighter — in this theater of operations . His last victory on the Eastern Front , his 19th overall , was claimed on 15 July 1941 . 
 = = = Channel Front = = = 
 Wurmheller was transferred back to the Channel Front on 20 July 1941 . He was assigned to the Stab ( headquarters unit ) of II . Gruppe of Jagdgeschwader 2 " Richthofen " ( JG 2 — 2nd Fighter Wing ) , named after the World War I fighter ace Manfred von Richthofen . He claimed his 20th aerial victory on 24 July 1941 and over a period of four weeks claimed a further 12 victories , all over Spitfires , including five in one day , making him an " ace @-@ in @-@ a @-@ day " . 
 On 30 August 1941 , Wurmheller was awarded the Honor Goblet of the Luftwaffe ( Ehrenpokal der Luftwaffe ) , and on 4 September he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes ) for 32 aerial victories . His former unit , 5 . Staffel of JG 53 , had nominated him for the Knight 's Cross , but the nomination was not approved until he was assigned to JG 2 " Richthofen " . On the same day , his fellow II . Gruppe pilot Oberfeldwebel Kurt Bühligen also received the Knight 's Cross . At the time , Wurmheller flew a Bf 109 F @-@ 2 from the airbase at St Pol @-@ <unk> . 
 Following a minor injury , Wurmheller was again posted to the fighter pilot school in Werneuchen as an instructor . Upon his return to front line duty in May 1942 , he was posted to 1 . Staffel and claimed 10 victories during May 1942 and a further 12 victories the following month . Among these claims were four Spitfires shot down on 31 May and five on 5 June 1942 . Most of these missions were flown with Rudolf Pflanz as his wingman . 
 Wurmheller 's most successful day as a fighter pilot was during the Dieppe Raid on 19 August 1942 . On that day , the Allies unsuccessfully attacked the German @-@ occupied port of Dieppe . Over 6 @,@ 000 infantrymen , predominantly Canadian , were supported by a Canadian armored regiment and a strong force of Royal Marines and smaller RAF landing contingents . Wurmheller , whose right foot was plastered in an orthopedic cast , claimed seven victories during the course of four combat missions that day , six Spitfires and a Bristol Blenheim bomber . The Blenheim most likely was a misidentified Martin Baltimore . He had to abort his first mission due to engine trouble , suffering a minor concussion in the forced landing . He returned from his second mission claiming two Spitfires and a Blenheim shot down . His third mission resulted in the destruction of three more Spitfires , his 56th to 58th victories . Wurmheller claimed another Spitfire shout down on his fourth combat mission . The next day , 20 August , he claimed his 60th aerial victory , which earned him the German Cross in Gold ( Deutsches Kreuz in Gold ) ; it was awarded on 21 August . 
 Wurmheller was promoted to Leutnant ( second lieutenant ) for bravery in the face of the enemy on 1 October 1942 . Following his 67th aerial victory , achieved in about 150 combat missions , he was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub ) on 14 November 1942 . He was the 146th officer or soldier of the Wehrmacht so honored . 
 The United States Army Air Forces ( USAAF ) , in particular the Eighth Air Force , began regular combat when the VIII Bomber Command attacked the Rouen – Sotteville marshalling yards in France on 17 August 1942 . Wurmheller claimed four Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress bombers shot down on 3 January 1943 . On 1 April 1943 he was appointed Staffelkapitän ( squadron leader ) of 9 . Staffel of JG 2 " Richthofen " , succeeding Hauptmann ( Captain ) Siegfried Schnell , who was transferred to III . Gruppe of Jagdgeschwader 54 ( JG 54 — 54th Fighter Wing ) . Wurmheller claimed his 70th victory on 17 May , when he shot down a B @-@ 17 . 
 On 23 September , Wurmheller was wounded by bomb splinters while making an emergency landing in his Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190 A @-@ 6 during a bombing raid at Vannes – <unk> . " Sepp " , as he was named by his comrades , was promoted to Oberleutnant ( first lieutenant ) on 1 August 1943 and to Hauptmann on 1 November 1943 . He claimed his first heavy bomber in the Defense of the Reich campaign on 8 February 1944 in the vicinity of Le <unk> . On 8 March 1944 , he claimed his 90th victory overall . 
 = = = Group commander and death = = = 
 Wurmheller claimed further aerial victories following the Allied invasion of Normandy on 6 June 1944 . He was appointed Gruppenkommandeur ( group commander ) of III . Gruppe of JG 2 " Richthofen " on 8 June , succeeding Hauptmann Herbert Huppertz who was killed in action near Caen earlier that day . Wurmheller claimed the last three victories of his total of 102 on 16 June 1944 . He was the 80th Luftwaffe pilot to achieve the century mark . 
 Wurmheller was killed in his Fw 190 A @-@ 8 ( Werknummer 171 053 ) on 22 June 1944 , when he collided with his wingman , Feldwebel ( Staff Sergeant ) Kurt Franzke , during aerial combat with USAAF Republic P @-@ 47 Thunderbolt and Royal Canadian Air Force ( RCAF ) Spitfire fighters near Alençon . He was posthumously awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub und Schwertern ) and promoted to the rank of Major ( major ) on 24 October 1944 , which was back @-@ dated to 1 June 1944 . Wurmheller and Franzke were buried side by side at the War Cemetery <unk> @-@ St. André , near Saint @-@ André @-@ de @-@ l 'Eure , in plot 9 , graves 1704 and 1705 respectively . 
 = = Awards = = 
 Wound Badge in Black 
 Front Flying Clasp of the Luftwaffe in Gold with Pennant " 400 " 
 Combined Pilots @-@ Observation Badge 
 Iron Cross ( 1939 ) 
 2nd Class ( 19 October 1939 ) 
 1st Class ( 16 October 1940 ) 
 Honor Goblet of the Luftwaffe ( 30 August 1941 ) 
 German Cross in Gold on 21 August 1942 as Oberfeldwebel in the I. / Jagdgeschwader 2 
 Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords 
 Knight 's Cross on 4 September 1941 as Oberfeldwebel and pilot in the 9 . / Jagdgeschwader 2 " Richthofen " 
 146th Oak Leaves on 13 November 1942 as Leutnant ( war officer ) and pilot in the 7 . / Jagdgeschwader 2 " Richthofen " 
 108th Swords on 24 October 1944 ( posthumously ) as Hauptmann ( war officer ) and Gruppenkommandeur of the III . / Jagdgeschwader 2 " Richthofen " 
 = What Lies Below = 
 " What Lies Below " is the 13th episode of the second season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe . Set in a quarantined Boston office building , the episode revolves around a thousands @-@ year @-@ old virus that infects and then influences its victims to attempt to spread the contagion outside of the building . 
 It was the third Fringe episode to be written by supervising producer Jeff Vlaming , while it was director Deran Sarafian 's only credit for the series to date . After his character becomes infected , actor Joshua Jackson commented during shooting to " just imagine the worst hangover I 've ever had and multiply it by ten " . 
 " What Lies Below " first aired in the United States on January 21 , 2010 on the Fox network . An estimated 6 @.@ 90 million viewers watched the episode , and it received mixed reviews from critics , with one calling it average and predictable . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Boston , a visibly sick man from the Netherlands arrives at an office building , only to collapse and die . The veins in his body erupt with blood , spraying surrounding witnesses . The Fringe team arrive on site , and while interviewing the witnesses , another man also becomes sick . The sick man attempts to leave the building , only to be stopped by Walter ( John Noble ) , who sees the man spray out blood and realizes there is a contagion . The building is quarantined with Walter 's son Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) , FBI agent Olivia ( Anna Torv ) , and the rest of the witnesses still inside . 
 The CDC arrives and soon clash with Walter , who wants some blood samples to take back to his lab at Harvard . As another witness , the receptionist , falls ill , the rest begin panicking that the virus is an airborne contagion . Olivia discovers that the Dutch man was an oil consultant who arrived to meet with Mr. Ames , one of the other office workers trapped in the building . 
 Walter explains that viruses have forms of " personalities , " that influence their hosts to act in certain ways . He posits that the virus is not airborne after all , but needs more samples for further tests . Meanwhile the infected receptionist is influenced by the virus , jumps out a window , and also scares Peter into falling into an infected pool of blood . The woman is sprayed with decontaminate spray , as Peter quickly rinses himself off . Knowing he is likely infected , Peter searches through the Dutch man 's pockets , leading to the discovery of a briefcase infected by the virus . 
 Walter continues his theory that the virus wants to escape the building , hence the multiple escape attempts by the infected . The virus was found on a sample taken 10 miles below the earth , and may be 75 @,@ 000 years old and responsible for wiping out the Ice Age mammals . As a bio @-@ hazard team enters the building to test people for the virus , a CDC official orders the army to prepare for a " level six eradication " , because they still do not know how to contain it . 
 Peter manages to fake the test and hide his infection . He and Olivia begin leading a team of healthy people outside the building , but before Peter is able to leave , his nose bleeds , clearly revealing that he is infected . While the virus overtakes Peter 's health and sanity , Walter becomes increasingly distressed as he fears losing his son again , and accidentally blurts out that he " can 't let Peter die again " to Astrid ( Jasika Nicole ) . Despite the threat of eradication and death , he and Astrid remain in the building to run further tests on the Dutch man . Walter realizes that sulfuric ash killed the virus thousands of years ago , and successfully finds a cure with some horseradish he found in the office break room . 
 The CDC agrees to allow Olivia to enter the building and use the air ventilation system to spread some fentanyl gas , which will gain them time while the cure is synthesized . While inside , Peter attacks her , but Olivia is able to turn the air on , successfully knocking out the building 's occupants . Peter and everyone else are successfully cured . Astrid later approaches Walter and asks what he meant when he said he couldn 't let Peter die again , to which he responds by saying " some things are meant to be left alone . " 
 = = Production = = 
 Supervising producer Jeff Vlaming wrote " What Lies Below " , his second episode of the season . Filmmaker Deran Sarafian served as the director , his first and only Fringe directional credit . The episode featured one @-@ time guest appearances by actors Demore Barnes , Geoff Pierson , Conrad Coates , Natassia Malthe , and David Richmond @-@ Peck . Actor Joshua Jackson , who plays an infected Peter Bishop in the episode , noted during shooting that he found inspiration from " <unk> [ ing ] the worst hangover I 've ever had and multiply it by ten " . 
 Actress Jasika Nicole was pleased that the writers decided to let her character discover Walter 's secret , commenting " Astrid finds out in a really emotional way because Walter lets it slip to her accidentally . I think that it was really nice for them to invite Astrid into the importance of that instead of keeping her in the dark . At least she knows that she 's a part of this family and this affects her . I think she serves as a really important character in these later episodes because Astrid is kind of the only person that isn 't directly involved with everything that is still on his side . She has to step up to the plate and be that comfort for him because if he doesn 't have anyone there , he 's basically going to regress and go back to the place , I think mentally , that he was in when he was in the mental institution . And of course we don 't want that . " 
 One of the episode 's scenes involves an infected woman jumping out of the building onto a van in an attempt to spread the virus further . To simulate her 160 @-@ feet fall , stuntwoman Angela <unk> was placed in a crane 10 to 15 feet above the van and asked to jump onto the van below . The crew removed the roof structure on the van , and carefully rigged it to cave @-@ in upon impact but also make it as painless as possible for <unk> . To achieve this , they modified the ribs that supported the roof by placing them on pins that would snap , and also added a three @-@ millimeter glass plate that would snap between two sheets of black hard nylon @-@ type plastic to further emphasize the distance she jumped . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The first airing of " What Lies Below " was watched by an estimated 6 @.@ 90 million viewers in the United States , with a 2 @.@ 6 / 7 rating for those aged 18 – 49 . SFScope writer Sarah Stegall considered these numbers to be " steady but stagnant ratings " , as they were " not much different " from the previous week . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " What Lies Below " received mixed reviews from television critics . The A.V. Club contributor Todd VanDerWerff graded the episode with a B- , explaining that despite some nice moments , it was " an episode of the show that started out utterly predictably , continued along an utterly predictable path and yet somehow got fairly enjoyable by the end just through sheer force of will on the part of the cast . " IGN 's Ramsey Isler also found the episode average and predictable , as it lacked " much of the quintessential storytelling elements that , once upon a time , made this one of the best shows on TV . " Like many other critics , Isler thought the episode was too similar to The X @-@ Files , and gave it 7 @.@ 0 / 10 . TV Squad columnist Jane Boursaw thought Walter discovering a cure was a little far @-@ fetched , and wished Broyles was a greater part of the show . Television Without Pity gave the episode a B + . 
 Andrew Hanson from the Los Angeles Times thought it was a really good episode , and even wished it could have been turned into a movie , were Fringe to get into filmmaking . Josh Wigler of MTV thought it was a " pretty cool " mystery @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week , and " while not quite as strong as when the mythology is in full gear , ' What Lies Below ' was nonetheless a compelling hour of television . " He was however bothered that there was no further information about the parallel universe . UGO Networks writer Alex Zalben compared " What Lies Below " to the similarly @-@ plotted The X @-@ Files episode " Ice " . Zalben concluded , " Though both episodes are very good , ' Ice ' is one of the best X @-@ Files hours ever , perfectly channeling – but not ripping off – John Carpenter 's The Thing . " 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 Director Deran Sarafian submitted " What Lies Below " for consideration in the Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series category at the 62nd Primetime Emmy Awards . He did not receive a nomination . 
 = Flitch of bacon custom = 
 The awarding of a flitch of bacon to married couples who can swear to not having regretted their marriage for a year and a day is an old tradition , the remnants of which still survive in some pockets in England . The tradition was maintained at <unk> until at least the eighteenth century but now remains only as a carving over the fireplace . At Little Dunmow in Essex a similar ceremony also survived into the eighteenth century . The tradition can be traced back to at least the fourteenth century at both sites and the Dunmow flitch is referred to in Chaucer . The awarding of a flitch at both sites seems to have been an exceedingly rare event . 
 The Dunmow tradition was revived in Victorian times , largely inspired by a book ( The Flitch of Bacon ) by William Harrison Ainsworth . Flitch trials are still held in modern times at Great Dunmow . A counsel is employed to cross @-@ examine the nominated couples and attempt to show they are undeserving of the award . 
 There is evidence that the flitch of bacon tradition existed outside Britain in mainland Europe and some would push its origins back as far as Saxon times . Historian Hélène Adeline Guerber associates the origins of the flitch of bacon ceremony with the Yule feast of Norse tradition in which boar meat is eaten in honour of the god Freyr . 
 = = Whichnoure = = 
 The manor of Whichnoure ( now <unk> Hall ) near Lichfield , Staffordshire was granted to Sir Philip de Somerville in the 10th year of the reign of Edward III ( 1336 ) from the Earl of Lancaster for a small fee but also on condition that he kept ready " arrayed at all times of the year but Lent , one bacon @-@ <unk> hanging in his hall at Whichnoure , to be given to every man or woman who demanded it a year and a day after the marriage , upon their swearing they would not have changed for none other " . 
 The couple are required to produce two of their neighbours to witness that the oath is true . The oath that was to be sworn by the couple reads , 
 Hear ye , Sir Philip de Somervile , lord of <unk> , maintainer and giver of this Bacon , that I , ( husband ) , <unk> I wedded ( wife ) , my wyfe , and <unk> I had her in my <unk> and at <unk> , by a Yere and a Day after our <unk> , I would not have changed for none other , <unk> ne <unk> , richer ne <unk> , ne for none other descended of <unk> <unk> , sleeping ne waking , at noo time ; and if the said ( wife ) were sole , and I sole , I would take her to be my wyfe before all the <unk> of the <unk> , of what <unk> <unk> they be , good or <unk> , as <unk> me God , and his <unk> , and this flesh , and all fleshes . 
 The winning couple are escorted away in a grand ceremony with " <unk> , <unk> , and other <unk> of <unk> " . Although this is a valuable prize , it does not seem to have been claimed very often . Horace Walpole , who visited Whichnoure in 1760 , reported that the flitch had not been claimed for thirty years and that a real flitch of bacon was no longer kept ready at the manor . A replacement , carved in wood , was now displayed over the mantle of the fireplace in the main hall , presumably in order to continue to meet the conditions of the original land grant . 
 Walpole is quite taken by this tradition and mentions it in several letters to his friends . In a letter to the Countess of Ailesbury ( Lady Caroline Campbell , daughter of John Campbell , 4th Duke of Argyll and widow of Charles Bruce , 4th Earl of Elgin and 3rd Earl of Ailesbury but by this stage married to Hon. H. S. Conway ) , Walpole with tongue firmly in cheek berates her for not having come to Whichnoure to claim the flitch : " Are you not ashamed , Madam , never to have put in your claim ? It is above a year and a day that you have been married , and I never once heard either of you mention a journey to Whichnoure . " Describing the location and explaining why the flitch no longer gets claimed , he writes " ... it is a little paradise , and the more like an antique one , as , by all I have said , the married couples seem to be driven out of it . " Walpole concludes , " If you love a prospect , or bacon , you will certainly come hither . " 
 An anonymous humorous piece appeared in Joseph Addison 's Spectator in 1714 purporting to explain the rarity of the flitch being awarded in terms of the poor quality of the applicants . The writer claims that the source is the Register of <unk> @-@ hall but the truth is that the piece is almost certainly entirely fictitious . The first couple to claim , according to this account , were at first successful , but then had the flitch taken away from them after they began to argue about how it should be dressed . Another couple failed when the husband , who had only reluctantly attended , had his ears boxed by his wife during the questioning . A couple who applied after only their honeymoon had finished passed the questioning but since insufficient time had elapsed were awarded just one <unk> . One of only two couples to be successful in the first century of the tradition was a ship 's captain and his wife who had not actually seen one another for over a year since their marriage . 
 As well as to married couples , a flitch of bacon was also given at Whichnoure to men in the religious profession one year and a day following their retirement . 
 = = Dunmow = = 
 A rather better @-@ known example of the awarding of a flitch of bacon to married couples occurred at Little Dunmow Priory in Essex . It is generally held to have been instituted by the family of Robert Fitzwalter in the 13th century . According to Rev. W. W. Skeat in his notes to the fourteenth @-@ century The Vision of William Concerning Piers the Plowman , 
 In the present passage we have the earliest known allusion to the singular custom known as that of " the Dunmow flitch of Bacon . " The custom was — " that if any pair could , after a <unk> of matrimony , come forward , and make oath at Dunmow [ co . Essex ] that , during the whole time , they had never had a quarrel , never regretted their marriage , and , if again open to an engagement , would make exactly that they had made , they should be rewarded with a flitch of Bacon . " 
 It is referred to in Chaucer ( 1343 – 1400 ) in a way that makes clear the reference would already be well known to the reader . It continued to be awarded until the middle of the 18th century , the last successful claim being made on 20 June 1751 . The ceremony of this last flitch award was recorded by the artist David <unk> who was present at the time to make sketches and , later , engravings . His images were later used as source material by Ainsworth for his novel , The Flitch of Bacon . Ainsworth 's 1854 novel proved so popular that it revived the custom which has continued in one form or another down to the present day and is now held every leap year . 
 The oath to be taken was very similar to the one at Whichnoure , that " neither of them in a year and a day , neither sleeping or waking , repented of their marriage " . The couple are required to kneel on sharp stones in the churchyard while taking the oath and a verse was chanted ; 
 Following the taking of the oath , the couple are then paraded around the town with their bacon in a noisy ceremony , much as at Whichnoure . 
 The historical Dunmow flitch is known to have been successfully claimed only a total of six times , although there may have been more that are unknown ( among the possible ones there are Montagu Burgoyne and his wife Elizabeth ) . Three are known prior to the dissolution of the monasteries from the records of the house of Sir Richard St George , and a further three awards are known from the records of the manor court at Dunmow now in the British Museum . There was a long gap after the dissolution but the tradition was revived by Sir Thomas May in 1701 when he became the owner of the Priory . 
 There was an attempt made to claim the flitch on 12 June 1772 by John and Susan Gilder . The couple had given due notice of their claim and were accompanied by a large crowd of onlookers . However , the lord of the manor had ordered that the ceremony should not take place and the gates of the priory were nailed shut to prevent it . By 1809 the tradition was definitely abolished . A further attempt to claim the flitch was made in 1832 by Josiah Vine , a retired cheesemaker , who travelled with his wife from Reading to make his claim . He too was refused a trial by a very unsympathetic Steward of Little Dunmow . John Bull on 8 October 1837 reported that it had been revived by the Saffron Walden and Dunmow Agricultural Society . Apparently however , this flitch was merely distributed at the annual society dinner . In 1851 a couple from Felstead were also refused a trial at the Priory , but obtained a flitch from the people of nearby Great Dunmow who felt that they deserved it . 
 = = = Modern flitch trials = = = 
 The flitch trials were revived in the Victorian era after the publication of Ainsworth 's novel in 1854 which proved to be tremendously popular . Ainsworth aided the reinstitution by himself donating two <unk> for the first of the revived ceremonies in 1855 . They have been held ever since in one form or another except for a gap caused by the World Wars . The first ceremony after World War II was held in 1949 , despite rationing still being in force . The modern trials are held every fourth year on leap years , the next one is planned for 2016 . The event is organised by the Dunmow Flitch Trials Committee who employ a counsel to cross @-@ examine the applicants in an attempt to save the bacon for the sponsors who donated it . The trial is decided by a jury . 
 When first revived the original stones on which the couple knelt had been removed and the chair on which they were carried if successful is kept permanently in Little Dunmow Priory . However , replacements for both of these have been provided for the modern ceremony . The modern trials are held in the town of Great Dunmow rather than the location of the original custom at Little Dunmow , a smaller nearby village . 
 Dunmow claims to be the only location to have continued the flitch of bacon custom into the 21st century . 
 = = Older traditions = = 
 Although the flitch ceremony at Dunmow is generally held to have originated with the <unk> in the 13th century there are some who would date it to earlier Norman or Saxon times , one suggested date being 1104 , the founding of the Little Dunmow Priory . This is partly because the flitch of Dunmow seems to have already been common knowledge in very early works such as the prologue to Chaucer 's " Wife of Bath " and also in the Visions of Pierce Plowman by William Langland . Some would also read passages in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle as alluding to the Dunmow flitch . 
 It is possible that the flitch of bacon custom was at one time quite widespread . There was a flitch of bacon tradition at the Abbey of St <unk> , Rennes , Brittany , where the bacon is said to have hung for six centuries without being claimed . In Vienna , there was a similar tradition in which the prize was a ham of bacon rather than a flitch . The ham was hung over the city gate , from where the winner was expected to climb up and remove it himself . One such winner had the prize revoked after winning it , after he inadvertently let slip that his wife would rebuke him for staining his coat while bringing down the ham . 
 Historian Hélène Adeline Guerber theorizes that the tradition traces back to an ancient Norse custom connected with the Yule feast , a Germanic pagan festival that in modern times has inextricably been absorbed into Christmas . Guerber theorizes that Yule is primarily dedicated to the god Thor , but is also important for the god Freyr ( who rides a wild boar , <unk> ) . A boar is eaten at Yule in Freyr 's honour and the boar can only be carved by a man of unstained reputation . Guerber says that Freyr was the patron of gladness and harmony and was often invoked by married couples who wished for the same , and that this led to the custom of married couples who actually succeeded in living in harmony for a given period being rewarded with a piece of boar meat . Guerber states that it is this tradition that became the flitch of bacon custom after converting boar meat into bacon . 
 = = In the arts and culture = = 
 The flitch of bacon , subtitled The custom of Dunmow : a tale of English home is a novel by William Harrison Ainsworth first published in 1854 . The central plot of the story is the flitch at Dunmow and the scheming by the leading character to be awarded it by marrying a succession of women in an attempt to find the right one . The description of the ceremony in the book is partly based on the art of David <unk> , an eyewitness to the last ceremony in 1751 . 
 The Flitch of Bacon public house , of which the protagonist of Ainsworth 's novel is the publican , still exists in Little Dunmow . 
 The Flitch of Bacon is a comic opera from 1779 by William Shield and Sir Henry Bate Dudley . 
 Made in Heaven is a 1952 film starring David Tomlinson and Petula Clark about a married couple attempting to win the Dunmow flitch . 
 = Third Battle of Gaza = 
 The Third Battle of Gaza was fought on the night of 1 / 2 November 1917 between British and Ottoman forces during the Sinai and Palestine Campaign of World War I , and came after the Egyptian Expeditionary Force ( EEF ) victory at the Battle of Beersheba had ended the Stalemate in Southern Palestine . The fighting occurred at the beginning of the Southern Palestine Offensive , and together with attacks on Hareira and Sheria on 6 – 7 November and the continuing Battle of Tel el Khuweilfe which had been launched by General Edmund Allenby on 1 November , it eventually broke the Gaza to Beersheba line defended by the Yildirim Army Group . Despite having held this line since March 1917 , the Ottoman Army was forced to evacuate Gaza and Tel el Khuweilfe during the night of 6 / 7 November . Only Sheria held out for most of the 7 November before it too was captured . 
 Following British defeats at the First and Second Battles of Gaza in March and April 1917 , Lieutenant General Philip Chetwode commanding the EEF 's Eastern Force and Kress von Kressenstein 's Ottoman Empire force had each adopted a defensive posture and a stalemate had developed in Southern Palestine . <unk> defences approximately on the lines held at the end of the second battle were strengthened , and both sides undertook regular mounted reconnaissances into the open eastern flank . In late June , Allenby replaced General Archibald Murray as commander of the EEF , which he quickly reorganised . At about the same time , the Ottoman Fourth Army was also restructured . As the stalemate continued in terrible conditions through the summer , reinforcements began to arrive to replace the large number of casualties suffered by the EEF during the previous fighting for Gaza , while several additional divisions also arrived . The Ottoman defenders were also reinforced at this time , and both sides carried out training while manning the front lines and monitoring the open eastern flank . By mid @-@ October , as the Battle of Passchendaele continued on the Western Front , the last of the British reinforcements arrived as Allenby 's preparations to commence a campaign of manoeuvre neared completion . 
 Prior to the Second Battle of Gaza , the town had been developed into a strong modern fortress , with entrenchments , wire entanglements and a glacis on its south and south – eastern edges . A series of field works , mutually supported by artillery , machine guns and rifles , extended from Gaza eastwards to within 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) of Beersheba . Beginning on 27 October , the EEF began a heavy and almost continuous bombardment of Gaza . During this time , the EEF 's XXI Corps , holding the Gaza section of the line , had been mostly passive until the night of 1 / 2 November , when a series determined night @-@ time assaults were mounted against the Gaza defences . Yet these attacks were only partially successful due to the strength of the garrison . The bombardment of Gaza intensified on 6 November and during the night of 6 / 7 November successful attacks were launched on several trench systems . On the morning of 7 November , Gaza was found to have been evacuated during the night . The Gaza to Beersheba line subsequently collapsed and the Ottoman Seventh and Eighth Armies were forced into retreat . Following several battles during the pursuit , the EEF captured Jerusalem on 9 December 1917 . 
 = = Background = = 
 Gaza was " a strong modern fortress , well entrenched and wired , with good observation and a glacis on its southern and south – eastern face . " These defences which were too strong for a daytime attack were extended eastwards by a series of " field works " to four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) from Beersheba . These fortifications were between 1 @,@ 500 to 2 @,@ 000 yards ( 1 @,@ 400 to 1 @,@ 800 m ) apart , each mutually supported by fire from artillery , machine guns and rifles . 
 As the troops of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force ( EEF ) began to concentrate in preparation for their attacks , they left their camps standing to deceive German and Ottoman aerial reconnaissances . The EEF assumed their opponents thought there were still six infantry divisions in the Gaza area and one in the eastern sector towards Beersheba . However , according to Falls , " [ t ] here is evidence that the [ Yildirim Army Group ] were fairly accurately informed of the British dispositions . " On 28 October , they knew the camps at Khan Yunis and Rafa were empty and accurately placed three infantry divisions east of the Wadi Ghuzzee with a fourth , the 10th ( Irish ) Division approaching the wadi . They estimated more cavalry at Asluj and Khalasa than was actually there . 
 The loss of Beersheba on 31 October stunned the Yildirim Army Group commander and staff . The Beersheba garrison withdrew either to the Ottoman defences around Tel es Sheria or northwards to Tel el Khuweilfe to defend the Hebron road . Here a considerable force , including all available reserve units , was deployed in the <unk> area to stop a threatened advance up the Hebron road to Jerusalem about fifty miles ( 80 km ) to the north . According to Powles , " ... the Turkish line had been thrown back on its left , but not broken . " The remainder of the Ottoman line stretching westward to the Mediterranean coast continued to be strongly defended , particularly at Hareira , Sharia and Gaza , but the loss of Beersheba had placed EEF mounted units across the Beersheba to Hebron and Jerusalem road , and three Eighth Army infantry battalions were sent by the German General Friedrich Freiherr Kress von Kressenstein to reinforce the Ottoman troops fighting at Khuweilfe to protect the road . They established a new defensive line north of Beersheba , and the 19th Division was sent from the XXII Corps defending Gaza to reinforce the new line at <unk> . However , the objective of the EEF advance north of Beersheba was to separate the Ottoman forces supplied by the roads and railways from Ramleh on the maritime plain from those supplied by the motor road from Jerusalem north of Beersheba . Such an advance would also place the EEF infantry corps in a position to begin to " roll up " the Ottoman flank . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 The EEF controlled the coastal sea lanes , and the Intelligence Service spread rumours about possible sea landings in the rear of Gaza . Ships were seen taking soundings off the coast and a fleet of small boats was located near Deir el Belah . During the late afternoon of 1 November , an embarkation of members of the Egyptian Labour Corps onto motor launches , trawlers and tugs at Deir el Belah was staged as a feint , giving the appearance of continuing into the night . The next morning , two trawlers appeared off the mouth of the Wadi el Hesi north of Gaza . To add to the confusion , between the Battle of Beersheba on 31 October and the main attacks at the Battle of Hareira and Sheria beginning on 6 November , the Ottoman left flank north of Beersheba was being fiercely contested during the Battle of Tel el Khuweilfe for control of the road to Hebron and Jerusalem . According to Wavell , " an assault on a portion of the Gaza defences was to be made by the XXI Corps . " The date of this attack , which was primarily a feint , was scheduled for between 24 and 48 hours before the attack on Sheria . 
 Meanwhile , preparations for the main attacks on the Gaza line at Hareira and Sharia , began on 1 November when the 53rd ( Welsh ) Division , with the Imperial Camel Brigade on the right , advanced northwards to occupy a line 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) to the west without opposition . This placed the infantry in a position from which they could cover the right flank of the proposed attack by the XX Corps on Hareira and Sheria . 
 = = = Defenders = = = 
 After the second battle for Gaza in April 1917 , Kress von Kressenstein — commander of the victorious 3rd , 16th and 53rd Divisions — was reinforced by the 7th and 54th Divisions . The 7th Infantry Division ( later part of the Eighth Army ) had experienced four months of strategic movement , similar to that of the 54th Division . Having arrived at Jerusalem , in early May the 20th Infantry Regiment began company @-@ level training . After moving to Beersheba where they remained in reserve , they participated in theatre @-@ specific training until late June , when they went into the front line . Training in fortification , reconnaissance , and counter – reconnaissance continued . The 21st Infantry Regiment received similar training , and on 6 August the regimental colours of the 20th and 21st Infantry Regiments were awarded military medals for service in the Gallipoli Campaign . At Beersheba on 28 June , the 7th Infantry Division inactivated the fourth company of each infantry battalion , before activating a machine gun company armed with light machine guns , in every infantry battalion on 10 August . Every Ottoman infantry division in Palestine repeated this reorganisation , with one quarter of their rifle strength being replaced by light machine guns , considerably increasing their fire power and strengthening their offensive and defensive capabilities . Following orders from von Kressenstein commanding the Gaza to Beersheba line defences , assault detachments equivalent to the German <unk> ( Stormtroopers ) were formed . The 7th Division activated an assault detachment of fifty men on 17 July 1917 . 
 The Yildirim Army Group under the command of Field Marshal Erich von Falkenhayn was responsible for the defence of Palestine . On the western flank the Ottoman Eighth Army was composed of the XXII Corps ' 3rd and 53rd Divisions defending Gaza and the XX Corps ' 26th and 54th Divisions defending the line stretching to the east of Gaza , under the command of von Kressenstein . The defence of Gaza was the responsibility of XXII Corps , which had two divisions in the front line ( 53rd , 3rd from west to east ) and two in reserve ( 7th and 19th ) . The XXII Corps ' four regiments had 4 @,@ 500 rifles , which were reinforced by two divisions to bring the total to 8 @,@ 000 defenders , deployed thus : 
 53rd Division holding from the Mediterranean shore to the eastern side of Gaza ( veteran of the Second Battle of Gaza ) , 
 3rd Division on their left ( veteran of the First and Second Battles of Gaza ) , and the 
 7th Division in reserve close behind . 
 These three divisions were supported by the 116 guns of the Ottoman XXII Corps artillery , six large naval guns and several batteries of 150 mm howitzers . 
 On the left of the XX Corps the Ottoman Seventh Army defended Beersheba , under the command of Fevzi Pasa . 
 = = = Attackers = = = 
 The EEF comprised 200 @,@ 000 men including Arab workers , 46 @,@ 000 horses , 20 @,@ 000 camels , more than 15 @,@ 000 mules and donkeys , and hundreds of artillery pieces . The fighting strength of the EEF was 100 @,@ 189 : 
 Desert Mounted Corps commanded by Lieutenant General Harry Chauvel had 745 officers , 17 @,@ 935 other ranks in the Anzac , Australian and Yeomanry Mounted Divisions ; 
 XX Corps commanded by Lieutenant General Philip Chetwode had 1 @,@ 435 officers , 44 @,@ 171 other ranks in the 10th , 53rd , 60th and 74th ( Yeomanry ) Divisions ; and 
 XXI Corps commanded by Lieutenant General Edward Bulfin had 1 @,@ 154 officers and 34 @,@ 759 other ranks in three infantry divisions . By 30 October there were 35 @,@ 000 rifles in the XXI Corps deployed to attack Gaza . They were : 
 52nd ( Lowland ) Division ( veteran of the First and Second Battles of Gaza ) 
 54th ( East Anglian ) Division ( veteran of the First and Second Battles of Gaza ) 
 75th Division 
 Composite Force of almost a division , consisting of the 25th Indian Infantry Brigade , a West Indian battalion , the French Détachement français de Palestine and the Italian <unk> italiano di Palestina , was camped east of the 75th Division . 
 Imperial Service Cavalry Brigade 1 @,@ 000 sabres 
 XXI Corps Cavalry Regiment , also known as the Composite Regiment , consisted of one squadron each from the Royal Glasgow Yeomanry , the Duke of Lancaster Yeomanry , and the 1 / 1st Hertfordshire Yeomanry . 
 The majority of General Edmund Allenby 's infantry were Territorial divisions , mobilised at the outbreak of the war . Most had fought the Ottoman Army before . During the Gallipoli Campaign , the 52nd ( Lowland ) Division fought at Cape Helles , the 53rd ( Welsh ) Division and the 54th ( East Anglian ) Division fought at Suvla Bay , while the 60th ( London ) Division had served on the Western Front and on the Salonika Front . The recently formed 74th ( Yeomanry ) Division was raised from eighteen under @-@ strength yeomanry regiments , all of which had fought dismounted at Gallipoli . The 10th ( Irish ) Division was a New Army ( K1 ) division , and had also fought at Suvla Bay and at Salonika . All three of the brigades of the Anzac Mounted Division and the two light horse brigades of the Australian Mounted Division had also fought at Gallipoli . 
 Army Wing aircraft were assigned to carry out strategic reconnaissances , to report on Ottoman reserves well behind their lines , to carry out daily photography , and to conduct air raids . Fighter and bombing squadrons were established for these purposes while the Corps Squadrons were attached to the two infantry corps carried out artillery and contact patrols , along with tactical reconnaissance . 
 = = = = Sherifial Forces = = = = 
