 In July , Allenby was hopeful that T. E. Lawrence and the Sherifial Arab force could support a September attack by the EEF , recognising that harvests were being collected before that time , and that after the end of September they normally moved to camel @-@ grazing lands in the Syrian desert . He wrote , " They , naturally , won 't and can 't do much unless I move ; and it is not much use their destroying the Turks ' communications unless I take immediate advantage of such destruction ... If I bring them into the fight and do not make progress myself , this will also expose them to retaliation — which to some tribes , such as the Druzes , S. of Damascus , may mean annihilation . " The EEF encouraged the Bedouin to defect : 
 The Arab rebellion is spreading well , and the Turkish communications will be difficult to guard against their raids . The enclosed photograph of the <unk> of Mecca , and the proclamation by him , is one of the means we have of inducing the Arabs to desert the Turks . We drop these papers and packets of cigarettes over the Turkish lines from aeroplanes . The proclamation is an appeal from the <unk> to the Arabs to leave the Turks and join in the war against them for the freedom and independence of Arabia . A good many come in , as a result of our propaganda . 
 = = Battle = = 
 Four EEF infantry brigades of 10 @,@ 000 rifles attacked four Ottoman regiments of 4 @,@ 500 rifles — which were reinforced by two divisions to over 8 @,@ 000 . Both sides suffered heavy losses . The attacks were to be carried out by well @-@ prepared troops , with overwhelming artillery support and six Mark IV tanks . These attacks were designed to keep the Gaza garrison of 8 @,@ 000 riflemen supported by 116 guns in place after the capture of Beersheba and during preparations for the main EEF attacks on Hareira and Sheria . 
 = = = Preliminary raids on Outpost Hill = = = 
 On 26 October , units of the 75th Division raided Outpost Hill . Then , just hours after the capture of Beersheba , on 1 November , a second raid by five officers and 220 riflemen of the 3 / 3rd Gurkhas Rifles ( 233rd Brigade 75th Division ) was carried out against Outpost Hill . At 03 : 00 , under cover of an intense bombardment , they entered the Ottoman defences on the hill ; two Gurkhas were killed and twenty @-@ three wounded . During the fighting , they killed twenty @-@ eight Ottoman soldiers and captured sixteen , before returning to their lines . The division was to make another attack during the next night , ( 1 / 2 November ) towards Atawineh Redoubt , on the Gaza to Beersheba road . 
 = = = Bombardment = = = 
 On 27 October , the XXI Corps artillery began the bombardment of Gaza , which gradually grew more intense with the support of British and French Navy 's guns from 29 October . They included the fourteen inches ( 360 mm ) guns on HMS Raglan , the Monitors M15 9 @.@ 2 inches ( 230 mm ) guns , the <unk> , the M31 , and the M32 with 6 inches ( 150 mm ) guns , the cruiser Grafton , and the destroyers Staunch and Comet . French vessels included the Requin , <unk> , Voltigeur , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . There were also two river gunboats Ladybird and Aphis , and three seaplane bombers . This flotilla was in action — although not altogether to allow for return to Port Said for refuelling — until the attack on Gaza was launched . The flotilla was targeted by hostile aircraft , while a shell from an Ottoman shore battery hit the mess deck of the Requin , causing 38 casualties . 
 The land based artillery of Bulfin 's XXI Corps ' heavy artillery consisted of 68 medium and heavy guns and howitzers , which were directed on to the Ottoman batteries during the battle . In addition two 6 @-@ inch guns made a surprise attack on the Ottoman railhead at Beit Hanun at a range of nine miles ( 14 km ) , supported by balloon observation . Between 27 October and the attack on Gaza , 15 @,@ 000 rounds were fired by the heavy artillery ; three hundred rounds were allocated for the destruction of each Ottoman battery which had been located . The anti – battery bombardments between 29 – 31 October also fired gas shells , which apparently had little or no effect . Together with the corps ' three divisional artilleries , the guns produced the heaviest bombardment of World War I outside European theatres . The sixth night 's bombardment from onshore and offshore guns produced " an even heavier concentration of fire on a small area than had been put in on the first day of the Battle of the Somme . " The six @-@ day bombardment program was arranged " so that the whole of the front of our group is plastered all day and every day . " 
 = = = 1 / 2 November night attacks = = = 
 The XXI Corps attacks were focused on a five thousand yards ( 4 @,@ 600 m ) stretch of sandhills stretching from Umbrella Hill about two thousand yards ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) south @-@ west of Gaza to the Mediterranean Sea . They were timed for the night because the strength of the Ottoman machine guns in defensive positions made day @-@ time attacks impossible . On the right flank , the final objective of the attack was only 500 yards ( 460 m ) behind the Ottoman front line , but on the left it was 2 @,@ 500 yards ( 2 @,@ 300 m ) away . 
 The first phase was the attack at Umbrella Hill by the 1 / 7th Battalion Scottish Rifles with one company of 1 / 8th Battalion , Scottish Rifles ( 156th Brigade , 52nd Division ) . The second phase was the capture on a broad front of El Arish Redoubt to the Sea Post on the shore by the 1 / 4th Battalion , Royal Scots and one company of 1 / 8th Battalion , Scottish Rifles ( 156th Brigade ) . The third phase was to be conducted by the 161st Brigade ( less one battalion ) and the 163rd Brigade ( 54th Division ) against Gaza 's south @-@ western defences , while the fourth phase by the 162nd Brigade was to capture Gun Hill and Sheikh Hasan 3 @,@ 500 yards ( 3 @,@ 200 m ) behind the front line at Sheikh <unk> . On 1 and 2 November , the Ottoman 7th and 53rd Divisions continued to defend most of their front line , carrying out locally successful counterattacks . 
 = = = = Phase one : Umbrella Hill = = = = 
 On 1 November , the assault of Umbrella Hill — a sand dune two thousand yards ( 1 @,@ 800 m ) south – west of Gaza to the west of the Rafa to Gaza road overlooking the main objectives — was to begin at 23 : 00 . The defending garrison was " assumed to be about 350 strong " . However , at 10 : 50 a preliminary move into No Man 's Land was observed by Ottoman soldiers in Fisher 's Orchard , who gave the alarm and began firing machine guns and rifles from the Ottoman trenches on Umbrella Hill . At 23 : 00 , an intense EEF bombardment began enabling a tape to be laid , along which the attacking troops formed up to launch their attack ten minutes later . Under cover of the intense ten @-@ minute bombardment , the 1 / 7th Battalion , Scottish Rifles with one company of 1 / 8th Battalion , Scottish Rifles ( 156th Brigade , 52nd ( Lowland ) Division ) attacked Umbrella Hill . After killing many of the defenders , they quickly captured the hill , three officers , fifty @-@ five Ottoman soldiers , three Lewis guns and numerous bombs . The attackers suffered light casualties ; however the sand dune was difficult to defend because the Ottoman trenches — without revetments — had virtually disappeared during the previous bombardments . The following Ottoman bombardment of Umbrella Hill caused 103 casualties to the 1 / 7th Battalion Scottish Rifles during the next twenty @-@ four hours . However , with the hill captured by the 52nd ( Lowland ) Division , the main attack could begin . 
 = = = = Phase two : El Arish redoubt = = = = 
 The second phase began at 03 : 00 on 2 November when the 156th Brigade of the 52nd ( Lowland ) Division launched the first attack on the El Arish Redoubt . This attack was aimed at breaking the line of defensive fortifications consisting of three groups of trench complexes and redoubts . These were the El Arish , Rafa , and Cricket redoubts , which were connected by a " series of trench lines several layers thick , and backed by other trenches and strong points " stretching two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) along the seaward defences to the west of Umbrella Hill . The attack on El Arish redoubt was to be supported by two of the six available tanks of the Palestine Tank Detachment 's eight tanks . 
 The 1 / 4th Battalion , Royal Scots ( 156th Brigade ) assault on El Arish Redoubt was carried out in waves through the Ottoman trenches , during which six Ottoman mines exploded , causing EEF casualties . The Ottoman artillery , which had become active as a result of the first attack , had stopped shortly before the second attack began at 06 : 00 with an intense , ten @-@ minute bombardment . At 06 : 30 , a heavy Ottoman counterattack drove back the leading company of Royal Scots , causing a number of casualties . A platoon from another company helped rally the remnants of the leading company , which was reinforced by the 1 / 4th Battalion Royal Scots and 1 / 8th Battalion Scottish Rifles when the position was consolidated . Two tanks passed through El Arish Redoubt , but shortly afterwards one was abandoned and the other hit , while a third tank moved along the front line rolling out wire from Sea Post on the coast to Beach Post . 
 A man who obviously had been able to get more than his allowance [ of rum ] started singing loudly , and was removed . We then set off in a long line , and passed through our front line trenches into " No – Man 's – Land . " I saw a man breaking the ranks , and dodging back towards our lines , obviously his nerves having given way . An NCO dashed out , got hold of him , and took him away . I was with <unk> <unk> . [ headquarters signals ] in the " fourth wave . " Four parallel lines of white tape , had been laid out , and I and the others spaced ourselves out along the fourth tape , and lay down , facing the enemy lines , to await the signal to advance . Two tanks came rumbling up from behind , and a few of us had to jump up and get out of the way to let them pass ... Our shelling increased in volume , and at 03 : 00 the 4th RS [ Royal Scots ] advanced in four lines on a front of 300 yards ( 270 m ) towards the El Arish Redoubt . Two Turkish contact mines exploded as our " first wave " approached the redoubt , blowing many of the men to pieces . We were not , of course , aware of this at the time . As I got near the Turkish trenches the enemy shell and machine – gun fire became so intense , with shells bursting all around , that I and several others decided to stop in a large shell or mine crater for a few minutes till the shelling eased somewhat . When the barrage moved forward we resumed our advance . 
 = = = = Phase three : coastal defences = = = = 
 When the Royal Scots had entered the eastern section of the El Arish Redoubt during the second phase of the attack , the western half was still held by Ottoman defenders . These defences became the objectives of the attacks by the 161st and 163rd Brigades of the 54th ( East Anglian ) Division , supported by four tanks — including the two which had passed through the El Arish redoubt . On the right of the 163rd Brigade 's advance , the 1 / 5th Battalion , The Suffolk Regiment moved towards the Ottoman trenches following a creeping barrage to attack and over – run the western El Arish trenches during hand – to – hand fighting when the 1 / 5th Battalion , The Suffolk Regiment suffered light casualties . Although they had captured the third line , part of this captured territory had to be abandoned because it was exposed to hostile fire , so they consolidated their position along the second line . Half of the 1 / 8th Battalion , Hampshire Regiment attacked Burj Trench while the other half attacked Triangle Trench , although it was not their objective . This caused some confusion , and the 1 / 4th and 1 / 5th Battalions , The Norfolk Regiment lost direction in the dust and smoke of the cloudy , hazy night . As a result , only small numbers reached Gibraltar and Crested Rock , from where they were quickly forced to withdraw . 
 On the left , the attacks by the 161st Brigade were similarly weakened by loss of direction when the 1 / 5th Battalion , The Essex Regiment attacked Rafa Redoubt instead of Zowaiid trench . However , the 1 / 6th Battalion , The Essex Regiment attacked and captured Beach and Sea Posts before attacking the Rafa Redoubt and trench systems , suffering light casualties . In support , a tank rolled out wire as it drove along the front line from Sea Post to Beach Post . Cricket Redoubt was captured with the help of the tank from Beach Post ; although the tank was temporarily disabled in the process . After being repaired , the tank was transporting some engineers ' stores to Sheikh Hasan when it was hit and disabled again . Two reserve tanks were ordered forward carrying engineers ' stores — including sandbags which were set on fire by hostile fire . 
 On the morning of the 2nd , Bulfin put in an attack , by the 54th and part of the 52nd Division , on the S.W. of Gaza . He got all his objectives , with the exception of a few yards of trench here and there ... The navy have given us great help . They are making splendid practice on the Gaza defences , and the railway bridge and junction at Deir <unk> . This is the result of careful preliminary work and close collaboration between land and sea . 
 = = = = Phase four : 2 November = = = = 
 On their right , the 1 / 10th Battalion , London Regiment ( 161st Brigade ) finished capturing and consolidating the Rafa redoubt , which had only been partly captured by the 1 / 6th Battalion , The Essex Regiment . Without the assistance of tanks which had been put out of action , this battalion lost contact with the barrage and suffered heavy losses . Nevertheless , they captured Gun Hill and by 06 : 00 on 2 November they were preparing to attack Sheikh Hasan , which they captured fifteen minutes later along with 182 prisoners . 
 Lion Trench , .75 miles ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) north @-@ east of Sheikh Hasan , was attacked at 07 : 30 by the 1 / 4th Battalion , Northamptonshire Regiment ( 162nd Brigade ) with the objective of clearing a gap through which the Imperial Service Cavalry Brigade could advance . However , 20 minutes after their successful attack , the Northamptonshire without artillery support were almost surrounded and forced to retreat to Sheikh Hasan on the coast . Here a strong counterattack was threatened by two regiments of reinforcements from the Ottoman 7th Division , which were advancing from Deir <unk> to the north and north @-@ east . ( See Falls Map 6 Coastal sector ) These Ottoman reinforcements were stopped by accurate shelling by the Corps Heavy Artillery , which fired on a three thousand yards ( 2 @,@ 700 m ) line previously registered and by shelling from the monitors off the coast . A planned repeat of the Lion Trench attack was postponed when the 1 / 4th Battalion , Northamptonshire Regiment attacked Yunis Trench instead . Although they captured the trench they were driven back by a counterattack . Throughout the remainder of the day , Ottoman heavy batteries shelled Sheikh Hasan , before the batteries were withdrawn during the night to the north @-@ east of Gaza . During the night of 2 / 3 November , Ottoman troops strengthened their defences on Turtle Hill , facing Sheikh Hasan . 
 The Third Battle of Gaza was never intended to capture the town , but to keep the garrison in place after the capture of Beersheba . Only the first line of Ottoman trenches had been the objectives of the XXI Corps , which used new infantry tactics , tanks and massed artillery organised in accordance with Western Front standards . Although all objectives had not been won , the operations had forced two regiments of the Ottoman 7th Division reserve to move away from Hareira and Sheria , forward to strengthen the Ottoman defences between Gaza and the sea . According to the British official historian , " The attack on the western defences of Gaza ... had fulfilled the Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief 's object . " The EEF had also inflicted severe losses on the Ottoman defenders ; more than one thousand of whom the EEF buried in the captured trenches . The EEF captured twenty @-@ eight officers , 418 soldiers , twenty @-@ nine machine guns and seven trench mortars . During the fighting , the corps infantry had advanced about two miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) on a five thousand yards ( 4 @.@ 6 km ) front , and held their gains against repeated Ottoman counterattacks , although the attempt to create a gap for the Imperial Service Cavalry Brigade to ride through was not successful . The front line defensive system on the south – west side of Gaza had been captured and the infantry occupied a position from which they could threaten " Ali Muntar and the rest of the defences in front of the town . " The XXI Corps suffered 350 killed , 350 missing and two thousand wounded during this fighting . Many casualties were blamed on loss of direction and crowding in the captured trenches , which were too shallow . 
 This morning , at 3 o 'clock , I attacked the SW front of the Gaza defences . We took them ; on a front of some 6000 yards , and to a depth of some 1000 to 1500 yards . We now overlook Gaza ; and my left is on the sea coast , NE of the town . The Navy cooperated with fire from the sea ; and shot well . We 've taken some 300 prisoners and some machine guns , so far . 
 = = = Air raids = = = 
 Air raids by the EEF were carried out during the night of 1 / 2 November , with twelve bombs being dropped on Gaza , and on 3 and 4 November , with air raids over the hills north of Beersheba . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = 3 – 6 November = = = 
 During a Khamsin on 3 November while the bombardment of Gaza resumed , the 1 / 4th Battalion The Essex Regiment ( 161st Brigade , 54th Division , XXI Corps ) attacked and captured Yunis trench at 04 : 30 . However , they were heavily counterattacked and forced to withdraw . The following night , several strong Ottoman counterattacks were made on the 75th Division 's position at Sheikh Abbas on the eastern side of Gaza , which were all stopped by machine gun and rifle fire . Meanwhile , the newly won position at Sheikh Hasan on the Ottoman right flank was consolidated . 
 By 5 November 1917 , the Ottoman XXII Corps commander in charge of the defence of Gaza , Colonel Refet <unk> , was continuing to maintain the " integrity of the Gaza fortress " , despite the Gaza garrison 's artillery batteries having only about 300 shells left . These batteries had also been suffering from effective counter @-@ battery fire from the EEF Heavy Artillery Groups . Refet had been warned the day before that evacuation may be necessary because of the loss of Beersheba , so plans were prepared for the complete withdrawal from the town during the night of 6 / 7 November , to a new defensive line on the Wadi Hesi . Falkenhayn commanding Yildirim Army Group realised that the Ottoman forces could not hold the EEF any longer , and he ordered the Eighth and Seventh Armies to withdraw about 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 mi ) . The first indications of the withdrawal were seen by EEF aerial reconnaissance , which reported Ottoman hospitals being moved back towards Mejdel . At midnight on 6 / 7 November , XXI Corps infantry patrols found Gaza had been evacuated by the Ottoman defenders . Until 6 November , German aircraft had rarely been seen over the Gaza lines , but that afternoon two R.E.8s and two <unk> from No. 1 Squadron AFC patrolling and taking photographs were attacked and badly damaged by four Albatros aircraft . 
 Meanwhile , the heavy EEF bombardment of the Ottoman line in the XXI Corps area at Gaza , which had resumed on 3 November , grew in intensity with the naval guns joining in on 5 and 6 November , and it reached its maximum intensity on 6 November . During the night of 6 / 7 November the XXI Corps was to launch an attack on Outpost Hill and the Yunus and Belah trench systems , after the main EEF attack on Hareira and Sheria began . This attack on the Wadi esh Sheria was to be " carried out in the most favourable circumstances " against only two Ottoman regiments holding the 6 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 10 @.@ 5 km ) line . 
 After launching the successful attack on 6 November against Hareira , the Sheria trenches were also attacked late in the day . These attacks were supported by renewed attacks in the Tel el Khuweilfe area at the eastern extremity of the Ottoman front line . During these attacks , the whole of the <unk> trenches and part of the Rushdi system which protected Hareira Redoubt , were captured and the Ottoman defenders were forced to withdraw to the Hareira Redoubt . Late in the day a large part of the Sheria defences were also captured after Hareira was bypassed . Only Tel esh Sheria blocked the British advance and Allenby ordered the next day 's attacks to continue on Tel esh Sheria , and to be renewed at Gaza . While these attacks took place on 6 November , EEF aircraft bombed Gaza , the main Ottoman positions behind the <unk> defences near Um <unk> , and positions west of Sheria . Three air combats were also fought against three hostile aircraft during the day . Mejdel was also bombed by EEF aircraft . Allenby wrote : 
 We 've had a successful day . We attacked the left of the Turkish positions , from N. of Beersheba , and have rolled them up as far as Sharia . The Turks fought well but have been badly defeated . Now , at 6 p.m. , I am sending out orders to press in pursuit tomorrow . Gaza was not attacked ; but I should not be surprised if this affected seriously her defenders . I am putting a lot of shell into them , and the Navy are still pounding them effectively . 
 = = = 7 November = = = 
 = = = = Occupation of Gaza = = = = 
 The EEF 's occupation of Gaza was not strongly resisted and a general advance during the morning of 7 November found the town abandoned . Orders for an attack at 04 : 50 by the 75th Division on Outpost Hill on the eastern side of Gaza had been issued ; these were expanded to include Middlesex Hill and a 54th ( East Anglian ) Division attack on the Belah and Yunis trenches , and Turtle Hill in the coastal sector . However , by 04 : 35 , two battalions each from the 161st and the 162nd Brigades ( 54th Division ) supported by artillery had already advanced to occupy Lion and Tiger Trenches and Sheikh <unk> in the coastal sector to the north @-@ north @-@ west of Gaza . The advance by the 162nd Brigade took them through " the gardens and fields of Gaza to the main road northwards " , when patrols sent into the city found it deserted . British artillery had destroyed all the homes , of the 40 @,@ 000 people who had lived in Gaza before the war . The 54th ( East Anglian ) Division subsequently took up a line stretching from the Jaffa road north of Sheikh <unk> to the Mediterranean sea . 
 When the Ottoman withdrawal became apparent on 7 November , the Royal Flying Corps — which had been mainly involved in strategic reconnaissance for the 40th ( Army ) Wing , artillery registration and tactical photography for the 5th ( Corps ) Wing — began bombing and machine gun air raids . For seven days , they also made numerous air attacks on Ottoman infrastructure including aerodromes , transport , artillery , and retreating columns . 
 = = = = Mounted breakthrough = = = = 
 The 75th Division ( XXI Corps ) with the Imperial Service Cavalry Brigade attached had been ordered to attack Outpost Hill on the eastern side of Gaza , and exploit any potential breakthrough . By 01 : 00 on 7 November , the 233rd Brigade ( 75th Division ) had already occupied Outpost Hill , and as the brigade moved forward to occupy Green Hill and the Labyrinth at 05 : 00 , they were only opposed by individual riflemen . By 07 : 00 , the 233rd Brigade had patrols on Ali Muntar ridge , while on their right , the 234th Brigade found that the Beer trenches and Road Redoubt defending the Gaza to Beersheba road were still held in strength with machine guns . Throughout the day the Ottoman rearguards in Tank and Atawineh Redoubts continued to fire their artillery at the increasing numbers of EEF troops advancing behind both these Ottoman rearguard 's flanks . However , by nightfall , the Beer trenches , and the Road and Tank Redoubts had been captured . 
 The Imperial Service Cavalry Brigade , which had been carrying out patrolling duties based at Tel el Jemmi , was ready to exploit a breakthrough at Gaza , and the Anzac and Australian Mounted Divisions were also prepared for a pursuit through a breach in the line at Sheria . At 09 : 00 , the Imperial Service Cavalry Brigade rode through the ruins of Gaza to reach Beit Hanun at 13 : 00 , where they encountered part of the Gaza garrison defending a strong rearguard position on a ridge 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) south @-@ east of Beit Hanun . 
 The Hyderabad and Mysore Lancers had advanced through <unk> to link with the Glasgow , Lancashire , and Hertfordshire squadrons of the XXI Corps Cavalry Regiment , holding the high ground at Beit <unk> five miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) north of Gaza , where they threatened the Ottoman flank . While the Corps Cavalry Regiment captured Beit <unk> , the Hyderabad Lancers advanced at 15 : 00 to capture the ridge west of Beit Hanun at Sheikh <unk> , but the village was strongly defended by numerous Ottoman machine gun detachments . Early in the afternoon , a regiment of the 4th Light Horse Brigade rode across to the north @-@ west to link with the Imperial Service Cavalry Brigade , which had been out of contact with the XX Corps and the Desert Mounted Corps . The 12th Light Horse Regiment ( 4th Light Horse Brigade ) met up with the Imperial Service Cavalry Brigade one mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) east of Beit Hanun at 14 : 45 . Here they delivered orders for the Imperial Service Cavalry Brigade to attack the Ottoman rearguard on the Wadi el Hesi near <unk> to the north of Beit Hanun . ( See sketch map showing the advance by the Imperial Service Cavalry Brigade and the 52nd ( Lowland ) Division on 7 November 1917 ) . By 16 : 55 , the rearguard was reported to still be holding Beit Hanun , with concentrations of Ottoman forces at Al Majdal ( also known as el Mejdel and Ashkelon ) and Beit Duras . 
 The lancers advanced from the east onto the ridge overlooking Beit Hanun , and despite meeting considerable resistance , captured the position . In the process , they secured twenty @-@ three prisoners , some artillery pieces and a large quantity of ammunition . They also captured the town 's water pumping machinery intact , but were forced to withdraw back to <unk> for water as the equipment ran on gas made from charcoal , which had to be converted before it could be used . 
 = = = = Infantry pursuit = = = = 
 While the 52nd ( Lowland ) Division was ordered by the XXI Corps to take up a line from the Jaffa road north of Sheikh Radwan to the sea on the northern outskirts of Gaza , the 157th Brigade ( 52nd Division ) began the infantry pursuit by advancing along the shore , reaching Sheikh Hasan by 12 : 15 . By 16 : 00 , these troops were seen marching along the coast towards the mouth of the Wadi Hesi — the nearest likely defensive line north of Gaza . By dusk , the 157th Brigade had reached and crossed the Wadi el Hesi near its mouth seven miles ( 11 km ) north of Gaza while the remainder of the XXI Corps occupied Gaza . Although dumps of rations , ammunition and engineer stores had been formed in concealed positions in the XXI Corps area before the battle , the corps was not in a position to move any distance . Almost all of their transport except ammunition tractors had been transferred to the XX Corps and the Desert Mounted Corps for their attack at the Battle of Beersheba . 
 = = = 8 November = = = 
 By the evening of 8 November , all the Ottoman positions of the Gaza to Beersheba line had been captured and the Eighth Army was in full retreat . In conjunction with the captures in the centre of the line at Sheria , the occupation of Gaza enabled a swift direct advance northwards , preventing a strong consolidation of the Wadi Hesi rearguard position . However , the Ottoman XXII Corps was not defeated at Gaza , but conducted a skillful , tactical retreat from the town , demonstrating both operational and tactical mobility . Late in the afternoon of 8 November , twenty @-@ eight British and Australian aircraft flew over Huj , the headquarters of the Ottoman force , targeting German and Ottoman aerodromes , railway junctions , dumps , and troops in close formation with bombs and machine guns . Arak el Menshiye was raided twice during the day with two hundred bombs dropped , forty @-@ eight hit ten hostile aircraft still on the ground . The next day , Et Tine was bombed , with at least nine hostile aircraft damaged . Virtually continual aerial attacks were made on railway stations , troops on the march and transport , while a German aircraft was shot down in flames near the Wadi Hesi . 
 = She ( Tyler , the Creator song ) = 
 " She " is a song by American hip hop artist and OFWGKTA member Tyler , The Creator from his album Goblin . It was released May 10 , 2011 as the third single from the album . It features another OFWGKTA member Frank Ocean , and serves as his debut single as an artist . The song was written by both Tyler and Ocean , with the production handled by Tyler . The song is written from the perspective of an obsessive lover who stalks and watches a woman while she sleeps . Lyrically , the song explored dark themes of necrophilia , stalking and obsession . The song received positive reviews from critics who praised Ocean 's hook , though the subject matter was often noted as questionable in nature and content . 
 A music video for the single was released June 3 , 2011 on the OFWGKTA YouTube channel . It was directed by Tyler himself and features Ocean . The video contains black humor and was noted for approaching its subject matter in a satirical , tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek manner . Both Tyler and Ocean would often perform the song together during their various tours and was notably performed at the April 2011 Coachella Musical Festival . 
 = = Production and composition = = 
 Rapper Tyler , the Creator , who is often known for his controversial nature , and R & B singer and occasional rapper Frank Ocean , who joined hip @-@ hop collective Odd Future , had quickly bonded and became friends , collaborating on several tracks such as " Analog 2 " , " Window " and " She . " Ocean appears on the track " She " providing a rapping verse , and the hook , while Tyler raps and covers the production . 
 " She " has been described as " the closest thing to a slow jam on Goblin , where " Tyler genuinely wrestles with lust . " The song features Tyler , the Creator pining " for a gorgeous girl " while " crooner Frank Ocean chimes in with a vocal hook " . The track is " delivered with sweetly juvenile expressions of desire , except that Tyler peppers the track with a single @-@ word epithet that would earn him a kick in the groin from any self @-@ respecting woman . " HipHopDX 's Sean Ryon mused that " even the more subdued songs like " She " with Frank Ocean " embody " Tyler ’ s middle @-@ fingers @-@ up attitude , as he twists perverted tales of stalking girls and “ stabbing Bruno Mars in his goddamn esophagus ” into <unk> odes to unbridled individualism . " 
 Though it was noted that even " She " has " passing moments of lyrical humanity to go with the pliant music ( " When I 'm with my friends I just put on a front / But in the back of my top I 'm writing songs about ' we ' " ) . It 's almost like there 's boyish innocence lurking underneath all that bile . " The Village Voice 's Eric Harvey mused that the " sinuous Frank Ocean feature " She " ramps up the voyeurism " and noted that he " keeps things within a Rear Window framework . He admits he 's going through the dating motions strictly to get laid , but he also says that his violent front is just a show for his boys . " 
 The song was featured on Tyler 's second studio album titled Goblin , in which " She " was released as the fourth single from that album . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " She " received positive reviews from most music critics . Pitchfork Media 's Scott Plagenhoef commented that while Goblin " could have used an editor " , " the highs are very high : " She " work as <unk> away from the album as a whole . " Source writer <unk> commented " Tyler links up with fellow breakout star of the OFWGKTA , Frank Ocean , where the in demand crooner spits a couple of better @-@ than @-@ it has @-@ any @-@ right @-@ being 16 bars , while seamlessly weaving into a haunting hook . " Craig Jenkin 's Prefix Magazine mused that the " jazzy chord progression and syrupy vocals from Odd Future associate Frank Ocean sneakily conceal its stalker vibe and crass lyrical conceit . " AbsolutePunk 's Ian Walker praised Ocean on the track , writing : " his verse and chorus showcase both sides of his expertise , as he can write both hip @-@ hop and R & B influenced vocals with ease . While “ She ” tends to get lost in the midst of heavier tracks like “ Yonkers ” and “ Transylvania , ” it deserves a ton of recognition for leaning a bit more towards a mainstream sound Odd Future isn 't known for while staying true to their original vision . " 
 NME 's Louis Pattison described the track as a " curdled take on silky ’ 70s rare groove legend Roy Ayers " and stated that it was " actually rather gorgeous " . Tiny Mix Tapes commented however that Tyler 's " flow is painful to listen to on slower tracks such as " She " though [ it ] was saved by his ambition [ in ] production " . Max Feldman of PopMatters noted that Tyler " also does a lot of thinking through the medium of his own genitals , as evidenced on lusty R & B crooner " She " where he lets his perverse side free . " 
 = = Promotion = = 
 The music video for " She " was shot in Los Angeles . Ocean posted several behind the scene photos of the video shoot onto his own personal tumblr account , including pictures " with a pretty young thing as his leading lady . " Ocean plays " double duty as a cop and the man of the house , almost unrecognizable in a white wig and drab attire . In one of the more chilling images , Tyler stares into the camera as a gun is pointed at his head , wearing the same black contacts he sported in his viral sensation “ Yonkers ” video . " 
 The video opens with Odd Future 's R & B crooner Frank Ocean in bed with the unnamed " she " of the video , and the singer stops when he sees a masked Tyler staring outside of her bedroom window . The rapper eventually enters the room as the girl falls asleep , caressing her and writing a note on her mirror while spitting the song 's first verse ; " I finally got the courage to ask you on a date , so just say yes and let the future fall into place , " a " twitchy Tyler asks the girl -- before the cops show up and arrest him . " 
 Tyler performed " She " and " Novacane " with Ocean at an Odd Future performance in New York . During Odd Future 2012 's tour promoting The Odd Future Tape Vol . 2 , Ocean performed with the group and played the song Tyler . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Digital download 
 " She " ( featuring Frank Ocean ) — 4 : 13 
 = Big Brother 10 ( UK ) = 
 Big Brother 2009 , also known as Big Brother 10 , was the tenth series of the British reality television series Big Brother . It began on 4 June 2009 and was aired on Channel 4 and E4 for 93 days , concluding on 4 September 2009 when Sophie " Dogface " Reade was crowned the winner with 74 @.@ 4 % of the viewer 's vote . The format of the programme remained largely unchanged from previous series ; a group of people , referred to as housemates , are enclosed in the Big Brother House under the surveillance of cameras and microphones . Each week , the viewers decide which of a selection of housemates is evicted and , in the final week , one housemate is voted as the winner . The daily highlights programme was narrated by Marcus Bentley , Davina McCall fronted the launch programme , evictions , special episodes , the final and Big Brother 's Big Mouth and George Lamb presented Big Brother 's Little Brother . 
 The programme included 22 participants , four of whom left the programme voluntarily whilst the fate of the others was decided by the public vote . The housemates were originally competing to win a £ 100 @,@ 000 prize but , due to rule @-@ breaking by the participants , this was reduced to £ 71 @,@ 320 . The series , which was sponsored by Lucozade , achieved significantly less media coverage and viewing figures , resulting in it becoming the least @-@ watched series in Big Brother UK history until Big Brother 12 in 2011 . This series also attracted controversy , with accusations of bullying between contestants drawing complaints and criticisms levelled at the welfare of housemates after they left the programme . 
 No housemates represented from series participated in Ultimate Big Brother , neither did any participate in tasks during that series . 
 On 17 May 2012 , housemate Sophia Brown died at the age of 30 , after suffering from the condition Lupus almost all her life . Marcus Bentley , McCall and several former housemates including Karly , Lisa , Marcus , Rodrigo and winner Sophie sent their condolences on Twitter shortly after her death . 
 = = Production = = 
 Big Brother 10 was produced by Brighter Pictures , a division of Endemol . This series of the programme had been confirmed since 2006 as part of a £ 180 million contract between Endemol and Channel 4 . Phil Edgar @-@ Jones was the creative director of the series whilst Sharon Powers was the executive producer . Open auditions for the programme , which were confirmed during the final of Celebrity Big Brother 6 , began on 3 January 2009 in Edinburgh and ended on 7 February in Manchester . Internet auditioning via YouTube , which saw 2 @,@ 600 apply , ended on 3 February 2009 . <unk> were subjected to three interviews with various producers , additional meetings with a psychologist and a psychiatrist and a final " talk of doom " , in which they were warned about the negative impact that appearing on Big Brother could have on their lives . In the weeks preceding the series , the selected housemates were put into " hiding " with no access to the outside world . Housemates were offered aftercare from the production team for up to six months after they left the programme . 
 = = = Eye logo = = = 
 The programme 's logo , the Big Brother Eye , is based on a black , purple and blue thumbprint and was released on 11 May . It was designed by Daniel <unk> . From 19 May , Channel 4 began uploading teaser clips to the official Big Brother UK YouTube channel ; these were also aired during commercial breaks on Channel 4 and its related channels . The series was sponsored by Lucozade Energy and the promotional break bumpers were created by M & C Saatchi and are based upon a ' little brother versus big brother ' scenario . The programme began on 4 June , with a 95 @-@ minute special programme which introduced the initial 16 participants , and was broadcast on Channel 4 and E4 over a period of 93 days , concluding with the final on 4 September . 
 = = = Broadcasts = = = 
 The main television coverage of Big Brother 10 was screened using daily highlights programmes , narrated by Marcus Bentley . These episodes summarised the events of the previous day in the House . Alongside these highlights shows were spin @-@ off programmes , Big Brother 's Big Mouth and Big Brother 's Little Brother , that commented on fandom , cultural reaction to the events within the House and included interviews with celebrities , former housemates and family and friends of housemates . On Fridays , a live eviction programme was hosted by Davina McCall in which the evicted contestant left the house and received an interview from McCall and two guests . For 2009 , <unk> returned with George Lamb presenting five weekday evening programmes and one Sunday edition per week . Big Mouth was also fronted by McCall and was broadcast on E4 on Friday nights for an hour after the main eviction programme . 
 = = = = Interview panel = = = = 
 In a change to normal eviction interviews this series saw McCall and the evictee on a panel joined by two celebrity fans or psychologists , joining them were : 
 Sophia Judi James and Dom Joly 
 Cairon Iain Lee and Vanessa <unk> 
 Angel Anthea Turner 
 Sree Kelly Osbourne 
 Kris Mel Blatt 
 Karly Judi James and Kathy Burke 
 Kenneth Terry Christian 
 Noirin Judi James and Jo Whiley 
 Hira Emma Kennedy and Bob Mortimer 
 Freddie Judi James and John <unk> 
 Bea Ulrika Jonsson 
 Marcus Grace Dent 
 Lisa Dave Schneider and Kim Woodburn 
 The panel was not used for the finale , however , Judi James made a recorded segment about each finalist . The panel format was scrapped for the following celebrity and regular series , where McCall interviewed the evictee in the traditional format . 
 = = House = = 
 As with each series since Big Brother 2002 , the programme was filmed at Elstree Studios in Borehamwood , Hertfordshire . A total of 27 editing suites , manned by over 300 members of staff , were situated in the " George Lucas Stage " to produce the programme . In the 18 May issue of Star magazine , aerial photographs of the House were published , showing the garden under construction . Official pictures of the House interior were released by Channel 4 on 1 June , showing the entrance stairway , living room and garden . The entrance stairway had images of insects on its walls whilst the garden and living room had a science fiction theme ; the former included a bus stop as the designated smoking area . On 3 June , Metro published an image of the Diary Room , which has a multicoloured chair and wall pattern . There was also a shipping container @-@ based bathroom , a sitting room with red sofas , a wood panelled <unk> with purple , black and white fittings and a bedroom with <unk> of paint covering the walls . The house contained 44 cameras , 75 two @-@ way mirrors and 57 fixed microphones , as well as individual microphones for each housemate . 
 = = Format = = 
 The format remained largely unchanged from previous series . Housemates were incarcerated in the Big Brother House with no contact to and from the outside world . Each week , the housemates took part in a compulsory task that determined the amount of money they were allocated to spend on their shopping ; if they passed , they received a luxury budget and they were allocated a basic budget if they failed . Housemates were instructed to nominate two fellow housemates for eviction each week . This compulsory vote was conducted in the privacy of the Diary Room and housemates were not allowed to discuss the nomination process or influence the nominations of others . On Day 68 , Big Brother changed the rules to allow housemates to discuss nominations until further notice . The two or more housemates who gathered the most nominations per week faced a public vote and the housemate receiving the most votes was evicted from the House on the Friday and interviewed by Davina McCall . Housemates could voluntarily leave the House at any time and those who broke the rules could have been ejected by Big Brother . 
 In a change from previous series , Channel 4 announced that it would no longer donate any of its income from the premium @-@ rate telephone lines , by which viewers vote for whom they would like to see evicted or win the programme , to charitable organisations . The broadcaster said that the current economic downturn is to blame for this decision and that the change would bring Big Brother into line with other programmes of its kind , such as The X Factor and Strictly Come Dancing . The format of the live eviction interview programme was altered for this series . Unlike previous series in which McCall interviewed evicted housemates by herself , she was instead joined by two guest panellists to " interrogate " the evictee . <unk> included former housemates , journalists , psychologists , and fans of the programme . A new rule was added to the programme at the start of the series ; " fake romances " were not permitted . 
 = = Housemates = = 
 Big Brother 10 saw 22 contestants competing to win . Sixteen participants entered the House on Day 1 and an additional five housemates entered the House on Day 44 , followed by one other on Day 56 . Four housemates left the House on their own accord . This series also gains the distinction of featuring the first homosexual relationship in the programme 's history , which involved the housemates Charlie Drummond and Rodrigo Lopes . 
 Angel McKenzie ( born 10 June 1973 ) is a 35 @-@ year @-@ old professional boxer and artist from Moscow , Russia . She is the adoptive daughter of former British and European light welterweight boxing champion , Clinton McKenzie She became a housemate as the result of a public vote on Day 4 . She kept her birthday a secret from her fellow housemates , celebrating it alone in the Diary Room . On Day 21 , in a special live nominations show , she was nominated for the first time . On Day 23 , became the fourth housemate to be evicted with 81 % of the public vote . Angel later appeared in the first episode of game show Red or Black ? on 3 September 2011 , where she finished as a runner @-@ up . 
 Bea Hamill ( born 28 September 1984 ) entered the House on Day 44 with four other new housemates . Alongside them she was tasked with ensuring that Noirin and Halfwit received the most nominations but refused to participate claiming it went against her morals . She was evicted on Day 79 , in week twelve just one week before the final . 
 Beinazir <unk> ( born 8 January 1981 ) is a study support assistant from Pakistan . Her family , after receiving death threats due to their support of former Pakistani Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto were given asylum in the United Kingdom when she was a year old . On Day 4 , Beinazir did not gain full housemate status by public vote and became the first evictee . There was no crowd present as she left the House and she was escorted from the premises in a red Routemaster Bus . 
 Cairon Reon Austin @-@ Hill ( born 5 July 1990 ) is a student and the youngest contestant in this year 's Big Brother . He became a housemate after winning the biscuit dunking task on Day 3 . On Day 12 , Cairon received four nominations by his fellow housemates which was enough to be up for eviction against Freddie . On Day 16 , he became the third evictee with 73 @.@ 16 % of the vote . 
 Charles Andrew " Charlie " Drummond ( born 3 January 1987 ) is a 22 @-@ year @-@ old <unk> customer service advisor from <unk> . He was Mr Gay Newcastle 2007 and was a runner up for Mr Gay UK . He became a housemate for successfully walking barefoot on broken sugar glass , believing it to be real glass . He finished in 4th place . 
 David Ramsden ( born 2 September 1980 ) is a clothing <unk> from Dewsbury , near Leeds in West Yorkshire . He entered the House on Day 44 with four other new housemates . With them he was tasked with ensuring that Noirin and Halfwit received the most nominations , but the new housemates failed their task and faced the public vote , though the eviction was ultimately cancelled . On Day 91 , David celebrated his 29th birthday , and he received a birthday message from fashion designer Vivienne Westwood , who he claims is his hero . David has also been on UK television show Golden Balls . He finished 3rd . 
 Frederick " Freddie / Halfwit " George Fisher , ( born 21 June 1985 ) is an Oxford graduate and book reseller from Market Drayton , who lives with his parents at their stately home . He changed his name by deed poll to Halfwit in order to gain housemate status . On Day 6 Halfwit was nominated for eviction by his fellow housemates and on Day 9 he survived the public vote after receiving 8 @.@ 8 % of the vote . On Day 12 he was nominated for eviction along with Cairon and on Day 16 , with 26 @.@ 84 % , he survived his second public vote . On Day 21 , in a special live nominations show , he was nominated for the third time , surviving with 19 % of the public vote on Day 23 . On Day 26 , Halfwit was nominated for eviction along with Sree , surviving for the fourth consecutive time on Day 30 with 15 % of the public vote . Halfwit survived the most consecutive evictions out of anyone in the history of the show , having survived the public vote 5 times in a row and 7 times in total . On Day 72 as a special prize , Halfwit and Dogface legally changed their names back to Freddie and Sophie . On the same day Freddie was evicted from the house over Marcus gaining 53 @.@ 6 % of the public vote to evict . 
 Hira <unk> entered on Day 44 , and was given a secret mission in which she had to brief her fellow new housemates , it involved ensuring that Noirin and Halfwit were nominated . The task was failed , resulting in her nomination along with the other new housemates . On Day 59 , she was named the ' Most Entertaining <unk> ' by Big Brother . On Day 65 she became the ninth person to be evicted with 5 @.@ 65 % of the public vote . 
 Isaac Stout is Noirin 's boyfriend and entered the house disguised as a fish and chips delivery @-@ man on Day 56 , and later walked out on day 58 after girlfriend , Noirin , was evicted . He originally met Noirin during his time as a castmate on MTV 's The Real World : Sydney . 
 Karly Ashworth ( born 14 April 1988 ) is a part @-@ time glamour model from Fife in Scotland . She was polled as one of FHM 's Top High Street <unk> . She became the seventh housemate after being tricked into believing that she had a motorbike ridden over her stomach . On Day 39 , Karly was nominated for eviction by her fellow housemates . Karly was evicted on Day 44 , the same night as her boyfriend , Kenneth , entered the house as a new housemate . 
 Kenneth Tong entered the house on Day 44 , minutes before his girlfriend Karly was evicted . Alongside his fellow new housemates , he had to ensure that both Noirin and Halfwit were nominated for eviction but the new housemates failed their task so faced the public vote . Tong blamed fellow housemate Bea Hamill for the task 's failure as she had refused to participate on " moral grounds " . Following an argument between the pair , Tong was warned by Big Brother for language that " could be perceived as threatening " when he said he would " pay someone to deal with her " . On Day 50 , Kenneth fled the house via the rooftop with Marcus ' assistance . As a result , the eviction for week eight was cancelled . 
 Kris Donnelly ( born 17 April 1985 ) is a visual <unk> from Shrewsbury . He became the fourth person to be confirmed as a housemate when he was selected by Lisa , who had earned the privilege to choose by answering a ringing phone . On Day 33 , Big Brother told Kris to remain silent until 2 a.m. as punishment for discussing nominations or automatically face the public vote . He failed to keep quiet and faced eviction . On Day 37 , he was evicted with 63 % of the public vote . 
 Lisa Elizabeth Wallace ( born 12 February 1968 ) is the oldest contestant in the series who entered the House with a distinctive pink <unk> haircut , which she shaved off during the series . She became the third person to be rewarded with housemate status when she answered a ringing telephone . She was evicted on day 90 in the final eviction of the series with 68 @.@ 59 % to evict . 
 Marcus Akin ( born 10 August 1973 ) was made a housemate as the result of a public vote on Day 4 . On Day 29 , Marcus was warned about comments he made to fellow housemate Sree , which Marcus hotly denied . On Day 50 , he helped Kenneth Tong escape from the Big Brother house . Marcus was the twelfth housemate to be evicted with 64 % of the vote on day 86 . 
 Noirin Kelly ( born 6 September 1983 ) from Dublin , Republic of Ireland is a former All Ireland athletics champion . She also appeared on The Real World : Sydney in 2007 as the girlfriend of fellow contestant Isaac Stout . She was granted housemate status when she allowed Rodrigo to shave her eyebrows and draw a moustache and glasses with permanent marker on her face . She had to do this every day until further notice . On Day 58 , Noirin was evicted from the Big Brother house with 60 @.@ 0 % of the public vote . Outside of the house in September 2009 <unk> appeared on the front cover of Nuts and 10 pages of the magazine consisted of pictures of her and an interview with her . 
 Rodrigo Lopes born 1 December 1985 ) is a Brazilian student living in Leeds . Rodrigo was the twelfth person to enter the house and earned housemate status after convincing Noirin to allow her eyebrows to be shaved and to draw a moustache and glasses on her face under the order of Big Brother . Rodrigo had spoken of an ambition to drink tea with the " Queen of Britain " and on Day 61 Big Brother gave Rodrigo the opportunity to send a letter to the Queen . Big Brother offered Rodrigo a chance to have tea with the " Queen " . However , all of the other housemates had to trick Rodrigo into thinking the Queen lookalike was actually the Queen . Rodrigo finished in 5th place . In 2012 , Rodrigo told the press that she is a trans woman , and she now uses the name Rebekah Shelton . 
 Saffia May Corden ( born 14 October 1981 ) is a beauty consultant from Hucknall , Nottingham and single mother of two children . She became a housemate for successfully walking barefoot on broken sugar glass , believing it to be real glass . She walked from the House on Day 8 . 
 Siavash <unk> ( born 25 April 1986 ) is an event organiser who left his homeland Iran at an early age to live in London . He was known in the house for wearing eccentric clothes and admitted he was a " slave to fashion " . Siavash was made a housemate as the result of a public vote on Day 4 and finished in second place . 
 Sophia Brown ( 8 December 1983 - 17 May 2012 ) was from London and worked as a private banking assistant . She was is 4 ' 11 " , and had the autoimmune condition lupus . She was made a housemate as the result of a public vote on Day 4 . On Day 6 Sophia was nominated for eviction by her fellow housemates . On Day 9 she became the second evictee with 91 @.@ 2 % of the public vote . Sophia died on 17 May 2012 . 
 Sophie / Dogface Victoria Reade ( born 18 May 1989 ) is a glamour model from Nantwich , Cheshire and was the winner of the series . She changed her name by deed poll to Dogface in order to become a housemate . On Day 72 as a special prize , Halfwit and Dogface legally changed their names back to Freddie and Sophie . Sophie was announced the winner of the show on 4 September with 74 @.@ 4 % of the final vote . 
 Sree Dasari ( born 14 September 1984 ) is from India . A students ' union president , he was in the United Kingdom studying for a master 's degree in International Business at the University of Hertfordshire in Hatfield . He was made a housemate as the result of a public vote on Day 4 . On Day 31 , with 85 % of the public vote , Sree became the fifth evictee and crowned Best <unk> Award for the season 10 . He attempted suicide by slashing his wrists shortly after being evicted . 
 Thomas Martin " Tom " Oliver ( born 22 June 1981 ) entered on Day 44 . On Day 53 , Tom voluntarily left the Big Brother after 9 days . 
 = = Summary = = 
 During the first three days , the group undertook a series of tasks by which they could earn the right to become housemates . For the first task , Rodrigo was given four minutes to convince someone to let him shave off their eyebrows and have a moustache and a pair of glasses permanently drawn on to their face for an unstated period of time ; he successfully convinced Noirin and they both became housemates , gaining access to the previously locked bedroom . The remaining non @-@ housemates were instructed to change into a special uniform . Anyone not obeying would lose the opportunity to become a housemate . Lisa gained housemate status in the early hours of Day 2 when she answered a ringing phone in the living room . Given 15 minutes to select the fourth housemate , she chose Kris . Charlie and Saffia later became housemates after walking barefoot over broken sugar glass , believing it to be real glass , and Karly became the seventh housemate after being tricked into believing that she had a motorbike ridden over her stomach . Freddie and Sophie became housemates after changing their names , documented by deed poll to Halfwit and Dogface respectively . On Day 3 Cairon earned housemate status by dunking a biscuit in a cup of tea for 25 @.@ 5 seconds without it disintegrating . Remaining non @-@ housemates Angel , Beinazir , Marcus , Siavash , Sophia and Sree faced the public vote on Day 4 to determine which five would become housemates and which one would be evicted . With 6 @.@ 8 % of a vote to save , Beinazir became the first evictee without ever becoming a housemate . 
 The first round of nominations took place on Day 6 and resulted in Halfwit and Sophia facing the public vote . On Day 8 , the first shopping task saw Kris negotiate his way through a field of laser beams to retrieve the " Emerald of Hope " , with one of his fellow housemates being soaked by a bursting balloon full of gunge whenever he interrupted a beam . He completed the task successfully , earning a luxury budget . However , as punishment for Marcus , Sophia and Sree discussing nominations , Big Brother doubled the price of every item on the shopping list . Later that day , Saffia left the House voluntarily to be with her children and Sophia was evicted with 91 @.@ 2 % of the public vote the following night . Cairon and Halfwit received the most nominations in week two and faced eviction . The housemates successfully learned and performed the song and dance routine " Me Ol ' Bamboo " from the film Chitty Chitty Bang Bang and won a luxury shopping budget of £ 5 per person per day . On Day 16 , Cairon was evicted with 73 @.@ 2 % of the vote . 
 Day 18 , the first day of week three , began with a day @-@ long hippy @-@ themed celebration of Halfwit 's 24th birthday , in which Big Brother gave him the " Gift of <unk> " that he could keep for himself or give to either Dogface or Noirin . He chose Noirin , freeing her from the obligation to draw a moustache and glasses on her face each day . The housemates failed every part of the Tudor @-@ themed shopping task and received only a basic budget . During the task , Siavash , playing King Henry VIII , was called upon to ban one housemate from nominating and to grant another immunity . He chose Charlie and Marcus respectively . On Day 21 , the housemates nominated against the clock in a live programme , resulting in Angel and Halfwit facing the public vote . On Day 23 , Angel became the fourth person to be evicted with 81 @.@ 0 % of the vote . 
 Halfwit and Sree received the most nominations and faced the public vote in week four . In an Italy @-@ themed shopping task , Siavash played the role of a fashionista who was required to change his outfit at Big Brother 's request and strike a pose whenever Madonna 's " Vogue " was played into the House . Sree and Dogface 's contribution was to run a 24 @-@ hour ice cream delivery service , while Marcus and Noirin created paintings based on the works of Leonardo da Vinci and Sandro Botticelli . Charlie and Kris played Italian footballers and Lisa had to predict football scores correctly . The task climaxed in a performance of Giacomo Puccini 's Nessun Dorma with Karly , Halfwit and Rodrigo playing The Three Tenors . On Day 28 , the housemates were told they had passed the task , earning themselves a luxury shopping budget . On Day 30 , Sree became the fifth person to be evicted from the House with 85 @.@ 0 % of the vote . 
 In week five , on Day 33 , Big Brother punished Charlie for discussing nominations , telling him to remain silent for the rest of the day or else face the public vote . Later , Dogface and Kris were similarly punished , also for discussing nominations . All three failed to keep quiet and faced the public vote , along with Halfwit and Marcus , who received the most nominations . On Day 35 , the housemates failed the circus @-@ themed shopping task and received a basic shopping budget . On Day 37 , Kris became the sixth person to be evicted from the House with 63 @.@ 0 % of the vote . 
 In week six , on Day 39 , Big Brother told Siavash and Dogface that , because they had discussed nominations earlier in the week , they would face eviction if they uttered a single profanity before 3 p.m. They both failed and therefore faced the public vote , along with Karly and Noirin who received the most nominations . The shopping task consisted of nine separate challenges from previous editions of Big Brother , in which housemates had to compete against former contestants ( see the week seven shopping task section ) . The housemates failed to pass the required number of challenges and therefore failed the overall task . On Day 44 , five new housemates , Kenneth , Bea , David , Hira and Tom entered the House and Karly became the seventh person to be evicted with 50 @.@ 4 % of the vote . 
 Week seven saw housemates take part in a Greek @-@ themed shopping task with a twist , which involved Charlie and Rodrigo learning a routine by Stavros Flatley , a dance duo featured on Britain 's Got Talent . However , playing Zeus , Halfwit was the only housemate aware of the true nature of the task . In each of three challenges he had to ensure , while still keeping the secret , that his chosen champion defeated the appropriate Greek god . He failed and the housemates received a basic shopping budget . Bea , Charlie , David , Dogface , Halfwit , Hira , Kenneth , Marcus , Noirin , Siavash and Tom all faced eviction . In the early hours of Day 50 , Kenneth escaped from the House via the rooftop with help from Marcus , and this led to the eviction being cancelled . 
 In week eight , in the early hours of Day 53 , Tom voluntarily left the Big Brother House . With five nominations each , Marcus and Noirin faced the public vote . For the shopping task the housemates split into two groups , creating human puppets with one housemate providing the head and feet and another providing the arms , and making them dance to music by Girls Aloud and Take That . Visitors to the Big Brother web site decided by voting that the housemates had failed the task . On Day 56 , Noirin 's ex @-@ boyfriend Isaac entered the House , but left voluntarily shortly after Noirin 's eviction on Day 58 with 60 @.@ 0 % of the public vote . 
 Bea and Marcus received the most nominations in week nine , but Marcus 's attempts to persuade the housemates to nominate him and Siavash 's refusal to nominate backfired when Big Brother declared the result void and made all housemates face the public vote to save , not evict . The shopping task was based on Lewis Carroll 's Victorian children 's novel Alice 's Adventures in Wonderland in which Hira , in the role of Alice , having first been " shrunk " in the Diary Room , spent more than five hours searching for a key buried inside a giant cupcake using only her face . The housemates passed the task and received a luxury shopping budget . On Day 65 , Hira became the ninth evictee , having received 5 @.@ 7 % of the vote to save . 
 In week ten , following continual rule breaking by a number of housemates , Big Brother decided to allow the discussion of nominations until further notice . Halfwit and Marcus received the most nominations and faced the public vote . The housemates took part in a " Best of British " shopping task in which they had to bog snorkel , play the bagpipes and convince Rodrigo he had met the Queen , who was in fact the impersonator Janette Charles . On Day 72 , as a special prize for succeeding in this task , Halfwit and Dogface legally changed their names back to Freddie and Sophie . On the same day , Freddie became the tenth evictee from the Big Brother House with 53 @.@ 6 % of the public vote . 
 Siavash and Sophie both refused to nominate in week eleven . As punishment for breaking this fundamental rule , Big Brother decided that the first two housemates with whom Siavash came into contact and the first two that Sophie mentioned by name after leaving the Diary Room would be taken as their nominations . Siavash touched Bea and Sophie , and Sophie named Rodrigo and Bea . Bea , David and Marcus received the most nominations and faced the public vote this week . In the House of Horrors @-@ themed shopping task Charlie , in the role of Dr Frankenstein , played a version of the game Operation in which Bea , playing his Monster , received a shock whenever his hand faltered . On Day 79 , Bea was evicted with 88 @.@ 2 % of the vote . 
 The housemates participated in a future @-@ related task during week twelve , in which Sophie and Rodrigo learned a robotic dance routine to Daft Punk 's song " Harder , Better , Faster , Stronger " and Lisa and David left the House with instructions to have photographs taken by members of the public in front of three London landmarks whilst dressed as aliens . While they were away , the rest of the housemates attempted to break out of the House and Big Brother responded by reducing the £ 100 @,@ 000 prize fund to zero , later announcing that the housemates would be given a chance to win back the money over the course of the next few days . As Siavash refused to nominate , Big Brother allocated his nominations to Charlie and Sophie and Marcus and Siavash were put up for eviction . On Day 85 , Siavash accepted the offer of £ 10 @,@ 000 towards the prize fund for exchanging his clothes with an outfit provided by Big Brother and the Housemates received a £ 20 cheque after requesting a mystery prize from the weekly shopping list . Later that day , Marcus rejected Big Brother 's offer of £ 15 @,@ 000 to shave his ponytail and the group turned down the chance to win £ 1 @,@ 500 by swimming 1 @,@ 500 lengths of the pool . On Day 86 , Rodrigo won £ 6 @,@ 000 towards the prize fund by correctly guessed the regional locations of three animals after listening to a series of sound effects . Later that day , Marcus was evicted with 64 @.@ 0 % of the public vote . 
 The housemates competed in a " task with no name " on Day 87 , the first day of week thirteen . In this task , the Housemates were provided with several challenges and puzzles but were unaware that they all had to leave the room in order to pass . The housemates passed the task and added £ 10 @,@ 000 to the prize fund . The following day , the housemates ' previous nominations were shown to the group and Big Brother set them a quiz on what they had seen in order to add money to the prize fund . The group answered 53 of the 60 questions correctly , gaining £ 5 @,@ 300 to the winner 's prize . A round of nominations took place on this day , which Charlie , Siavash and Sophie refused to participate in . This meant that all of the housemates faced eviction , as David , Lisa and Rodrigo received the most eligible nominations . On Day 89 , the housemates were shown the episode of Big Brother which documented Day 50 in the House and were told to re @-@ enact it over a five @-@ hour period . They passed this task , earning a luxury shopping budget . However , in order to view the reconstruction the group had to replicate the music video of " Single Ladies ( Put a Ring on It ) " , a song by Beyoncé Knowles . The group did so , with David portraying Knowles , and were therefore rewarded with a screening of the task after Lisa was evicted with 68 @.@ 6 % of the vote . On Day 91 , Charlie , Rodrigo , Sophie and Siavash were instructed to rank themselves in different categories , such as order of selfishness and likelihood to win . David , who was isolated in the Diary Room , had to answer questions based on their answers . As he answered four of the ten questions correctly , he added £ 40 @,@ 000 to the prize fund . This meant that the prize fund was settled at £ 71 @,@ 320 . 
 After Lisa 's eviction on Day 90 , the viewers began voting for who they wanted to win the programme . On Day 93 , the final day , Rodrigo was the first to be evicted with 11 @.@ 0 % of the five @-@ way vote and he was followed by Charlie , who received 13 @.@ 2 % of the five @-@ way vote . It was then announced that David had finished in third place after gaining 19 @.@ 0 % of the three @-@ way vote . Davina McCall then revealed that Sophie had won this series with 74 @.@ 4 % of the final two @-@ way vote , with Siavash finishing in second place . 
 = = Nominations table = = 
 = = Tenth year commemorations = = 
 = = = Additional programming = = = 
 Three special , one @-@ off programmes aired on E4 before the launch to commemorate ten years of the programme . The first of which , entitled Jade : As Seen On TV aired on 26 May and commented on the life of Big Brother 2002 contestant Jade Goody and the infamy that surrounded her . The most successful Big Brother housemate worldwide , Goody died of cervical cancer two months before the programme aired . The programme was watched by 305 @,@ 000 people ; 1 @.@ 8 % of the TV audience . 
 Big Brother 's Big Quiz , hosted by Davina McCall , aired on 29 May and featured celebrity team captains singer Jamelia , TV presenter and Celebrity Big Brother winner Ulrika Jonsson and comedians Danny Wallace and Jack Whitehall . It also featured former Big Brother housemates such as Craig Phillips and Sam and Amanda Marchant . 
 Big Brother : A Decade in the Headlines was transmitted on 30 May and looked back at the social , political and cultural changes that Big Brother had made to society since it began . The documentary was hosted by Grace Dent and featured participation from Mark Frith , Carole Malone , Oona King , Peter Tatchell , Krishnan Guru @-@ Murthy and Ian Hyland . 
 Spin @-@ off programme Big Brother 's Little Brother featured new competitions and features to mark the event . The first , The George Lamb Quiz of the Decade , was launched on 7 June . The participants had to show their knowledge of the programme by participating in a quiz relating to every series of Big Brother . Another competition was established as part of the Greek @-@ themed task in week eight . Here , male Big Brother 's Little Brother viewers were asked to apply to become a date for Bea Hammill , who was playing the role of Aphrodite . The contestant chosen was Robin from Bristol . The programme also offered a viewer the chance to become Big Brother and talk to the housemates via the Diary Room on the final day of the programme ; this was won by Simon " <unk> " Jobson , a 22 @-@ year @-@ old DJ from Alnwick , Northumberland . Former housemates , such as Nadia Almada and Rachel Rice , also appeared as guests to mark the occasion . 
 = = = Week seven shopping task = = = 
 The shopping task for week seven saw housemates from the previous nine series temporarily return , as current housemates competed against them in a series of " classic " tasks . Former housemates were not paid ; a donation was made to Jade Goody 's trust fund instead . On Day 40 , Craig Phillips , winner of the first series of Big Brother , entered the house to participate in a replica of his series ' assault course task alongside Halfwit . Phillips was drafted in after " Nasty " Nick Bateman withdrew . Later that day , Lisa competed in a task to build a sugar cube tower alongside Dean O 'Loughlin of series two . Day 41 saw Alex Sibley , Sophie Pritchard and Lee Davey from the programme 's third edition compete in a re @-@ creation of the egg and spoon race task with Rodrigo trying to predict the outcome . Later that day , Federico <unk> from series four participated in a gymkhana competition against Noirin using fake horses and Dogface and Michelle Bass both sang Pie Jesu , which featured in the wedding task of series five , with viewers deciding which performance was the best . On Day 42 , Craig Coates and <unk> <unk> challenged Siavash to the box task from the sixth series and series seven 's Nikki Grahame reenacted her silent disco task alongside Karly . Brian Belo from series eight took part in a word association game with Charlie . The task drew to a close on Day 43 when Rex Newmark from the previous series returned to participate in the electric shock task with Marcus , in which the rest of housemates were subjected to shocks . The housemates failed to pass the required minimum of seven of the nine challenges and therefore failed the overall task . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In comparison with other contemporary reality television programmes and previous editions of Big Brother , this series has received lower viewing figures and less press coverage . Bookmakers have also reported that this series has attracted the lowest amount of bets placed for any reality programme in the last decade . Four weeks before the programme began , former chat show presenter Michael Parkinson was critical of the programme ; " I object to the exploitation of the underclass in shows like Big Brother . It is the modern version of Bedlam , where you pay to see the poor benighted people making asses of themselves " . Charlie Brooker of The Guardian said that the series contained forgettable participants and that the producers were alienating the viewers with confusing tasks that seemed to take place " every four minutes " . Simmy Richman of The Independent wrote that the programme had become predictable after ten editions and that it had a " here @-@ we @-@ go @-@ again feel " . They also complained that the format had become clichéd and the housemates stereotypical , and they criticised the producers for enrolling participants who were using the programme as " a springboard to a Heat magazine cover and temporary free entry to dodgy nightclubs " . Maggie Brown , writing in her book A Licence to be Different — The Story of Channel 4 , believed that the programme limited its broadcaster as the cost to produce the programme were not justified by the number of viewers it attracted . Mark Lawson , also writing in The Guardian , suggested that the lack of viewers linked with a tired format and minimal press coverage , claiming that the newspapers had become preoccupied with stories such as the outbreak of swine flu , death of Michael Jackson and MPs ' expenses scandal . Lawson also believed that the death of Big Brother 2002 participant Jade Goody prior to the launch of Big Brother 2009 contributed to the low viewing figures . Journalist James Donaghy branded the programme a " sorry atrocity " and celebrity gossip blogger Darryn Lyons said that the series had been " massively disappointing " , pinpointing Isaac Stout 's entrance as a " desperate stunt " to attract viewers . Despite returning to the House to participate in a task , former housemate Dean O 'Loughlin has also been critical of this series , describing it as " way too superficial " . 
 However , the series has also received praise from various parties . For example , Gerard Gilbert of The Independent argued that in comparison to contemporary TV dramas , Big Brother provides much more entertainment , psychological depth and social impact . Gilbert also commented that the storylines of the programme were equal to that of the works of Samuel Beckett . Craig Phillips , the winner of the first series of Big Brother , and the programme 's presenter Davina McCall have responded to the criticisms of the programme 's decreasing viewing figures , respectively arguing that the programme achieves low numbers due to the different way in which viewers can watch the programme and that the programme is achieving well considering its timeslot and broadcaster . Brian Dowling , who won the second edition of Big Brother in 2001 , defended both the programme and the reality genre as a whole , telling BBC Breakfast that producers were simply providing viewers what they want , such as extreme participants . The Guardian 's Heidi Stephens also complimented the series by claiming that it has " seen the emergence of some truly fascinating personalities " and welcomed the return to the basic format of the programme . Stephens went on to compare the storylines and characters of the programme with that of a John Hughes film . <unk> Horgan @-@ Wallace , who came third in the seventh series , and Big Brother 2003 winner Cameron Stout praised the selection of housemates , both claiming that the quality of the programme had improved on previous years . Entertainment website Digital Spy was also complimentary of the series , naming Sophie " Dogface " Reade and Kris Donnelly as two of the sexiest housemates of the past ten years and Angel McKenzie as one of the most outrageous . Towards the end of the programme 's airing , Neil Boom of The Independent argued that the series is " one of the best ever " despite a decline in the number of viewers . He claimed that there was still high interest on internet forums and that the lower television ratings might be due to the removal of the 24 @-@ hour live feed . He praised the selection of housemates and highlighted Siavash , Freddie and Marcus as particular examples . Following the end of the series , Davina McCall also considered Big Brother 10 to be " Big Brother at its best . " 
 = = = Viewing figures = = = 
 These viewing figures are taken from BARB . 
 = 1949 Ambato earthquake = 
 The 1949 Ambato earthquake was the largest earthquake in the Western Hemisphere in more than five years . On August 5 , 1949 , it struck Ecuador 's Tungurahua Province southeast of its capital Ambato and killed 5 @,@ 050 people . Measuring 6 @.@ 8 on the Richter scale it originated from a hypocenter 40 km ( 25 mi ) beneath the surface . The nearby villages of Guano , Patate , Pelileo , and Pillaro were destroyed , and the city of Ambato suffered heavy damage . The earthquake flattened entire buildings , and subsequent landslides caused damage throughout the Tungurahua , Chimborazo , and Cotopaxi Provinces . It disrupted water mains and communication lines and opened a fissure into which the small town of Libertad sank . Moderate shaking from the event extended as far away as Quito and Guayaquil . 
 Earthquakes in Ecuador stem from two major interrelated tectonic areas : the subduction of the Nazca Plate under the South American Plate and the Andean Volcanic Belt . The 1949 Ambato earthquake initially followed an intersection of several northwest @-@ southeast @-@ trending faults in the Inter @-@ Andean Valley which were created by the subduction of the Carnegie Ridge . Strata of rock cracked as the earthquake ruptured the faults , sending out powerful shockwaves . Today threats exist throughout the country from both interplate and intraplate seismicity . 
 = = Background = = 
 Earthquakes are common in Ecuador . Near the Nazca subduction zone the recorded history of interplate earthquakes spans 80 years . At the time it struck the 1949 Ambato earthquake was the second @-@ worst earthquake in Ecuador 's modern history topped only by the 1797 Riobamba earthquake , and the most devastating earthquake in the Western Hemisphere since the 1944 San Juan earthquake . Several major earthquakes have occurred throughout the country since 1949 , including the 1987 Ecuador earthquakes and the 1997 Ecuador earthquake . The 2007 Peru earthquake also affected the country . 
 = = Geology = = 
 Much of South American seismic activity and volcanism originates from subduction of the oceanic Nazca Plate under the continental South American Plate and subduction of the Pacific 's lithosphere under the South American continent . This seismicity extends for 6 @,@ 000 km ( 3 @,@ 728 mi ) along the continent 's western edge and probably stems from a region of northeast @-@ trending faulting near the Ecuadorian Trench . The region of faulting may actually function as its own microplate . 
 The Carnegie Ridge is sliding under Ecuadorian land , causing coastal uplift and volcanism . The ridge 's movement may also have changed the type of faulting along the coast , causing strike @-@ slip faults ( faults that move horizontally past each other ) . Evidence of this subduction altering the course of faulting is found at the <unk> fault , which , unlike the rest of the Panama Basin faults , trends to the west instead of north @-@ south , indicating that the Carnegie Ridge may be colliding with the continental mass of Ecuador . This collision created northwest @-@ southeast and northeast @-@ southwest @-@ trending faults in the region , and with that , caused strong earthquakes in Riobamba in 1797 and <unk> in 1961 . Several of the northwest @-@ southeast @-@ trending faults converge in the Inter @-@ Andean Valley where the 1949 Ambato earthquake took place . 
 The hypocenter of the earthquake occurred 40 km ( 25 mi ) beneath the surface , under a mountain 72 km ( 45 mi ) from Ambato . Nearby fault lines ruptured , breaking rock strata and sending shock waves to the surface capable of bringing down entire buildings . Life reported that local seismologists first placed the earthquake 's magnitude at 7 @.@ 5 , but the official measurement was later revised to 6 @.@ 8 . 
 = = Damage and casualties = = 
 The earthquake was preceded by a foreshock which although modest was strong enough to cause chaos and force people to flee from their homes into the streets . The main shock originated southeast of Ambato . When the primary shock hit Ambato 's main cathedral and military barracks collapsed , as did most of the city 's buildings , scores of young girls preparing for their first communions perished in the cathedral . The shaking ruptured water mains , disabled communication lines , opened cracks in the earth , reduced bridges to rubble , and derailed a train . The earthquake demolished buildings in rural hamlets ; closer to the nearest mountains of the Andes , landslides destroyed roads and blocked rivers . The village of Libertad near Pelileo sank 460 m ( 1 @,@ 509 ft ) into a huge hole about 800 m ( 2 @,@ 625 ft ) in diameter with all of its 100 inhabitants . Shaking up to intensity IV extended as far away as Quito and Guayaquil . 
 Initial reports ( around August 7 ) estimated the death toll at 2 @,@ 700 people . The cities of Patate and Pelileo suffered the most with 1 @,@ 000 and 1 @,@ 300 dead respectively . In Ambato reports of the death toll ranged from 400 to 500 , and the Ecuadorean Embassy in Washington , D.C. , estimated that 1 @,@ 000 to more than 2 @,@ 000 people were injured . The town of Pillaro , destroyed by the quake , had more than 20 dead , and in <unk> , 11 were killed and 30 injured ; 50 homes , two churches , and the local government building were also ruined . Fifteen other towns and cities were also badly affected , including Guano which was devastated . 
 Later counts assumed around 3 @,@ 200 casualties in Pelileo ; the total death toll estimates were adjusted to around 4 @,@ 000 people . Officials reported that many of the dead had been inside buildings as they buckled or were killed by flooding brought about by the blockage of a drainage canal . Others were crushed by landslides from nearby mountains . No homes in the city of Pelileo were left standing , many buildings were flattened , and large cracks formed in the ground . In Ambato alone 75 percent of the homes still standing had to be demolished . On August 8 , an aftershock with " considerable strength " struck near Ambato . 
 The final death toll according to the United States Geological Survey was 5 @,@ 050 . The earthquake severely affected some 30 communities and left approximately 100 @,@ 000 people homeless . 
 = = Relief efforts = = 
 Ecuador 's President Galo Plaza Lasso flew to Ambato to take personal charge of the primary relief efforts . Plaza directed rescue efforts for two days as airlifts from Quito dropped supplies . A group of Red Cross volunteers and medical supplies were sent on American aircraft . The United States Army sent two relief teams equipped with serum and blood plasma . The mayor of Miami along with seven other politicians began a fund @-@ raising campaign for medical needs and clothing and coordinated the distribution of 69 kg ( 152 lb ) of Rexall drugs . Several nearby countries sent airplanes carrying medicine and food . A local fund @-@ raising effort collected 250 @,@ 000 Ecuadorian <unk> ( approximately $ 14 @,@ 815 1949 USD ) within two hours of its launch . Plaza said " We have not lost our courage . Neither Ambato nor Ecuador shall cry any more , but begin to work . " 
 On August 7 a plane carrying 34 rescue workers from the Shell Oil Company crashed 32 km ( 20 mi ) from Ambato leaving no survivors . Disease began to spread in Pelileo within days of the earthquake which prompted a team of American soldiers – who were acting as relief workers – to order water purification devices and DDT airdrops to cleanse the area of airborne agents . Sick victims were quarantined and prevented from leaving the city . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The earthquake considerably impacted a number of cities : it destroyed Guano , Patate , Pelileo , Pillaro , and one @-@ third of Ambato . The city of Ambato was a " scene of anguish and pain " described by " scores of little funerals winding their way through the debris " . The brand @-@ new hospital had been reduced to four walls , and most of the buildings in town were demolished . In Pelileo relief workers found victims feeding buried people through holes in the ground . In the days following the earthquakes aftershocks occurred and torrential rains ensued . 
 In an effort to help the inhabitants a festival of fruit and flowers was held on June 29 , 1950 . The festival was a success and became an annual event that is celebrated each year during Carnaval and is now an important tourist attraction . Ambato was completely rebuilt after the earthquake . The city 's main church , the Iglesia Matriz de Ambato , was replaced by a new cathedral known as Iglesia La Catedral in 1954 . Pelileo was rebuilt on a new site 2 km ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) from its previous location . 
 = = Current situation = = 
 Ambato is frequently visited by tourists traveling on the Pan @-@ American Highway . The city is well known for its extensive market which sells a wide array of items including local delicacies and flowers , and for its <unk> – old estates that serve as historic parks – some of which pre @-@ date the earthquake . 
 Ecuador is still at risk from earthquakes : both intraplate ( such as those in March 1987 ) and interplate earthquakes are possible . <unk> seismicity poses a more formidable threat , as it can be much more powerful than interplate seismicity and is usually associated with landslides , subsidence , and even soil liquefaction . 
 = The 3rd Birthday = 
 The 3rd Birthday ( Japanese : ザ ・ <unk> <unk> , Hepburn : Za <unk> <unk> ) is a third @-@ person role @-@ playing shooter co @-@ developed by Square Enix and HexaDrive , and published by Square Enix for the PlayStation Portable . It was released in 2010 in Japan and 2011 in North America and Europe . The game is both the third entry in the Parasite Eve video game series , based on the titular Japanese novel , and a spin @-@ off , having only a loose connection to events from past games . The game features a third @-@ person shooter @-@ based combat system with role @-@ playing mechanics . A key mechanic is the Overdive ability , which allows the player to possess pre @-@ positioned human allies and inflict damage upon enemies . 
 The game takes place in 2013 , a year after creatures known as the Twisted have appeared from beneath Manhattan and decimated the city . To fight back against the Twisted , an investigatory team called the Counter Twisted Investigation ( CTI ) is formed . Among their number is series protagonist Aya Brea , who was found unconscious and suffering amnesia two years before the game 's events . Using her Overdive ability , Aya travels into the past to alter the outcome of battles against the Twisted . At the same time , Aya attempts to find out the origin of the Twisted and regain her memories . 
 The 3rd Birthday was created as a conceptual rebirth for Aya 's character , as well as a means of re @-@ introducing her to the gaming community , with it being over a decade since the last game in the series . Among the staff were Hajime Tabata , Yoshinori Kitase , Motomu Toriyama , Isamu Kamikokuryo , and Aya 's original designer Tetsuya Nomura . Originally announced as an episodic title for mobile phones , the game was later changed into a PSP exclusive . Upon release , the game reached sixth place in Japanese sales charts , and was among the top five games in North American and UK sales charts during its opening months . Reviews have been mixed ; critics praised the presentation and several parts of the gameplay , while opinions were mixed about the story , and many cited difficulties with camera control and some of the shooter mechanics . Several reviewers have also made negative comments on Aya 's portrayal . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The 3rd Birthday is a third @-@ person role @-@ playing shooter . The player controls series protagonist Aya Brea through rendered @-@ to @-@ scale environments in from a third person perspective . The game plays out as a series of missions , between which Aya rests at the Counter Twisted Investigation headquarters , which acts as the game 's main hub . In the hub , Aya can receive briefings for missions , view additional documents , buy and customize new weapons . She also has the option to transport back there should she die during a mission . The game can be saved both at the hub and in safe zones within missions . At the end of each mission , Aya is given a grade based on performance , enemies killed , and the number of times she died . Depending on her score , she will earn differing amounts of Bounty Points , a currency used to customize weapons and repair protective gear in the hub area . 
 During missions , players navigate a series of linear linked areas fighting off multiple enemies . Items can be picked up during missions , such as grenades and medical kits . Aya has access to multiple guns for use in combat , including handguns , assault rifles and shotguns . By holding down a button on the controller , Aya automatically aims at an enemy and can fire at will . Taking cover behind objects or shields , or standing idle outside of battle , allows Aya to regenerate health . While in combat , an energy meter is charged and can be activated when full . When activated , Aya entered " Liberation Mode " , a state enabling her to move around the battlefield at high speed for a short period of time . 
 In most battle situations , Aya is accompanied by a group of allied NPC ( non @-@ playable character ) soldiers that the player can direct around the battle area . Available commands include offering supporting fire , directly attacking enemies , or staying behind cover . They can also all fire at the same enemy in certain situations , dealing high damage . Each NPC has a separate health meter , and is permanently removed from battle upon defeat . Central to combat is Overdive , an ability which enables Aya to transmit herself between bodies . If her health is low , Aya can transport into the body of an allied NPC , taking on their health level , position and current weapon in the process . NPCs not controlled by Aya are controlled by the game 's AI . Aya can remain in a body for the duration of a level , or until the unit has died . If Aya cannot jump to another body , she dies and the level must either be restarted or exited . Overdive can be activated at any time , enabling Aya to transport around the battlefield to avoid enemy attacks or save herself when her current unit 's health is low . Overdive can also be used to attack enemies if Aya maintains a sustained assault . After a time , a triangle icon appears on enemies , allowing her to perform an Overdive attack , dealing high damage to the targeted enemy . 
 During combat , Aya gains experience points and gains experience levels when a certain quantity is achieved . Gaining a level both restores her health and raises her maximum health and energy levels . Weapons also gain levels the more they are used . In addition to leveling up , Aya 's stats can be customized using Over Energy ( OE ) clips found during missions or acquired during Overdive attacks . Using a 3x3 grid accessed in the hub area , certain OE clips grand different stat boosts and abilities . Creating a new grid automatically deletes the effects of the original . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game 's story plays out in episodes , similar to a television series , with many events told out of sequence . On Christmas Eve of 2012 , monstrous creatures dubbed as " Babels " appear in New York City . Along with lifeforms spawned by them called the Twisted , they lay wasted to the city and consume any human in their path . By the following year , an investigatory team known as the CTI ( Counter Twisted Investigation ) has been formed . One of the CTI members is Aya Brea , who was found outside St. Thomson 's Cathedral in 2010 , just before the Babels and Twisted began appearing . Dr. Hyde Bohr , Chief of the CTI , finds that Aya is suffering from amnesia , and that her personality has changed . After taking Aya in , the CTI discovered that she was capable of transferring her soul from body to body independent of time , an ability dubbed " Overdive " , which enables her to fight the Twisted . 
 Bohr and the others planned to use this unique ability to travel back through time and prevent the disaster , developing a machine called " Overdive System " to allow Aya to travel into the past and change events . As she embarks on each mission , she is confronted by powerful , sentient Twisted born from corrupted humans , later dubbed High Ones . One such High One is Kyle Madigan , a man she met and fell in love with during Parasite Eve II . As she defeats each High One , she regains pieces of her memory , most prominently her memories of being engaged to Kyle , and the existence of Eve Brea , her adopted sister . After an incident that saw the CTI HQ and the Overdive device destroyed by the Kyle High One , Aya reunites with Kunihiko Maeda , a man who aided her in Parasite Eve , to resolve the entire mystery behind the appearance of the Babel , Twisted and High Ones . Aya eventually discovers that Bohr is himself a High One . Bohr masterminded the death of other High Ones in order to form the Grand Babel , which functions like a giant Overdive system . Bohr seeks to dive back in the past to Time Zero , the point where events were set in motion , to fulfill his plan for the survival of his own species from a time war cycle between humans , the Twisted , and the High Ones . Aya battles Bohr and is pulled with him into Time Zero , where she discovers the truth . 
 In 2010 at St. Thomson 's Cathedral , Aya and Kyle were going to be married . The Cathedral was attacked by a SWAT team and Aya was killed . Eve attempted to save Aya by sending her consciousness into Aya 's body , creating the Overdive ability . The event caused Aya 's consciousness to separate from her body and fragment through time to create the Twisted , Eve 's consciousness to become trapped in Aya 's body , and parts of Eve 's body to be transplanted into people close to the pair to create the High Ones . The " Aya " of the main story is in fact Eve in Aya 's body . After these revelations , Eve returns to her body and is asked by Bohr to assimilate him and trigger the birth of a new species . Eve refuses , and when Bohr tries to force the process , a reborn Aya shoots him to death . Aya then reveals that to avert the birth of the Twisted and High Ones , the sources ( Aya and Eve ) must be removed . Expressing her regret at not being able to marry Kyle , she tells Eve to shoot her . In a fit of emotion , Eve switches bodies with Aya before shooting her , creating a new timeline where Eve 's body and Aya 's consciousness do not exist , erasing the game 's events . Though Eve offers to marry Kyle , he refuses and hints that he is going to find Aya . In a post @-@ credits sequence four years after the game 's events , Eve is walking the streets of New York and is wished a " Happy Fourth Birthday " by a woman resembling Aya . 
 = = Development = = 
 Concepts for a third installment in the Parasite Eve video game series had been around for some time . As work was being finished on Crisis Core : Final Fantasy VII , Nomura voiced his wish to create a new game for the character Aya Brea , and this time it was taken up . Despite the story of Parasite Eve II not leaving many avenues for a sequel , the development team wanted to take advantage of advancing gaming technology and popularity by creating a mature gaming experience that would re @-@ introduce Aya to players around the world . The main staff consisted of director Hajime Tabata , producer Yoshinori Kitase , creative producer and character designer Tetsuya Nomura , art director Isamu Kamikokuryo , scenario director Motomu Toriyama , and main writer Toshimitsu Takeuchi . Nomura requested Tabata as the two had worked well together on previous projects , and Nomura was busy with other projects despite his strong interest . The 3rd Birthday was originally announced in May 2007 as an episodic mobile game developed by Square Enix for Japan 's FOMA mobile service . In 2008 , during a special Square Enix event , the game was announced to have changed to a game for the PlayStation Portable . Part of the reason , as stated by Nomura , was that the desired level of realism was not possible on mobile phones . The game became exclusive to PSP as Tabata wanted to make full usage of the platform 's hardware capabilities , along with it being a gaming platform available worldwide . Tabata and his team worked on the The 3rd Birthday at the same time as fellow mobile @-@ turned @-@ PSP title Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 . Square Enix requested Tabata to concentrate on finishing The 3rd Birthday , leading to Type @-@ 0 almost being cancelled . 
 The final version of the game was co @-@ developed by Square Enix and HexaDrive , a company created by former Capcom staff members . As the new form of The 3rd Birthday had transformed into a third @-@ person shooter , Square Enix wanted staff members with experience at developing such games , and then @-@ company CEO Yoichi Wada recommended HexaDrive to Tabata . As multiple HexaDrive staff members had also worked on fellow shooter Lost Planet : Extreme Condition , Tabata agreed to the collaboration . While aiming for a high quality product , the team designed the game as if for the PlayStation 3 home console , then worked to fit it onto the PSP . During development , the team sought creative help from the team developing Final Fantasy XIII for the visual design . The team had previous experimented with shooters with Dirge of Cerberus : Final Fantasy VII , but this time they wanted to create something closer to a third @-@ person shooter . While working inside the control and hardware limitations of the title , the team created firearms and the lock @-@ on mechanic as the fundamental attack action , instead of the free @-@ roaming style of a standard third @-@ person shooter . While designing levels to function with the game 's Overdive system , the team considered what the level would hold , how often players would utilize the function , the difficulty of levels , and the positioning and strength of enemies . During development , a questionnaire was circulated around company staff concerning the character Aya , to find out which of the planned features was popular . One of those that survived in the final game was Aya 's clothes being damaged when she was hit by an enemy , which was used to emphasize her sexuality . Nomura was among the first to suggest this feature originally . 
 Nomura worked on the character designs for the main cast . He was originally only going to work on Aya and Eve , but after seeing the settings for the other characters , he offered to design them too . The team wanted to emphasize the character 's sexuality . As part of this , the team included a scene where Aya takes a shower . This was inspired by a similar scene in Parasite Eve II . When the title was being developed for PSP , the team 's main challenge with the character was to make her look as realistic as possible while retaining her established physical traits . Using this new realism , the team wanted to portray the fear felt by humans when faced with such threats through Aya . Achieving this realism proved one of the most difficult aspects of development . Her alternate costumes were not a high priority for the team , so their artists had high creative freedom . 
 While many of the concepts for the final version were present in the original mobile version , such as Overdive and the Twisted , the original story was scrapped when the game changed platforms . In creating the story for The 3rd Birthday , the team took inspiration from the 10 @-@ year gap in the character 's in @-@ game and real @-@ time history . This meant that it would be difficult to create a straightforward sequel , so the team instead decided to make the game about Aya 's return . Toriyama imagined story concepts such as the snowy New York setting and the image of a bloodstained wedding dress . These two concepts survived the platform change . Over the course of the development , he adjusted the plot numerous times to be more adult @-@ oriented and to include complex narrative twists . The original concept was to make the game feel like a television drama , with multiple cliffhangers and moments of high drama . The game was designed from the outset as having no direct connection to the previous Parasite Eve games . The game 's title came from it being Aya 's third video game appearance , as well as it being a noticeable change in setting . The game 's logo was designed to both look like the letter " B " and the number " 3 " . It was originally only going to represent the number , but Nomura added the extra lines to display the game 's " multi @-@ faceted " nature . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music for The 3rd Birthday was composed by Mitsuto Suzuki and Tsuyoshi Sekito , with additional work by original Parasite Eve composer Yoko Shimomura . Shimomura was involved from an early stage , when The 3rd Birthday was still a mobile game . When she was originally asked to compose for the title , she was involved with a number of other projects which made handling the entire score difficult . When asked whether she wanted to work with anyone on the composition , she suggested Suzuki and Sekito . The general instruction was to follow the pattern used by the music for Parasite Eve , with Suzuki and Sekito handling the majority of tracks , going so far as referring to the songs from the original Parasite Eve when handling remixes of old themes . In keeping with the game 's other development goals , Shimomura wanted to alter some of the established music , although she asked the team to include familiar themes from earlier games for fans . Suzuki was responsible for a large amount of track mixing . Sekito was mostly involved with choosing and helping with instrumentation , in particular whether to include symphonic music . The composers had a relatively high degree of freedom , but they also had problems when composing some tracks that did not fit into selected scenes . Re @-@ orchestrations of two pieces of classical music , " Sleepers Wake " by Johann Sebastian Bach , and " Joy to the World " , a popular Christmas song , were used by Suzuki and Shimomura respectively to represent key moments and motifs within the game . The order of songs in the game was created to reflect the situation in a level . These variations were emphasized during mixing , while they also needed to adjust the mixing and track length based on the game as a whole . For the game 's theme song , the company collaborated with Japanese rock band Superfly . The game 's theme song Eyes on Me , described as a " standard love song " , was specially composed by the band for the game . It was the band 's first video game theme song . The game 's soundtrack was released as an album by Square Enix on December 22 , 2010 . The 3rd Birthday Original Soundtrack contains 66 tracks across 3 discs and has a total length of 2 : 56 : 52 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 During production , Nomura and Tabata stated that the team were aiming to sell 500 @,@ 000 copies of the game , a sales @-@ goal based strategy they had previously used for Crisis Core . During its first week , The 3rd Birthday debuted at # 6 in Japanese gaming charts , selling 140 @,@ 000 units . By the end of 2011 , the game had sold 249 @,@ 747 units in Japan . The game reached the top of the charts for PSP games in North America by the beginning of April 2011 , overtaking fellow Square Enix title Dissidia 012 : Final Fantasy and the PSP port of The Legend of Heroes : Trails in the Sky . Later that month , it had fallen to # 3 in US charts , remaining there into June of that year . In the UK during the same initial period , it reached # 3 , tailing behind Dissidia 012 and Lego Star Wars III : The Clone Wars . 
 Japanese gaming magazine Famitsu praised the title 's gameplay , calling Aya " deeply customizable " , finding the Overdive system and its strategic elements exhilarating and saying that those undaunted by the high difficulty would find much enjoyment in repeated playthroughs . Jeremy Parish of 1UP.com called it " an interesting blend of RPG and shooter " , praising the working of Overdive . Eurogamer 's Kristan Reed was less enthusiastic , referring to the conflicts with the Twisted as " relentless and ultimately repetitive " , finding the high difficulty off @-@ putting and Aya 's movement speed unsuited for battle . Game Informer 's Annette Gonzalez enjoyed the control layout and gameplay , but cited difficulties with the camera . Carolyn Petit of GameSpot said that the game sometimes succeeded in creating tension , but that other battles were frustrating and the camera was difficult . IGN 's Patrick Kolan was pleased with the effort put into the game , and generally praised the battle and later levels , despite several cases of repetition during the main campaign . Emily Gera of VideoGamer.com found the basic shooter gameplay repetitive , but felt that the gameplay was saved by the Overdive ability and the quality of fights . 
 Parish said the game looked " gorgeous " and the soundtrack " exceptional " . Petit praised the CGI cutscenes and varied level environments , and said the score " shifts adeptly between haunting and thrilling to suit the action . " Kolan generally called the game one of the best @-@ looking entries on the platform , and praised the soundtrack , despite it being " a little ho @-@ hum " . Gonzalez also praised the cutscenes , while citing the environments as " [ ranging ] from detailed to drab " . 
 Famitsu was less positive about the story , saying that the mix of different elements made it " a bit hard to follow . " Parish positively noted connections to the second game , but finding the later story developments either confusing or weak , and disliked the way returning supporting characters had been changed . Petit said that those who wanted a straightforward story would be disappointed , and positively noted its exploration of existence , identity , and memory . Her main criticism was with the dialogue , which she referred to as " stilted " . Kolan also faulted the voice acting and localization , especially when compared to games such as Tactics Ogre : Let Us Cling Together . Gonzalez cited the story as intriguing , with " plenty of plot twists " . Parish and Petit were both highly critical of Aya 's portrayal : Parish disliked both her outfit , which seemed to conform too much female stereotypes in video games , and the clothes @-@ tearing mechanic , which seemed to be included merely to flaunt her sexuality . Petit shared many points of criticism with Parish , also noting that Aya 's portrayal of " one @-@ part action hero , one @-@ part submissive sex object " was wrong for a lead character , and that Aya 's in @-@ combat vocals were not suited to the game 's situations . Reed referred to Aya as " [ a ] sighing , whimpering lead character " . 
 = John Marshall Harlan II = 
 John Marshall Harlan ( May 20 , 1899 – December 29 , 1971 ) was an American jurist who served as an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court from 1955 to 1971 . His namesake was his grandfather John Marshall Harlan , another associate justice who served from 1877 to 1911 . 
 Harlan was a student at Upper Canada College and Appleby College and then at Princeton University . Awarded a Rhodes Scholarship , he studied law at Balliol College , Oxford . Upon his return to the U.S. in 1923 Harlan worked in the law firm of Root , Clark , Buckner & Howland while studying at New York Law School . Later he served as Assistant U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York and as Special Assistant Attorney General of New York . In 1954 Harlan was appointed to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit , and a year later president Dwight Eisenhower nominated Harlan to the United States Supreme Court following the death of Justice Robert H. Jackson . 
 Harlan is often characterized as a member of the conservative wing of the Warren Court . He advocated a limited role for the judiciary , remarking that the Supreme Court should not be considered " a general haven for reform movements " . In general , Harlan adhered more closely to precedent , and was more reluctant to overturn legislation , than many of his colleagues on the Court . He strongly disagreed with the doctrine of incorporation , which held that the provisions of the federal Bill of Rights applied to the state governments , not merely the Federal . At the same time , he advocated a broad interpretation of the Fourteenth Amendment 's Due Process Clause , arguing that it protected a wide range of rights not expressly mentioned in the United States Constitution . Harlan is sometimes called the " great dissenter " of the Warren Court , and has been described as one of the most influential Supreme Court justices in the twentieth century . Justice Harlan was gravely ill when he retired from the Supreme Court on September 23 , 1971 . He died from spinal cancer three months later , on December 29 , 1971 . After Harlan 's retirement , President Nixon appointed William Rehnquist to replace him . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 John Marshall Harlan was born on May 20 , 1899 in Chicago , Illinois . He was the son of John Maynard Harlan , a Chicago lawyer and politician , and Elizabeth Flagg . He had three sisters . Historically , Harlan 's family had been politically active . His forebear , George Harlan , served as one of governors of Delaware during the seventeenth century ; his great @-@ grandfather , James Harlan , was a congressman during the 1830s ; his grandfather , also John Marshall Harlan , was an associate justice of the United States Supreme Court from 1877 to 1911 ; and his uncle , James S. Harlan , was attorney general of Puerto Rico and then chairman of the Interstate Commerce Commission . 
 In his younger years , Harlan attended The Latin School of Chicago . He later attended two boarding high schools in the Toronto Area , Canada : Upper Canada College and Appleby College . Upon graduation from Appleby , Harlan returned to the U.S. and in 1916 enrolled at Princeton University . There , he was a member of the Ivy Club , served as an editor of The Daily Princetonian , and was class president during his junior and senior years . After graduating from the university in 1920 , he received a Rhodes Scholarship , which he used to attend Balliol College , Oxford . He studied jurisprudence at Oxford for three years , returning from England in 1923 . Upon his return to the United States , he began work with the law firm of Root , Clark , Buckner & Howland ( now known as Dewey & LeBoeuf ) , one of the leading law firms in the country , while studying law at New York Law School . He received his law degree in 1924 and earned admission to the bar in 1925 . 
 Between 1925 and 1927 , Harlan served as Assistant U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York , heading the district 's Prohibition unit . He prosecuted Harry M. Daugherty , former United States Attorney General . In 1928 , he was appointed Special Assistant Attorney General of New York , in which capacity he investigated a scandal involving sewer construction in Queens . He prosecuted Maurice E. Connolly , the Queens borough president , for his involvement in the affair . In 1930 , Harlan returned to his old law firm , becoming a partner one year later . At the firm , he served as chief assistant for senior partner Emory Buckner and followed him into public service when Buckner was appointed United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York . As one of " Buckner 's Boy Scouts " , eager young Assistant United States Attorneys , Harlan worked on Prohibition cases , and swore off drinking except when the prosecutors visited the Harlan family fishing camp in Quebec , where Prohibition did not apply . Harlan remained in public service until 1930 , and then returned to his firm . Buckner had also returned to the firm , and after Buckner 's death , Harlan became the leading trial lawyer at the firm . 
 As a trial lawyer Harlan was involved in a number of famous cases . One such case was the conflict over the estate left after the death in 1931 of Ella Wendel , who had no heirs and left almost all her wealth estimated at 30 – 100 million to churches and charities . However a number of claimants , filed suits in state and federal courts demanding a part of her fortune . Most of the claimants were imposters ; Harlan acted as the main defender of her estate and will as well as the chief negotiator . Eventually a settlement among lawful claimants was reached in 1933 . In the following years Harlan specialized in corporate law dealing with the cases like Randall v. Bailey , concerning the interpretation of state law governing distribution of corporate dividends . In 1940 , he represented the New York Board of Higher Education unsuccessfully in The Bertrand Russell Case in its efforts to retain Bertrand Russell on the faculty of the City College of New York ; Russell was declared " morally unfit " to teach . The future justice also represented boxer Gene Tunney in a breach of contract suit brought by a would @-@ be fight manager , a matter settled out of court . 
 In 1937 , Harlan was one of five founders of the controversial Pioneer Fund , a group associated with eugenics advocacy , and served on its board for long time . He , however , never played any significant role in the fund . 
 During World War II , Harlan volunteered for military duty , serving as a colonel in the United States Army Air Force from 1943 to 1945 . He was the chief of the Operational Analysis Section of the Eighth Air Force in England . He won the Legion of Merit from the United States , and the Croix de guerre from both France and Belgium . In 1946 Harlan returned to private law practice representing Du Pont family members against a federal antitrust lawsuit . In 1951 , however , he returned to public service , serving as Chief Counsel to the New York State Crime Commission , where he investigated the relationship between organized crime and the state government as well as illegal gambling activities in New York and other areas . During this period Harlan also served as a committee chairman of the Association of the Bar of the City of New York , and to which he was later elected vice president . Harlan 's main specialization at that time was corporate and anti @-@ trust law . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1928 , Harlan married Ethel Andrews , who was the daughter of Yale history professor Charles McLean Andrews . This was the second marriage for her . Ethel was originally married to a New York architect Henry K. Murphy , who was twenty years her elder . After Ethel divorced Murphy in 1927 , her brother John invited her to a Christmas party at Root , Clark , Buckner & Howland , where she was introduced to John Harlan . They saw each other regularly afterwards and married on November 10 , 1928 in Farmington , Connecticut . 
 Harlan , a Presbyterian , maintained a New York City apartment , a summer home in Weston , Connecticut and a fishing camp in Murray Bay , Quebec , a lifestyle he described as " awfully tame and correct " . The justice played golf , favored tweeds , and wore a gold watch which had belonged to the first Justice Harlan . In addition to carrying his grandfather 's watch , when he joined the Supreme Court he used the same furniture which had furnished his grandfather 's chambers . 
 John and Ethel Harlan had one daughter , Evangeline Dillingham ( born on February 2 , 1932 ) . She was married to Frank Dillingham of West Redding , Connecticut , until his death , and has five children . One of Eve 's children , Amelia Newcomb , is the international news editor at The Christian Science <unk> and has two children : Harlan , named after John Marshall Harlan II , and Matthew Trevithick . Another daughter , Kate Dillingham , is a professional musician ( cellist ) and published author . 
 = = Supreme Court career = = 
 On January 13 , 1954 , United States President Dwight D. Eisenhower nominated Harlan to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit , to fill a vacancy created by the death of Judge Augustus Noble Hand . He was confirmed by the United States Senate on February 9 , and took office on February 10 . Harlan knew this court well , as he had often appeared before it and was friendly with many of the judges . However , his stay on the court only lasted for a year . On January 10 , 1955 , President Eisenhower nominated Harlan to the United States Supreme Court following the death of Justice Robert H. Jackson . On being nominated , the reticent Harlan called reporters into his chambers in New York , and stated , in full , " I am very deeply honored . " Despite the brevity of his stay on the Second Circuit , Harlan would serve as the Circuit Justice responsible for the Second Circuit throughout his Supreme Court capacity , and , in that capacity , would enjoyably attend the Circuit 's annual conference , bringing his wife and catching up on the latest gossip . 
 Harlan 's nomination came shortly after the Supreme Court handed down its landmark decision in Brown v. Board of Education , declaring segregation in public schools unconstitutional . James Eastland ( the chairman of the United States Senate Committee on the Judiciary ) and several other southern senators delayed his confirmation , because they ( correctly ) believed that he would support desegregation of the schools and civil rights . Unlike almost all previous Supreme Court nominees , Harlan appeared before the Senate Judiciary Committee to answer questions relating to his judicial views . Every Supreme Court nominee since Harlan has been questioned by the Judiciary Committee before confirmation . The Senate finally confirmed him on March 17 , 1955 by a vote of 71 – 11 . He took seat on March 28 , 1955 . Of the eleven senators who voted against his appointment , nine were from the South . He was replaced on the Second Circuit by Joseph Edward Lumbard . 
 On the Supreme Court , Harlan often voted alongside Justice Felix Frankfurter , who was his principal mentor on the court . Some legal scholars even viewed him as " Frankfurter without mustard " , though others recognize his own important contributions to the evolution of the legal thought . Harlan was an ideological adversary — but close personal friend — of Justice Hugo Black , with whom he disagreed on a variety of issues , including the applicability of the Bill of Rights to the states , the Due Process Clause , and the Equal Protection Clause . 
 Justice Harlan was very close to the law clerks whom he hired , and continued to take an interest in them after they left his chambers to continue their legal careers . The justice would advise them on their careers , hold annual reunions , and place pictures of their children on his chambers ' walls . He would say to them of the Warren Court , " We must consider this only temporary , " that the Court had gone astray , but would soon right itself . 
 Justice Harlan is remembered by people , who worked with him , for his tolerance and civility . He treated his fellow Justices , clerks and attorneys representing parties with respect and consideration . While Justice Harlan often strongly objected to certain conclusions and arguments , he never criticized other justices or anybody else personally , and never said any disparaging words about someone 's motivations and capacity . Harlan was reluctant to show emotion , and was never heard to complain about anything . Harlan was one of the intellectual leaders of the Warren Court . Harvard Constitutional law expert Paul Freund said of him : 
 His thinking threw light in a very introspective way on the entire process of the judicial function . His decisions , beyond just the vote they represented , were sufficiently philosophical to be of enduring interest . He decided the case before him with that respect for its particulars , its special features , that marks alike the honest artist and the just judge . 
 = = Jurisprudence = = 
 Harlan 's jurisprudence is often characterized as conservative . He held precedent to be of great importance , adhering to the principle of stare decisis more closely than many of his Supreme Court colleagues . Unlike Justice Black , he eschewed strict textualism . While he believed that the original intention of the Framers should play an important part in constitutional adjudication , he also held that broad phrases like " liberty " in the Due Process Clause could be given an evolving interpretation . 
 Harlan believed that most problems should be solved by the political process , and that the judiciary should play only a limited role . In his dissent to Reynolds v. Sims , he wrote : 
 These decisions give support to a current mistaken view of the Constitution and the constitutional function of this court . This view , in short , is that every major social ill in this country can find its cure in some constitutional principle and that this court should take the lead in promoting reform when other branches of government fail to act . The Constitution is not a panacea for every blot upon the public welfare nor should this court , ordained as a judicial body , be thought of as a general haven of reform movements . 
 = = = Equal Protection Clause = = = 
 The Supreme Court decided several important equal protection cases during the first years of Harlan 's career . In these cases , Harlan regularly voted in favor of civil rights — similar to his grandfather , the only dissenting justice in the infamous Plessy v. Ferguson case . 
 He voted with the majority in Cooper v. Aaron , compelling defiant officials in Arkansas to desegregate public schools . He joined the opinion in <unk> v. Lightfoot , which declared that states could not redraw political boundaries in order to reduce the voting power of African @-@ Americans . Moreover , he joined the unanimous decision in Loving v. Virginia , which struck down state laws that banned interracial marriage . 
 = = = Due Process Clause = = = 
 Justice Harlan advocated a broad interpretation of the Fourteenth Amendment 's Due Process Clause . He subscribed to the doctrine that the clause not only provided procedural guarantees , but also protected a wide range of fundamental rights , including those that were not specifically mentioned in the text of the Constitution . ( See substantive due process . ) However , as Justice Byron White noted in his dissenting opinion in Moore v. East Cleveland , " no one was more sensitive than Mr. Justice Harlan to any suggestion that his approach to the Due Process Clause would lead to judges ' roaming at large in the constitutional field . ' " Under Harlan 's approach , judges would be limited in the Due Process area by " respect for the teachings of history , solid recognition of the basic values that underlie our society , and wise appreciation of the great roles that the doctrines of federalism and separation of powers have played in establishing and preserving American freedoms . " 
 Harlan set forth his interpretation in an often cited dissenting opinion to Poe v. Ullman , which involved a challenge to a Connecticut law banning the use of contraceptives . The Supreme Court dismissed the case on technical grounds , holding that the case was not ripe for adjudication . Justice Harlan dissented from the dismissal , suggesting that the Court should have considered the merits of the case . Thereafter , he indicated his support for a broad view of the due process clause 's reference to " liberty . " He wrote , " This ' liberty ' is not a series of isolated points pricked out in terms of the taking of property ; the freedom of speech , press , and religion ; the right to keep and bear arms ; the freedom from unreasonable searches and seizures ; and so on . It is a rational continuum which , broadly speaking , includes a freedom from all substantial arbitrary impositions and purposeless restraints . " He suggested that the due process clause encompassed a right to privacy , and concluded that a prohibition on contraception violated this right . 
 The same law was challenged again in Griswold v. Connecticut . This time , the Supreme Court agreed to consider the case , and concluded that the law violated the Constitution . However , the decision was based not on the due process clause , but on the argument that a right to privacy was found in the " penumbras " of other provisions of the Bill of Rights . Justice Harlan concurred in the result , but criticized the Court for relying on the Bill of Rights in reaching its decision . " The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment stands , " he wrote , " on its own bottom . " The Supreme Court would later adopt Harlan 's approach , relying on the due process clause rather than the penumbras of the Bill of Rights in right to privacy cases such as Roe v. Wade and Lawrence v. Texas . 
 Harlan 's interpretation of the Due Process Clause attracted the criticism of Justice Black , who rejected the idea that the Clause included a " substantive " component , considering this interpretation unjustifiably broad and historically unsound . The Supreme Court has agreed with Harlan , and has continued to apply the doctrine of substantive due process in a wide variety of cases . 
 = = = Incorporation = = = 
 Justice Harlan was strongly opposed to the theory that the Fourteenth Amendment " incorporated " the Bill of Rights — that is , made the provisions of the Bill of Rights applicable to the states . His opinion on the matter was opposite to that of his grandfather , who supported the full incorporation of the Bill of Rights . When it was originally ratified , the Bill of Rights was binding only upon the federal government , as the Supreme Court ruled in the 1833 case Barron v. Baltimore . Some jurists argued that the Fourteenth Amendment made the entirety of the Bill of Rights binding upon the states as well . Harlan , however , rejected this doctrine , which he called " historically unfounded " in his Griswold concurrence . 
 Instead , Justice Harlan believed that the Fourteenth Amendment 's due process clause only protected " fundamental " rights . Thus , if a guarantee of the Bill of Rights was " fundamental " or " implicit in the concept of ordered liberty , " Harlan agreed that it applied to the states as well as the federal government . Thus , for example , Harlan believed that the First Amendment 's free speech clause applied to the states , but that the Fifth Amendment 's self @-@ incrimination clause did not . 
 Harlan 's approach was largely similar to that of Justices Benjamin Cardozo and Felix Frankfurter . It drew criticism from Justice Black , a proponent of the total incorporation theory . Black claimed that the process of identifying some rights as more " fundamental " than others was largely arbitrary , and depended on each Justice 's personal opinions . 
 The Supreme Court has eventually adopted some elements of Harlan 's approach , holding that only some Bill of Rights guarantees were applicable against the states — the doctrine known as selective incorporation . However , under Chief Justice Earl Warren during the 1960s , an increasing number of rights were deemed sufficiently fundamental for incorporation ( Harlan regularly dissented from these rulings ) . Hence , the majority of provisions from the Bill of Rights have been extended to the states ; the exceptions are the Third Amendment , the grand jury clause of the Fifth Amendment , the Seventh Amendment , the excessive bail provision of the Eighth Amendment , the Ninth Amendment , and the Tenth Amendment . Thus , although the Supreme Court has agreed with Harlan 's general reasoning , the end result of its jurisprudence is very different from what Harlan advocated . 
 = = = First Amendment = = = 
 Justice Harlan supported many of the Warren Court 's landmark decisions relating to the separation of church and state . For instance , he voted in favor of the Court 's ruling that the states could not use religious tests as qualifications for public office in Torcaso v. Watkins . He joined in Engel v. Vitale , which declared that it was unconstitutional for states to require the recitation of official prayers in public schools . In Epperson v. Arkansas , similarly , he voted to strike down an Arkansas law banning the teaching of evolution . 
 In many cases , Harlan took a fairly broad view of First Amendment rights such as the freedom of speech and of the press , although he thought that the First Amendment applied directly only to the federal government . According to Harlan the freedom of speech was among the " fundamental principles of liberty and justice " and therefore applicable also to states , but less stringently than to the national government . Moreover , Justice Harlan believed that federal laws censoring " obscene " publications violated the free speech clause . Thus , he dissented from Roth v. United States , in which the Supreme Court upheld the validity of a federal obscenity law . At the same time , Harlan did not believe that the Constitution prevented the states from censoring obscenity . He explained in his Roth dissent : 
 The danger is perhaps not great if the people of one State , through their legislature , decide that Lady Chatterley 's Lover goes so far beyond the acceptable standards of candor that it will be deemed offensive and non @-@ <unk> , for the State next door is still free to make its own choice . At least we do not have one uniform standard . But the dangers to free thought and expression are truly great if the Federal Government imposes a blanket ban over the Nation on such a book . [ ... ] The fact that the people of one State cannot read some of the works of D. H. Lawrence seems to me , if not wise or desirable , at least acceptable . But that no person in the United States should be allowed to do so seems to me to be intolerable , and violative of both the letter and spirit of the First Amendment . 
 Harlan concurred in New York Times Co. v. Sullivan , which required public officials suing newspapers for libel to prove that the publisher had acted with " actual malice . " This stringent standard made it much more difficult for public officials to win libel cases . He did not , however , go as far as Justices Hugo Black and William O. Douglas , who suggested that all libel laws were unconstitutional . In Street v. New York , Harlan wrote the opinion of the court , ruling that the government could not punish an individual for insulting the American flag . In 1969 he noted that the Supreme Court had consistently " rejected all manner of prior restraint on publication . " 
 When Harlan was a Circuit Judge in 1955 , he authorized the decision upholding the conviction of leaders of the Communist Party USA ( including Elizabeth Gurley Flynn ) under the Smith Act . The ruling was based on the previous Supreme Court 's decisions , by which the Court of Appeals was bound . Later , when he was a Supreme Court justice , Harlan , however , wrote an opinion overturning the conviction of Communist Party activists as unconstitutional in the case of Yates v. United States . Another such case was Watkins v. United States . 
 Harlan penned the majority opinion in Cohen v. California , holding that wearing a jacket emblazoned with the words " Fuck the Draft " was speech protected by the First Amendment . His opinion was later described by constitutional law expert Professor Yale <unk> as one of the greatest ever written on freedom of expression . In the Cohen opinion , Harlan famously wrote " one man 's vulgarity is another 's lyric , " a quote that was later denounced by Robert Bork as " moral relativism " . 
 Justice Harlan is credited for the establishing that the First Amendment protects the freedom of association . In NAACP v. Alabama , Justice Harlan delivered the opinion of the court , invalidating an Alabama law that required the NAACP to disclose membership lists . However he did not believe that individuals were entitled to exercise their First Amendment rights wherever they pleased . He joined in Adderley v. Florida , which controversially upheld a trespassing conviction for protesters who demonstrated on government property . He dissented from Brown v. Louisiana , in which the Court held that protesters were entitled to engage in a sit @-@ in at a public library . Likewise , he disagreed with Tinker v. Des Moines , in which the Supreme Court ruled that students had the right to wear armbands ( as a form of protest ) in public schools . 
 = = = Criminal procedure = = = 
 During the 1960s the Warren Court made a series of rulings expanding the rights of criminal defendants . In some instances , Justice Harlan concurred in the result , while in many other cases he found himself in dissent . Harlan was usually joined by the other moderate members of the Court : Justices Potter Stewart , Tom Clark , and Byron White . 
 Most notably , Harlan dissented from Supreme Court rulings restricting interrogation techniques used by law enforcement officers . For example , he dissented from the Court 's holding in Escobedo v. Illinois , that the police could not refuse to honor a suspect 's request to consult with his lawyer during an interrogation . Harlan called the rule " ill @-@ conceived " and suggested that it " unjustifiably fetters perfectly legitimate methods of criminal law enforcement . " He disagreed with Miranda v. Arizona , which required law enforcement officials to warn a suspect of his rights before questioning him ( see Miranda warning ) . He closed his dissenting opinion with a quotation from his predecessor , Justice Robert H. Jackson : " This Court is forever adding new stories to the temples of constitutional law , and the temples have a way of collapsing when one story too many is added . " 
 In Gideon v. Wainwright , Justice Harlan agreed that the Constitution required states to provide attorneys for defendants who could not afford their own counsel . However , he believed that this requirement applied only at trial , and not on appeal ; thus , he dissented from Douglas v. California . 
 Harlan wrote the majority opinion Leary v. United States — a case that declared Marijuana Tax Act unconstitutional based on the Fifth Amendment protection against self @-@ incrimination . 
 Justice Harlan 's concurrence in Katz v. United States set forth the test for determining whether government conduct constituted a search . In this case the Supreme Court held that eavesdropping of the petitioner 's telephone conversation constituted a search in the meaning of the Fourth Amendment and thus required a warrant . According to Justice Harlan , there is a two @-@ part requirement for a search : 1 . That the individual have a subjective expectation of privacy ; and 2 . That the individual 's expectation of privacy is " one that society is prepared to recognize as ' reasonable . ' " 
 = = = Voting rights = = = 
 Justice Harlan rejected the theory that the Constitution enshrined the so @-@ called " one man , one vote " principle , or the principle that legislative districts must be roughly equal in population . In this regard , he shared the views of Justice Felix Frankfurter , who in Colegrove v. Green admonished the courts to stay out of the " political thicket " of reapportionment . The Supreme Court , however , disagreed with Harlan in a series of rulings during the 1960s . The first case in this line of rulings was Baker v. Carr . The Court ruled that the courts had jurisdiction over malapportionment issues and therefore were entitled to review the validity of district boundaries . Harlan , however , dissented , on the grounds that the plaintiffs failed to demonstrate that malapportionment violated their individual rights . 
 Then , in Wesberry v. Sanders , the Supreme Court , relying on the Constitution 's requirement that the United States House of Representatives be elected " by the People of the several States , " ruled that congressional districts in any particular state must be approximately equal in population . Harlan vigorously dissented , writing , " I had not expected to witness the day when the Supreme Court of the United States would render a decision which casts grave doubt on the constitutionality of the composition of the House of Representatives . It is not an exaggeration to say that such is the effect of today 's decision . " He proceeded to argue that the Court 's decision was inconsistent with both the history and text of the Constitution ; moreover , he claimed that only Congress , not the judiciary , had the power to require congressional districts with equal populations . 
 Harlan was the sole dissenter in Reynolds v. Sims , in which the Court relied on the Equal Protection Clause to extend the one man , one vote principle to state legislative districts . He analyzed the language and history of the Fourteenth Amendment , and concluded that the Equal Protection Clause was never intended to encompass voting rights . Because the Fifteenth Amendment would have been superfluous if the Fourteenth Amendment ( the basis of the reapportionment decisions ) had conferred a general right to vote , he claimed that the Constitution did not require states to adhere to the one man , one vote principle , and that the Court was merely imposing its own political theories on the nation . He suggested , in addition , that the problem of malapportionment was one that should be solved by the political process , and not by litigation . He wrote : 
 This Court , limited in function in accordance with that premise , does not serve its high purpose when it exceeds its authority , even to satisfy justified impatience with the slow workings of the political process . For when , in the name of constitutional interpretation , the Court adds something to the Constitution that was deliberately excluded from it , the Court , in reality , substitutes its view of what should be so for the amending process . 
 For similar reasons , Harlan dissented from Carrington v. Rash , in which the Court held that voter qualifications were subject to scrutiny under the equal protection clause . He claimed in his dissent , " the Court totally ignores , as it did in last Term 's reapportionment cases [ ... ] all the history of the Fourteenth Amendment and the course of judicial decisions which together plainly show that the Equal Protection Clause was not intended to touch state electoral matters . " Similarly , Justice Harlan disagreed with the Court 's ruling in Harper v. Virginia Board of Elections , invalidating the use of the poll tax as a qualification to vote . 
 = = Retirement and death = = 
 John M. Harlan 's health began to deteriorate towards the end of his career . His eyesight began to fail during the late 1960s . To cover this , he would bring materials to within an inch of his eyes , and have clerks and his wife read to him ( once when the Court took an obscenity case , a chagrined Harlan had his wife read him Lady Chatterley 's Lover ) . Gravely ill , he retired from the Supreme Court on September 23 , 1971 . 
 Harlan died from spinal cancer three months later , on December 29 , 1971 . He was buried at the Emmanuel Church Cemetery in Weston , Connecticut . President Richard Nixon considered nominating Mildred Lillie , a California appeals court judge , to fill the vacant seat ; Lillie would have been the first female nominee to the Supreme Court . However , Nixon decided against Lillie 's nomination after the American Bar Association found Lillie to be unqualified . Thereafter , Nixon nominated William Rehnquist ( a future Chief Justice ) , who was confirmed by the Senate . 
 Despite his many dissents , Harlan has been described as one of the most influential Supreme Court justices of the twentieth century . He was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1960 . Harlan 's extensive professional and Supreme Court papers ( 343 cubic feet ) were donated to Princeton University , where they are housed at the Seeley G. Mudd Manuscript Library and open to research . Other papers repose at several other libraries . Ethel Harlan , his wife , outlived him by only a few months and died on June 12 , 1972 . She suffered from Alzheimer 's disease for the last seven years of her life . 
 = Interstate 190 ( New York ) = 
 Interstate 190 ( I @-@ 190 , locally known as The One @-@ Ninety ) is a north – south auxiliary Interstate Highway that connects I @-@ 90 in Buffalo , New York with the Canada @-@ U.S. border near Niagara Falls . The freeway bisects downtown Buffalo before crossing Grand Island and travelling around the outskirts of Niagara Falls before crossing the Niagara River on the Queenston @-@ Lewiston Bridge into Ontario . On the Canadian side of the border , the freeway continues as Highway 405 , a short spur that connects with the Queen Elizabeth Way ( QEW ) , which in turn provides a freeway connection to Toronto , Canada 's largest city . The 28 @.@ 34 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 45 @.@ 61 km ) route also provides access to the Peace Bridge between Buffalo and Fort Erie , Ontario . 
 Officially , I @-@ 190 from I @-@ 90 north to New York State Route 384 ( NY 384 ) is named the Niagara Thruway and is part of the New York State Thruway system . The remainder , from NY 384 to Lewiston , is known as the Niagara Expressway and is maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation . I @-@ 190 is the only three @-@ digit Interstate Highway to reach the Canada – US border , and one of only two to connect to an international border , the other being Interstate 110 in Texas . 
 Parts of the highway were built along the former rights @-@ of @-@ way of the Lehigh Valley Railroad and the Erie Canal . The entire route was built as part of the New York State Thruway in the late 1950s and early 1960s , and was completed in 1964 . In 2006 , the tolls along the freeway were removed , although the Grand Island ones remain in place . 
 = = Route description = = 
 I @-@ 190 begins at an interchange with the New York State Thruway ( I @-@ 90 ) in Cheektowaga in Erie County , just north of the West Seneca town line and east of the Buffalo city line . I @-@ 190 heads west into Buffalo , passing the former location of the City Line toll barrier ahead of an interchange with South Ogden Street ( exit 1 ) . Farther west , I @-@ 190 meets NY 354 ( exit 2 ) , NY 16 ( exit 3 ) , and several local streets before entering downtown Buffalo . Within the downtown area , I @-@ 190 passes between First Niagara Center and Coca @-@ Cola Field near an interchange with NY 5 ( exit 7 ) on the shores of Lake Erie . At NY 5 , I @-@ 190 turns northward to follow the path of the Niagara River . Shortly after meeting NY 266 ( exit 8 ) immediately northwest of downtown , I @-@ 190 interchanges with Porter Avenue ( exit 9 ) , a local roadway connecting I @-@ 190 to the Peace Bridge and , thus , the Queen Elizabeth Way in Canada . 
 North of downtown Buffalo , I @-@ 190 follows the eastern edge of the Black Rock Canal ( and passes the site of the former Black Rock toll barrier ) before rejoining the banks of the Niagara near an exit with the Scajaquada Expressway ( NY 198 , exit 11 ) . I @-@ 190 continues north through the northern extents of Buffalo , meeting multiple streets before separating from the Niagara and interchanging with NY 266 and NY 324 ( exits 15 and 16 ) in quick succession . At exit 16 , NY 324 joins I @-@ 190 northward through western Tonawanda . The two routes then meet I @-@ 290 and NY 266 a second time prior to crossing the Niagara River on the South Grand Island Bridge . NY 324 leaves the expressway shortly after arriving on Grand Island at exit 18 . 
 I @-@ 190 and NY 324 follow parallel routings across Grand Island , with both roads passing on opposite sides of Martin 's Fantasy Island , a local amusement park , near the center of the island . At the northern edge of the island , NY 324 , as signed , terminates at exit 20 ; however , officially , NY 324 rejoins I @-@ 190 across the Niagara River once again via the North Grand Island Bridge . Now in Niagara Falls , Niagara County , NY 324 ends at a complex interchange featuring NY 384 , the Niagara Scenic Parkway , and the LaSalle Expressway on the eastern bank of the river . Farther north , I @-@ 190 meets U.S. Route 62 ( US 62 ) at exit 22 and NY 182 at exit 23 . 
 Past NY 182 , I @-@ 190 turns to the northwest , skirting the northeastern edge of Niagara Falls and roughly paralleling NY 265 to the east . In Lewiston , the expressway meets NY 31 at exit 24 southwest of the large Robert Moses Niagara Power Plant reservoir . I @-@ 190 continues onward , crossing the canal between the reservoir and the power plant on a small dam also used by NY 265 . The freeway then interchanges with NY 265 , the Niagara Scenic Parkway , and NY 104 at the expansive exit 25 before curving to the west and terminating at the approach to the Lewiston – Queenston Bridge . Across the bridge in Queenston , Ontario , the roadway becomes Highway 405 . 
 = = History = = 
 The portion of modern I @-@ 190 south of NY 384 in Niagara Falls was originally built by the New York State Thruway Authority as part of the New York State Thruway system . Construction on two segments of the highway — from South Ogden Street to Porter Avenue in downtown Buffalo and from Beaver Island Parkway to West River Road on Grand Island — began in 1953 . On Grand Island , construction began to connect the two existing two lane bridges on July 16 , 1954 . By 1955 , construction had begun on the remainder of the Niagara Thruway . On July 30 , 1959 , the Thruway was opened from the Tri @-@ Level Interchange at I @-@ 90 to Porter Avenue , and from Sheridan Drive to the southern Grand Island bridge . The remainder of the highway , with the exception of the twinned Grand Island bridges , was completed by 1964 . 
 On August 14 , 1957 , the routing of what is now I @-@ 190 ( including the then @-@ partially complete Niagara Thruway ) was originally designated as I @-@ <unk> , as intercity routes were assigned before three @-@ digit Interstate numbers were applied to the shorter intracity routes . I @-@ <unk> was renumbered to I @-@ 190 on February 24 , 1959 . Construction on the portion of I @-@ 190 north of NY 384 began c . 1962 and was completed by 1964 . 
 In 1991 , maintenance of I @-@ 84 in downstate New York was transferred from the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) to the New York State Thruway Authority ( NYSTA ) . The monies for that purpose came from tolls levied on I @-@ 190 in downtown Buffalo . Under the laws authorizing the Thruway construction , the tolls were to be removed once the original bonds used to pay for the construction were paid off , which occurred in 1996 ; however , the tolls would remain for ten more years . Attorney Carl Paladino brought a lawsuit against the state in 2006 to force the removal of the tolls . On October 30 , 2006 , the Thruway Authority voted to both begin the process of returning maintenance of I @-@ 84 to NYSDOT and to remove the tolls on I @-@ 190 in Buffalo . Collection of the tolls stopped that day . Both major candidates in the 2006 New York gubernatorial election , Democrat Eliot Spitzer and Republican John Faso , had pledged to remove the tolls on I @-@ 190 if elected . While the toll barriers in Buffalo have since been demolished , the tolls further north on the two Grand Island bridges still remain . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = Everytime = 
 " Everytime " is a song by American recording artist Britney Spears , taken from her fourth studio album , In the Zone ( 2003 ) . It was released on May 10 , 2004 by Jive Records as the third single from the album . After her relationship with American singer Justin Timberlake ended in 2002 , she made friends with her backing vocalist Annet Artani . They started writing songs together at Spears 's house in Los Angeles , and then traveled to Lombardy , Italy , where " Everytime " was written . Spears composed the music and she developed the lyrics with Artani . According to Artani , the song was written as a response to Timberlake 's 2002 song " Cry Me a River " . Spears has neither confirmed nor denied these allegations . 
 " Everytime " is considered a pop ballad with breathy vocals . Its lyrics are a plea for forgiveness for inadvertently hurting a former lover . Music critics mostly complimented its lyrical content , deeming the song " organic " in comparison with most of the tracks on its host album . Spears ' maturity in the production and her songwriting abilities were also complimented . " Everytime " peaked inside the top five in several countries , while reaching the top of the charts in Australia , Hungary , Ireland and the United Kingdom . In the U.S. it was a top 20 single , peaking at number 15 on Billboard Hot 100 . Spears performed " Everytime " in a series of live appearances such as television shows Saturday Night Live and Top of the Pops . She has also performed the song on piano in a flowered @-@ themed setting at The Onyx Hotel Tour ( 2004 ) , while suspended on a giant umbrella at The Circus Starring Britney Spears ( 2009 ) and in an angel costume at Britney : Piece of Me ( 2013 ) . " Everytime " has been covered by artists such as Glen Hansard and Kelly Clarkson , and was used in the film Spring Breakers ( 2013 ) . 
 Inspired by the cinematography of Leaving Las Vegas , the music video for " Everytime " portrays Spears as a star hounded by paparazzi , who drowns in her bathtub when she starts bleeding from a wound in her head . In the hospital , doctors fail to resuscitate her while a child is born in the next room , implying she has been reincarnated . The original treatment would have had Spears killing herself from a drug overdose , but the plot was removed after it received criticism by organizations such as Kidscape , who perceived it as a glamorization of suicide . Critics noted the video for its religious references to The Passion of the Christ , Kabbalah and stigmata , and for predicting Spears 's future struggles with fame . 
 = = Background and writing = = 
 Spears 's relationship of three years with pop singer Justin Timberlake ended in 2002 after months of speculation . In November 2002 , Timberlake released the song " Cry Me a River " as the second single from his solo debut album . The music video featured a Spears look @-@ alike and fueled the rumors that she had been unfaithful to him . " Cry Me a River " is often credited as being the song that propelled the album into the charts . In September 2001 , Annet Artani accepted to become a backing vocalist for Spears 's 2001 – 2002 Dream Within a Dream Tour . Her interactions with Spears during most of the tour were limited to small conversations at the gym and vocal warm ups . Artani had begun a relationship with the show 's musical director during 2002 ; however , it was not working out well by the end of the tour . Before the last date in Mexico City , Spears called her and asked about the relationship . Artani told her they were going to break up , to which Spears responded , " Don 't worry about it , you 're going to hang out with me " . Following the end of the tour , Spears and Artani began to forge a friendship . Spears invited Artani to her house in Los Angeles , California . According to Artani , their relationship grew out of their shared romantic experiences at the time . She explained , " Basically , we commiserated because she , at that time , had broken up with Justin [ Timberlake ] . Maybe like nine months before , but of course it was really fresh in the media . I was just breaking up with this guy , so we kind of like — I think we kind of needed each other . " Artani stayed at Spears 's house for a few weeks , in which they started writing songs at the piano . Shortly after , they traveled to Lake Como in Lombardy , Italy . Artani added , " It was me and her , her stylist and Felicia , and we had this humongous house to ourselves , and they had a piano there as well " . 
 According to Artani , " Everytime " was written in large part as a response to " Cry Me a River " as well as various radio interviews . Artani explained , " He was getting personal . Here , she had a different type of image , and he was really exposing some stuff that she probably didn 't want out there , and in front of her little sister ... I remember her sister being mortified and her being mortified . I 'm sure that that really hurt her . " The song was also speculated to be a reply to Timberlake 's " Never Again " , a ballad which appeared on his debut solo album Justified . " Everytime " was recorded at Conway Studios in Los Angeles and mixed at Frou Frou Central in London , United Kingdom . During an interview with Hip Online , Spears commented about the recording sessions , saying , 
 " ... Like with ' Everytime ' I wrote the whole thing from scratch on the piano . Musically there was no track or anything . I was just at my house and I did the whole thing by myself . And then I went and I played it for [ Guy Sigsworth ] and I just basically told him exactly how I wanted the song to sound . And he was so amazing because there 's a lot of producers you tell them things and they don 't get it . And you 're like oh , that 's not the right way . He got it just right . He was amazing . And so that song specifically , you know , I did everything . " 
 " Everytime " was one of the first songs finished for In the Zone , previewed on May 30 , 2003 , to <unk> Philippe of MTV at Battery Studios in New York City . It was registered with the U.S. Copyright Office on April 26 , 2003 under the title of " Everytime I Try " and <unk> registration number with a given recording year of 2002 . Spears named it the most personal song of the album along with " Touch of My Hand " , explaining , " It 's one of the songs that when you hear , it 's like the kind of song when you go to heaven . It kind of takes you away . You know , it takes you in to a very cool consciousness I think . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Everytime " is a pop ballad . It begins with a music box introduction accompanying Spears 's breathy vocals , which build from soft to strong through the song . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Universal Music Publishing Group , " Everytime " is composed in the key of E ♭ major , with a tempo of 110 beats per minute . Spears 's vocal range spans from the low @-@ tone of A ♭ 3 to the high @-@ tone of E ♭ 5 . " Everytime " lyrics are a plea for forgiveness for inadvertently hurting a former lover . In the song , the singer explains she feels unable to continue in lines such as " Everytime I try to fly I fall / Without my wings I feel so small " . Jennifer Vineyard of MTV compared the song lyrically to another ballad from In the Zone , " Shadow " , since they both speak " about how reminders of a lover can still linger after he 's gone . " During an interview with Jennifer Vineyard of MTV , Spears said about " Everytime " , " It 's about heartbreak , it 's about your first love , your first true love . That 's something all people can relate to , because you all have that first love that you think you 're going to be with the rest of your life . " When asked if " Everytime " was about Timberlake during an interview with Diane Sawyer in PrimeTime , she responded " I 'll let the song speak for itself . " 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Gavin Mueller of Stylus Magazine deemed " Everytime " as the best track of In the Zone , explaining " it is just a spare piano ballad , simple yet effectively fragile " . Ali Fenwick of The Johns Hopkins News @-@ Letter complimented Spears 's songwriting and added the song " shows a glimmer of the talent that hides behind the robotic , <unk> @-@ out vocals on the rest of the album . " Christy Lemire of msnbc.com called it " actually a pretty tune " and named it the best ballad in Greatest Hits : My Prerogative . Jason Shawhan of About.com said " Everytime " " screams Single ! " . 
 Spence D. of IGN said the song " continues to mine the Zone turf and unleashes what is ostensibly Britney 's first mature ballad , at least in terms of being musically staid and stripped of any <unk> sweat and gloss . " Linda McGee of RTÉ.ie said that along with In the Zone 's " Brave New Girl " , they were " individually impressive " , but disrupted the direction of the album . David Browne of Entertainment Weekly commented , " With its dainty piano , ' Everytime ' plays like a forlorn postmortem on her Justin Timberlake era . " Sterling Clover of The Village Voice called it " a weeper in the best ' Time After Time ' ( 1984 ) tradition . " William Shaw of Blender said that while " Everytime " was not her greatest ballad , the lyrics were " certainly heartfelt " . A reviewer from the Huddersfield Daily Examiner stated , " [ the ] breathy ballad [ has ] got a stage musical feel to it , but Britney 's no Elaine Paige " . Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine named it along with " Shadow " " two sappy ballads " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 On May 22 , 2004 , " Everytime " debuted at number 61 on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 , becoming the " Highest Debut " of the week . On July 3 , 2004 , it peaked at number 15 and stayed in the position for four weeks . The song also peaked at number four on Billboard 's Pop Songs and at number 17 and number 25 on the Hot Dance Club Songs and Adult Pop Songs charts , respectively . On November 18 , 2004 , " Everytime " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) selling 500 @,@ 000 copies . As of July 2010 , " Everytime " has sold 469 @,@ 000 paid digital downloads in the United States . 
 In Canada , the song peaked at number two on the Canadian Singles Chart . 
 In Australia , " Everytime " debuted at the top of the ARIA Singles Chart on the week of June 28 , 2004 , becoming the " Highest Debut " . It received a gold certification by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipments over 35 @,@ 000 units . 
 In the United Kingdom , the single debuted at the top of the UK Singles Chart on June 20 , 2004 ― for the week ending date June 26 , 2004 ― becoming her second consecutive number one single in Britain from In the Zone , following Toxic in March 2004 . According to The Official Charts Company , the song has sold 270 @,@ 000 copies in Britain . 
 " Everytime " was also successful elsewhere in Europe , reaching the top of the charts in Hungary and Ireland , peaking at number two in France , number three in Sweden and reaching top five positions in Austria , Belgium ( Flanders and Wallonia ) , Czech Republic , Denmark , Germany , Norway and the Netherlands . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development and release = = = 
 On March 9 , 2004 , the treatment of the music video for " Everytime " was released online . It portrayed Spears as a star hounded by photographers , who eventually kills herself by taking prescription drugs and drowning in a bathtub . The suicide scene was perceived to be Spears 's response to the rumors that suggested she suffered from a mental disorder . After news of the concept broke , it was criticized by a number of organizations in the United Kingdom and the United States . Director of child protection charity Kidscape , Michele Elliott , said , " This is absolutely outrageous , totally irresponsible , completely stupid . If even one child follows her lead she will surely be held responsible . What is she thinking of ? " . She also commented the release of the music video could cause an increase in suicide rates , comparing it to the death of actress Marilyn Monroe in August 1962 . MTV News ' " You Tell Us " also received numerous letters from upset viewers , who criticized Spears saying they perceived the ending was a glamorization of suicide . On March 12 , 2004 , Spears announced through Jive Records she had removed the concept , " due to the potential for a fictional accidental occurrence to be misinterpreted as a suicide " . She also clarified it was not her intent to present suicide in any sort of positive light . 
 The video was directed by David LaChapelle and shot on March 13 and 14 , 2004 , in Los Angeles . The lighting was described as " saturated , but low and naturalistic " to give the video a cinematic feel , referencing the 1995 film Leaving Las Vegas . It premiered on TRL on April 12 , 2004 . Spears called the show and explained the video explored reincarnation . She added , " It 's more like a movie . It 's different than anything I 've ever done . It 's dark , and it shows me in a different light . Of course , I 'm going to go back and do dance videos , but I wanted to be inspired and challenged . " An alternate version of the video which features Spears singing in the white hallway scenes was released on the 2004 DVD Greatest Hits : My Prerogative . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video begins with an aerial shot of Las Vegas , Nevada , showing the Palms Casino Resort and continues with a shot of a marquee hotel that reads " Britney Spears Live From Miami The Onyx Hotel Tour Las Vegas " , with a picture of Spears holding a leather strap and referencing her Showtime concert special from Miami . Christian author Eva Marie Everson compared the image to " Madonna doing her own impersonation of Marilyn Monroe . " Spears and her boyfriend ( played by Stephen Dorff ) are arriving to the hotel inside a limousine . They sit apart from each other , staring out separate windows . Spears wears a Birmingham Barons cap in these scenes . The boyfriend is talking on his cell phone , and when she attempts to touch him , he pushes her away . The entrance is full of fans and paparazzi taking pictures . When they leave the car , fans and paparazzi alike act in an extreme way and fights break in the crowd . While her bodyguards try to protect her , her boyfriend throws magazines at the paparazzi . Stephanie Zacharek of The New York Times compared the shots of the paparazzi with the Jews in the 2004 film The Passion of the Christ . During this scene , she gets hit in the head with a camera , and unknowingly gets a wound on her head , but keeps walking . 
 Inside their hotel room , Spears and her boyfriend start screaming at each other . He throws a vase at the wall while Spears goes into the bathroom , hurling something at the mirror . She begins to fill the bathtub and remove her clothes . After this , the video includes intercut scenes of a close @-@ up of Spears singing in a white shirt in front of a bright white light . As she lies in the bathtub , a red string , a custom associated with Kabbalah is seen in her wrist . She touches her head and looks at her hand , realizing she is bleeding from the wound . According to Jennifer Vineyard of MTV , the blood in her hand is stigmata . She loses consciousness in the bathtub and drowns . Shortly after , her boyfriend finds her and tries to resuscitate her . Meanwhile , it is revealed that in the close @-@ up scenes Spears is actually inside a hospital hallway . The video continues with scenes of her being carried into an ambulance and surrounded by photographers , as well as scenes of her being resuscitated by doctors in a hospital bed . The ghost of Spears in a white shirt , watches herself in the bed and walks into the next room , where a baby girl is born . Spears is then seen running away from the camera into the light . The music video ends with her rising from under the water , resting her head and smiling , suggesting the whole scene of her death was a dream or a morbid fantasy . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Eva Marie Everson wrote that the music video showed the reality " behind the glitz and the glamour " . Dominic Fox commented , " Even in its bowdlerised form , the ' Everytime ' video presents a moment of existential indecision , a fugue of suicidal ideation in which the singer fantasises about her own death " . While reviewing the music video for her 2009 single " If U Seek Amy " , James Montgomery of MTV called the music video for " Everytime " " underrated " . Rolling Stone in their 2009 article " Britney Spears : The Complete Video Guide " , called it " horribly prophetic and depressing " and added that the clip foreshadowed Spears 's struggles with fame and mental instability during 2007 and 2008 . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On October 18 , 2003 , " Everytime " was performed by Spears during the twenty @-@ ninth season of the American comedy show Saturday Night Live . She also performed it at Britney Spears : In the Zone , a concert special that aired in ABC on November 17 , 2003 . " Everytime " was also performed by Spears at 2004 's The Onyx Hotel Tour . Before the tour began , Spears said that it was one of the songs she was looking most forward to perform , explaining , " I really think I 'm talking to everyone when I perform ' Everytime ' " . It was the first song of the third act , titled " Mystic Garden " . It began with a video interlude in which Spears walked into a garden wearing a rainbow @-@ colored dress and sat in a flower @-@ covered piano . As the video ended , it was revealed that she was sitting onstage in a similar setting . She started the performance talking to the audience about the media coverage of her personal life . She played the piano and sang until the second verse , where she stood up and walked to the center of the stage to continue the performance . Neil Strauss of The New York Times commented , " It was the only song that she appeared to sing unaccompanied by backing tapes " . Kelefa Sanneh of Blender called it the best performance of the show . 
 " Everytime " was also performed by Spears at the British music chart show Top of the Pops on August 5 , 2004 . Spears also performed the song at 2009 's The Circus Starring Britney Spears . " Everytime " was the only song that was not included in the released setlist , and was added as a surprise . It was the sixth and last song of the second act , titled " House of Fun ( Anything Goes ) " . After a Bollywood @-@ inspired performance of " Me Against the Music " from In the Zone , Spears sat on a giant umbrella in the middle of the stage and briefly talked to the audience . She performed " Everytime " while the umbrella was lifted into the air . Spears included " Everytime " on the setlist for her Las Vegas residency , Britney : Piece of Me . After a brief interlude , descended from the <unk> as a " giant , white @-@ winged angel " . After a snow shower of confetti , the song transitioned into " ... Baby One More Time " . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 " Everytime " was covered by Glen Hansard of Irish band The Frames . It was recorded during a live show at Today FM and released in the 2004 covers compilation , Even Better than the Real Thing Vol . 2 . It was also covered in Mandarin by Taiwanese girl group <unk> and released on their studio album Encore ( 2004 ) . Their version was retitled " <unk> <unk> <unk> " ( <unk> " Don 't Say Sorry " ) . American pop rock singer Sally Maer also covered " Everytime " to release it on her studio album Bed of Roses ( 2008 ) . " Everytime " was used during the 2009 Irish production of the 1896 play The Seagull . Jackie Evancho covered the song for her debut album Prelude to a Dream ( 2009 ) . On August 19 , 2010 , her version debuted at number three on Billboard 's Classical Digital Songs chart . British singer Cher Lloyd covered the song live on The X Factor in the United Kingdom in 2010 . On July 27 , 2012 , Kelly Clarkson covered the song during the Las Vegas stop of her summer tour , as an audience request . Clarkson had a harpist accompany her during the performance , and told the audience , " This song is one of my favourite songs . [ ... ] I actually prefer [ Spears 's ] version better , because it just sounds really sad , but I 'm going to try and do it . " Spears approved of Clarkson 's cover via her Twitter account , calling it " beautiful " . " Everytime " was also covered on the American series Glee episode " Britney 2 @.@ 0 " by the character Marley Rose ( played by Melissa Benoist ) ; her rendition was rated a B by TVLine 's Michael Slezak . In July 2016 , the song was covered by YouTube personality Trisha <unk> . 
 " Everytime " was also used in the 2013 American film Spring Breakers , directed by Harmony Korine . The scene begins with the characters of Candy ( Vanessa Hudgens ) , Brittany ( Ashley Benson ) and Cotty ( Rachel Korine ) standing in the backyard of the character of Alien ( James Franco ) , who sits at a white grand piano . The girls are wearing My Little Pony ski masks , sparkly pink tiger bathing suits , sweatpants with " <unk> " on the rear and shotguns in their hands . They ask Alien to " Play us something sweet . Something uplifting , Something fucking inspiring , " to which he responds " One of the greatest singers of all time , and an angel if there ever was one on this earth " , before starting to sing " Everytime " . As the song transitions from Alien 's vocals to Spears 's original version we are shown a montage of the girls and Alien robbing other spring breakers at gunpoint . Harmony Korine said about the song , 
 " I like her music ! I think it ’ s like perfect pop music . That song " Everytime " — I was always taken by that song . It has this real kind of beauty and <unk> and this haunting kind of morose lullaby effect and underneath it there ’ s some type of hardcore aggression and menace that was really connected to the film in the way that the film deals with the culture of surfaces , this candy @-@ coated neon haze reality . Underneath it , there ’ s this subtext and feeling of this kind of darkness . It was a connection I felt . " 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Britney Spears – lead vocals , songwriting , production 
 Annet Artani – songwriting 
 Guy Sigsworth – co @-@ production , all instruments 
 Sean McGhee – mixing , engineering , editing 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = The Book Job = 
 " The Book Job " is the sixth episode of the twenty @-@ third season of the American animated sitcom The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 20 , 2011 . In the episode , Lisa is shocked to discover that all popular young @-@ adult novels are conceived by book publishing executives through use of market research and ghostwriters to make money . When Homer hears this , he decides to get rich by starting work on a fantasy novel about trolls together with Bart , Principal Skinner , Patty , Moe , Professor Frink , and author Neil Gaiman . Lisa , who does not think writing should be about money , decides to write a novel on her own . However , she is constantly distracted by other things and fails to make any progress on it . After selling their novel to a book publishing executive , the group members later discover that the executive has replaced the trolls with vampires because vampires are more popular . In an attempt to replace this new version with the old before the novel goes into print , they break into the book publishing company 's headquarters . 
 The episode was written by freelancer Dan <unk> , though The Simpsons executive producer Matt Selman received the idea for it . His inspiration came from a magazine article he had read about the book packaging company Alloy Entertainment and its use of ghostwriters . In addition , the episode was inspired by the Ocean 's Trilogy , a film series about a group of criminals that heist casinos , and features many elements from it . Actor Andy García , who appears in that series as a casino owner , guest starred in " The Book Job " as the book publishing executive . It also contains several references to and parodies of the Harry Potter and Twilight series , aimed at young adults . The episode was seen by approximately 5 @.@ 77 million people during its original airing and since then it has received positive reviews from television critics , particularly for its satire of the book publishing industry and for its references to the Ocean 's Trilogy . Gaiman , who provided his voice for the episode , has also been praised for his performance . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After watching a dinosaur show at an arena in Springfield , Lisa discovers one of her favorite authors , T. R. Francis , working there in a dinosaur costume . The woman reveals to a shocked Lisa that she is just an actress the book publishing company used for the jacket photos , and that T. R. Francis is a complete fabrication . She further reveals that all popular young @-@ adult book series are conceived by book publishing executives through market research and the use of multiple ghostwriters , just to make more money . When Homer finds out about this , he decides to get rich by group @-@ writing a fantasy novel . He recruits a team consisting of Bart , Principal Skinner , Patty Bouvier , Moe Szyslak , and Professor Frink , all of whom have personal attributes or experiences that will help with writing the book : Skinner knows what teens like , Patty is a fantasy fiction fan , Moe has already published some children 's books , and Frink has a computer . Lisa is shocked to find that they are group @-@ writing a book , as she knows the only reason one would do that is to gain money . To show that what they are doing is wrong , she decides to write a novel on her own with a personal story that readers will connect with . 
 For their novel , the group members decide to take the typical elements from already popular young @-@ adult series . Homer initially suggest that they write about vampires , but Patty notes the fact that there are already so many popular novels out there in that genre . They therefore decide to write about an orphan troll who goes to a magic school located under the Brooklyn Bridge . Fantasy author Neil Gaiman overhears the team talking and offers his help writing the novel ; although they allow him to join , he is only given the task of bringing food for them while they are writing . The group members quickly finish the novel , which they name The Troll Twins of Underbridge Academy , and meet up with a book publishing executive for TweenLit Inc. at a book fair . Although he likes the novel , he dismisses it because it lacks a fake author with an inspirational back story . Meanwhile , Lisa is having a hard time making progress on her book because of constant distractions and quickly becomes saddened after realizing that she will never have her name on a novel . However , Homer approaches her and offers her to be the fake author of The Troll Twins of Underbridge Academy . Lisa admits defeat and takes the offer . They and the rest of the crew then approach the book publishing executive again , and he decides to buy the novel for a million dollars . As the team is celebrating at Moe 's Tavern , they receive an advance copy . They are shocked to discover that the publisher has replaced the troll @-@ aspects of the story with vampires , renaming the novel The Vampire Twins of Transylvania Prep , because market testing showed that vampires are more popular than trolls . 
 The team breaks into TweenLit Inc . ' s headquarters , planning to replace the new novel with their old version before the mass printing begins . However , when they reach the printing room , the book publishing executive shows up with a group of armed men . He reveals that someone tipped him off about their plan , just as Lisa appears letting them know it was her because she wants her name on a book that will actually be popular . The executive types in the password in the printing machine and gives Lisa the honor of inserting the USB flash drive with the novel on it . Later , when the saddened members of the group @-@ writing team are walking away from the headquarters , they pass a book store and discover that The Troll Twins of Underbridge Academy is being put on the stands . Lisa shows up again , letting them know that she only pretended to betray them so that the publisher would type in the password . When Lisa gave Bart a hug , she replaced the executive 's flash drive with Bart 's flash drive that contained the troll novel . As a result , she was able to put the original version into print . Lisa is happy to know that her name is finally on a book ; however , when she opens a copy , she discovers that Gaiman is listed as the author , not her . It turns out that there were three flash drives and that Gaiman <unk> his way to the best @-@ seller list " once again " despite being illiterate . During the credits , it is revealed that Moe was aware of Gaiman 's scheme , and was in fact allied with him from the start . The two celebrate with a toast at Shelbyville Beach , but Gaiman double @-@ crosses Moe and poisons his drink . 
 = = Production = = 
 Freelance writer Dan <unk> , who is known for his work on the animated series Futurama , wrote " The Book Job " with contributions from the staff writers on The Simpsons . Matt Selman , an executive producer and writer on The Simpsons , was the one who conceived of the idea behind the episode . He was inspired by an article in The New Yorker about the book packaging company Alloy Entertainment — the publisher of series such as Gossip Girl and Vampire Diaries — and the company 's use of ghostwriters . According to Selman , the article " was all about how these executives take market research and come up with the ideas for these books and farms them out and slaps the name of fake writers on them and fabricates backgrounds for these authors who don ’ t exist . We took that trend and kind of blew it up and shoved it in the face of Lisa " . 
 Selman told the Los Angeles Times that the episode praises collaborative writing , and answers the question of whether or not writing in a group is as valuable as writing alone . He commented : " I 've been with The Simpsons for 15 years and everyday [ sic ] it 's been pretty much writing as a team . We ’ re proud of what we 've done even if it 's not the traditional idea of one writer sitting down with a passion and a vision . In a strange way this episode ends up as a defense of writing in a group and celebrating the way it makes you feel connected to the work and to the people in that group in ways you didn 't expect . It 's all about a writers room ... and you know , in the story , Homer 's cynical heist team does end up being incredibly productive . " The episode features several references to literature and parodies several popular young @-@ adult book series , particularly Twilight , a vampire @-@ themed fantasy book series by Stephenie Meyer that has received much popularity . While chasing T. R. Francis through the stadium where the dinosaur show took place , Lisa passes a bathroom in which a group of dinosaurs are smoking in reference to a Far Side comic of dinosaurs smoking . The dinosaur show itself , Sitting with Dinosaurs , is based on the live Walking with Dinosaurs show . 
 In addition to literature , the episode spoofs the Ocean 's Trilogy , a film series about a group of criminals that heist casinos . Selman revealed to Entertainment Weekly in January 2011 that the episode is essentially about " Homer and some people in Springfield hav [ ing ] to perpetrate an Ocean 's Eleven – style heist in the non @-@ Ocean 's Eleven world of children ’ s fantasy book publishing . " Throughout the episode as the story progresses , title cards with titles such as " The Crew " , " The Setup " , " The Heist " , and " The Payday " appear . During these title cards , which last for about three to four seconds each , a version of the song " Gritty Shaker " by David Holmes is heard . This song was played for approximately three minutes during a scene in Ocean 's Eleven . On his blog , The Simpsons music editor Chris Ledesma wrote that Selman wanted " Gritty Shaker " to be played repeatedly throughout " The Book Job " because he erroneously thought that was how it was done in film . During the heist of TweenLit Inc . ' s headquarters , the screen splits in several ways , showing the different team members making their way to the printing room . According to Selman , " the set @-@ up and feel [ of the episode ] is a real creative departure for us . It 's sort of a heist movie where the heist is writing a book but when that kicks in , there 's a giant stylistic leap . It 's also a little sillier , a little more stylistic than most episodes . We 're coming up on 500 episodes , but really , this is the kind of episode a show would only do if hadn 't already had a couple hundred episodes . " Cuban American actor Andy García , who appeared in the Ocean 's Trilogy as casino owner Terry Benedict , guest starred in " The Book Job " as the book publishing executive . At the end of January 2011 , the recording of his performance took place . 
 English fantasy author Neil Gaiman guest starred in the episode as himself , helping Homer and the others write the book . He recorded his lines in January 2011 in Los Angeles , California under the direction of Selman . Gaiman has said that when he first agreed to guest star , he assumed he would only be getting a brief appearance , popping up for a few seconds . He told the press that " when they actually sent me the script and I started to read it and discovered that I was in it all the way through and was actually having to act and that stuff happened , it was enormously fun . " Gaiman also noted that he does not think the episode gives an entirely accurate portrayal of him , commenting : " Truthfully , the real @-@ life me almost never hangs around in Barnes & Noble @-@ like bookstores waiting to find groups of local townsfolk who 've decided to write pseudonymous young adult fantasy series , offering my services . And even if I did , I probably wouldn 't be doing the catering . " On his official Tumblr page , Gaiman noted that while he did not have much input on the story , he got to improvise while recording and gave suggestions on how to make his dialogue sound as close to something he might actually say in real life . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " The Book Job " originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 20 , 2011 . It was watched by approximately 5 @.@ 77 million people during this broadcast . In the demographic for adults aged 18 – 49 , the episode received a 2 @.@ 7 Nielsen rating ( down twenty @-@ one percent from the previous episode ) and a seven percent share . The Simpsons became the second highest @-@ rated program in Fox 's Animation Domination lineup that night in terms of total viewers and in the 18 – 49 demographic , finishing with a higher rating than Allen Gregory and American Dad ! , but a lower rating than Family Guy . 
 Since airing , " The Book Job " has received positive reviews from critics . Josh Harrison of Ology named it one the season 's strongest episodes so far , praising it for featuring " a brilliant appearance by author [ ... ] Neil Gaiman and a slick Ocean 's Eleven aesthetic " . AOL TV 's Jason Hughes applauded the uncommon structuring of the episode , writing : " So why was this episode so much more fun than usual ? We think it has to do with the format and the playfulness in the presentation . After two decades , it pays to shake things up and give us a completely fresh look at the show . Even the team created some new combinations from the massive Springfield citizenry . Maybe they should consider doing that more often . " Hayden Childs of The A.V. Club praised the episode as " entertaining and successful " , commenting that " element of surprise is the key here , and The Simpsons did something quite surprising tonight , combining a parody of heist movies with a sharp satirical look at book mill publishing . With the successful guest appearances by both Neil Gaiman and Andy García , this episode delivered an increasingly rare treat for Simpsons fans : a well @-@ written and well @-@ acted half @-@ hour that gets better and funnier as it goes . " Childs did , however , criticize the " split screens of various heist @-@ style shenanigans " as the " least amusing part of the episode . " He noted that while " the rest of the gags have some thrust to them , [ these ] cross the line into cute pandering to the audience . Fortunately , they are over in about ten seconds . " 
 Michael Cavna of The Washington Post wrote positively about the episode , commenting that from " the one @-@ liners of the episode ’ s dinosaur @-@ show opening ( reminding that a prime @-@ time ' fossil ' like The Simpsons still has sharp comedic bicuspids ) to the final trick up ' Neil Gaiman ’ s ' dark sleeve , ' The Book Job ' is worthy of the show ’ s DVD wall of fame . " Cavna particularly praised the episode for being based on real @-@ life publishing , noting how Selman drew inspiration from the article on Alloy Entertainment . He also commended the parodies of the Ocean 's Trilogy and Far Side , and <unk> 's guest appearance . Cavna wrote that " Gaiman ’ s role is so much more than mere walk @-@ on . Like the show ’ s very best guest voice performances , here Gaiman is called upon to lend true dimension to the episode . " Similarly , Cyriaque Lamar of io9 wrote that the episode " did justice to Gaiman 's guest appearance ... in that it made the author look like a total nutcase . " He added that " Gaiman gamely depicts himself as a goony spaniel . Sure , Andy García guest @-@ starred too , but Gaiman stole the show . " In addition , Lamar praised the episode for several of its gags , including the Far Side reference and the disclosures of Patty being able to speak fluent Dothraki and Twilight originally revolving around golems . 
 = Jon Weber ( baseball ) = 
 Jonathan Brian Weber ( born January 20 , 1978 in Lakewood , California ) is a professional baseball player . An outfielder , Weber bats and throws left @-@ handed . Considered a journeyman , Weber has played professionally in minor league baseball since 1999 , without playing in Major League Baseball . 
 Weber played collegiately for Los Angeles Harbor College and Texas Tech University before embarking on his professional career in 1999 . As a professional , he played in the minor league organizations of the Cincinnati Reds , Oakland Athletics , Los Angeles Dodgers , Arizona Diamondbacks , Tampa Bay Rays , New York Yankees , and Detroit Tigers . He has also played independent league baseball in the unaffiliated Frontier League , Northern League , and American Association of Independent Professional Baseball . Weber has competed for the United States national baseball team , winning the gold medal at the 2009 Baseball World Cup . 
 = = Amateur career = = 
 Weber was born in Lakewood , California . He attended Lakewood High School in Lakewood , California . There , he played for the school 's baseball team , known as the Lancers , graduating in 1996 . 
 Out of high school , Weber was selected by the Oakland Athletics in the thirty @-@ first round of the 1997 Major League Baseball Draft . However , he chose not to sign with the Athletics , opting to attend college . He began his college baseball career at Los Angeles Harbor College ( LAHC ) of the National Junior College Athletic Association ( NJCAA ) in 1997 . At LAHC , Weber was a NJCAA All @-@ America selection . 
 In 1999 , Weber transferred to Texas Tech University to compete in the National Collegiate Athletic Association 's ( NCAA ) Division I during his junior year . At Texas Tech , he played college baseball for the Texas Tech Red Raiders baseball team in the Big 12 Conference . Weber led the conference with eight triples , setting a Red Raiders team record in the process . He was named the Collegiate Baseball National Player of the Week and Big 12 Baseball Player / Pitcher of the Week for the week of February 1 , 1999 . Weber became the fourth player in Texas Tech history to hit for the cycle . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = 1999 – 2004 = = = 
 Weber signed his first professional contract with the Cincinnati Reds as a non @-@ drafted free agent in August 1999 . He made his professional debut that summer with the Rookie @-@ level Billings Mustangs of the Pioneer League , recording a .238 batting average , .365 on @-@ base percentage ( OBP ) and .500 slugging percentage ( SLG ) with five home runs and 17 runs batted in ( RBI ) in 22 games . The next year , he hit .221 with a .333 OBP and .333 SLG with six home runs and 34 RBIs in 108 games for the Single @-@ A Clinton <unk> of the Midwest League . However , Weber was released by the Reds after the season . He felt the Reds " treated [ him ] like a non @-@ prospect " . 
 In 2001 , Weber played independent league baseball for the Canton Crocodiles of the Frontier League . He batted .307 with a .382 OBP , .559 SLG , 18 home runs and 69 RBI in 84 games , being named to the Frontier League post @-@ season All @-@ Star team . He led the Frontier League in home runs and triples . Canton sold Weber to the Fargo @-@ Moorhead Redhawks of the independent Northern League in 2002 , where he hit .296 with a .351 OBP , .501 SLG , and 30 doubles for Fargo @-@ Morehead , placing fourth in the league in doubles . Back with Fargo @-@ Moorhead to open 2003 , he batted .309 with a .408 OBP and .520 SLG through 52 games , as the team went on to win the Northern League championship . 
 However , in July 2003 , the Oakland Athletics organization purchased Weber 's contract from Fargo @-@ Moorhead . With the Athletics organization , Weber hit .361 with a .394 OBP , <unk> SLG , seven home runs and 48 RBIs in 35 games with the Single @-@ A Advanced Modesto A 's of the California League for the remainder of that year . In 2004 , he hit .280 with a .356 OBP , .458 SLG , 15 home runs and 68 RBI in 111 games with the Double @-@ A Midland RockHounds of the Texas League , and hit .341 with a .383 OBP , <unk> SLG , two home runs and 12 RBI in 12 games with the Triple @-@ A Sacramento River Cats of the Pacific Coast League ( PCL ) , helping the River Cats win the PCL championship . 
 = = = 2005 – 2009 = = = 
 Weber signed with the Los Angeles Dodgers after the 2004 season as a free agent . In 2005 he hit .300 with a .369 OBP , .456 SLG , 11 home runs and 68 RBIs in 117 games with the Double @-@ A Jacksonville Suns of the Southern League . He was ninth in the league in batting average and led the league 's outfielders in assists ( 19 ) and double plays ( 7 ) . With Weber , Jacksonville won the Southern League championship , his third year in a row as a member of a championship @-@ winning team . During the season , Weber received a 15 @-@ game suspension for violating minor league baseball 's drug policy . Weber , who failed a drug test administered in August 2004 , said he had taken <unk> , a supplement that contained the banned substance ephedrine , and denied taking steroids . 
 After starting the 2006 season with the Triple @-@ A Las Vegas Stars of the PCL , where he hit .258 with a .338 OBP , .352 SLG , 2 home runs and 31 RBI in 82 games , he was released . He signed with the Arizona Diamondbacks , where he played for the Triple @-@ A Tucson Sidewinders of the PCL , hitting .321 with a .374 OBP , .518 SLG , 5 home runs and 27 RBI in 46 games . The Sidewinders won the PCL championship , Weber 's fourth consecutive league championship . 
 Weber was released by the Diamondbacks during 2007 spring training . He signed with Fargo @-@ Moorhead . After 16 games there , batting .283 with a .371 OBP and .417 SLG , his contract was sold to the Texas Rangers on June 4 , 2007 . The Rangers assigned him to the Single @-@ A Advanced Bakersfield Blaze of the California League , where he hit .356 with a <unk> OBP , .550 SLG , five home runs , 14 doubles , 25 RBI , and 34 runs scored in 37 games . After spending a month with the Rangers organization , on July 16 , the Tampa Bay Rays purchased his contract from the Rangers and assigned him to the Triple @-@ A Durham Bulls of the International League . There , he hit .265 with three home runs and 21 RBIs in 39 games . Weber re @-@ signed with the Rays on a minor league contract after the 2007 season , and batted .265 with a .334 OBP , .447 SLG , 13 home runs for the Bulls in 2008 . 
 Weber returned to the Rays ' organization in 2009 , almost making the Rays ' opening day roster until Matt Joyce recovered from an injury . Weber returned to Durham , where he hit .302 with 14 home runs in 117 games , and led the 2009 International League with 46 doubles and finished ninth in batting average . He was named to the International League post @-@ season All @-@ Star team . 
 = = = 2010 – present = = = 
 After the 2009 season , Weber signed with the New York Yankees organization and was invited to spring training for the 2010 season . Weber signed with the Yankees because they gave him an opportunity to compete for a job in the major leagues , while other teams told him they viewed him exclusively as a minor leaguer . In spring training , Weber led the Yankees with a .483 batting average and was presented with the James P. Dawson Award , given annually to the best rookie in the Yankees ' camp . Manager Joe Girardi indicated that Weber could beat out Marcus Thames and Rule 5 draft pick Jamie Hoffmann for the fifth outfielder position on the Yankees 25 man roster , but ultimately the Yankees chose Thames , as the Yankees preferred a right @-@ handed batter to complement their left @-@ handed hitting outfielders , and assigned Weber to the Triple @-@ A Scranton Wilkes @-@ Barre Yankees . He hit .258 with no home runs in 47 games with Scranton / Wilkes @-@ Barre before being released by the Yankees on June 3 . He signed with the Detroit Tigers , reporting to the Triple @-@ A Toledo Mud Hens of the International League . He hit .256 with a .310 OBP and .372 SLG in 21 games for Toledo . He announced his retirement on July 15 , 2010 . 
 On July 19 , 2010 , Major League Baseball announced Weber 's 100 @-@ game suspension for having failed a drug test for the third time . The drug was identified as a " drug of abuse " rather than a performance @-@ enhancing drug . 
 Despite announcing his retirement earlier in the year , Weber continued his career in leagues unaffiliated with MLB . He played winter league baseball in the winter of 2010 @-@ 11 in the Dominican Republic , then signed with the Winnipeg Goldeyes of the American Association of Independent Professional Baseball in June when they had an injury to outfielder Jonathan Wyatt . Weber was named the team 's most valuable player . Weber returned to Winnipeg for the 2012 season . After batting .281 in 78 games , the Goldeyes waived Weber , giving him his unconditional release . 
 = = International career = = 
 Weber joined the United States national baseball team for the 2009 Baseball World Cup held in Nettuno , Italy in September 2009 , helping the United States win the gold medal . Weber made the Cup 's All @-@ Tournament Team . 
 Weber has routinely played winter league baseball . Following the 2006 season , Weber played for the <unk> de Hermosillo of the Mexican Pacific League ( MPL ) , appearing in the 2006 Caribbean Series . He played for the <unk> de Los Mochis of the MPL after the 2007 season . With the <unk> de Mazatlán of the MPL after the 2008 season , Weber reached the 2009 Caribbean Series . In the 2011 @-@ 12 offseason , he played for the <unk> del Cibao of the Dominican Winter League . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Weber is married . He and his wife have two children . Weber works in construction during his time away from baseball to help make ends meet . 
 = Rose and Bernard Nadler = 
 Rose and Bernard Nadler are fictional characters on the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) television series Lost , played by L. Scott Caldwell and Sam Anderson respectively . Rose and Bernard visit a faith healer on their honeymoon in Australia , in the hope of healing Rose 's cancer . When Bernard visits the restroom during the return flight , the plane splits in half , with the two halves crashing on different parts of an island in the South Pacific . The couple reunite midway through season two , and Rose reveals the Island has healed her . After time traveling in season five they separate from the remaining survivors and build a cabin near the ocean to live in . 
 Originally , the story of a woman separated from her husband when the plane crashes was going to be used for Kate , but when Kate 's role in the series changed the producers kept that story for Rose . Much of the couple 's story prior to the plane crash was based on the events of Caldwell 's life ; she married her husband even though he was dying . Due to Caldwell and Anderson having other acting commitments , the writers found it difficult finding time when both actors could appear together in the show , resulting in neither character featuring in most of season three . Critics reacted positively to the couple , often hoping they would appear more frequently , and both actors were praised for their work . 
 = = Arc = = 
 Most of the couple 's backstory is told in flashbacks during " S.O.S. " . Rose Henderson , an office manager , meets dentist Bernard Nadler when her car becomes stuck in a snowbank one night . After dating for five months , Bernard proposes to her , which prompts Rose to reveal she has cancer that had gone into remission but has now returned ; she only has a year left to live . The two marry regardless , and on their honeymoon in Australia , Bernard takes Rose to a faith healer named Isaac ( Wayne <unk> ) . Despite her initial protests , she agrees to see him . Isaac is unable to heal her , but Rose tells Bernard that he was able to , in order to stop him from wasting any more of the time that they have left together . During a flashback in " Pilot : Part 1 " , Rose is seated alone across from Jack Shepherd on Oceanic Flight 815 , after Bernard leaves to use one of the restrooms , when the plane suddenly hits turbulence . It splits apart in midair , with the fuselage and tail @-@ section landing at opposite ends of an island . 
 Upon impact , Rose lies unconscious on the beach with the fuselage survivors , but is eventually revived by Jack ( Matthew Fox ) . During the first few days on the Island , Rose is in shock , and keeps herself away from the other survivors , attracting the attention of Jack . While Jack believes that Bernard is dead , Rose is adamant that he is still alive . After Claire ( Emilie de Ravin ) is kidnapped by the Island 's inhabitants ( known to the survivors as the Others ) , Rose comforts Charlie ( Dominic Monaghan ) , who believes it is not his fault and encourages him not to lose hope and prays for him . 
 During season two it is shown that Bernard lands with the tail @-@ section survivors on the other side of the Island . After the Others invade their camp , Bernard finds himself as one of the few remaining survivors . They move inland , and discover an abandoned research station , where they find an assortment of items , including a radio . Bernard uses the radio , and makes contact with Boone ( Ian Somerhalder ) , one of the fuselage survivors , but Ana Lucia ( Michelle Rodriguez ) switches it off , dismissing it as a trick by the Others . After three of the fuselage survivors , Michael ( Harold Perrineau ) , Jin ( Daniel Dae Kim ) and Sawyer ( Josh Holloway ) meet the tail @-@ section survivors , they reassure Bernard that Rose is alive and well . They all set off to migrate with the fuselage survivors . Near the fuselage survivors ' beach camp , Ana Lucia accidentally kills one of the fuselage survivors , Shannon ( Maggie Grace ) , she refuses to allow anyone to go any further , but they eventually press on without her ; Bernard is then reunited with Rose . In " S.O.S. " , Bernard concocts a plan to create a giant S.O.S. sign on the beach , but Rose discourages him from spreading false hope among the survivors , and refuses to take part . She confesses that she was not healed in Australia , but has now been healed by the Island , so fears that her illness will return should she leave the Island . 
 In the twenty @-@ first episode of season three , " Greatest Hits " , Jack announces his plan to rig their tents with dynamite to prevent the Others from kidnapping anyone else , so Rose and Bernard assist by tying lengths of wire together . Rose grows concerned when Bernard volunteers to stay behind and detonate the dynamite . She reluctantly allows him to take part , but grows angry at Jack when the plan backfires later that night , and Bernard is captured by the Others . He is soon rescued by Sawyer , Hurley ( Jorge Garcia ) and Juliet ( Elizabeth Mitchell ) , who kill the Others holding him hostage . Rose watches on as Jack contacts a nearby freighter that he believes has come to rescue them . In the season four premiere " The Beginning of the End " , the survivors reunite in the jungle , where Locke ( Terry O 'Quinn ) proposes they hide from the freighter crew , as he believes them to be dangerous . Bernard allows Rose to decide whether to follow Jack or Locke , and she chooses Jack . When the people who arrived from the freighter use morse code to contact the boat , Bernard , who also knows morse code , reveals that they are lying about the message and that there is in fact no one coming to rescue them . Jack falls ill and needs his appendix removed , so Rose and Bernard help with the operation : Rose prepares the table and Bernard helps to knock him out , but Rose is confused to why Jack fell ill when the island normally heals sickness . 
 After Ben ( Michael Emerson ) , the leader of the Others , causes the Island to move , Rose and Bernard are amongst the survivors who begin to jump to different periods of time , but they eventually lose the others . After three years , Sawyer , Juliet and Kate ( Evangeline Lilly ) encounter Rose and Bernard , and the couple explains they have built a cabin and retired , purposely avoiding contact with the remaining survivors because they wish to live their remaining days in peace . Later , they rescue Desmond ( Henry Ian Cusick ) from a well , and are threatened by the Man in Black ( Terry O 'Quinn ) . Desmond and the Man in Black reach an agreement and leave Rose and Bernard alone . In season six , the afterlife experienced by the characters is shown , in which Rose is the supervisor at a temp agency while Bernard is once again working as a dentist . In the series finale , Rose and Bernard reunite with the other survivors from the plane in a church , where they prepare to " move on " together . 
 = = Development = = 
 In the initial plans for the series , Jack was going to die midway through the first episode , and then Kate would emerge as the leader of the survivors . Kate 's original backstory was that her husband went to the bathroom shortly before the plane split in mid @-@ air , and on the Island she would remain adamant that he was alive . However the Lost producers changed their minds about Jack 's death ; they decided he would become the leader and created a new backstory for Kate . They still liked Kate 's original backstory , so they used it for Rose . As Rose is black , the producers thought the audience would expect Rose 's husband to also be black , and decided to make Bernard a white character to surprise the audience . They expected the audience to assume Mr. Eko ( Adewale Akinnuoye @-@ Agbaje ) , the only black man in the tail @-@ section survivors , was Bernard . L. Scott Caldwell , Rose 's portrayer , was unaware of their plans and had been picturing her own husband , a tall black man , when playing the scenes . When she found out Bernard was white she was surprised , but not shocked . Sam Anderson was unaware of which character he would be playing when he was cast in Lost . During his audition he performed a scene where a man from the plane crash was informed his daughter was still alive , which he noted covered a similar emotion to the scene in which Bernard is told Rose is still alive . Anderson and Caldwell were given a rough idea of how much they would appear at the start of the seasons . 
 Caldwell and Anderson deliberately did not meet before their reunion scene in " Collision " as they wanted it to be as authentic as possible . In the following episode , Hurley comments that he did not expect Rose 's husband to be white , before Jack quickly changes the subject . The producers felt it was important to address that they are an interracial couple , and that Hurley was saying what the audience would be thinking . Caldwell agreed with them and thought it would be odd if the issue was not addressed . Anderson also was glad that Hurley brought up the issue , and liked that Jack did not pay any attention . 
 The couple 's backstory was originally planned to be told during season three ; however during season two , the Lost writers wanted to tell the story of one of the background characters of the show . As Rose and Bernard are the most prominent of these characters , and fans were keen to learn their backstory , they decided to do an episode focusing on the couple . Caldwell 's husband was going through health problems during the shooting of the first season , which was the inspiration for Rose 's flashbacks in " S.O.S. " . Following this episode , Caldwell did not think Rose 's healing had anything to do with the Island and stated " If she is cured , it 's because she 's willed it herself " . 
 Other than reused footage from " Pilot : Part 1 " in " Exposé " , Rose and Bernard do not feature in season three until the twenty @-@ first episode " Greatest Hits " . The writers cited Caldwell and Anderson 's other projects as a reason for their absence . Additionally , it was feared that fans would complain if the couple appeared when many actors with star billing had received limited screentime in the early third season . The writers did not want to have the couple on the show to just stand in the background ; they wanted to have Rose and Bernard in the show with interesting storylines . Anderson found that although he normally had more fun portraying villains , playing Bernard was " one of the greatest rides of [ his ] life " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Throughout the series Rose and Bernard have been well received . Chris Carabott from IGN found the conversation where Rose insists Bernard is alive " touching " . TV Guide 's Matt Roush called Caldwell " terrific " , and hoped the producers would use her again in the future . Entertainment Weekly 's Michael Slezak was surprised when he discovered Bernard is white , although he was unsure why . Mac Slocum , senior editor of Filmfodder.com , thought it was " super @-@ emotional " when Bernard asked the survivors if Rose was still alive . C. K. Sample III , of AOL 's TV Squad , liked " S.O.S. " because it showed " two characters ' back stories which we 've all been longing to see " , and noted the couple represent the theme of dichotomy within the show . Lost producer Leonard Dick called Rose and Bernard " much @-@ beloved characters " , and thought they did an " excellent job " in " S.O.S. " . Jen Chaney from The Washington Post thought it was " touching " and " poignant " that the couple 's backstory was based on Caldwell 's real life . Noel Murray of The A.V. Club conceded that whilst learning Rose and Bernard 's backstory was entertaining , it wasted time and slowed down the pace of the storytelling . 
 Rick Porter from Zap2it was pleased when Rose and Bernard returned in " Greatest Hits " . After this reappearance , Patrick Day from the Los Angeles Times hoped they would be featured more often , saying " If they brought these two back ... just to kill them , it will be anti @-@ climactic " . Entertainment Weekly 's Jeff Jensen called their return a " sight @-@ for @-@ sore @-@ eyes " . Maureen Ryan from the Chicago Tribune thought Rose was speaking for the fans when she said " If you say ' live together , die alone ' to me , Jack , I 'm going to punch you in your face " , and hoped Rose and Bernard would feature more often in future episodes . The couple were ranked twelfth in IGN 's list of the top fifteen characters from the first three seasons . The critics from IGN also liked Rose 's " live together , die alone " line , which they called " both surprising comic relief and the stuff of solid character development ; characters like Rose remember and evolve , even if they spend most of their time on the sidelines " . The couple were called " the unofficial heart of the show " by the critics , who noted every appearance made by them was a welcome one . Erin Martell from TV Squad thought Rose 's role in " Something Nice Back Home " was " awesome " , because she asked all the questions fans have been asking . 
 Variety 's Cynthia Littleton " loved seeing Bernard in Grizzly Adams mode " in the season five finale , while Ryan McGee from Zap2it compared Bernard 's appearance to both Moses and the Gorton 's Fisherman . McGee said " It ’ s a gorgeous , gorgeous scene , even if it stands as a meta @-@ criticism of the angst and turmoil of the show ’ s major characters " . Alan Sepinwall from The Star @-@ Ledger called it " one of the best , most moving scenes of the finale " . Noel Murray from The A.V. Club thought the scene was useful as it allowed the characters to leave the show , but also it caused him to question whether opting out was the right or wrong thing to do . The Huffington Post 's Jay Glatfelter thought their decision not to participate " all but solidified them as the ' Adam and Eve ' [ skeletons ] from the caves " , although this was shown not to be the case in season six . Maureen Ryan of the Chicago Tribune listed the pair amongst her favourite characters of the series , commenting " Few things made [ her ] happier than seeing them comfortably ensconced in their retirement cabin with Walt 's dog , Vincent . They had the good sense to give up the whole island rat race , and their optimistic , straightforward attitudes and down @-@ to @-@ earth humor grounded Lost and gave us a window into normalcy , which , goodness knows , we needed sometimes " . 
 = Banksia speciosa = 
 Banksia speciosa , commonly known as the showy banksia , is a species of large shrub or small tree in the family Proteaceae . It occurs on the south coast of Western Australia between Hopetoun ( 33 ° 57 ′ S ) and the Great Australian Bight ( approximately 33 ° S 130 ° E ) , growing on white or grey sand in shrubland . Reaching up to 8 m ( 26 ft ) in height , it is a single @-@ stemmed plant that has thin leaves with prominent triangular " teeth " along each margin , which are 20 – 45 cm ( 7 @.@ 9 – 17 @.@ 7 in ) long and 2 – 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) wide . The prominent cream @-@ yellow flower spikes known as inflorescences appear throughout the year . As they age they develop up to 20 follicles each that store seeds until opened by fire . Banksia speciosa . Though widely occurring , it is highly sensitive to dieback and large populations of plants have succumbed to the disease . 
 Collected and described by Robert Brown in the early 19th century , Banksia speciosa is classified in the series Banksia within the genus . Its closest relative is B. baxteri . Banksia speciosa plants are killed by bushfire , and regenerate from seed . The flowers attract <unk> and insect @-@ feeding birds , particularly honeyeaters , and a variety of insects . In cultivation , Banksia speciosa grows well in a sunny location on well @-@ drained soil in areas with dry summers . It cannot be grown in areas with humid summers , though it has been grafted onto Banksia serrata or B. integrifolia . 
 = = Description = = 
 Banksia speciosa grows as a shrub or small tree anywhere from 1 to 6 or rarely 8 m ( 4 – 26 ft ) high . It has an open many @-@ branched habit , arising from a single stem or trunk with smooth grey bark . Unlike many banksias , it does not have a lignotuber . The plant puts on new growth , which is covered in rusty @-@ coloured fur , in summer . The long thin leaves are linear , 20 – 45 cm ( 8 – 18 in ) long and 2 – 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 6 in ) wide . They are bordered with 20 to 42 prominent triangular lobes that have a zigzag pattern . The lobes are 1 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) long and 1 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 1 in ) wide , while the V @-@ shaped sinuses between intrude almost to the midrib of the leaf . The leaf margins are slightly recurved . On the underside of each lobe , there are 3 – 10 nerves converging on the lobe apex . The midrib is raised on the leaf undersurface ; it is covered with white hair when new but brownish hair when mature . 
 The cream to yellow flower spikes , known as inflorescences , can appear at any time of year . They arise on the ends of one- or two @-@ year @-@ old stems and are roughly cylindrical in shape with a domed apex , measuring 4 – 12 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 – 4 @.@ 7 in ) high and 9 – 10 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 – 3 @.@ 9 in ) wide at anthesis . Each is a compound flowering structure , with a large number of individual flowers arising out of a central woody axis . A field study on the southern sandplains revealed an average count of 1369 ± 79 on each spike . The perianth is grey @-@ cream in bud , maturing to a more yellow or cream . The style is cream and the tip of the pollen @-@ presenter maroon . Ageing spikes are grey , with old flowers remaining on them , and develop up to 20 large red follicles each . Roughly oval and jutting out prominently from the spike , each follicle is 3 @.@ 5 – 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 4 – 2 @.@ 0 in ) long by 2 – 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 1 in ) wide and 2 – 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 1 in ) high and is covered in dense fur , red @-@ brown initially before aging to grey . It remains closed until opened by bushfire , and contains one or two viable seeds . 
 The seed is 3 @.@ 7 – 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 @.@ 5 – 1 @.@ 8 in ) long and fairly flattened , and is composed of the seed body proper , measuring 1 – 1 @.@ 4 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 6 in ) long and 0 @.@ 9 – 1 @.@ 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 5 in ) wide , and a papery wing . One side , termed the outer surface , is grey and the other is dark brown ; on this side the seed body protrudes and is covered with tiny filaments . The seeds are separated by a dark brown seed separator that is roughly the same shape as the seeds with a depression where the seed body sits adjacent to it in the follicle . It measures 3 @.@ 7 – 4 @.@ 5 cm ( 1 – 2 in ) long and 2 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 – 1 in ) wide . The dull green cotyledons of seedlings are wider than they are long , measuring 1 @.@ 4 – 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 6 in ) across and 1 @.@ 2 – 1 @.@ 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) long , described by Alex George as " broadly obovate " . Each cotyledon has a 2 mm ( 0 @.@ 08 in ) auricle at its base and has three faint nerve @-@ like markings on its lower half . The hypocotyl is smooth and red . The seedling leaves emerge in an opposite arrangement and are deeply serrated into three triangular lobes on each side . The seedling stem is covered in white hair . 
 A variant from the Gibson area has an upright habit and leaves . Otherwise , Banksia speciosa shows little variation across its range . Combined with its vigour and prominence in its habitat , this has led George to speculate that it is a recent development among its relatives . 
 Banksia baxteri resembles B. speciosa and co @-@ occurs with it at the western edge of its range , but has shorter , wider leaves with larger lobes , shorter flower spikes and is a smaller , more open shrub . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The first botanical collection of this species may well have been Claude Riche , naturalist to Bruni d 'Entrecasteaux 's 1791 expedition in search of the lost ships of Jean @-@ François de Galaup , comte de La Pérouse . During a visit to Esperance Bay , Riche explored an area in which B. speciosa is extremely common . However , he got lost and was forced to abandon his collections . The species was eventually collected by Robert Brown in 1802 , and published by him in 1810 . Alex George selected an 1802 specimen collected at Lucky Bay to be the lectotype in 1981 . An early common name was handsome banksia . Common names include showy banksia and <unk> banksia , from the zigzag shape of its long thin leaves . 
 Robert Brown recorded 31 species of Banksia in his 1810 work Prodromus Florae Novae Hollandiae et Insulae Van Diemen , and in his taxonomic arrangement , placed the taxon in the subgenus Banksia verae , the " True Banksias " , because the inflorescence is a typical Banksia flower spike . By the time Carl Meissner published his 1856 arrangement of the genus , there were 58 described Banksia species . Meissner divided Brown 's Banksia verae , which had been renamed Eubanksia by Stephan Endlicher in 1847 , into four series based on leaf properties . He placed B. speciosa in the series Dryandroideae . 
 George Bentham published a thorough revision of Banksia in his landmark publication Flora Australiensis in 1870 . In Bentham 's arrangement , the number of recognised Banksia species was reduced from 60 to 46 . Bentham defined four sections based on leaf , style and pollen @-@ presenter characters . Banksia speciosa was placed in section Orthostylis . 
 In 1891 , German botanist Otto Kuntze challenged the generic name Banksia L.f. , on the grounds that the name Banksia had previously been published in 1775 as Banksia J.R.Forst & G.Forst , referring to the genus now known as Pimelea . Kuntze proposed Sirmuellera as an alternative , republishing B. speciosa as Sirmuellera speciosa . The challenge failed , and Banksia L.f. was formally conserved . 
 = = = Current placement = = = 
 Alex George published a new taxonomic arrangement of Banksia in his classic 1981 monograph The genus Banksia L.f. ( Proteaceae ) . Endlicher 's Eubanksia became B. subg . Banksia , and was divided into three sections . B. speciosa was placed in B. sect . Banksia , and this was further divided into nine series , with B. speciosa placed in B. ser . Banksia . He thought its closest relative was clearly Banksia baxteri based on their similar appearance , noting the two overlapped in their distribution . 
 Kevin Thiele and Pauline Ladiges published a new arrangement for the genus in 1996 ; their morphological cladistic analysis yielded a cladogram significantly different from George 's arrangement . Thiele and Ladiges ' arrangement retained B. speciosa in series Banksia , placing it in B. subser . Cratistylis along with B. baxteri as its sister taxon and seven other Western Australian species . This arrangement stood until 1999 , when George effectively reverted to his 1981 arrangement in his monograph for the Flora of Australia series . B. speciosa 's placement within Banksia according to Flora of Australia is as follows : 
 Genus Banksia 
 Subgenus Banksia 
 Section Banksia 
 Series Banksia 
 B. serrata 
 B. aemula 
 B. ornata 
 B. baxteri 
 B. speciosa 
 B. menziesii 
 B. candolleana 
 B. sceptrum 
 In 2002 , a molecular study by Austin Mast again showed Banksia speciosa and B. baxteri to be each other 's closest relatives , but they were only distantly related to other members of the series Banksia . Instead , their next closest relative turned out to be the distinctive Banksia coccinea . 
 Mast , Eric Jones and Shawn Havery published the results of their cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data for Banksia in 2005 . They inferred a phylogeny greatly different from the accepted taxonomic arrangement , including finding Banksia to be paraphyletic with respect to Dryandra . A new taxonomic arrangement was not published at the time , but early in 2007 Mast and Thiele initiated a rearrangement by transferring Dryandra to Banksia , and publishing B. subg . Spathulatae for the species having spoon @-@ shaped cotyledons ; in this way they also redefined the autonym B. subg . Banksia . They foreshadowed publishing a full arrangement once DNA sampling of Dryandra was complete . In the meantime , if Mast and Thiele 's nomenclatural changes are taken as an interim arrangement , then B. speciosa is placed in B. subg . Banksia . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Banksia speciosa occurs on coastal dunes and sandplains in the Esperance Plains and Mallee biogeographic regions on the south coast of Western Australia , from East Mount Barren in the Fitzgerald River National Park and the vicinity of Hopetoun eastwards to Israelite Bay , generally within 50 km ( 31 mi ) of the coast . The range extends inland to Mount Ragged and 25 km ( 16 mi ) southwest of Grass Patch . There is an outlying population to the east at Point Culver on the Great Australian Bight . 
 Banksia speciosa grows on flat or gently sloping ground on deep white or grey sand . It is often the dominant shrub in shrubland , commonly found with such species as Lambertia inermis , Banksia pulchella , and B. petiolaris . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The prominent flower spikes are visited by many birds and insects . Honeyeaters are common visitors , particularly the New Holland honeyeater , as well as the fuscous honeyeater , western wattlebird and western spinebill . Other birds recorded foraging include the grey butcherbird and species of thornbill . Insects recorded include ants , bees , wasps , butterflies , moths , flies and beetles . The short @-@ billed black cockatoo breaks off old cones with follicles to eat the seed , often doing so before the seed is ripe . 
 Banksia speciosa is serotinous , that is , it has an aerial seed bank in its canopy in the form of the follicles of the old flower spikes . These are opened by fire and release seed in large numbers , which germinate and grow after rain . Seed can last for many years ; old spikes 11 to 12 years old have been found to have 50 % viable seed . Flower spikes appear to have similar numbers of follicles regardless of the age of the parent plant . Young plants begin flowering three years after regenerating from bushfire and store progressively larger numbers of old flowerheads ( and hence seed ) in the canopy . In one study , decade @-@ old plants averaged around 3 @.@ 5 old cones , whereas 21 @-@ year @-@ old plants had 105 , and were calculated as having over 900 viable seeds per plant . Plants appear to have a life span of at least 40 years , as healthy and vigorous individuals of this age are known . An experimental burn and monitoring of resultant seedling germination and growth showed B. speciosa seeds , though numerous , had poor rates of establishment but that seedlings were able to access water more easily and had higher rates of survival after two years than co @-@ occurring Banksia species . Though this suggested B. speciosa might outcompete its conspecifics , the authors of the study noted that there could be other factors not accounted for in its natural environment . 
 Banksia speciosa is extremely sensitive to dieback caused by Phytophthora cinnamomi and numbers in Cape Le Grand and Cape Arid National Parks have been drastically reduced as whole populations of plants have perished after exposure . It is an indicator species for the presence of the disease . Nursery plants in Italy perished from root and basal stem rot from the pathogen Phytophthora taxon <unk> . 
 The tiny sac fungus <unk> banksiae subspecies <unk> has been described from the leaves of B. speciosa , its sole host . This fungus manifests as round flat cream @-@ coloured spots around 1 – 3 mm in diameter on the upper leaf surface . The surrounding leaf tissue is sometimes discoloured orange . One or two shiny black fruit bodies measuring around 0 @.@ 25 – 0 @.@ 75 by 0 @.@ 25 – 1 mm appear in the centre of the spots . 
 = = Cultivation = = 
 A fast @-@ growing and attractive plant , Banksia speciosa grows readily in a sunny location in dry climates on well @-@ drained soil , but does poorly in areas of humid summer climate , such as Australia 's east coast . It has been grafted successfully onto Banksia serrata and B. integrifolia to enable cultivation in these areas . Seeds do not require any treatment , and take 27 to 41 days to germinate . A specimen flowered in a greenhouse in the Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh in 1830 . Banksia speciosa is an important cut flower crop . It was one of several species considered for commercial cropping in Tenerife , and trials showed that seedlings were moderately tolerant to salinity . 
 = Blackburn Firebrand = 
 The Blackburn Firebrand was a British single @-@ engine strike fighter for the Fleet Air Arm of the Royal Navy designed during World War II by Blackburn Aircraft . Originally intended to serve as a pure fighter , its unimpressive performance and the allocation of its Napier Sabre piston engine by the Ministry of Aircraft Production for the Hawker Typhoon caused it to be redesigned as a strike fighter to take advantage of its load @-@ carrying capability . Development was slow and the first production aircraft was not delivered until after the end of the war . Only a few hundred were built before it was withdrawn from front @-@ line service in 1953 . 
 = = Development = = 
 In general , the Fleet Air Arm had required fighters that were capable of navigating long ranges over sea and speed differential over attackers was not critical . However , while defence of British naval bases was a RAF commitment , provision had not been made for this and so the Admiralty accepted that it would have to take on the duty . For this it needed an interceptor fighter . Experience in the Norwegian Campaign of early 1940 had also shown a high @-@ performance , carrier @-@ based , single @-@ seat fighter would be an advantage . Blackburn tendered their B @-@ 37 design using the Napier Sabre 24 @-@ cylinder H @-@ type engine , and this was accepted by June 1940 with a proposal to order " off the drawing board " ( meaning without prototypes ) . Air Ministry Specification <unk> / 40 — stating a minimum top speed of 350 knots ( 650 km / h ; 400 mph ) — was raised to cover this design and an order placed in January 1941 for three prototypes . 
 The B @-@ 37 , given the service name " Firebrand " on 11 July 1941 , was a low @-@ winged , all @-@ metal monoplane . Aft of the cockpit the fuselage was an oval @-@ shaped stressed @-@ skin semi @-@ monocoque , but forward it had a circular @-@ section , tubular @-@ steel frame that housed the 169 @-@ imperial @-@ gallon ( 770 l ; 203 US gal ) main fuel tank and the 71 @-@ imperial @-@ gallon ( 320 l ; 85 US gal ) auxiliary fuel tank behind the engine . The radiators for the neatly <unk> Sabre engine were housed in wing @-@ root extensions . The large wing consisted of a two @-@ spar centre section with manually folded outer panels ( with 5 degrees of dihedral ) to allow more compact storage in the hangar decks of aircraft carriers . To increase lift and reduce landing speed the wing was fitted with large , hydraulically powered Fowler flaps that extended to the edges of the Frise ailerons . The fixed armament of four 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) Hispano autocannon was fitted in the outer wing panels with 200 rounds per gun . The vertical stabilizer and rudder were positioned forward of the horizontal stabilizer to ensure spin recovery and that the rudder would retain its effectiveness . The mainwheels of the conventional landing gear were mounted at the ends of the centre wing section and retracted inwards . The Firebrand was unusual in that there was an airspeed gauge mounted outside of the cockpit so that during landing the pilot would not have to look down into the cockpit to take instrument readings , presaging the development of the modern heads @-@ up display . 
 The unarmed first prototype first flew on 27 February 1942 using the Sabre II , the first of two armed prototypes following on 15 July . The initial flight trials were a disappointment as the aircraft could only reach 32 mph ( 51 km / h ) below Blackburn 's estimated maximum speed of 390 mph . Replacement of the Sabre II with a Sabre III ( an engine built specifically for the Firebrand ) improved its top speed to 358 mph ( 576 km / h ) . The second prototype , <unk> , conducted deck @-@ landing trials , with Commander Dennis Cambell at the controls , aboard the fleet carrier HMS Illustrious in February 1943 . The Sabre engine was also used in the Hawker Typhoon , a fighter already in production , and the Ministry of Air Production ( MAP ) decided that the Typhoon had priority for the Sabre . The Sabre was also experiencing production problems and so a new engine was needed , along with the necessary airframe improvements to accommodate it ; rather than abandon the time and effort invested in the design , the MAP decided to convert the Firebrand into an interim strike fighter to meet the Fleet Air Arm 's requirement for a single @-@ seat torpedo bomber capable of carrying bombs and rockets as well as engaging in air @-@ to @-@ air combat . Nine production F. Mk I aircraft were built to the original specifications and all were retained for trials and development work . 
 After it was badly damaged during an emergency landing , <unk> was converted into a prototype of the first strike variant , the Firebrand T.F. Mk II ( with the company designation B @-@ 45 ) , that flew on 31 March 1943 . It was an adaptation of the Mk I with the wing centre section widened by 1 foot 3 @.@ 5 inches ( 39 @.@ 4 cm ) to make room for the torpedo on the centreline between the mainwheels . Like the Mk I , the TF Mk II only saw a very limited production run of 12 aircraft and they were also allocated for development work , including those assigned to 708 Naval Air Squadron , a shore @-@ based trials unit . Blackburn proposed several versions of the Sabre @-@ powered aircraft including one for the RAF as the B @-@ 41 , a version with a high @-@ lift wing as the B @-@ 42 , and the B @-@ 43 floatplane , none of which were accepted for further development . 
 A new specification was issued as <unk> / 43 to cover the development of the Firebrand T.F. Mk III ( B @-@ 45 ) with the 2 @,@ 400 @-@ horsepower ( 1 @,@ 800 kW ) Bristol Centaurus VII radial engine . Two prototypes were converted from incomplete F Mk Is and 27 additional aircraft were delivered , completing the first batch of 50 aircraft . The first prototype flew on 21 December 1943 , but construction of the new aircraft was very slow with the first flight not being made until November 1944 . Most changes were related to the installation of the larger @-@ diameter Centaurus engine , including air intakes for the carburetor and oil cooler in the wing @-@ root extensions that formerly housed the engine 's radiators . Spring @-@ loaded trim tabs were also fitted to all control surfaces . Production aircraft after the first 10 were fitted with the improved Centaurus IX engine . The Mk III was found to be unsuitable for carrier operations for a variety of reasons . The new engine produced more torque than the Sabre , and rudder control was insufficient on takeoff with the full flaps needed for carrier use . Visibility while landing was very poor , the tailhook attachment to the airframe was too weak , and the aircraft had a tendency to drop a wing at the stall while landing , so development continued to rectify these issues . 
 The T.F. Mk IV ( B @-@ 46 ) , as the new development was designated , featured larger tail surfaces for better low @-@ speed control . The enlarged rudder was horn balanced and the vertical stabilizer was offset three degrees to port to counteract the four @-@ bladed Rotol propeller 's torque . The wings now featured hydraulically operated dive brakes on both upper and lower surfaces . The aircraft 's wings were now stressed to carry one 2 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 910 kg ) bomb under each wing or a 45 @-@ imperial @-@ gallon ( 200 l ; 54 US gal ) drop tank or eight RP @-@ 3 rockets . The frame that held the torpedo was connected to the undercarriage so that it pivoted nose @-@ downward to increase ground clearance with the landing gear extended and pivoted upward to reduce drag while in flight . A 100 @-@ imperial @-@ gallon ( 450 l ; 120 US gal ) fuel tank could be fitted on the centreline in lieu of the torpedo . The Mk IV first flew on 17 May 1945 , and was the first version of the Firebrand to enter mass production , with 170 built , although 50 more aircraft were cancelled . 
 The later Firebrand T.F. Mk 5 featured minor aerodynamic improvements and 123 were converted from Mk IVs . The final version was the Firebrand T.F. Mk 5A with hydraulically boosted ailerons to increase the aircraft 's rate of roll . Two Mk 5s and five Mk IVs were converted to Mk 5A standard . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 The Firebrand did not see action in World War II , as TF 4s were not issued to 813 Naval Air Squadron until 1 September 1945 . The squadron was disbanded 30 September 1946 without ever deploying to sea . It was reformed with TF 5s on 1 May 1947 and flew them from the carrier HMS Implacable , later HMS Indomitable , until it was reequipped with turboprop Westland Wyvern attack aircraft in February 1953 . 827 Naval Air Squadron received their TF 5 and 5As on 13 December 1950 and flew them primarily off the carrier HMS Eagle until it disbanded on 19 November 1952 . A variety of second @-@ line squadrons were issued Firebrands of various marks for training or trials at one time or another . 
 In test pilot and naval aviator Captain Eric Brown 's opinion the aircraft was " short of performance , sadly lacking in manoeuvrability , especially in rate of roll " . Furthermore , the positioning of the cockpit even with the trailing edge of the wing gave the pilot a very poor view over the nose and inhibited his ability to view his target and to land his aircraft aboard a carrier , enough so that Brown called it " a disaster as a deck @-@ landing aircraft " . 
 = = Variants = = 
 Blackburn B @-@ 37 
 Three prototypes ordered to meet Specification <unk> / 40 , named Firebrand on 11 July 1941 . Second prototype re @-@ built as T.F. II prototype . 
 Firebrand F. I 
 Production variant of the Blackburn <unk> with an order for 50 aircraft to be built at Brough , most completed as T.F. II and T.F. III variants , first nine completed as F. Is . 
 Firebrand T.F. II 
 Improved variant , 12 built from original production branch . 
 Firebrand T.F. III 
 Blackburn B @-@ 45 , a <unk> VII powered @-@ variant , two prototypes to <unk> / 43 and 27 production aircraft for original production batch . 
 Firebrand T.F. IV 
 Blackburn B @-@ 46 , improved variant with 2 @,@ 520 bhp Centaurus IX or Centaurus 57 , 250 ordered , but only 170 were completed , of which 124 were converted to T.F. 5 standard , some before delivery . Six were modified and designated as T.F. IV ( mod ) . 
 Firebrand T.F. 5 
 Improved variant , 124 modified from T.F. IV , two conversions to T.F. 5A . 
 Firebrand T.F. 5A 
 One prototype modified from a T.F. 5 and six conversions from either T.F. IV or Vs . 
 = = Operators = = 
 United Kingdom 
 Royal Navy Fleet Air Arm 
 813 Naval Air Squadron 
 827 Naval Air Squadron 
 = = Specifications ( Firebrand T.F. Mk IV ) = = 
 Data from The Firebrand ... Blackburn 's Baby ' <unk> 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 1 
 Length : 38 ft 9 in ( 11 @.@ 81 m ) 
 Wingspan : 51 ft 3 @.@ 5 in ( 15 @.@ 634 m ) 
 Height : 13 ft 3 in ( 4 @.@ 04 m ) 
 Wing area : 383 sq ft ( 35 @.@ 6 m2 ) 
 Empty weight : 11 @,@ 457 lb ( 5 @,@ 197 kg ) 
 Gross weight : 16 @,@ 700 lb ( 7 @,@ 575 kg ) 
 Fuel capacity : 239 imp gal ( 1 @,@ 090 l ; 287 US gal ) 
 Powerplant : 1 × Bristol Centaurus IX 18 @-@ cylinder radial engine , 2 @,@ 520 hp ( 1 @,@ 880 kW ) 
 Propellers : 4 @-@ bladed Rotol , 13 ft 3 in ( 4 @.@ 04 m ) diameter 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 342 mph ( 550 km / h ; 297 kn ) 
 Cruise speed : 256 mph ( 222 kn ; 412 km / h ) 
 Range : 745 mi ( 647 nmi ; 1 @,@ 199 km ) 
 Rate of climb : 2 @,@ 600 ft / min ( 13 m / s ) 
 Armament 
 Guns : 4 × 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) Hispano autocannon 
 Rockets : 16 × RP @-@ 3 
 Bombs : 1 × 1 @,@ 850 lb ( 840 kg ) torpedo or 2 × 2 @,@ 000 lb ( 910 kg ) bombs 
 = Alexander Stoddart = 
 Alexander " Sandy " Stoddart ( born 1959 ) is a Scottish sculptor , who , since 2008 , has been the Queen 's Sculptor in Ordinary in Scotland . He works primarily on figurative sculpture in clay within the neoclassical tradition . Stoddart is best known for his civic monuments , including 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) bronze statues of David Hume and Adam Smith , philosophers during the Scottish Enlightenment , on the Royal Mile in Edinburgh , and others of James Clerk Maxwell and John Witherspoon . Stoddart says of his own motivation , " My great ambition is to do sculpture for Scotland " , primarily through large civic monuments to figures from the country 's past . 
 Stoddart was born in Edinburgh and raised in Renfrewshire , where he developed an early interest in the arts and music , and later trained in fine art at the Glasgow School of Art ( 1976 – 1980 ) and read the History of Art at the University of Glasgow . During this time he became increasingly critical of contemporary trends in art , such as pop art , and concentrated on creating figurine pieces in clay . Stoddart associates the lack of form in modern art with social decay ; in contrast , his works include many classical allusions . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Stoddart 's grandfather was an evangelical Baptist preacher , and his parents met through that church . He was born in Edinburgh , though his father , also an artist , moved the family to the village of Elderslie in Renfrewshire , where the young Stoddart immediately noticed the monument there at William Wallace 's purported birthplace . Today , Stoddart lives and works in nearby Paisley . At school Stoddart became interested in music ( and remains so ) but decided he was not good enough to become a professional . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Stoddart went , aged seventeen , to train in fine art at the Glasgow School of Art where he studied from 1976 to 1980 . There he settled on sculpture and initially worked within the modernist vogue . Stoddart has recalled an epiphany moment several times : when , after finishing a riveted metal pop @-@ art sculpture ( praised by his tutors ) he found a bust of the Apollo Belvedere , " I thought my pop @-@ riveted thing was rubbish by comparison . It 's extraordinarily easy to pop @-@ rivet two bits of metal together and extraordinarily difficult to make a figure like the Apollo , but I thought I had to try . " 
 Stoddart wrote his undergraduate thesis on the life and work of John Mossman , an English sculptor who worked in Scotland for fifty years . His work remains an influence on Stoddart . Stoddart graduated in 1980 with a Bachelor of Arts degree , first class , though he was demoralised by his peers ' ignorance of the art history : " the name Raphael meant nothing to them " . He went on to read History of Art at the University of Glasgow . Afterwards , he worked for six " difficult " years in the studio of Ian Hamilton Finlay . Although Hamilton Finlay is considered one of the most important Scottish artists of the 20th century , Stoddart profoundly disagrees with his working methods : " Finlay was the godfather of a problem that 's rampant everywhere today . He called the people who made his work ' collaborators ' . What we call them nowadays is ' fabricators ' . They 're talented people who are plastically capable , but they never meet their ' artist ' . They 're grateful , desperate and thwarted . " 
 He is an Honorary Professor at the University of the West of Scotland . On 30 December 2008 , it was announced that Stoddart had been appointed Her Majesty 's Sculptor in Ordinary in Scotland . 
 = = Aesthetic viewpoint = = 
 Stoddart is deeply critical of modernism and contemporary art , and scornful of " public art " , a phrase which makes him search for " a glass of whisky and a revolver " . He has repeatedly criticised winners of the Turner Prize , such as Damien Hirst " there 's plenty of them " , and Tracey Emin , whom he calls " the high priestess of societal decline " . Stoddart said of his own repeated public denouncements , " Somebody will be exhibiting a bunch of bananas in a gallery , and they 'll [ radio producers ] get me on to talk dirty about it " . Stoddart has characterised modern art as dominated by left @-@ wing politics , to the extent that " certain artistic forms likewise became suspect : the tune ; the rhyme ; the moulding ; the plinth " as coercive and overly traditional . He argued that an equestrian statue of the Mariner King , William IV should be placed on the fourth plinth in Trafalgar Square , as originally intended . 
 He developed an interest in music at school , where he learned to play the piano , which he still does daily . He called his own medium , sculpture " an art inferior to the super @-@ art of music " and nominated Wagner as the greatest composer . Stoddart developed his theme on the quietism of monumental art and its relation to <unk> resignation in a lecture to the Wagner Society of Scotland on 2 March 2008 . 
 Stoddart works within the neo @-@ classical tradition of art , and believes that greatness and respect for posterity are important considerations . In 2010 he rebuffed a query about his interest in sculpting a memorial to Bill McLaren , a rugby union broadcaster : " I do not do sportsmen and I certainly do not do sports commentators . I do artists , philosophers and poets " , he said , warning that memorials are often hastily erected . Advocates of the memorial described the remarks as insensitive , and said that " To have Bill looking down on the fans at Murrayfield , microphone in hand , would bring a huge smile to so many faces . " 
 Despite their idiomatic differences , Raymond McKenzie argues that the works of both Ian Hamilton Finlay and Stoddart combine formal and intellectual elegance with sharp , sometimes satirical critiques of contemporary society . 
 Stoddart himself outspoken about Modernism , and its contemporary failures and historical misunderstandings , without hesitation , makes clear that his work stems from a Modernism born in neo @-@ classicism , " And yet , after having said all this about Modernism , I consider myself a Modernist – but in the context of a vast application of the term extending miles beyond the pokey wee official area to which usually it is confined . For in truth there are really two kinds of Modernism to be uncovered in the space of the last two and a half centuries , and it is to the first and largest of these that I belong and to which , in my small way , I contribute . This is the Modernism that was born in neo @-@ classicism and has , as its great central titan , the mighty Richard Wagner . " 
 = = Works = = 
 = = = Civic monuments = = = 
 In his own work , Stoddart has developed " heroic @-@ realist " neo @-@ classical representations of historical figures . Stoddart works as a civic @-@ <unk> for Scotland , and described the need his work fills thus : " We need serious monuments which don 't have the Braveheart touch . If we 're to be a nation , we need that . Fletcher of <unk> is absolutely urgent if we 're to show we mean business . We don 't do it with a stupid Parliament building that looks like a Barcelona @-@ inspired cafeteria . It 's a bloody outrage . " 
 He has made sculptures of David Hume and Adam Smith , philosophers of the Scottish Enlightenment , which stand in the Royal Mile in Edinburgh . Hume is depicted in a philosopher 's toga , representing the timelessness of philosophical thought , a decision which was criticised as atavistic after the unveiling in 1996 , though Stoddart remained stoic , " So here I discovered that the right thing , done in public , will often earn one great disapproval : a lesson for life – in the modern age at least . " Local philosophy students soon began a tradition of rubbing the statue 's toe to absorb some of his knowledge . Though Stoddart placed the foot over the edge of the plinth to encourage such engagement , the irony of the practice given Hume 's critiques of superstition has been remarked upon . 
 Smith , a philosopher who forged the new discipline of economics , is , by contrast , depicted in contemporary attire , showing his concern for the practical matters of economic activity , a gown draped over his shoulder retains the connection to philosophy and academia . Smith 's economic ideas are also encoded into the statue : the plough behind him represents the agrarian economics he supplanted , the beehive before , is a symbol of the industry he predicted would come . His hand , resting on a globe , is obscured by the gown : a literal presentation of Smith 's famous metaphor of the invisible hand . The life @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half size statue of Smith , is cast in bronze from a plaster model by the sculptor and was unveiled in 2008 . It was funded by private subscriptions organised by the Adam Smith Institute . 
 Stoddart 's statue of James Clerk Maxwell , a physicist , stands in George Street in Edinburgh and a memorial to Robert Louis Stevenson , a novelist , is on Corstorphine Road . His monument to John Witherspoon stands in Paisley , with a copy outside Princeton University . 
 There are several pieces by Stoddart in Glasgow 's Merchant City quarter . Italia , a 2 @.@ 6 metre , glass re @-@ in @-@ forced polymer statue on top of Ingram Street represents the contribution of Italian traders to the area . Classical in style , the female form is swathed in a <unk> and carries symbols of ancient Italy : a palm branch in her right hand and an inverted cornucopia in her left . On John Street , a trio of figures , Mercury , Mercurius and Mercurial form a triangle . The first two , identical figures , sit above the John St. façade of the Italian centre ; their English and Roman names signify the two different manifestations of the deity in Roman mythology . Here , they embody a " dialogue " between ancient lore and modern city life . Opposite , on a plinth on the street , stands Mercurial , cast in bronze and with the adjectival form of the name , it complements the duality of the other two with an underlying unity . 
 Putative projects include a monument to Willie Gallacher , the Paisley @-@ born Communist MP , championed by Tony Benn and funded by a public appeal and " Oscar " , an amphitheatre carved into the rock on the Scottish coast dedicated to Ossian , the mythical Scot bard . 
 = = = Busts , cabinet displays and architectural sculpture = = = 
 During 2000 to 2002 the Queen 's Gallery at Buckingham Palace was renovated in the neo @-@ classical style under the direction of John Simpson , envisioned as " building visible history " . For the walls in the two @-@ storied entrance hall , Stoddart made architectural friezes which interpret Homeric themes in twentieth century Britain . For the Sackler Library in Oxford University , he made a 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) by 25 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 m ) bronze frieze , depicting an allegory of traditionalist and modernist values . Stoddart has also worked on busts of living figures whom he admires , often fellow @-@ classicists including Roger Scruton , a philosopher , Robert Adam and John Simpson , architects , the architectural historian David Watkin , and Tony Benn , the politician . 
 = ANAK Society = 
 The ANAK Society is the oldest known secret society and honor society at the Georgia Institute of Technology ( Georgia Tech ) in Atlanta , Georgia , United States . Founded in 1908 , ANAK 's purpose is " to honor outstanding juniors and seniors who have shown both exemplary leadership and a true love for Georgia Tech " . The society is named after Anak , a biblical figure said to be the forefather of a race of giants . 
 ANAK comprises at least 1 @,@ 100 Georgia Tech graduates , faculty members , and honorary members . Although not founded as a secret society , it has kept its activities and membership rosters confidential since 1961 . Membership is made public upon a student 's graduation or a faculty member 's retirement . Notable members include Jimmy Carter ( honorary ) , Bobby Dodd ( honorary ) , Ivan Allen Jr . , Bobby Jones , and most of Georgia Tech 's presidents . Membership in the ANAK Society has long been considered the highest honor a Georgia Tech student can receive , although the society 's activities have been the object of suspicion and controversy in recent years . 
 The society has been influential in the history of Georgia Tech . ANAK played a major role in establishing several of Georgia Tech 's most active student organizations – including its yearbook , the Blueprint ; its student newspaper , the Technique ; and its Student Government Association – as well as several lasting Georgia Tech traditions . The society also claims involvement in a number of civil rights projects , most notably in peacefully integrating Georgia Tech 's first African American students and preventing the Ku Klux Klan from setting up a student chapter at Georgia Tech . These claims have yet to be substantiated by independent sources . 
 A philanthropic organization , the ANAK Society annually awards two undergraduate student scholarships , the George Wingfield Semmes Memorial Scholarship and the Merri Gaye Hitt Memorial Scholarship . Additionally , the society annually recognizes distinguished Georgia Tech alumni with the Joseph M. Pettit Distinguished Service Award . The society 's ANAK Award , granted annually to an outstanding Georgia Tech faculty member , is considered the most prestigious award of its kind . The society has also donated a number of gifts to Georgia Tech in honor of its members and notable alumni . 
 = = Name and symbology = = 
 The ANAK Society explained its name as originating from a passage in the Book of Numbers , one of the books of the Hebrew Bible . The passage , attributed to Numbers 13 : 33 , reads , " And there were the <unk> [ sic ] , the sons of ANAK , who came of the giants : and we were in our own sight as grasshoppers , and so we were in their sight . " Anak was a biblical figure said to be the forefather of the Nephilim , a race of giants . For unknown reasons , the society 's name has sustained minor alterations over the years , from Anak in the 1908 Blue Print , the first edition of Georgia Tech 's yearbook , to ANAK in recent editions of The Technique , Georgia Tech 's student newspaper . 
 The ANAK Society has adopted a number of symbols over the years , although it has never offered any official explanation as to their meaning . From its founding in 1908 to 1927 , the society identified itself only by the name " Anak " or " Anak Society " . In 1928 and 1929 , the society adopted a bend sinister gules , a type of diagonal red line borrowed from heraldry . The bend was dropped after 1930 , following the introduction of a crest bearing the face of a cyclops and the Hebrew inscription <unk> , meaning Anak , both affixed to a capital letter T. This loosely drawn crest was replaced with a more professionally illustrated version in 1940 ( see right image ) . In later decades , the society adopted a simple lidless eye to represent itself ; this symbol appeared on red ribbon armbands worn at ANAK " tapping " rituals and a plaque outside the Paul G. Mayer Memorial Garden on Georgia Tech 's campus . Most recently , ANAK published a modernized version of its crest , a lidless eye affixed to a capital letter T , in The Technique in January 2008 to commemorate its centennial . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Founding = = = 
 The ANAK Society was founded on January 1 , 1908 by four Georgia Tech seniors : George Wyman McCarty , Jr . ( President ) , Harry Read Vaughan ( Vice President ) , Lewis Edward Goodier , Jr . ( Secretary ) and Charles Atwater Sweet , Jr . ( Treasurer ) . The " guiding spirit " behind these students was said to be William Henry Emerson , a professor of chemistry . Officer titles were named after famous cyclopes in Greek mythology : the president was Polyphemus ; the vice president , <unk> ; the treasurer , <unk> ; and the secretary , <unk> . Other charter members ( all seniors ) were G. A. Hendrie , C. A. Adamson , S. J. Hargrove , J. E. Davenport , L. W. Robert , W. R. Snyder , C. L. Emerson ( son of William Henry Emerson ) and G. W. Holmes Cheney . Additional members have been initiated each subsequent year , but following the tradition set by the society 's founders , no more than 12 members may be initiated per year . 
 In the 1909 Blue Print , the society described its purpose as follows : " [ The ANAK Society ] is composed of men from the Senior Class of Georgia Tech who have shown themselves zealous in the development of college spirit . This organization is not here , primarily , as a social club or honorary society , but to do all it can to develop a better morale among the student body and improve all phases of college life . " 
 As the society 's membership base grew , its influence and prestige likewise increased . By 1940 , the ANAK Society was referred to as " the oldest honorary organization on the Tech campus " and membership as " the highest local honor a Tech student may obtain " . These claims would generally go unchallenged throughout the rest of the century . Faculty recognition by the society , first initiated with the ANAK Award in 1942 , would reach an equivalent level of prestige by the end of the century . 
 = = = Transition to a secret society = = = 
 For many years following the ANAK Society 's founding , membership was not confidential . ANAK members would select new initiates by " tapping " them ( tapping them on the shoulder ) or presenting them with red ribbon armbands at Georgia Tech 's semi @-@ annual Interfraternity Council ( IFC ) dance . The ritual was dropped in 1961 when ANAK elected to become a secret society . From this point forward , ANAK membership was made public only upon a student 's graduation , via a list of graduating ANAK members published in the Blueprint and the Technique each year and the ANAK Society 's home page . A similar policy applies to faculty and honorary members , whose involvement with the society is only made known upon their retirement from Georgia Tech . 
 The specific reasons for ANAK 's transition to secrecy remain unclear . One reason , cited in several editions of the Blueprint , offers that the society changed its policies to protect its members from fallout associated with ANAK 's civil rights activities at the time . According to Gary S. May , the society 's faculty advisor , ANAK membership is confidential because " the members don 't want to exert undue influence on processes or people because of their status as a member " . In contrast , critics of the society suggest that the society acts in secret to shirk accountability for any negative consequences of its activities . 
 = = = Modern organization = = = 
 By the 21st century , ANAK comprised at least 1 @,@ 100 graduates , faculty members and honorary members . Among current Georgia Tech students , only upperclassmen ( junior and senior undergraduates ) are eligible for regular membership . Honorary memberships for faculty members and distinguished alumni are also available . The society apparently selects members based on " leadership ability , personal achievement , strong character , and love for Georgia Tech " . Membership is unrestricted by race or gender , and academic achievement is not considered in the selection criteria . The society admitted its first female member , Carol A. <unk> , in 1976 , 23 years after Georgia Tech began admitting women . 
 As the ANAK Society is ostensibly a student organization at Georgia Tech , it is subject to the same rules and regulations as other student organizations . The society files paperwork with Georgia Tech administration and the Student Government Association , holds elections for each of its four mandatory officer positions ( president , vice president , treasurer , and secretary ) and is formally advised by a Georgia Tech faculty member . The president 's name must be kept on file in the Office of Leadership and Civic Engagement , available to any student who seeks it . As of 2007 , the society 's current faculty advisor is Gary S. May , the dean of the College of Engineering and an ANAK member since 1985 . 
 = = Influence = = 
 = = = Student organizations = = = 
 The ANAK Society played a major role in establishing several of Georgia Tech 's most active student organizations , including two student publications and the student government . The society 's existence was formally announced in the first edition of the Blue Print in 1908 . Four ANAK charter members served on the first Blue Print editorial board . By 1911 , ANAK admitted four more 1908 Blue Print editors into the society , including Editor @-@ in @-@ Chief John G. Chapman . These close relationships enabled the society to assert a great deal of control over the yearbook 's direction in future decades . Along with several other clubs and societies , ANAK listed its membership roster and provided a group photograph in the yearbook . 
 ANAK and three Georgia Tech faculty members appointed the first staff of the Technique , Georgia Tech 's student newspaper . Eugene A. Turner , secretary of the Georgia Tech YMCA , and Albert Blohm , an adjunct professor of English , served as the newspaper 's first editors , while W. G. Perry , a junior professor of English , acted as the Technique 's first faculty advisor . The Technique published its first edition on November 11 , 1911 , and has been in continuous weekly publication since that time , with a modern circulation of 10 @,@ 000 . 
 In the absence of an official student government during the first few decades at Georgia Tech , the ANAK society acted as an unofficial student government and proposed an Honor Code , modeled on that of West Point 's , in 1908 . ANAK worked to set up a more formal organization , the Student Council ( later the Student Government Association ) , in 1922 , at which point it relinquished any decision @-@ making privileges it had over the student body . 
 Other student organizations ANAK claims to have established include a chapter of the YMCA in 1910 and the Ramblin ' Reck Club in 1930 . The former claim , however , contradicts evidence of a YMCA chapter existing before 1908 , and possibly as early as 1901 . In 1912 , ANAK additionally formed the <unk> Society , a comparable honor society geared towards sophomores and juniors at Georgia Tech . 
 = = = Traditions = = = 
 The ANAK Society is credited with beginning a number of lasting Georgia Tech traditions . ANAK created the " Rat Cap " , a gold baseball cap still distributed to new Georgia Tech students , in 1915 in response to distinctive freshman headgear popularized at other educational institutions at the time . ANAK organized the first homecoming celebration combined with an alumni reunion around 1920 , a tradition that continues to this day . 
 = = = Civil rights = = = 
 Beginning in the early 1920s , the ANAK Society involved itself in a number of civil rights activities . In 1921 , ANAK spearheaded an effort to prevent the white supremacist Ku Klux Klan from setting up a chapter at Georgia Tech . The effort was successful . 
 Around 1960 , ANAK held a series of secret dinner meetings with the families of Ford Greene , Ralph A. Long , Jr. and Lawrence Michael Williams , Georgia Tech 's first three African American students . The goal of these meetings , facilitated through the Georgia Tech YMCA , was to discuss the range of potential situations that could arise when the three students enrolled at Georgia Tech the following year , as well as appropriate reactions to each of these situations . When Greene , Long , and Williams enrolled in the fall semester of 1961 , ANAK members discreetly kept a close watch on the three students for the first two weeks to ensure their safety . As a result of ANAK 's efforts and those of other Institute and city organizations , none of the students was involved in any serious incident , paving the way for continued peaceful racial integration . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 A philanthropic organization , the ANAK Society annually awards two undergraduate student scholarships , the George Wingfield Semmes Memorial Scholarship and the Merri Gaye Hitt Memorial Scholarship . Semmes and Hitt were both Georgia Tech alumni and ANAK members ; Semmes , the Class of 1910 and Hitt , the Class of 1977 . Additionally , the society annually recognizes distinguished Georgia Tech alumni with the Joseph M. Pettit Distinguished Service Award ( formerly the ANAK Service Award ) . Finally , since 1942 ( annually since 1947 ) , the society has presented the ANAK Award to an outstanding Georgia Tech faculty member . This award is considered " the highest honor the undergraduate student body can bestow on a Georgia Tech faculty member " . For example , upon his retirement in 1999 , Georgia Tech professor David J. McGill recalled winning the ANAK Award in 1990 as the highlight of his teaching career , despite having also won two Outstanding Teaching Awards ( in 1974 and 1986 ) and being named the Carnegie Foundation 's Professor of the Year for the state of Georgia in 1996 . 
 The ANAK Society has donated a number of gifts to Georgia Tech . In 1921 , the society donated a staircase connecting Tech Tower to the D. P. Savant Building . The staircase bears a plaque naming ANAK as the benefactor , one of very few conspicuous declarations of the society 's existence on the Georgia Tech campus . On September 26 , 1947 , ANAK presented a life @-@ size bronze bust of Georgia Tech football head coach William A. Alexander to the Georgia Tech Athletic Association to commemorate the society 's 40th anniversary . The bust was sculpted by Julian H. Harris , a noted sculptor , architect , and Georgia Tech professor from 1936 to 1972 . Along with the Class of 1924 , ANAK gifted a portrait of William Henry Emerson , Georgia Tech 's first dean , to Georgia Tech in 1924 . The portrait was painted by noted Atlanta artist Kate Edwards . After being lost some time in the 1980s , the portrait was found and restored in the early 1990s . It has hung in the atrium of the Lyman Hall Building since October 15 , 1992 . Along with the Omicron Delta Kappa honor society , ANAK was involved in the dedication of the Paul G. Mayer Memorial Garden on May 30 , 1987 . The garden , located between the Georgia Tech Library and the William Vernon Skiles Classroom Building , features a plaque bearing the lidless eye symbol of the ANAK Society . 
 In 2002 , the ANAK Society donated a collection of its records from 1948 to 1983 to Georgia Tech . The records are publicly available through the Georgia Tech Library 's Archives and Records Management Department and include constitutions , anniversary dinner invitations , and member directories . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 In recent years , ANAK 's influence and status as a secret society has raised suspicion and controversy among Georgia Tech students . In particular , the society had " fallen under heavy scrutiny " during a series of student government election scandals in the late 1990s . 
 In 1998 , Marc D. Galindo , a Georgia Tech student and ANAK member , defeated competitor Vikas Chinnan in Student Government Association runoff elections after Chinnan was disqualified for repeated campaign violations . The disqualification , however , was eventually overturned by the Undergraduate Judiciary Cabinet ( the judiciary branch of student government ) . Although Galindo had committed a similar ( but not identical nor a repeated ) campaign violation , the Elections Committee did not disqualify him . Galindo had used his staff account to distribute campaign information while Chinnan had repeatedly used academic email distribution lists not available to the general public . Allegations of corruption erupted when two members of the Elections Committee turned out to be Galindo 's fellow ANAK members ; however , no proof of wrongdoing was ever uncovered . Chinnan , at the time of the election , was dating Anu Khurana , the then @-@ president of the ANAK Society . Chinnan had agreed with and acknowledged that Galindo had not wanted him to be " disqualified on a technicality " . 
 A similar incident occurred at Georgia Tech the following year . During Student Government Association elections in 1999 , rumors circulated that Wendy Horowitz , a candidate for Student Body President , was a member of ANAK . " Conspiracy theories " and " intense debate " ensued among students regarding the society 's intentions , benevolent or otherwise . Horowitz lost the election , a result widely attributed to her purported ANAK affiliation . It was later revealed that Horowitz , in fact , had served as president of the ANAK Society for the 1999 – 2000 term . 
 As a result of these controversies , a general feeling of distrust towards the ANAK society propagated throughout the Georgia Tech campus , epitomized by an anonymous email circulated in 1999 that accused ANAK of " being the ' lapdog of President Clough ' [ and ] improperly influencing elections , scholarships , and the press , among other things " . Critics expressed concern that ANAK members were shirking accountability for " their mistakes , their bad ideas , and their bad decisions " under the guise of eschewing " praise for their accomplishments " . The Student Government Association 's policy towards secret societies was called into question , resulting in a Joint Campus Organizations Committee ( <unk> ) resolution to consider the issue of accountability among student organization leaders . The controversial <unk> resolution , strongly opposed by ANAK representatives , would " require candidates for officer positions to recognize all campus affiliations including position and duration of involvement " . The resolution failed , ensuring that ANAK membership rosters and meetings would continue to remain confidential . 
 = = Notable members = = 
 The ANAK Society has granted honorary membership to a host of notable individuals associated with Georgia Tech , including former United States senator Sam Nunn , former Georgia Tech football head coach Bobby Dodd , former Georgia Tech basketball head coach Bobby <unk> , sportscaster Al <unk> , former United States president Jimmy Carter ( inducted 1946 ) , and most of Georgia Tech 's presidents . Notable ANAK members who were active in the society as Georgia Tech students include former Atlanta mayor Ivan Allen , Jr . ( inducted 1933 ) , Scientific Atlanta founder Glen P. Robinson , former United States astronaut John W. Young ( inducted 1952 ) and former Georgia Tech football head coach William A. Alexander ( inducted 1912 ) , and Lucius Sanford and Reggie Wilkes , former Georgia Tech and NFL football players ( inducted 1978 ) . George P. Burdell , Georgia Tech 's most famous fictional student , has been a member of the ANAK Society since 1930 . 
 = Ready to Die = 
 Ready to Die is the debut studio album by American rapper The Notorious B.I.G. ; it was released on September 13 , 1994 , by Bad Boy Records . The label 's first release , the album features production by Bad Boy founder Sean " Puffy " Combs , Easy Mo Bee , Chucky Thompson , DJ Premier and Lord Finesse , among others . Recording for the album took place during 1993 to 1994 at The Hit Factory and D & D Studios in New York City . The partly autobiographical album tells the story of B.I.G. ' s experiences as a young criminal . Ready to Die is his only studio album released during his lifetime , as he was murdered just days prior to the release of his second album , Life After Death ( 1997 ) . 
 Ready to Die was released to critical acclaim and became a commercial success , achieving gold certification . In 1995 , after the release , the album became a certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , and the album has reached a certified quadruple platinum with sales . It was significant for revitalizing the East Coast hip hop scene , amid West Coast hip hop 's commercial dominance . The album 's second single , " Big Poppa " , was nominated for a Grammy Award for Best Rap Solo Performance at the 1996 Grammy Awards . Ready to Die has been regarded by many music critics as one of the greatest hip @-@ hop albums of all time . In 2003 , it was ranked number 133 on Rolling Stone magazine 's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time , making it the third highest hip hop album on the list after It Takes a Nation of Millions to Hold Us Back and Raising Hell . In 2006 , Time included it on their list of the 100 greatest albums of all time . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 The album was recorded in New York City ( mainly in The Hit Factory recording studio ) in two stages between 1993 and 1994 . In 1994 , Biggie was only 21 going through 22 @-@ years old , when he recorded the album . In 1993 , Biggie was signed to the Uptown Records label by A & R Sean " Puffy " Combs . Biggie started recording his debut album in New York , after making a numerous guest appearances on among his label @-@ mates ' singles during the previous year . The first tracks recorded include the album 's darker , less radio @-@ friendly content ( including " Ready to Die , " " Gimme the Loot " and " Things Done Changed " ) . In these sessions , XXL magazine describe an " inexperienced , higher @-@ pitched " Biggie sounding " hungry and paranoid " . 
 When executive producer Sean " Puffy " Combs was fired from Uptown , Biggie 's career hung in limbo , as the album was only partially completed . After a brief period dealing drugs in North Carolina , Biggie returned to the studio the following year on Combs ' new Bad Boy Records label possessing " a smoother , more confident vocal tone " and completed the album . In this stage , the more commercial @-@ sounding tracks of the album were recorded , including the album 's singles . Between the two stages , XXL writes that Biggie moved from writing his lyrics in notebooks to freestyling them from memory . 
 The album was released with a cover depicting an infant resembling the artist , though sporting an afro , which pertains to the album 's concept of the artist 's life from birth to his death . It has been listed as among the best album covers in hip hop . 
 = = = Lawsuits and sample removal = = = 
 On March 24 , 2006 , Bridgeport Music and Westbound Records won a federal lawsuit against Bad Boy Records for copyright infringement , with a jury deciding that Combs and Bad Boy had illegally used samples for the production of the songs " Ready to Die " , " Machine Gun Funk " , and " Gimme the Loot " . The jury awarded $ 4 @.@ 2 million in punitive and direct damages to the two plaintiffs , and federal judge Todd Campbell enacted an immediate sales ban on the album and tracks in question . On appeal , the Sixth Circuit found the damages unconstitutionally high and in violation of due process and remanded the case , at which point Campbell reduced them by $ 2 @.@ 8 million ; however , the verdict was upheld . All versions of the album released since the lawsuit are without the disputed samples . 
 Although a fair use issue , Combs and Bad Boy never raised the legal concept of the fair use doctrine in their defense . This decision was questioned by some legal experts : Anthony Falzone of the Fair Use Project at Stanford Law School criticized Combs and Bad Boy for not defending the legality of sampling and suggested that they might have refused to raise such a defense because they feared it could later imperil their control over their own music . 
 On April 2 , 2014 , Lee Hutson of The Impressions filed a multimillion @-@ dollar copyright infringement suit against Combs , Bad Boy Records , and the estate of the late Notorious B.I.G. for copyright infringement , alleging that his song " Can 't Say Enough About Mom " was illegally sampled in the production of the song " The What " . The estate countersued in turn , claiming the sample as used was short , adapted , and supplemented , and thus subject to fair use , a legal tactic not pursued previously . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 The production on the album was mainly handled by Easy Mo Bee and The Hitmen . Cheo H. Coker of Rolling Stone depicted the beats as " heavy bottomed and slick , but B.I.G. ' s rhymes are the showstoppers . The tracks only enhance them , whether it 's the live bass driving a menacing undercurrent or [ the ] use of bluesy guitar and wah @-@ wah feedback " and that the production is used to " push the rapper to new heights . " The production is mainly sample @-@ based with the samples varying from the percussion of funk tracks to the vocals of hip hop songs . Steve Huey presented some criticism over the beats , stating that the " deliberate beats do get a little samey , but it hardly matters : this is Biggie 's show " . 
 = = = Lyrical themes = = = 
 The Notorious B.I.G. ' s lyrics on the album were generally praised by critics . Many critics applauded his story @-@ telling ability such as Allmusic writer Steve Huey , who stated " His raps are easy to understand , but his skills are hardly lacking — he has a loose , easy flow and a talent for piling multiple rhymes on top of one another in quick succession " . He also went on to mention that his lyrics are " firmly rooted in reality , but play like [ a ] scene from a movie " . Touré , writing for The New York Times , referred to The Notorious B.I.G. , proclaiming that he stood out from other rappers because " his lyrics mix autobiographical details about crime and violence with emotional honesty , telling how he felt while making a living as a drug dealer " . The album is also noted for its dark tone and sinister sense of depression . In the original Rolling Stone review , Cheo H Coker declared that he " maintains a consistent level of tension by juxtaposing emotional highs and lows " . " Things Done Changed " was also one of the few hip hop songs in The Norton Anthology of African American Literature . 
 The lyrics on Ready to Die tend to deal with violence , drug dealing , women , alcohol and marijuana use , and other elements of Notorious B.I.G. ' s environment . He rapped about these topics in " clear , sparse terms , allowing the lyrics to hit the first time you hear them " . The album contains a loose concept starting out with an intro that details his birth , his early childhood , his adolescence and his life at the point of the album 's release . Songs on the album range from homicide narratives ( " Warning " ) to braggadocios battle raps ( " The What , " " Unbelievable " ) . The final song was " Suicidal Thoughts " , a song where The Notorious B.I.G. contemplates and finally commits suicide . 
 = = Singles = = 
 Three singles were released from the album : " Juicy " , " Big Poppa " , " One More Chance " and a promotional track of Biggie : " Warning " . According to XXL the more commercial sound of the singles compared to the rest of the album was a result of encouragement by Combs during the later recording sessions in which they were recorded . 
 " Juicy " was released as the lead single on August 8 , 1994 . It peaked at number 27 on the Billboard Hot 100 , number 14 on Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks and reached number 3 on the Hot Rap Singles . It shipped 500 @,@ 000 copies in the United States and the RIAA certified it Gold on November 8 , 1994 . Produced by Combs , it features a prominent sample of " Juicy Fruit " as performed by James Mtume . Allmusic 's Steve Huey stated that , along with the other singles , it was an " upbeat , commercial moment " , calling it a " rags @-@ to @-@ riches chronicle " . Andrew <unk> , of <unk> , stated that the song was one of his " greatest and most @-@ revealing songs " and went on to say it was a " Part @-@ autobiography , part @-@ declaration @-@ of @-@ success . It document [ s ] the star 's transition from Brooklyn knucklehead to magazine cover story . " Producer Pete Rock , who was commissioned to remix the track , alleged that Puffy stole the idea for the original song 's beat after hearing it from him during a visit . Rock explained this in an interview with Wax Poetics : 
 I did the original version , didn 't get credit for it . They came to my house , heard the beat going on the drum machine , it 's the same story . You come downstairs at my crib , you hear music . He heard that shit and the next thing you know it comes out . They had me do a remix , but I tell people , and I will fight it to the end , that I did the original version of that . I 'm not mad at anybody , I just want the correct credit . 
 " Big Poppa " was released as the second single on February 20 , 1995 and like the previous single , it was a hit on multiple charts . It reached number six on the Billboard Hot 100 , number four on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks and number one on Hot Rap Singles . It sold over a million units and the RIAA certified it Platinum on May 23 , 1995 . Featuring production by Combs and Chucky Thompson of The Hitmen , it samples " Between the Sheets " by The Isley Brothers . The song was nominated at the 1996 Grammy Awards for Best Rap Solo Performance , but lost to Coolio 's " Gangsta 's Paradise " . Steve Huey named it an " overweight @-@ lover anthem " . 
 " One More Chance " was released as the third single on June 9 , 1995 . The single was a remix of the album track . It was produced by Combs and featured a sample from DeBarge 's " Stay With Me " . It peaked at number two on the Billboard Hot 100 and reached number one on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Singles & Tracks and Hot Rap Singles . It sold over a million copies and the RIAA certified it Platinum on July 31 , 1995 . Steve Huey labeled it a " graphic sex rap " . Rolling Stone writer Cheo H. Coker had a similar view of the song , noting that it was " one of the <unk> sex raps since Kool G Rap 's classic , " Talk Like Sex " and continued , stating it " proves hilarious simply because of B.I.G. ' s <unk> vulgarity . " 
 = = Commercial success = = 
 The album shipped 57 @,@ 000 units in its first week of release . However , it was then certified gold by the RIAA only two months after its release on November 16 , 1994 , and was certified double platinum on October 16 , 1995 , only a year and one month after its release . Ready to Die was then certified triple platinum on August 26 , 1998 and was later certified 4x platinum by the RIAA on October 19 , 1999 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Ready to Die received critical acclaim from music critics . In his review for Rolling Stone , Cheo H. Cocker stated " Ready to Die is the strongest solo rap debut since Ice Cube 's <unk> 's Most Wanted . From the breathtakingly visual moments of his birth to his <unk> end in " Suicidal Thoughts , " B.I.G. proves a captivating listen . It 's difficult to get him out of your head once you sample what he has to offer " . Robert Christgau from The Village Voice commented " His sex raps are erotic , his jokes are funny , and his music makes the thug life sound scary rather than luxuriously laid back . When he considers suicide , I not only take him at his word , I actively hope he finds another way " . The New York Times wrote " Though drug dealing carries tremendous heroic value with some young urban dwellers , he sacrifices the figure 's romantic potential . His raps acknowledge both the excitement of drug dealing and the stress caused by the threat from other dealers , robbers , the police and parents , sometimes one 's own . In presenting the downside of that life , Ready to Die offers perhaps the most balanced and honest portrait of the dealer 's life of any in hip @-@ hop " . 
 Q magazine gave Ready to Die three out of five stars , and stated " the natural rapping , clever use of sound effects and acted dialogue , and concept element ( from a baby being born at the start to the fading heartbeat at the end ) set this well apart from the average gangsta bragging " . In their original review for Ready to Die , The Source gave it four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of five ' mics ' , stating " Big weaves tales like a cinematographer , each song is like another scene in his lifestyle . Overall , this package is complete : ridiculous beats , harmonizing honeys , ill sound effects , criminal scenarios , and familiar hooks " . In 1996 , acclaimed singer @-@ songwriter Randy Newman enthused " It 's one of the best records ever made . It 's a strange album in that the first cut says , ' Oh , back in the old days was everybody was shootin ' everybody … ' and ' Let 's stop killing each other ' , and then the rest of the record is all about people killing each other . It 's the damnedest thing ; I don 't know what the hell he had in mind … It 's like when Public Enemy would put out a record and it was noticeably classier than all the other rap stuff at the time . " 
 = = = Retrospect = = = 
 In retrospect , Ready to Die has been highly acclaimed . In 1998 , The Source included it on their 100 Best Rap Albums of All Time list , and in 2002 , they re @-@ rated it to the maximum five ' mics ' . Rolling Stone has also given acclaim to Ready to Die over the years . In 2003 , they ranked it number 133 on their 500 Greatest Albums of All Time list , and one year later , they re @-@ rated it to five stars . In 2011 , Rolling Stone also placed it at number eight on their 100 Best Albums of the Nineties list , and described it as " mapping out the sound of ' <unk> 's cool " . Kilian Murphy from Stylus Magazine wrote favorably of the album in a retrospective review , and concluded " Sweet , hypocritical , sensitive , violent , depressed and jubilant ; these words could all fittingly describe Big at various points on Ready to Die . " 
 Steve Huey from AllMusic gave it five stars , stating " The album that reinvented East Coast rap for the gangsta age , Ready to Die made the Notorious B.I.G. a star . Today it 's recognized as one of the greatest hardcore rap albums ever recorded , and that 's mostly due to Biggie 's skill as a storyteller " . In 2006 , Time magazine included it on their 100 Greatest Albums of All Time list , and stated " On Ready to Die , Wallace took his street corner experiences and filtered them through his considerable charm . The result was a record that mixed long stretches of menace with romance and lots of humor . No rapper ever made multi @-@ syllabic rhymes sound as smooth " . The album was also included in the book 1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 The information regarding accolades is adapted from <unk> , except for lists that are sourced otherwise . 
 ( * ) signifies unordered lists 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Samples = = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = SMS Árpád = 
 SMS Árpád was a pre @-@ dreadnought battleship built by the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy in the early 20th century . She was launched on 11 September 1901 as the second of three Habsburg @-@ class battleships . Along with her sister ships , she participated at the bombardment of Ancona during World War I. Due to a shortage of coal , she was soon decommissioned after the bombardment of Ancona and used as harbor defense ship for the remainder of the war . After the war , all of the Habsburg @-@ class battleships were ceded to Great Britain as war prizes . She was scrapped in Italy in 1921 . 
 = = Construction and layout = = 
 Árpád was the second of three battleships of her class . Her hull was laid down on 10 June 1899 at the Stabilimento Tecnico Triestino shipyard in Trieste . Following more than two years of construction , she was launched on 11 September 1901 . After final fitting @-@ out work was finished , Árpád was fully ready for service and commissioned into the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy on 15 June 1903 . 
 Like all ships of her class , Árpád was 113 @.@ 11 m ( 371 ft 1 in ) long at the waterline and was 114 @.@ 55 m ( 375 ft 10 in ) in overall length . She had a beam of 19 @.@ 8 m ( 65 ft 0 in ) and a draft of 7 @.@ 5 m ( 24 ft 7 in ) . Freeboard was approximately 5 @.@ 8 m ( 19 ft ) forward and about 5 @.@ 5 m ( 18 ft ) aft . She also displaced 8 @,@ 364 metric tons ( 8 @,@ 232 long tons ) . Once construction on her had finished and she was commissioned into the Navy , Árpád had a crew of 638 officers and enlisted men . 
 Árpád was powered by 2 @-@ shaft , 4 @-@ cylinder vertical triple expansion engines , which were supplied with steam by 16 Belleville boilers . Árpád 's power output was rated at 14 @,@ 307 indicated horsepower ( 10 @,@ 669 kW ) , which produced a top speed of 19 @.@ 65 knots ( 36 @.@ 39 km / h ; 22 @.@ 61 mph ) . 
 The hull for the ship was constructed from longitudinal and transverse steel frames , over which the outer hull plates were riveted into place . The hull incorporated a double bottom that ran for 63 % of the ship 's length . A series of watertight bulkheads also extended from the keel to the gun deck . All in all , there was a total of 174 watertight compartments in the ship . Árpád had a metacentric height of between .82 m ( 2 @.@ 7 ft ) and 1 @.@ 02 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) . Bilge keels were mounted on either side of the hull to reduce rolling and prevent her from capsizing . Árpád had a flush main deck that was planked with wood , while the upper decks were covered with linoleum or corticine . 
 Árpád had three 24 cm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) L / 40 guns , two mounted in a twin turret forward and one mounted in a single turret aft of the main superstructure . The C 97 @-@ type guns were manufactured by Krupp in Germany . The main guns fired at a rate of between three and four 215 kg ( 474 lb ) armor @-@ piercing ( AP ) shells per minute . Her secondary armament consisted of twelve 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) SK L / 40 guns in casemates . These guns could fire at 4 – 5 shells per minute . She was built with face @-@ hardened chrome @-@ nickel steel . The main armored belt was 220 mm ( 8 @.@ 7 in ) in the central portion of the ship , where the ammunition magazines , machinery spaces , and other critical areas were located . The belt tapered slightly to 180 mm ( 7 @.@ 1 in ) on either end of the central section . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Peacetime = = = 
 Árpád took part in her first fleet maneuvers in mid @-@ 1903 with her sister ship Habsburg . The third sister , Babenberg , was commissioned in Summer 1904 , and participated in successive fleet drills . Following a series of simulated war games pitting Árpád and her sister ships against the three Monarch @-@ class battleships , Árpád and the other two Habsburg @-@ class ships became the I Battleship Division . This new division was active in the Mediterranean region . When Habsburg underwent a training cruise with the three Monarch @-@ class battleships in January 1903 , Árpád joined her the next year in a voyage around the Mediterranean Sea . With the commissioning of the Erzherzog Karl @-@ class battleships in 1906 and 1907 , the Habsburg @-@ class ships were transferred from the I to the II Battleship Division , and the three Monarch @-@ class battleships were moved from the II to the III Battleship Division . In 1910 – 1911 , Árpád had one of her superstructure decks removed to reduce weight . 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 Early in World War I , Árpád was transferred to the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy 's IV Division after the first new Tegetthoff @-@ class battleships came into service . At around the same time , Árpád , her sister ships Habsburg and Babenberg and the remainder of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy were mobilized to support the flight of SMS Goeben and Breslau from 28 July to 10 August 1914 . The two German ships were stationed in the Mediterranean and were attempting to break out of the strait of Messina , which was surrounded by British vessels . After breaking out , the German ships planned to steam to Turkey . After the Germans successfully broke out of Messina , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy was recalled . The fleet had by that time advanced as far south as Brindisi in southeastern coast of Italy . After Italy entered the war on the side of France and Great Britain , the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy bombarded several Italian port cities along the Adriatic coast . Árpád took part in the Bombardment of Ancona on 23 May 1915 . 
 Due to a coal shortage , Árpád was later decommissioned and re @-@ purposed as a harbor defense ship for the latter half of the war . Árpád 's crew was transferred to man the new U @-@ boats and aircraft . Following the war , Árpád , along with her sister ships , were awarded to Great Britain as war prizes . They were sold to Italy and broken up for scrap in 1921 . 
 = History of the United States Navy = 
 The history of the United States Navy divides into two major periods : the " Old Navy " , a small but respected force of sailing ships that was also notable for innovation in the use of ironclads during the American Civil War , and the " New Navy " , the result of a modernization effort that began in the 1880s and made it the largest in the world by the 1920s . 
 The United States Navy claims 13 October 1775 as the date of its official establishment , when the Second Continental Congress passed a resolution creating the Continental Navy . With the end of the American Revolutionary War , the Continental Navy was disbanded . Under President George Washington threats to American merchant shipping by Barbary pirates from 4 north African Muslim States , in the Mediterranean , led to the Naval Act of 1794 , which created a permanent standing U.S. Navy . The original six frigates were authorized as part of the Act . Over the next 20 years , the Navy fought the French Navy in the Quasi @-@ War ( 1798 – 99 ) , Barbary states in the First and Second Barbary Wars , and the British in the War of 1812 . After the War of 1812 , the U.S. Navy was at peace until the Mexican – American War in 1846 , and served to combat piracy in the Mediterranean and Caribbean seas , as well fighting the slave trade . In 1845 , the Naval Academy was founded . In 1861 , the American Civil War began and the U.S. Navy fought the small Confederate Navy with both sailing ships and ironclad ships while forming a blockade that shut down the Confederacy 's civilian shipping . After the Civil war , most of the its ships were laid up in reserve , and by 1878 , the Navy was just 6 @,@ 000 men . 
 In 1882 , the U.S. Navy consisted of many outdated ship designs . Over the next decade , Congress approved building multiple modern armored cruisers and battleships , and by around the start of the 20th century had moved from twelfth place in 1870 to fifth place in terms of numbers of ships . After winning two major battles during the 1898 Spanish – American War , the Navy continued to build more ships , and by the end of World War I had more men and women in uniform than the Royal Navy . The Washington Naval Conference recognized the Navy as equal in capital ship size to the Royal Navy , and during the 1920s and 1930s , the Navy built several aircraft carriers and battleships . The Navy was drawn into World War II after the Japanese Attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941 , and over the next four years fought many historic battles including the Battle of the Coral Sea , the Battle of Midway , multiple naval battles during the Guadalcanal Campaign , and the largest naval battle in history , the Battle of Leyte Gulf . Much of the Navy 's activity concerned the support of landings , not only with the " island @-@ hopping " campaign in the Pacific , but also with the European landings . When the Japanese surrendered , a large flotilla entered Tokyo Bay to witness the formal ceremony conducted on the battleship Missouri , on which officials from the Japanese government signed the Japanese Instrument of Surrender . By the end of the war , the Navy had over 1 @,@ 600 warships . 
 After World War II ended , the U.S. Navy entered the Cold War and participated in the Korean War , the Vietnam War , the Persian Gulf War , and the Iraq War . Following the collapse of the Soviet Union , the Soviet Navy fell apart , which made the United States the world 's undisputed naval superpower . Nuclear power and ballistic missile technology led to new ship propulsion and weapon systems , which were used in the Nimitz @-@ class aircraft carriers and Ohio @-@ class submarines . By 1978 , the number of ships had dwindled to less than 400 , many of which were from World War II , which prompted Ronald Reagan to institute a program for a modern , 600 @-@ ship Navy . Today , the United States is the world 's undisputed naval superpower , with the ability to engage and project power in two simultaneous limited wars along separate fronts . In March 2007 , the U.S. Navy reached its smallest fleet size , with 274 ships , since World War I. Former U.S. Navy admirals who head the U.S. Naval Institute have raised concerns about what they see as the ability to respond to ' aggressive moves by Iran and <unk> 
 = = Foundations of the " Old Navy " = = 
 = = = Continental Navy ( 1775 – 1785 ) = = = 
 The Navy was rooted in the American seafaring tradition , which produced a large community of sailors , captains and shipbuilders in the colonial era . During the Revolution , several states operated their own navies . On 12 June 1775 , the Rhode Island General Assembly passed a resolution creating a navy for the colony of Rhode Island . The same day , Governor Nicholas Cooke signed orders addressed to Captain Abraham Whipple , commander of the sloop Katy , and commodore of the armed vessels employed by the government . 
 The first formal movement for the creation of a Continental navy came from Rhode Island , because its merchants ' widespread smuggling activities had been severely harassed by British frigates . On 26 August 1775 , Rhode Island passed a resolution that there be a single Continental fleet funded by the Continental Congress . The resolution was introduced in the Continental Congress on 3 October 1775 , but was tabled . In the meantime , George Washington had begun to acquire ships , starting with the schooner USS Hannah which was paid for out of Washington 's own pocket . Hannah was commissioned and launched on 5 September 1775 , from the port of Marblehead , Massachusetts . 
 The US Navy recognizes 13 October 1775 as the date of its official establishment — the date of the passage of the resolution of the Continental Congress at Philadelphia , Pennsylvania that created the Continental Navy . On this day , Congress authorized the purchase of two vessels to be armed for a cruise against British merchant ships . Congress on 13 December 1775 , authorized the building of thirteen frigates within the next three months , five ships of 32 guns , five with 28 guns and three with 24 guns . 
 On Lake Champlain , Benedict Arnold ordered the construction of 12 Navy vessels to slow down the British fleet that was invading New York from Canada . The British fleet did destroy Arnold 's fleet , but the U.S. fleet managed to slow down the British after a two @-@ day battle , known as the Battle of Valcour Island , and managed to slow the progression of the British Army . By mid @-@ 1776 , a number of ships , ranging up to and including the thirteen frigates approved by Congress , were under construction , but their effectiveness was limited ; they were completely outmatched by the mighty Royal Navy , and nearly all were captured or sunk by 1781 . 
 Privateers had some success , with 1 @,@ 697 letters of marque being issued by Congress . Individual states , American agents in Europe and in the Caribbean also issued commissions ; taking duplications into account more than 2 @,@ 000 commissions were issued by the various authorities . Over 2 @,@ 200 British ships were taken by Yankee privateers , amounting to almost $ 66 million , a significant sum at the time . 
 One particularly notable American naval hero of the Revolution was John Paul Jones , who in his famous voyage around the British Isles defeated the British ship Serapis ( 1779 ) in the Battle of Flamborough Head . Partway through the battle , with the rigging of the two ships entangled , and several guns of Jones ' ship Bonhomme Richard ( 1765 ) out of action , the captain of Serapis asked Jones if he had struck his colors , to which Jones has been quoted as replying , " I have not yet begun to fight ! " 
 France officially entered the war on 17 June 1778 , and the ships of the French Navy sent to the Western Hemisphere spent most of the year in the West Indies , and only sailed near the Thirteen Colonies during the Caribbean hurricane season from July until November . The first French fleet attempted landings in New York and Rhode Island , but ultimately failed to engage British forces during 1778 . In 1779 , a fleet commanded by Vice Admiral Charles Henri , comte d 'Estaing assisted American forces attempting to recapture <unk> , Georgia . 
 In 1780 , a fleet with 6 @,@ 000 troops commanded by Lieutenant General Jean @-@ Baptiste , comte de Rochambeau landed at Newport , Rhode Island , and shortly afterwards the fleet was blockaded by the British . In early 1781 , Washington and de Rochambeau planned an attack against the British in the Chesapeake Bay area to coordinate with the arrival of a large fleet commanded by Vice Admiral François , comte de Grasse . Successfully deceiving the British that an attack was planned in New York , Washington and de Rochambeau marched to Virginia , and de Grasse began landing forces near Yorktown , Virginia . On 5 September 1781 a major naval action was fought by de Grasse and the British at the Battle of the Virginia Capes , ending with the French fleet in control of the Chesapeake Bay . The U.S. Navy continued to interdict British supply ships until peace was finally declared in late 1783 . 
 = = = Disarmament ( 1785 – 1794 ) = = = 
 The Revolutionary War was ended by the Treaty of Paris in 1783 , and by 1785 the Continental Navy was disbanded and the remaining ships were sold . The frigate Alliance , which had fired the last shots of the American Revolutionary War , was also the last ship in the Navy . A faction within Congress wanted to keep the ship , but the new nation did not have the funds to keep her in service . Other than a general lack of money , other factors for the disarmament of the navy were the loose confederation of the states , a change of goals from war to peace , and more domestic and fewer foreign interests . 
 After the American Revolutionary War the brand @-@ new United States struggled to stay financially afloat . National income was desperately needed and most came from tariffs on imported goods . Because of rampant smuggling , the need was immediate for strong enforcement of tariff laws . On 4 August 1790 the United States Congress , urged on by Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton , created the Revenue @-@ Marine , the forerunner for the United States Coast Guard , to enforce the tariff and all other maritime laws . Ten cutters were initially ordered . Between 1790 and 1797 when the Navy Department was created , the Revenue @-@ Marine was the only armed maritime service for the United States . 
 American merchant shipping had been protected by the British Navy , and as a consequence of the Treaty of Paris and the disarmament of the Continental Navy , the United States no longer had any protection for its ships from pirates . The fledgling nation did not have the funds to pay annual tribute to the Barbary states , so their ships were vulnerable for capture after 1785 . By 1789 , the new Constitution of the United States authorized Congress to create a navy , but during George Washington 's first term ( 1787 – 1793 ) little was done to rearm the navy . In 1793 , the French Revolutionary Wars between Great Britain and France began , and a truce negotiated between Portugal and Algiers ended Portugal 's blockade of the Strait of Gibraltar which had kept the Barbary pirates in the Mediterranean . Soon after , the pirates sailed into the Atlantic , and captured 11 American merchant ships and more than a hundred seamen . 
 In reaction to the seizure of the American vessels , Congress debated and approved the Naval Act of 1794 , which authorized the building of six frigates , four of 44 guns and two of 36 guns . Supporters were mostly from the northern states and the coastal regions , who argued the Navy would result in savings in insurance and ransom payments , while opponents from southern states and inland regions thought a navy was not worth the expense and would drive the United States into more costly wars . 
 = = = Establishment ( 1794 – 1812 ) = = = 
 After the passage of the Naval Act of 1794 , work began on the construction of the six frigates : USS United States , President , Constellation , Chesapeake , Congress , and Constitution . Constitution , launched in 1797 and the most famous of the six , was nicknamed " Old Ironsides " ( like the earlier HMS Britannia ) and , thanks to the efforts of Oliver Wendell Holmes , Sr. , is still in existence today , anchored in Boston harbor . Soon after the bill was passed , Congress authorized $ 800 @,@ 000 to obtain a treaty with the Algerians and ransom the captives , triggering an amendment of the Act which would halt the construction of ships if peace was declared . After considerable debate , three of the six frigates were authorized to be completed : United States , Constitution and Constellation . However , the first naval vessel to sail was USS Ganges , on 24 May 1798 . 
 At the same time , tensions between the U.S. and France developed into the Quasi @-@ War , which originated from the Treaty of Alliance ( 1778 ) that had brought the French into the Revolutionary War . The United States preferred to take a position of neutrality in the conflicts between France and Britain , but this put the nation at odds with both Britain and France . After the Jay Treaty was authorized with Britain in 1794 , France began to side against the United States and by 1797 they had seized over 300 American vessels . The newly inaugurated President John Adams took steps to deal with the crisis , working with Congress to finish the three almost @-@ completed frigates , approving funds to build the other three , and attempting to negotiate an agreement similar to the Jay Treaty with France . The XYZ Affair originated with a report distributed by Adams where alleged French agents were identified by the letters X , Y , and Z who informed the delegation a bribe must be paid before the diplomats could meet with the foreign minister , and the resulting scandal increased popular support in the country for a war with France . Concerns about the War Department 's ability to manage a navy led to the creation of the Department of the Navy , which was established on 30 April 1798 . 
 The war with France was fought almost entirely at sea , mostly between privateers and merchant ships . The first victory for the United States Navy was on 7 July 1798 when USS Delaware captured the French privateer Le <unk> , and the first victory over an enemy warship was on 9 February 1799 when the frigate Constellation captured the French frigate L 'Insurgente . By the end of 1800 , peace with France had been declared , and in 1801 , to prevent a second disarmament of the Navy , the outgoing Federalist administration rushed through Congress an act authorizing a peacetime navy for the first time , which limited the navy to six active frigates and seven in ordinary , as well as 45 officers and 150 midshipmen . The remainder of the ships in service were sold and the dismissed officers were given four months pay . 
 The problems with the Barbary states had never gone away , and on 10 May 1801 the Tripolitans declared war on the United States by chopping down the flag in front of the American Embassy , which began the First Barbary War . USS Philadelphia was captured by the Moors , but then set on fire in an American raid led by Stephen Decatur . The Marines invaded the " shores of Tripoli " in 1805 , capturing the city of Derna , the first time the U.S. flag ever flew over a foreign conquest . This act was enough to induce the Barbary rulers to sign peace treaties . Subsequently the Navy was greatly reduced for reasons of economy , and instead of regular ships , many gunboats were built , intended for coastal use only . This policy proved completely ineffective within a decade . 
 President Thomas Jefferson and his Republican party opposed a strong navy , arguing that small gunboats in the major harbors were all the nation needed to defend itself . They proved useless in wartime . 
 The Royal Navy continued to illegally press American sailors into the Royal Navy ; an estimated 10 @,@ 000 sailors between 1799 and 1812 . In 1807 , in the Chesapeake @-@ Leopard Affair , HMS Leopard demanded that USS Chesapeake submit to an inspection , ostensibly looking for British citizens but in reality looking for any suitable sailors to press into the Royal Navy . Leopard severely damaged Chesapeake when she refused . The most violent of many such encounters , the affair further fueled the tensions and in June 1812 the U.S. declared war on Britain . 
 = = = War of 1812 ( 1812 – 1815 ) = = = 
 Much of the war was expected to be fought at sea ; and within an hour of the announcement of war , the diminutive American navy set forth to do battle with an opponent outnumbering it 50 @-@ to @-@ 1 . After two months , USS Constitution sank HMS Guerriere ; Guerriere 's crew were most dismayed to see their cannonballs bouncing off the Constitution 's unusually strong live oak hull , giving her the enduring nickname of " Old Ironsides " . On 29 December 1812 Constitution defeated HMS Java off the coast of Brazil and Java was burned after the Americans determined she could not be salvaged . On 25 October 1812 , USS United States captured HMS Macedonian ; after the battle Macedonian was captured and entered into American service . In 1813 , USS Essex commenced a very fruitful raiding venture into the South Pacific , preying upon the British merchant and whaling industry . The Essex was already known for her capture of HMS Alert and a British transport the previous year , and gained further success capturing 15 British merchantmen / whalers . The British finally took action , dispatching HMS Cherub and HMS Phoebe to stop the Essex . After violating Chile 's neutrality , the British captured the Essex in the Battle of Valparaíso . 
 The capture of the three British frigates led the British to deploy more vessels on the American seaboard to tighten the blockade . On 1 June 1813 , off Boston Harbor , the frigate USS Chesapeake , commanded by Captain James Lawrence , was captured by the British frigate HMS Shannon under Captain Sir Philip Broke . Lawrence was mortally wounded and famously cried out , " Don 't give up the ship ! " . Despite their earlier successes , by 1814 many of the Navy 's best ships were blockaded in port and unable to prevent British incursions on land via the sea . 
 During the summer of 1814 , the British fought the Chesapeake Campaign , which was climaxed by amphibious assaults against Washington and Baltimore . The capital fell to the British almost without a fight , and several ships were burned at the Washington Navy Yard , including the 44 @-@ gun frigate USS Columbia . At Baltimore , the bombardment by Fort McHenry inspired Francis Scott Key to write " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " , and the hulks blocking the channel prevented the fleet from entering the harbor ; the army reembarked on the ships , ending the battle . 
 The American naval victories at the Battle of Lake Champlain and Battle of Lake Erie halted the final British offensive in the north and helped to deny the British exclusive rights to the Great Lakes in the Treaty of Ghent . Shortly before the treaty was signed , USS President was captured by 4 British frigates . Three days after the treaty was signed , the Constitution captured HMS Levant and Cyane . The final naval action of the war occurred almost 5 months after the treaty on 30 June 1815 when the sloop USS Peacock captured the East India Company brig Nautilus , the last enemy ship captured by the U.S. Navy until World War II . 
 = = = Continental Expansion ( 1815 – 1861 ) = = = 
 After the war , the Navy 's accomplishments paid off in the form of better funding , and it embarked on the construction of many new ships . However , the expense of the larger ships was prohibitive , and many of them stayed in shipyards half @-@ completed , in readiness for another war , until the Age of Sail had almost completely passed . The main force of the Navy continued to be large sailing frigates with a number of smaller sloops during the three decades of peace . By the 1840s , the Navy began to adopt steam power and shell guns , but they lagged behind the French and British in adopting the new technologies . 
 Enlisted sailors during this time included many foreign @-@ born men , and native @-@ born Americans were usually social outcasts who had few other employment options or they were trying to escape punishment for crimes . In 1835 , almost 3 @,@ 000 men sailed with merchant ships out of Boston harbor , but only 90 men were recruited by the Navy . It was unlawful for black men to serve in the Navy , but the shortage of men was so acute this law was frequently ignored . 
 Discipline followed the customs of the Royal Navy but punishment was much milder than typical in European navies . Sodomy was rarely prosecuted . The Army abolished flogging as a punishment in 1812 , but the Navy kept it until 1850 . 
 During the War of 1812 , the Barbary states took advantage of the weakness of the United States Navy to again capture American merchant ships and sailors . After the Treaty of Ghent was signed , the United States looked at ending the piracy in the Mediterranean which had plagued American merchants for two decades . On 3 March 1815 , the U.S. Congress authorized deployment of naval power against Algiers , beginning the Second Barbary War . Two powerful squadrons under the command of Commodores Stephen Decatur , Jr. and William Bainbridge , including the 74 @-@ gun ships of the line Washington , Independence , and Franklin , were dispatched to the Mediterranean . Shortly after departing Gibraltar en route to Algiers , Decatur 's squadron encountered the Algerian flagship <unk> , and , in the Action of 17 June 1815 , captured it . Not long afterward , the American squadron likewise captured the Algerian brig <unk> in the Battle off Cape Palos . By June , the squadrons had reached Algiers and peace was negotiated with the Dey , including a return of captured vessels and men , a guarantee of no further tributes and a right to trade in the region . 
 Piracy in the Caribbean sea was also a major problem , and between 1815 and 1822 an estimated 3 @,@ 000 ships were captured by pirates . In 1819 , Congress authorized President James Madison to deal with this threat , and since many of the pirates were privateers of the newly independent states of Latin America , he decided to embark on a strategy of diplomacy backed up by the guns of the Navy . An agreement with Venezuela was reached in 1819 , but ships were still regularly captured until a military campaign by the West India Squadron , under the command of David Porter , used a combination of large frigates escorting merchant ships backed by many small craft searching small coves and islands , and capturing pirate vessels . During this campaign USS Sea Gull became the first steam @-@ powered ship to see combat action . Although isolated instances of piracy continued into the 1830s , by 1826 the frequent attacks had ended and the region was declared free for commerce . 
 Another international problem was the slave trade , and the African squadron was formed in 1820 to deal with this threat . Politically , the suppression of the slave trade was unpopular , and the squadron was withdrawn in 1823 ostensibly to deal with piracy in the Caribbean , and did not return to the African coast until the passage of the Webster – Ashburton treaty with Britain in 1842 . After the treaty was passed , the United States used fewer ships than the treaty required , ordered the ships based far from the coast of Africa , and used ships that were too large to operate close to shore . Between 1845 and 1850 , the United States Navy captured only 10 slave vessels , while the British captured 423 vessels carrying 27 @,@ 000 captives . 
 Congress formally authorized the establishment of the United States Military Academy in 1802 , but it took almost 50 years to approve a similar school for naval officers . During the long period of peace between 1815 and 1846 , midshipmen had few opportunities for promotion , and their warrants were often obtained via patronage . The poor quality of officer training in the U.S. Navy became visible after the Somers Affair , an alleged mutiny aboard the training ship USS Somers in 1842 , and the subsequent execution of midshipman Philip Spencer . George Bancroft , appointed Secretary of the Navy in 1845 , decided to work outside of congressional approval and create a new academy for officers . He formed a council led by Commodore Perry to create a new system for training officers , and turned the old Fort Severn at Annapolis into a new institution in 1845 which would be designated as the United States Naval Academy by Congress in 1851 . 
 Naval forces participated in the effort to forcibly move the Seminole Indians from Florida to a reservation west of the Mississippi . After a massacre of army soldiers near Tampa on 28 December 1835 , marines and sailors were added to the forces which fought the Second Seminole War from 1836 until 1842 . A " mosquito fleet " was formed in the Everglades out of various small craft to transport a mixture of army and navy personnel to pursue the Seminoles into the swamps . About 1 @,@ 500 soldiers were killed during the conflict , some Seminoles agreed to move but a small group of Seminoles remained in control of the Everglades and the area around Lake Okeechobee . 
 The Navy played a role in two major operations of the Mexican – American War ( 1845 – 1848 ) ; during the Battle of Veracruz , it transported the invasion force that captured Veracruz by landing 12 @,@ 000 troops and their equipment in one day , leading eventually to the capture of Mexico City , and the end of the war . Its Pacific Squadron 's ships facilitated the capture of California . 
 In 1853 Commodore Matthew Perry led the Perry Expedition , a squadron of four ships which sailed to Japan to establish normal relations with Japan . Perry 's two technologically advanced steam @-@ powered ships and calm , firm diplomacy convinced Japan to end three centuries of isolation and sign Treaty of Kanagawa with the U.S. in 1854 . Nominally a treaty of friendship , the agreement soon paved the way for the opening of Japan and normal trade relations with the United States and Europe . 
 = = = American Civil War ( 1861 – 1865 ) = = = 
 Between the beginning of the war and the end of 1861 , 373 commissioned officers , warrant officers , and midshipmen resigned or were dismissed from the United States Navy and went on to serve the Confederacy . On 20 April 1861 , the Union burned its ships that were at the Norfolk Navy Yard to prevent their capture by the Confederates , but not all of the ships were completely destroyed . The screw frigate USS Merrimack was so hastily scuttled that her hull and steam engine were basically intact , which gave the South 's Stephen Mallory the idea of raising her and then armoring the upper sides with iron plate . The resulting ship was named CSS Virginia . Meanwhile , John Ericsson had similar ideas , and received funding to build USS Monitor . 
 Winfield Scott , the commanding general of the U.S. Army at the beginning of the war , devised the Anaconda Plan to win the war with as little bloodshed as possible . His idea was that a Union blockade of the main ports would weaken the Confederate economy ; then the capture of the Mississippi River would split the South . Lincoln adopted the plan in terms of a blockade to squeeze to death the Confederate economy , but overruled Scott 's warnings that his new army was not ready for an offensive operation because public opinion demanded an immediate attack . 
 On 8 March 1862 , the Confederate Navy initiated the first combat between ironclads when the Virginia successfully attacked the blockade . The next day , the Monitor engaged the Virginia in the Battle of Hampton Roads . Their battle ended in a draw , and the Confederacy later lost the Virginia when the ship was scuttled to prevent capture . The Monitor was the prototype for the monitor warship and many more were built by the Union Navy . While the Confederacy built more ironclad ships during the war , they lacked the ability to build or purchase ships that could effectively counter the monitors . 
 Along with ironclad ships , the new technologies of naval mines , which were known as torpedoes after the torpedo eel , and submarine warfare were introduced during the war by the Confederacy . During the Battle of Mobile Bay , mines were used to protect the harbor and sank the Union monitor USS Tecumseh . After Tecumseh sank , Admiral David G. Farragut famously said , " Damn the torpedoes , full speed ahead ! " . The forerunner of the modern submarine , CSS David , attacked USS New Ironsides using a spar torpedo . The Union ship was barely damaged and the resulting geyser of water put out the fires in the submarine 's boiler , rendering the submarine immobile . Another submarine , CSS H.L. Hunley , was designed to dive and surface but ultimately did not work well and sank on five occasions during trials . In action against USS Housatonic the submarine successfully sank its target but was lost by the same explosion . 
 The Confederate States of America operated a number of commerce raiders and blockade runners , CSS Alabama being the most famous , and British investors built small , fast blockade runners that traded arms and luxuries brought in from Bermuda , Cuba , and The Bahamas in return for high @-@ priced cotton and tobacco . When the Union Navy seized a blockade runner , the ship and cargo were sold and the proceeds given to the Navy sailors ; the captured crewmen were mostly British and they were simply released . 
 The blockade of the South caused the Southern economy to collapse during the war . Shortages of food and supplies were caused by the blockade , the failure of Southern railroads , the loss of control of the main rivers , and foraging by Union and Confederate armies . The standard of living fell even as large @-@ scale printing of paper money caused inflation and distrust of the currency . By 1864 the internal food distribution had broken down , leaving cities without enough food and causing food riots across the Confederacy . The Union victory at the Second Battle of Fort Fisher in January 1865 closed the last useful Southern port , virtually ending blockade running and hastening the end of the war . 
 = = = Decline of the Navy ( 1865 – 1882 ) = = = 
 After the war , the Navy went into a period of decline . In 1864 , the Navy had 51 @,@ 500 men in uniform , and almost 700 ships and about 60 monitor @-@ type coastal ironclads which made the U.S. Navy the second largest in the world after the Royal Navy . By 1880 the Navy only had 48 ships in commission , 6 @,@ 000 men , and the ships and shore facilities were decrepit but Congress saw no need to spend money to improve them . The Navy was unprepared to fight a major maritime war before 1897 . 
 In 1871 , an expedition of five warships commanded by Rear Admiral John Rodgers was sent to Korea to obtain an apology for the murders of several shipwrecked American sailors and secure a treaty to protect shipwrecked foreigners in the future . After a small skirmish , Rodgers launched an amphibious assault of approximately 650 men on the forts protecting Seoul . Despite the capture of the forts , the Koreans refused to negotiate , and the expedition was forced to leave before the start of typhoon season . Nine sailors and six marines received Medals of Honor for their acts of heroism during the Korean campaign ; the first for actions in a foreign conflict . 
 By the 1870s most of the ironclads from the Civil War were laid up in reserve , leaving the United States virtually without an ironclad fleet . When the Virginius Affair first broke out in 1873 , a Spanish ironclad happened to be anchored in New York Harbor , leading to the uncomfortable realization on the part of the U.S. Navy that it had no ship capable of defeating such a vessel . The Navy hastily issued contracts for the construction of five new ironclads , and accelerated its existing repair program for several more . USS Puritan and the four Amphitrite @-@ class monitors were subsequently built as a result of the Virginius war scare . All five vessels would later take part in the Spanish – American War of 1898 . 
 By the time the Garfield administration assumed office in 1881 , the Navy 's condition had deteriorated still further . A review conducted on behalf of the new Secretary of the Navy , William H. Hunt , found that of 140 vessels on the Navy 's active list , only 52 were in an operational state , of which a mere 17 were iron @-@ hulled ships , including 14 aging Civil War era ironclads . Hunt recognized the necessity of modernizing the Navy , and set up an informal advisory board to make recommendations . Also to be expected , morale was considerably down ; officers and sailors in foreign ports were all too aware that their old wooden ships would not survive long in the event of war . The limitations of the monitor type effectively prevented the United States from projecting power overseas , and until the 1890s the United States would have come off badly in a conflict with even Spain or the Latin American powers . 
 = = " New Navy " = = 
 = = = Rebuilding ( 1882 – 1898 ) = = = 
 In 1882 , on the recommendation of an advisory panel , the Navy Secretary William H. Hunt requested funds from Congress to construct modern ships . The request was rejected initially , but in 1883 Congress authorized the construction of three protected cruisers , USS Chicago , USS Boston , and USS Atlanta , and the dispatch vessel USS Dolphin , together known as the ABCD ships . In 1885 , two more protected cruisers , USS Charleston and USS Newark which was the last American cruiser to be fitted with a sail rig , were authorized . Congress also authorized the construction of the first battleships in the Navy , USS Texas and USS Maine . The ABCD ships proved to be excellent vessels , and the three cruisers were organized into the Squadron of Evolution , popularly known as the White Squadron because of the color of the hulls , which was used to train a generation of officers and men . 
 Alfred Thayer Mahan 's book The Influence of Sea Power upon History , 1660 – 1783 , published in 1890 , was very influential in justifying the naval program to the civilian government and to the general public . With the closing of the frontier , some Americans began to look outwards , to the Caribbean , to Hawaii and the Pacific , and with the doctrine of Manifest Destiny as philosophical justification , many saw the Navy as an essential part of realizing that doctrine beyond the limits of the American continent . 
 In 1890 , Mahan 's doctrine influenced Navy Secretary Benjamin F. Tracy to propose the United States start building no less than 200 ships of all types , but Congress rejected the proposal . Instead , the Navy Act of 1890 authorized building three battleships , USS Indiana , USS Massachusetts , and USS Oregon , followed by USS Iowa . By around the start of the 20th century , two Kearsarge @-@ class battleships and three Illinois @-@ class battleships were completed or under construction , which brought the U.S. Navy from twelfth place in 1870 to fifth place among the world 's navies . 
 Battle tactics , especially long @-@ range gunnery , became a central concern . 
