 = = = Spanish – American War ( 1898 ) = = = 
 The United States was interested in purchasing colonies from Spain , specifically Cuba , but Spain refused . Newspapers wrote stories , many which were fabricated , about atrocities committed in Spanish colonies which raised tensions between the two countries . A riot gave the United States an excuse to send USS Maine to Cuba , and the subsequent explosion of Maine in Havana Harbor increased popular support for war with Spain . The cause of the explosion was investigated by a board of inquiry , which in March 1898 came to the conclusion the explosion was caused by a sea mine , and there was pressure from the public to blame Spain for sinking the ship . However , later investigations pointed to an internal explosion in one of the magazines caused by heat from a fire in the adjacent coal bunker . 
 Assistant Navy secretary Theodore Roosevelt quietly positioned the Navy for attack before the Spanish – American War was declared in April 1898 . The Asiatic Squadron , under the command of George Dewey , immediately left Hong Kong for the Philippines , attacking and decisively defeating the Spanish fleet in the Battle of Manila Bay . A few weeks later , the North Atlantic Squadron destroyed the majority of heavy Spanish naval units in the Caribbean in the Battle of Santiago de Cuba . 
 The Navy 's experience in this war was both encouraging , in that it had won , and cautionary , in that the enemy had one of the weakest of the worlds ' modern fleets , and that the Manila Bay attack was extremely risky ; if the American ships had been severely damaged or had run out of supplies , they were 7 @,@ 000 miles from the nearest American harbor . This realization would have a profound effect on Navy strategy , and , indeed , American foreign policy , in the next several decades . 
 = = = Rise of the Modern Navy ( 1898 – 1914 ) = = = 
 Fortunately for the New Navy , its most ardent political supporter , Theodore Roosevelt , became President in 1901 . Under his administration , the Navy went from the sixth largest in the world to second only to the Royal Navy . Theodore Roosevelt 's administration became involved in the politics of the Caribbean and Central America , with interventions in 1901 , 1902 , 1903 , and 1906 . At a speech in 1901 , Roosevelt said , " Speak softly and carry a big stick , you will go far " , which was a cornerstone of diplomacy during his presidency . 
 Roosevelt believed that a U.S.-controlled canal across Central America was a vital strategic interest to the U.S. Navy , because it would significantly shorten travel times for ships between the two coasts . Roosevelt was able to reverse a decision in favor of a Nicaraguan Canal and instead moved to purchase the failed French effort across the Isthmus of Panama . The isthmus was controlled by Colombia , and in early 1903 , the Hay – Herrán Treaty was signed by both nations to give control of the canal to the United States . After the Colombian Senate failed to ratify the treaty , Roosevelt implied to Panamanian rebels that if they revolted , the US Navy would assist their cause for independence . Panama proceeded to proclaim its independence on 3 November 1903 , and USS Nashville impeded any interference from Colombia . The victorious Panamanians allowed the United States control of the Panama Canal Zone on 23 February 1904 , for US $ 10 million . The naval base at Guantanamo Bay , Cuba was built in 1905 to protect the canal . 
 The latest technological innovation of the time , submarines , were developed in the state of New Jersey by an Irish @-@ American inventor , John Philip Holland . His submarine , USS Holland was officially commissioned into U.S. Navy service in the fall of 1900 . The Russo @-@ Japanese War of 1905 and the launching of HMS Dreadnought in the following year lent impetus to the construction program . At the end of 1907 Roosevelt had sixteen new battleships to make up his " Great White Fleet " , which he sent on a cruise around the world . While nominally peaceful , and a valuable training exercise for the rapidly expanding Navy , it was also useful politically as a demonstration of United States power and capabilities ; at every port , the politicians and naval officers of both potential allies and enemies were welcomed on board and given tours . The cruise had the desired effect , and American power was subsequently taken more seriously . 
 The voyage taught the Navy more fueling stations were needed around the world , and the strategic potential of the Panama Canal , which was completed in 1914 . The Great White Fleet required almost 50 coaling ships , and during the cruise most of the fleet 's coal was purchased from the British , who could deny access to fuel during a military crisis as they did with Russia during the Russo @-@ Japanese War . 
 = = = World War I ( 1914 – 1918 ) = = = 
 = = = = Mexico = = = = 
 When United States agents discovered that the German merchant ship Ypiranga was carrying illegal arms to Mexico , President Wilson ordered the Navy to stop the ship from docking at the port of Veracruz . On 21 April 1914 , a naval brigade of marines and sailors occupied Veracruz . A total of 55 Medals of Honor were awarded for acts of heroism at Veracruz , the largest number ever granted for a single action . 
 = = = = Preparing for war 1914 @-@ 1917 = = = = 
 Despite U.S. declarations of neutrality and German accountability for its unrestricted submarine warfare , in 1915 the British passenger liner Lusitania was sunk , leading to calls for war . President Wilson forced the Germans to suspend unrestricted submarine warfare and after long debate Congress passes the Naval Act of 1916 that authorized a $ 500 million construction program over three years for 10 battleships , 6 battlecruisers , 10 scout cruisers , 50 destroyers and 67 submarines . The idea was a balanced fleet , but in the event destroyers were much more important , because they had to handle <unk> and convoys . By the end of the war 273 destroyers had been ordered ; most were finished after World War I ended but many served in World War II . There were few war plans beyond the defense of the main American harbors . 
 Navy Secretary Josephus Daniels , a pacifistic journalist , had built up the educational resources of the Navy and made its Naval War College an essential experience for would @-@ be admirals . However , he alienated the officer corps with his moralistic reforms , ( no wine in the officers ' mess , no hazing at Annapolis , more chaplains and YMCAs ) . Ignoring the nation 's strategic needs , and disdaining the advice of its experts , Daniels suspended meetings of the Joint Army and Navy Board for two years because it was giving unwelcome advice . He chopped in half the General Board 's recommendations for new ships , reduced the authority of officers in the Navy yards where ships were built and repaired , and ignored the administrative chaos in his department . Bradley Fiske , one of the most innovative admirals in American naval history , in 1914 was Daniels ' top aide ; he recommended a reorganization that would prepare for war , but Daniels refused . Instead he replaced Fiske in 1915 and brought in for the new post of Chief of Naval Operations an unknown captain , William S. Benson . Chosen for his compliance , Benson proved a wily bureaucrat who was more interested in preparing for an eventual showdown with Britain than an immediate one with Germany . 
 In 1915 Daniels set up the Naval Consulting Board headed by Thomas Edison to obtain the advice and expertise of leading scientists , engineers , and industrialists . It popularized technology , naval expansion , and military preparedness , and was well covered in the media . Daniels and Benson rejected proposals to send observers to Europe , leaving the Navy in the dark about the success of the German submarine campaign . Admiral William Sims charged after the war that in April , 1917 , only ten percent of the Navy 's warships were fully manned ; the rest lacked 43 % of their seamen . Only a third of the ships were fully ready . Light antisubmarine ships were few in number , as if no one had noticed the u @-@ boat factor that had been the focus of foreign policy for two years . The Navy 's only warfighting plan , the " Black Plan " assumed the Royal Navy did not exist and that German battleships were moving freely about the Atlantic and the Caribbean and threatening the Panama Canal . His most recent biographer concludes that , " it is true that Daniels had not prepared the navy for the war it would have to fight . " 
 = = = = Fighting a world war , 1917 – 18 = = = = 
 America entered the war in April 1917 and the Navy 's role was mostly limited to convoy escort and troop transport and the laying of a minefield across the North Sea . The United States Navy sent a battleship group to Scapa Flow to join with the British Grand Fleet , destroyers to Queenstown , Ireland and submarines to help guard convoys . Several regiments of Marines were also dispatched to France . The first victory for the Navy in the war occurred on 17 November 1917 when USS Fanning and USS Nicholson sank the German U @-@ boat U @-@ 58 . During World War I , the Navy was the first branch of the United States armed forces to allow enlistment by women in a non @-@ nursing capacity , as Yeoman ( F ) . The first woman to enlist in the U.S. Navy was Loretta <unk> Walsh on 17 March 1917 . 
 The Navy 's vast wartime expansion was overseen by civilian officials , especially Assistant Secretary Franklin D. Roosevelt . In peacetime , the Navy confined all munitions that lacked civilian uses , including warships , naval guns , and shells to Navy yards . The Navy yards expanded enormously , and subcontracted the shells and explosives to chemical companies like DuPont and Hercules . Items available on the civilian market , such as food and uniforms were always purchased from civilian contractors . Armor plate and airplanes were purchased on the market . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war entrenchment and expansion ( 1918 – 1941 ) = = = 
 At the end of World War I , the United States Navy had almost 500 @,@ 000 officers and enlisted men and women and in terms of personnel was the largest in the world . Younger officers were enthusiastic about the potential of land @-@ based naval aviation as well as the potential roles of aircraft carriers . Chief of Naval Operations Benson was not among them . He tried to abolish aviation in 1919 because he could not " conceive of any use the fleet will ever have for aviation . " However Roosevelt listened to the visionaries and reversed Benson 's decision . 
 After a short period of demobilization , the major naval nations of the globe began programmes for increasing the size and number of their capital ships . Wilson 's plan for a world @-@ leading set of capital ships led to a Japanese counter @-@ programme , and a plan by the British to build sufficient ships to maintain a navy superior to either . American isolationist feeling and the economic concerns of the others led to the Washington Naval Conference of 1921 . The outcome of the conference included the Washington Naval Treaty ( also known as the Five @-@ Power treaty ) , and limitations on the use of submarines . The Treaty prescribed a ratio of 5 : 5 : 3 : 1 : 1 for capital ships between treaty nations . The treaty recognized the U.S. Navy as being equal to the Royal Navy with 525 @,@ 000 tons of capital ships and 135 @,@ 000 tons of aircraft carriers , and the Japanese as the third power . Many older ships were scrapped by the five nations to meet the treaty limitations , and new building of capital ships limited . 
 One consequence was to encourage the development of light cruisers and aircraft carriers . The United States 's first carrier , a converted collier named USS Langley was commissioned in 1922 , and soon joined by USS Lexington and USS Saratoga , which had been designed as battlecruisers until the treaty forbade it . Organizationally , the Bureau of Aeronautics was formed in 1921 ; naval aviators would become referred to as members of the United States Naval Air Corps . 
 Army airman Billy Mitchell challenged the Navy by trying to demonstrate that warships could be destroyed by land @-@ based bombers . He destroyed his career in 1925 by publicly attacking senior leaders in the Army and Navy for incompetence for their " almost treasonable administration of the national defense . " 
 The Vinson @-@ Trammell Act of 1934 set up a regular program of ship building and modernization to bring the Navy to the maximum size allowed by treaty . The Navy 's preparation was helped along by another Navy assistant secretary turned president , Franklin D. Roosevelt . The naval limitation treaties also applied to bases , but Congress only approved building seaplane bases on Wake Island , Midway Island and Dutch Harbor and rejected any additional funds for bases on Guam and the Philippines . Navy ships were designed with greater endurance and range which allowed them to operate further from bases and between refits . 
 The Navy had a presence in the Far East with a naval base in the US @-@ owned Philippines and river gunboats in China on the Yangtze River . The gunboat USS Panay was bombed and machine @-@ gunned by Japanese airplanes . Washington quickly accepted Japan 's apologies and compensation . 
 African @-@ Americans were enlisted during World War I , but this was halted in 1919 and they were mustered out of the Navy . Starting in the 1930s a few were recruited to serve as stewards in the officers mess . African @-@ Americans were recruited in larger numbers only after Roosevelt insisted in 1942 . 
 The Naval Act of 1936 authorized the first new battleship since 1921 , and USS North Carolina , was laid down in October 1937 . The Second Vinson Act authorized a 20 % increase in the size of the Navy , and in June 1940 the Two @-@ Ocean Navy Act authorized an 11 % expansion in the Navy . Chief of Naval Operations Harold Rainsford Stark asked for another 70 % increase , amounting to about 200 additional ships , which was authorized by Congress in less than a month . In September 1940 , the Destroyers for Bases Agreement gave Britain much @-@ needed destroyers — of WWI vintage — in exchange for United States use of British bases . 
 In 1941 , the Atlantic Fleet was reactivated . The Navy 's first shot in anger came on 9 April , when the destroyer USS Niblack dropped depth charges on a U @-@ boat detected while Niblack was rescuing survivors from a torpedoed Dutch freighter . In October , the destroyers Kearny and Reuben James were torpedoed , and Reuben James was lost . 
 = = = = Submarines = = = = 
 Submarines were the " silent service " — in terms of operating characteristics and the closed @-@ mouth preferences of the submariners . Strategists had , however , been looking into this new type of warship , influenced in large part by Germany 's nearly successful U @-@ boat campaign . As early as 1912 , Lieutenant Chester Nimitz had argued for long @-@ range submarines to accompany the fleet to scout the enemy 's location . The new head of the Submarine Section in 1919 was Captain Thomas Hart , who argued that submarines could win the next war : " There is no quicker or more effective method of defeating Japan than the cutting of her sea communications . " However Hart was astonished to discover how backward American submarines were compared to captured German U @-@ boats , and how unready they were for their mission . The public supported submarines for their coastal protection mission ; they would presumably intercept enemy fleets approaching San Francisco or New York . The Navy realized it was a mission that isolationists in Congress would fund , but it was not actually serious . Old @-@ line admirals said the mission of the subs ought to be as eyes of the battle fleet , and as assistants in battle . That was unfeasible since even on the surface submarines could not move faster than 20 knots , far slower than the 30 knot main warships . The young commanders were organized into a " Submarine Officers ' Conference " in 1926 . They argued they were best suited for the commerce raiding that had been the forte of the U @-@ boats . They therefore redesigned their new boats along German lines , and added the new requirement that they be capable of sailing alone for 7 @,@ 500 miles on a 75 @-@ day mission . Unrestricted submarine warfare had led to war with Germany in 1917 , and was still vigorously condemned both by public opinion and by treaties , including the London Treaty of 1930 . Nevertheless , the submariners planned a role in unrestricted warfare against Japanese merchant ships , transports and oil tankers . The Navy kept its plans secret from civilians . It was an admiral , not President Roosevelt , who within hours of the Pearl Harbor attack , ordered unrestricted warfare against any enemy ship anywhere in the Pacific . 
 The submariners had won over Navy strategists , but their equipment was not yet capable of handling their secret mission . The challenge of designing appropriate new boats became a high priority by 1934 , and was solved in 1936 as the first new long @-@ range , all welded submarines were launched . Even better were the S @-@ class Salmon class ( launched in 1937 ) , and its successors the T @-@ class or Tambor submarines of 1939 and the Gato class of 1940 . The new models cost about $ 5 – 6 million each . At 300 feet in length and 1500 tons , they were twice as big as the German U @-@ boats , but still highly maneuverable . In only 35 seconds they could crash dive to 60 feet . The superb Mark 3 TDC Torpedo Data Computer ( an analog computer ) took data from periscope or sonar readings on the target 's bearing , range and angle on the bow , and continuously set the course and proper gyroscope angle for a salvo of torpedoes until the moment of firing . Six forward tubes and 4 aft were ready for the 24 Mk @-@ 14 " fish " the subs carried . Cruising on the surface at 20 knots ( using 4 diesel engines ) or maneuvering underwater at 8 @-@ 10 knots ( using battery @-@ powered electric motors ) they could circle around slow @-@ moving merchant ships . New steels and welding techniques strengthened the hull , enabling the subs to dive as deep as 400 feet in order to avoid depth charges . Expecting long cruises the 65 crewmen enjoyed good living conditions , complete with frozen steaks and air conditioning to handle the hot waters of the Pacific . The new subs could remain at sea for 75 days , and cover 10 @,@ 000 miles , without resupply . The submariners thought they were ready — but they had two hidden flaws . The penny @-@ pinching atmosphere of the 1930s produced <unk> commanders and defective torpedoes . Both would have to be replaced in World War II . 
 = = Modern era = = 
 = = = World War II ( 1941 – 1945 ) = = = 
 = = = = Command structure = = = = 
 After the disaster at Pearl Harbor Roosevelt turned to the most aggressive sailor available , Admiral Ernest J. King ( 1878 @-@ 1956 ) . Experienced in big guns , aviation and submarines , King had a broad knowledge and a total dedication to victory . He was perhaps the most dominating admiral in American naval history ; he was hated but obeyed , for he made all the decisions from his command post in the Washington , and avoided telling anyone . The civilian Secretary of the Navy was a cipher whom King kept in the dark ; that only changed when the Secretary died in 1944 and Roosevelt brought in his tough @-@ minded aide James Forrestal . Despite the decision of the Joint Chiefs of Staff under Admiral William D. Leahy to concentrate first against Germany , King made the defeat of Japan his highest priority . For example , King insisted on fighting for Guadalcanal despite strong Army objections . His main strike force was built around carriers based at Pearl Harbor under the command of Chester Nimitz . Nimitz had one main battle fleet , with the same ships and sailors but two command systems that rotated every few months between Admiral Bull Halsey and Admiral Raymond A. Spruance . The Navy had a major advantage : it had broken the Japanese code . It deduced that Hawaii was the target in June 1942 , and that Yamamoto ’ s fleet would strike at Midway Island . King only had four carriers in operation ; he sent them all to Midway where in a miraculous few minutes they sank the Japanese carriers . This gave the Americans the advantage in firepower that grew rapidly as new American warships came on line much faster than Japan could build them . King paid special attention to submarines to use against the overextended Japanese logistics system . They were built for long @-@ range missions in tropical waters , and set out to sink the freighters , troop transports and oil tankers that held the Japanese domains together . The Southwest Pacific theatre , based in Australia , was under the control of Army General Douglas MacArthur ; King assigned him a fleet of his own without any big carriers . 
 = = = = Carrier warfare = = = = 
 On 7 December 1941 , Japan 's carriers launched the Attack on Pearl Harbor , sinking or disabling the entire battleship fleet . The stupendous defeat forced Admiral King to develop a new strategy based on carriers . Although the sunken battleships were raised , and many new ones were built , battleships played a secondary role in the war , limited chiefly to bombardment of islands scheduled for amphibious landings . The " Big Gun " club that had dominated the Navy since the Civil War lost its clout . 
 The U.S. was helpless in the next six months as the Japanese swept through the Western Pacific and into the Indian Ocean , rolling up the Philippines as well as the main British base at Singapore . After reeling from these defeats the Navy stabilized its lines in summer 1942 . 
 At the start of the war , the United States and Japan were well matched in aircraft carriers , in terms of numbers and quality . Both sides had nine , but the Mitsubishi A6M Zero carrier fighter plane was superior in terms of range and maneuverability to its American counterpart , the F4F Wildcat . By reverse engineering a captured Zero , the American engineers identified its weaknesses , such as inadequate protection for the pilot and the fuel tanks , and built the Hellcat as a superior weapon system . In late 1943 the Grumman F6F Hellcats entered combat . Powered by the same 2 @,@ 000 horsepower Pratt and Whitney 18 @-@ cylinder radial engine as used by the F4U Corsair already in service with the Marine Corps and the UK 's allied Fleet Air Arm , the <unk> were faster ( at 400 mph ) than the Zeros , quicker to climb ( at 3 @,@ 000 feet per minute ) , more nimble at high altitudes , better at diving , had more armor , more firepower ( 6 machine guns fired 120 bullets per second ) than the Zero 's two machine guns and pair of 20 mm autocannon , carried more ammunition , and used a gunsight designed for deflection shooting at an angle . Although the Hellcat was heavier and had a shorter range than the Zero , on the whole it proved a far superior weapon . Japan 's carrier and pilot losses at Midway crippled its offensive capability , but America 's overwhelming offensive capability came from shipyards that increasingly out produced Japan 's , from the refineries that produced high @-@ octane gasoline , and from the training fields that produced much better trained pilots . In 1942 Japan commissioned 6 new carriers but lost 6 ; in 1943 it commissioned 3 and lost 1 . The turning point came in 1944 when it added 8 and lost 13 . At war 's end Japan had 5 carriers tied up in port ; all have been damaged , all lacked fuel and all lacked warplanes . Meanwhile , the US launched 13 small carriers in 1942 and one large one ; and in 1943 added 15 large and 50 escort carriers , and more came in 1944 and 1945 . The new American carriers were much better designed , with far more antiaircraft guns , and powerful radar . 
 Both sides were overextended in the exhaustive sea , air and land battles for Guadalcanal . The Japanese were better at night combat ( because they American destroyers had only trained for attacks on battleships ) . However , the Japanese could not feed its soldiers so the Americans eventually won because of superior logistics . The Navy built up its forces in 1942 @-@ 43 , and developed a strategy of " island @-@ hopping , that is to skip over most of the heavily defended Japanese islands and instead go further on and select islands to seize for forward air bases . 
 In the Atlantic , the Allies waged a long battle with German submarines which was termed the Battle of the Atlantic . Navy aircraft flew from bases in Greenland and Iceland to hunt submarines , and hundreds of escort carriers and destroyer escorts were built which were specifically designed to protect merchant convoys . In the Pacific , in an ironic twist , the U.S. submarines fought against Japanese shipping in a mirror image of the Atlantic , with U.S. submarines hunting Japanese merchant ships . At the end of the war the U.S. had 260 submarines in commission . It had lost 52 submarines during the war , 36 in actions in the Pacific . Submarines effectively destroyed the Japanese merchant fleet by January 1945 and choked off Japan 's oil supply . 
 In the summer of 1943 , the U.S. began the Gilbert and Marshall Islands campaign to retake the Gilbert and Marshall Islands . After this success , the Americans went on to the Mariana and Palau Islands in summer 1944 . Following their defeat at the Battle of Saipan , the Imperial Japanese Navy 's Combined Fleet , with 5 aircraft carriers , sortied to attack the Navy 's Fifth Fleet during the Battle of the Philippine Sea , which was the largest aircraft carrier battle in history . The battle was so one @-@ sided that it became known as the " Marianas turkey shoot " ; the U.S. lost 130 aircraft and no ships while the Japanese lost 411 planes and 3 carriers . Following victory in the Marianas , the U.S. began the reconquest of the Philippines at Leyte in October 1944 . The Japanese fleet sortied to attack the invasion fleet , resulting in the four @-@ day Battle of Leyte Gulf , one of the largest naval battles in history . The first kamikaze missions are flown during the battle , sinking USS St. Lo and damaging several other U.S. ships ; these attacks were the most effective anti @-@ ship weapon of the war . 
 The Battle of Okinawa became the last major battle between U.S. and Japanese ground units . Okinawa was to become a staging area for the eventual invasion of Japan since it was just 350 miles ( 560 km ) south of the Japanese mainland . Marines and soldiers landed unopposed on 1 April 1945 , to begin an 82 @-@ day campaign which became the largest land @-@ sea @-@ air battle in history and was noted for the ferocity of the fighting and the high civilian casualties with over 150 @,@ 000 Okinawans losing their lives . Japanese kamikaze pilots inflicted the largest loss of ships in U.S. naval history with the sinking of 36 and the damaging of another 243 . Total U.S. casualties were over 12 @,@ 500 dead and 38 @,@ 000 wounded , while the Japanese lost over 110 @,@ 000 men , making Okinawa one of the bloodiest battles in history . 
 The fierce fighting on Okinawa is said to have played a part in President Truman ’ s decision to use the atomic bomb and to forsake an invasion of Japan . When the Japanese surrendered , a flotilla of 374 ships entered Tokyo Bay to witness the ceremony conducted on the battleship USS Missouri . By the end of the war the US Navy had over 1200 warships . 
 = = = Cold War ( 1945 – 1991 ) = = = 
 The immediate postwar fate of the Navy was the scrapping and mothballing of ships on a large scale ; by 1948 only 267 ships were active in the Navy . 
 Another important postwar development for the Navy was that in 1948 the Women 's Armed Services Integration Act gave women permanent status in the Regular and Reserve forces of the Navy . 
 The Navy gradually developed a reputation for having the most highly developed technology of all the U.S. services . The 1950s saw the development of nuclear power for ships , under the leadership of Admiral Hyman G. Rickover , the development of missiles and jets for Navy use and the construction of supercarriers . The USS Enterprise was the world 's first nuclear @-@ powered aircraft carrier and was followed by the Nimitz @-@ class supercarriers . Ballistic missile submarines grew ever more deadly and quiet , culminating in the Ohio @-@ class submarines . 
 Tension with the Soviet Union came to a head in the Korean War , and it became clear that the peacetime Navy would have to be much larger than ever imagined . Fleets were assigned to geographic areas around the world , and ships were sent to hot spots as a standard part of the response to the periodic crises . However , because the North Korean navy was not large , the Korean War featured few naval battles ; the combatant navies served mostly as naval artillery for their in @-@ country armies . A large amphibious landing at Inchon succeeded in driving the North Koreans back across the 38th parallel . The Battle of Chosin Reservoir ended with the evacuation of almost 105 @,@ 000 UN troops from the port of Hungnam . 
 The U.S. Navy 's 1956 shipbuilding program was significant because it included authorization for the construction of eight submarines , the largest such order since World War II . This FY @-@ 56 program included five nuclear @-@ powered submarines – Triton , the guided missile submarine Halibut , the lead ship for the Skipjack class , and the final two Skate @-@ class attack submarines , <unk> and <unk> . It also included the three diesel @-@ electric Barbel class , the last diesel @-@ electric submarines to be built by the U.S. Navy . 
 An unlikely combination of Navy ships fought in the Vietnam War ; aircraft carriers offshore launched thousands of air strikes , while small gunboats of the " Brown @-@ water navy " patrolled the rivers . Despite the naval activity , new construction was curtailed by Presidents Johnson and Nixon to save money , and many of the carriers on Yankee Station dated from World War II . By 1978 the fleet had dwindled to 217 surface ships and 119 submarines . 
 Meanwhile , the Soviet fleet had been growing , and outnumbered the U.S. fleet in every type except carriers , and the Navy calculated they probably would be defeated by the Soviet Navy in a major conflict . This concern led the Reagan administration to set a goal for a 600 @-@ ship Navy , and by 1988 the fleet was at 588 , although it declined again in subsequent years . The Iowa @-@ class battleships Iowa , New Jersey , Missouri , and Wisconsin were reactivated after 40 years in storage , modernized , and made showy appearances off the shores of Lebanon and elsewhere . In 1987 and 1988 , the United States Navy conducted various combat operations in the Persian Gulf against Iran , most notably Operation Praying Mantis , the largest surface @-@ air naval battle since World War II . 
 = = = Post – Cold War ( 1991 – present ) = = = 
 When a crisis confronts the nation , the first question often asked by policymakers is : ' What naval forces are available and how fast can they be on station ? ' 
 Following the collapse of the Soviet Union , the Soviet Navy fell apart , without sufficient personnel to man many of its ships or the money to maintain them — indeed , many of them were sold to foreign nations . This left the United States as the world 's undisputed naval superpower . U.S. naval forces did undergo a decline in absolute terms but relative to the rest of the world , however , United States dwarfs other nations ' naval power as evinced by its 11 aircraft supercarriers and their supporting battle groups . During the 1990s , the United States naval strategy was based on the overall military strategy of the United States which emphasized the ability of the United States to engage in two simultaneous limited wars along separate fronts . 
 The ships of the Navy participated in a number of conflicts after the end of the Cold War . After diplomatic efforts failed , the Navy was instrumental in the opening phases of the 1991 Gulf War with Iraq ; the ships of the navy launched hundreds of Tomahawk II cruise missiles and naval aircraft flew sorties from six carriers in the Persian Gulf and Red Sea . The battleships Missouri and Wisconsin fired their 16 @-@ inch guns for the first time since the Korean war on several targets in Kuwait in early February . In 1999 , hundreds of Navy and Marine Corps aircraft flew thousands of sorties from bases in Italy and carriers in the Adriatic against targets in Serbia and Kosovo to try to stop the ethnic cleansing in Kosovo . After a 78 @-@ day campaign Serbia capitulated to NATO 's demands . 
 As a result of a large number of command officers being fired for failing to do their job properly , in 2012 the Chief of Naval Operations ( CNO ) ordered a new method of selecting command officers across the Navy . 
 In March 2007 , the U.S. Navy reached its smallest fleet size , with 274 ships , since World War I. Since the end of the Cold War , the Navy has shifted its focus from preparations for large @-@ scale war with the Soviet Union to special operations and strike missions in regional conflicts . The Navy participated in Operation Enduring Freedom , Operation Iraqi Freedom , and is a major participant in the ongoing War on Terror , largely in this capacity . Development continues on new ships and weapons , including the Gerald R. Ford @-@ class aircraft carrier and the Littoral combat ship . One hundred and three U.S. Navy personnel died in the Iraq War . U.S. Navy warships launched cruise missiles into military targets in Libya during Operation Odyssey Dawn to enforce a UN resolution . 
 Former U.S. Navy admirals who head the U.S. Naval Institute have raised concerns about what they see as the ability to respond to " aggressive moves by Iran and China " . As part of the pivot to the Pacific , Defense Secretary Leon E. Panetta said that the Navy would switch from a 50 / 50 split between the Pacific and the Atlantic to a 60 / 40 percent split that favored the Pacific , but the Chief of Naval Operations , Admiral Jonathan <unk> , and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff , General Martin Dempsey , have said that this would not mean " a big influx of troops or ships in the Western Pacific " . This pivot is a continuation of the trend towards the Pacific that first saw the Cold War 's focus against the Soviet Union with 60 percent of the American submarine fleet stationed in the Atlantic shift towards an even split between the coasts and then in 2006 , 60 percent of the submarines stationed on the Pacific side to counter China . The pivot is not entirely about numbers as some of the most advanced platforms will now have a Pacific focus , where their capabilities are most needed . However even a single incident can make a big dent in a fleet of modest size with global missions . 
 On January 12 , 2016 , Iranian armed forces captured United States Navy personnel when their boats entered Iranian territorial waters off the coast of Farsi Island in the Persian Gulf . They were released the next day following diplomatic discussions between the USA and Iran . 
 = = = Historiography = = = 
 <unk> , Kurt H. " The US Navy , 1860 – 1920 . " in James C. Bradford A Companion to American Military History ( 2 vol 2009 ) 1 : 388 – 98 
 <unk> , Joel I. " Review Essay : <unk> the Interwar U.S. Navy , " Journal of Military History ( 2012 ) 76 # 1 193 – 210 
 McKee , Christopher . " The US Navy , 1794 – 1860 : Men , Ships , and Governance . " in James C. Bradford A Companion to American Military History ( 2 vol 2009 ) 1 : 378 @-@ 87 . 
 Winkler , David F. " The US Navy since 1920 . " in James C. Bradford A Companion to American Military History ( 2 vol 2009 ) 1 : 399 – 410 . 
 = All God 's Children Need Traveling Shoes = 
 All God 's Children Need Traveling Shoes , published in 1986 , is the fifth book in African @-@ American writer and poet Maya Angelou 's seven @-@ volume autobiography series . Set between 1962 and 1965 , the book begins when Angelou is 33 years old , and recounts the years she lived in Accra , Ghana . The book , deriving its title from a Negro spiritual , begins where Angelou 's previous memoir , The Heart of a Woman , ends — with the traumatic car accident involving her son Guy — and closes with Angelou returning to America . 
 As she had started to do in her first autobiography , I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings , and continued throughout her series , Angelou upholds the long tradition of African @-@ American autobiography . At the same time she makes a deliberate attempt to challenge the usual structure of the autobiography by critiquing , changing , and expanding the genre . Angelou had matured as a writer by the time she wrote Traveling Shoes , to the point that she was able to play with the form and structure of the work . As in her previous books , it consists of a series of anecdotes connected by theme . She depicts her struggle with being the mother of a grown son , and with her place in her new home . 
 Angelou examines many of the same subjects and themes that her previous autobiographies covered . Although motherhood is an important theme in this book , it does not overwhelm the text as it does in some of her other works . At the end of the book , she ties up the mother / son plot when she leaves her son in Ghana and returns to America . According to scholar Mary Jane Lupton , " Angelou 's exploration of her African and African @-@ American identities " is an important theme in Traveling Shoes . By the end of the book , Angelou comes to term with what scholar Dolly McPherson calls her " double @-@ consciousness " , the parallels and connections between the African and American parts of her history and character . Racism continues to be an important theme as she learns more about it and about herself . Journey and a sense of home is another important theme in this book ; Angelou upholds the African @-@ American tradition of the slave narrative and of her own series of autobiographies . This time she focuses on " trying to get home " , or on becoming assimilated in African culture , which she finds unattainable . 
 All God 's Children Need Traveling Shoes received a mixed reception from critics , but most of their reviews were positive . 
 = = Background = = 
 All God 's Children Need Traveling Shoes , published in 1986 , is the fifth installment of Maya Angelou 's series of seven autobiographies . The success of Angelou 's previous autobiographies and the publication of four volumes of poetry had brought Angelou a considerable amount of fame by 1986 . And Still I Rise , published in 1978 , reinforced Angelou 's success as a writer . Her first volume of poetry , Just Give Me a Cool Drink of Water ' fore I Diiie ( 1971 ) was nominated for a Pulitzer Prize . 
 As writer Hilton Als states , Angelou was one of the first African @-@ American female writers to publicly discuss her personal life , and one of the first to use herself as a central character in her books , something she continues in Traveling Shoes . Writer Julian Mayfield , who calls her first autobiography I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings " a work of art that eludes description " , states that Angelou 's work sets a precedent not only for other Black women writers , but for the genre of autobiography as a whole . 
 Als called Angelou one of the " pioneers of self @-@ exposure " , willing to focus honestly on the more negative aspects of her personality and choices . For example , while Angelou was composing her second autobiography , Gather Together in My Name , she was concerned about how her readers would react to her disclosure that she had been a prostitute . Her husband Paul Du Feu talked her into publishing the book by encouraging her to " tell the truth as a writer " and " be honest about it " . Through the writing of her life stories Angelou has become recognized and highly respected as a spokesperson for Blacks and women . It made her , as scholar Joanne Braxton has stated , " without a doubt , ... America 's most visible black woman autobiographer " . 
 According to McPherson , Traveling Shoes is " a mixture of Maya Angelou 's personal recollection and a historical document of the time in which it is set " , the early 1960s . This was the first time that many Black Americans , due to the independence of Ghana and other African states , as well as the emergence of African leaders such as Kwame Nkrumah , were able to view Africa in a positive way . Ghana was " the center of an African cultural renaissance " and of Pan @-@ Africanism during this time . 
 = = Title = = 
 According to Angelou , the title of Traveling Shoes comes from a spiritual . African @-@ American scholar Lyman B. Hagen reports that the title comes from the spiritual " All God 's Chillun Got Wings " , Angelou 's " clever reference " to her ongoing search for a home while being aware of " our ultimate home " . The title demonstrates Angelou 's love of African @-@ American spirituals and deep sense of religion that appears in all of her works . Critic Mary Jane Lupton finds the appearance of the word " traveling " purposeful , since it emphasizes the journey theme , one of Angelou 's most important themes of the book . Like Angelou 's previous volumes in her series , the title contributes to its plot and thematic impact . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 All God 's Children Need Traveling Shoes begins as Angelou 's previous book , The Heart of a Woman , ends : with her depiction of a serious automobile accident involving her son Guy . After spending two years in Cairo , they come to Accra to enroll Guy in the University of Ghana , and the accident occurs three days after they arrive . Following Guy 's long convalescence , they remain in Ghana , Angelou for four years , from 1962 to 1965 . Angelou describes Guy 's recovery , including her deep depression . She is confronted by her friend Julian Mayfield , who introduces her to writer and actor Efua Sutherland , the Director of the National Theatre of Ghana . Sutherland becomes Angelou 's " sister @-@ friend " and allows her to cry out all her pain and bitterness . 
 Angelou finds a job at the University of Ghana and " falls in love " with the country and with its people , who remind her of African Americans she knew in Arkansas and California . As the parent of an adult , she experiences new freedoms , respects Guy 's choices , and consciously stops making her son the center of her life . She creates new friendships with her roommates and native Africans , both male and female . She becomes part of a group of American expatriates whom she calls the " Revolutionist Returnees " , people such as Mayfield and his wife Ana Livia , who share her struggles . 
 Angelou strengthens her ties with Africa while traveling through eastern Ghanaian villages , and through her relationships with several Africans . She describes a few romantic prospects , one of which is with a man who proposes that she become his " second wife " and accept West African customs . She also becomes a supporter of Ghana president Kwame Nkrumah and close friends with tribal leader Nana <unk> and poet Kwesi Brew . During one of her travels through West Africa , a woman identifies her as a member of the Bambara tribe based solely upon her appearance and behavior , which helps Angelou discover the similarities between her American traditions and those of her West African ancestors . 
 Although Angelou is disillusioned with the nonviolent strategies of Martin Luther King , Jr . , she and her friends commemorate his 1963 march on Washington by organizing a parallel demonstration in Ghana . The demonstration becomes a tribute to African @-@ American W.E.B. Du Bois , who has died the previous evening . A few pages later , she allies herself with Malcolm X , who visits Ghana in 1964 to elicit the support of Black world leaders . He encourages Angelou to return to America to help him coordinate his efforts , as she had done for King in The Heart of a Woman . While driving Malcolm X to the airport , he chastises her for her bitterness about Du Bois ' wife Shirley Graham 's lack of support for the civil rights movement . 
 Angelou and her roommates reluctantly hire a village boy named Kojo to do housework for them . He reminds her of her brother Bailey , and he serves as a substitute for her son Guy . She accepts a maternal role with Kojo , helping him with his schoolwork and welcoming the thanks of his family . Traveling Shoes , like Angelou 's previous autobiographies , is full of conflicts with Guy , especially surrounding his independence , his separation from his mother , and his choices . When she learns that he is dating a woman older than her , she reacts with anger and threatens to strike him , but he patronizes her , calls her his " little mother " , and insists upon his autonomy from her . 
 The African narrative in Traveling Shoes is interrupted by " a journey within a journey " when she decides to join a theatrical company in a revival of The Blacks , a play by French writer Jean Genet . As she had done in New York and described in her previous autobiography The Heart of a Woman , she plays the White Queen and tours Berlin and Venice with the company , which include Cicely Tyson , James Earl Jones , Lou Gossett , Jr. and Roscoe Lee Brown . While in Berlin , she accepts a breakfast invitation with a racist , wealthy German family . 
 The book ends with Angelou 's decision to return to America . At the airport , a group of her friends and associates , including Guy , are present to wish her farewell as she leaves . She metaphorically connects her departure from the African continent with the forced enslavement of her ancestors and her departure from Guy . 
 = = Genre = = 
 All seven of Angelou 's installments of her life story continue the long tradition of African @-@ American autobiography . Starting with I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings , Angelou made a deliberate attempt while writing her books to challenge the usual structure of the autobiography by critiquing , changing , and expanding the genre . Her use of fiction @-@ writing techniques such as dialogue , characterization , and thematic development has often led reviewers to categorize her books as autobiographical fiction . Angelou expressed in a 1989 interview her opinion that she was the only " serious " writer to choose the genre to express herself . Angelou reports not one person 's story , but the collective 's . She represents the convention in African @-@ American autobiography , which serves as a public gesture that speaks for an entire group of people . As Angelou had done in her previous autobiographies , she uses elements of the African @-@ American slave narrative , including as Lupton puts it , " the journey , the quest for freedom ; [ and ] empathy for the horrors suffered by slaves " . 
 All of Angelou 's autobiographies conform to the genre 's standard structure : they are written by a single author , they are chronological , and they contain elements of character , technique , and theme . Although Angelou referred to her books as autobiographies in 1983 interview with African @-@ American literature critic Claudia Tate , she acknowledged that there are fictional aspects to all her books , with the tendency to " diverge from the conventional notion of autobiography as truth " . When speaking of her unique use of the genre , Angelou acknowledges that she follows the slave narrative tradition of " speaking in the first @-@ person singular talking about the first @-@ person plural , always saying I meaning ' we ' " . McPherson states that Angelou is a master of this autobiographical form , especially the " confrontation of the Black self within a society that threatens to destroy it " , but departs from it in Traveling Shoes by taking the action to Africa . Lupton , referring to the journey motif in the book , insists that its narrative point of view is " again sustained through the first @-@ person autobiographer in motion " . 
 Angelou recognizes that there are fictional aspects to all her books , although there is less fictionalization in Traveling Shoes than in her previous autobiographies . Her approach parallels the conventions of many African @-@ American autobiographies written during the abolitionist period in the US , when truth was often censored for purposes of self @-@ protection . Hagen places Angelou in the long tradition of African @-@ American autobiography , but insists that Angelou has created a unique interpretation of the autobiographical form . Journalist George Plimpton asked her in a 1998 interview if she changed the truth to improve her story ; she stated , " Sometimes I make a diameter from a composite of three or four people , because the essence in only one person is not sufficiently strong to be written about " . Although Angelou has never admitted to changing the facts in her stories , she fictionalizes them to make an impact and to enhance her readers ' interest . Angelou 's long @-@ time editor , Robert Loomis stated that she could have rewritten any of her books by changing the order of her facts to make a different impact on the reader . 
 = = Style = = 
 For the first and only time in Angelou 's series , she repeats the same episode in detail — her son 's automobile accident — at the end of her fourth autobiography The Heart of a Woman and the beginning of this one , a technique that both centralizes each installment and connects each book in the series with each other . Additionally , each volume " ends with abrupt suspense " . It also creates a strong and emotional link between the two autobiographies . Angelou has said that she used this technique so that each book would stand alone and to establish the setting in Traveling Shoes — " who she was and what she was doing in Africa " . 
 In Traveling Shoes , Angelou has matured as a writer to the point that she can experiment with form . For the first time , instead of using traditional numbered chapters , the book consists of anecdotes separated with a few inches of white space . Lupton calls these segments " short stories or vignettes " , a technique that Angelou had used before , to portray dynamic characters such as Malcolm X. Angelou 's stories are told within the context of her entire life story , but each vignette can be read or analyzed individually , without harming the text 's consistency . Most of Angelou 's anecdotes no longer focus on the famous or her family , but on Ghanaians ; for example , according to Lupton , her description of her houseboy Kojo is her most delightful character sketch in the book . 
 In Traveling Shoes , Angelou continues to demonstrate her strengths as an autobiographer , especially her ability to connect emotionally with her audience , which Lupton calls her " superb use of language in recording moments of emotional intensity " . As in her previous books , Angelou uses inventive metaphors and personifications of abstract objects and concepts . Even her descriptions exhibit the style , developed after years of maturity as a writer , of " displaying vivid and captivating sentences and phrases " . Angelou 's self @-@ portrait of a Black woman and her ability to communicate her misfortunes destroys stereotypes and demonstrates " the trials , rejections , and <unk> which so many Black women share " . Hagen calls this book " reflective " and its writer " introspective and deeply moved " . 
 Even though Traveling Shoes can be read on its own , Angelou connects the events in this book with her previous volumes , as she had done throughout her series . As McPherson states , " Everyday experiences serve as links to Angelou 's past and thus embody powerful meanings " . Events that occur in this book and Angelou 's responses to them evoke earlier moments in her previous books ; for example , Angelou responds to her son 's accident with muteness , as she had responded to her rape in Caged Bird . As is customary in autobiography in general , she uses the literary convention of flashbacks in order to tie this book to its predecessors . She uses humor , another convention she has used before , both to criticize racism and to balance her weighty insights . She also uses quotes from literary sources , especially the Bible , which demonstrates that she has not lost contact with her family roots as she searches for a home and for her identity . 
 Traveling Shoes is " more tightly controlled " than Angelou 's previous books , most likely due to the dominance of the travel motif . Setting , always an important element for Angelou , becomes even more important in this book . Unlike her previous books , most of this book 's action occurs in one setting , Accra , which contributes to and is tightly connected with her personal development . Angelou 's feelings towards living in Ghana are ambivalent , which provides Traveling Shoes with richness and depth . Many feel that Angelou 's inclusion of her tour with The Blacks to Berlin and Venice as a digression that detracts from the African setting , but Lupton sees it as a contribution to her character development and provides the book with a " universal quality " as Angelou reaches beyond the confines of her personal life and encounters racism in Germany . During this trip , she comes to see her fellow African @-@ Americans differently , as more spirited than the Africans she has met in Ghana . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Motherhood = = = 
 A major theme in Traveling Shoes , one that many critics overlook , is Angelou 's love for her son . The theme of motherhood is one of Angelou 's most consistent themes throughout her series of autobiographies , although it does not overwhelm this book as it does in Gather Together in My Name and Singin ' and Swingin ' and Gettin ' Merry Like Christmas . Motherhood is present in many of the book 's subthemes — her relationship with her houseboy Kojo , her delight in being called " Auntie " by many African children , and her feelings toward " Mother Africa " . Traveling Shoes begins with Guy 's accident , his long recovery , and his mother 's reaction to it , thus universalizing the fear of every parent — the death of a child . The main character is a mother of a grown son , so liberation from the daily responsibilities of motherhood is emphasized , but it is complicated by the recognition that part of motherhood is letting go , something Angelou struggles with . Confrontations between Angelou and Guy are minimal , consisting of their conflict over his choice of dating a much @-@ older woman and of his demands for autonomy after she returns from the Genet tour . Angelou seems to vacillate between wanting to supervise him and wanting to let go throughout this book . In this way , as Lupton says , the motherhood theme , like the identity theme , is " dual in nature " . 
 Like many of her previous books , Angelou is conflicted about her feelings towards Guy , and is skilled at expressing it in this book . One way she expresses her conflict is through her reluctant relationship with Kojo . She compares her feelings for Kojo with the pain of childbirth , and he serves as substitute for Guy . At the end of the book Angelou leaves Guy in Africa to continue his education , suggesting , as Lupton puts it , the " apparent end of the mother / son plot " . Lupton also reports that some reviewers have criticized Angelou for " the willful cutting of the maternal ties that she established throughout the series " , but Angelou implies in Traveling Shoes that motherhood is never over . 
 = = = Race / Identity = = = 
 Angelou 's exploration of her African and African @-@ American identities is an important theme in Traveling Shoes . The alliances and relationships with those she meets in Ghana contribute to Angelou 's identity and growth . Her experiences in Ghana helped her come to terms with her personal and historical past , and by the end of the book she is ready to return to America with a deeper understanding of both the African and American parts of her character . McPherson calls Angelou 's parallels and connections between Africa and America her " double @-@ consciousness " , which contribute to her understanding of herself . 
 Angelou is able to recognize similarities between African and African @-@ American culture ; as Lupton puts it , the " blue songs , shouts , and gospels " she has grown up with in America " echo the rhythms of West Africa " . She recognizes the connections between African and American Black cultures , including the children 's games , the folklore , the spoken and non @-@ verbal languages , the food , sensibilities , and behavior . She connects the behavior of many African mother figures , especially their generosity , with her grandmother 's behaviors . In one of the most significant sections of Traveling Shoes , Angelou recounts an encounter with a West African woman who recognizes her , on the basis of her appearance , as a member of the Bambara group of West Africa . As Lupton states , these and other experiences in Ghana demonstrate her maturity , as a mother who is able to let go of her adult son , as a woman who is no longer dependent upon a man , and as an American who is able to " perceive the roots of her identity " and how they affect her personality . 
 Angelou comes to terms with her difficult past , both as a descendant of Africans taken forcibly to America as slaves and as an African @-@ American who has experienced racism . As she tells interviewer Connie Martinson , she brought her son to Ghana to protect him from the negative effects of racism because she did not think he had the tools to withstand them . She remains in Accra after his accident because it was traumatic for her as well — so traumatic it reduces her to silence , similar to her muteness after she was raped as a child in Caged Bird . Her friend Julian Mayfield introduces her to Efua Sutherland , who becomes Angelou 's " Sister friend " and allows her to cry out her pain , grief , and fear , something Angelou later admitted went against her American upbringing of emotional restraint . 
 Racism , an important theme in all of Angelou 's autobiographies , continues to be important in this book , but she has matured in the way she deals with it in Traveling Shoes . For the first time in Angelou 's life , she " does not feel threatened by racial hate " in Ghana . She finds a strong support system there , and as Hagen states , she " has come far from the mute , shy little girl of Stamps , Arkansas " . As Hagen states , Angelou " is not yet ready to toss off the stings of prejudice , but tolerance and even a certain understanding can be glimpsed " . This is demonstrated in Angelou 's treatment of the " genocidal involvement of Africans in slave @-@ trading " , something that is often overlooked or misrepresented by other Black writers . Angelou is taught an important lesson about combating racism by Malcolm X , who compares it to a mountain in which everyone 's efforts , even the efforts of Shirley Graham DuBois , whom Angelou resents , is needed . 
 Angelou learns lessons about herself and about racism throughout Traveling Shoes , even during her brief tour of Venice and Berlin for The Blacks revival . She revives her passion for African @-@ American culture as she associates with other African @-@ Americans for the first time since moving to Ghana . She compares her experiences of American racism with Germany 's history of racial prejudice and military aggression . The verbal violence of the folk tales shared during her luncheon with her German hosts and Israeli friend is as significant to Angelou as physical violence , to the point that she becomes ill . Angelou 's first @-@ hand experience with fascism , as well as the racist sensibilities of the German family she visits , " help shape and broaden her constantly changing vision " regarding racial prejudice . 
 = = = Journey / Home = = = 
 I never agreed , even as a young person , with the Thomas Wolfe title You Can 't Go Home Again . Instinctively I didn ’ t . But the truth is , you can never leave home . You take it with you ; it ’ s under your fingernails ; it ’ s in the hair follicles ; it ’ s in the way you smile ; it ’ s in the ride of your hips , in the passage of your breasts ; it ’ s all there , no matter where you go . You can take on the affectations and the postures of other places and even learn to speak their ways . But the truth is , home is between your teeth . 
 <unk> Angelou , 1990 
 The journey , or travel , is a common theme in American autobiography as a whole ; as McPherson states , it is something of a national myth to Americans as a people . This is also the case for African @-@ American autobiography , which has its roots in the slave narrative . Like those narratives that focus on the writers ' search for freedom from bondage , modern African @-@ American autobiographers such as Angelou seek to develop " an authentic self " and the freedom to find it in their community . McPherson states , " The journey to a distant goal , the return home , and the quest which involves the voyage out , achievement , and return are typical patterns in Black autobiography " . 
 The travel motif is seen throughout Angelou 's series of autobiographies , emphasizing what Lupton describes as Angelou 's " continuing journey of the self " . Angelou continues the travel motif in Traveling Shoes , as evidenced in the book 's title , but her primary motivation in living in Africa , as she told interviewer George Plimpton , was " trying to get home " . Angelou not only relates her own journey of an African @-@ American woman searching for a home , but the journeys of other Black expatriates at the time , whom McPherson compares to the descriptions of white expatriates in Europe in the 1920s by Ernest Hemingway and Henry James . 
 Angelou was one of over two hundred Black American expatriates living in Accra at the time . She was able to find a small group of expatriates , humorously dubbed " the Revolutionary Returnees " , who became her main source of support as she struggled with her place in African culture — " the conflicting feelings of being ' home ' yet simultaneously being ' homeless , ' cut off from America without tangible roots in their adopted black nation " . For many Black Americans , it was the first time they were able to positively identify with Africa . Angelou describes the group of Black American expatriates as " a little group of Black folks , looking for a home " . Reviewer Jackie <unk> has stated that Angelou presents her readers with " a wealth of information and penetrating impressions of the proud , optimistic new country of Ghana " . Angelou also presents a " romanticized " view of Africa . She " falls in love " with Ghana and wishes to settle into her new home " as a baby <unk> in a mother 's arms " . 
 Angelou soon discovers that her fellow Black expatriates " share similar delusions " and that their feelings towards Ghana and its people are not reciprocated . Lupton states , " Angelou 's alliance with the African @-@ American community often focuses on their indignation over the Ghanaians ' refusal to fully welcome them " . Angelou uses the parallel demonstration to King 's 1963 March on Washington to demonstrate both her and her fellow expatriates ' tenuous relationship with Africa and her desire for full citizenship and assimilation , an " unattainable goal that falls outside of her desire for assimilation " and something she can never acquire in Ghana . Not only is Angelou a Black American , whether she likes it or not , " she is a Black American in exile " . Houston A. Baker , Jr . , in his review of Traveling Shoes , states that Angelou is unable to experience a connection with what Angelou calls the " soul " of Africa , and that Angelou speculates that only the American Black , forcibly displaced and taken from the home of her ancestors , can truly understand " that home is the place where one is created " . 
 Angelou 's issues are resolved at the end of Traveling Shoes when she decides to leave Guy to continue his education in Accra and return to America . The final scene of the book is at the Accra airport , with Angelou surrounded by Guy and her friends as they wish her farewell . Even though she " forsakes her new embraced alliance with Mother Africa , " she claims she is " not sad " to be leaving . She calls her departure a " second leave @-@ taking " , and compares it to the last time she left her son , with his grandmother in Singin ' and Swingin ' and Gettin ' Merry Like Christmas when he was a child , and to the forced departure from Africa by her ancestors . As Lupton states , " Angelou 's journey from Africa back to America is in certain ways a restatement of the historical phase known as mid @-@ passage , when slaves were brutally transported in ships from West Africa to the so @-@ called New World " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 All God 's Children Need Traveling Shoes was greeted with both praise and disappointment , although reviews of the book were generally positive . According to the Poetry Foundation , " Most critics have judged Angelou ’ s subsequent autobiographies in light of her first , and I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings remains the most highly praised " . Hagen states that Traveling Shoes , as in her previous books , demonstrated Angelou 's " broad appeal " to both her readers and her critics . The book 's accuracy was verified by her close friend and fellow expatriate Julian Mayfield . 
 Even though Traveling Shoes is Angelou 's fifth book in her series of autobiographies , it is able to stand on its own . Houston A. Baker , Jr . , in his review of the book , called Angelou " one of the geniuses of Afro @-@ American serial autobiography " . Interviewer Connie Martinson told Angelou , " You make me , the reader ... live through it with you " . Scholar Eugenia Collier , writing when the possibility of the publication of consequent autobiographies in Angelou 's series was uncertain , considered Traveling Shoes " the apex toward which the other autobiographies have pointed " . Hagen considered Traveling Shoes " another professional , rich , full , journeyman text " , and saw a higher @-@ quality of writing , especially her " often lyrical and soaring " prose , than in her previous books . Other reviewers agree . Reviewer Janet A. Blundell found the book " absorbing reading " , and reviewer Jackie <unk> stated that the " prose sings " . 
 Some critics were less favorable in their views of All God 's Children Need Traveling Shoes . Even though the book left interviewer Russell Harris with " a haunting feeling " , he found the book more " pedantic " than her previous books , and thought that it contained fewer fictional aspects compared to Angelou 's other autobiographies . Scholar John C. <unk> found the conflicts in the book unresolved and the ending " too easily manufactured at the last minute to resolve the problem of the book " . Reviewer Deborah E. McDowell agreed , and found the resolution of the plot to be " stereotyped and <unk> " . 
 = Bad Timing ( Adventure Time ) = 
 " Bad Timing " is the forty @-@ ninth episode from the fifth season of Adventure Time , an animated television series . It was written by Pendleton Ward , who created the show , and Kent Osborne , its head of story . In the episode , Lumpy Space Princess falls in love with a former mate ( Mark Proksch ) from secondary school . When she suspects she has lost her date to Princess Bubblegum , she attempts to wield time travel to win back his affections . 
 Visually unique to this episode , it comprises two frames : a circular inner frame holds the main story , while the outer margins carry small creatures . The writers likened the story to revisiting a former high school peer who was , at the time , unnoticeable . Originally aired on 3 March 2014 , this broadcast was seen by more than one million viewers . Writers of entertainment @-@ related publications praised the episode for its depth of mood and visuals . The New Yorker critic Emily Nussbaum , in particular , saw it as establishing Lumpy 's intricacy as a character , and Eric Kohn in IndieWire called the episode the pièce de résistance of the show . 
 = = Background = = 
 Adventure Time follows the adventures of principal characters Finn the Human , aged 16 , and Jake the Dog . Recurring characters featured in " Bad Timing " include Princess Bubblegum and Lumpy Space Princess . As she governs her kingdom of candy people , Bubblegum works as a scientist on varying experiments . Meanwhile , Lumpy ( Pendleton Ward ) , portrayed as a valley girl , is the source of drama due to her arrogant personality and shallow relationships with others . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Princess Bubblegum demonstrates to company a device capable of time travel . Lumpy Space Princess comes in and demands Bubblegum transport Lumpy back to when she and her ex were still in love . Bubblegum explains that the machine is only capable of logging molecules of a given entity . Lumpy attacks her , and Bubblegum forces her to leave . 
 Lamenting at a bar , she meets Johnnie ( Mark Proksch ) , a former mate at their secondary school . Johnnie confesses his anxiety regarding a scheduled interview with Bubblegum for a business venture . Lumpy advises that he fix his posture as to appear more confident . Johnnie thanks Lumpy for her advice and invites her to his complex . There , the two fall in love and share good nights . When Lumpy finds Johnnie absent in the morning , she suspects that he , like her ex , has abandoned her . Much to her relief , she finds him cooking breakfast in his kitchen . When he returns from the interview , he reveals he has been invited to a separate meeting with Bubblegum at her castle . Lumpy asks that she appear with him , but Johnnie says the meeting is private . Supposing Bubblegum has stolen his heart , Lumpy leaves in a fit of rage . 
 Delivering a monologue on the passion necessary for love , Lumpy hurls a Molotov cocktail at the castle . Bubblegum considers its impact an attack on her kingdom and tells Johnnie to hide at the foot of their desk . When Lumpy finds Johnnie , she uses the device on him , attempting to revert him to when he loved her . Johnnie disappears ; when Bubblegum figures out what has happened , she informs Lumpy that by failing to log his molecules , he no longer exists as part of their universe . To avoid having to grieve , Lumpy asks Bubblegum to use the device , properly , on her . Erased of her memory past her attacking Bubblegum , Lumpy storms out . Bubblegum pours herself a drink . 
 = = Production = = 
 This episode is the forty @-@ ninth from the fifth season of Adventure Time . Visually , the episode is framed having the important events of the story occur in its center , bordered circularly . Small polygonal creatures appear in the margins of the outer frame . Film and television critic Eric Kohn , in IndieWire , dubbed the inner frame a time bubble , absorbing the creatures Bubblegum experiments on with the time travel device . Following Lumpy having her memory erased in the episode , Johnnie appears in the outer frame . 
 " Bad Timing " was written by Pendleton Ward and Kent Osborne . They previously collaborated with Jack Pendarvis and Adam Muto to come up with the idea for the episode , with the former duo adapting that to a storyboard . The creator of Adventure Time , Ward resigned from his occupation as its runner during production of the season . Osborne is the head of story . Alluding to the episode , for Hulu , Muto and Osborne summarized it as Lumpy confounding the concept of time travel . The writers related the episode to " one of those situations where you run into someone from high school and you 're like , ' <unk> , why didn 't I ever notice you before ? ' " <unk> to in this episode , the one it precedes involves time travel as well . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Cartoon Network originally aired " Bad Timing " on 3 March 2014 . Over a million and a half people saw the episode live on broadcast . Television critic Emily Nussbaum gave this episode praise in The New Yorker , comparing it to a fairy tale characterized by laughter and sorrow . Kohn called its mood happy yet miserable the same , evoking more emotions as a whole than even the preceding episode . The A.V. Club writer Oliver Sava gave it an A grade , finding it , like Kohn , emotionally intense . Kohn praised the episode for supplying Lumpy , a usually arrogant character , with a tragic circumstance . Sava saw the character as more explored that way . Nussbaum , who considered the episode proof of her intricacy as a character , wrote that Lumpy appropriately shows pathos . 
 Sava specifically lauded the monologue delivered by Lumpy for showing her consistent strength that makes her so admirable . He further praised how the episode was capable of condensing mature topics for children the show is aimed at in a humorous way . Kohn opined the episode helms the " waters of eroticism " responsibly . In the Adventure Time – dedicated podcast Conversation Parade , hosted by John Moe and Open Mike Eagle , Moe found Johnnie written so " incredibly complicated , whimsy , and sad " that he performed – with the direction of guest Osborne – some of his lines on the podcast . 
 Kohn regarded its visuals as the pinnacle of the show . Sava wrote that the notion of time being a flat circle could have inspired the circular shape of the inner frame . He noted the use of color beyond the circle as a way to convey the many emotions evoked for the whole of the episode . Ignoring this device , Sava saw its use as humorous diversions while it contributed to the splendor . Nussbaum described the creatures appearing in the outer frame as <unk> and a mute chorus , suggesting they live in a parallel universe of both connection and isolation . The episode was later released on DVD twice , first in the year of that broadcast , as part of the Princess Day box set , and later in 2015 , as part of a box set for the complete fifth season . Home video critic Justin Remer called " Bad Timing " " surprisingly devastating " in DVD Talk . Kohn summed up the episode 's climax as the pièce de résistance of Adventure Time . 
 = Hurricane John ( 2006 ) = 
 Hurricane John was the eleventh named storm , seventh hurricane , and fifth major hurricane of the 2006 Pacific hurricane season . Hurricane John developed on August 28 from a tropical wave to the south of Mexico . Favorable conditions allowed the storm to intensify quickly , and it attained peak winds of 135 mph ( 215 km / h ) on August 30 . Eyewall replacement cycles and land interaction with western Mexico weakened the hurricane , and John made landfall on southeastern Baja California Sur with winds of 110 mph ( 180 km / h ) on September 1 . It slowly weakened as it moved northwestward through the Baja California peninsula , and dissipated on September 4 . Moisture from the remnants of the storm entered the southwest United States . 
 The hurricane threatened large portions of the western coastline of Mexico , resulting in the evacuation of tens of thousands of people . In coastal portions of western Mexico , strong winds downed trees , while heavy rain resulted in mudslides . Hurricane John caused moderate damage on the Baja California peninsula , including the destruction of more than 200 houses and thousands of flimsy shacks . The hurricane killed five people in Mexico , and damage totaled $ 663 million ( 2006 MXN , $ 60 @.@ 8 million 2006 USD ) . In the southwest United States , moisture from the remnants of John produced heavy rainfall . The rainfall aided drought conditions in portions of northern Texas , although it was detrimental in locations that had received above @-@ normal rainfall throughout the year . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 The tropical wave that would become John moved off the coast of Africa on August 17 . It entered the eastern Pacific Ocean on August 24 , and quickly showed signs of organization . That night , Dvorak classifications were initiated on the system while it was just west of Costa Rica , and it moved west @-@ northwestward at 10 – 15 mph ( 15 – 25 km / h ) . Conditions appeared favorable for further development , and convection increased late on August 26 over the area of low pressure . Early on August 27 , the system became much better organized about 250 miles ( 400 km ) south @-@ southwest of Guatemala , although convection remained minimal . Early on August 28 , banding increased within its organizing convection , and the system developed into Tropical Depression Eleven @-@ E. 
 Due to low amounts of vertical shear , very warm waters , and abundant moisture , steady intensification was forecast , and the depression strengthened to Tropical Storm John later on August 28 . Deep convection continued to develop over the storm , while an eye feature developed within the expanding central dense overcast . The storm continued to intensify , and John attained hurricane status on August 29 while 190 miles ( 305 km ) south @-@ southeast of Acapulco . Banding features continued to increase as the hurricane moved west @-@ northwestward around the southwest periphery of a mid- to upper @-@ level ridge over northern Mexico . The hurricane underwent rapid intensification , and John attained major hurricane status 12 hours after becoming a hurricane . Shortly thereafter , the eye became obscured , and the intensity remained at 115 mph ( 185 km / h ) due to an eyewall replacement cycle . Another eye formed , and based on Reconnaissance data , the hurricane attained Category 4 status on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale on August 30 about 160 miles ( 260 km ) west of Acapulco , or 95 miles ( 155 km ) south of Lázaro Cárdenas , Michoacán . Hours later , the hurricane underwent another eyewall replacement cycle , and subsequently weakened to Category 3 status as it paralleled the Mexican coastline a short distance offshore . 
 Due to land interaction and its eyewall replacement cycle , Hurricane John weakened to a 105 mph ( 170 km / h ) hurricane by late on August 31 , but restrengthened to a major hurricane shortly after as its eye became better defined . After completing another eyewall replacement cycle , the hurricane again weakened to Category 2 status , and on September 1 it made landfall on Cabo del Este on the southern tip of Baja California Sur with winds of 110 mph ( 180 km / h ) . John passed near La Paz as a weakening Category 1 hurricane on September 2 , and weakened to a tropical storm shortly thereafter over land . John continued to weaken , and late on September 3 the system deteriorated to a tropical depression while still over land . By September 4 , most of the convection decoupled from the circulation towards mainland Mexico , and a clear circulation had not been discernible for 24 hours . Based on the disorganization of the system , the National Hurricane Center issued its last advisory on the system . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 The Mexican army and emergency services were stationed near the coast , while classes at public schools in and around Acapulco were canceled . Officials in Acapulco advised residents in low @-@ lying areas to be on alert , and also urged fishermen to return to harbor . Authorities in the twin resort cities of Ixtapa and Zihuatanejo closed the port to small ocean craft . Government officials in the state of Jalisco declared a mandatory evacuation for 8 @,@ 000 citizens in low @-@ lying areas to 900 temporary shelters . Temporary shelters were also set up near Acapulco . The state of Michoacán was on a yellow alert , the middle of a five @-@ level alert system . Carnival Cruise Lines diverted the path of one cruise ship traveling along the Pacific waters off Mexico . 
 On August 31 , the Baja California Sur state government ordered the evacuation of more than 10 @,@ 000 residents . Those who refused to follow the evacuation order would have been forced to evacuate by the army . Shelters were set up to allow local residents and tourists to ride out the storm . Just weeks after a major flood in the area , officials evacuated hundreds of citizens in Las <unk> in northern Mexico area near a dam . All public schools in the area were closed , as well . 
 The United States ' National Weather Service issued flood watches and warnings for portions of Texas and the southern two @-@ thirds of New Mexico . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 The powerful winds of Hurricane John produced heavy surf and downed trees near Acapulco . The hurricane produced a 10 foot ( 3 m ) storm surge in Acapulco that flooded coastal roads . In addition , John caused heavy rainfall along the western coast of Mexico , peaking at 12 @.@ 5 inches ( 317 @.@ 5 mm ) in Los Planes , Jalisco . The rainfall resulted in mudslides in the Costa Chica region of Guerrero , leaving around 70 communities isolated . 
 In La Paz , capital of Baja California Sur , the hurricane downed 40 power poles . Authorities cut off the power supply to the city to prevent electrocutions from downed wires . Strong winds downed trees and destroyed many advertisement signs . Heavy rainfall totaling more than 20 inches ( 500 mm ) in isolated areas resulted in ankle @-@ deep flooding , closing many roads in addition to the airport in La Paz . In La Paz , 300 families received damage to their homes , with another 200 families left homeless after their houses were destroyed . The combination of winds and rain destroyed thousands of flimsy houses across the region . The rainfall also destroyed large areas of crops , and also killed many livestock . The rainfall caused the <unk> dam in Comondú to overflow , isolating 15 towns due to 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) floodwaters . In the coastal city of Mulegé , flash flooding caused widespread damage throughout the town and the death of a United States citizen . More than 250 homes were damaged or destroyed in the town , leaving many people homeless . Severe flooding blocked portions of Federal Highway 1 , and damaged an aqueduct in the region . 
 In all , Hurricane John destroyed hundreds of houses and blew off the roofs of 160 houses on the Baja California peninsula . Five people were killed , and damage in Mexico amounted to $ 663 million ( 2006 MXN , $ 60 @.@ 8 million 2006 USD ) . 
 In Ciudad Juárez , Chihuahua , across the U.S. border from El Paso , Texas , rainfall from the storm 's remnants flooded 20 neighborhoods , downed power lines , and resulted in several traffic accidents . Rainfall from John , combined with continual precipitation during the two weeks before the storm , left thousands of people homeless . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 Moisture from the remnants of John combined with an approaching cold front to produce moderate amounts of rainfall across the southwest United States , including a total of 8 inches ( 200 mm ) in <unk> and more than 3 inches ( 75 mm ) in El Paso , Texas . The rainfall flooded many roads in southwestern Texas , including a ½ mile ( 800 m ) portion of Interstate 10 in El Paso . A slick runway at El Paso International Airport delayed a Continental Airlines jet when its tires were stuck in mud . Rainfall from John in El Paso , combined with an unusually wet year , resulted in twice the normal annual rainfall , and caused 2006 to be the ninth wettest year on record by September . Damage totaled about $ 100 @,@ 000 ( 2006 USD ) in the El Paso area from the precipitation . In northern Texas , the rainfall alleviated a severe drought , caused the Double Mountain Fork Brazos River to swell and Lake Alan Henry to overflow . The Texas Department of Transportation closed numerous roads due to flooding from the precipitation , including a portion of U.S. Route 385 near Levelland . Several other roads were washed out . 
 Moisture derived from John also produced rainfall across southern New Mexico , peaking at 5 @.@ 25 inches ( 133 mm ) at Ruidoso . The rainfall overflowed rivers , forcing people to evacuate along the Rio Ruidoso . The rainfall also caused isolated road flooding . Rainfall in New Mexico canceled an annual wine festival in Las Cruces and caused muddy conditions at the All American Futurity at the Ruidoso Downs , the biggest day of horse racing in New Mexico . Flooding was severe in Mesquite , Hatch , and Rincon , where many homes experienced 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) of flooding and mud . Some homeowners lost all they owned . Tropical moisture from the storm also produced rainfall in Arizona and Southern California . In California , the rainfall produced eight separate mudslides , trapping 19 vehicles , but caused no injuries . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Branches of the Mexican Red Cross in Guerrero , Oaxaca and Michoacán were put on alert . The organization 's national emergency response team was on stand @-@ by to assist the most affected areas . Navy helicopters delivered food and water to remote areas of the Baja California peninsula . The Mexican Red Cross dispatched 2 @,@ 000 food parcels to the southern tip of Baja California Sur . In the city of Mulegé , gas supply , which was necessary to run generators , was low , drinking water was gone , and the airstrip was covered with mud . Many homeless residents initially stayed with friends or in government @-@ run shelters . Throughout the Baja California peninsula , thousands remained without water or electricity two days after the storm , although a pilot from Phoenix prepared to fly to the disaster area with 100 gallons ( 380 litres ) of water . Other pilots were expected to execute similar flights , as well . The office of Baja California Sur Tourism stated that minimal damage occurred to the tourism infrastructure , with only minimal delays to airports , roads , and maritime facilities . The Episcopal Relief and Development delivered food , clothing , medicine , and transportation to about 100 families , and gave mattresses to about 80 families . 
 Many residents in Tucson , including more than 50 students , delivered supplies to flood victims in New Mexico , including clothing and other donations . 
 = Fort Manoel = 
 Fort Manoel ( Maltese : Forti Manoel or <unk> Manoel ) is a star fort on Manoel Island in <unk> , Malta . It was built in the 18th century by the Order of Saint John , during the reign of Grand Master António Manoel de Vilhena , after whom it is named . The British military took over the fort in 1800 and it remained in use by them until 1964 . The fort was severely damaged in World War II , but it was restored and it is now in good condition . 
 Fort Manoel is located to the north west of Valletta , and commands Marsamxett Harbour and the anchorage of Sliema Creek . The fort is an example of Baroque architecture , and it was designed with both functionality and aesthetics in mind . 
 Fort Manoel has been on Malta 's tentative list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites since 1998 , as part of the Knights ' Fortifications around the Harbours of Malta . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background and failed proposals = = = 
 In the 16th century , the Marsamxett Harbour was one of the two major harbours in the Maltese city of Valletta . In the centre of the harbour was an island , originally known as l <unk> and now known as Manoel Island after the fort , which overlooked the city . Shortly after Valletta 's construction , the Order of Saint John realised this was a potential vulnerability in the city 's defences . As early as 1569 , it was proposed that a small fort with a cavalier be built on the <unk> to prevent the enemy from taking the island and building batteries on it . The threat was again highlighted by the Spanish military engineer Scipione Campi in 1577 , and by Giovanni Battista in 1582 . 
 The next proposal to build a fortification on the island was made by the Italian military engineer Antonio Maurizio Valperga in 1670 . He proposed a roughly hexagonal fort with a hornwork , in the Dutch style of fortification . The proposal was criticized by the Order 's engineers , and a third proposal was drawn up by the Flemish military engineer Carlos de Grunenbergh in 1687 . <unk> 's proposal consisted of a fort with four bastions and a ravelin , surrounded by a ditch , covertway and faussebraye . 
 Other proposals were made in 1715 , this time by the knight René Jacob de Tigné and a team of French engineers . There were several different plans , including building a coastal battery and a redoubt . Other plans included building a four @-@ bastioned fort , or combining all three ( fort , battery and redoubt ) for the defence of the island . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 Eventually , the final design was agreed in 1723 , and it incorporated the work of de Tigné as well as Charles François de Mondion , the Order 's military engineer . The new fort was to be square in shape , with four bastions and two cavaliers . The fort was financed by , and named after , the Portuguese Grand Master , António Manoel de Vilhena . He also set up the Manoel Foundation , a fund responsible for the maintenance and garrison of Fort Manoel and its outworks . 
 The first stone was laid by de Vilhena on 14 September 1723 , and work progressed rapidly . By 1727 , the enceinte , cavaliers and gateway were complete . The ditch had been excavated by 1732 , while the chapel , barracks , magazines and <unk> were completed in around 1733 . The fort was an active military establishment by 1734 . When Mondion died in 1733 , he was buried in the crypt under the fort 's chapel . 
 In 1757 , Lembi Battery was added near Tigné Point , Sliema . The battery was funded by the Manoel Foundation and it was considered to be an outwork of Fort Manoel , since it was intended to prevent an enemy from bombarding the fort 's northern flank . It was decommissioned following the construction of Fort Tigné in 1795 . The construction of the latter fort was also partially funded by the Manoel Foundation . 
 = = = French occupation = = = 
 The fort first saw use during the French invasion of Malta in June 1798 , in the French Revolutionary Wars . At the time , it was commanded by the Portuguese knight <unk> , and it was garrisoned by the Cacciatori , who were a volunteer chasseur light infantry regiment , as well as a few men from the <unk> militia . The fort surrendered after Grand Master Hompesch officially capitulated to Napoleon . 
 A French garrison of a few hundred men took over the fort on 12 June . During the subsequent Maltese uprising and insurrection against the French , Maltese insurgents built <unk> and <unk> <unk> batteries to bombard Fort Manoel . The Maltese attacked the fort on a number of occasions , and the French retaliated with their own bombardment at least once . On 12 September 1799 , a company of French troops from Fort Manoel attempted to silence an insurgent gun position in San <unk> , but were repelled by the Maltese insurgents . 
 = = = British rule = = = 
 When Malta became a British protectorate in 1800 , Fort Manoel was officially taken over by the British military that September . In the late 19th century , the echaugettes on the bastions facing Valletta were dismantled to make way for gun emplacements . Later on , significant alterations were made to St. Anthony Bastion , when its gunpowder magazine was demolished to make way for a battery of three QF 12 @-@ pounder guns . 
 The British military finally decommissioned the fort 's guns in 1906 , although it remained a military establishment . It was included on the Antiquities List of 1925 . The fort saw use again during World War II , when a battery of 3 @.@ 7 @-@ inch heavy anti @-@ aircraft guns was deployed there . The guns were mounted in concrete gun emplacements and deployed in a semicircle in and around the fort . The fort suffered considerable damage to its ramparts , barracks and chapel as a result of aerial bombing during the war . The fort was eventually decommissioned in 1964 . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 After being decommissioned , Fort Manoel was abandoned and fell into a state of disrepair . Parts of it were also vandalized . In 1970 , the Royal Malta Yacht Club acquired part of the fort as its club house , and the yacht club remained there until it acquired new premises in Ta ' <unk> in 2008 . 
 In August 2001 , the development company MIDI plc began restoration work on the fort . Phase One of the project , which included the restoration of the piazza and the reconstruction of the ruined chapel , was completed in 2009 . The second phase , including the restoration of the outer fortifications and glacis , was approved by the Malta Environment and Planning Authority in 2012 . The restoration of Fort Manoel together with that of the nearby Fort Tigné cost a total of € 30 million . 
 = = Layout = = 
 Fort Manoel is built in the shape of a square , with a pentagonal bastion on each corner , giving it the shape of a star fort . The four bastions are called St. Helen , St. Anthony , St. John and Notre Dame Bastions . 
 St. Helen and St. Anthony Bastions are located on the seaward side , facing Valletta . They originally had echaugettes and gunpowder magazines , but the echaugettes on both bastions were dismantled in the 19th century , and the magazine on St. Anthony Bastion was demolished to make way for three QF 12 @-@ pounder gun emplacements . The magazine on St. Helen Bastion is still intact . The curtain wall linking these two bastions contains the main gate , which is protected by a lunette known as the <unk> Porte . 
 St. John and Notre Dame Bastions are located along the landward side of the fort . Each bastion is protected by a low cavalier . The curtain wall between the two bastions is further protected by a pentagonal ravelin , which is largely rock hewn . 
 A Piazza is located inside the fort , and it contains the rebuilt Chapel of St. Anthony of Padua , several barrack blocks , an armoury and other buildings . A statue of Grand Master Vilhena once stood in the square but it was removed in the 19th century and relocated to Valletta . It was later relocated once again and it is now in Floriana . 
 = = Ghost story = = 
 The fort is supposedly haunted by the Black Knight , who wears the armour and regalia of the Order of St. John , and resembles Grand Master de Vilhena . In the 1940s , the knight began to appear out of thin air near the ruins of the Chapel of St. Anthony of Padua , which had just been bombed in World War II . The apparition was reportedly seen by Maltese and English men within the fort . When the rubble from the ruined chapel began to be cleared , the workmen reported that the knight was supervising their work . When the crypt beneath the chapel was opened , it was found that it had been vandalized , and the remains of knights which had been buried there were scattered around . After the crypt was restored and the bones were reburied , the Black Knight stopped appearing . In 1980 , the crypt was vandalized for a second time , and the Black Knight reportedly began to appear again . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Fort Manoel is featured in the 2007 fiction book Il @-@ <unk> tal @-@ Forti Manoel ( The Mystery of Fort Manoel ) by Charles Zarb . 
 The fort served as a location for the shooting of the climactic scene of Baelor , the ninth episode of the TV series Game of Thrones , in 2011 . 
 The fort was also used in the filming of the 2016 films Risen and Assassin 's Creed . 
 The fort is also visible in the 2016 film 13 Hours : The Secret Soldiers of Benghazi . 
 = Graudenz @-@ class cruiser = 
 The Graudenz class of light cruisers was a class of two ships built for the German Imperial Navy . The class comprised SMS Graudenz and SMS Regensburg . The ships both were laid down in 1912 , launched in October 1913 and April 1914 and commissioned in August 1914 and January 1915 , respectively . They were armed with a main battery of twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm guns , though over the course of their careers , they were rearmed with seven more powerful 15 cm guns . They displaced 6 @,@ 382 t ( 6 @,@ 281 long tons ) at full load and were rated at a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 knots ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) 
 Both ships saw extensive service during World War I , primarily in the reconnaissance forces of the High Seas Fleet . They participated in several raids on the British coast , screening for the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group . Regensburg saw heavy combat at the Battle of Jutland , the largest naval battle of the war ; Graudenz had been damaged by a mine and was in dock for repairs at the time of the battle . Both were involved in the Wilhelmshaven mutiny at the end of the war . Following Germany 's defeat , Graudenz was ceded to Italy and served as Ancona until 1937 , when she was sold for scrap . Regensburg was transferred to France , where she served as Strasbourg until 1936 , when she was converted into a barracks ship . She was ultimately scuttled in Lorient to protect the German U @-@ boat pens there . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 The ships of the Graudenz class were 139 meters ( 456 ft ) long at the waterline and 142 @.@ 70 m ( 468 @.@ 2 ft ) long overall . They had a beam of 13 @.@ 80 m ( 45 @.@ 3 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 75 m ( 18 @.@ 9 ft ) forward and 6 @.@ 08 m ( 19 @.@ 9 ft ) aft . They displaced 4 @,@ 912 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 834 long tons ) at designed displacement and 6 @,@ 382 t ( 6 @,@ 281 long tons ) at full combat load . The ships ' hulls were constructed with longitudinal steel frames and contained seventeen watertight compartments and a double bottom that extended for forty @-@ seven percent of the length of the keel . 
 The two vessels each had a standard crew of twenty @-@ one officers and 364 enlisted men . While serving as a second command flagship or a flotilla leader , they had an additional three officers and fourteen enlisted men for the commander 's staff . They carried a number of smaller boats , including one picket boat , one barge , one cutter , two yawls , and two dinghies . The German Navy regarded the ships as good sea boats , with slight weather helm and gentle motion in a swell . The cruisers were maneuverable , but were slow going into a turn . Steering was controlled by a single large rudder . They lost speed only slightly in a head sea , but lost up to sixty percent in hard turns . They had a transverse metacentric height of .79 m ( 2 ft 7 in ) . 
 The ships ' propulsion system consisted of two sets of Marine @-@ type steam turbines , each of which drove a three @-@ bladed screw 3 @.@ 50 m ( 11 ft 6 in ) in diameter . Each turbine was divided into its own engine room . They were designed to give 26 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 19 @,@ 000 kW ) . These were powered by ten coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers and two oil @-@ fired double @-@ ended boilers , divided into four boiler rooms on the centerline . These gave the ship a top speed of 27 @.@ 5 knots ( 50 @.@ 9 km / h ; 31 @.@ 6 mph ) . The ships carried 1 @,@ 280 t ( 1 @,@ 260 long tons ) of coal , and an additional 375 t ( 369 long tons ) of oil that gave them a range of approximately 5 @,@ 500 nautical miles ( 10 @,@ 200 km ; 6 @,@ 300 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . At 25 knots ( 46 km / h ; 29 mph ) , the range fell considerably , to 1 @,@ 000 nmi ( 1 @,@ 900 km ; 1 @,@ 200 mi ) . Each ship had two turbo generators and one diesel generator with a combined output of 260 kilowatts ( 350 hp ) at 220 Volts . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 The ships were armed with twelve 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns in single pedestal mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , eight were located amidships , four on either side , and two in a superfiring pair aft . The guns had a maximum elevation of 30 degrees , which allowed them to engage targets out to 12 @,@ 700 m ( 41 @,@ 700 ft ) . These were replaced with seven 15 cm SK L / 45 guns and two 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 45 anti @-@ aircraft guns in 1916 for Graudenz and 1917 for Regensburg . They were also equipped with a pair of 50 cm ( 19 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes submerged in the hull on the broadside . Two deck @-@ mounted launchers were added for Graudenz when the gun armament was upgraded ; Regensburg had her submerged tubes removed and four deck mounted launchers installed . Both ships could also carry 120 mines . 
 The ships were protected by a waterline armored belt that was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) thick amidships and 18 mm ( 0 @.@ 71 in ) thick on the bow . The stern was unarmored . The deck was covered with up to 60 mm thick armor plate forward , 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick amidships , and 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) thick aft . Sloped armor 40 mm thick connected the deck and belt armor . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides and a 20 mm thick roof . A rangefinder was added with 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick steel plating . The main battery guns had 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick gun shields . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Graudenz = = = 
 Graudenz saw extensive service during World War I , including serving as part of the reconnaissance screen for the battlecruisers of the I Scouting Group during the raid on Scarborough , Hartlepool and Whitby in December 1914 . The ship also took part in the Battle of Dogger Bank in January 1915 , and the Battle of the Gulf of Riga in August 1915 . She had been damaged by a mine and was unable to participate in the Battle of Jutland in May 1916 . She was assigned to the planned final operation of the High Seas Fleet in October 1918 , weeks before the end of the war , but a major mutiny forced the cancellation of the plan . After the end of the war , the ship was ceded to Italy as a war prize and commissioned into the Italian Navy as Ancona ; she remained in service until 1937 when she was stricken and broken up for scrap . 
 = = = Regensburg = = = 
 Regensburg served in the reconnaissance forces of the High Seas Fleet during World War I. She saw significant action at the Battle of Jutland on 31 May – 1 June 1916 , where she served as the leader of the torpedo boat flotillas that screened for the I Scouting Group battlecruisers . Like Graudenz , Regensburg was to have participated in the final sortie of the German fleet at the end of the war , and was involved in the mutiny that forced the cancellation of the plan . After the end of the war , she was ceded to France in 1920 and renamed Strasbourg . In 1928 she took part in the Arctic rescue operations searching for the Airship Italia . Removed from service in 1936 , she was used as a barracks ship in Lorient until 1944 , when she was seized by the Germans and scuttled in the harbor to protect the U @-@ boat pens there . 
 = Worcester city walls = 
 Worcester 's city walls are a sequence of defensive structures built around the city of Worcester in England between the 1st and 17th centuries . The first walls to be built around Worcester were constructed by the Romans . These early walls lasted beyond the fall of the Empire , and the defences encouraged several early Christian foundations to establish themselves in Worcester during the troubled 6th and 7th centuries . The Anglo @-@ Saxons expanded Worcester in the 890s , forming a new walled , planned city , called a burh . The burh utilised the southern stretches of the old Roman walls , but pushed further north to enclose a much larger area . The Anglo @-@ Saxon city walls were maintained by a share of taxes on a local market and streets , in an agreement reinforced by a royal charter . 
 After the Norman conquest of England in the 11th century a motte and bailey castle was constructed on the south side of the city , but the Norman rulers continued to use the older burh walls , despite the city having expanded beyond these defences in the north and south @-@ east . During the years of the Anarchy in the 1140s , Worcester was successfully attacked several times ; after the war a new city wall was built to improve the city 's defences . The new walls , completed by the early 13th century , were constructed of stone and had three main gates . They were maintained in good condition into the 17th century . 
 During the English Civil War in the 1640s the old medieval walls were reinforced with modern earthwork bastions and an outlying fort , called a sconce . Worcester changed hands several times during the conflict , and after the war ended the newer fortifications were dismantled . During the 18th century the older medieval stone walls and gatehouses were sold and mostly destroyed : by the 20th century , few parts survived . Post @-@ war archaeology in the 1950s and 1960s and construction work in the 1970s revealed previously hidden stretches of the wall , and in the 21st century plans have been drawn up to improve the conservation and maintenance of this historic monument . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1st – 7th centuries = = = 
 The first defensive walls at Worcester were built after the Roman conquest of Britain in AD 43 . Although a settlement existed on the site during the Iron Age , there is no evidence that walls were ever built around it . The Roman town was probably preceded by the construction a Roman fort , both located on the south side of the modern city and protected by the River Severn to the west . There are relatively few historical details or archaeological evidence from this period , but archaeological investigations of the Roman town walls suggest that it had wooden ramparts and was protected by an 89 @-@ foot ( 27 m ) wide ditch . As with other Roman towns , the walls would have enclosed a rectangular town , protecting a settlement with a grid @-@ like network of streets . 
 The decline of the Roman Empire brought an end to Roman rule in Britain by the start of the 5th century . The town within the old Roman walls at Worcester continued to be occupied however , remaining a prominent military feature . New Christian religious foundations were established at Worcester during this period , attracted there in large part by the security the Roman defences offered during a troubled period . In the 7th century , Worcester Cathedral was built , once again within the old Roman walls . 
 = = = 8th – 11th centuries = = = 
 During the Anglo @-@ Saxon period , Worcester first became the capital of the Hwicce kingdom , and later formed part of the wider kingdom of Mercia . Worcester and its defences were reorganised by Ealdorman Æthelred and Æthelflæd and bishop Werferth in the 890s . This involved creating a burh , a fortified Anglo @-@ Saxon town ; in Worcester this took the form of a planned settlement , extending out from the old Roman defences , with the Shambles forming a street running along the wall on the east . Archaeological evidence suggests that the burh had 4 @,@ 650 feet ( 1 @,@ 417 m ) of walls in total ; documentary evidence from the Burghal Hidage document , written shortly after the creation of the walls , suggests they were 4 @,@ 960 feet ( 1 @,@ 512 m ) long , a discrepancy that may be accounted for by changes in the course of the river since the 10th century . The walls incorporated the old Roman fortifications on the south and south @-@ east side of the city and appear to have included a defensive ditch , with a revetment supporting a wooden palisade . 
 The creation of the burh walls is recorded in a charter witnessed by King Alfred , which lays out the responsibilities of the various churchmen and nobles involved , and notes that the upkeep of the walls would be paid for out of a share of taxes on a new market and on the new streets . The local lords took responsibility for building the burh wall , which unusually for the period was not built on royal lands . During the 10th century , the documents on the burh suggest that the aristocratic thegns living around Worcester also owned and maintained buildings within the walls ; Creighton and Higham suggest that these may have been linked to their responsibilities for defending the settlement . 
 During the 10th and 11th centuries Worcester spread north beyond the original burh walls , and south @-@ east to form Sidbury . In 1041 Worcester was attacked by the royal army of Harthacnut over a tax @-@ dispute that had led to the death of two of the king 's men ; despite the defensive walls , the city was successfully taken and burnt . 
 = = = 11th – 16th centuries = = = 
 In 1066 William the Conqueror defeated the English army at the battle of Hastings and Norman forces advanced west into Worcestershire . To reinforce their occupation , the Normans built a motte and bailey castle on the south side of the city , taking advantage of the shape of the existing burh walls . The remaining burh walls continued to be used into the Norman period , but the city had already spread beyond them , reducing their effectiveness . 
 In the late 1130s a period of civil war broke out in England , called the Anarchy , in which the rival factions of King Stephen and the Empress Matilda contested the kingdom – Worcestershire proved to be a key battleground in the war . The first attack on Worcester itself occurred in late 1139 when an Angevin army from Gloucestershire assaulted the city . After an attempt to take the castle on the south side of the city , the Gloucester forces entered from the north , looting and burning . Worcester became a base for Stephen 's forces for a period , before joining the Empress 's faction . In response , Stephen first stormed and burnt the city in 1148 , and then attacked it again in 1150 , shortly before the end of the conflict . From the accounts of these sieges , it appears that Worcester still lacked substantial walls during this period . 
 During the second half of the 12th century a new city wall began to be built around Worcester , with work probably continuing until early the next century . <unk> about 85 acres ( 34 @.@ 4 hectares ) , its design tracked the flow of natural streams to the north and east , and made use of the castle in the south as part of the defences . The walls were constructed of sandstone , and appear to have been surrounded by a flat bottomed , water @-@ filled ditch , more than 30 feet ( 9 m ) wide . The new walls cut across existing parts of the city and would have required the demolition of numerous existing buildings that lay in their way ; the new defences also cut off the outlying districts of Sidbury , <unk> , Foregate Street and The <unk> from the inside of the walled city . Three main gates were built in the walls – North Gate , St Martin 's Gate and Sidbury Gate – protected by gatehouses of paired circular towers and arrowslits for use by crossbowmen . Smaller gates were built between them , such as Friar 's Gate . 
 Civil war broke out again in England in 1215 between forces loyal to King John and rebel barons , supported in due course by Prince Louis of France , in what gas become known as the First Barons ' War . Worcester sided with the rebels , and in July 1216 the city was attacked by forces under the command of Ranulf , the Earl of Chester . Ranulf attempted to storm the castle , rather than the north side of the city , and after he eventually gained access a £ 100 fine was imposed on the city with the threat that their walls would be destroyed if the money was not paid . Although Worcester 's walls clearly played a military role during this period , they would also have been symbolically important to the city and have played a part in controlling civic access and enforcing the city 's laws . 
 One method of paying for the construction and maintenance of city walls was a tax called murage , usually levied by permission of the king on particular goods being imported into a city . In Worcester , murage was raised to support work on the walls during three main phases , 1224 to 1239 , 1252 to 1310 and 1364 to 1411 . Worcester was attacked again during the Second Barons ' War in the 1260s , and the records suggest that some of the murage payments were used to repair damage caused by that attack . In the late 14th century a watergate was built in the western walls of the city , close to a slipway for launching boats . Worcester 's last murage grant occurred in 1439 , although in 1459 Henry VI allowed the city to use stones from the castle to repair the walls to defend the city in anticipation of a Yorkist attack during the Wars of the Roses . As in many other English towns and cities , as the medieval period progressed , housing began to encroach on the city walls in Worcester . 
 = = = 17th – 19th centuries = = = 
 At the start of the 17th century , Worcester 's city walls were still intact , and were recorded in John Speed 's famous 1610 map of the city . In 1642 the English Civil War broke out between followers of King Charles I and Parliament . Worcester began the war under Royalist control , before rapidly being taken by Parliament and then changing hands again in 1643 following the battle of Edgehill . Worcester remained Royalist for the rest of the war until it was once again besieged and finally surrendered in 1646 . 
 The war was the first prolonged conflict in Britain to involve the use of artillery and gunpowder . Sieges became a prominent part of the war with over 300 occurring during the period . Worcester was once again a strategically important region in the war , and walled towns and cities like Worcester that could be defended against passing armies were particularly significant from a military perspective . By the 1640s the design of military fortifications had progressed significantly on the continent , owing largely to the Thirty Years War ; while older medieval stone walls still had military utility , they typically needed reinforcement with more modern earthworks to be truly effective . These new ideas were applied to city defences in England . In some cases a circuit of forts was built around a city ; in other cases , an entirely new city wall comprising modern bastions would be built . At Worcester , the unimproved walls were considered to be indefensible at the start of the war in 1642 , and the chosen solution was to directly reinforce the existing medieval wall with new earthworks . 
 To form these new defences , the buildings outside the old city walls were cleared and six large bastions were attached to them along the north and east sides of the city , while a sconce , Fort Royal Hill was built outside Sidbury Gate in the south , linked to the walls by a walkway . The ditch protecting the new earthworks was relatively shallow at about eight feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) deep , but when combined with the high ramparts of the bastions , which were probably protected by sharpened stakes and a <unk> firing platform , the bastions would have been well defended . The reinforced walls were manned in 1642 by soldiers employed by the Robert Devereux , the Earl of Essex . Prince Maurice subsequently conscripted the adult men and women of Worcester to work on the walls , threatening the death penalty if they did not attend . During the 1643 and 1646 sieges the reinforced defences were able to withstand the artillery bombardments – the surrender in 1646 was mainly the result of a shortage of food and the collapse of the wider Royalist position across the south @-@ west of England . 
 Following further fighting between 1648 and 1649 , the Third English Civil War broke out in 1651 . Royalist forces under the command of Charles II advanced as far as Worcester , where the army paused to reinforce the walls further and await reinforcements in relative safety . The Parliamentary forces under Oliver Cromwell attacked in early September ; the ensuing battle of Worcester saw the Royalist forces pushed steadily back into the city . Fort Royal was successfully stormed and its guns turned on the city itself . Cromwell 's men began forcing their way into the city from west , south and east and by the evening the city had fallen . The collapse marked the end of the Third Civil War . In the aftermath the bastions and other fortifications were mostly destroyed by Parliament , although the medieval walls and gates were spared . 
 By the 18th century local residents had built summer houses on top of the walls , which were still largely intact . During the next hundred years city and town walls across England began to be demolished to make way for new developments , and Worcester proved no exception . By the end of the century the walls and gates were being sold off and destroyed ; Friar 's Gate was probably the last to be demolished , early in the 19th century . Only a few tracts of wall survived , often concealed behind other buildings and new constructions . 
 = = Today = = 
 The remains of Worcester 's city walls were largely ignored until after the Second World War ; limited archaeological excavations first began in 1957 . Work continued in the 1960s and picked up pace in the 1970s , when the creation of the City Walls Road in Worcester uncovered more parts of the wall , formerly hidden from view . The Civil War earthworks of Fort Royal Hill are still visible overlooking the city . 
 As a result of their mixed history , the remains of the walls are owned by various different organisations and subject to different legal protection . Some parts of the walls are protected as Grade II listed buildings and scheduled monuments , although most of the walls lack this legal recognition . The multiple ownership of the different parts of the city walls contributed to what English Heritage considered an " uncoordinated " approach to their conservation . In response , a conservation plan has been created by Worcester City Council , proposing that the walls , despite their mixed ownership , should be managed as a single historic monument , and advising that some sections be repaired urgently ; as of 2010 this plan was awaiting approval by English Heritage . 
 = Blink @-@ 182 ( album ) = 
 Blink @-@ 182 is the eponymously titled fifth studio album by American pop @-@ punk band Blink @-@ 182 . It was produced by Jerry Finn and released November 18 , 2003 , through Geffen Records . Following the band 's ascent to stardom and success of their prior two releases , the trio were compelled to take a break and subsequently participated in various side projects ( Box Car Racer and Transplants ) . When they regrouped , the band felt inspired to approach song structure and arrangements differently on their next effort together . The record was left untitled as to refrain from labeling its content , and its packaging features a " smiley face " logo inspired by pop art . 
 Recorded throughout 2003 , Blink @-@ 182 marks a departure from the band 's earlier work , infusing experimental elements into their usual pop punk sound , inspired by lifestyle changes ( the band members all became fathers before the album was released ) and side projects . Its songs are characterized by downcast and expansive sonic atmospheres , showcasing what critics dubbed a more elaborate , mature side of the band . Songwriting is more personal in nature and explores darker territory , touching upon the realities of adulthood and unexpected hardships . The record features a collaboration with The Cure frontman Robert Smith . 
 Fans were generally split regarding the band 's " new " direction , but the record proved successful , selling 2 @.@ 2 million copies in the United States . The album received positive reviews , with critics welcoming the change in tone . Lead singles " Feeling This " and " I Miss You " received the most radio airplay of the four singles released and peaked high on Billboard charts . The worldwide touring schedule , which saw the band travel to Japan and Australia , also found the three performing for troops stationed in the Middle East . Blink @-@ 182 was the band 's last recording with longtime producer Jerry Finn and their final original material before a four @-@ year @-@ long hiatus . 
 = = Background = = 
 Take Off Your Pants and Jacket became Blink @-@ 182 's first number one album in the United States upon its June 2001 release ; it also hit the top position in Canada and Germany . Hit singles " The Rock Show " and " First Date " continued the band 's mainstream success worldwide , with MTV cementing their image as video stars . However , guitarist Tom DeLonge felt as though his creativity was stifled by label limitations , and sessions became contentious among the trio . They rescheduled European tour dates in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks , and they were called off a second time after DeLonge suffered a herniated disc in his back . With time off from touring , DeLonge felt an " itch to do something where he didn 't feel locked in to what Blink was , " and channeled his chronic back pain and resulting frustration into Box Car Racer ( 2002 ) , a post @-@ hardcore disc that further explores his Fugazi and Refused inspiration . Refraining from paying for a studio drummer , he invited Blink drummer Travis Barker to record drums on the project . 
 Box Car Racer , intended as a one @-@ time experimental project , became a full @-@ fledged band with Barker behind the kit and Hazen Street guitarist David Kennedy on guitar . Blink bassist Mark Hoppus felt betrayed and jealous , and it would create an unresolved tension within the trio that followed the band for several years . " At the end of 2001 it felt like Blink @-@ 182 had broken up . It wasn ’ t spoken about , but it felt over , " said Hoppus later . Barker , meanwhile , joined rap rock group Transplants in 2002 , and was featured on their first album , Transplants . In addition , Blink @-@ 182 co @-@ headlined the Pop Disaster Tour with Green Day , alongside opening acts Jimmy Eat World , Saves the Day and Kut U Up in 2002 . It was an " uncomfortable " time in the band , according to Hoppus , but they had " hundreds of discussions about it " and seemingly moved on . Barker felt the dynamics of the band changed with Hoppus and DeLonge 's marriages : " Blink @-@ 182 were no longer just three inseparable guys who were touring together . " Meanwhile , he began dating model Shanna Moakler , inviting tabloid attention , adding to the " awkwardness " present in the band . 
 The post @-@ hardcore sound of Box Car Racer inspired the change in tone and experimental nature the band approached Blink @-@ 182 with . Hoppus described his desire for the album to experiment with different arrangements in a 2002 interview : " Before , we got one guitar sound that we changed a little bit through the record . This time we want to try a whole different setup for each song . " Hoppus recalled that Barker entered the production process by urging the band to " [ not think of the album ] as the next Blink @-@ 182 record — think of it as the first Blink @-@ 182 record . " The members were also inspired after hearing Houston : We Have a Drinking Problem by Bad Astronaut and its expansive sound . " Once the door was opened by Tom and Travis with Box Car Racer , Mark started to be more on board with that concept . He was also more flexible and the next Blink album was able to be a pretty big departure from the previous two , " said assistant engineer Sam <unk> . " Box Car Racer opened the door in that sense and I think the three of them wanted to be more creative and have more creative liberty on that next album . " 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 In January 2003 , the band rented a home in the San Diego luxury community of Rancho Santa Fe , planning to record the entire album there . In addition to being converted into a studio , pay @-@ per @-@ view pornography was on continuous play , and it included a space to " smoke hella weed " in the garage . The trio ditched their typical previous recording process ( writing and demoing several songs and recording them in a studio one instrument at a time ) , and instead approached each song together . The band " attacked " each song and worked on three @-@ four songs per day , simply moving on to the next one when feeling " burned out " on a track . The band also had fun at the home studio ; DeLonge commented , " If I wasn ’ t smoking half of Colombia I probably ran up $ 3 million in adult film charges . " The band recorded at the home until April 2003 , when the owners of the house " kicked them out . " Barker , unwilling to leave Moakler , would drive from Los Angeles to San Diego each day . He subsequently left that spring to tour with Transplants , leaving the band with a variety of drum tracks to listen to while he was gone . The band regrouped after being " kicked out " of the house they were recording in by the owners , and began recording at Rolling Thunder studios until the band left to perform a couple of summer shows in Canada and Japan , where they premiered several songs live . The in @-@ studio antics and behind the scenes moments were recorded and posted on the official Blink @-@ 182 website throughout 2003 , as well as a MTV album release segment . 
 The recording process of the album eventually lasted from January to August 2003 , with an additional mixing and mastering period lasting until October . Previous Blink @-@ 182 sessions were recorded in three months . The band stated that being in a studio longer than three months gave them the luxury of experimenting with different methods of writing , playing , and recording . The band built each song with a minute attention to detail . Hoppus described the studio as a " musical laboratory " : over 70 guitars , 30 amps , " 30 or 40 " different snare drums , up to six drum kits , and various keyboards , turntables , and pianos were used in the album 's production . Barker was responsible for the turntables and a copy of Pink Floyd 's The Wall . The group also enlisted the help of James Guthrie , an engineer behind The Wall . The trio also sent The Cure frontman Robert Smith the bed track of " All of This " in hopes he would contribute ; Smith makes a guest appearance and recorded his parts in England . The three initially believed their legitimacy would be in question due to the humor @-@ oriented nature of their earlier recordings , to which Smith responded , " Nobody knows what kind of songs you are going to write in the future and nobody knows the full potential of any band . I really like the music you sent me . " The band also collaborated with DJ Shadow and Dan the Automator , and Barker desired to work with The Neptunes . Jerry Finn , who had produced the previous two Blink @-@ 182 albums and the Box Car Racer album , returned to produce Blink @-@ 182 , which would be his final contribution with the band . 
 As the record neared completion by August , the band performed for a short time for the armed forces in the Middle East , and premiered more new songs at their Reading and Leeds sets . The trio shot small , home @-@ made videos for several songs on Blink @-@ 182 , as well as the official music video for " Feeling This " , which they picked as the first single . The band spent time to finalize the CD booklet and album artwork in September . Mark Hoppus stated that the album was so " personal to all three of us that we really wanted to be involved in every aspect of it . " The release date kept getting missed and pushed back to where Jordan Schur , then @-@ president of Geffen Records , made calls asking , " What is the absolute last possible second that we can turn this thing in and still make our release date ? " DeLonge described the final days of mixing the album as " crazy stressful " , with " literally hours to turn [ the album ] to have it come it out on time . " The album was in production so late that final mixes were still being judged by Hoppus , DeLonge , and Barker the night before the album was sent to the pressing plant . For Barker , he later considered it his favorite time in the band 's history , commenting , " That was a good time in my life . I was smoking just enough weed and taking just enough pills . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Music and style = = = 
 While still rooted in pop punk , Blink @-@ 182 finds the band expanding their sonic template with darker , restless songs . The compositions on the record have been described as musically diverse and " borderline experimental , " with sullen moodiness and off @-@ kilter hooks the basis for many tracks . The record pulls from a variety of styles , including electronic rock , jangle pop , and " reflective " alternative rock . Experimentation was constantly present : the band tried different mic techniques and toyed with harmonium organs , Polynesian Gamelan bells , and turntables . The band infused these experimentalist elements into their usual pop punk sound , inspired by lifestyle changes ( the band members all became fathers before the album was released ) and side @-@ projects ( Box Car Racer and Transplants . ) In a full article about the album in the November 20 , 2003 , edition of the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel , Ben Wener described the music of the album as " expansive , downcast , and sometimes spectral . " The New York Times considered that the album may have been influenced by the growing popularity of emo pop , while Allmusic regarded it a delve into post @-@ punk . " Much of the punk has been dissolved , the buzzsaw guitars faded into the corners , allowing room for staggering dynamics , cathartic guitar bursts and a weightier , more experimental and ambitious sound , " wrote Tom Bryant of Kerrang ! . The goal for Blink @-@ 182 was continuity : each song develops lyrically like chapters in a book , and songs segue into one another to present a cohesive feel instead of a regular collection of tracks . In addition to the side @-@ projects , the music of the album was inspired by the September 11 attacks and the onset of the Iraq War . The mood was unsettling for DeLonge , whose brother is a Navy officer : " It was so weird because we 'd all be glued to the TV , watching these bombs explode over another country . So I 'd see all this and wonder where he was at , and then we 'd have to go into the next room and sing or finish writing lyrics . I think it affected our moods throughout the day . " In addition , it was just inspired by socializing : " We would just hang out for hours talking . It was really cool , " said DeLonge . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 Music critics agreed that this album represents a more " mature " Blink @-@ 182 than seen in the past , noticeable by the absence of songs with toilet humour or jokes for which the band had been known . Mark Hoppus , the bassist in the band , said in an interview with MTV Album Launch that the desired effect of the album was for people to listen to it and say , " Wait a minute ... that 's Blink @-@ 182 ? " The themes for the album include growing up and dealing with the realities of adulthood including relationship woes , daily pressures and unexpected hardships . The album is lyrically consumed with sorrow and uncertainty about the world . Entertainment Weekly described the album as a concept album based on a dying relationship , a " self @-@ meditation on romantic decay . " " I think at this point in our career , we are better musicians and we 've evolved our way of thinking as far as songwriting , " DeLonge told Billboard in reference to the band 's more mature lyricism . Hoppus , in his interview with the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel , described the lyrics as the most personal he had written up to that point . While past recordings tended to meditate on feelings from high school , the band felt it was akin to safety net and desired to write about " what 's going on [ … ] right now . " Lyrics continued to be autobiographical , but the band took more time than usual on their writing . DeLonge would routinely rewrite his sections upwards of four times . 
 = = Songs = = 
 The record opens with " Feeling This " , which features flanged drums and an unconventional " syncopated Latin @-@ flavored backbeat and a harmony @-@ rich chorus " following a series of " half @-@ barked " vocals . " Feeling This " was the first song written for the album , and illustrates a scenario of lust , ambivalence and regret , with the protagonist of the song reflecting over his romance 's dimming flame in the chorus : " Fate fell short this time / Your smile fades in the summer . " Hoppus and DeLonge wrote the song in two different rooms and upon meeting to discuss the song , the two realized they had both written about sex : the passionate , lustful side ( reflected in the verses ) and the romantic side ( the choruses ) . It segues into " Obvious " , which explores the Wall of Sound technique and features a brooding , heavy intro combined with cascading guitar riffs . " Obvious " equates broken hearts with global violence . " I Miss You " is an all @-@ acoustic affair , featuring a melancholy piano , cello , upright acoustic bass , and a " <unk> hip @-@ hop groove . " The song features references to Tim Burton 's 1993 animated film The Nightmare Before Christmas , with " We can live like Jack and Sally " and " We 'll have Halloween on Christmas " . In interviews and the liner notes for Blink @-@ 182 , Barker reveals that the line was directed towards his then girlfriend , Shanna Moakler . " Violence " flicks between " bizarre , spoken jazzy verses and anthemic punk rock choruses . " 
 " Stockholm Syndrome " has been described as " the most obvious examples of Blink @-@ 182 's experimentation " , was recorded using a microphone dating back to the 1950s , and the reverb on the vocals was achieved by playing the recordings into a shower . The drum fills for the song were recorded separately than the rest of the tracks , with the tape machines " sped up and super compressed " , then played back at normal speed , to sound really " deep and gigantic " , according to Hoppus in the liner notes for Blink @-@ 182 . It features an interlude before it in which Joanne Whalley reads letters Hoppus ' grandfather wrote to his grandmother during World War II . DeLonge explained the letters as " Real sincere , genuine letters from the worst war in history . " " Down " continues the theme of longing , set to a rain @-@ drenched soundscape . The original version of " Down " ran over six minutes long , and contained a drum and bass breakdown from Barker . " The Fallen Interlude " , which functions as an outro to " Down " , finds Barker showcasing different percussive techniques over a funk @-@ tinged jazz sound . It is a near @-@ instrumental recorded with Sick <unk> of hip @-@ hop band Psycho Realm . " Go " is the record 's only straight punk rock song , and precedes " <unk> " , in which real NASA transmissions from the Apollo 9 space flight are used . " <unk> " is centered on a fictional astronaut stranded in space , floating in an Apollo capsule , and contemplating whether or not returning to his home planet . It is also the only song in Blink 182 's catalog that to feature a 3 / 4 time signature ( during the bridge ) . The song was inspired by DeLonge ’ s self @-@ admitted " paranoia " regarding the future and how war and famine could effect it . 
 " Always " features an uptempo backbeat combined with a New Romantic @-@ era keyboard , and pulls from new wave influences ; the band often jokingly called the track the " ' 80s song . " It contains a riff reminiscent of The Only Ones ' " Another Girl , Another Planet " . " Easy Target " and " All of This " were based on a story from producer Jerry Finn 's middle school years . Finn was in love with a female classmate , Holly , who invited him over , only for have her and her friend drench him with a hose ; humiliated , he rode home on his bicycle . " All of This " is a gothic @-@ tinged pop song that uses strings and guitar effects to create a moody atmosphere . The track " Here 's Your Letter " , according to Hoppus in the liner notes for Blink @-@ 182 , is about " people 's inability to communicate with one another and how words and explanations only confuse the issues . " " I 'm Lost Without You " mixes an industrial loop with piano . The latter track took many months to create , and took " over 50 " different tracks , including two drum sets combined during the last minute of the song . Barker described the idea for the percussion combination as " something we always wanted to do , but never got around to , " and believed the song sounded like Pink Floyd or Failure . 
 The UK edition of the record features B @-@ side " Not Now " , originally recorded during the sessions . " Not Now " features a church organ in its verses and guitar riffs reminiscent of the Descendents ; its subject matter continues the theme of complicated miscommunication and fading love . 
 = = Packaging and title = = 
 Due to some contradicting sources , the title of the album ( or lack thereof ) is debated . Travis Barker , in his memoir Can I Say , writes that " Some people think it ’ s a self @-@ titled album , called Blink @-@ 182 , but Mark [ Hoppus ] has always insisted it was actually untitled . " A 2003 interview and article from MTV News discussing the naming of the pending album repeatedly refers to the release as the " untitled album , " while a press release from that time period confirms the same . Despite this , several critics have used the terms " eponymous " and " self @-@ titled " in describing the album . In a 2009 MTV News article , James Montgomery refers to the album as self @-@ titled , joking , " Or Untitled … It 's never really been clear . " The title for the album was originally rumored to be Use Your Erection I & II , a parody of the Guns N ' Roses albums Use Your Illusion I and II , but was revealed to be a joke Barker made to " get a rise out of people . " DeLonge , in reference to previous joke album titles ( such as Enema of the State ) , stated , " We didn 't want to label it with a joke title that people might expect . " As such , a Billboard article from the week of the album 's release lists three rejected joke titles : Diarrhea de Janeiro , <unk> , <unk> @-@ a @-@ you and " Our Pet Sounds " . 
 To support the new album , Blink @-@ 182 created an entirely new logo , a " smiley face " with X 's for each eye and five arrows on the left side of its face . According to Barker , the Blink @-@ 182 logo originated at his clothing line , Famous Stars and <unk> . Barker wanted to brand an icon for the band : " It just had to be a cool kind of happy face but I wanted arrows . You know , like The Jam were my favorite band , they always had arrows in their logos and stuff . It was just kind of inspired by pop @-@ art . " Hoppus seconded this sentiment : " He spearheaded all the artwork for the record . There were smiley @-@ face stickers and posters all over Los Angeles , and that was his idea . " Barker invited his tattoo artist , Mister Cartoon , to create artwork for the record , and his good friend Estevan Oriol to handle photography . " His style , incorporated into Blink ’ s , didn ’ t make us too gangster : it just gave us a bit of an edge . It was cool to feel like Blink had a dangerous side , " Barker later remembered . The logo was later changed to have six arrows around the time that they released " Neighborhoods " . Their reunion record . 
 musicOMH described the album booklet as " ... Meticulously put together and resembling a <unk> pastiche . " Each song includes small notes detailing the lyrical inspiration for each song , what it means to each band member , and the recording techniques used . The band originally wanted each CD booklet to be made from canvas material . Geffen gave the band a choice between the custom artwork or keeping the sale price down to US $ 12 , and the band chose the latter , as they felt it was more important that young listeners obtain the record for less money . 
 = = Promotion and singles = = 
 Blink @-@ 182 was the band 's first release on Geffen , which absorbed sister label MCA Records in 2003 . Prior to it dissolving , MCA had attempted to penalize the band for breaking stipulations in their contract that they would have an album out by a specific quarter . MCA had previously rushed the band into recording Take Off Your Pants and Jacket , but the band had much more freedom with Geffen . " Geffen came down and heard three songs and they said , ' This is the best record you 've ever done , this is the record of your career , take as much time as you want , call us when it 's done . ' It just completely outlined the perspective of putting accounting before creative , and when you 're in the entertainment business , you 've got to put creative first . It 's an art , you 've got to look at it like an art , treat it like an art , and then you 'll get the best product in the long run . " 
 Promotion for the record included a " golden ticket " contest – the prize being a private Blink @-@ 182 show for the winner . MTV 's website streamed the full album a week before its release , beginning on November 10 . As promotion for the album and single release [ s ] , the band performed " Feeling This " on Jimmy Kimmel Live ! on a week after the release of the album on November 26 , 2003 , and " Down " on Late Show with David Letterman on May 27 , 2004 . Performances of " I Miss You " and " The Rock Show " on The WB 's Pepsi Smash concert series from June 10 , 2004 , were released on the Australian Tour edition of the album , as well as the " Always " single . 
 The band picked " Feeling This " as the first single because it was representative of the transition the band had undergone since Take Off Your Pants and Jacket . A slightly different version of the song had been released previously as part of the soundtrack for the video game Madden NFL 2004 under the erroneous title " Action " . Barker explained in an interview that " ' Action ' just sounded kind of dorky to us . Like we would always call it ' Feeling This ' and then someone at our label , I think , like wrote it as ' Action ' one time and sent out singles to people . And it was always supposed to be ' Feeling This ' . " The video for " Feeling This " was recorded shortly before the release of the album in October 2003 . The track peaked high at number 2 on the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart , hovering at that position for three weeks . " I Miss You " was commissioned as the record 's second single in December 2003 , when the band recorded a music video for it . " I Miss You " became arguably the most successful single from the album , becoming Blink @-@ 182 's second number 1 hit on the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart during the week of April 3 , 2004 , until dethroned by Hoobastank 's " The Reason " two weeks later . 
 Despite briefly considering " Easy Target " to be released as the album 's third single , " Down " was released instead . The video for " Down " , which features real @-@ life ex @-@ gang members , made its television premiere in June 2004 . The single was a mixed success , peaking at number 10 on the Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart during the week of July 31 , 2004 , but quickly falling off afterward . " Always " was announced as the fourth and final single from Blink @-@ 182 in August 2004 . " It 's gonna change people 's lives and might actually change the world forever , " DeLonge jokingly predicted . After deciding on the video concept , the clip was recorded and released in November 2004 , and continued success all the way into January 2005 . A fifth single from the album ( " All of This " ) was discussed ; however , plans were dropped following the band 's declaration of an ' indefinite hiatus ' in February 2005 . In response to the idea of " All of This " becoming a possible single , DeLonge joked " We would love it because it 's a bad @-@ ass song , and The Cure 's Robert Smith sings on it , and that makes us cooler than everybody else . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 The album debuted at number three on the US Billboard 200 chart , with first @-@ week sales of 313 @,@ 000 copies . In comparison , Take Off Your Pants and Jacket debuted at number one and sold more than 350 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . The album charted at number three , below fellow new album In the Zone by Britney Spears ( number one ) and above remix album Let It Be ... Naked by The Beatles ( number five ) . Blink @-@ 182 charted highest in Canada , where it debuted at number one . The album was also successful in other countries , debuting in the top ten in Australia and New Zealand . 
 The album was certified by the RIAA as platinum for shipments of over one million copies in 2004 , although it has since sold over 2 @.@ 2 million copies in the US and 7 @.@ 5 million copies <unk> and the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) and Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) as double platinum , respectively . The album has also reached platinum certifications in the United Kingdom . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The album received generally favorable reviews by music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 71 , based on 12 reviews . Jenny Eliscu of Rolling Stone , while giving the album four stars , wrote that " ... their lyrics are still unsophisticated and lovelorn , but even the poppiest tunes prove artful " . Her review regards Blink @-@ 182 as " more experimental and harder @-@ hitting than anything else [ the band ] has done " . It was subsequently included in the Top 50 Best of 2003 end of the year list by Rolling Stone . The album was given four stars by Allmusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine , who called Blink @-@ 182 " an unexpected and welcome maturation from a band that just an album ago seemed permanently stuck in juvenilia . " Blender 's Jonah Weiner praised DeLonge 's vocals , describing them as a " lean , thrilling ride through adolescent hopelessness . " Many critics expressed surprise at the newfound maturity of the band , and lauded the surprise appearance of The Cure vocalist Robert Smith on the track " All of This " . 
 The band 's decision in favor of more mature material was received positively by many critics ; Tim <unk> of Soul Shine Magazine wrote that " Blink show that they can retain their infectious and endearing qualities while recording music of a more thoughtful calibre . " Spin described the record as emotionally intense , and best experienced through headphones . USA Today 's Edna Gundersen felt that " Blink @-@ 182 bravely adheres to a single sober theme — a disintegrating romance — through 14 songs that adhere to its pop @-@ punk principles without recycling cartoonish accessories . Blink @-@ 182 is growing up , not growing stale . " Nick Catucci of The Village Voice called the album " brilliant " and compared Blink @-@ 182 to fellow pop punk band Green Day 's 2000 effort , Warning , writing , " Let it be noted , however , that Warning searches for subject matter where Blink @-@ 182 searches for meaning . " Greg Kot of Entertainment Weekly wrote that " Despite their newfound earnestness , [ the band ] seem incapable of pretension . And in a career littered with songs about awkward moments , their latest is a dork classic . " Scott Shelter of Slant gave the album four stars , stating " Giving up the fart jokes is risky business for Blink — but Blink @-@ 182 might just be the band 's best album to date . " Among the more negative reviews , Jason Arnopp of Q felt the majority of material forgettable , but commended it as " some of their most imaginatively constructed work . " The A.V. Club 's Stephen Thompson believed " The disc [ does ] meander in spots , and its most achingly sincere love songs become cloying . " 
 = = Touring = = 
 Blink @-@ 182 announced their first tour in support of Blink @-@ 182 on October 17 , 2003 , named the <unk> Tour . The all @-@ ages club tour featured support acts Bubba Sparxxx and The Kinison , and , as the name suggests , tickets were sold for $ 1 . DeLonge explained the first return to small venues in several years in the initial press release for the tour : " For years we played in small clubs and that 's where you can really connect with your fans . " The tour ended shortly after the release of Blink @-@ 182 on November 21 , 2003 , at local San Diego venue SOMA . An additional concert at the Phoenix Concert Theatre on December 2 , 2003 , was held in Toronto , Canada with My Chemical Romance as the opener . 
 A performance at <unk> 's Twisted X @-@ Mas show shortly before Christmas 2003 became the final show of the year , and a European tour followed during in mid @-@ February 2004 . During an Australian tour in March 2004 , Barker injured his foot and the band was forced to cancel tour dates in Japan for the rest of the month . A U.S. tour took place from late April to May 2004 , and a highly publicized tour featuring Blink @-@ 182 and No Doubt was performed during June 2004 , in support of Blink @-@ 182 and No Doubt 's The Singles 1992 – 2003 . The cancelled Australian tour dates were rescheduled and performed in August and September 2004 . The band appeared on September 17 , 2004 , at the MTV Icon tribute to The Cure , performing a cover of " A Letter to Elise " and " All of This " , which was recorded and later broadcast on October 31 , 2004 . The band headed to Europe for a two @-@ week tour near the end of the year , which culminated at their final show on December 16 , 2004 , at the Point Theatre in Dublin , Ireland . 
 Although the band had planned for a U.S. tour in support of " Always " , tensions within the band had risen on the final European tour and the band announced an ' indefinite hiatus ' on February 22 , 2005 , as breakup rumors swirled . After touring through 2004 , the three essentially stopped communicating with one another . Hoppus had initially had difficulty accepting the group 's new direction . After some tragic events involving the band and its entourage , Blink @-@ 182 reunited in February 2009 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The Los Angeles Times referred to Blink @-@ 182 as the band 's " underrated masterwork , " writing that the record is generally considered by " fans , critics and band members alike as its best work , Blink ’ s answer to Pet Sounds or Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band . " The band themselves have regarded it as a " huge turning point " in their career , marking a change in the way to write and record music , as well as view themselves . In his memoir Can I Say , Barker writes : " It had a little bit of everything : we ventured far enough outside our genre to make ourselves happy , but not so far that we offended our fan base . It was a perfect happy medium , and it ’ s the Blink album that Mark , Tom , and I are most proud of . " 
 The band celebrated the tenth anniversary of the album by performing it in full in November 2013 . After a pair of Hollywood Palladium shows sold out in a record 32 seconds , the band added three additional dates at The Wiltern in Los Angeles , which also sold out . MTV News called it " a fitting tribute to an album that , in the decade since it was first released , has become a bit of a touchstone — a defining moment not just for the band , but for the genre of punk , in all its permutations . " Jon Blistein of <unk> called the album " an unquestionable masterpiece " in the site 's " Not Fade Away " series , which examines " some of the greatest albums of the past few decades . " In it , he writes on the album 's influence : " Blink @-@ 182 was the band ’ s most concise break from the pop @-@ punk formula and a catalyst for the wave of pierced @-@ hearts @-@ stuck @-@ to @-@ sleeves @-@ with @-@ tears @-@ and @-@ <unk> " emo " outfits that rose to popularity in its wake ( sans the potty humor , of course ) , including but not limited to Fall Out Boy , My Chemical Romance and Panic ! at the Disco . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Mark Hoppus , Tom DeLonge , and Travis Barker , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = = Chart procession and succession = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = 2003 North Indian Ocean cyclone season = 
 The 2003 North Indian Ocean cyclone season was mostly focused in the Bay of Bengal , where six of the seven depressions developed . The remaining system was a tropical cyclone that developed in the Arabian Sea in November , which was also the only system that did not affect land . There were three cyclonic storms , which is below the average of 5 @.@ 4 . Only one storm formed before the start of the monsoon season in June , although it was also the most notable . On May 10 , a depression formed in the central Bay of Bengal , and within a few days became a very severe cyclonic storm . After it stalled , it drew moisture from the southwest to produce severe flooding across Sri Lanka , killing 254 people and becoming the worst floods there since 1947 . Damage on the island totaled $ 135 million ( 2003 USD ) . The storm eventually made landfall in Myanmar on May 19 . It is possible that the storm contributed to a deadly heat wave in India due to shifting air currents . 
 In late July , a monsoon depression moved across much of India , and another monsoon disturbance persisted off the coast of Pakistan . The interaction between the two systems resulted in heavy rainfall across the region , flooding dozens of villages . <unk> rainfall killed 285 people between Pakistan and India in the summer of 2003 . In late August , another monsoon depression moved across northeastern India . A depression that struck Andhra Pradesh in India killed 21 people in early October . Later that month , a tropical depression crossed Thailand from the western Pacific Ocean , contributing to ongoing flooding that killed 19 . Once in the Indian Ocean , this system struck southeastern India without causing much damage . The last system of the year was a cyclonic storm that struck southeastern India in December , killing 81 people and causing $ 28 million in damage ( 2003 USD ) . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 There were seven depressions throughout the season , of which three attained cyclonic storm status . One of the cyclonic storms formed before the start of the monsoon season , two depressions formed during the monsoon season from June to September , and the remaining systems formed after September . The number of depressions was similar or greater than that of the previous three years . However , the total of 3 cyclonic storms was below the average of 5 @.@ 4 . 
 In May 2004 , seven of the eight members of the World Meteorological Organization panel on tropical cyclones for the North Indian Ocean met in Colombo , Sri Lanka to review the season . During the meeting , the panel announced the first list of tropical cyclone names to be used in the basin for the following season . The panel noted the increasing frequency of deadly natural disasters in the region , such as the floods that affected Sri Lanka in May 2003 from a cyclone . One of the panel 's goals was increased coordination between the countries in the region . The India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) in New Delhi served as the official Regional Specialized Meteorological Center , although the Joint Typhoon Warning Center also issued warnings for the region in an unofficial capacity . The IMD utilized satellite data from EUMETSAT to track cyclones , as well as radars from Bangladesh , Sri Lanka , and India . 
 There were several other monsoon disturbances that affected various countries in the region , including Bangladesh , Pakistan , and Oman . On July 27 , during the monsoon season , an area of convection exited from the coast of Pakistan . On the next day , the thunderstorms organized around the center , prompting the Pakistan Meteorological Department to classify the system as a monsoon depression . The IMD operationally classified the system as a depression on July 29 , although it was dropped during the agency 's annual report . The system weakened into a remnant low on July 30 . The system drew moisture from another depression that had moved across India from the Bay of Bengal , bringing three days of heavy rainfall to Karachi , Pakistan . <unk> in southeastern Pakistan recorded 292 mm ( 11 @.@ 5 in ) of rainfall in 24 hours . The rainfall extended into northwestern India , and in Gujarat , a station received more than its annual rainfall during the deluge . Flooding from the heavy rainfall destroyed widespread crops and flooded dozens of villages , and ongoing rains persisted throughout the summer , killing 285 people in the two countries . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Very Severe Cyclonic Storm BOB 01 ( 01B ) = = = 
 The first storm of the season originated from the monsoon trough , developing into a depression on May 10 in the Bay of Bengal . Initially favorable conditions allowed the system to steadily intensify while moving northwestward , reaching peak maximum sustained winds of 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) on May 13 . This made it a very severe cyclonic storm according to the IMD . The storm later drifted northward and later to the east in the central Bay of Bengal , although increased wind shear induced weakening into a deep depression . The system eventually began a steady northeast track , bringing it ashore in western Myanmar on May 19 as a re @-@ intensified cyclonic storm . It dissipated shortly thereafter over land , and was no longer observable on satellite imagery by May 20 . 
 Early and later in its duration , the storm brought rainfall to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands . Although the storm never passed within 700 km ( 430 mi ) of the island , the cyclone produced torrential rainfall across southwest Sri Lanka after it stalled in the central Bay of Bengal . The storm drew moisture from the southwest that coalesced in the mountainous portion of the island . A station at Ratnapura recorded 366 @.@ 1 millimetres ( 14 @.@ 41 in ) of rainfall in 18 hours on May 17 , including 99 @.@ 8 mm ( 3 @.@ 93 in ) in one hour . This followed a period of regular rainfall in the first 15 days of May across the region . The rains caused flooding and landslides in southwestern Sri Lanka that destroyed 24 @,@ 750 homes and damaged 32 @,@ 426 others , leaving about 800 @,@ 000 people homeless . Overall damage totaled about $ 29 million ( 2003 USD ) , mostly to roads and buildings , and there were 254 deaths . This made it the worst floods on the island since 1947 . The storm also drew moisture away from India , which possibly contributed to a heat wave that killed 1 @,@ 200 people , and dropped heavy rainfall in Myanmar . 
 = = = Deep Depression BOB 02 = = = 
 A low pressure area persisted over the northern Bay of Bengal on July 22 , eventually organizing into a depression on July 25 about 160 km ( 100 mi ) south of Kolkata . Moving northwestward , the system quickly intensified into a deep depression , with peak winds estimated at 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) . Late on July 25 , the system made landfall north of Balasore in Odisha state . It progressed inland across India , weakening to depression status but remaining a distinct system . On July 28 , the depression degenerated into a remnant low over Rajasthan in northwestern India , later merging with a heat low . Rainfall associated with the system mostly occurred in the southwestern periphery , with a peak of 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) at <unk> ; there was little damage . Rainfall also spread into Bangladesh . 
 = = = Depression BOB 03 = = = 
 On August 27 , a low pressure area concentrated into a depression about 230 km ( 145 mi ) south of Kolkata . The system largely consisted of a circulation without much organized convection . It moved to the west @-@ northwest and failed to intensify , moving ashore near Chandabali , Odisha on August 28 . Once over land , the depression stalled until dissipating on August 29 . Rainfall from the storm peaked at 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) at <unk> in Odisha , and there were no reports of damage . The system was largely connected with the monsoon , resulting in an increase in rainfall over northeastern India . 
 = = = Depression BOB 04 = = = 
 A low pressure area persisted on October 4 in the western Bay of Bengal , off the east coast of Tamil Nadu . Two days later , the system organized into a depression and moved northward . Early on October 7 , the depression made landfall at Kalingapatnam , Andhra Pradesh . After moving slowly northwestward over land , the system turned to the northeast , degenerating into a remnant low on October 10 over West Bengal . The depression dropped heavy rainfall along its path , peaking at 380 mm ( 15 in ) in Chandabali , Odisha . Kolkata received 267 mm ( 10 @.@ 5 in ) , and rainfall spread as far northeast as Assam . The rains caused widespread flooding across southeastern India , inundating 20 villages and covering 16 @,@ 000 hectares ( 39 @,@ 000 acres ) of rice paddies . A tornado spawned by the depression injured 11 people and damaged several houses in Murshidabad . Across its track , the depression killed 13 people in West Bengal and another eight in Andhra Pradesh . 
 = = = Deep Depression BOB 05 ( 23W ) = = = 
 On October 21 , an area of convection formed in the Gulf of Thailand in the western Pacific Ocean . With low wind shear , the thunderstorms organized around the circulation , prompting the JTWC to initiate advisories on Tropical Depression 23W . While drifting northward , the system failed to organize further . Later , a ridge steered the depression to the west , bringing it ashore Thailand on October 24 near Hua Hin District . The next day , the circulation entered the Bay of Bengal after weakening over land , passing near the Andaman and Nicobar Islands . On October 26 , the IMD began classifying the system as a depression . The convection gradually reorganized as the system turned to the northwest , prompting the JTWC to upgrade it to a minimal tropical storm on October 27 . On the same day , the IMD upgraded it to deep depression status . The system made landfall between Visakhapatnam and Kalingapatnam in Andhra Pradesh on October 28 , and dissipated the next day . 
 While crossing Thailand , the depression produced heavy rainfall reaching 127 @.@ 7 mm ( 5 @.@ 03 in ) at Hua Hin over a 24 ‑ hour period . Ongoing monsoonal flooding in the country forced thousands of people to evacuate their houses . About 22 @,@ 000 cattle were killed , and large areas of farmlands were inundated . Officials opened the Kaeng <unk> Dam to prevent it from being destroyed by the floods . Damage from the depression alone was estimated at ฿ 1 billion baht ( $ 25 million 2003 USD ) . The monsoonal rains in October and November 2003 in the country killed 19 people . In India , the depression dropped locally heavy rainfall , reaching 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) in <unk> . There was little damage in the country . 
 = = = Severe Cyclonic Storm ARB 06 ( 02A ) = = = 
 The lone system in the Arabian Sea in the season originated from a trough . On November 10 , an area of convection formed off the western coast of India . With little wind shear , the system organized further as it moved west @-@ southwestward due to a ridge to the north . On November 12 , the system developed into a depression and quickly intensified into a deep depression . That day , the JTWC classified the system as Tropical Cyclone 02A , and it intensified into a cyclonic storm on November 13 . The storm was located at an unusually low latitude of 6 ° N. After an eye developed in the center of the convection , the JTWC upgraded the storm to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane , estimating peak winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) on November 14 . By contrast , the IMD estimated peak winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) , making the system a severe cyclonic storm . Subsequently , drier air weakened the storm , causing the convection to decrease . By November 15 , the storm had weakened to depression status while approaching Somalia . That day , the JTWC discontinued advisories while the storm was about 520 km ( 320 mi ) east of the Somalia coastline . On November 16 , the depression degenerated into a remnant low , and subsequently dissipated . 
 = = = Severe Cyclonic Storm BOB 07 ( 03B ) = = = 
 On December 10 , an area of convection with an associated circulation persisted about 740 km ( 460 mi ) west of the northern tip of Sumatra , as part of a trough in the region and enhanced by the monsoon . A steady decline in the wind shear allowed the thunderstorms to organize , and a depression formed on December 11 . On the next day , the JTWC initiated advisories on Tropical Cyclone 03B . The storm moved generally northwestward , steered by a ridge to the north . The IMD upgraded the system to a deep depression and later cyclonic storm on December 13 , and further to a severe cyclonic storm a day later . The agency estimated peak winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) , noting spiral convection organizing around the beginnings of an eye feature . The storm also developed well @-@ defined outflow due to an approaching trough from the west . At around 14 : 30 UTC on December 15 , the storm made landfall near False Divi Point in southeastern India , along the coast of Andhra Pradesh . After turning to the northeast over land , the system rapidly weakened , degenerating into a remnant low on December 16 . 
 Before the storm made landfall , officials evacuated about 20 @,@ 000 people . As the storm moved ashore in India , it produced heavy rainfall that reached 190 mm ( 7 @.@ 5 in ) at <unk> , Andhra Pradesh . Light rains fell in neighboring Tamil Nadu . The rains deluged 61 @,@ 898 @.@ 5 ha ( 152 @,@ 955 acres ) of fields in Andhra Pradesh . The storm damaged or destroyed 9 @,@ 090 houses , and downed several trees and power lines . Local news reports indicated that the storm produced 10 m ( 33 ft ) waves as it moved ashore , which damaged a ship and forced its crew to be rescued by the Indian Coast Guard . In Andhra Pradesh , the storm killed 83 people and resulted in $ 28 million ( 2003 USD ) in damage . After the storm , the government provided ₹ 50 @,@ 000 rupees ( $ 1 @,@ 111 USD ) to the family of every storm victim . 
 = Political Animals and Animal Politics = 
 Political Animals and Animal Politics is a 2014 edited collection published by Palgrave Macmillan and edited by the green political theorists Marcel Wissenburg and David Schlosberg . The volume addresses the emergence of academic animal ethics informed by political philosophy ( as opposed to moral philosophy ) , and was the first edited collection to be published on the topic , as well as the first book @-@ length attempt to explore the limits of the literature . As well as a substantial introduction by the editors , it features ten sole @-@ authored chapters split over three parts , with contributions from Wissenburg , Schlosberg , Manuel Arias @-@ Maldonado , Chad Flanders , Christie Smith , Clemens Driessen , Simon Otjes , Kurtis Boyer , Per @-@ Anders Svärd and Mihnea Tanasescu . 
 In part , Political Animals and Animal Politics arose from a workshop Wissenburg and Schlosberg had organised at the 2012 European Consortium for Political Research Joint Sessions conference , though not all attendees contributed to the volume and not all contributors presented at the workshop . Political Animals and Animal Politics was published as part of the Palgrave Macmillan Animal Ethics Series , edited by Andrew Linzey and Priscilla Cohn . Reviewers praised the volume for its trailblazing nature , picking out the contributions from Driessen , Wissenburg , Flanders and Boyer , but challenged its inclusion of environmentally @-@ focused contributions and criticised it for its failure to include contributions from the key voices in the politically @-@ focused animal ethics literature , such as Robert Garner , Sue Donaldson and Will Kymlicka , Alasdair Cochrane , Kimberly Smith or Siobhan O 'Sullivan . 
 = = Production and release = = 
 Marcel Wissenburg and David Schlosberg organised a workshop entitled " Political Animals and Animal Politics " at the 2012 European Consortium for Political Research Joint Sessions conference , which was held at the University of Antwerp , Belgium , between 10 – 15 April 2012 . The two had been talking for around a year about organising a conference broadly on the theme of " nature , animals and political theory " . The workshop aimed to fill a gap in the political literature on the status of nonhuman animals , something previously considered only at the margins of work otherwise about the environment / resource management , or else by those more primarily interested in moral issues . Both Wissenburg and Schlosberg presented papers , and , in addition , papers were presented by Manuel Arias @-@ Maldonado ( University of Granada ) , Susan <unk> @-@ Berson ( Wageningen University and Research Centre ) , Kurtis Boyer ( Lund University ) , Clemens Driessen ( Utrecht University ) , Chad Flanders ( Saint Louis University ) , Robert Garner ( University of Leicester ) , Margareta Hanes ( Vrije Universiteit Brussel ) , Paul <unk> ( University of Groningen ) , Christopher Neff ( University of Sydney ) , Kaspar <unk> ( Ghent University ) , Simon Otjes ( Leiden University ) , Christie Smith ( University of Exeter ) , Mihnea Tanasescu ( Vrije Universiteit Brussel ) and Catherine <unk> ( University of Liège ) . 
 The workshop also featured a lecture by Michel <unk> , of the Belgian organisation Global Action in the Interest of Animals . On the workshop 's second day , those involved were joined by Niko <unk> of the Dutch Party for the Animals and Karen <unk> of that party 's Pierson Foundation think tank . Footage from that day of the workshop , shot by Joost de Haas , was included in the documentary film De Haas in de Marathon ( The Hare in the Marathon , 2012 ) . For Schlosberg , the workshop , and the wide range of papers presented , illustrated the " coming @-@ of @-@ age of animal politics as a sub field of political theory " . 
 This workshop formed the basis of Political Animals and Animal Politics , a collection edited by Wissenburg and Schlosberg , with earlier versions of many of the volume 's chapters having being presented at that time . Originally , the editors had intended to have discussion of political theory , of movements for animals and of real @-@ world politics , but the final volume was somewhat more theory @-@ based than this . Political Animals and Animal Politics was published in 2014 by Palgrave Macmillan in hardback format ; it is part of the Palgrave Macmillan Animal Ethics Series , which is edited by Andrew Linzey and Priscilla Cohn . This interdisciplinary series aims to explore the practical and conceptual challenges posed by animal ethics . 
 Political Animals and Animal Politics was the first edited collection devoted to the " political turn in animal ethics " , and the first " book @-@ length attempt at seeking to define the contours " of this literature . The book engages with what the editors call " animal political philosophy " , which they identify as an academic literature at the meeting point of animal ethics , political philosophy and real @-@ world but theory @-@ driven politics . Wissenburg and Schlosberg posit that this literature , though at one time only a small part of more morally @-@ focused animal ethics , has developed into a separate field of enquiry in its own right . They single out two key texts : Robert Garner 's 2013 A Theory of Justice for Animals ( Oxford University Press ) and Sue Donaldson and Will Kymlicka 's 2011 Zoopolis ( Oxford University Press ) . Recognising the editors ' identification of the political turn in animal ethics , Garner , writing with Siobhan O 'Sullivan and Alasdair Cochrane , argues that the literature is both made distinct and unified by its focus on justice ; contributions to this literature , these authors argue , " imagine how political institutions , structures and processes might be transformed so as to secure justice for both human and nonhuman animals . Put simply , the essential feature of the political turn is this constructive focus on justice . " 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Political Animals and Animal Politics has three key aims , and , correspondingly , its chapters are split into three sections . These aims are the analysis of three key " innovations " that the editors identify in the book 's introduction . The first of these is the move , in animal ethics , from thinking about personal change to thinking about the implementation of rules or norms of conduct at the societal level . The second of these is a possible rapprochement between animal ethics and <unk> ( environmental ethics and green political theory ) . The third is the increased presence of animal protection laws for the benefit of nonhuman animals themselves . Aside from the introduction , the book features ten single @-@ authored chapters , with three in Part I : The Politicization of the Animal Advocacy Discourse , three in Part II : The Rapprochement between Animal Ethics and <unk> , and four in Part III : The Introduction of Laws and Institutions for the Benefit of Animals . 
 = = Contributions = = 
 " Rethinking the Human @-@ Animal Divide in the Anthropocene " , Manuel Arias @-@ Maldonado 
 Arias @-@ Maldonado argues that traditional appeals to the value of nonhuman animals have failed to be sufficiently motivating , and that , instead , human / nonhuman relationships are appropriately grounded upon the ideas of human exceptionalism and human domination . These notions , he claims , can be the basis of political transformation for nonhuman animals . He argues that once these ideas are properly understood , they can ground an idea of human sympathy for nonhuman animals , which is just one part of a caring and sustainable Anthropocene . Even if an alternative politics might ultimately be preferable , Arias @-@ Maldonado argues , a change to a focus on sympathy might be useful and realistic as a political strategy . 
 " An Agenda for Animal Political Theory " , Marcel Wissenburg 
 For the purposes of his contribution , Wissenburg takes many standard contentions in animal ethics for granted . However , he challenges mainstream animal ethicists ' tendency to adopt the language of liberalism , which he suggests <unk> nonhuman animals as individuals and posits false dichotomies about their status . This adoption of liberal ideas can come in Tom Regan 's " old " form or Donaldson and Kymlicka 's " new " form . Wissenburg challenges Donaldson and Kymlicka 's extension of citizenship to nonhuman animals , and instead sketches the outline of an alternative proposal which pays attention to individual animals ' modes of being . This he labels , paraphrasing Robert Nozick , " liberalism for humans and feudalism for animals " . 
 " Public Reason and Animal Rights " , Chad Flanders 
 Flanders argues that nonhuman animals could be " below " politics , in that they do not have politically @-@ considerable interests , or " above " politics , in that they have rights which trump political decision @-@ making processes . Flanders argues that if animals are excluded from basic justice , as John Rawls held , they can be defended on metaphysical grounds ( what Rawls refers to as on the basis of comprehensive doctrines , as opposed to the public reasons which must be used for arguments in the political realm ) . This is potentially liberating for animal advocates . Nonetheless , Flanders argues , animal issues may be matters of basic justice insofar as they affect humans or the animals themselves have rights . Alternatively , the wrongness of animal cruelty may be a " fixed point " in our political reasoning . Flanders concludes that <unk> provides a good starting point for the inclusion of animals in political decision @-@ making . 
 " <unk> Ecological <unk> of Recognition " , Christie Smith 
 Smith argues that Val <unk> is incorrect to declare the <unk> of animals into ethical terms as <unk> as opposed to the necessary <unk> of humans into ecological terms , as the two tasks are linked . Smith rejects the culture / nature dichotomy , and suggests that a politics of recognition is an appropriate way to think about relationships . She draws upon feminist and <unk> literature to conceive of recognition theory beyond <unk> self / other relations , allowing recognition beyond a human self , a concept which she challenges . Smith seeks to show that recognition theories should not be considered " soft " or " naive " as accounts of justice , and instead that they offer an appropriate mode for thinking about ecological and animal injustices . 
 " Ecological Justice for the Anthropocene " , David Schlosberg 
 Schlosberg 's contribution , is , in many ways , a response to challenges made to his Defining Environmental Justice ( 2007 ) . Schlosberg aims to step beyond previous accounts of animal rights or environmentalism as requirements of justice by deploying a mixed capabilities / deliberation approach applicable to both ecosystems and nonhuman animals . Schlosberg challenges criticisms of his capabilities approach ( specifically , a capabilities approach which moves beyond humans ) grounded in the existence of conflicts of capabilities , claiming that a form of deliberative democracy can overcome the problem posed by these conflicts . His mixed account , he claims , provide a form of justice appropriate for thinking about human and nonhuman individuals and collectives in the Anthropocene . 
 " Animal Deliberation " , Clemens Driessen 
 Driessen explores ways in which nonhuman animals might be understood to be engaging in political deliberation . His claim is empirical rather than normative , as he presents nonhuman animals as already being in political dialogue with humans ; rather than arguing that rights should be extended to animals , he calls for a recognition of how interactions with animals have always been political . This is particularly noticeable , he argues , when humans are involved in the development of new technologies , analysing the example ( following Bruno Latour ) of Gaston <unk> building a door in dialogue with his boss and the office cat , and of farmers and cows using milking robots . He argues that a recognition of this animal deliberation can lead to more thoughtful forms of both environmentalism and democracy . 
 " Animal Party Politics in Parliament " , Simon Otjes 
 Otjes 's approach is more empirical than that of many contributors to Political Animals and Animal Politics . He examines the Dutch Party for the Animals ( PvdD ) , which , in 2006 , won two seats in the House of Representatives . Otjes explores whether the PvdD 's presence has changed the amount of time more established parties spent on animal issues by examining both parliamentary speeches and motions before and after the introduction of the PvdD members . He finds that established parties began to talk more about animal issues in 2006 , and that this could be attributed to conflict between the PvdD and the established parties . Though Otjes allows that his study 's relevance may seem limited , he concludes that smaller parties can affect government agenda by remaining focused on their own primary concern . 
 " The Limits of Species Advocacy " , Kurtis Boyer 
 Boyer observes the distinction between how nonhuman animals can receive political protection as individuals and as species . He argues that the latter form of protection is motivated by a desire to preserve human experience of the species rather than the experiences of the nonhuman animals themselves . Politically @-@ motivated species advocacy , Boyer argues , is highly anthropocentric , as advocates present these animals as sharing in particular revered virtues ; as a result , the likes of habitat and genetic health are the focus of advocates , rather than nonhuman animals themselves . Using the example of polar bear preservation , Boyer illustrates how species advocacy becomes tied up with broader political goals concerning humans and competing visions of the value of animals . He concludes that the advancement of species advocacy can limit the achievement of animal welfare / rights goals . 
 " Slaughter and Animal <unk> in Sweden 1900 – 1944 " , Per @-@ Anders Svärd 
 Svärd , taking a more empirical approach than many other contributors , explores laws surrounding animal welfare in early 20th century Sweden . He seeks to offer an empirical grounding for the argument that animal <unk> is problematic for animals , entrenching harmful use and speciesism . He analyses all official documentation from the Riksdag from 1900 – 1944 on the subject of animal slaughter and welfare drawing upon <unk> policy analysis and poststructuralist discourse analysis . He conceives of the debates as a political <unk> in which ( drawing upon Lacanian psychoanalysis ) animal cruelty was blamed on certain " other " groups ( such as Jews and Sami ) . He argues that animal <unk> was not the natural continuation of an old anti @-@ cruelty discourse , but that Sweden 's 1937 regulation of slaughter and 1944 animal protection laws served to reconstitute , reaffirm and expand <unk> relations , paving the way for animal exploitation 's expansion . 
 " The Rights of Nature : Theory and Practice " , Mihnea Tanasescu 
 Tanasescu explores the idea of rights for nature , an idea which , though unorthodox , has seen success in implementation . He first introduces the concept , with a focus on the differences between moral and legal rights , before examining the particular case of Ecuador 's entrenchment of rights for nature in its 2008 constitution , which is compared with other real @-@ world cases . He finally addresses what can be learnt from these theoretical and practical considerations . He concludes that much work on the topic is left to be done , but the key lesson to be learnt is the significance of innovation ; environmental politics , he claims , should remain both inventive and optimistic . 
 = = Academic reception = = 
 Political Animals and Animal Politics was reviewed by Garner for Environmental Values and the British philosopher Josh Milburn for the Political Studies Review . Garner lamented the absence of many of the key voices in the political theory literature on animal ethics — such as Cochrane , Donaldson and Kymlicka , O 'Sullivan , Tony Milligan , Kimberly Smith or Garner himself — in the book , meaning that Political Animals and Animal Politics " takes on the role of an observer of this debate rather than directly contributing to it in a leading sense " . In addition , he felt that the book offered little consideration of the details of the work of these leading theorists , identifying the absence of discussion of Cochrane 's interest @-@ based rights approach , a superficial consideration of Regan 's account of animal rights , an oversimplification of his own position and a lack of context to understand the respective work of Kimberly Smith and O 'Sullivan . He considered <unk> 's chapter to be the only one which engages with the debate about the political turn in general , but notes that Wissenburg 's approach is a negative one ; Garner considers this unsurprising , given that Wissenburg is a green political theorist with little sympathy for " animal political theory " . 
 Milburn questioned the success of the volume in achieving its second stated goal , concerning rapprochement between animal and environmental ethics ; he considered the contributions respectively of Christie Smith , Schlosberg , and Tanasescu to be more clearly in the domain of environmental ethics than animal ethics , questioning the extent to which they belong in a volume about " animal politics " . He felt that the opening chapters ( and introduction ) did well to establish the volume , and was happy with the inclusion of the more empirical contributions , given their potential theoretical significance . Milburn picked out the chapters by Driessen , Boyer and Wissenburg respectively as highlights , suggesting that the contributions of Driessen and Boyer seemed to challenge the volume 's second stated goal , and noting that , though it was strong , he disagreed with the claims of Wissenburg 's chapter . Garner highlighted the contributions of Flanders and Driessen . He commended the editors for putting together the book , and , though he claimed that it was likely to be superseded , concluded that Political Animals and Animal Politics should be " welcomed for its trailblazing " . 
 = St Cristiolus 's Church , Llangristiolus = 
 St Cristiolus 's Church , Llangristiolus is a medieval church near the village of Llangristiolus , in Anglesey , north Wales . The village , about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from the building , takes its name from the church . Reputedly founded by St Cristiolus in 610 , the present building dates from the 12th and 13th centuries . Alterations were made in the 16th century , when the large east window in Perpendicular style was added to the chancel – a window which has been described by one guide to the buildings of north Wales as " almost too big to fit " in the wall . Some restoration work took place in the mid @-@ 19th century , when further windows were added and the chancel largely rebuilt . 
 The church is still in use for weekly Sunday services ( in Welsh and English ) , as part of the Church in Wales , and is one of four churches in a combined parish . It is a Grade II * listed building , a national designation given to " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " , in particular because of its age and the east window . The church contains a decorated font from the 12th century , as well as memorials from the 18th , 19th and 20th centuries . Richard Owen , a 19th @-@ century Calvinistic Methodist minister from Llangristiolus , is buried in the graveyard . 
 = = History and location = = 
 St Cristiolus 's Church is in central Anglesey , north Wales . It is situated just to the south of the A5 and A55 roads , on raised ground above Malltraeth Marsh . The modern village of Llangristiolus is about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the west of the church . The village takes its name from the church : the Welsh word llan originally meant " enclosure " and then " church " , and " <unk> " is a modified form of the saint 's name . 
 The date of foundation of the first building on this site is unknown . Geraint Jones , in a 2006 guide to Anglesey churches , wrote that it is thought that St Cristiolus established a church here in 610 . Cristiolus , a 7th @-@ century saint about whom little detail is known , was a follower of St Cadfan , a Breton saint associated with the Christian community on Bardsey Island in Wales . Cristiolus is also credited with the foundation of the church in <unk> in modern @-@ day Pembrokeshire , south Wales . He was the brother of St <unk> , who established the church at <unk> in mid @-@ Wales . 
 The present building dates from the 12th century ; it is the only medieval building in the parish . During the 13th century , the chancel was extended , and the older part of the church may have been rebuilt using the previous stones at this time . By 1535 , the position of rector of the parish was held by the person holding the position of Archdeacon of Anglesey , as part of the remuneration for that office ; this is no longer the case . Further structural changes to the church were made in the early 16th century when some windows were added to the chancel . In 1852 , restoration work took place to the nave and chancel under Henry Kennedy , architect of the Diocese of Bangor . The chancel was rebuilt , although the east wall and window were retained , and further windows were added in the church . 
 St Cristiolus 's Church is still in regular use and belongs to the Church in Wales . It is one of six churches in the combined benefice of <unk> <unk> <unk> a <unk> . The other churches in the benefice are St Michael 's , Gaerwen ; St Ffinan 's , Llanffinan ; St Caffo 's , Llangaffo ; St Edwen 's , Llanedwen ; and St Mary 's , Llanfairpwll . It is within the deanery of Malltraeth , the archdeaconry of Bangor and the Diocese of Bangor . The current incumbent ( as of 2013 ) , Emlyn Williams , was appointed as vicar of St Cristiolus 's Church in 2007 ; before that , the position had been vacant for 20 years despite many attempts by the Church in Wales to fill it . He is assisted by one associate priest and two associate curates . Services are held every Sunday morning , alternating between a bilingual service of Holy Communion and a service of Morning Prayer ; there are no midweek services . 
 People associated with the church include Henry Maurice ( elected Lady Margaret Professor of Divinity at the University of Oxford shortly before his death in 1691 ; his father , Thomas , was the perpetual curate of the church ) and the 19th @-@ century writer and priest Owen Wynne Jones ( who was the curate for a time in the early 1860s ) . The 19th @-@ century Calvinistic Methodist preacher Richard Owen was born in the parish , and is buried in the graveyard that surrounds the church . 
 = = Architecture and fittings = = 
 The church is built from rubble masonry ( mainly gritstone ) and dressed with freestone . The nave measures 44 feet 9 inches long by 15 feet 6 inches wide ( 13 @.@ 6 by 4 @.@ 7 m ) and the chancel measures 32 feet 9 inches long by 20 feet 6 inches ( 10 by 6 @.@ 25 m ) wide . The nave has three bays , and the chancel at the east end of the nave has two bays ; it is slightly wider than the nave . The nave and the chancel have external buttresses . 
 Internally , the chancel arch dates from the 13th century . It is 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) wide and 19 feet ( 5 @.@ 8 m ) from the floor to the top of the arch ; the supporting pillars are 10 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) tall . There are windows from the early 16th century in the chancel , with the large east window in Perpendicular style ( in contrast to the rest of the church , which is mainly in Decorated style ) . It has five ogee @-@ headed lights separated by vertical tracery , and measures 10 feet 10 inches ( 3 @.@ 3 m ) at its widest point by 14 feet 2 inches ( 4 @.@ 3 m ) at its tallest . Unlike most of the other windows in the church , it contains coloured glass . A smaller window in the north wall also dates from this time , and has a square frame containing two lights ; a matching window was added in the 19th century in the opposite wall . The other windows in the church are from the 19th century in various designs . One window , in the north wall of the nave , has had stained glass added as a memorial to two local residents who died in the 1990s . 
 The entrance is through a porch ( probably dating from the 16th century ) on the south side of the building , at the west end of the nave . At the west end of the roof , which is made of slate , there is an ornate bellcote for one bell ( added by Kennedy ) . There are plain iron crosses on top of the porch and the chancel . Inside , the rafters and trusses of the roof are exposed . The pews and choir stalls were added in the 19th century . The nave has a brass memorial to a former Chancellor of Bangor Cathedral , William Morgan ( died 1713 ) , his wife and son . There are other memorials inside the church , including one for those from the parish who died during the First World War . 
 The gritstone circular font , at the west end , dates from the 12th century , and has six decorative panels . It is one of a group of fonts in north @-@ west Wales using interlace ( a medieval decorative style ) showing links to Irish and Norse artistic traditions ; other similar fonts in Anglesey are found at St Ceinwen 's , Cerrigceinwen , St Peter 's , Newborough and St Beuno 's , Trefdraeth . One author says that the patterns on the fonts at Llangristiolus and St Beuno 's Church , Pistyll ( in the nearby county of Gwynedd ) seem " closely linked " to patterns on one of the stone crosses at St Seiriol 's Church , Penmon . 
 = = Churchyard = = 
 The churchyard contains six Commonwealth war graves : in the east part of the ground are buried two British Army soldiers of World War I and north @-@ north @-@ west of the church are buried three soldiers and an airman of World War II . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 The church has national recognition and statutory protection from alteration as it has been designated as a Grade II * listed building – the second @-@ highest ( of three ) grade of listing , designating " particularly important buildings of more than special interest " . It was given this status on 30 January 1968 , and has been listed because it is a medieval church that , unusually for Anglesey , dates substantially from the 12th and 13th centuries . Cadw ( the Welsh Assembly Government body responsible for the built heritage of Wales and the inclusion of Welsh buildings on the statutory lists ) also notes the " fine 16th @-@ century rebuilding of the chancel " and the chancel window . The chancel arch has been described ( in a 2009 guide to the buildings of north @-@ west Wales ) as the best such arch in the region , and the " fine " east window as " almost too big to fit " in the wall . 
 The 19th @-@ century antiquarian Angharad Llwyd described the church as " a spacious structure , exhibiting some excellent architectural details , and decorated with an east window , of good design , enriched with tracery . " Writing in 1846 ( before Kennedy 's restoration work in 1852 ) , the clergyman and antiquarian Harry Longueville Jones noted a wooden gallery at the west end , above the font , inscribed <unk> DE <unk> FECIT 1778 . <unk> DEO . He described the chancel arch as displaying " workmanship of good character . " 
 The Welsh politician and church historian Sir Stephen Glynne visited the church in 1849 . He wrote that it was a " fair specimen of the better sort of Anglesey village church " . The nave and chancel were " of good proportions " , with the chancel " properly distinguished and developed " . He also said that the chancel arch was " of considerable elegance , unusual in North Wales , having excellent moulding and clustered shafts which have a Middle Pointed character . " 
 = Scottish Parliament Building = 
 The Scottish Parliament Building ( Scottish Gaelic : <unk> na h @-@ Alba , Scots : Scots <unk> Biggin ) is the home of the Scottish Parliament at Holyrood , within the UNESCO World Heritage Site in central Edinburgh . Construction of the building commenced in June 1999 and the Members of the Scottish Parliament ( MSPs ) held their first debate in the new building on 7 September 2004 . The formal opening by Queen Elizabeth II took place on 9 October 2004 . Enric Miralles , the Spanish Catalan architect who designed the building , died before its completion . 
 From 1999 until the opening of the new building in 2004 , committee rooms and the debating chamber of the Scottish Parliament were housed in the General Assembly Hall of the Church of Scotland located on The Mound in Edinburgh . Office and administrative accommodation in support of the Parliament were provided in buildings leased from the City of Edinburgh Council . The new Scottish Parliament Building brought together these different elements into one purpose @-@ built parliamentary complex , housing 129 MSPs and more than 1 @,@ 000 staff and civil servants . 
 From the outset , the building and its construction have been controversial . The choices of location , architect , design , and construction company were all criticised by politicians , the media and the Scottish public . Scheduled to open in 2001 , it did so in 2004 , more than three years late with an estimated final cost of £ 414 million , many times higher than initial estimates of between £ 10m and £ 40m . A major public inquiry into the handling of the construction , chaired by the former Lord Advocate , Peter Fraser , was established in 2003 . The inquiry concluded in September 2004 and criticised the management of the whole project from the realisation of cost increases down to the way in which major design changes were implemented . Despite these criticisms and a mixed public reaction , the building was welcomed by architectural academics and critics . The building aimed to achieve a poetic union between the Scottish landscape , its people , its culture , and the city of Edinburgh . The parliament building won numerous awards including the 2005 Stirling Prize and has been described by landscape architect Charles Jencks as " a tour de force of arts and crafts and quality without parallel in the last 100 years of British architecture " . 
 = = Location = = 
 Comprising an area of 1 @.@ 6 ha ( 4 acres ) , with a perimeter of 480 m ( 1570 ft ) , the Scottish Parliament building is located 1 km ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) east of Edinburgh city centre on the edge of the Old Town . The large site previously housed the headquarters of the Scottish and Newcastle brewery which were demolished to make way for the building . The boundary of the site is marked by the Canongate stretch of the Royal Mile on its northern side , Horse Wynd on its eastern side , where the public entrance to the building is , and Reid 's Close on its western side . Reid 's Close connects the Canongate and Holyrood Road on the southwestern side of the complex . The south eastern side of the complex is bounded by the Our Dynamic Earth visitor attraction which opened in July 1999 , and Queen 's Drive which fringes the slopes of the Salisbury Crags . 
 In the immediate vicinity of the building is the Palace of Holyroodhouse , which is bordered by the broad expanse of Holyrood Park . To the south of the parliamentary complex are the steep slopes of the Salisbury Crags and Arthur 's Seat . The Holyrood and <unk> areas , to the west of the site , have been extensively redeveloped since 1998 , with new retail , hotel and office developments , including Barclay House , the new offices of The Scotsman Publications Ltd . 
 = = Project history = = 
 Before 1707 , the Kingdom of Scotland was a sovereign independent state which had its own legislature — the Parliament of Scotland — which met , latterly , at Parliament House on the Royal Mile in Edinburgh . The Treaty of Union , signed in 1707 , created an incorporating political union between the Kingdom of Scots and the Kingdom of England . The two previous Acts of Union ( one for the British Parliament and one for the Parliament of Scotland ) had dissolved the previous parliaments . The Treaty of Union created the Parliament of Great Britain which was housed in the Palace of Westminster in London . As a consequence , Scotland was directly governed from London for the next 292 years without a legislature or a Parliament building of its own . 
 Pressure for an independent parliament grew in the 1970s with the growth of the Scottish National Party and monies were invested into the conversion of the former Royal High School on Calton Hill into an official parliament . Whilst much of this conversion was completed ( including creation of the main debating hall ) and the building was renamed New Parliament House it was determined that the facility was too small for its stated purpose ( as and when that purpose arose ) . Following the April 1992 election , when a weakened John Major was re @-@ elected , a campaign group set up adjacent to the Royal High School at the foot of the access road to Calton Hill . Starting informally this became a permanently manned " vigil " to keep the concept in the public mind . This led to the Royal High School being the " popular " choice of site in the public ( and particularly SNP ) mindset . 
 A referendum of the Scottish electorate , held on 11 September 1997 , approved the establishment of a directly @-@ elected Scottish Parliament to legislate on most domestic affairs . Following this , the Scottish Office , led by the then Secretary of State for Scotland , Donald Dewar , decided that a new purpose @-@ built facility would be constructed in Edinburgh , to house the Scottish Parliament . 
 Initially , three sites in and around Edinburgh were considered as possible locations for the building , including St Andrew 's House / New Parliament House ( better known as the imposing former Royal High School on Calton Hill ) St Andrews House being the home of the Scottish Office — later the Scottish Government ; Victoria Quay at Leith docks ( adjacent to the major Scottish Office building there ) and Haymarket on the vacant railway goods yard , in the west end of the city . The Holyrood site was not entered into the picture until after the official closure date of the competition between the three sites . The date for announcing the winner overran and on the date of the expected announcement instead it was announced that they were going to " rethink their decision " ( inferring that indeed a decision had been made ) and add the Holyrood Brewery site into the running ( which had only just closed ) . However negotiations with the brewing company Scottish and Newcastle , who owned the land , resulted in the company indicating that they would be able to vacate the site in early 1999 . As a consequence , the Secretary of State for Scotland agreed that the Holyrood site merited inclusion on the shortlist of proposed locations . The Scottish Office commissioned feasibility studies of the specified areas in late 1997 and in January 1998 , the Holyrood site was selected from the shortlist . 
 Following on from the site selection , the Scottish Office announced that an international competition would be held to find a designer for a new building to house the Parliament . A design committee was appointed under the chairmanship of Dewar , and was tasked with choosing from a shortlist of designs . Proposals were submitted from internationally renowned architects such as Rafael Viñoly , Michael Wilford and Richard Meier . Twelve designs were selected in March 1998 , which were whittled down to five by the following May . The five final designs were put on public display throughout Scotland in June 1998 . Feedback from the public displays showed that the designs of the Spanish architect Enric Miralles were amongst the most popular . The design team took account of public opinion on the designs and invited all five shortlisted entrants to make presentations on their proposed designs before announcing a winner . 
 On 6 July 1998 , it was declared that the design of Enric Miralles was chosen , with work being awarded to EMBT / RMJM ( Scotland ) Ltd , a Spanish @-@ Scottish joint venture design company , specifically created for the project . Construction , which was undertaken by Bovis , commenced in June 1999 , with the demolition of the Scottish and Newcastle brewery and the beginning of foundation work to support the structure of the building . MSPs began to move into the building complex in the Summer of 2004 , with the official opening by the Queen taking place in October of the same year . 
 = = Parliamentary complex = = 
 We don 't want to forget that the Scottish Parliament will be in Edinburgh , but will belong to Scotland , to the Scottish land . The Parliament should be able to reflect the land it represents . The building should arise from the sloping base of Arthur 's Seat and arrive into the city almost surging out of the rock . 
 Miralles sought to design a parliament building that could represent and present a national identity . This <unk> difficult question was tackled by displacing the question of identity into the landscape of Scotland . In a characteristically poetic approach he talked about slotting the building into the land " in the form of a gathering situation : an amphitheatre , coming out from Arthur 's Seat . " where the building would reflect a dialogue between the landscape and the act of people sitting . So an early goal of the design was to open the building and its public spaces , not just to Edinburgh but to a more general concept of the Scottish landscape . Miralles intended to use the parliament to help build the end of Canongate — " not just another building on the street ... it should reinforce the existing qualities of the site and its surroundings . In a subtle game of cross views and political implications . " 
 The result was a non @-@ hierarchical , organic collection of low @-@ lying buildings intended to allow views of , and blend in with , the surrounding rugged scenery and symbolise the connection between nature and the Scottish people . As a consequence the building has many features connected to nature and land , such as the leaf shaped motifs of the roof in the Garden Lobby of the building , and the large windows of the debating chamber , committee rooms and the Tower Buildings which face the broad expanse of Holyrood Park , Arthur 's Seat and the Salisbury Crags . Inside the buildings , the connection to the land is reinforced by the use of Scottish rock such as gneiss and granite in the flooring and walls , and the use of oak and sycamore in the construction of the furniture . 
 The Parliament is actually a campus of several buildings , reflecting different architectural styles , with a total floor area of 31 @,@ 000 square metres ( 312 @,@ 000 sq ft ) , providing accommodation for MSPs , their researchers and parliamentary staff . The buildings have a variety of features , with the most distinctive external characterisation being the roof of the Tower Buildings , said to be reminiscent of upturned boats on the shoreline . The inspiration had come from Edwin Lutyens ' sheds , made from upturned herring busses ( boats ) which Miralles saw on a visit to Lindisfarne in Northumberland . It is said that in the first design meeting , Miralles , armed with some twigs and leaves , thrust them onto a table and declared " This is the Scottish Parliament " reinforcing the unique and abstract nature of the parliamentary campus . 
 The north @-@ western boundaries of the site , the MSPs ' building , Queensberry House and the Canongate Building reinforce the existing medieval street patterns " expressing intimacy with the city and its citizens " . The south @-@ eastern aspect of the complex is extensively landscaped . Concrete " branches " , covered in turf and wild grass extend from the parliamentary buildings , and provide members of the public with somewhere to sit and relax . Indigenous Scottish wildflowers and plants cover much of the area , blending the Parliament 's grounds with the nearby Holyrood Park and Salisbury Crags . Oak , Rowan , Lime and Cherry trees have also been planted in the grounds . Adjacent to the landscaped area of the complex , where it meets Horse Wynd , there is an open plan piazza , with bike racks , seating and external lighting shaped like rocks incorporated into concrete paving . Three distinctive water features provide the centrepiece for this area . 
 References to Scottish culture are also reflected in the building and particularly on some of the building 's elevations . There are a series of " trigger panels " , constructed out of timber or granite . Not to everyone 's taste , these have been said to represent anvils , <unk> , guns , question marks or even the hammer and sickle . Shortly after the official opening of the building , Enric Miralles ' widow , Benedetta Tagliabue , revealed that the design is simply that of a window curtain pulled back . Her late husband however , enjoying the use of ambiguous forms with multiple meanings , had previously said he would love the profile to evoke an icon of Scottish culture , the painting of Reverend Walker skating on ice . The architectural critic Charles Jencks finds this a particularly apt metaphor for balanced movement and democratic debate and also notes the irony that Miralles too was skating on ice with his designs for the building . Elsewhere , in the public area beneath the debating chamber , the curved concrete vaults carry various stylised <unk> . Here the architect intends another metaphor ; by setting the debating chamber directly above the public area , he seeks to remind MSPs whilst sitting in the chamber that their power derives from the people below them . 
 The Scottish Parliament Building is open to visitors all year round . On non @-@ sitting days , normally Mondays , Fridays and weekends as well as during parliamentary recess periods , visitors are able to view the Main Hall of the building and can access the public galleries of the debating chamber and main committee rooms . Guided tours are also available on non @-@ sitting days and these allow visitors access to the floor of the chamber , the Garden Lobby , Queensberry House and committee rooms in the company of a parliamentary guide . On sitting days , members of the public must purchase tickets for the public galleries of both the chamber and committee rooms . 
 = = = Sustainability = = = 
 The Scottish Parliament Building was designed with a number of sustainability features in mind . The decision to build the Parliament on a brownfield site and its proximity to hubs of public transport are seen as sustainable , environmentally friendly features . All of the electricity purchased for the building comes from renewable sources and solar panels on the Canongate Building are used for heating water in the complex . 
 A high level of insulation was used to keep the building warm during the winter months . This approach , however , brings with it the potential problem of overheating during the summer due to solar heat gains through the glazing , body heat and the use of computers and electric lighting . Standard solutions to the problem usually involve using energy intensive HVAC systems . The Scottish Parliament Building , however , reduces the requirements for such systems to only 20 % of the accommodation by a variety of strategies . Natural ventilation is used wherever possible . A computerised management system senses the temperature in different parts of the Parliament and automatically opens windows to keep the building cool . During summer months , the building opens the windows during the night time when it is unoccupied and permits the heavy concrete floors and structure to cool and rid themselves of heat absorbed during the <unk> then helps to keep the building temperature down during the day by absorbing the excess heat from the glazing , occupants and electrical equipment . Some of the concrete floors are further cooled by water from 25 metres ( 80 ft ) deep bore holes beneath the parliamentary campus which also provide water for the toilet facilities . The building achieves the highest rating in the Building Research Establishment 's Environmental Assessment Method ( BREEAM ) . 
 = = = Debating chamber = = = 
 The debating chamber contains a shallow elliptical horseshoe of seating for the MSPs , with the governing party or parties sitting in the middle of the semicircle and opposition parties on either side , similar to other European legislatures . Such a layout is intended to blur political divisions and principally reflects the desire to encourage consensus amongst elected members . This is in contrast to the " adversarial " layout reminiscent of other Westminster style national legislatures , including the House of Commons , where government and opposition sit apart and facing one another . There are 131 desks and chairs on the floor of the chamber for all the elected members of the Scottish Parliament and members of the Scottish Government . The desks are constructed out of oak and sycamore and are fitted with a lectern , a microphone and in @-@ built speakers as well as the electronic voting equipment used by MSPs . Galleries above the main floor can accommodate a total of 255 members of the public , 18 guests and 34 members of the press . 
 The most notable feature of the chamber is the roof . The roof is supported by a structure of laminated oak beams joined with a total of 112 stainless steel connectors ( each slightly different ) , which in turn are suspended on steel rods from the walls . The connecting nodes were fabricated by welders for Scotland 's oil industry . Such a structure enables the debating chamber to span over 30 metres ( 100 ft ) without any supporting columns . In entering the chamber , MSPs pass under a stone lintel — the Arniston Stone — that was once part of the pre @-@ 1707 Parliament building , Parliament House . The use of the Arniston Stone in the structure of the debating chamber symbolises the connection between the historical Parliament of Scotland and the present day Scottish Parliament . 
 Cut into the western wall of the debating chamber are laminated glass panels , of different shapes , intended to give a human dimension to the chamber . At night , light is shone through the glass panels and is projected onto the MSPs ' desks to create the impression that the chamber is never unoccupied . Natural light diffuses into the chamber and is provided by " glass fins " which run down from light spaces in the ceiling . Glimpses out of the chamber are given to the landscape and city beyond , intentionally , to visually connect the MSPs to Scotland . The necessities of a modern parliament , banks of light , cameras , electronic voting and the MSPs ' console have all been transformed into works of craft and art , displaying the sweeping curves and leaf motifs that inform the rest of the building . Such is the level of craftsmanship , a result of the union of Miralles ' inventive designs , superb detailing by RMJM and excellent craftsmanship in execution , that Jencks was prompted to state that the [ Parliament ] is " an arts and crafts building , designed with high @-@ tech flair . You really have to go back to the Houses of Parliament in London to get interior design of such a high creative level — in fact , it is more creative " . 
 On 2 March 2006 , a beam in the roof of the debating chamber swung loose from its hinges during a debate , resulting in the evacuation of the debating chamber and the suspension of parliamentary business . Parliament moved to other premises while the whole roof structure was inspected and remedial works were carried out . The structural engineers , Arup , stated that the problem with the collapsed beam was entirely due to the failure of one bolt and the absence of another . There was no design fault . The engineers concluded , in a report to MSPs , that the damage is likely to have been done during construction work on the chamber roof , in the latter phases of the project . The report also indicated that whilst one of the bolts was missing , the other was broken and had damaged threads commensurate with being <unk> or jammed , which twisted the head off , or came close to doing so . 
 = = = Garden Lobby = = = 
 The Garden Lobby is at the centre of the parliamentary complex and connects the debating chamber , committee rooms and administrative offices of the Tower Buildings , with Queensberry House and the MSP building . The Garden Lobby is the place where official events as well as television interviews normally take place and it is used as an open social space for MSPs and parliamentary staff . The main feature of the Garden Lobby are the <unk> , which when viewed from above resemble leaves or the early Christian " vesica " shape and allow natural light into the building . The <unk> are made from stainless steel and the glasswork is covered by a lattice of solid oak struts . The route through the Garden Lobby up the main staircase to the debating chamber has been described as " one of the great processional routes in contemporary architecture . " 
 = = = MSP building = = = 
 The MSP building is connected to the Tower Buildings by way of the Garden Lobby and stands at the western end of the parliamentary complex , adjoining Reid 's Close . The block contains offices for each MSP and two members of staff , fitted out with custom @-@ designed furniture . The building is between four and six storeys in height , and is clad in granite . MSPs occupy 108 of the total 114 rooms in the building . Each office is divided into two parts — one for the MSP , with a floor space of 15 square metres ( 160 sq ft ) and another part for their staff , which has a floor space of 12 square metres ( 130 sq ft ) . The most distinctive feature of the MSP block are the unusual windows which project out from the building onto the western elevation of the parliamentary complex , inspired by a combination of the repeated leaf motif and the traditional Scottish stepped gable . In each office , these bay windows have a seat and shelving and are intended as " contemplation spaces " . Constructed from stainless steel and framed in oak , with oak lattices covering the glass , the windows are designed to provide MSPs with privacy and shade from the sun . Criticism has been levelled at the design of the windows by some MSPs who claim that the design blocks out natural light from their offices . To remove the uniformity from the western side of the building , the windows jut out at different widths and angles . At its north end , the building is six storeys high ( ground floor plus five ) stepping down to four storeys ( ground floor plus three ) at the south end . 
 = = = Other buildings = = = 
 Four tower buildings fan out along the front , or eastern edge , of the parliamentary complex and are notable for the curvature of their roofs . The Tower Buildings are home to the public entrance of the Scottish Parliament and to the Main Hall which is located on the eastern side of the parliamentary complex , beneath the debating chamber . A stone vaulted ceiling is the principal feature of the Main Hall , which has cross like representations carved into it , reminiscent of the Saltire — the national flag of Scotland . The main hall contains permanent exhibitions on the role of the Scottish Parliament , as well as public seating , a visitor information desk , a shop , lockers and a creche . Like much of the parliamentary complex , the materials used to construct the Main Hall and its vaulted ceiling include Kemnay Granite from Aberdeenshire in north east Scotland and Caithness stone which is used in much of the flooring in the buildings . Connected to the Tower Buildings in the eastern portion of the complex are the Media and Canongate Buildings , which house the IT and procurement departments of the Parliament , as well as media offices and the Scottish Parliament Information Centre ( <unk> ) . The centrepiece of the Canongate Building is a two @-@ storey cantilever structure , with the building connected at one end by reinforced concrete and 18 metres ( 60 ft ) of the building suspended above ground and protruding outwards unsupported by any columns . 
 Originally dating from 1667 , Queensberry House is an example of a seventeenth century Edinburgh townhouse and contrasts with the modern architecture of the rest of the parliamentary complex . From c.1800 , Queensberry House has been used as a hospital , army barracks , a refuge and a geriatric hospital . In 1996 , the geriatric hospital closed and the building was incorporated into the Scottish and Newcastle brewery , who owned the surrounding site . The building has been extensively refurbished , and returned to its original height of three storeys to provide facilities for the Presiding Officer , Deputy Presiding Officers , the Chief Executive of the Scottish Parliament and various parliamentary support staff . Internally and externally the building has been strengthened with reinforced steel and concrete . The original timber flooring has been replaced throughout with a mixture of carpet , vinyl , oak and Caithness stone . Queensberry House also contains the Donald Dewar Room , dedicated to the founding First Minister of Scotland who died in October 2000 . The room hosts the personal collection of books and other memorabilia donated to the Parliament by the family of Donald Dewar after his death . 
 = = = Artwork and features = = = 
 The Scottish Parliament holds a wide variety of artwork and sculpture ranging from specially commissioned pieces to official gifts from overseas parliamentary delegations . The intention of including artwork and sculptures in the building reinforces the desire of Miralles that the project should reflect the nature of Scotland , particularly its land and people . In order to facilitate the incorporation of art into the building , a consultative steering group was established by the Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body ( SPCB ) under the chairmanship of Jamie Stone MSP with the remit of deciding which artworks should be chosen . Some pieces of artwork are on public display in the building . As well as artwork and sculptures , quotations , furniture and photography have been commissioned as part of the art strategy . A range of quotations have been inscribed onto the stonework in and around the parliamentary complex . Beneath the Canongate Building façade is the Canongate Wall , constructed from a variety of indigenous Scottish rocks such as Lewisian gneiss , Torridonian sandstone and Easdale slate . The stones are set into large concrete casts , each one inscribed with a quotation . The Canongate Wall contains a total of 24 quotations . Etched along the lower stretch of the wall is a pictorial representation of the Old Town of Edinburgh @-@ based around a sketch by Enric Miralles showing the view of the Old Town from his bedroom window in the Balmoral Hotel . 
 The Main Hall of the Parliament contains a number of distinctive features and sculptures , including the gold @-@ plated Honours of Scotland sculpture . Presented by the Queen upon the opening of the Parliament building , the sculpture is modelled on the actual Honours of Scotland , the crown , sceptre and the sword of the state , and combines these three separate elements into one composition . During meetings of the original Parliament of Scotland , the actual Honours were always present but since 1819 they have been permanently housed in Edinburgh Castle . The 11 m ( 36 ft ) long Visitor Information Desk also stands in the Main Hall . Commissioned by the art strategy group , the desk combines a unique design constructed from oak and sycamore and functions as a workstation for six members of parliamentary staff . At a cost of £ 88 @,@ 000 the desk has been criticised by some over its price and functionality . 
 Another feature gifted to the Scottish Parliament by the Queen , following its inauguration in July 1999 , is the parliamentary mace . The mace is housed in a glass case in the debating chamber and has a formal , ceremonial role during meetings of the Parliament . The mace sits in front of the Presiding Officers ' desk and is made from silver and inlaid with gold panned from Scottish rivers and inscribed with the words : Wisdom , Compassion , Justice and Integrity . The words - There shall be a Scottish Parliament ( which are the first words of the Scotland Act 1998 ) , are inscribed around the head of the mace . At the beginning of each session in the chamber , the case is removed to symbolise that a full meeting of the Parliament is taking place . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 Public reaction to the design of the building has been mixed . In the first 6 months of the building being open to the public , 250 @,@ 000 people visited it , which Presiding Officer George Reid has said showed the public were " voting with their feet " . Critics of the building , such as Margo MacDonald MSP , have pointed out that the high number of visitors does not prove that all of them like the building . As well as cost , criticisms of the building stem primarily from the modernist and abstract architecture , the quality of the building work and the location of the building . 
 The mixed public reaction contrasts sharply with the response from architectural critics . Its rampant complexity , iconography and layering of meaning and metaphor are widely regarded as producing a building which is " quite a meal " . This prompted Catherine Slessor , writing in the Architectural Review , to describe it as " A Celtic @-@ Spanish cocktail to blow both minds and budgets , it doesn 't play safe , energetically mining a new seam of National Romanticism refined and reinterpreted for the twenty @-@ first century . " Jencks attempted to dampen criticism of the cost overruns by questioning how ' value for money ' might be judged . For him , the building is not just a functional or economic enterprise , it is an exploration of national identity and in comparing it to other comparable assemblies , not least the Palace of Westminster , he argues the cost is comparable . The conception of the building has been singled out for praise , particularly in the way it re @-@ establishes Scotland 's traditional focus towards mainland Europe and its values by means of the layout of the non @-@ adversarial debating chamber and the creation of the public spaces in front of the building , " where people can meet and express themselves as a force " . In an era of the Bilbao effect and the iconic building , Jencks is impressed that rather than being a monumental building , as is usual for capital landmarks , the building creates a complex union of nature and culture that nestles itself into the landscape . 
 The building has also won a number of awards , including an award at the VIII Biennial of Spanish Architecture , the RIAS Andrew Doolan Award for Architecture , and the 2005 Stirling Prize , the UK 's most prestigious architecture award . The inclusion of the Scottish Parliament Building on the shortlist for the Stirling Prize in 2004 , led the judges to describe the building as " a statement of sparkling excellence " . In October 2005 the building was identified as Scotland 's 4th greatest modern building by readers of Prospect magazine . 
 = = Problems = = 
 = = = Timeline of cost increases = = = 
 The construction of the Scottish Parliament Building has generated controversy in several respects . Rising costs and the use of public money to fund the project generated most controversy . Initial estimates for constructing a new building were projected to be between £ 10m and £ 40m in 1997 . By early 2004 , the estimated final cost of the project was set at £ <unk> , some ten times greater . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 Notwithstanding the level of controversy surrounding cost , the Scottish Parliament Building proved controversial in a number of other respects : the decision to construct a new building , the choice of site , the selection of a non @-@ Scottish architect , and the selection of Bovis as construction manager after having earlier been excluded from the shortlist . In 1997 , the initial cost of constructing a new Parliament building was given as £ 40 million , a figure produced by the Scottish Office , prior to the September 1997 devolution referendum , and subsequently revealed to be the figure for housing MSPs . Further controversy surrounding the project sprang from the selection of the Holyrood site , which was a late entrant onto the list of sites to be considered , and the rejection of the Royal High School on Calton Hill , long thought to be the home of any future devolved Scottish Parliament . After a formal visit to the Royal High School by Dewar and his aides on 30 May 1997 , it was rejected as unsuitable on the grounds of size and location . 
 Control of the building project passed from the Scottish Office to the cross @-@ party Scottish Parliamentary Corporate Body ( SPCB ) on 1 June 1999 , headed by the Parliament 's then Presiding Officer , Sir David Steel , at a time of increasing costs . Rising costs sprang from the need for a formal entrance and the need to accommodate parliamentary staff in light of better knowledge of how Parliament was working at its primary location on the Royal Mile , where it was clear there were staff overcrowding problems . With the cost increases in mind , and heightened media interest in the Holyrood Project , the Members of the Scottish Parliament held a debate on whether to continue with construction on 17 June 1999 voting by a majority of 66 to 57 in favour to complete the project . 
 In August 1999 , the architect informed the project group that the Parliament would need to be further increased in size by 4 @,@ 000 square metres ( 43 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . A subsequent costing revealed that taking into account the increased floorspace net construction costs had risen to £ <unk> by September 1999 . Early in 2000 , the SPCB commissioned an independent report by the architect John Spencely . The report concluded that savings of 20 % could be made on the current project and that scrapping the project completely at that stage or moving to another site would entail additional costs of £ 30m . Spencely also cited poor communication between the SPCB and construction officials as increasingly costly . Given the outcomes of the Spencely report , MSPs voted to continue with the construction project on the Holyrood site in a debate in the Scottish Parliament on 5 April 2000 . 
 The project was also complicated by the deaths of Miralles in July 2000 , of Dewar the following October and the existence of a multi @-@ headed client consisting of the SPCB , the Presiding Officer and an architectural advisor . The client took over the running of the project from the Scottish Executive ( formerly the Scottish Office ) while it was already under construction . Subsequently , the events of 9 / 11 led to further design changes , especially with regard to security , which again resulted in rising costs . However , it was later rejected that the re @-@ designs required to incorporate greater security into the building structure were the " single biggest " factor affecting the increased costs of the project . 
 By March 2004 the cost had reached the sum of £ <unk> ( compared to an original budget of £ 55m in July 1998 when the architects were appointed ) . This equates to £ 85 for each of the 5 @.@ 1 million people in Scotland . A report published by the Auditor General for Scotland in July 2004 specifically identified elements that contributed to both increasing costs and the delay in completing the project . His report criticised the overall management of the project and stated that had the management and construction process been executed better , costs could have been reduced . The report attempted to identify the reasons why there had been an acceleration in cost from £ <unk> in September 2000 to £ <unk> in February 2004 and concluded that over 2000 design changes to the project were a major factor . The building was finally certified for occupation in the Summer of 2004 , with the official opening in October of the same year , three years behind schedule . 
 = = Fraser Inquiry = = 
 In May 2003 the First Minister , Jack McConnell , announced a major public inquiry into the handling of the building project . The inquiry ( known as the Holyrood Inquiry , or the Fraser Inquiry ) was headed by Lord Fraser of Carmyllie and held at the Scottish Land Court in Edinburgh . The inquiry took evidence from architects , civil servants , politicians and the building companies . Evidence was taken over the course of 49 hearings and the final report ran to 300 pages . 
 = = = Criticisms = = = 
 Presenting his report in September 2004 , Lord Fraser told how he was " astonished " that year after year the ministers who were in charge were kept so much in the dark over the increases in cost estimates . He also stated that a Parliament building of sufficient scale could never have been built for less than £ 50m , and was " amazed " that the belief that it could be was perpetuated for so long . He believed that from at least April 2000 , when MSPs commissioned the Spencely Report to decide whether the building should continue , it should have been realised that the building was bound to cost in excess of £ 200m . Furthermore , £ 150m of the final cost was wasted as a result of design delays , over @-@ optimistic programming and uncertain authority . 
 Despite having only an outline design , the designers RMJM / EMBT ( Scotland ) Ltd stated without foundation that the building could be completed within a £ 50m budget . Nevertheless , these estimates were believed by officials . The two architectural practices in the RMJM and EMBT joint venture operated <unk> and failed to communicate effectively with each other and the project manager . The death of Miralles also gave rise to a substantial period of disharmony . The Brief emphasised the importance of design and quality over cost , and was not updated despite considerable evolution of the design . Ministers were not informed of grave concerns within the Scottish Office over the cost of the project and officials failed to take the advice of the cost consultants . 
 The Scottish Office decided to procure the construction work under a " construction management contract " , rather than under a Private Finance Initiative , in order to speed construction , but without properly evaluating the financial risks of doing so , and - in a decision that Fraser stated " beggars belief " - without asking Ministers to approve it . This was one of the two most flawed decisions which the report singled out , the other was the insistence on a rigid programme . Officials decided that rapid delivery of the new building was to be the priority , but that quality should be maintained . It was therefore inevitable that the cost would suffer . The client was obsessed with early completion and failed to understand the impact on cost and the completion date if high @-@ quality work and a complex building were required . In attempting to achieve early completion , the management contractor produced optimistic programmes , to which the architects were unwise to commit . The main causes of the slippage were delays in designing a challenging project that was to be delivered against a tight timetable using an unusual procurement route . 
 The inquiry was widely seen as clearing Donald Dewar for the initial mishandling of the project . This came after speculation suggesting that Dewar was aware that the initial costs of a new Parliament Building , circulated to the public , were too low . However , in his report , Lord Fraser stated " there was no evidence whatsoever , that he [ Dewar ] deliberately or knowingly misled MSPs . He relied on cost figures given to him by senior civil servants . " The inquiry also resisted the temptation to " lay all of the blame at the door of a deceased wayward architectural genius [ Miralles ] ..... costs rose because the client wanted increases and changes or at least approved of them in one manifestation or other . " 
 = = = Reaction and recommendations = = = 
 In his report , Lord Fraser set out a number of recommendations stemming from the inquiry . Primarily , in terms of design selection and when using an international architect linking with a Scottish @-@ based firm , the report advised that a full analysis of the compatibility of different working cultures and practices needs to be made . 
 Lord Fraser advocated that when " construction management " contracts were used , civil servants or local government officials should evaluate the risks of such a contract and set out the advantages and disadvantages of embarking upon such a route before their political superiors . Alongside that recommendation , Lord Fraser stated that independent advisors should be retained and have the ability to communicate their advice to ministers , without those views being " filtered " by public officials . Similarly , where civil servants are part of large project management contracts , clear guidelines of governance should be set out and be as rigorous as standards applied in the private sector . 
 Following publication of the report , Jack McConnell stated that the Fraser recommendations would be fully implemented , and that fundamental reform of the civil service was already under way , with trained professionals being recruited to handle such projects . The First Minister emphasised that he was keen to see an increase in the specialist skills of civil servants , in order for them to be able to administer projects of such magnitude in the future . John <unk> , the most senior civil servant in Scotland , admitted that best practice had not been followed and apologised for the way the project had been handled . He did not rule out the possibility of taking disciplinary action against civil service staff , although subsequent Scottish Government investigations resulted in no action being taken against individual public officials involved with the project . 
 = = Demonstrations = = 
 In 2015 , the pro @-@ independence group People 's Voice established a demonstration camp on the grounds of the Scottish parliament demanding <unk> this camp was objected to as it risked infringing on the political neutrality of the parliamentary estate and prevented others from using the grounds . Sheriff officers have issued the campers with a notice ordering them to leave , however the campers have refused . 
 = James D. Black = 
 James Dixon Black ( September 24 , 1849 – August 5 , 1938 ) was the 39th Governor of Kentucky , serving for seven months in 1919 . He ascended to the office when Governor Augustus O. Stanley was elected to the U.S. Senate . 
 Black graduated from Tusculum College in 1872 and taught school while studying law . He was admitted to the bar in 1874 and opened his legal practice in Barbourville , Kentucky . Eventually , his son , Pitzer Dixon , and his son @-@ in @-@ law , Hiram H. Owens , became partners in his practice , called Black , Black and Owens . Deeply interested in education , he served as superintendent of the Knox County public schools for two years , and was instrumental in the founding of Union College in Barbourville . He served as president of the college from 1910 to 1912 . 
 Black was chosen as the Democratic nominee for lieutenant governor in 1915 , despite having only meager previous political experience . He was elected on a ticket with Augustus O. Stanley and was elevated to governor when Stanley resigned to take a seat in the U.S. Senate . Much of his seven months as governor were spent on his re @-@ election campaign . He was unable to satisfactorily answer charges of corruption made against the Stanley administration by his opponent , Edwin P. Morrow . Morrow won the election by more than 40 @,@ 000 votes . Black returned to his legal practice in Barbourville and served as president of a bank founded by his older brother . He was campaign manager for Alben Barkley 's senatorial campaign when he died of pneumonia on August 5 , 1938 . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 James Dixon Black was born on September 24 , 1849 nine miles from Barbourville on Richland Creek in Knox County , Kentucky . He was the youngest of twelve children born to John Craig and Clarissa " Cassie " ( Jones ) Black . Black 's older brother , Isaac Jones Black ( August 5 , 1828 - October 22 , 1866 ) , was captain of the 49th Kentucky Mounted Infantry in the Union Army during the Civil War . 
 Black was educated in the rural and subscription schools in and around Barbourville . In 1872 , he graduated from Tusculum College near Greeneville , Tennessee with a Bachelor of Arts degree . After college , Black returned to Knox County where he taught in the public schools for two years . Concurrently , he studied law , and was admitted to the bar in August 1874 . He opened his legal practice in Barbourville . 
 Black married Mary Jeanette " Nettie " Pitzer on December 2 , 1875 in Barbourville . The couple had three children : Pitzer Dixon , Gertrude Dawn , and Georgia Clarice . All were members of the Methodist Episcopal Church . All three children graduated from what is now Centre College in Danville , Kentucky . Pitzer then went on to study law at the University of Virginia . After being admitted to the bar , he became a partner in his father 's law firm . Georgia Black married Hiram Hercules Owens , who also became a partner in the Barbourville firm of Black , Black , and Owens . 
 = = Educational career = = 
 Black was elected to represent Knox and Whitley counties in the Kentucky House of Representatives in 1876 . A Democrat representing a district with a majority of Republican voters , he served a single , one @-@ year term . 
 In 1879 , Black and other citizens of Barbourville purchased stock to fund the start up of a new college in Barbourville . Black insisted that the college be named Union College , because he hoped the college would unify the community . He continued to be involved in the development of the college , serving as its attorney and as a fund @-@ raiser . Deeply interested in education , he also served as superintendent of the Knox County public schools in 1884 and 1885 , but returned to his law practice thereafter . 
 A long @-@ time Freemason , Black served as master of his local lodge on seven different occasions , was twice high priest of the Barbourville Chapter of the Royal Arch Masons , and was chosen Grand Master of Kentucky in 1888 . In 1893 , he was chosen by Kentucky governor John Y. Brown as a commissioner to the Chicago World 's Columbian Exposition , representing Kentucky 's forestry and mineral departments . 
 On September 10 , 1910 , Black was named the eighth president of Union College . The following year , his alma mater awarded him an honorary Doctor of Laws degree . He served as president of Union College until 1912 . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Black returned to politics in 1912 when he became Kentucky 's first assistant attorney general . In 1915 , he was chosen as the Democratic nominee for lieutenant governor . Black was pro @-@ temperance , and was chosen to balance the ticket with Augustus O. Stanley , who opposed prohibition . While Black defeated his opponent , Lewis L. Walker , by more than 8 @,@ 000 votes , Stanley bested Republican Edwin P. Morrow by only 421 votes , the closest gubernatorial election in the state 's history . 
 Though Stanley and Black won the election , they never became political allies . At the time of their election and service , the Kentucky Constitution prescribed that the lieutenant governor would act as governor any time the governor left the state . Consequently , Stanley refused to travel out of state on vacation because he feared he would not approve of anyone Black would appoint to any unfilled governmental offices while he was gone . 
 Black ascended to the governorship on May 19 , 1919 when Governor Stanley resigned to assume a seat in the U.S. Senate . His pro @-@ temperance stand cost him many of Stanley 's supporters , while his association with Stanley , a prohibition opponent , caused his support to wane among prohibitionists . There was no legislative session of the General Assembly during Black 's term , so potential conflicts with the legislature were avoided . 
 Black immediately faced accusations of poor appointments by Stanley . The School Textbook Commission was singled out for particular criticism . The Kentucky Court of Appeals had ruled that the Commission acted illegally in selecting textbooks submitted in dummy form . Black called on the commissioners to resign , but when they refused , he claimed he had no power to remove them except for fraud or corruption . The Louisville Courier @-@ Journal pointed out that Black could replace any Stanley appointees that had not yet been confirmed by the Senate , but Black refused to do so . Some believed that Black had agreed to retain Stanley 's appointees in exchange for Stanley 's support of Black 's re @-@ election campaign . 
 The settlement of state inheritance taxes on two estates also plagued Black . In the first case , Governor Stanley had made a compromise settlement of back taxes with L. V. Harkness before his death . The compromise was criticized , and although Black asked the attorney general to investigate , the case was not decided during Black 's tenure as governor . In the second case , Stanley had appointed three special attorneys to collect inheritance taxes from the estate of Mrs. Robert Worth Bingham . Black wanted the attorneys to resign and save the state their large fees , but refused to remove them outright . This action was made more damning because one of the attorneys was a member of Black 's campaign staff . 
 In 1919 , Black was chosen as the Democratic gubernatorial nominee over John D. Carroll , chief justice of the Kentucky Court of Appeals , by more than 20 @,@ 000 votes . The Republicans again nominated Edwin P. Morrow , who implored voters to " Right the Wrong of 1915 " . Since Black had very little record as governor in his own right , Morrow campaigned against him by attacking Stanley 's administration as corrupt . Morrow cited as evidence the tax cases of Mr. Harkness and Mrs. Bingham and Black 's inaction against the State Textbook Commission . 
 Black tried to remain positive in his race , and focused on national issues rather than defending Stanley 's administration . He touted his support of President Woodrow Wilson and declared his support for the United States ' admission into the League of Nations . His support of Wilson hurt him with German American voters , and Wilson 's handling of recent coal strikes hurt Black with the traditionally Democratic labor vote . 
 Days before the election , Morrow exposed a contract approved by the state Board of Control to purchase cloth from a man named A. S. J. Armstrong at twice its normal price . Black responded to the allegation by temporarily suspending his campaign and ordering an investigation . The investigation revealed that Armstrong was a plumber who was bidding on behalf of his brother @-@ in @-@ law , a former prison official in the Stanley administration . Despite this revelation , Black refused to remove members of the Board of Control . This issue finally sank Black 's candidacy ; Morrow won the election by more than 40 @,@ 000 votes . 
 In his final days in office , Black considered many requests for executive clemency . On December 1 , 1919 , he issued a pardon for Henry Youtsey , a recent parolee who had served eighteen years for conspiracy in the assassination of Governor William Goebel . 
 In 1918 , while still serving as lieutenant governor , Black had assumed the presidency of the John A. Black National Bank of Barbourville , named for and founded by his older brother . He became chief prohibition inspector for Kentucky in 1920 . Later , he served as director of the Barbourville Cemetery Company . While working as Ninth Congressional District campaign manager for Senator Alben Barkley in 1938 , Black developed pneumonia and died on August 5 , 1938 . He is entombed in a mausoleum at Barbourville Cemetery . 
 = John de Breton = 
 John de Breton ( sometimes John le Breton , John Breton , John <unk> or John Brito ; died c . 12 May 1275 ) was a medieval Bishop of Hereford . He served as a royal justice and sheriff before being nominated to Hereford . He is sometimes credited with the legal treatise Britton ; but in its current form Breton cannot be the author as the work refers to laws written 15 years after the bishop 's death . 
 = = Life = = 
 Breton was the son of William le Breton , a royal justice . The elder Breton , who is sometimes styled William Brito in records , came from a family who often served as justices and other legal officials . Occasionally the younger Breton appears in the records as John <unk> or John Brito . He served as Sheriff of Herefordshire from 1254 to 1257 , and then as constable and bailiff of Abergavenny around 1257 . In October 1259 he was sent abroad on matters pertaining to King Henry III of England , and Henry 's son , the future Edward I. He then served Edward as keeper of the prince 's wardrobe and then after November 1261 as the prince 's steward . 
 In late 1261 Breton is noted as owing £ 120 in the royal records . A notation next to the debt implies that he was a canon of Hereford Cathedral at this point , but the Fasti Ecclesiae Anglicanae 1066 – 1300 does not identify him as such . Breton does not appear in the records from this point until after the Battle of Evesham in 1265 , when he is noted as holding a grant of royal safeguarding . 
 Breton served as a royal justice from 1266 , first in the Court of Common Pleas , and then at the King 's Bench from 1268 . He was elected to the see of Hereford around 6 January 1269 . He was consecrated on 2 June 1269 at Waverley by Nicholas of Ely who was Bishop of Winchester . After his election and consecration , he no longer served as a royal justice . 
 Breton was given leave to go to the continent to meet Edward when he returned from Crusade , in 1273 , but the bishop did not attend Edward 's coronation . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Breton died on or before 12 May 1275 , when the custodian of the bishopric was given orders to seize Breton 's estate because of debts owed to the king . These debts dated back over 20 years , to his time as sheriff . A Thomas le Breton , presumably a relative , was a canon at Hereford Cathedral from 1273 , and probably owed his office to John . 
 A number of chronicles that mention Breton 's death also note that he was the author of a legal treatise entitled le <unk> , but this cannot be the surviving work called Britton , at least not in the current form , as that work discusses laws composed 15 years after Breton 's death . It is unclear why he was credited with the work , and whether this attribution is just a confusion of Breton with the real author or if he did in fact author the work , which was later revised . The fact that the Britton is written in French , not Latin , and that it contains little information about the theory of law , being mostly concerned with the practical application of laws , points rather strongly to an author who was a royal justice , which Breton was . 
 = River Trym = 
 The River Trym is a short river , some 4 @.@ 5 miles ( 7 @.@ 2 km ) in length , which rises in Filton , South Gloucestershire , England . The upper reaches are culverted , some underground , through mostly urban landscapes , but once it emerges into the open it flows through a nature reserve and city parks before joining the tidal River Avon at Sea Mills . 18th @-@ century water mills near the mouth gave the area its name . 
 Portus Abonae was a Roman port at the mouth which provided an embarkation point for journeys across the River Severn to South Wales . In the 18th century there were short lived attempts at creating a port and a whale fishery here . The name Trym appears to have Anglo @-@ Saxon roots . In recent years silting problems , caused by urban development have caused some difficulties , but alleviation works have helped reduce the problem . 
 = = Course = = 
 The Trym rises near Filton in South Gloucestershire , in the area of Filton Golf <unk> and much of its upper course is culverted underneath 20th century housing . It surfaces in the Bristol suburb of Southmead , then flows open through Badock 's Wood nature reserve . Just south of here is <unk> Swimming Lake , a former quarry fed by springs , the overflow running into the Trym . The river is culverted through Westbury @-@ on @-@ Trym village . A sluice here is used to divert water into a storm drain in times of high rainfall to save the village centre from flooding . 
 The Trym then disappears into culverts , re @-@ emerging at Henbury Golf Club before entering the Blaise Castle estate where it is joined on the right bank by the Hazel Brook above Coombe Dingle . The remains of Coombe Mill , which was fed by both the Hazel Brook and the Trym can be seen here . Passing under Dingle Road bridge , the river then flows through Sea Mills river park , passing under the Portway and the Severn Beach railway line before joining the river Avon . A weir under the Portway prevents flooding upstream , except during the highest spring tides . 
 = = Natural history = = 
 Badock 's Wood in Southmead is a nature reserve managed by Bristol City Council . Areas of beech , oak and ash woodland support a range of other bushes and shrubs , including hazel , maple , hawthorn and blackthorn . Badock 's Meadow , a former prefab housing estate has been reseeded with native meadow plants including <unk> daisies , yellow rattle , wild carrot and knapweed . Wildlife includes native woodland birds including woodpeckers and owls , also pipistrelle bats . 
 The Blaise Castle estate contains a variety of trees and plant life , also providing cover for birds and small mammals . Further downstream , just above Sea Mills , Himalayan Balsam and Japanese Knotweed , both invasive riverside plants have established themselves . Ducks and moorhen can be found along many stretches of the river , with gulls and estuary birds near the mouth . 
 A pollution incident by Wessex Water which allowed sewage to flow into the Trym in 2001 , killing eels , sticklebacks and invertebrates , resulted in a fine following prosecution by the Environment Agency . Other pollution incidents have followed . 
 = = History = = 
 At the confluence of the Trym with the Avon was the Roman port and small town of Portus Abonae , which took its name from the main river Avon which simply means ' river ' in British Celtic . Abona was a staging point for the Roman invasion of Wales and was at the western end of the Roman road from Silchester . 
 In the 15th century there were tide mills at <unk> , near the mouth . An attempt was made in 1712 by the entrepreneur Joshua Franklyn to open a commercial dock at the mouth of the Trym , on the Roman site , but the venture foundered after a few decades . A whale fishery enterprise set up in 1752 was equally short lived . Parts of the dock walls can still be seen . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 Linguistics sources indicate that the name Trym may derive from the Anglo @-@ Saxon , meaning ' firm ' or ' strong ' one ' . 
 = = Hydrology = = 
 The flow of the river has decreased in power in recent years , partly because of surface run @-@ off in the upper catchment of the Hazel Brook , especially from the large retail centre at Cribbs Causeway , which sends a good deal of silt into the system , slowing the flow and creating a risk of flooding downstream . This problem has now been partially alleviated by the construction of the <unk> attenuation reservoir near Cribbs Causeway . Measurements of pollution by the city council show the water to be relatively clean . 
 = Natasha Williams ( Neighbours ) = 
 Natasha " Tash " Williams is a fictional character from the Australian soap opera Neighbours , played by Valentina Novakovic . The role of Natasha is Novakovic 's first acting job and she relocated from Sydney to Melbourne for filming . Natasha was introduced to Neighbours along with her father , Michael Williams ( Sandy Winton ) and she made her debut screen appearance during the episode broadcast on 5 May 2010 . In November 2012 , Novakovic confirmed that she would be leaving Neighbours and she filmed her final scenes in December . Natasha departed on 29 March 2013 . 
 Natasha has been described as spirited , rebellious and having a burning desire to rule the school . She likes to have all the attention on her and often chooses to rebel so people will notice her . She can also be quite manipulative . Executive producer , Susan Bower said Natasha loves to gossip and wants to be a famous model . She often clashes with Summer Hoyland ( Jordy Lucas ) , who is a feminist and quite the opposite to her . Novakovic stated that Natasha and Summer are " frenemies . " The actress also explained that she finds playing Natasha challenging , as her persona is quite different from her own . Novakovic has said that she would like to see Natasha grow up , become nicer and turn over a new leaf . She expressed her desire to portray Natasha 's softer and funnier side during an interview with Digital Spy . 
 Natasha 's storylines have mainly focused on her relationship with Andrew Robinson ( Jordan Smith ) . Novakovic named this storyline as one of her favourites and said that Natasha and Andrew belong together as they bring out the worst in each other . Their relationship led to a complex love triangle involving Summer and later saw Natasha faking a pregnancy to keep Andrew . Natasha casually dates Ivan DeMarco ( Ben Knight ) and in a bid to appear more mature , she sends him naked photos of herself . They are leaked , causing a scandal amongst Natasha 's school friends . Other storylines have seen Natasha trying to achieve her dream of becoming a model , making sure she remains popular at school , coping with her father 's relationships and discovering the truth about her mother 's death . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Natasha models for a PirateNet advertising campaign , where she meets Andrew Robinson and Summer Hoyland . Natasha gets into trouble with her father , Michael ( Sandy Winton ) , after he finds out she lied by saying she was eighteen on the consent form . He threatens to sue the station owner and Andrew 's father , Paul Robinson ( Stefan Dennis ) . Natasha and Andrew work together to change the posters , so they are no longer revealing . They then attend a concert together and kiss at the end of the night . Natasha clashes with Summer and starts a rumour that her boyfriend , Chris Pappas ( James Mason ) , bought the <unk> team captaincy . Her relationship with her father is strained further when he learns she started the rumour . The schools English teacher , Libby Kennedy ( Kym Valentine ) , discovers Natasha is hiding her maths skills and makes her join the Mathletes as a punishment . Natasha wonders if Andrew is only with her because of her looks and she becomes insecure about their relationship . 
 Natasha and Andrew break up and Natasha briefly dates Kyle Canning . Natasha discovers that a student in her class is gay and tries to out them , the resulting rumours lead Chris to reveal he is gay . Michael starts dating Ruby Rogers ( <unk> Spence ) and Natasha tries to sabotage the relationship . She reveals that she does not want to see Michael get hurt . Natasha becomes head of the school social committee and she bullies the other members , in particular Sophie Ramsay ( Kaiya Jones ) , into voting for the things she wants . Natasha notices that Andrew is spending time with Summer and she steals the social money , causing the event to be cancelled . Natasha convinces Andrew to throw a party and they get back together . Michael discovers Natasha took the money and suspends her . Natasha later warns Summer to stay away from Andrew . When she notices Summer 's house is on fire , Natasha runs in to rescue her . Michael finds Natasha and they , along with Summer and Andrew , are rescued by firefighters . 
 Natasha sustains a burn on her neck and she becomes insecure about it . Natasha sees Andrew and Summer kissing , which leaves her devastated . To stop Andrew from breaking up with her , Natasha tells him she is pregnant . Michael , though initially angry , tells his daughter that he will support her . Andrew books Natasha in for an ultrasound scan and after trying to get out of it , Natasha buys fake ultrasound images over the internet . She convinces Andrew not to come into the doctor 's office with her and she gives him the fake pictures . Summer reveals the images are fake and Natasha explains that she lied because Andrew cheated on her . Michael tells Natasha that he no longer trusts her and she becomes ostracised at school . Natasha is thrown off the Mathletes team and Lisa Devine ( Sophie Tilson ) takes her place as the most popular girl in the school . Chris befriends Natasha and she and Summer apologise to each other for their actions . Chris and Natasha try to get Summer and Andrew back together and Natasha successfully challenges Lisa for the Mathletes captaincy . 
 Feeling lonely , Natasha goes out clubbing and meets Ivan DeMarco ( Ben Knight ) , an older man . Michael discovers the relationship and bans Natasha from seeing Ivan . However , Natasha continues to see him in secret and when Ivan asks her for some naked pictures , she sends him some . Natasha learns Ivan has been showing the pictures to his friends and that they are on the internet . She initially lies to Michael about who took the photos , but Michael learns the truth from Ivan . Natasha becomes desperate to win her father 's favour back and she sprays the street with derogatory graffiti about herself . However , Michael discovers she was responsible for the graffiti and he disowns her . After she is taunted about her appearance , Natasha decides to get rhinoplasty and uses Michael 's credit card to pay the deposit . Natasha then sells some of her father 's records to raise the money and Michael decides to send her to a boarding school . He changes his mind after Natasha nearly drowns in the pool at Number 30 and their relationship begins to improve . 
 Natasha begins looking for information about her mother , Helena , and learns that her aunt Emilia lives in Australia . Without revealing her identity , Natasha meets Emilia at a fashion shoot . Emilia works out Natasha is her niece and comes to Erinsborough to talk to her . Natasha learns her mother drowned and she demands the truth about her death . Michael reveals that Helena was not a strong swimmer , but she went into the sea to save Natasha . When he became aware of what was happening , he could only save one of them . Michael reassures Natasha that Helena 's death was not her fault . Michael collapses and undergoes surgery for a perforated stomach ulcer , causing Natasha to blame herself for his condition . However , she learns that Michael caught Summer cheating on her exam the day he collapsed and falls out with her friends , as they let her blame herself for what happened . After receiving her exam results , Natasha decides to study Contemporary Arts at university . 
 Michael and Emilia reveal that they are dating and Natasha accepts their relationship . However , when she learns that they were having affair at the time Helena died , Natasha takes Michael 's panel van and sets it on fire . Natasha remains angry with her father and after asking him to leave her alone , she learns he has gone to Serbia with Emilia . Natasha throws a house party , but it gets out of control and the street is trashed . When Natasha is fined by the police , she is forced to seek employment to earn some money . She competes with Kate Ramsay ( Ashleigh Brewer ) for a job at Charlie 's and Celeste McIntyre ( Cassandra Magrath ) gives them both a two @-@ week trial . When Michael informs her that he is selling the house , Natasha tries to put off potential buyers and decides to sabotage Kate 's chances of getting the job at Charlie 's . Natasha becomes upset when Mason Reeves ( Carter Doyle ) tries to ask her out , revealing that he saw her pictures online . Jade Mitchell ( Gemma Pranita ) comforts Natasha and opens up to her about an abusive relationship that she was once in . 
 Celeste gives Natasha the waitressing job at Charlie 's and she moves in with Summer and Karl Kennedy ( Alan Fletcher ) , after her house is sold . Natasha also decides to drop out of her university course , upon realising that it is not right for her . Natasha meets Ed Lee ( Sebastian Gregory ) at Charlie 's and offers to help him solve a maths equation , but he dismisses her . When she solves the problem , he invites her to a maths club . Natasha later transfers to his calculus course and Ed helps her with conditional probability , which they use to predict the outcome of a game of cards . They decide to play a game of Blackjack with a group of guys at Charlie 's , but are forced to stop when a couple of police officers walks in . Natasha convinces Ed to hold a game at the Men 's Shed , so they can continue to test the theory and make some money . Andrew comes up with an idea to use the theory to make an odds calculator mobile app . When Natasha goes to asks Ed about the idea , he introduces her to the hobby of LARPing , before agreeing to sign Andrew 's contract . 
 Natasha spends more time with Ed and attends a comic swap with him . Shortly before a press conference for the app , Ed finds an error and he and Natasha work together to fix it . While they are celebrating , Natasha and Ed almost kiss . Andrew asks Natasha to talk to a blogger about the app without Ed , which she thinks is wrong . When Ed learns what has happened , he accuses Natasha and Andrew of using him . Natasha tries to apologise , but Ed insists that she and Andrew pay him for his help and then they can go their separate ways . Ed and Natasha eventually make up and she asks him out on a date . Andrew reveals that an offer as been made for the app , but Natasha refuses to sell it . During a car journey to the city with her friends , Natasha learns that Andrew faked her signature to sell the app behind her back and an argument breaks out . Andrew tries to stop Natasha from calling the police and he bumps Chris ' arm , causing him to lose control of the car and crash . Natasha frees herself from the car , before pulling Ed from the wreckage . 
 At the hospital , Natasha blames Andrew for the crash . She learns Ed has a fractured collarbone and sits with him until he wakes up . When he does , Natasha kisses him . They begin dating , but Natasha worries that they do not have much in common . Natasha helps organise a ball for the university and takes an immediate dislike to Ed 's vintage suit . She spills coffee on it and then lends Ed a nicer one that she found . Ed realises what she has done and they fight . After apologising to each other , Natasha decides to break up with Ed , as they are too different . When Natasha finds Andrew having a fit in Charlie 's , she learns that he has epilepsy . She agrees to keep it a secret . After he collapses , Natasha encourages Andrew to go to the hospital for tests . Before he can leave , he suffers a fit in front of Paul . Andrew initially blames Natasha for causing the fit when Paul takes Charlie 's away from him . She then helps him to convince Paul to change his mind . Natasha and Andrew begin dating again in secret . They later decide to tell everyone and Summer reveals that she already knew and does not mind . Natasha later finds an old email from Andrew proclaiming his love for Summer and she begins to worry about her relationship with him . However , Andrew reassures her that he loves her and their relationship is different this time around . Natasha asks Andrew to take a month of celibacy , but they end up breaking it early . Natasha quits university and tells Andrew that she is leaving Erinsborough to travel around Europe . She asks Andrew to come with her and he agrees . They leave the following day with Paul 's blessing . 
 = = Casting = = 
 In early 2010 , it was announced that three new characters ; Doug Harris ( Mahesh <unk> ) , Michael Williams ( Sandy Winton ) and Natasha Williams were to join Neighbours in the following months . Novakovic , a performing arts college graduate , was cast in the role of Natasha . The actress had been studying architecture at university , before she chose to move into acting . Shortly after her casting was announced , Novakovic revealed that the role of Natasha was her first acting job and that while she would always be interested in architecture , she really wanted to enjoy the experience on Neighbours . Novakovic moved from Sydney to Melbourne , where Neighbours is filmed , for the role . She is three years older than the character she portrays . In 2011 , Novakovic revealed she is still happy with the career choice she made , stating " I enjoy what I 'm doing now a lot more than studying , because this is where I want to be . [ ... ] The best thing for me is that I enjoy going to work every day and have some great friends there , including the crew . It 's awesome to do something you love every single day . " 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Characterisation = = = 
 Before she entered Neighbours , Natasha was described as being " spirited , rebellious and conniving " . Channel Five 's Holy Soap website described her as being a " teen rebel " . After she entered the show , Network Ten described Natasha as having a " major attitude " and a " burning desire to rule the school . " They also go on to explain that Natasha never misses an opportunity to be the centre of attention and does whatever it takes to be noticed . However , Natasha really wants to get her father 's attention and she chooses to rebel , so that he notices her . TV Soap called Natasha a vixen and Novakovic describes Natasha as being " manipulative " and knowing what she wants . 
 During an interview , executive producer Susan Bower explained that Natasha is " a teenage troublemaker who is actually really , really clever " . Natasha wants to be a famous model , she loves to gossip and she knows how to get the boy 's attentions . Bower also added that Natasha and Summer Hoyland ( Jordy Lucas ) clash because Summer is a feminist who fights for causes , while Natasha is the opposite . Novakovic is fond of the love @-@ hate relationship Natasha shares with Summer and said that they were " frenemies . " She further explained , " They 're in the same social group at school , and despite the fact that they have so many differences , they 're similar in a lot of ways . And Summer is Natasha 's only female friend , don 't forget . " 
 Natasha 's personality began to change and in October 2010 , Novakovic said " When she arrived she was full @-@ on , and that was all a part of getting the attention she loves . It 's all about knowing that she 's liked . But she 's more settled now " . Novakovic also explained that it is " quite challenging " to play someone so different from herself , but it is fun . She also hoped that she is not as irritating as Natasha in real life and added " I 'm not a manipulative teenage girl who 's forever wanting everything her own way . " In March 2011 , Novakovic revealed that she would like to see Natasha become a nicer person , grow up and turn over a new leaf . She said " There are glimpses of the nice girl in Tash . " She later said that as she has played the villain for over a year , she would like to show Natasha 's " softer , funnier side . " Novakovic also hoped that her future storylines could see Natasha 's background and her relationship with her mother explored and developed . 
 In November 2012 , Novakovic proclaimed that Natasha was still herself , despite how much she had grown . She explained " It 's so much fun to playing such a free spirited character . I like that she 's matured and thinks a little clearer now that she is older , but I don 't think Tash could ever become boring , no matter how much she matures . " 
 = = = Family = = = 
 In order to form the father @-@ daughter bond needed for their respective roles , both Novakovic and Winton introduced each other to their families . The actors spent a lot of time together , to ensure they were comfortable together on and off screen . Natasha 's father , Michael , is a widower and she is his only child . Bower revealed Natasha has her father wrapped around her finger . Michael dotes upon Natasha and Bower opined Natasha causes havoc because he is not strict with her . Winton said he thinks Michael is not handling things with Natasha " too poorly " , but she does make things difficult for him . During a 2011 interview with Channel 5 , Winton said that Michael and Natasha 's relationship had become tortured . Winton stated that Michael wishes Natasha would stop lying to him and hoped she would get her act together , so they could have some semblance of a father / daughter relationship . Winton wanted Michael to build a better relationship with Natasha in the future as he loves her , despite the things she has done . 
 Following an incident in which Natasha sprays graffiti around Ramsay Street , Michael disowns his daughter and ignores her attempts to get back in his good books . Natasha finds the situation weird and she is hurt by her father 's actions . Novakovic said Natasha is disappointed in herself for hurting Michael so much . Natasha responds by taking advantage of her new independence to try to get Michael 's attention . She also tries to get back on her father 's good side , by doing some housekeeping , but Michael brushes it all aside . Of how Natasha feels about this , Novakovic said " She knows how much her father loves her which is why this is even more jarring , as she realises it must be killing her father to act this way . " Natasha and Michael eventually make amends , but it is not an easy journey and they have a lot to work through . Novakovic told Daniel Kilkelly of Digital Spy that the storyline would change Natasha and she would become more sensitive and less self @-@ absorbed . 
 Bower later teased an upcoming storyline which shows the beginning of Natasha wanting to find out more about her late mother . Bower told Kilkelly that the secret would be revealed in three parts , which would change Natasha and Michael 's lives forever . " In July 2011 , it was announced Natasha 's long lost aunt , Emilia ( played by Freya Stafford ) , would be introduced . The Neighbours official website said Emilia 's arrival would dig up a lot of secrets and she plays a " <unk> role in Natasha 's teenage angst . " Novakovic revealed Natasha and Emilia had met before , but Natasha was a toddler and does not remember her . The actress said Natasha and Emilia begin meeting each other in secret and get along well . Novakovic added " Although when Tash mentions her mother , Emilia 's reaction is quite strange . But there is so much coming up between these two that all this could change ! " 
 = = = Relationship with Andrew Robinson = = = 
 Natasha starts dating Andrew Robinson ( Jordan Smith ) and she believes that they are perfect for each other . Novakovic said that they " bring out the worst in each other " and added " I don 't think she could find a guy that would tolerate her like Andrew does . She thinks he 's the only guy she could possibly be with . " Natasha thinks that school and studying is not cool and is happy that Andrew feels the same , until Summer Hoyland joins their class and Andrew becomes interested in his studies . Natasha fears that she could lose her control over Andrew . Summer later asks Natasha if there is anything else , other than the physical aspect , to her relationship with Andrew . Novakovic says that " Natasha is furious , but it does make her stop and think about what she is doing . " Natasha does begin to have her doubts about the relationship and she decides to test Andrew , by telling him she wants their relationship to have to be about communicating and understanding each other . Andrew does not take the new direction of the relationship well . Novakovic said that Natasha believes the relationship between her neighbours , Susan ( Jackie Woodburne ) and Karl Kennedy ( Alan Fletcher ) , is something to be inspired by . She added " That 's what she wants to look forward to , but she 's getting way ahead of herself . Andrew likes her but he isn 't as serious as she is . " Novakovic opined that Andrew and Natasha " bring out the worst in each other " and that Natasha 's relationship with Andrew had been one of her favourite storylines . 
 Andrew and Natasha briefly split and she starts dating Kyle Canning ( Chris Milligan ) . Natasha decides to break off the relationship , but Kyle dumps her first . TV Soap said " She 's usually the one calling the shots and doing the dumping , but young Natasha is about to find out what it 's like on the other side of the fence " . They add that Natasha rarely thinks before dropping one guy and moving onto another . Natasha grows bored of Kyle 's company , but Kyle also becomes bored with his younger girlfriend and he ends their relationship . Natasha is embarrassed and she lies to Andrew about who ended the relationship first . Natasha and Andrew eventually get back together and Adelaide Now said that thrills Natasha " as she 's completely obsessed " with Andrew . 
 A love triangle between Natasha , Andrew and Summer is formed . Natasha 's feelings for Andrew grow when they organise a party together , but she notices Andrew 's concern for Summer when she collapses and warns Summer away from Andrew . Natasha later asks Andrew if he loves her , but he does not reply . In December 2010 , Summer and Andrew give into their feelings for each other and have sex . Novakovic said Natasha would be " devastated " if she knew what had happened and that she would not let Andrew and Summer off lightly . Andrew tells Natasha that he is going to business meeting , but he meets Summer instead . While they are together in Summer 's house , a fire breaks out . Natasha sees the smoke and calls her father and the emergency services before entering the house to rescue Summer , unaware Andrew is also there . Novakovic explained Natasha 's ordeal : " Natasha is pulled from the fire by her dad , Michael . Andrew and Summer are rescued separately , and Natasha has no idea of the reason why Andrew was in the house - he was cheating on her with Summer ! " After the rescue , Natasha has to come to terms with the fact she will be scarred from a burn she sustains on her neck . Novakovic said that it is a " big deal " for Natasha , as she aspires to be a model and this could ruin her chances . Novakovic also opines that Summer wants nothing more than to be with Andrew , but how can she take him when Natasha tried to save her ? Novakovic believed Natasha was blasé to their feelings adding " Deep down , I think Natasha knows that there 's something going on , but she doesn 't want to admit it to herself . But sooner or later , I reckon she 'll have to face the inevitable . " 
 = = = Fake pregnancy = = = 
 A couple of months later , Natasha discovers Andrew is cheating on her with Summer . Natasha is hurt and angry and she lies to Andrew about being pregnant . Of Natasha 's rash decision , Novakovic explained " She is hurt and the whole cheating thing has really crushed her . She feels like the fool , no one goes behind her back . And she feels they are pitying her because of her injury [ the burn she sustained in the fire ] and [ she ] really hates that . " Natasha wants Andrew and Summer to feel guilty about betraying her and she wants Andrew for herself . Andrew believes Natasha is pregnant and instead of being with Summer , he decides to stick by Natasha and their baby . Novakovic said that the new storyline is " very exciting " and she could not wait to discover the new developments . Novakovic insisted that Natasha is making the plan up as she goes along . She has not thought it out or how the whole situation might end . Her main goal is to keep Andrew and Summer apart because they betrayed and hurt her . Natasha and Andrew attend a pre @-@ natal class together and they get on quite well . During an interview with Digital Spy , Novakovic explained that Natasha is reminded of why she fell for Andrew in the first place , especially when she sees his gentle side . Because Natasha is getting along well Andrew , there are times when she feels guilty for what she is doing . Natasha does not have any sort of plan to admit the truth as she knows Andrew will be angry . 
 Novakovic enjoyed filming the storyline because there was so much drama . When she was asked if she had any sympathy for Natasha during filming , she told Digital Spy that she had to because she needed to understand how her character is feeling . Novakovic also hoped viewers would have sympathy for Natasha too . The lie starts to grow out of control and Natasha is forced to make up stories about why she does not want to go to the doctor . She later buys fake ultrasound scan photos over the internet , but Summer becomes suspicious about them and discovers they are from overseas and are fake . Summer realises that Natasha has been lying about being pregnant and reveals the truth in front of Andrew and Natasha 's father , shocking Natasha . Andrew does not take the news well and Michael blames himself for his daughter 's actions . Novakovic hoped the experience would change Natasha and she would start to grow up . The actress added that Natasha cannot cope by herself and if she continues lying to everyone , they may turn against her . 
 = = = Photo scandal = = = 
 In June 2011 , Inside Soap reported that Natasha would " hook up " with Ivan DeMarco ( Ben Knight ) , an older man she meets while out clubbing . A source told the magazine : " Tash sets her sights on somebody who isn 't necessarily good for her . " They added that Natasha is in a reckless frame of mind , which leads to more conflict with her father . In an attempt to impress Ivan and to show how mature she is , Natasha sends him " raunchy photos " of herself . The Daily Star reported that Ivan would then betray Natasha by showing the pictures to his friends . Natasha 's pictures go viral after her " act of recklessness " and TV Week said that her situation should be a lesson to anyone thinking of doing the same . Natasha 's classmates find out about the pictures and it causes a scandal at her school . Of the situation , a Neighbours insider told the paper " Tash doesn 't think of the consequences when she takes a series of very naughty pictures of herself to send to Ivan . He 's more than ten years older than her and she 's desperate to keep him interested . " 
 Natasha 's father , Michael , discovers what has happened and he is disgusted when he hears the boys at school talking about his daughter . He confronts Ivan , thinking he made Natasha take the pictures , but he is " gutted " when he learns that it was all Natasha 's idea . Natasha tries to win her father 's favour back and she sprays some unpleasant graffiti about herself around the street , before playing the victim . Natasha enjoys the attention she receives , but when Michael realises what she did , he chooses to disown his daughter and tells her that he does not care what she gets up to . Natasha is left shocked by Michael 's decision and does not know what to do about it . Natasha becomes insecure following the photo scandal and Michael 's rejection of her and she begins to obsess about improving her appearance . Natasha searches for nose jobs online , before stealing her father 's credit card and booking herself in for a procedure . 
 = = = Ed Lee = = = 
 A writer for Channel 5 revealed in March 2012 , that Natasha would be introduced to the hobby of LARPing , by a new guy who has " a surprising impact on her " . The following month , it was announced that Sebastian Gregory had joined the cast of Neighbours as " maths genius " Ed Lee , Natasha 's new love interest . Shortly after she drops out of her arts course at university , Natasha meets Ed in Charlie 's . She initially believes he is trying to ask her out on a date , but is embarrassed when she realises that she has <unk> the signals . Natasha apologises and offers to help him out with a difficult maths equation he has been trying to solve . A writer for All About Soap explained " judgemental Ed dismisses her , assuming the waitress hasn 't got much in the brains department ! " . Natasha solves Ed 's equation , proving him wrong and forcing him to apologise to her . Ed then invites Natasha to attend a university maths club , but she leaves at the last minute " refusing to be labelled a nerd . " Natasha , Andrew and Ed make an anti @-@ gambling phone app using a maths probability theory and Natasha develops feelings for Ed . While they are celebrating the completion of the phone app , Natasha and Ed embrace and almost share a kiss . However , the moment is ruined when Andrew calls Natasha . Jackie Brygel of TV Week commented " Will beauty and the geek , Tash and Ed , ever get to lock lips ? " 
 = = = Departure = = = 
 On 1 November 2012 , Novakovic confirmed that she would be leaving Neighbours to pursue acting opportunities in the United States . Of her decision to leave the serial , Novakovic stated " Australia is small compared to what else is out there , especially in Los Angeles . I love acting and it 's what I want to do , so why not be in the thick of it all ? I certainly love to do more Aussie things but , being realistic , there is nowhere near as much opportunity here . " During her first interview since announcing her departure , Novakovic explained that her main reasons for leaving Neighbours were to try other things and explore different characters . The actress said that she had wanted to do two years with the show , but when the time came , she decided to stay for another year to prepare herself to leave . 
 Novakovic told Kilkelly that she did not have the full details of how Natasha would leave , but said that it would involve " a drive off in a car " . She did not mind Natasha leaving the show without a dramatic exit , stating that leaving on good terms would be good . The actress commented that she had loved her character 's transition from " bratty " to " almost nice " and believed that Natasha was still herself no matter what she had gone through . Novakovic was pleased that she got to explore every aspect of Natasha and go through every emotion with her . She added that she wanted Natasha to be remembered by the viewers . Novakovic filmed her final scenes in December , but Natasha continued to appear on @-@ screen until 29 March 2013 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 For her portrayal of Natasha , Novakovic was included on the long list for the 2011 Most Popular New Talent Logie Award . A writer for Holy Soap said Natasha 's most memorable moment was " Showing she could be a heroine as she rushed to rescue her friends from the Ramsay Street fire . " Virginia Blackburn of the Daily Express nicknamed Natasha and Andrew " The <unk> and The Slug " after learning about Natasha 's talent for Maths . A reporter from The Sun @-@ Herald branded Natasha a " teen rebel " , while a TV Soap columnist stated that she was the new Izzy Hoyland of Neighbours . Michelle Duff of The Dominion Post called Natasha a " blonde @-@ haired vixen . " Duff also used Natasha 's fake pregnancy storyline as an example of how life in Ramsay Street is more " melodramatic " than life in a real street . Jaci Stephen of the Daily Mail also commented on Natasha 's pregnancy lie , saying " As plans go , Tash 's seem to be right down there with building an ark in Las Vegas . " Stephen later advised Natasha that there were other ways to hold on to a bloke , like using handcuffs . Laura Morgan from All About Soap said she enjoyed Natasha 's fake pregnancy storyline , saying " We love nothing more than a fake pregnancy to shake things up a bit ! " A writer for Channel 5 proclaimed the storyline was " arguably one of the soap 's most jaw @-@ dropping revenge plots . " 
 Holy Soap ran a poll on who Andrew should be with and 16 @,@ 000 votes were cast , with 92 % of viewers choosing Summer over Natasha . In June 2011 , a Daily Record reporter called Natasha a " wayward teen " and said her relationship with Ivan was likely to end in tears . In August 2011 , Anthony D. Langford of AfterElton commented " the show really needs a new direction for Tash . Her endless stunts and tricks are kind of boring at this point . Tash is a likeable character , and I love her friendship with Chris . But this character needs some growth and a new direction . And perhaps a love interest as well . " Langford later said Natasha just simply asking Aidan Foster ( Bobby Morley ) if he was gay or straight was " so in character that you weren 't shocked when she did it . " All About Soap 's Claire Crick praised Natasha 's reaction to finding out that Michael and Emilia were having an affair at the time of her mother 's death , saying " we can 't help but love her rebellious revenge ! " Crick explained " After being in the dark about her mum 's death all her life , you can 't blame Tash for lashing out , especially when she assumed that her dad was keeping things secret to protect her ... when in actual fact he was just protecting his own sordid secret ! " She added that she could not wait to see what happens next , " especially if it involves more from the tearaway teen – go , Tash ! " A Channel 5 website writer commented that Natasha was " one of Neighbours ' most colourful and controversial characters " . 
 = The Eraser = 
 The Eraser is the debut solo album by Thom Yorke of the English alternative rock band Radiohead , released on 10 July 2006 on the independent label XL Recordings . It was produced by longtime Radiohead producer Nigel Godrich . The album comprises electronic music Yorke recorded during Radiohead 's 2004 hiatus and between their 2005 rehearsals , and makes heavy use of original samples . 
 The lyrics express Yorke 's political concerns . Lead single " Harrowdown Hill " was written about the death of David Kelly , a whistleblower who allegedly committed suicide after telling a reporter that the British government had falsely identified weapons of mass destruction in Iraq . The album artwork , by longtime Radiohead cover artist Stanley Donwood , was inspired by the legend of King Canute failing to command the ocean , which Yorke likened to government attitudes towards climate change . 
 The Eraser debuted at number three on the UK Albums Chart and number two on the American Billboard 200 . It was named one of the best albums of 2006 by the NME , Rolling Stone and the Observer , and was nominated for the 2006 Mercury Music Prize and the 2007 Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album . 
 Two singles were released from the album : " Analyse " and " Harrowdown Hill " . It was followed in the same year by a B @-@ sides EP , Spitting Feathers , and in 2009 a remix album , The Eraser <unk> . In 2010 , to perform the album live , Yorke formed Atoms for Peace with musicians including Godrich and Red Hot Chili Peppers bassist Flea . 
 = = Recording = = 
 In 2004 , after finishing the tour for their sixth album Hail to the Thief ( 2003 ) , Radiohead went on hiatus . Songwriter Thom Yorke began recording The Eraser , his first solo release , with longtime Radiohead producer Nigel Godrich in late 2004 , and continued work throughout 2005 between Radiohead sessions . He told Pitchfork : " I 've been in the band since we left school and never dared do anything on my own ... It was like , ' Man , I 've got to find out what it feels like , ' you know ? " 
 The album was recorded in Radiohead 's Oxford studio , Godrich 's studio in Covent Garden , and Yorke 's home . Yorke wanted to " approach and engage with computers and not a lot else , and yet still have lots of life and energy in the music . " To generate ideas , he cut and pasted clips at random from Radiohead 's library of original samples , many of which were created on laptops in hotel rooms as the band toured . He would send sound fragments to Godrich , who identified passages that could become songs , edited them , and returned them to Yorke . Describing the collaborative process , Yorke said : " ' Black Swan ' , back in the day , was a ... nine @-@ minute load of bollocks . Except for this one juicy bit , and [ Godrich ] goes past and goes , ' That bit . Fuck the rest . ' Usually it 's something like that . " 
 To create the title track , Yorke sampled piano chords played by Radiohead guitarist Jonny Greenwood and cut them into a new order . " And it <unk> All Night " contains an " enormously shredded @-@ up " sample from " The Gloaming " ( from Hail to the Thief ) , and " Black Swan " samples a rhythm recorded by Radiohead guitarist Ed O 'Brien and drummer Philip Selway in 2000 . Yorke said " Harrowdown Hill " had been " kicking around " during the 2002 Hail to the Thief sessions , but felt it could not have worked as a Radiohead song . 
 Yorke initially intended to create instrumental tracks , but added vocals at the encouragement of Godrich . On Radiohead albums , Yorke had altered his voice with layers of reverb and digital effects ; however , for The Eraser , Godrich wanted Yorke 's voice to be " dry and loud . " As Yorke found it difficult to write lyrics to loops of music , saying he could not " react spontaneously and differently every time " , he translated the music to guitar and piano and generated new musical components in the process . 
 Yorke saved one song recorded in the Eraser sessions , " Last Flowers " , for the bonus disc of Radiohead 's seventh album , In Rainbows ( 2007 ) . Another song , " The Hollow Earth " , was finished later and released as a single in 2009 . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 The Observer described The Eraser as " an insidious collection of skittery beats and <unk> rhythms and minimal post @-@ <unk> " . The LA Times described it as " an evocative portrait of life made slippery by urban sprawl , murky political alliances and global warming ... with the blips and bleeps of Yorke 's laptop excursions coalescing into soulful , politically charged songs . " Pitchfork described it as " glitchy , sour , feminine , brooding " . Citing inspiration from the 1997 Björk album Homogenic , Yorke said the album was designed to be heard in an " isolated space – on headphones , or stuck in traffic . " Louis Patterson of the NME and Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone likened the album to the 2000 Radiohead album Kid A. 
 David Fricke of Rolling Stone felt the album 's lyrics have an " emotional and pictorial directness , rare for Yorke " . According to the Globe and Mail , " The Clock " , influenced by Arabic music , is a " gliding , droning song about losing control while pretending ' that you are still in charge ' . " " Analyse " was inspired by a blackout Yorke experienced in his hometown Oxford : " The houses were all dark , with candlelight in the windows , which is obviously how it would have been when they were built . It was beautiful . " The album title was inspired by " these huge elephants that we have in the room at the moment , in the West , and people are desperately trying to erase them from public consciousness . " 
 Yorke wrote " Harrowdown Hill " about David Kelly , a whistleblower who allegedly committed suicide after telling a reporter that the British government had falsely identified weapons of mass destruction in Iraq . Kelly 's body was found in the Harrowdown Hill woods near Yorke 's former school in Oxfordshire . According to the Globe and Mail , the song resembles a love song with a sense of " menace " and " grim political showdown " . Yorke was uncomfortable about the subject matter and conscious of Kelly 's grieving family , but felt that " not to write it would perhaps have been worse . " In an interview with the Observer , he said it was " the most angry song " he had ever written . 
 = = Artwork and packaging = = 
 The Eraser cover art was created by longtime Radiohead artist Stanley Donwood . The artwork , a linocut titled London Views , depicts a figure standing before London destroyed by flood in imitation of King Canute failing to command the ocean . It was inspired by the 2004 Boscastle flood and an article by the environmentalist Jonathan Porritt comparing the British government 's attitude to climate change to the Canute legend . The album is packaged as a single large foldout containing the CD ; Donwood and Yorke wanted to avoid using plastic . 
 = = Release = = 
 On 11 May 2006 , Yorke posted a link to <unk> on the official Radiohead website . Two days later , he wrote in a press a press announcing The Eraser : " I have been itching to do something like this for ages . It was fun and quick to do ... Yes , it 's a record ! No , it 's not a Radiohead record . " He emphasised that Radiohead were not splitting up and that the album was made " with their blessing " . Before the album 's release , " Black Swan " was used in the closing credits of the film A Scanner Darkly . 
 The Eraser was released on July 11 , 2006 by the independent label XL Recordings on CD and vinyl . Yorke said he chose the label because " it 's very mellow . There 's no corporate ethic . All [ major labels are ] like that . Stupid little boys ' games – especially really high up . " The album was also released on iTunes . It debuted at number three in the UK album chart and stayed in the top 100 for ten weeks . In the United States , it debuted at number two on the Billboard 200 , selling over 90 @,@ 000 copies in its first week . The album leaked online a month before release ; Yorke said he regretted not releasing the album as a download beforehand . 
 " Harrowdown Hill " was released as a single on August 21 and " Analyse " on November 6 . The album was followed in the same year by a B @-@ sides EP , Spitting Feathers , and in 2009 by The Eraser <unk> , an album of remixes by various artists . 
 In 2009 , to perform The Eraser live , Yorke formed Atoms for Peace with musicians including Godrich and Red Hot Chili Peppers bassist Flea . The band performed eight North American shows in 2010 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 On the review aggregator site Metacritic , The Eraser has a score of 76 / 100 , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . Reviewing The Eraser for the NME , Louis Patterson praised Yorke 's vocals and wrote : " Some will mourn its lack of viscera ; its coldness ; its reluctance to rock . But it ’ s yet another revealing glimpse into Yorke 's cryptic inner @-@ world , and one that has the courage not to hide its political message in code . " Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone said : " These aren 't Radiohead songs , or demos for Radiohead songs . They 're something different , something we haven 't heard before ... it 's intensely beautiful , yet it explores the kind of emotional turmoil that makes the angst of [ Radiohead albums ] OK Computer or The Bends sound like kid stuff . " PopMatters wrote : " The Eraser isn ’ t a masterpiece , but it ’ s much more than solo @-@ project divergence . Yorke has stayed focused and created a tight album that draws on its predecessors without being held to or afraid of them . " 
 In The Guardian , Alexis Petridis wrote that the album " offers a plethora of low @-@ key delights " , but " you can 't help imagining what it might have sounded like if Yorke had turned it over to Radiohead . " The Village Voice praised Yorke 's vocals , but found that " without the hooks of his inspirations or [ Radiohead 's ] density , the results offer pleasantries where they could provoke profound <unk> . " Pitchfork wrote that The Eraser is " strikingly beautiful and thuddingly boring in maddeningly equal measure . " 
 The Eraser was named the 15th best album of 2006 by the NME , the 30th by the Observer , and the 34th by Rolling Stone . It was nominated for the 2006 Mercury Prize and the 2007 Grammy Award for Best Alternative Music Album . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Thom Yorke , except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Adapted from the album liner notes . 
 Stanley Donwood - artwork 
 Nigel Godrich – arrangement , production , mixing , extra instrumentation 
 Jonny Greenwood – piano on " The Eraser " 
 Graeme Stewart - engineering 
 Darrell Thorp - mixing 
 Thom Yorke – music , arrangement 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = Stanley Kubrick = 
 Stanley Kubrick ( / <unk> / ; July 26 , 1928 – March 7 , 1999 ) was an American film director , screenwriter , producer , cinematographer , editor , and photographer . Part of the New Hollywood film @-@ making wave , Kubrick 's films are considered by film historian Michel Ciment to be " among the most important contributions to world cinema in the twentieth century " , and he is frequently cited as one of the greatest and most influential directors in cinematic history . His films , which are typically adaptations of novels or short stories , cover a wide range of genres , and are noted for their realism , dark humor , unique cinematography , extensive set designs , and evocative use of music . 
 Kubrick grew up in the Bronx in New York City , and attended William Howard Taft High School from 1941 to 1945 . Although he only received average grades , Kubrick displayed a keen interest in literature , photography , and film from a young age , and taught himself all aspects of film production and directing after graduating from high school . After working as a photographer for Look magazine in the late 1940s and early 1950s , he began making short films on a shoestring budget , and made his first major Hollywood film , The Killing , for United Artists in 1956 . This was followed by two collaborations with Kirk Douglas , the war picture Paths of Glory ( 1957 ) and the historical epic Spartacus ( 1960 ) . His reputation as a filmmaker in Hollywood grew , and he was approached by Marlon Brando to film what would become One @-@ Eyed Jacks ( 1961 ) , though Brando eventually decided to direct it himself . Creative differences arising from his work with Douglas and the film studios , a dislike of Hollywood , and a growing concern about crime in America prompted Kubrick to move to the United Kingdom in 1961 , where he spent most of the remainder of his life and career . His home at Childwickbury Manor in Hertfordshire , which he shared with his wife Christiane , became his workplace , where he did his writing , research , editing , and management of production details . This allowed him to have almost complete artistic control over his films , but with the rare advantage of having financial support from major Hollywood studios . His first British productions were two films with Peter Sellers , Lolita ( 1962 ) and Dr. Strangelove ( 1964 ) . 
 Kubrick is noted for his attention to detail and skillful use of music . A demanding perfectionist , he assumed control over most aspects of the filmmaking process , from direction and writing to editing , and took painstaking care with researching his films and staging scenes , working in close coordination with his actors and other collaborators . He often asked for several dozen retakes of the same scene in a movie , which resulted in many conflicts with his casts . Despite the resulting notoriety among actors , many of Kubrick 's films broke new ground in cinematography . The scientific realism and innovative special effects of 2001 : A Space Odyssey ( 1968 ) were without precedent in the history of cinema , and the film earned him his only personal Oscar , for Best Visual Effects . Steven Spielberg has referred to the film as his generation 's " big bang " , and it is often included in polls of the greatest films ever made . For the 18th @-@ century period film Barry Lyndon ( 1975 ) , Kubrick obtained lenses developed by Zeiss for NASA , to film scenes under natural candlelight . With The Shining ( 1980 ) , he became one of the first directors to make use of a Steadicam for stabilized and fluid tracking shots . While many of Kubrick 's films were controversial and initially received mixed reviews upon release — particularly A Clockwork Orange ( 1971 ) , which Kubrick pulled from circulation in the UK following a mass media frenzy — most of his films were nominated for Oscars , Golden Globes , or BAFTA Awards . His last film , Eyes Wide Shut , was completed shortly before his death in 1999 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Stanley Kubrick was born on July 26 , 1928 , in the Lying @-@ In Hospital at 307 Second Avenue in Manhattan , New York City . He was the first of two children of Jacob Leonard Kubrick ( May 21 , 1902 – October 19 , 1985 ) , known as Jack or Jacques , and his wife Sadie Gertrude Kubrick ( née <unk> ; October 28 , 1903 – April 23 , 1985 ) , known as Gert , both of whom were Jewish . His sister , Barbara Mary Kubrick , was born in May 1934 . Jack Kubrick , whose parents and paternal grandparents were of Polish , Austrian , and Romanian origin , was a doctor , graduating from the New York Homeopathic Medical College in 1927 , the same year he married Kubrick 's mother , the child of Austrian immigrants . Kubrick 's great @-@ grandfather , Hersh Kubrick ( also spelled <unk> or <unk> ) , arrived at Ellis Island via Liverpool by ship on December 27 , 1899 , at the age of 47 , leaving behind his wife and two grown children , one of whom was Stanley 's grandfather Elias , to start a new life with a younger woman . Elias Kubrick followed in 1902 . At Stanley 's birth , the <unk> lived in an apartment at 2160 Clinton Avenue in the Bronx . Although his parents had been married in a Jewish ceremony , Kubrick did not have a religious upbringing , and would later profess an atheistic view of the universe . By the district standards of the West Bronx , the family was fairly wealthy , his father earning a good income as a physician . 
 Soon after his sister 's birth , Kubrick began schooling in Public School 3 in the Bronx , and moved to Public School 90 in June 1938 . Although his IQ was discovered to be above average , his attendance was poor , and he missed 56 days in his first term alone , as many as he attended . He displayed an interest in literature from a young age , and began reading Greek and Roman myths and the fables of the Grimm brothers which " instilled in him a lifelong affinity with Europe " . He spent most Saturdays during the summer watching the New York Yankees , and would later photograph two boys watching the game in an assignment for Look magazine to emulate his own childhood excitement with baseball . When Kubrick was 12 , his father Jack taught him chess . The game remained a lifelong interest of Kubrick 's , appearing in many scenes of his films . Kubrick himself , who later became a member of the United States Chess Federation , explained that chess helped him develop " patience and discipline " in making decisions . At the age of 13 , Kubrick 's father bought him a Graflex camera , triggering a fascination with still photography . He became friends with a neighbor , Marvin Taub , who shared his passion for photography . Taub had his own darkroom , where the young Kubrick and he would spend many hours perusing photographs and watching the chemicals " magically make images on photographic paper " . The two indulged in numerous photographic projects for which they roamed the streets for interesting subjects to capture , and spent time in local cinemas studying films . Freelance photographer Weegee ( Arthur Fellig ) had a considerable influence on Kubrick 's development as a photographer ; Kubrick would later hire Fellig as the special stills photographer for Dr. Strangelove ( 1964 ) . As a teenager , Kubrick was also interested in jazz , and briefly attempted a career as a drummer . 
 Kubrick attended William Howard Taft High School from 1941 to 1945 . One of his classmates was Edith <unk> , later known as the singer Eydie <unk> . Though he joined the school 's photographic club , which permitted him to photograph the school 's events in their magazine , he was a mediocre student , with a meager 67 grade average . <unk> and shy , Kubrick had a low attendance record , and often skipped school to watch double @-@ feature films . He graduated in 1945 , but his poor grades , combined with the demand for college admissions from soldiers returning from the Second World War , eliminated hope of higher education . Later in life , Kubrick spoke disdainfully of his education and of contemporary American schooling as a whole , maintaining that schools were ineffective in stimulating critical thinking and student interest . His father was disappointed in his son 's failure to achieve excellence in school , of which he felt Stanley was fully capable . Jack also encouraged Stanley to read from the former 's library at home , while at the same time permitting Stanley to take up photography as a serious hobby . 
 = = Photographic career = = 
 While still in high school , Kubrick was chosen as an official school photographer for a year . In the mid @-@ 1940s , since he was not able to gain admission to day session classes at colleges , he briefly attended evening classes at the City College of New York . Eventually , he sold a photographic series to Look magazine , having taken a photo to Helen O 'Brian , head of the photographic department , who purchased it without hesitation for £ 25 on the spot . It was printed on June 26 , 1945 . Kubrick supplemented his income by playing chess " for quarters " in Washington Square Park and various Manhattan chess clubs . 
 In 1946 , he became an apprentice photographer for Look and later a full @-@ time staff photographer . G. Warren <unk> , Jr . , another new photographer for the magazine at the time , recalled that he thought Kubrick lacked the personality to make it as a director in Hollywood , remarking , " Stanley was a quiet fellow . He didn 't say much . He was thin , skinny , and kind of poor — like we all were " . Kubrick quickly became known , however , for his story @-@ telling in photographs . His first , published on April 16 , 1946 , was entitled " A Short Story from a Movie Balcony " and staged a fracas between a man and a woman , during which the man is slapped in the face , caught genuinely by surprise . In another assignment , 18 pictures were taken of various people waiting in a dental office . It has been said retrospectively that this project demonstrated an early interest of Kubrick in capturing individuals and their feelings in mundane environments . In 1948 , he was sent to Portugal to document a travel piece , and covered the Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus in Sarasota , Florida . Kubrick , a boxing enthusiast , eventually began photographing boxing matches for the magazine . His earliest , " <unk> " , was published on January 18 , 1949 , and captured a boxing match and the events leading up to it , featuring Walter Cartier . On April 2 , 1949 , he published a photo essay , named " Chicago @-@ City of Extremes " in Look , which displayed his talent early on for creating atmosphere with imagery , including a photograph taken above a congested Chicago street at night . The following year , on July 18 , 1950 , the magazine published his photo essay , " Working Debutante - Betsy von Furstenberg " , which featured a Pablo Picasso portrait of Angel F. de Soto in the background . Kubrick was also assigned to photograph numerous jazz musicians , from Frank Sinatra and Errol Garner to George Lewis , Eddie Condon , Phil Napoleon , Oscar <unk> , Alphonse <unk> , Muggsy Spanier , Sharkey Bonano , and others . 
 Kubrick married his high @-@ school sweetheart Toba Metz on May 28 , 1948 . They lived together in a small apartment at 36 West 16th Street , off 6th Avenue just north of Greenwich Village . During this time , Kubrick began frequenting film screenings at the Museum of Modern Art and the cinemas of New York City . He was inspired by the complex , fluid camerawork of the director Max Ophüls , whose films influenced Kubrick 's later visual style , and by the director Elia Kazan , whom he described as America 's " best director " at that time , with his ability of " performing miracles " with his actors . Friends began to notice that Kubrick had become obsessed with the art of filmmaking — one friend , David Vaughn , observed that Kubrick would scrutinize the film at the cinema when it went silent , and would go back to reading his paper when people started talking . He also spent many hours reading books on film theory and writing down notes . Sergei Eisenstein 's theoretical writings had a profound impact on Kubrick , and he took a great number of notes from books in the library of Arthur Rothstein , the photographic technical director of Look magazine . 
 = = Film career = = 
 = = = Short films ( 1951 – 53 ) = = = 
 Kubrick shared a love of film with his school friend Alexander Singer , who after graduating from high school had the intention of directing a film version of Homer 's The Iliad . Through Singer , who worked in the offices of the newsreel production company , The March of Time , Kubrick learned that it could cost $ 40 @,@ 000 to make a proper short film , money he could not afford . However , he had $ 1500 in savings and managed to produce a few short documentaries fueled by encouragement from Singer . He began learning all he could about filmmaking on his own , calling film suppliers , laboratories , and equipment rental houses . 
 Kubrick decided to make a short film documentary about boxer Walter Cartier , whom he had photographed and written about for Look magazine a year earlier . He rented a camera and produced a 16 @-@ minute black @-@ and @-@ white documentary , Day of the Fight . Kubrick found the money independently to finance it . He had considered asking Montgomery Clift to narrate it , whom he had met during a photographic session for Look , but settled on CBS news veteran Douglas Edwards . According to Paul Duncan the film was " remarkably accomplished for a first film " , and was notable for using the reverse tracking shot to film a scene in which the brothers walk towards the camera , a device later to become one of Kubrick 's characteristic camera movements . Vincent Cartier , Walter 's brother and manager , later reflected on his observations of Kubrick during the filming . He said , " Stanley was very stoic , impassive but imaginative type person with strong , imaginative thoughts . He commanded respect in a quiet , shy way . Whatever he wanted , you complied , he just captivated you . Anybody who worked with Stanley did just what Stanley wanted " . After a score was added by Singer 's friend Gerald Fried , Kubrick had spent $ 3900 in making it , and sold it to RKO @-@ Pathé for $ 4000 , which was the most the company had ever paid for a short film at the time . Kubrick described his first effort at filmmaking as having been valuable since he believed himself to have been forced to do most of the work , and he later declared that the " best education in film is to make one " . 
 Inspired by this early success , Kubrick quit his job at Look and visited professional filmmakers in New York City , asking many detailed questions about the technical aspects of film @-@ making . He stated that he was given the confidence during this period to become a filmmaker because of the number of bad films he had seen , remarking , " I don 't know a goddamn thing about movies , but I know I can make a better film than that " . He began making Flying Padre ( 1951 ) , a film which documents Reverend Fred <unk> , who travels some 4 @,@ 000 miles to visit his 11 churches . The film was originally going to be called " Sky Pilot " , a pun on the slang term for a priest . During the course of the film , the priest performs a burial service , confronts a boy bullying a girl , and makes an emergency flight to aid a sick mother and baby into an ambulance . Several of the views from and of the plane in Flying Padre are later echoed in 2001 : A Space Odyssey ( 1968 ) with the footage of the spacecraft , and a series of close @-@ ups on the faces of people attending the funeral were most likely inspired by Sergei Eisenstein 's Battleship Potemkin ( 1925 ) and Ivan the Terrible ( 1944 / 1958 ) . 
 Flying Padre was followed by The Seafarers ( 1953 ) , Kubrick 's first color film , which was shot for the Seafarers International Union in June 1953 . It has shots of ships , machinery , a canteen , and a union meeting . For the cafeteria scene in the film , Kubrick chose a long , sideways @-@ shooting dolly shot to establish the life of the seafarer 's community ; this shot is an early demonstration of a technique which would become a signature of his . The montage of speaker and audience echoes scenes from Eisenstein 's Strike ( 1925 ) and October ( 1928 ) . Day of the Fight , Flying Padre and The Seafarers constitute Kubrick 's only surviving documentary works , although some historians believe he made others . 
 = = = Early feature work ( 1953 – 55 ) = = = 
 After raising $ 1000 showing his short films to friends and family , Kubrick found the finances to begin making his first feature film , Fear and Desire ( 1953 ) , originally running with the title The Trap , written by his friend Howard Sackler . Kubrick 's uncle , Martin <unk> , a Los Angeles businessman , invested a further $ 9000 on condition that he be credited as executive producer of the film . Kubrick assembled several actors and a small crew totaling 14 people ( five actors , five crewmen , and four Mexicans to help transport the equipment ) and flew to the San Gabriel Mountains in California for a five @-@ week , low @-@ budget shoot . Later renamed The Shape of Fear before finally being named Fear and Desire , it is a fictional allegory about a team of soldiers who survive a plane crash and are caught behind enemy lines in a war . During the course of the film , one of the soldiers becomes infatuated with an attractive girl in the woods and binds her to a tree . This scene is noted for its close @-@ ups on the face of the actress . Kubrick had intended for Fear and Desire to be a silent picture in order to ensure low production costs ; the added sounds , effects , and music ultimately brought production costs to around $ 53 @,@ 000 , exceeding the budget . He was bailed out by producer Richard de Rochemont on the condition that he help in de Rochemont 's production of a five @-@ part television series about Abraham Lincoln on location in Hodgenville , Kentucky . 
 Fear and Desire garnered several positive reviews upon release , but was nonetheless a commercial failure . Critics such as the reviewer from The New York Times believed that Kubrick 's professionalism as a photographer shone through in the picture , and that he " artistically caught glimpses of the grotesque attitudes of death , the <unk> of hungry men , as well as their bestiality , and in one scene , the wracking effect of lust on a pitifully juvenile soldier and the pinioned girl he is guarding " . Columbia University scholar Mark Van Doren was highly impressed by the scenes with the girl bound to the tree , remarking that it would live on as a " beautiful , terrifying and weird " sequence which illustrated Kubrick 's immense talent and guaranteed his future success . Kubrick himself later expressed embarrassment with Fear and Desire , however , and attempted over the years to keep prints of the film out of circulation . 
 Following Fear and Desire , Kubrick began working on ideas for a new boxing film . Due to the commercial failure of his first feature , Kubrick avoided asking for further investments , but commenced a film noir script with Howard O. Sackler . Originally under the title Kiss Me , Kill Me , and then The Nymph and the Maniac , Killer 's Kiss ( 1955 ) is a 67 @-@ minute film noir about a young heavyweight boxer 's involvement with a woman being abused by her criminal boss . Like Fear and Desire , it was privately funded by Kubrick 's family and friends , with some $ 40 @,@ 000 put forward from Bronx pharmacist Morris <unk> . Kubrick began shooting footage in Times Square , and frequently explored during the filming process , experimenting with cinematography and considering the use of unconventional angles and imagery . He initially chose to record the sound on location , but encountered difficulties with shadows from the microphone booms , restricting camera movement . His decision to drop the sound in favor of imagery was a costly one ; after 12 – 14 weeks shooting the picture , he spent some seven months and $ 35 @,@ 000 working on the sound . Alfred Hitchcock 's Blackmail ( 1929 ) directly influenced the film with the painting laughing at a character , and Martin Scorsese has , in turn , cited Kubrick 's innovative shooting angles and atmospheric shots in Killer 's Kiss as an influence on Raging Bull ( 1980 ) . Actress Irene Kane , the star of the film , observed : " Stanley 's a fascinating character . He thinks movies should move , with a minimum of dialogue , and he 's all for sex and sadism " . Killer 's Kiss met with limited commercial success and made very little money in comparison with its production budget of $ 75 @,@ 000 . Although critics have praised the film 's camerawork , its acting and story are generally considered mediocre . 
 = = = Hollywood success ( 1956 – 61 ) = = = 
 While playing chess in Washington Square , Kubrick met producer James B. Harris , who considered Kubrick to be " the most intelligent , most creative person I have ever come in contact with " , and the two formed the Harris @-@ Kubrick Pictures Corporation in 1955 . Harris purchased the rights to Lionel White 's novel Clean Break for $ 10 @,@ 000 and Kubrick wrote the script , but upon Kubrick 's suggestion , they hired film noir novelist Jim Thompson to write the dialog for the film — which later became The Killing ( 1956 ) — about a meticulously planned racetrack robbery gone wrong . The film starred Sterling Hayden , with whom Kubrick had been impressed in The Asphalt Jungle ( 1950 ) . Kubrick and Harris moved to Los Angeles from New York and signed with the Jaffe Agency to shoot the picture , which became Kubrick 's first full @-@ length feature film shot with a professional cast and crew . The Union in Hollywood stated that Kubrick would not be permitted to be both the director and the cinematographer of the movie , so veteran cinematographer Lucien Ballard was hired for the shooting . Kubrick agreed to waive his fee for the production , which was shot in just 24 days on a budget of $ 330 @,@ 000 . He clashed with Ballard during the shooting , and on one occasion Kubrick threatened to fire Ballard following a camera dispute , despite being only 27 years old at the time and 20 years Ballard 's junior . Hayden recalled that Kubrick was " cold and detached . Very mechanical , always confident . I 've worked with few directors who are that good " . The Killing failed to secure a proper release across the United States ; the film made little money , and was promoted only at the last minute , as a second feature to the Western movie <unk> ! ( 1956 ) . Several contemporary critics lauded the film , however , with a reviewer for TIME comparing its camerawork to that of Orson Welles . Today , critics generally consider The Killing to be among the best films of Kubrick 's early career ; its nonlinear narrative and clinical execution also had a major influence on later directors of crime films , including Quentin Tarantino . Dore Schary of Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer was highly impressed as well , and offered Kubrick and Harris $ 75 @,@ 000 to write , direct , and produce a film , which ultimately became Paths of Glory ( 1957 ) . 
 Paths of Glory , set during World War I , is based on Humphrey Cobb 's 1935 antiwar novel , which Kubrick had read while waiting in his father 's office . Schary of MGM was familiar with the novel , but stated that the company would not finance another war picture , given their backing of the anti @-@ war film The Red Badge of Courage ( 1951 ) . After Schary was fired by MGM in a major shake @-@ up , Kubrick and Harris managed to interest Kirk Douglas in playing Colonel Dax . The film , shot in Munich , from January 1957 , follows a French army unit ordered on an impossible mission , and follows with a war trial of Colonel Dax and his men for misconduct . For the battle scene , Kubrick meticulously lined up six cameras one after the other along the boundary of no @-@ man 's land , with each camera capturing a specific field and numbered , and gave each of the hundreds of extras a number for the zone in which they would die . Kubrick himself operated an Arriflex camera for the battle , zooming in on Douglas . Paths of Glory became Kubrick 's first significant commercial success , and established him as an up @-@ and @-@ coming young filmmaker . Critics praised the film 's unsentimental , spare , and unvarnished combat scenes and its raw , black @-@ and @-@ white cinematography . Bosley Crowther of The New York Times wrote : " The close , hard eye of Mr Kubrick 's sullen camera bores directly into the minds of scheming men and into the hearts of patient , frightened soldiers who have to accept orders to die " . Despite the praise , the Christmas release date was criticized , and the subject was a controversial one in Europe . The film was banned in France until 1974 for its " unflattering " depiction of the French military , and was censored by the Swiss Army until 1970 . 
 Marlon Brando contacted Kubrick , asking him to direct a film adaption of the Charles <unk> western novel , The Authentic Death of Hendry Jones , featuring Pat Garrett and Billy the Kid . Brando was highly impressed with the director , remarking that " Stanley is unusually perceptive , and delicately attuned to people . He has an adroit intellect , and is a creative thinker — not a repeater , not a fact @-@ gatherer . He digests what he learns and brings to a new project an original point of view and a reserved passion " . The two worked on a script for six months , begun by a then unknown Sam Peckinpah . Many disputes broke out over the project , and in the end , Kubrick distanced himself from what would become One @-@ Eyed Jacks ( 1961 ) . 
 In February 1959 , Kubrick received a phone call from Kirk Douglas asking him to direct Spartacus ( 1960 ) , based on the true life story of the historical figure Spartacus and the events of the Third Servile War . Douglas had acquired the rights to the novel by Howard Fast and blacklisted screenwriter Dalton Trumbo began penning the script . It was produced by Douglas , who also starred as rebellious slave Spartacus , and cast Laurence Olivier as his foe , the Roman general and politician Marcus Licinius Crassus . Douglas hired Kubrick for a reported fee of $ 150 @,@ 000 to take over direction soon after he fired director Anthony Mann . Kubrick had , at 31 , already directed four feature films , and this became his largest by far , with a cast of over 10 @,@ 000 and a large budget of $ 6 million . At the time , this was the most expensive film ever made in America , and Kubrick became the youngest director in Hollywood history to helm an epic . It was the first time that Kubrick filmed using the anamorphic 35mm horizontal Super Technirama process to achieve ultra @-@ high definition , which allowed him to capture large panoramic scenes , including one with 8 @,@ 000 trained soldiers from Spain representing the Roman army . Disputes broke out during the filming . Kubrick complained about not having full creative control over the artistic aspects , insisting on <unk> extensively during the production . Kubrick and Douglas were also at odds over the script , with Kubrick angering Douglas when he cut all but two of his lines from the opening 30 minutes . Despite the on @-@ set troubles , Spartacus was a critical and commercial success , earning $ 14 @.@ 6 million at the box office in its first run . The film established Kubrick as a major director , receiving six Academy Award nominations and winning four ; it ultimately convinced him that if so much could be made of such a problematic production , he could achieve anything . Spartacus also marked , however , the end of the working relationship between Kubrick and Douglas . 
 = = = Collaboration with Peter Sellers ( 1962 – 64 ) = = = 
 Kubrick and Harris made a decision to film Kubrick 's next movie Lolita ( 1962 ) in England , due to clauses placed on the contract by producers Warner Bros. that gave them complete control over every aspect of the film , and the fact that the Eady plan permitted producers to write off the costs if 80 % of the crew were English . Instead , they signed a $ 1 million deal with Eliot Hyman 's Associated Artists Productions , and a clause which gave them the artistic freedom that they desired . Lolita , Kubrick 's first attempt at black comedy , was an adaptation of the novel of the same name by Vladimir Nabokov , the story of a middle @-@ aged college professor becoming infatuated with a 12 @-@ year @-@ old girl . Stylistically , Lolita , starring Peter Sellers , James Mason , Shelley Winters , and Sue Lyon , was a transitional film for Kubrick , " marking the turning point from a naturalistic cinema ... to the surrealism of the later films " , according to film critic Gene Youngblood . Kubrick was deeply impressed by the chameleon @-@ like range of actor Peter Sellers and gave him one of his first opportunities to improvize wildly during shooting , while filming him with three cameras . 
 Lolita was shot over 88 days on a budget of $ 2 million at Elstree Studios , between October 1960 and March 1961 . Kubrick often clashed with Shelley Winters , whom he found " very difficult " and demanding , and nearly fired at one point . Because of its provocative story , Lolita was Kubrick 's first film to generate controversy ; he was ultimately forced to comply with censors and remove much of the erotic element of the relationship between Mason 's Humbert and Lyon 's Lolita which had been evident in Nabokov 's novel . The film was not a major critical or commercial success upon release , earning $ 3 @.@ 7 million at the box office on its opening run . Lolita has since become acclaimed by film critics . Social historian Stephen E. Kercher documented that the film " demonstrated that its director possessed a keen , satiric insight into the social landscape and sexual hang @-@ ups of cold war America " , while Jon <unk> of Film4 wrote : " Lolita , with its acute mix of pathos and comedy , and Mason 's mellifluous delivery of Nabokov 's sparkling lines , remains the definitive depiction of tragic transgression " . 
 Kubrick 's next project was Dr. Strangelove or : How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb ( 1964 ) , another satirical black comedy . Kubrick became preoccupied with the issue of nuclear war as the Cold War unfolded in the 1950s , and even considered moving to Australia because he feared that New York City might be a likely target for the Russians . He studied over 40 military and political research books on the subject and eventually reached the conclusion that " nobody really knew anything and the whole situation was absurd " . After buying the rights to the novel Red Alert , Kubrick collaborated with its author , Peter George , on the script . It was originally written as a serious political thriller , but Kubrick decided that a " serious treatment " of the subject would not be believable , and thought that some of its most salient points would be fodder for comedy . Kubrick and George then reworked the script as a satire ( provisionally titled " The Delicate Balance of Terror " ) in which the plot of Red Alert was situated as a film @-@ within @-@ a @-@ film made by an alien intelligence , but this idea was also abandoned , and Kubrick decided to make the film as " an outrageous black comedy " . Just before filming began , Kubrick hired noted journalist and satirical author Terry Southern to transform the script into its final form , a black @-@ comedy , loaded with sexual innuendo , becoming a film which showed Kubrick 's talents as " unique kind of absurdist " according to the film scholar Abrams . Although Southern certainly made major contributions to final script , and was co @-@ credited ( above Peter George ) in the film 's opening titles , his perceived role in the writing later led to a public rift between Kubrick and Peter George , who subsequently complained in a letter to Life magazine that Southern 's intense but relatively brief ( November 16 to December 28 , 1962 ) involvement with the project was being given undue prominence in the media , while his own role as the author of the film 's source novel , and his ten @-@ month stint as the script 's co @-@ writer , were being downplayed - a perception Kubrick evidently did little to address . 
 Kubrick found that Dr. Strangelove , a $ 2 million production which employed what became the " first important visual effects crew in the world " , would be impossible to make in the U.S. for various technical and political reasons , forcing him to move production to England . It was shot in 15 weeks , ending in April 1963 , after which Kubrick spent eight months editing it . Peter Sellers again agreed to work with Kubrick , and ended up playing three different roles in the film . Upon release , the film stirred up much controversy and mixed opinions . The New York Times film critic Bosley Crowther worried that it was a " discredit and even contempt for our whole defense establishment ... the most shattering sick joke I 've ever come across " , while Robert <unk> of Out of This World in a February 1970 article called it a " <unk> satire " . Kubrick responded to the criticism , stating : " A satirist is someone who has a very skeptical view of human nature , but who still has the optimism to make some sort of a joke out of it . However brutal that joke might be " . Today , the film is considered to be one of the sharpest comedy films ever made , and holds a near perfect 99 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes based on 68 reviews as of August 2015 . It was voted the 39th @-@ greatest American film and third @-@ greatest comedy film of all time by the American Film Institute , and in 2010 , it was voted the sixth @-@ best comedy film of all time by The Guardian . 
 = = = Ground @-@ breaking cinema ( 1965 – 71 ) = = = 
 Kubrick spent five years developing his next film , 2001 : A Space Odyssey ( 1968 ) , having been highly impressed with science fiction writer Arthur C. Clarke 's novel Childhood 's End , about a superior race of alien beings who assist mankind in eliminating their old selves . After meeting Clarke in New York City in April 1964 , Kubrick made the suggestion to work on his 1948 short story The Sentinel , about a tetrahedron which is found on the Moon which alerts aliens of mankind . That year , Clarke began writing the novel 2001 : A Space Odyssey , and the screenplay was written by Kubrick and Clarke in collaboration . The film 's theme , the birthing of one intelligence by another , is developed in two parallel intersecting stories on two very different times scales . One depicts transitions between various stages of man , from ape to " star child " , as man is reborn into a new existence , each step shepherded by an enigmatic alien intelligence seen only in its artifacts : a series of seemingly indestructible eons @-@ old black monoliths . In space , the enemy is a supercomputer known as HAL who runs the spaceship , a character which novelist Clancy <unk> described as being " far , far more human , more humorous and conceivably decent than anything else that may emerge from this far @-@ seeing enterprise " . 
 Kubrick spent a great deal of time researching the film , paying particular attention to accuracy and detail in what the future may look like . He was granted permission by NASA to observe the spacecraft being used in the Ranger 9 mission for accuracy . Filming commenced on December 29 , 1965 , with the excavation of the monolith on the moon , and footage was shot in Namib Desert in early 1967 , with the ape scenes completed in the summer of that year . The special effects team continued working diligently until the end of the year to complete the film , taking the cost to $ 10 @.@ 5 million . 2001 : A Space Odyssey was conceived as a Cinerama spectacle and was photographed in Super Panavision 70 , giving the viewer a " dazzling mix of imagination and science " through ground @-@ breaking effects , which earned Kubrick his only personal Oscar , an Academy Award for Visual Effects . Louise Sweeney of the Christian Science Monitor called the film the " ultimate trip " while praising one of the scenes where the viewer moves through space while witnessing a vibrant mix of lighting , color , and patterns . Kubrick said of the concept of the film in an interview with Rolling Stone : " On the deepest psychological level , the film 's plot symbolized the search for God , and finally postulates what is little less than a scientific definition of God . The film revolves around this metaphysical conception , and the realistic hardware and the documentary feelings about everything were necessary in order to undermine your built @-@ in resistance to the poetical concept " . 
 Upon release in 1968 , 2001 : A Space Odyssey was not an immediate hit among many critics , who faulted its lack of dialogue , slow pacing , and seemingly impenetrable storyline . The film appeared to defy genre convention , much unlike any science @-@ fiction movie before it , and clearly different from any of Kubrick 's earlier films or stories . Kubrick was particularly outraged by a scathing review from Pauline Kael , who called it " the biggest amateur movie of them all " , with Kubrick doing " really every dumb thing he ever wanted to do " . Despite the initial poor critical response , 2001 : A Space Odyssey gradually gained popularity and earned $ 31 million worldwide by the end of 1972 . Today , it is widely considered to be one of the greatest and most influential films ever made , and is a staple on All Time Top 10 lists . Baxter describes the film as " one of the most admired and discussed creations in the history of cinema " , and Steven Spielberg has referred to it as " the big bang of his film making generation " . For LoBrutto it " positioned Stanley Kubrick as a pure artist ranked among the masters of cinema " . 
 After completing 2001 : A Space Odyssey , Kubrick searched for a project that he could film quickly on a small budget . He settled on A Clockwork Orange ( 1971 ) at the end of 1969 , an exploration of violence and experimental rehabilitation by law enforcement authorities , based around the character of Alex ( portrayed by Malcolm McDowell ) . Kubrick had originally received a copy of Anthony Burgess 's novel of the same name from Terry Southern while they were working on Dr. Strangelove , but had rejected it on the grounds that <unk> , a street language for young teenagers , was too difficult to comprehend . In 1969 , the decision to make a film about the degeneration of youth was a more timely one ; the New Hollywood movement was witnessing a great number of films that were centered around the sexuality and rebelliousness of young people , which no doubt influenced Kubrick in Baxter 's opinion . A Clockwork Orange was shot over the winter of 1970 @-@ 1 on a budget of £ 2 million . Kubrick abandoned his use of CinemaScope in the filming , deciding that the 1 @.@ 66 : 1 widescreen format was , in the words of Baxter , an " acceptable compromise between spectacle and intimacy " , and favored his " rigorously symmetrical framing " , which " increased the beauty of his compositions " . The film heavily features " pop erotica " of the period , including a giant white plastic set of male genitals , decor which Kubrick had intended to give it a " slightly futuristic " look . McDowell 's role in Lindsay Anderson 's if .... ( 1968 ) was crucial to his casting as Alex , and Kubrick professed that he probably would not have made the film if McDowell had been unavailable . 
 Because of its depiction of teenage violence , A Clockwork Orange became one of the most controversial films of the decade , and part of an ongoing debate about violence and its glorification in cinema . It received an X @-@ rated certificate upon release , just before Christmas in 1971 , though many critics saw much of the violence depicted in the film as satirical , and less violent than Straw Dogs , which had been released a month earlier . Kubrick personally pulled the film from release in the United Kingdom after receiving death threats following a series of copycat crimes based on the film ; it was thus completely unavailable legally in the UK until after Kubrick 's death , and not re @-@ released until 2000 . John Trevelyan , the censor of the film , personally considered A Clockwork Orange to be " perhaps the most brilliant piece of cinematic art I 've ever seen , and believed it to present an " intellectual argument rather than a sadistic spectacle " in its depiction of violence , but acknowledged that many would not agree . Ignoring the negative media hype over the film , A Clockwork Orange received four Academy Award nominations , for Best Picture , Best Director , Best Screenplay and Best Editing , and was named by the New York Film Critics Circle as the Best Film of 1971 . After William Friedkin won Best Director for The French Connection that year , he told the press : " Speaking personally , I think Stanley Kubrick is the best American film @-@ maker of the year . In fact , not just this year , but the best , period " . 
 = = = Period and horror filming ( 1972 – 80 ) = = = 
 Barry Lyndon ( 1975 ) is an adaptation of William Makepeace Thackeray 's The Luck of Barry Lyndon ( also known as Barry Lyndon ) , a picaresque novel about the adventures of an 18th @-@ century Irish rogue and social climber . John Calley of Warner Bros. agreed in 1972 to invest $ 2 @.@ 5 million into the film , on condition that Kubrick approach major Hollywood stars , to ensure it of success . Like previous films , Kubrick and his art department conducted an enormous amount of research , and he went from knowing very little about the 18th century at the start of the production to becoming an expert on it . Extensive photographs were taken of locations and artwork in particular , and paintings were meticulously replicated from works of the great masters of the period in the film . The film was shot on location in Ardmore , County Waterford , Ireland , beginning in the autumn of 1973 , at a cost of $ 11 million with a cast and crew of 170 . The decision to shoot in Ireland stemmed from the fact that it still retained many buildings from the 18th century period which England lacked . The production was problematic from the start , plagued with heavy rain and political strife involving Northern Ireland at the time . After Kubrick received death threats from the IRA in the New Year of 1974 due to the shooting scenes with English soldiers , he fled Ireland with his family on a ferry from Dún Laoghaire under an assumed identity , and filming resumed in England . 
 Baxter notes that Barry Lyndon was the film which made Kubrick notorious for paying scrupulous attention to detail , often demanding twenty or thirty retakes of the same scene to perfect his art . Often considered to be his most authentic @-@ looking picture , the cinematography and lighting techniques that Kubrick and cinematographer John Alcott used in Barry Lyndon were highly innovative . Most notably , interior scenes were shot with a specially adapted high @-@ speed f / 0 @.@ 7 Zeiss camera lens originally developed for NASA to be used in satellite photography . The lenses allowed many scenes to be lit only with candlelight , creating two @-@ dimensional , diffused @-@ light images reminiscent of 18th @-@ century paintings . Cinematographer Allen Daviau states that the method gives the audience a way of seeing the characters and scenes as they would have been seen by people at the time . Many of the fight scenes were shot with a hand @-@ held camera to produce a " sense of documentary realism and immediacy " . 
 Although Barry Lyndon found a great audience in France , it was a box office failure , grossing just $ 9 @.@ 5 million in the American market , not even close to the $ 30 million Warner Bros. needed to generate a profit . The pace and length of Barry Lyndon at three hours put off many American critics and audiences , but the film was nominated for seven Academy Awards and won four , including Best Art Direction , Best Cinematography , Best Costume Design , and Best Musical Score , more than any other Kubrick film . As with most of Kubrick 's films , Barry Lyndon 's reputation has grown through the years and it is now considered to be one of his best , particularly among filmmakers and critics . Numerous polls , such as Village Voice ( 1999 ) , Sight & Sound ( 2002 ) , and Time ( 2005 ) , have rated it as one of the greatest films ever made . As of August 2015 , it has as 96 % rating on Rotten Tomatoes , based on 52 reviews . Roger Ebert referred to it as " one of the most beautiful films ever made " , " certainly in every frame a Kubrick film : technically awesome , emotionally distant , remorseless in its doubt of human goodness . " 
 The Shining , released in 1980 , was adapted from the novel of the same name by bestselling horror writer Stephen King . The Shining was not the only horror film to which Kubrick had been linked ; he had turned down the directing of both The Exorcist ( 1973 ) and Exorcist II : The Heretic ( 1977 ) , despite once claiming in 1966 to a friend that he had long desired to " make the world 's scariest movie , involving a series of episodes that would play upon the nightmare fears of the audience " . The film stars Jack Nicholson as a writer who takes a job as a winter caretaker of a large and isolated hotel in the Rocky Mountains . He spends the winter there with his wife , played by Shelley Duvall , and their young son , who displays paranormal abilities . During their stay , they confront both Jack 's descent into madness and apparent supernatural horrors lurking in the hotel . Kubrick gave his actors freedom to extend the script , and even improvise on occasion , and as a result , Nicholson was responsible for the ' Here 's Johnny ! ' line and scene in which he 's sitting at the typewriter and unleashes his anger upon his wife . So determined to produce perfection was Kubrick , he often demanded up to 70 or 80 retakes of the same scene . The bar scene with the ghostly bartender was shot 36 times , while the kitchen scene between the characters of Danny ( Danny Lloyd ) and Halloran ( Scatman Crothers ) ran to 148 takes . The aerial shots of the Overlook Hotel were shot at Timberline Lodge on Mount Hood in Oregon , while the interiors of the hotel were shot at Elstree Studios in England between May 1978 and April 1979 . Cardboard models were made of all of the sets of the film , and the lighting of them was a massive undertaking , which took four months of electrical wiring . Kubrick made extensive use of the newly invented Steadicam , a weight @-@ balanced camera support , which allowed for smooth hand @-@ held camera movement in scenes where a conventional camera track was impractical . According to Garrett Brown , Steadicam 's inventor , it was the first picture to use its full potential . 
 Five days after release on May 23 , 1980 , Kubrick ordered the deletion of a final scene , in which the hotel manager Ullman ( Barry Nelson ) visits Wendy ( Shelley Duvall ) in hospital , believing it to have been unnecessary after witnessing the audience excitement in cinemas at the climax of the film . The Shining opened to strong box office takings , earning $ 1 million on the first weekend and earning $ 30 @.@ 9 million in America alone by the end of the year . The original critical response was mixed , and King himself detested the film and disliked Kubrick . Janet Maslin of The New York Times praised the " eerie way " in which Kubrick turned an " enormous building into something cramped and claustrophobic " , which would " undoubtedly amount to one of the screen 's scarier haunted houses " . The Shining is now considered to be a horror cult classic , and the American Film Institute has ranked it as the 27th greatest thriller film of all time . 
 = = = Later work and final years ( 1981 – 99 ) = = = 
 Kubrick met author Michael Herr through mutual friend David Cornwell ( novelist John le Carré ) in 1980 , and became interested in his book Dispatches , about the Vietnam War . Herr had recently written Martin Sheen 's narration for Apocalypse Now ( 1979 ) . Kubrick was also intrigued by Gustav Hasford 's Vietnam War novel The Short @-@ Timers . With the vision in mind to shoot what would become Full Metal Jacket ( 1987 ) , Kubrick began working with both Herr and Hasford separately on a script . He eventually found Hasford 's novel to be " brutally honest " and decided to shoot a film which closely follows the novel . All of the film was shot at a cost of $ 17 million within a 30 @-@ mile radius of his house between August 1985 and September 1986 , later than scheduled as Kubrick shut down production for five months following a near @-@ fatal accident with a jeep involving Lee Ermey . A derelict gasworks in Beckton in the London Docklands area posed as the ruined city of Huế , which makes the film visually very different from other Vietnam War films . Around 200 palm trees were imported via 40 @-@ foot trailers by road from North Africa , at a cost of £ 1000 a tree , and thousands of plastic plants were ordered from Hong Kong to provide foliage for the film . Kubrick explained he made the film look realistic by using natural light , and achieved a " newsreel effect " by making the Steadicam shots less steady , which reviewers and commentators thought contributed to the bleakness and seriousness of the film . According to critic Michel Ciment , the film contained some of Kubrick 's trademark characteristics , such as his selection of ironic music , portrayals of men being dehumanized , and attention to extreme detail to achieve realism . In a later scene where United States Marines patrol the ruins of an abandoned and totally destroyed city , the theme song to the Mickey Mouse Club is heard as a sardonic counterpoint . The film opened strongly in June 1987 , taking over $ 30 million in the first 50 days alone , but critically it was overshadowed by the success of Oliver Stone 's Platoon , released a year earlier . According to one review , notes co @-@ star Matthew Modine , " The first half of FMJ is brilliant . Then the film degenerates into a masterpiece . " Roger Ebert was not particularly impressed with it , awarding it a mediocre 2 @.@ 5 out of 4 . He concluded : " Stanley Kubrick 's Full Metal Jacket is more like a book of short stories than a novel " , a " strangely shapeless film from the man whose work usually imposes a ferociously consistent vision on his material " . Kubrick 's final film was Eyes Wide Shut ( 1999 ) , starring Tom Cruise and Nicole Kidman as a Manhattan couple on a sexual odyssey . Tom Cruise portrays a doctor who witnesses a bizarre masked <unk> orgiastic ritual at a country mansion , a discovery which later threatens his life . The story is based on Arthur Schnitzler 's 1926 Freudian novella <unk> ( Dream Story in English ) , which Kubrick relocated from turn @-@ of @-@ the @-@ century Vienna to New York City in the 1990s . Kubrick said of the novel : " A difficult book to describe — what good book isn 't . It explores the sexual ambivalence of a happy marriage and tries to equate the importance of sexual dreams and might @-@ have @-@ beens with reality . All of Schnitzler 's work is psychologically brilliant " . Although Kubrick was almost 70 , he worked relentlessly for 15 months to get the film out by its planned release date of July 16 , 1999 . He commenced a script with Frederic Raphael , and worked 18 hours a day , all the while maintaining complete confidentiality about the film . Principal photography began on November 7 , 1996 , and ended in February 1998 . Eyes Wide Shut , like Lolita and A Clockwork Orange before it , faced censorship before release . Kubrick sent an unfinished preview copy to the stars and producers a few months before release , but his sudden death on March 7 , 1999 , came a few days after he finished editing . He never saw the final version released to the public , but he did see the preview of the film with Warner Bros. , Cruise , and Kidman , and had reportedly told Warner executive Julian Senior that it was " my best film ever " . Today , critical opinion of the film is mixed , and it is viewed less favorably than most of Kubrick 's films . Roger Ebert awarded it 3 @.@ 5 out 4 stars , comparing the structure to a thriller and writing that it is " like an erotic daydream about chances missed and opportunities avoided " , and thought that Kubrick 's use of lighting at Christmas made the film " all a little garish , like an urban sideshow . " Stephen Hunter of The Washington Post disliked the film , writing : " Its actually sad , rather than bad . It feels creaky , ancient , hopelessly out of touch , infatuated with the hot taboos of his youth and unable to connect with that twisty thing contemporary sexuality has become . " 
 = = = A.I. Artificial Intelligence and unrealized projects = = = 
 = = = = A.I. Artificial Intelligence = = = = 
 Throughout the 1980s and early 1990s , Kubrick collaborated with Brian Aldiss on an expansion of his short story " Super @-@ Toys Last All Summer Long " into a three @-@ act film . It was a futuristic fairy tale about a robot that resembles and behaves as a child , and his efforts to become a ' real boy ' in a manner similar to Pinocchio . Kubrick approached Spielberg in 1995 with the AI script with the possibility of Steven Spielberg directing it and Kubrick producing it . Kubrick reportedly held long telephone discussions with Spielberg regarding the film , and , according to Spielberg , at one point stated that the subject matter was closer to Spielberg 's sensibilities than his . 
 Following Kubrick 's death in 1999 , Spielberg took the various drafts and notes left by Kubrick and his writers and composed a new screenplay based on an earlier 90 @-@ page story treatment by Ian Watson written under Kubrick 's supervision and according to Kubrick 's specifications . In association with what remained of Kubrick 's production unit , he directed the movie A.I. Artificial Intelligence ( 2001 ) . which was produced by Kubrick 's longtime producer ( and brother @-@ in @-@ law ) Jan Harlan . Sets , costumes , and art direction were based on the works of conceptual artist Chris Baker , who had also done much of his work under Kubrick 's supervision . 
 Although Spielberg was able to function autonomously in Kubrick 's absence , he said he felt " inhibited to honor him , " and followed Kubrick 's visual schema with as much fidelity as he could , according to author Joseph McBride . Spielberg , who once referred to Kubrick as " the greatest master I ever served , " now with production underway , admitted , " I felt like I was being coached by a ghost . " The film was released in June 2001 . It contains a posthumous production credit for Stanley Kubrick at the beginning and the brief dedication " For Stanley Kubrick " at the end . John Williams 's score contains many allusions to pieces heard in other Kubrick films . 
 = = = = Napoleon = = = = 
 Following 2001 : A Space Odyssey , Kubrick originally planned to make a film about the life of the French emperor Napoleon . Fascinated by his life and own " self @-@ destruction " , Kubrick spent a great deal of time planning the film 's development , and had conducted about two years of extensive research into Napoleon 's life , reading several hundred books and gaining access to Napoleon 's personal memoirs and commentaries . He also tried to see every film ever made about Napoleon and found none of them appealing , including Abel Gance 's 1927 film which is generally considered to be a masterpiece , but for Kubrick , a " really terrible " movie . Lo <unk> states that Napoleon was an ideal subject for Kubrick , embracing the director 's " passion for control , power , obsession , strategy , and the military " , while Napoleon 's psychological intensity and depth , logistical genius and war , sex , and the evil nature of man were all ingredients which deeply appealed to Kubrick . 
 Kubrick drafted a screenplay in 1961 , and envisaged making a " grandiose " epic , with up to 40 @,@ 000 infantry and 10 @,@ 000 cavalry . He had intended hiring the armed forces of an entire country to make the film , as he considered Napoleonic battles to be " so beautiful , like vast lethal ballets " , with an " aesthetic brilliance that doesn 't require a military mind to appreciate " . He wanted them to be replicated as authentically as possible on screen . Kubrick had sent research teams to scout for locations across Europe , and commissioned screenwriter and director Andrew Birkin , one of his young assistants on 2001 , to the Isle of Elba , Austerlitz , and Waterloo , taking thousands of pictures for his later perusal . Kubrick approached numerous stars to play leading roles , including Audrey Hepburn for Empress Josephine , a part which she could not accept due to <unk> . British actors David Hemmings and Ian Holm were considered for the lead role of Napoleon , before Jack Nicholson was cast . The film was well into preproduction and ready to begin filming in 1969 when MGM cancelled the project . Numerous reasons have been cited for the abandonment of the project , including its projected cost , a change of ownership at MGM , and the poor reception the 1970 Soviet film about Napoleon , Waterloo , received . In 2011 , Taschen published the book , Stanley Kubrick 's Napoleon : The Greatest Movie Never Made , a large volume compilation of literature and source documents from Kubrick , such as scene photo ideas and copies of letters Kubrick wrote and received . In March 2013 , Steven Spielberg , who previously collaborated with Kubrick on A.I. Artificial Intelligence and is a passionate admirer of his work , announced that he would be developing Napoleon as a TV miniseries based on Kubrick 's original screenplay . 
 = = = = Other projects = = = = 
 In the 1950s , Kubrick and Harris developed a sitcom starring Ernie Kovacs and a film adaption of the book I Stole $ 16 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , but nothing came of them . Tony Frewin , an assistant who worked with the director for a long period of time , revealed in a March 2013 Atlantic article : " He [ Kubrick ] was <unk> interested in anything to do with Nazis and desperately wanted to make a film on the subject . " Kubrick had intended making a film about the life story of Dietrich Schulz @-@ Koehn , a Nazi officer who used the pen name " Dr. Jazz " to write reviews of German music scenes during the Nazi era . Kubrick had been given a copy of the Mike Zwerin book Swing Under the Nazis after he had finished production on Full Metal Jacket , the front cover of which featured a photograph of Schulz @-@ Koehn . A screenplay was never completed and Kubrick 's film adaptation plan was never initiated . The unfinished Aryan Papers , based on Louis Begley 's debut novel <unk> Lies , was a factor in the abandonment of the project . Work on Aryan Papers depressed Kubrick enormously , and he eventually decided that Steven Spielberg 's Schindler 's List ( 1993 ) covered much of the same material . 
 According to biographer John Baxter , Kubrick had shown an interest in directing a pornographic film based on a satirical novel written by Terry Southern , entitled Blue Movie , about a director who makes Hollywood 's first big @-@ budget porn film . However , Baxter claims that Kubrick concluded that he did not have the patience or temperament to become involved in the porn industry , and Southern stated that Kubrick was " too ultra conservative " towards sexuality to have seriously gone ahead with it , but liked the idea . Kubrick was unable to direct a film of Umberto Eco 's Foucault 's Pendulum as Eco had given his publisher instructions to never sell the film rights to any of his books after his dissatisfaction with the film version of The Name of the Rose . Also , when the film rights to Tolkien 's The Lord of the Rings were sold to United Artists , the Beatles approached Kubrick to direct them in a film based on the books , but Kubrick was unwilling to produce a film based on a very popular book . Director Peter Jackson has reported that Tolkien was against the involvement of the Beatles . 
 = = Career influences = = 
 Anyone who has ever been privileged to direct a film knows that , although it can be like trying to write War and Peace in a bumper car at an amusement park , when you finally get it right , there are not many joys in life that can equal the feeling . 
 As a young man , Kubrick was fascinated by the films of Soviet filmmakers such as Sergei Eisenstein and Vsevolod Pudovkin . Kubrick read Pudovkin 's seminal theoretical work , Film Technique , which argues that editing makes film a unique art form , and it needs to be employed to manipulate the medium to its fullest . Kubrick recommended this work to others for many years . Thomas Nelson describes this book as " the greatest influence of any single written work on the evolution of [ Kubrick 's ] private aesthetics " . Kubrick also found the ideas of Constantin Stanislavski to be essential to his understanding the basics of directing , and gave himself a crash course to learn his methods . 
 Kubrick 's family and many critics felt that his Jewish ancestry may have contributed to his worldview and aspects of his films . After his death , both his daughter and wife stated that although he was not religious , " he did not deny his Jewishness , not at all " . His daughter noted that he wanted to make a film about the Holocaust , the Aryan Papers , having spent years researching the subject . Most of Kubrick 's friends and early photography and film collaborators were Jewish , and his first two marriages were to daughters of recent Jewish immigrants from Europe . British screenwriter Frederic Raphael , who worked closely with Kubrick in his final years , believes that the originality of Kubrick 's films was partly because he " had a ( Jewish ? ) respect for scholars " . He declared that it was " absurd to try to understand Stanley Kubrick without reckoning on Jewishness as a fundamental aspect of his mentality " . 
 Walker notes that Kubrick was influenced by the tracking and " fluid camera " styles of director Max Ophüls , and used them in many of his films , including Paths of Glory and 2001 : A Space Odyssey . Kubrick noted how in Ophuls ' films " the camera went through every wall and every floor " . He once named Ophüls ' Le Plaisir ( 1952 ) as his favorite film . According to film historian John Wakeman , Ophüls himself learned the technique from director Anatole Litvak in the 1930s , when he was his assistant , and whose work was " replete with the camera trackings , pans and swoops which later became the trademark of Max Ophüls " . Geoffrey Cocks believes that Kubrick was also influenced by Ophüls ' stories of thwarted love and a preoccupation with predatory men , while Herr notes that Kubrick was deeply inspired by G. W. Pabst , who earlier tried , but was unable to adapt Schnitzler 's <unk> , the basis of Eyes Wide Shut . Film critic Robert Kolker sees the influence of Welles ' moving camera shots on Kubrick 's style . LoBrutto notes that Kubrick identified with Welles and influenced the making of The Killing , with its " multiple points of view , extreme angles , and deep focus " . Kubrick also cited David Lynch 's Eraserhead ( 1977 ) as one of his favorite films and used it as a creative reference during the directing of The Shining . 
 = = Directing techniques = = 
 = = = Philosophy = = = 
 Kubrick 's films typically involve expressions of an inner struggle , examined from different perspectives . He was very careful not to present his own views of the meaning of his films and leave them open to interpretation . He explained in a 1960 interview with Robert Emmett <unk> : " One of the things I always find extremely difficult , when a picture 's finished , is when a writer or a film reviewer asks , ' Now , what is it that you were trying to say in that picture ? ' And without being thought too presumptuous for using this analogy , I like to remember what T. S. Eliot said to someone who had asked him — I believe it was The Waste Land — what he meant by the poem . He replied , ' I meant what I said ' . If I could have said it any differently , I would have " . Kubrick likened the understanding of his films to popular music , in that whatever the background or intellect of the individual , a Beatles record , for instance , can both be appreciated by the Alabama truck driver and the young Cambridge intellectual in the way that his films can because their " emotions and subconscious are far more similar than their intellects " . He believed that the subconscious emotional reaction evoked by audiences was far more powerful in the film medium than in any other traditional verbal form , and was one of the reasons why he often relied on long periods in his films without dialogue , placing emphasis on images and sound . In a Time magazine interview in 1975 , Kubrick further stated : " The essence of a dramatic form is to let an idea come over people without it being plainly stated . When you say something directly , it is simply not as potent as it is when you allow people to discover it for themselves . " He also said " Realism is probably the best way to dramatize argument and ideas . Fantasy may deal best with themes which lie primarily in the unconscious " . 
 Diane Johnson , who co @-@ wrote the screenplay for The Shining with Kubrick , notes that he " always said that it was better to adapt a book rather than write an original screenplay , and that you should choose a work that isn 't a masterpiece so you can improve on it . Which is what he 's always done , except with Lolita " . When deciding on a subject for a film , there were a number of aspects that he looked for , and he always made films which would " appeal to every sort of viewer , whatever their expectation of film " . According to his co @-@ producer Jan Harlan , Kubrick mostly " wanted to make films about things that mattered , that not only had form , but substance " . Kubrick himself believed that audiences quite often were attracted to " enigmas and allegories " and did not like films in which everything was spelled out clearly . 
 Although none of his features display graphic sex scenes , sexuality in Kubrick 's films is usually depicted outside matrimonial relationships in hostile situations . Baxter states that Kubrick explores the " furtive and violent side alleys of the sexual experience : voyeurism , domination , bondage and rape " in his films . He further points out that films like A Clockwork Orange are " powerfully homoerotic " , from Alex walking about his parents ' flat in his Y @-@ fronts , one eye being " made up with doll @-@ like false eyelashes " , to his innocent acceptance of the sexual advances of his post @-@ corrective adviser <unk> ( Aubrey Morris ) . British critic Adrian Turner notes that Kubrick 's films appear to be " preoccupied with questions of universal and inherited evil " , and Malcolm McDowell referred to his humor as " black as coal " , questioning his outlook on humanity . Although a few of his pictures were obvious satires and black comedies , such as Lolita and Dr. Strangelove , many of his other films also contained less visible elements of satire or irony . His films are unpredictable , examining " the duality and contradictions that exist in all of us " . Ciment notes how Kubrick often tried to confound audience expectations by establishing radically different moods from one film to the next , remarking that he was almost " obsessed with contradicting himself , with making each work a critique of the previous one " . Kubrick stated himself that " there is no deliberate pattern to the stories that I have chosen to make into films . About the only factor at work each time is that I try not to repeat myself " . As a result , Kubrick was often misunderstood by critics , and only once did he have unanimously positive reviews upon the release of a film — for Paths of Glory . 
 = = = Writing and staging scenes = = = 
 Film author Patrick Webster considers Kubrick 's methods of writing and developing scenes to fit with the classical auteur theory of directing , allowing collaboration and improvization with the actors during filming . Malcolm McDowell recalled Kubrick 's collaborative emphasis during their discussions and his willingness to allow him to improvize a scene , stating that " there was a script and we followed it , but when it didn 't work he knew it , and we had to keep rehearsing endlessly until we were bored with it . " Once Kubrick was confident in the overall staging of a scene , and felt the actors were prepared , he would then develop the visual aspects , including camera and lighting placement . Walker believes that Kubrick was one of " very few film directors competent to instruct their lighting photographers in the precise effect they want . " Baxter believes that although American , Kubrick was heavily influenced by his ancestry and always possessed a European perspective to filmmaking , particularly the Austro @-@ Hungarian empire and his admiration for Johann Ophuls and Richard Strauss . 
 Gilbert Adair , writing in a review for Full Metal Jacket , commented that " Kubrick 's approach to language has always been of a reductive and uncompromisingly deterministic nature . He appears to view it as the exclusive product of environmental conditioning , only very marginally influenced by concepts of subjectivity and interiority , by all whims , shades and modulations of personal expression " . Johnson notes that although Kubrick was a " visual filmmaker , " he also loved words and was like a writer in his approach , very sensitive to the story itself , which he found unique . Before shooting began , Kubrick tried to have the script as complete as possible , but still allowed himself enough space to make changes during the actual filming , finding it " more profitable to avoid locking up any ideas about staging or camera or even dialogue prior to rehearsals " as he put it . Kubrick told Robert Emmett <unk> : " I think you have to view the entire problem of putting the story you want to tell up there on that light square . It begins with the selection of the property ; it continues through the creation of the story , the sets , the costumes , the photography and the acting . And when the picture is shot , it 's only partially finished . I think the cutting is just a continuation of directing a movie . I think the use of music effects , opticals and finally main titles are all part of telling the story . And I think the fragmentation of these jobs , by different people , is a very bad thing " . Kubrick also said : " I think that the best plot is no apparent plot . I like a slow start , the start that gets under the audience 's skin and involves them so that they can appreciate grace notes and soft tones and don 't have to be pounded over the head with plot points and suspense tools . " 
 = = = Directing = = = 
 Kubrick was notorious for demanding multiple takes during filming to perfect his art , and his relentless approach was often extremely demanding for his actors . Jack Nicholson remarked that Kubrick would often demand up to 50 takes of a scene . Nicole Kidman explains that the large number of takes he often required stopped actors from consciously thinking about technique , thereby helping them enter a " deeper place . " Kubrick 's high take ratio was considered by some critics as " irrational , " although he firmly believed that actors were at their best during the actual filming , as opposed to rehearsals , due to the sense of intense excitement that it generates . Kubrick explained : " Actors are essentially emotion @-@ producing instruments , and some are always tuned and ready while others will reach a fantastic pitch on one take and never equal it again , no matter how hard they try " ... " When you make a movie , it takes a few days just to get used to the crew , because it is like getting undressed in front of fifty people . Once you 're accustomed to them , the presence of even one other person on set is discordant and tends to produce self @-@ consciousness in the actors , and certainly in itself " . He also told biographer Michel Clement : " It 's invariably because the actors don 't know their lines , or don 't know them well enough . An actor can only do one thing at a time , and when he learned his lines only well enough to say them while he 's thinking about them , he will always have trouble as soon as he has to work on the emotions of the scene or find camera marks . In a strong emotional scene , it is always best to be able to shoot in complete takes to allow the actor a continuity of emotion , and it is rare for most actors to reach their peak more than once or twice . There are , occasionally , scenes which benefit from extra takes , but even then , I 'm not sure that the early takes aren 't just glorified rehearsals with the adding adrenaline of film running through the camera . " 
 Kubrick would devote his personal breaks to having lengthy discussions with actors . Among those who valued his attention was Tony Curtis , star of Spartacus , who said Kubrick was his favorite director , adding , " his greatest effectiveness was his one @-@ on @-@ one relationship with actors . " He further added , " Kubrick had his own approach to film @-@ making . He wanted to see the actor 's faces . He didn 't want cameras always in a wide shot twenty @-@ five feet away , he wanted close @-@ ups , he wanted to keep the camera moving . That was his style . " Similarly , Malcolm McDowell recalls the long discussions he had with Kubrick to help him develop his character in A Clockwork Orange , noting that on set he felt entirely uninhibited and free , which is what made Kubrick " such a great director . " Kubrick also allowed actors at times to improvize and to " break the rules " , particularly with Peter Sellers in Lolita , which became a turning point in his career as it allowed him to work creatively during the actual shooting , as opposed to the preproduction stage . During an interview , Ryan O 'Neal recalled Kubrick 's directing style : " God , he works you hard . He moves you , pushes you , helps you , gets cross with you , but above all he teaches you the value of a good director . Stanley brought out aspects of my personality and acting instincts that had been dormant ... My strong suspicion [ was ] that I was involved in something great " . He further added that working with Kubrick was " a stunning experience " and that he never recovered from working with somebody of such magnificence . 
 = = = Cinematography = = = 
