 Kubrick credited the ease with which he photographed scenes to his early years as a photographer . He rarely added camera instructions in the script , preferring to handle that after a scene is created , as the visual part of film @-@ making came easiest to him . Even in deciding which props and settings would be used , Kubrick paid meticulous attention to detail and tried to collect as much background material as possible , functioning rather like what he described as " a detective " . Cinematographer John Alcott , who worked closely with Kubrick on four of his films , and won an Oscar for Best Cinematography on Barry Lyndon , remarked that Kubrick " questions everything " , and was involved in the technical aspects of film @-@ making including camera placement , scene composition , choice of lens , and even operating the camera which would usually be left to the cinematographer . Alcott considered Kubrick to be the " nearest thing to genius I 've ever worked with , with all the problems of a genius " . 
 Among Kubrick 's notable innovations in cinematography are his use of special effects , as in 2001 , where he used both slit @-@ scan photography and front @-@ screen projection , which won Kubrick his only Oscar for special effects . Some reviewers have described and illustrated with video clips , Kubrick 's use of " one @-@ point perspective " , which leads the viewer 's eye towards a central vanishing point . The technique relies on creating a complex visual symmetry using parallel lines in a scene which all converge on that single point , leading away from the viewer . Combined with camera motion it could produce an effect that one writer describes as " hypnotic and thrilling . " The Shining was among the first half @-@ dozen features to use the then @-@ revolutionary Steadicam ( after the 1976 films Bound for Glory , Marathon Man and Rocky ) . Kubrick used it to its fullest potential , which gave the audience smooth , stabilized , motion @-@ tracking by the camera . Kubrick described Steadicam as being like a " magic carpet " , allowing " fast , flowing , camera movements " in the maze in The Shining which would otherwise would have been impossible to accomplish . 
 Kubrick was among the first directors to use video assist during filming . At the time he began using it in 1966 , it was considered cutting @-@ edge technology , requiring him to build his own system . Having it in place during the filming of 2001 , he was able to view a video of a take immediately after it was filmed . On some films , such as Barry Lyndon , he used custom made zoom lenses , which allowed him to start a scene with a close @-@ up and slowly zoom out to capture the full panorama of scenery and to film long takes under changing outdoor lighting conditions by making aperture adjustments while the cameras rolled . LoBrutto notes that Kubrick 's technical knowledge about lenses " dazzled the manufacturer 's engineers , who found him to be unprecedented among contemporary filmmakers . " For Barry Lyndon he also used a specially adapted high @-@ speed ( f / 0 @.@ 7 ) Zeiss camera lens , originally developed for NASA , to shoot numerous scenes lit only with candlelight . Actor Steven Berkoff recalls that Kubrick wanted scenes to be shot using " pure candlelight , " and in doing so Kubrick " made a unique contribution to the art of filmmaking going back to painting ... You almost posed like for portraits . " LoBrutto notes that cinematographers all over the world wanted to know about Kubrick 's " magic lens " and that he became a " legend " among cameramen around the world . 
 = = = Editing and music = = = 
 Kubrick spent extensive hours editing , often working seven days a week , and more hours a day as he got closer to deadlines . For Kubrick , written dialogue was one element to be put in balance with mise en scène ( set arrangements ) , music , and especially , editing . Inspired by Pudovkin 's treatise on film editing , Kubrick realized that one could create a performance in the editing room and often " re @-@ direct " a film , and he remarked : " I love editing . I think I like it more than any other phase of filmmaking ... Editing is the only unique aspect of filmmaking which does not resemble any other art form — a point so important it cannot be overstressed ... It can make or break a film " . Biographer John Baxter stated that " Instead of finding the intellectual spine of a film in the script before starting work , Kubrick felt his way towards the final version of a film by shooting each scene from many angles and demanding scores of takes on each line . Then over months ... he arranged and rearranged the tens of thousands of scraps of film to fit a vision that really only began to emerge during editing " . 
 Kubrick 's attention to music was an aspect of what many referred to as his " perfectionism " and extreme attention to minute details , which his wife Christine attributed to an addiction to music . In his last six films , Kubrick usually chose music from existing sources , especially classical compositions . He preferred selecting recorded music over having it composed for a film , believing that no hired composer could do as well as the public domain classical composers . He also felt that building scenes from great music often created the " most memorable scenes " in the best films . In one instance , for a scene in Barry Lyndon which was written into the screenplay as merely , " Barry duels with Lord Bullingdon , " he spent forty @-@ two working days in the editing phase . During that period , he listened to what LoBrutto describes as " every available recording of seventeenth @-@ and eighteenth- century music , acquiring thousands of records to find Handel 's sarabande used to score the scene . " Jack Nicholson likewise observed his attention to music for his films , stating that Kubrick " listened constantly to music until he discovered something he felt was right or that excited him . " 
 Kubrick is credited with introducing Hungarian composer György Ligeti to a broad Western audience by including his music in 2001 , The Shining and Eyes Wide Shut . According to Baxter , the music in 2001 was " at the forefront of Kubrick 's mind " when he conceived the film . During earlier screening he played music by Mendelssohn and Vaughan Williams , and Kubrick and writer Clarke had listened to Carl Orff 's transcription of Carmina Burana , consisting of 13th century sacred and secular songs . Ligeti 's music employed the new style of <unk> , which used sustained dissonant chords that shift slowly over time , a style he originated . Its inclusion in the film became a " boon for the relatively unknown composer " partly because it was introduced alongside background by notable composers , Johann Strauss and Richard Strauss . 
 In addition to Ligeti , Kubrick also enjoyed a collaboration with composer Wendy Carlos , whose 1968 album Switched @-@ On — which re @-@ interpreted classical music through the use of a Moog synthesizer — caught the filmmaker 's attention . In 1971 , Carlos composed and recorded music for the soundtrack of A Clockwork Orange . Additional music not used in the film was released in 1972 as Wendy Carlos 's Clockwork Orange . Kubrick later collaborated with Carlos on The Shining ( 1980 ) . The opening of the film — in which the camera follows Jack Torrance 's yellow VW beetle through the mountains to the Overlook Hotel — employs Carlos ' eerie rendering of " Dies Irae " ( Day of Wrath ) from Hector Berlioz 's Symphonie Fantastique . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Kubrick married his high @-@ school sweetheart Toba Metz , a keen caricaturist , on May 29 , 1948 , when he was nineteen years of age . They had attended Taft High School together and had lived in the same apartment block on Shakespeare Avenue . The couple lived together in Greenwich Village and divorced three years later in 1951 . He met his second wife , the Austrian @-@ born dancer and theatrical designer Ruth Sobotka , in 1952 . They lived together in New York 's East Village beginning in 1952 , got married in January 1955 and moved to Hollywood in July 1955 , where she played a brief part as a ballet dancer in Kubrick 's film , Killer 's Kiss ( 1955 ) . The following year she was art director for his film , The Killing ( 1956 ) . They divorced in 1957 . Kubrick lived with dancer and actress <unk> <unk> after the marriage broke down . 
 During the production of Paths of Glory in Munich in early 1957 , Kubrick met and romanced the German actress Christiane Harlan , who played a small though memorable role in the film . Kubrick married Harlan in 1958 , and the couple remained together 40 years , until his death in 1999 . Besides his stepdaughter , they had two daughters together : Anya Renata ( April 6 , 1959 – July 7 , 2009 ) and Vivian Vanessa ( born August 5 , 1960 ) . In 1959 they settled into a home at 316 South Camden Drive in Beverly Hills with Harlan 's daughter , Katherina , aged six . They also lived in New York , during which time Christiane studied art at the Art Students League of New York , later becoming an independent artist . The couple moved to the United Kingdom in 1961 to make Lolita , and Kubrick hired Peter Sellers to star in his next film , Dr. Strangelove , Sellers was unable to leave the UK , so Kubrick made Britain his permanent home thereafter . The move was quite convenient to Kubrick , since he shunned the Hollywood system and its publicity machine , and he and Christiane had become alarmed with the increase in violence in New York . 
 In 1965 the <unk> bought Abbots Mead on Barnet Lane , just south of the Elstree / Borehamwood studio complex in England . Kubrick worked almost exclusively from this home for 14 years where , with some exceptions , he researched , invented special effects techniques , designed ultra @-@ low light lenses for specially modified cameras , pre @-@ produced , edited , post @-@ produced , advertised , distributed and carefully managed all aspects of four of his films . In 1978 , Kubrick moved into Childwickbury Manor in Hertfordshire , a mainly 18th century stately home , which was once owned by a wealthy racehorse owner , about 30 mi ( 50 km ) north of London and a 10 @-@ minute drive from his previous home at Abbotts Mead . His new home became a workplace for Kubrick and his wife , " a perfect family factory " as Christiane called it , and Kubrick converted the stables into extra production rooms besides ones within the home that he used for editing and storage . 
 A workaholic , Kubrick rarely took a vacation or left England during the forty years before he died . Biographer Vincent LoBrutto notes that Kubrick 's confined way of living and desire for privacy has led to spurious stories about his reclusiveness , similar to those of Greta Garbo , Howard Hughes , and J. D. Salinger . Michael Herr , Kubrick 's co @-@ screenwriter on Full Metal Jacket , who knew him well , considers his " reclusiveness " to be myth : " [ H ] e was in fact a complete failure as a recluse , unless you believe that a recluse is simply someone who seldom leaves his house . Stanley saw a lot of people ... he was one of the most gregarious men I ever knew , and it didn 't change anything that most of this conviviality went on over the phone . " Lo <unk> states that one of the reasons he acquired a reputation as a recluse was because he insisted in remaining near his home , but the reason for this was because for Kubrick there were only three places on the planet he could make high quality films with the necessary technical expertise and equipment : Los Angeles , New York or around London . He disliked living in Los Angeles , and had thought London a superior film production center to New York . 
 As a person , Kubrick was described by Norman Lloyd as " a very dark , sort of a glowering type who was very serious " . Marisa Berenson , who starred in Barry Lyndon fondly recalled : " There was great tenderness in him and he was passionate about his work . What was striking was his enormous intelligence , but he also had a great sense of humor . He was a very shy person and self @-@ protective , but he was filled with the thing that drove him twenty @-@ four hours of the day . " Kubrick was particularly fond of machines and technical equipment , to the point that his wife Christiane once stated that " Stanley would be happy with eight tape recorders and one pair of pants " . Although Kubrick had obtained a pilot 's license in August 1947 , some have claimed that he later developed a fear of flying , stemming from an incident in the early 1950s when a colleague had been killed in a plane crash . Kubrick had been sent the charred remains of his camera and notebooks which , according to Duncan , traumatized him for life . Kubrick also had a strong mistrust of doctors and medicine , especially those he did not know , and on one occasion he had a dentist from the Bronx flown to London to treat him . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 On March 7 , 1999 , four days after screening a final cut of Eyes Wide Shut for his family and the stars , Kubrick died in his sleep at the age of 70 , after suffering a massive heart attack . His funeral was held five days later at his home estate at Childwickbury Manor , with only close friends and family in attendance , totaling approximately 100 people . The media were kept a mile away outside the entrance gate . Alexander Walker , who attended the funeral , describes it as a " family farewell , ... almost like an English picnic , " with cellists , clarinetists and singers providing song and music from many of his favorite classical compositions . Kaddish , the Jewish prayer of mourning , was recited . A few of his obituaries mentioned his Jewish background . Among those who gave eulogies were Terry Semel , Jan Harlan , Steven Spielberg , Nicole Kidman and Tom Cruise . He was buried next to his favorite tree on the estate . In her book dedicated to Kubrick , his wife Christiane included one of his favorite quotations of Oscar Wilde : " The tragedy of old age is not that one is old , but that one is young . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Part of the New Hollywood film @-@ making wave , Kubrick 's films are considered by film historian Michel Ciment to be " among the most important contributions to world cinema in the twentieth century " , and he is frequently cited as one of the greatest and most influential directors in the history of cinema . Leading directors , including Martin Scorsese , Steven Spielberg , George Lucas , James Cameron , Woody Allen , Terry Gilliam , the Coen brothers , Ridley Scott , and George A. Romero , have cited Kubrick as a source of inspiration , and in the case of Spielberg , collaboration . On the DVD of Eyes Wide Shut , Steven Spielberg comments that the way Kubrick " tells a story is antithetical to the way we are accustomed to receiving stories " and that " nobody could shoot a picture better in history " . Writing in the introduction to a recent edition of Michel Ciment 's Kubrick , film director Martin Scorsese notes that most of Kubrick 's films were misunderstood and under @-@ appreciated when first released . Then came a dawning recognition that they were masterful works unlike any other films . Perhaps most notably , Orson Welles , one of Kubrick 's greatest personal influences and all @-@ time favorite directors , famously said that : " Among those whom I would call ' younger generation ' , Kubrick appears to me to be a giant . " 
 Kubrick continues to be cited as a major influence by many directors , including Christopher Nolan , Jack Thomas Smith , Todd Field , David Fincher , Guillermo del Toro , David Lynch , Lars von Trier , Tim Burton , Michael Mann , and Gaspar Noé . Many filmmakers imitate Kubrick 's inventive and unique use of camera movement and framing , as well as his use of music , notably Frank Darabont . Paul Thomas Anderson , in an interview with Entertainment Weekly , stated , " it 's so hard to do anything that doesn 't owe some kind of debt to what Stanley Kubrick did with music in movies . Inevitably , you 're going to end up doing something that he 's probably already done before . It can all seem like we 're falling behind whatever he came up with . " 
 In 2000 , BAFTA renamed their Britannia lifetime achievement award the " Stanley Kubrick Britannia Award " , joining the likes of D. W. Griffith , Laurence Olivier , Cecil B. DeMille , and Irving Thalberg , all of whom have annual awards named after them . Kubrick won this award in 1999 , and subsequent recipients have included George Lucas , Warren Beatty , Tom Cruise , Robert De Niro , Clint Eastwood , and Daniel Day @-@ Lewis . A number of people who worked with Kubrick on his films created the 2001 documentary Stanley Kubrick : A Life in Pictures , produced and directed by Kubrick 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Jan Harlan , who had executive produced Kubrick 's last four films . The film 's chapters each cover one of Kubrick 's films and Kubrick 's childhood is explored in the introductory section . 
 In 2009 , an exhibition of paintings and photos inspired by Kubrick 's films was held in Dublin , Ireland , entitled " Stanley Kubrick : Taming Light " . On October 30 , 2012 , an exhibition devoted to Kubrick opened at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art ( LACMA ) and concluded in June 2013 . Exhibits include a wide collection of documents , photographs and on @-@ set material assembled from 800 boxes of personal archives that were stored in Kubrick 's home @-@ workplace in the UK . A number of celebrities attended and spoke at the museum 's pre @-@ opening gala , including Steven Spielberg , Tom Hanks and Jack Nicholson , while Kubrick 's widow , Christiane , appeared at the pre @-@ gala press review . In October 2013 , the Brazil São Paulo International Film Festival paid tribute to Kubrick , staging an exhibit of his work and a retrospective of his films . The exhibit is also scheduled to open at the Toronto International Film Festival ( TIFF ) in late 2014 . 
 Kubrick is widely referenced in popular culture , and the TV series The Simpsons is said to contain more references to Kubrick films than any other pop culture phenomenon . When the Director 's Guild of Great Britain gave Kubrick a lifetime achievement award , they included a cut @-@ together sequence of all the homages from the show . Pop singer Lady Gaga 's concert shows have included the use of dialogue , costumes , and music from A Clockwork Orange . Several films have been made related to Kubrick 's life , including the mockumentary film Dark Side of the Moon ( 2002 ) , which is a parody of the pervasive conspiracy theory that Kubrick had been involved with the faked footage of the NASA moon landings during the filming of 2001 : A Space Odyssey , and Colour Me Kubrick ( 2005 ) , starring John Malkovich as Alan Conway , a con artist who had assumed Kubrick 's identity in the 1990s . Both films were authorized by Kubrick 's family . In the 2004 film The Life and Death of Peter Sellers , Kubrick was portrayed by Stanley Tucci , and documents their filming of Dr. Strangelove , rather than Lolita . 
 = = Filmography and awards = = 
 = Jesuit Missions of Chiquitos = 
 The Jesuit Missions of Chiquitos are located in Santa Cruz department in eastern Bolivia . Six of these former missions ( all now secular municipalities ) collectively were designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1990 . Distinguished by a unique fusion of European and Amerindian cultural influences , the missions were founded as reductions or reducciones de indios by Jesuits in the 17th and 18th centuries to convert local tribes to Christianity . 
 The interior region bordering Spanish and Portuguese territories in South America was largely unexplored at the end of the 17th century . Dispatched by the Spanish Crown , Jesuits explored and founded eleven settlements in 76 years in the remote Chiquitania – then known as Chiquitos – on the frontier of Spanish America . They built churches ( <unk> ) in a unique and distinct style that combined elements of native and European architecture . The indigenous inhabitants of the missions were taught European music as a means of conversion . The missions were self @-@ sufficient , with thriving economies , and virtually autonomous from the Spanish crown . 
 After the expulsion of the Jesuit order from Spanish territories in 1767 , most Jesuit reductions in South America were abandoned and fell into ruins . The former Jesuit missions of Chiquitos are unique because these settlements and their associated culture have survived largely intact . 
 A large restoration project of the missionary churches began with the arrival of the former Swiss Jesuit and architect Hans Roth in 1972 . Since 1990 , these former Jesuit missions have experienced some measure of popularity , and have become a tourist destination . A popular biennial international musical festival put on by the nonprofit organization Asociación Pro Arte y Cultura along with other cultural activities within the mission towns , contribute to the popularity of these settlements . 
 = = Location = = 
 The six World Heritage Site settlements are located in the hot and semiarid lowlands of Santa Cruz Department of eastern Bolivia . They lie in an area near the Gran Chaco , east and northeast of Santa Cruz de la Sierra , between the Paraguay and <unk> rivers . 
 The westernmost missions are San Xavier ( also known as San Javier ) and Concepción , located in the province of Ñuflo de Chávez between the San Julián and <unk> rivers . Santa Ana de Velasco , San Miguel de Velasco , and San Rafael de Velasco are located to the east , in José Miguel de Velasco province , near the Brazilian border . San José de Chiquitos is located in Chiquitos province , about 200 kilometres ( 120 mi ) south of San Rafael . 
 Three other former Jesuit missions – San Juan Bautista ( now in ruins ) , Santo Corazón and Santiago de Chiquitos – which have not been named UNESCO heritage sites – lie east of San José de Chiquitos not far from the town of <unk> . The capital of José Miguel de Velasco Province , San Ignacio de Velasco was founded as a Jesuit mission but also is not a World Heritage Site as the current church is a reconstruction , not a restoration . 
 = = Name “ Chiquitos ” = = 
 Ñuflo de <unk> , a 16th @-@ century Spanish conquistador and founder of Santa Cruz " la Vieja " , introduced the name Chiquitos , or little ones . It referred to the small doors of the straw houses in which the indigenous population lived . Chiquitos has since been used incorrectly both to denote people of the largest ethnic group in the area ( correctly known as Chiquitano ) , and collectively to denote the more than 40 ethnic groups with different languages and cultures living in the region known as the [ Gran ] Chiquitania . Properly , “ Chiquitos ” refers only to either a modern @-@ day department of Bolivia , or the former region of Upper Peru ( now Bolivia ) that once encompassed all of the Chiquitania and parts of <unk> ( or Moxos ) and the Gran Chaco . 
 The current provincial division of Santa Cruz department does not follow the Jesuits ’ concept of a missionary area . The Chiquitania lies within five modern provinces : Ángel Sandoval , Germán Busch , José Miguel de Velasco , Ñuflo de Chávez and Chiquitos province . 
 = = History = = 
 In the 16th century , priests of different religious orders set out to evangelize the Americas , bringing Christianity to indigenous communities . Two of these missionary orders were the Franciscans and the Jesuits , both of which eventually arrived in the frontier town of Santa Cruz de la Sierra and then in the Chiquitania . The missionaries employed the strategy of gathering the often nomadic indigenous populations in larger communities called reductions in order to more effectively Christianize them . This policy sprang from the colonial legal view of the “ Indian ” as a minor , who had to be protected and guided by European missionaries so as not to succumb to sin . Reductions generally were construed as instruments to enable the natives adopt European lifestyles and values ; this was not the case in the Jesuit reductions , however , where the Jesuits allowed the inhabitants to retain many pre @-@ colonial cultural practices . 
 = = = Arrival in the Viceroyalty of Peru = = = 
 With the permission of King Philip II of Spain a group of Jesuits travelled to the Viceroyalty of Peru in 1568 , some 30 years after the arrival of the Franciscans , Dominicans , Augustinians and <unk> . The Jesuits established themselves in Lima in 1569 before moving east toward Paraguay ; in 1572 they reached the Audience of Charcas in modern @-@ day Bolivia . Because they were not allowed to establish settlements on the frontier they built chapter houses , churches and schools in pre @-@ existing settlements , such as La Paz , Potosí and La Plata ( present day Sucre ) . 
 In 1587 the first Jesuits , Fr . Diego Samaniego and Fr . Diego Martínez , arrived in Santa Cruz de la Sierra , located just south of where the future mission of San José de Chiquitos would be established . In 1592 the settlement had to be moved 250 kilometres ( 160 mi ) west because of conflicts with natives , although the remains of the original town exist in the Santa Cruz la Vieja archaeological site . The Jesuits did not start missions in the valleys northeast of the cordillera until the 17th century . The two central areas for their activities were Moxos , situated in the department of Beni , and the Chiquitania ( then simply Chiquitos ) in the department of Santa Cruz de la Sierra . In 1682 , Fr . Cipriano <unk> founded the first of the Jesuit reductions in Moxos , located at Loreto . 
 = = = The Jesuits in the Chiquitania = = = 
 While the mission towns in Paraguay flourished , the evangelization of the Guaraní proved difficult . With encouragement from Agustín Gutiérrez de Arce , the governor of Santa Cruz , the Jesuits focused their efforts on the Chiquitania , where the Christian doctrine was more readily accepted . Between 1691 and 1760 eleven missions were founded in the area ; however , fires , floods , plagues , famines and attacks by hostile tribes or slave traders caused many missions to be re @-@ established or rebuilt . The Chiquitos missions were spared large @-@ scale epidemics , unlike those in Paraguay , mainly because of their remote locations and the lack of transportation infrastructure . 
 The first Jesuit reduction in the Chiquitania was the mission of San Francisco Xavier , founded in 1691 by the Jesuit priest Fr . José de Arce . In September 1691 , de Arce and Br . Antonio de Rivas intended to meet seven other Jesuits at the Paraguay River to establish a connection between Paraguay and Chiquitos . However , the beginning of the rainy season brought bad weather , and Arce and his companion only got as far as the first native village . The local <unk> tribe , who were suffering from a plague , begged Arce and Rivas to stay and promised to build a house and a church for the Jesuits , which were finished by the end of year . The mission was later moved a number of times until 1708 when it was established in its present location . 
 Ten more missions were founded in the Chiquitania by the Jesuits in three periods : the 1690s , the 1720s , and after 1748 . In the 1690s , five missions were established : San Rafael de Velasco ( 1696 ) , San José de Chiquitos ( 1698 ) , Concepción ( 1699 ) and San Juan Bautista ( 1699 ) . San Juan Bautista is not part of the World Heritage Site , and only the ruins of a stone tower survive near the present village of ( San Juan de ) <unk> . 
 The War of the Spanish Succession ( 1701 – 1714 ) caused a shortage of missionaries and instability in the reductions , so no new missions were built during this period . By 1718 San Rafael was the largest of the Chiquitos missions , and with 2 @,@ 615 inhabitants could not sustain a growing population . In 1721 the Jesuits Fr . Felipe Suárez and Fr . Francisco Hervás established a split @-@ off of the San Rafael mission , the mission of San Miguel de Velasco . To the south , San Ignacio de Zamucos was founded in 1724 but abandoned in 1745 ; today nothing remains of the mission . 
 A third period of mission foundations began in 1748 with the establishment of San Ignacio de Velasco , which was not declared a part of the World Heritage Site . The church is nonetheless a largely faithful 20th @-@ century reconstruction – as opposed to renovation ( a key criterion for inclusion in the World Heritage Site group ) – of the second Jesuit <unk> built in 1761 . In 1754 the Jesuits founded the mission of Santiago de Chiquitos . This church also is a reconstruction , dating from the early 20th century and likewise is not part of the World Heritage Site group . In 1755 the mission of Santa Ana de Velasco was founded by the Jesuit Julian Knogler ; it is the most authentic of the six World Heritage Site missions dating from the colonial period . The last mission in the Chiquitania to be established was founded by the Jesuits Fr . Antonio Gaspar and Fr . José <unk> as Santo Corazón in 1760 . However , nothing of the original settlement remains in the modern village . 
 The Jesuits in the Chiquitania had a secondary objective , which was to secure a more direct route to Asunción than the road then being used via Tucumán and Tarija to link the Chiquitania with the Jesuit missions in Paraguay . The missionaries in Chiquitos founded their settlements increasingly further east , towards the Paraguay River , while those south of Asunción moved closer to the Paraguay River by establishing their missions increasingly farther north , thereby avoiding the impassable Chaco region . Although Ñuflo de Chávez had attempted a route through the Chaco on an expedition as early as 1564 , subsequent Jesuit explorations from Chiquitos ( e.g. in 1690 , 1702 , 1703 , and 1705 ) were unsuccessful . The Jesuits were stopped by the hostile Payaguá and <unk> tribes , and by the impenetrable swamps of <unk> . In 1715 , de Arce , the co @-@ founder of the first mission in San Xavier , set out from Asunción on the Paraguay River with the Flemish priest Fr . Bartolomé <unk> . Payaguá warriors killed <unk> during the journey , but de Arce struggled on to reach San Rafael de Velasco in the Chiquitania . On the return trip to Asunción he too was killed in Paraguay . Not until 1767 , when the missions had encroached sufficiently on the hostile region and just before the Jesuits were expelled from the New World , did Fr . José Sánchez Labrador manage to travel from Belén in Paraguay to Santo Corazón , the easternmost Chiquitos mission . 
 = = = Expulsion and recent development = = = 
 In 1750 as a result of the Treaty of Madrid seven missions in present @-@ day Rio Grande do Sul state in Brazil were transferred from Spanish to Portuguese control . The native Guaraní tribes were unhappy to see their lands turned over to Portugal ( their enemy for over a century ) and they rebelled against the decision , leading to the Guarani War . In Europe , where the Jesuits were under attack , they were accused of supporting the rebellion and perceived as defending the native peoples . In 1758 , the Jesuits were accused of a conspiracy to kill the king of Portugal , known as the Távora affair . All members of the Society of Jesus were evicted from Portuguese territories in 1759 , and from French territories in 1764 . In 1766 Jesuits were accused of causing <unk> Riots in Madrid ; consequently in February 1767 , Charles III of Spain signed a royal decree with expulsion orders for all members of the Society of Jesus in Spanish territories . 
 From then on , spiritual and secular administration were to be strictly separated . At the time of the expulsion , 25 Jesuits served a Christianized population of at least 24 @,@ 000 , in the ten missions of the Chiquitania . The Chiquitos mission properties included 25 estancias ( ranches ) with 31 @,@ 700 cattle and 850 horses . Libraries across the settlements held 2 @,@ 094 volumes . 
 By September 1767 , all but four Jesuits had left the Chiquitania , and they went the following April . The Spanish considered it essential to maintain the settlements as a buffer against Portuguese expansion . The archbishop of Santa Cruz de la Sierra , Francisco Ramón <unk> , established a new system of government , very similar to that set up by the Jesuits . He stipulated that each mission be run by two secular ( parish ) priests , one to take care of the spiritual needs while the other was in charge of all other – political and economic – affairs of the mission administration . One change was that the Indians were allowed to trade . In practice , the shortage of clergy and the low quality of those appointed by the bishop – almost all of whom did not speak the language of the local peoples and in some cases had not been ordained – led to a rapid general decline of the missions . The priests also broke ethical and religious codes , appropriated the major part of the missions ' income and encouraged contraband trade with the Portuguese . 
 Within two years of the expulsion , the population in the Chiquitos missions dropped below 20 @,@ 000 . Despite the general decline of the settlements , however , the church buildings were maintained and , in some cases , extended by the towns ' inhabitants . The construction of the church in Santa Ana de Velasco falls into this period . Bernd <unk> , an anthropologist who studied the Chiquitano , suggests three reasons that the Chiquitano preserved the heritage of the Jesuits even after their expulsion : the memory of their prosperity with the Jesuits ; the desire to appear as civilized Christians to mestizos and white people ; and to preserve the ethnicity that originated from a mix of various culturally distinct groups blended by an enforced common language and customs learned from the Jesuits . 
 In January 1790 , the Audiencia of Charcas ended the diocese ’ s mismanagement , and temporal affairs were delegated to civil administrators , with the hope of making the missions economically more successful . Sixty years after the expulsion of the Jesuits the churches remained active centers of worship , as the French naturalist Alcide d 'Orbigny reported during his mission to South America in 1830 and 1831 . Although much diminished economically and politically , the culture the Jesuits established was still evident . According to d 'Orbigny , the music at a Sunday mass in San Xavier was better than those he had heard in the richest cities of Bolivia . The population of the Chiquitania missions reached a low of around 15 @,@ 000 inhabitants in 1830 . In 1842 the Comte de Castelnau visited the area and , referring to the church in Santa Ana de Velasco , proclaimed : " This beautiful building , surrounded by gardens , presents one of the most impressive views imaginable . " 
 By 1851 , however , the reduction system of the missions had disappeared . <unk> who had moved to the area in their quest for land began to outnumber the original indigenous population . Starting with the creation of the Province of José Miguel de Velasco in 1880 , the Chiquitania was split into five administrative divisions . With the rubber boom at the turn of the century , more settlers came to the areas and established large haciendas , moving the economic activities together with the native peoples out of the towns . 
 In 1931 , the spiritual administration of the missions was given to German @-@ speaking Franciscan missionaries . Ecclesiastical control moved back to the area with the creation of the Apostolic Vicariate of Chiquitos in San Ignacio in that year . As of 2016 , the churches not only serve the mestizo inhabitants of the villages but present spiritual centers for the few remaining indigenous peoples living in the periphery . 
 In 1972 , the Swiss architect and then @-@ Jesuit priest Hans Roth began an extensive restoration project of the missionary churches and many colonial buildings that were in ruins . These churches exist in their present form as a result of Roth 's effort , who worked on the restoration with a few colleagues and many local people until his death in 1999 . The restoration works have continued sporadically into the beginning of the 21st century under local leadership . 
 Six of the reductions were listed as part of the World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 1990 . The churches of San Ignacio de Velasco , Santiago de Chiquitos and Santo Corazón have been reconstructed from scratch and are not part of the World Heritage Site . In San Juan Bautista only ruins remain . UNESCO listed the site under criteria IV and V , acknowledging the adaption of Christian religious architecture to the local environment and the unique architecture expressed in the wooden columns and banisters . Recently ICOMOS , the International Council on Monuments and Sites , warned that the traditional architectural ensemble that makes up the site has become vulnerable following agrarian reforms from 1953 which threatened the fragile socioeconomic infrastructure of the region . At the time of the nomination , the World Heritage Site was protected by the Pro Santa Cruz committee , <unk> , Plan <unk> de Santa Cruz , and the local mayoral offices of the mission towns . 
 = = World Heritage Missions = = 
 = = = San Xavier = = = 
 16 @.@ <unk> ° S 62 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / <unk> ; <unk> 
 Initially established in 1691 , the mission of San Xavier was the first of the missions listed in the World Heritage Site . In 1696 , due to the incursion of Paulistas from Brazil in the east , the mission was relocated toward the San Miguel River . In 1698 , it was relocated closer to Santa Cruz , but in 1708 was moved away to protect the Indians from the Spaniards . The original inhabitants of San Xavier were the <unk> tribe . The church was built between 1749 and 1752 by the Swiss Jesuit and architect Fr . Martin Schmid . The school and church , as well as other characteristics of residential architecture , are still visible today in the village . San Xavier was restored by Hans Roth between 1987 and 1993 . 
 = = = San Rafael de Velasco = = = 
 16 @.@ 7869 ° S 60 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / <unk> ; <unk> 
 The mission of San Rafael de Velasco was the second mission built out of the six inscribed the World Heritage Site . Founded in 1695 by the Jesuits Fr . Juan Bautista Zea and Fr . Francisco Hervás , it was moved several times . The mission had to be moved in 1701 and 1705 because of epidemics in the region . In 1719 the mission was moved once more due to fire . Fr . Martin Schmid built the church between 1747 and 1749 , which has survived . San Rafael de Velasco was restored between 1972 and 1996 as part of Hans Roth 's restoration project . 
 = = = San José de Chiquitos = = = 
 17 @.@ <unk> ° S 60 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / <unk> ; <unk> 
 Founded in 1698 by the Jesuits Fr . Felipe Suárez and Fr . <unk> Ávila , the mission of San José de Chiquitos was the third mission built of those of the World Heritage Site . At first , the mission was inhabited by the <unk> tribe . The church was built between 1745 and 1760 by an unknown architect . It is built of stone , unlike other mission churches in the area which were built with local adobe and wood . The mission is one of four that remain in their original location . As of 2016 , a mortuary chapel ( 1740 ) , the church ( 1747 ) , a bell tower ( 1748 ) , a house for the priests ( <unk> ) and workshops ( both 1754 ) still exist , and were renovated by Hans Roth 's restoration project between 1988 and 2003 . Restoration efforts continue . 
 = = = Concepción = = = 
 16 @.@ 1344 ° S 62 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / <unk> ; <unk> 
 The fourth mission in the World Heritage Site , the mission of Concepción , was initially founded in 1699 by the Jesuit priests Fr . Francisco Lucas Caballero and Fr . Francisco Hervás . A nearby mission , San Ignacio de <unk> , was incorporated in 1708 . The mission was moved three times : in 1707 , 1708 and 1722 . The mission was inhabited by the <unk> , the largest tribe in the region . The mission church was constructed between 1752 and 1756 , by Fr . Martin Schmid and Fr . Johann Messner . From 1975 to 1996 the mission was reconstructed as part of Hans Roth 's restoration project . 
 = = = San Miguel de Velasco = = = 
 16 @.@ <unk> ° S 60 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / <unk> ; <unk> 
 The fifth mission in the World Heritage Site , that of San Miguel de Velasco , was established by the Jesuits Fr . Felipe Suarez and Fr . Francisco Hervás in 1721 . San Miguel was an offshoot of the mission of San Rafael de <unk> , where the population had grown too large . The mission church was built between 1752 and 1759 , probably by Fr . Johann Messner , a collaborator with or student of Fr . Martin Schmid . The church was restored by Hans Roth between 1979 and 1983 . 
 = = = Santa Ana de Velasco = = = 
 16 @.@ <unk> ° S 60 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / <unk> ; <unk> 
 The mission of Santa Ana de Velasco was the final World Heritage Site @-@ inscribed mission to be established . It was founded by the Jesuit priest Fr . Julian Knogler in 1755 . The original native inhabitants of the missions were the <unk> and <unk> tribes . The mission church was designed after the expulsion of the Jesuits between 1770 and 1780 by an unknown architect and built entirely by the indigenous population . The complex , consisting of the church , bell tower , sacristy and a grassy plaza lined by houses , is considered to have the most fidelity to the original plan of the Jesuit reductions . Starting in 1989 and lasting until 2001 , the mission underwent partial restoration through the efforts of Hans Roth and his team . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 In their design of the reductions , the Jesuits were inspired by “ ideal cities “ as outlined in works such as Utopia and Arcadia , written respectively by the 16th @-@ century English philosophers Thomas More and Philip Sidney . The Jesuits had specific criteria for building sites : locations with plenty of wood for construction ; sufficient water for the population ; good soil for agriculture ; and safety from flooding during the rainy season . Although most of the missions in the Chiquitania were relocated at least once during the time of the Jesuits , four of ten towns remained at their original sites . Wood and adobe were the main materials used in the construction of the settlements . 
 = = = Mission layout = = = 
 The architecture and internal layout of these missions followed a scheme which was repeated later with some variations in the rest of the missionary reductions . In Chiquitos , the oldest mission , San Xavier , formed the basis for the organizational style , which consisted of a modular structure , the center formed by a wide rectangular square , with the church complex on one side and the houses of the inhabitants on the three remaining sides . The centralized organization of the Jesuits dictated a certain uniformity of measures and sizes . Despite being based on the same basic model , the towns of Chiquitos nonetheless show remarkable variations . For example , the orientation of the settlements toward the cardinal points differed and was determined by individual circumstances . 
 = = = Plaza = = = 
 The plaza was an almost square area varying in size from 124 by 148 metres ( 407 ft × 486 ft ) in the older towns of San Xavier and San Rafael de Velasco to 166 by 198 metres ( 545 ft × 650 ft ) in San Ignacio de Velasco . As they were used for religious and civil purposes , these were open spaces free of vegetation except a few palm trees surrounding a cross in the center of the plaza . The evergreen palm trees symbolizing eternal love , deliberately hearkened to Psalm 92 : 12 . Four chapels facing the central cross were placed at the corners of the square and were used in processions . Almost no remains exist of the chapels at the mission sites , as the plazas subsequently were redesigned to reflect the republican and mestizo lifestyle prevalent after the period of the Jesuits . Most have undergone recent expansion as well . Trees and shrubs were planted , and in some cases monuments were erected . Out of the original ten missions , only the plaza at Santa Ana de Velasco does not show major changes , consisting as it did in colonial times , of an open grassy space . 
 = = = Houses = = = 
 The houses of the natives had an elongated layout , and were arranged in parallel lines extending from the main square in three directions . Those facing the plaza were originally occupied by the chiefs of the indigenous tribes , and often were larger . The architecture of these houses was simple , consisting of large rooms ( <unk> meters ) , walls up to 60 centimetres ( 2 ft ) thick , and a roof made of reed ( <unk> ) and wood ( <unk> ) that reached a height of 5 m ( 16 ft ) in the center . Double doors and open galleries provided protection from the elements . The latter have had a social function as meeting places up to the present day . 
 Over the last 150 years , this layout has been replaced by the usual Spanish colonial architecture of large square blocks with internal patios . Remnants of the initial design can still be seen in San Miguel de Velasco , San Rafael de Velasco and Santa Ana de Velasco , places that were not as much exposed to modernization as the other settlements . 
 = = = Church complex = = = 
 Along the fourth side of the plaza lay the religious , cultural and commercial centers of the towns . In addition to the church , which dominated the complex , there would have been a mortuary chapel , a tower and a <unk> or " school " , connected by a wall along the side of the plaza . Behind the wall and away from the plaza would have been the patio with living quarters for the priests or visitors , rooms for town council matters , for music and storage , as well as workshops , which often were arranged around a second patio . Behind the buildings , a vegetable garden surrounded by a wall and a cemetery likely would have been found . The cemeteries and workshops have disappeared completely from the mission settlements , while the other elements of the church complex still survive to varying degrees . Two stone towers ( in San Juan Bautista and San José de Chiquitos ) and one of adobe ( in San Miguel de Velasco ) can be traced back to the time of the Jesuits . Others are of more recent construction , or the result of the conservation and restoration work spearheaded by Roth toward the end of the 20th century . Many of these are tall wooden constructions open on all sides . Of the Jesuit schools only those in San Xavier and Concepción are preserved entirely . Like the houses of the indigenous residents , the buildings of the church complex were single @-@ level ones . 
 = = = = Church = = = = 
 Once a settlement had been established , the missionaries , working with the native population , began to erect the church , which served as the educational , cultural and economic center of the town . The initial church in each mission ( except in Santa Ana de Velasco ) was temporary , essentially no more than a chapel and built as quickly as possible of local wood , <unk> save for a simple altar . The Jesuit masterpieces seen today general were erected several decades into the settlements ’ existence . Fr . Martin Schmid , Swiss priest and composer , was the architect for at least three of these missionary churches : San Xavier , San Rafael de Velasco , and Concepción . Schmid combined elements of Christian architecture with traditional local design to create a unique baroque @-@ mestizo style . Schmid placed a quotation from the Genesis 28 : 17 above the main entrance of each of the three churches . In San Xavier the quotation is in Spanish : CASA DE <unk> Y <unk> DEL <unk> ; and in Latin at the other two churches : <unk> DEI ET <unk> <unk> , meaning The house of god and the gate of heaven . 
 The construction of the restored churches seen today falls in the period between 1745 and 1770 and is characterized by the use of locally available natural materials like wood , used in the carved columns , pulpits and sets of drawers . Artistic adornments were added even after the Jesuits ’ expulsion in 1767 , until around 1830 . Some of the altars are covered in gold . Often the walls of the mission churches were made of adobe , the same material that had been used for the houses of the natives . In San Rafael de Velasco and San Miguel de Velasco , mica also was used on the walls , giving them an iridescent effect . The construction of the church in San José de Chiquitos is an exception : inspired by an unknown baroque model , it has a stone façade . The only other example where stone was used on a grand scale is in the construction of San Juan Bautista , although only the ruins of a tower remain . 
 All of the churches consist of a wooden skeleton with columns , fixed in the ground , which provided stability to the building and supported the tile @-@ covered roof . The adobe walls were placed directly on the ground , virtually independent of the wooden construction , and had no supporting role . <unk> and a large porch roof provided protection from the heavy tropical rains . The floor was covered in tiles which , like those of the roof , were produced in local tile works . The churches have a barn @-@ like appearance , albeit of monumental size ( width : 16 – 20 metres ( 52 – 66 ft ) , length : 50 – 60 metres ( 160 – 200 ft ) height : 10 – 14 metres ( 33 – 46 ft ) ) with a capacity for more than 3 @,@ 000 people , with a wide structure and distinctive low @-@ hanging eaves . This style also is evident in the building method of native community houses . 
 The construction of the church required a major effort by the community and employed hundreds of indigenous carpenters . Fr . José <unk> described the process : 
 All these buildings are made in a different way of those made in Europe : because the roof is built first and the walls afterwards . First large tree trunks are buried in the soil , these are worked by <unk> . Above these they place the beams and sills ; and above these the trusses and locks , tins and roof ; after that the foundations of stone are placed , and about 2 or 3 spans above the surface of the soil , and from here upwards they place the walls of adobe . The wooden trunks or pillars , which are called <unk> , remain in the central part of the walls , carrying the complete weight of the roof and no weight on the walls . In the central naves and in the place where the wall will be placed , 9 feet deep holes are made , and with architectural machines they introduce the carved <unk> in the form of columns . The 3 meters ( 9 feet ) stay inside the soil and are not carved , and keep part of the trees roots for greater strength , and these parts are burned so they may resist the humidity . 
 The walls were decorated with cornices , moldings , pilasters and at times blind arcades . First the walls were plastered entirely by a mix of mud , sand , lime and straw , both inside and outside . Paint in earth tones was applied over the lime whitewash , and ornaments were drawn , featuring elements from flora and fauna , as well as angels , saints and geometrical patterns . As noted above , in some cases mica was used to decorate the walls , columns and <unk> . Large oval " <unk> @-@ de @-@ <unk> " windows , surrounded by relief petals , above the main doors are a characteristic feature . 
 The churches had three aisles , divided by wooden columns , often <unk> columns , carved with twisted fluting resembling those at St. Peter 's baldachin in St Peter 's , Rome . Until modern times , there were no pews so the congregation had to kneel or sit on the floor . A variety of fine pieces of art adorn the inside of the churches , notably their altars , which are sometimes covered in gold , silver or mica . Especially remarkable are the pulpits made of brightly painted wood and supported by carved sirens . The pulpit in the church of San Miguel de Velasco features motifs derived from local vegetation . Elements specific to the Chiquitos missions exist also in other decorations . The altars of the churches of San Xavier and Concepción include depictions of notable Jesuits together with indigenous peoples . There remain a handful of original sculptures in retablos often depicting Madonnas , the crucifixion , and saints , carved in wood and then painted . These sculptures exhibit a style unique to the Chiquitos region , differing from that of the reductions in Paraguay or the Bolivian highlands . The tradition of figure carving has been preserved to the present day in workshops where carvers make columns , finials and windows for new or restored churches or chapels in the area . In addition , carvers produce decorative angels and other figures for the tourist market . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 The missionary churches are the true architectural highlights of the area . Hans Roth initiated an important restoration project in these missionary churches in 1972 . In San Xavier , San Rafael de Velasco , San José de Chiquitos , Concepción , San Miguel de Velasco and Santa Ana de Velasco , these churches have undergone meticulous restoration . In the 1960s , the San Ignacio de Velasco church was replaced with modern construction ; in the 1990s , Hans Roth and his co @-@ workers brought the restoration as close as possible to the original edifices . In addition to the churches , Roth constructed more than a hundred new buildings , including schools and houses . He also founded museums and archives . 
 Roth researched and recovered the original techniques used to construct churches prior to the restorations . He installed new building infrastructure including saw mills , locksmith shops , and carpentry and repair shops , and trained local people in traditional crafts . European volunteers , non @-@ profit organizations , the Catholic Church , and the Bolivian Learning Institute ( IBA ) helped in the project . 
 Roth convinced the local inhabitants of the importance of the restoration works , which required a large labor force : typically 40 to 80 workers in towns with populations of 500 to 2 @,@ 000 were required for church restoration . The effort indicates the strength of and commitment to the unique shared heritage present in the towns . This restoration has resulted in a revival of local traditions and a qualified workforce . 
 = = Life in the mission towns = = 
 The reductions were self @-@ sufficient indigenous communities of 2 @,@ 000 – 4 @,@ 000 inhabitants , usually headed by two Jesuit priests and the cabildo ( town council and cacique ( tribal leader ) , who retained their functions and played the role of intermediaries between the native peoples and the Jesuits . However , the degree to which the Jesuits controlled the indigenous population for which they had responsibility and the degree to which they allowed indigenous culture to function is a matter of debate , and the social organization of the reductions have been variously described as jungle utopias on the one hand , to theocratic regimes of terror , the former description being much closer to the mark . 
 The Jesuits quickly learned the languages of their subjects , which eased the missionary work and contributed to the success of the missions . Although initially each mission were conceived as home to one specific tribe , numerous tribal families lived in the Chiquitania , and often were gathered in next to each other on the same mission . According to a report from 1745 , of the 14 @,@ 706 people living in the missions , 65 @.@ 5 % spoke Chiquitano , 11 % Arawak , 9 @.@ 1 % <unk> , 7 @.@ 9 % Zamucos , 4 @.@ 4 % <unk> and 2 @.@ 1 % Guaraní . It should , however , be understood that by this time most of the inhabitants of these missions spoke Chiquitano as a second language . Such ethnic diversity is unique among the Jesuit missions in America . Reflecting the view of the colonial powers , the Jesuit records only distinguished between Christian and non @-@ Christian Indios . Eventually <unk> , the formal name for language spoken by the Chiquitano tribe , became the lingua franca of the mission settlements , and the numerous tribes were culturally united in the Chiquitano ethnic group . By 1770 , within three years of the expulsion of the Jesuits , Spanish authorities instituted a new policy of forced " <unk> " or " <unk> " of the language , thereby causing the number of speakers of native languages to decline . 
 Many Indians who joined the missions were looking for protection from Portuguese slave traders or the encomienda system of the Spanish conquistadores . In the reductions , the natives were free men . The land in the missions was common property . After a marriage , individual plots were assigned to newly founded families . For the Jesuits , the goal was always the same : to create cities in harmony with the paradise where they had encountered the indigenous peoples . 
 Though the settlements were officially a part of the Viceroyalty of Peru through the Royal Audiencia of Charcas and of the diocese of Santa Cruz in church affairs , their remoteness made them effectively autonomous and self @-@ sufficient . As early as 1515 , the Franciscan friar Bartolomé de las Casas had initiated a " foreigner law " for the " ' Indian people ' " , and no white or black man , other than the Jesuits and authorities , was allowed to live in the missions . Merchants were allowed to stay for three days at most . 
 = = = Economy = = = 
 Traditionally most of the Chiquitos tribes practiced swidden agriculture , growing maize and yuca on a small scale . After contact with the Spanish , cocoa and rice also were cultivated . Hunting and fishing provided additional nutrition in the dry season . The Jesuits introduced cattle breeding . 
 In each settlement , one of the Jesuits was responsible for church matters , while another dealt with commercial affairs and the general well @-@ being of the community . As the Swiss priest , musician and architect Fr . Martin Schmid wrote in a 1744 letter from San Rafael : 
 „ ... the Missionary Priests ... are not only parish priests who have preach , hear confessions and govern souls , they are also responsible for the life and health of their parishioners and must provide all the things needed by their towns , because the soul cannot be saved if the body dies . Therefore , the missionaries are town counsellors and judges , doctors , <unk> , masons , carpenters , <unk> , locksmiths , shoemakers , tailors , millers , backers , cooks , shepherds , gardeners , painters , sculptors , turners , carriage makers , brick makers , potters , weavers , tanners , wax and candle makers , <unk> , and any artisans which may be required in a republic . “ 
 The Jesuits administered labor , the introduction of new technologies , and the disposition of goods . They designated that each family receive all that was necessary to live . The Jesuits did not rely on donations , because by right the priests received a fixed income ( usually insufficient for their needs ) from the community to support their work . The thriving economy in the reductions enabled them to export surplus goods to all parts of Upper Peru , although ironically not to Paraguay – the region the Jesuits most wanted to reach . The income was used to pay royal tributes and to purchase goods not locally available , such as books , paper , and wine , from as far away as Europe . In the missions themselves money was not used . This laid the foundation of the belief that the Jesuits were guarding immense riches acquired through local labor . In reality the communities were economically successful but hardly constituted any important source of income for the Jesuit order . 
 All the inhabitants , including the young and elderly , were subject to a schedule of alternating work , religious practice , and rest . According to d 'Orbigny , the inhabitants of the Chiquitos missions enjoyed considerably more freedom than those in the <unk> missions . There was also less time spent practicing religion . The catechumens were instructed by the Jesuits in various arts . They learned very quickly and soon became proficient carpenters , painters , weavers , sculptors and artisans . Each settlement had its own set of craftsmen ; as a result , in addition to the caciques , a new social class of craftsmen and artisans emerged . This group and the rest of the population , who worked primarily in agriculture or cattle raising , were each represented by two alcaldes . Initially the main commercial products included honey , yerba <unk> , salt , tamarind , cotton , shoes , and leather . Later , artisans exported musical instruments , liturgical items , rosaries , and silverware . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Music played a special part in all aspects of life and in the evangelization of the natives . Realizing the musical capacities of the Indians , the Jesuits sent important composers , choir directors , and manufacturers of musical instruments to South America . The most famous was probably the Italian baroque composer Domenico Zipoli , who worked in the reductions in Paraguay . Fr . Johann <unk> and Fr . Martin Schmid , two Jesuit missionaries with musical talent , went to the Chiquitania . Schmid in particular was responsible for this skill being developed to such a high degree that polyphonic choirs would perform , and whole orchestras would play Baroque operas on handmade instruments . He directed the production of violins , harps , flutes , and organs , and wrote and copied masses , operas , and motets . He built an organ with six stops in Potosí , disassembled it , transported it by mules over a distance of 1 @,@ 000 kilometres ( 620 mi ) on a difficult road to the remote mission of Santa Ana de Velasco , and re @-@ assembled it there from hand . It is still is use . The Jesuits used musical lessons as a first step to the Christianization of the natives . 
 As Schmid , who also acted as a composer , wrote in a 1744 letter from San Rafael de Velasco : 
 „ “ ... In all these towns the sound of my organs already can be heard . I made a pile of all kind of musical instruments and taught the Indians how to play them . Not a single day passes without the sound of songs in our churches ... and I sing , play the organ , the zither , the flute , the trumpet , the psalter and the lyre , in high mode and low mode . All these musical art forms , which I ignored partially , I am able to practice now and teach them to the children of the natives . Your Reverence would be able to observe here , how children which were torn away from the jungle just a year ago , together with their parents are able today to sing well and with an absolutely firm beat , they play the zither , lyre and the organ and dance with precise movements and rhythm , that they might compete with the Europeans themselves . We teach these people all these mundane things so they may get rid of their rude customs and resemble civilized persons , predisposed to accept Christianity . ” 
 = = = Today = = = 
 Some Jesuit institutions still exist in the Chiquitania . For example , the towns of San Rafael de Velasco , San Miguel de Velasco , Santa Ana de Velasco and San Ignacio de Velasco have functioning town councils ( cabildos ) , and the caciques and the sexton still retain their capacities . The majority of the population of the Chiquitania is staunchly Catholic ; the Chiquitano cosmovision is now only a dimly understood mythology for its inhabitants . Between 1992 and 2009 , the populations of San Xavier and especially Concepción tripled , and more than doubled in San Ignacio de Velasco , now the region ’ s fastest @-@ growing municipality . In other mission towns the population also increased , albeit on a smaller scale . As of 2011 , San José de Chiquitos , San Xavier and Concepción have around 10 @,@ 000 inhabitants each ; and San Ignacio de Velasco , the largest town in the Chiquitania , has about 35 @,@ 000 and is now boasts a campus of a national university . On the other hand , in Santa Ana de Velasco there are currently only a few hundred people . The remoter settlements of Santiago de Chiquitos and Santo Corazón are quite small as well . According to various sources , in Bolivia the number of ethnic <unk> is between 30 @,@ 000 and 47 @,@ 000 of which less than 6 @,@ 000 – mainly elderly people – still speak the original language . Only a few hundred are monolingual in the Chiquitano language . 
 Economically , the area depends on agriculture . Maize , rice , yuca , cotton and heart of palm are produced and exported . Cattle ranching and the industrial processing of milk and cheese have been developed extensively in recent years . Crafts , often carved of wood using the same techniques as in colonial times , provide additional income . Since the launch of the Jesuit Mission Circuit – a marketing label to promote regional tourism – in 2005 , craftsmanship and tourism have been closely related . 
 The musical festivals and concerts held regularly in the Chiquitos <unk> towns testify to the living heritage of this art form . Some of the original instruments and sculptures made by Fr . Martin Schmid and his apprentices survive in small museums in the mission towns , most notably in Concepción which also houses the music archive . In San Xavier , San Rafael de Velasco and Santa Ana de Velasco three original harps from the time of the Jesuits are preserved . The church in Santa Ana de <unk> also houses the only original organ in Chiquitos , transported there from Potosí by mule , accompanied by Schmid in 1751 . More than a dozen orchestras and choirs brought together by the Sistema de <unk> y <unk> ( <unk> ) dot the area . 
 Since 1996 , the nonprofit institution <unk> Pro Arte y Cultura ( APAC ) has organized the biennial Festival Internacional de Musica <unk> y <unk> Americana . 
 Starting in 1975 , restoration work on the church ( now cathedral ) of Concepción unearthed more than 5 @,@ 000 musical scores from the 17th and 18th centuries . Later another 6 @,@ 000 scores were found in Moxos and several thousand additionally in San Xavier . Some of these works have been interpreted at the 2006 and 2008 festivals . The statistics of these festivals over the years is as follows : 
 The festival is carried out in the designated Plazas <unk> ( among other places ) , usually housed in churches and also in the main plaza of Santa Cruz . In one event , orchestras of various countries compete against each other . One of the local orchestras , Orquesta <unk> , is made up of people native to the ex @-@ missions who use instruments which they build themselves according to plans left by the Jesuit missionaries . 
 = = Tourism = = 
 Shortly after the start of the restoration effort , the potential for tourism in the missions was assessed in a report published by UNESCO in 1977 . 
 To promote the missions as a tourist destination , travel agencies , chambers of commerce and industry , the towns ' mayors , native communities and other institutions organized the <unk> <unk> del Destino <unk> " Chiquitos " , Misiones <unk> de Bolivia , a five @-@ day tourist event lasting from March 23 – 27 , 2006 . Journalists and international tour operators were shown the important tourist attractions , and introduced to the culture through visits to museums , local workshops , various concerts , native dances , high masses , processions , crafts festivals , and local cuisine . The organisers ’ goal initially was to raise the number of tourists from 25 @,@ 000 to 1 million per year over a ten @-@ year period , which would have represented US $ 400 million of income . Subsequently , in the face of lack of support from the Bolivian government and the downturn of the national and local economies , a more modest goal of attracting between 200 @,@ 000 and 250 @,@ 000 people per annum was established . 
 Tourism is now an important source of income for the region , amounting in Concepción <unk> alone to US $ 296 @,@ 140 , or 7 @.@ 2 % of the annual gross production . An additional US $ 40 @,@ 000 or 1 % comes from crafts . According to a report published by the " <unk> <unk> de la Provincia Velasco " in 2007 , 17 @,@ 381 people visited San Ignacio de Velasco , the largest town in the region , as tourists in 2006 . About 30 % of them came from outside of Bolivia . The main attraction for tourists are the nearby missions of San Miguel de Velasco , San Rafael de Velasco and Santa Ana de Velasco . Tourism to San Ignacio de Velasco generated 7 @,@ 821 @,@ 450 <unk> in income in 2006 . Tourism income is ostensibly translated to improvements in the infrastructure , although there has been criticism that earmarked funds do not always reach their intended destinations . Other than cultural tourism to the missionary circuit and musical festivals , the region offers many natural attractions like rivers , lagoons , hot springs , caves and waterfalls , although there is no infrastructure to support tourism in this regard . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Many elements of the early days of the Jesuit missions are shown in the movie The Mission , although the movie attempts to depict life in the Guaraní missions of Paraguay , not those of the Chiquitos missions , which were considerably more culturally expressive . The events around the expulsion of the Jesuits ( the <unk> ) are depicted in Fritz <unk> 's play Das heilige Experiment ( The Strong are Lonely ) . Both are set in Paraguay . It has been suggested that Das heilige Experiment sparked interest in the 20th century among scholars in the forgotten Jesuit missions . 
 = = = Historic accounts = = = 
 Of the primary sources , i.e. , those composed by the Jesuits themselves during the years 1691 through 1767 , those that have been extensively researched ( many as yet have not been thoroughly examined ) are few . The most useful is the monumental Historia general de la Compañía de Jesús en la Provincia del Perú : Crónica <unk> de 1600 que <unk> del <unk> y misiones de la Compañía de Jesús en los <unk> de <unk> española en la América meridional , vol . II , edited by Francisco Mateos ( Madrid : Consejo Superior de <unk> <unk> , 1944 ) . Also of importance is the unedited archive of correspondence from the Jesuits of Paraguay from the years 1690 @-@ 1718 . Collectively known as “ Cartas a los <unk> de la Provincia del Paraguay 1690 @-@ 1718 , ” these manuscripts are housed in the Jesuit Archives of Argentina in Buenos Aires , which also contain the invaluable annals of the Paraguay Province of the Company of Jesus , covering the years 1689 @-@ 1762 . The German edition of Fr . Julián Knogler ’ s <unk> einer Beschreibung der <unk> deren <unk> , <unk> <unk> Societatis Jesu , 39 / 78 ( Rome : Company of Jesus , 1970 ) is indispensable , as is his account <unk> sobre el <unk> y la nación de los Chiquitos en las Indias Occidentales o América del Sud y en la misiones en su <unk> , for a condensed version of which , see Werner Hoffman , Las misiones <unk> entre los <unk> ( Buenos Aires : Fundación para la Educación , la Ciencia y la Cultura , 1979 ) . Fr . Juan de Montenegro ’ s Breve <unk> de las <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , y sangre <unk> , en <unk> de la fe , de el venerable padre Augustín <unk> , de la Compañía de Jesús , insigne <unk> de la provincia del Paraguay , en las <unk> de Chiquitos , Zamucos , y <unk> en la <unk> de los <unk> <unk> , ( Madrid : Manuel Fernández , <unk> del Supremo Consejo de la <unk> , de la <unk> Cámara <unk> , y del Convento de las <unk> de la Encarnación , en la <unk> <unk> , 1746 ) and Fr . Juan Patricio Fernández ’ s Relación <unk> de las misiones de los indios , que <unk> <unk> , que <unk> a cargo de los padres de la Compañía de Jesús de la provincia del Paraguay ( Madrid : Manuel Fernández , <unk> de Libros , 1726 ) are also valuable . There are other primary sources as yet unexamined , the majority of which are archived in Cochabamba , Sucre , and Tarija ( in Bolivia ) ; Buenos Aires , Córdoba , and Tucumán ( in Argentina ) ; Asunción ( Paraguay ) ; Madrid ; and Rome . 
 Castelnau , Francis . Expédition dans les parties <unk> de l 'Amérique du Sud , de Rio de Janeiro à Lima : et de Lima au Para ( in French ) . 
 <unk> , L. Alfred ( 1860 ) . Histoire physique , économique et politique du Paraguay et des <unk> des <unk> . ( in French ) 1 . Paris : Librairie de L. Hachette . 
 <unk> , L. Alfred ( 1864 ) . Histoire physique , économique et politique du Paraguay et des <unk> des <unk> . ( in French ) 2 . Paris : Librairie de L. Hachette . 
 Fernandez , Juan Patricio ( 1895 ) . Relacion <unk> de Las Misiones de Indios Chiquitos que en el Paraguay <unk> los padres de la Compañia de Jesús . Colección de <unk> <unk> ó <unk> que <unk> de América ( in Spanish ) 1 . Madrid : Victoriano Suárez . 
 Fernandez , Juan Patricio ( 1896 ) . Relacion <unk> de Las Misiones de Indios Chiquitos que en el Paraguay <unk> los padres de la Compañia de Jesús ( in Spanish ) 2 . Asunción del Paraguay : A. de Uribe y Compañia . 
 <unk> , Bernardo ( 1774 ) . <unk> Reich in Paraguay : durch <unk> der Gesellschaft Jesu <unk> von dem aus dem <unk> <unk> Pater <unk> ( in German ) . Cölln : Peter <unk> . 
 References to many others are found in the extensive bibliography offered by Roberto <unk> <unk> , OFM , in La Primera <unk> en las <unk> de Chiquitos , Bolivia ( 1691 @-@ 1767 ) , pp. 669 – 714 . 
 = = = Modern books = = = 
 <unk> , Antonio Eduardo ( 1987 ) . Una Joya en la <unk> <unk> ( in Spanish ) . Zarautz , Spain : <unk> . ISBN 978 @-@ 84 @-@ <unk> @-@ 212 @-@ 0 . 
 Cisneros , Jaime ( 1998 ) . Misiones <unk> ( in Spanish ) ( 2nd ed . ) . La Paz : <unk> Offset Color <unk> 
 Groesbeck , Geoffrey A.P. ( 2007 ) . A Brief History of the Jesuit Missions of Chiquitos ( PDF ) . Springfield , IL : University of Illinois . ISSN <unk> @-@ <unk> . 
 Groesbeck , Geoffrey A.P. ( 2012 ) . Evanescence and <unk> : Toward an Accurate Understanding of the Legacy of the Jesuit Missions of Chiquitos . 
 Groesbeck , Geoffrey A.P. ( 2012 ) . The Long Silence : The Jesuit Missions of Chiquitos after the <unk> . 
 Molina Barbery , Placido ; Alcides Parejas ; Ramón Gutiérrez Rodrigo ; Bernd <unk> ; Virgilio Suárez ; Hans Roth ; Stefan Fellner ; Eckart Kühne ; Pedro <unk> ; Leonardo <unk> ; Irma Ruiz ; Bernardo Huseby ( 1995 ) . Pedro <unk> , ed . Las misiones <unk> de Chiquitos ( in Spanish ) . La Paz , Bolivia : Fundación Banco <unk> Nacional , Línea Editorial , La <unk> p . 718 . 
 Parejas Moreno , Alcides ( 2004 ) . Chiquitos : a look at its history . Milton Whitaker ( trans . ) , Ana Luisa Arce de Terceros ( trans . ) . Santa Cruz de la Sierra : Asociación Pro Arte y <unk> p . 93 . ISBN <unk> @-@ 0 @-@ 802 @-@ X. 
 <unk> <unk> , Roberto ( 2002 ) . La Primera <unk> en las <unk> de Chiquitos , Bolivia ( 1691 @-@ 1767 ) ( in Spanish ) . Cochabamba : Editorial Verbo <unk> p . 740 . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> @-@ 1 @-@ 009 @-@ 6 . 
 = Unforgiven ( 2006 ) = 
 Unforgiven ( 2006 ) was a professional wrestling pay @-@ per @-@ view event produced by World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) , which took place on September 17 , 2006 , at the Air Canada Centre in Toronto , Ontario . It was the eighth annual Unforgiven event . The show 's seven matches showcased prominent WWE wrestlers , who acted out the franchise 's stories in and out of the ring . The event starred talent from the Raw brand . 
 The main event was a Tables , Ladders , and Chairs match for the WWE Championship between Edge and John Cena , which Cena won after retrieving the belt suspended above the ring . One of the predominant matches on the card was D @-@ Generation X ( Triple H and Shawn Michaels ) versus The Big Show , Vince and Shane McMahon in a Handicap Hell in a Cell match . Triple H and Michaels won the match after Triple H pinned Vince following a sledgehammer shot to his back . Another primary match on the undercard was Lita versus Trish Stratus for the WWE Women 's Championship in what was Stratus ' final match of her full @-@ time wrestling career . Stratus won the match after forcing Lita to submit to the sharpshooter , thus becoming a record setting seven time WWE Women 's Champion . 
 As many of the existing feuds ended following the event , some did not . Notably , Jeff Hardy continued to feud with Johnny Nitro , facing off against him for the WWE Intercontinental Championship throughout September . The feud between D @-@ Generation X ( DX ) and The McMahons ended after the event , as DX began an angle with Edge and Randy Orton . Following his win against Edge , Cena began an angle with Kevin Federline , which started the proceeding month at Cyber Sunday and lasted throughout the year . 
 = = Background = = 
 The event featured seven professional wrestling matches with different wrestlers involved in pre @-@ existing scripted feuds , plots and storylines . Wrestlers were portrayed as either villains or fan favorites as they followed a series of tension @-@ building events , which culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches . All wrestlers belonged to the Raw brand – a storyline division in which WWE assigned its employees to a different program , the other being SmackDown ! . 
 The main feud heading into Unforgiven was between Edge and John Cena over the WWE Championship . The two were evenly matched , with one victory each . Cena defeated Edge by disqualification at Saturday Night 's Main Event , and Edge had beaten Cena at SummerSlam to retain his championship . On the edition of August 21 , 2006 of Raw , Lita , Edge 's girlfriend , threw Cena 's customized belt , which had a spinning center plate of the WWE logo , into the Long Island Sound . Afterwards , Edge proclaimed that it was the end of the " Cena era " in his life . Edge went on to unveil a new version of the belt , which had a spinning center plate of his " Rated @-@ R Superstar " logo . Later in the evening , Edge had a match with the returning Jeff Hardy ; however , the match ended in a no @-@ contest after Cena interfered and attacked Edge . After the match , the two fought outside the arena , and Cena tossed Edge into the Long Island Sound . On the edition of August 28 , 2006 of Raw , Edge demanded that Shane McMahon , who was in charge of Raw that night , fire Cena for his actions the week before . Cena , however , interrupted and told Edge that if he got another WWE Championship match and lost , he would sign a contract with SmackDown ! and leave Edge 's life . Edge agreed , but on the condition that he decided when , where , and what type of match it would be . After Cena defeated Chris Masters later that night , Edge hit Cena with a chair , a ladder , and later put him through a table . Following his attack , Edge told Cena that the match was going to be a Tables , Ladders , and Chairs match at Unforgiven in his hometown of Toronto . 
 The other main match on the card was D @-@ Generation X ( DX ) ( Triple H and Shawn Michaels ) versus The McMahons ( Vince and Shane ) and The Big Show in a Hell in a Cell match . At SummerSlam , DX defeated The McMahons in a tag team match . On the edition of August 21 , 2006 of Raw , as part of the storyline , DX vandalized the WWE headquarters and Vince McMahon 's personal jet plane and limousine . On the edition of August 28 of Raw , The McMahons viciously attacked DX after their 3 @-@ on @-@ 2 handicap match with their SummerSlam opponents , Mr. Kennedy , Finlay and William Regal . But before Vince and Shane proceeded to attack DX , Big Show attacked DX , giving the advantage to The McMahons . Moments after the assault , Vince booked a match at Unforgiven , where he teamed up with Shane and Big Show to take on DX in a 3 @-@ on @-@ 2 handicap Hell in a Cell match . 
 One of the main undercard matches was between Lita and Trish Stratus for the WWE Women 's Championship . Lita engaged herself in a feud with Trish Stratus , after Lita and Edge interrupted Stratus ' title match with Mickie James . Lita and Edge then went on to attack Stratus ' , only to involve Carlito , who was in an on @-@ screen relationship with Stratus , to brawl with Lita and Edge . A scheduled tag team match between Lita and Edge versus Stratus and Carlito occurred , in which Edge and Lita were the winners . On the edition of August 28 , 2006 of Raw , Lita revealed that Stratus would retire following Unforgiven , which was later confirmed by Stratus . On the edition of September 4 of Raw , Stratus challenged Lita to a match at Unforgiven for the WWE Women 's title , for her retirement match , in which Lita accepted . 
 = = Event = = 
 The event unofficially began with a dark match between Super Crazy and Shelton Benjamin . Crazy pinned Benjamin for the win . 
 = = = Preliminary matches = = = 
 The first match was between Jeff Hardy and Johnny Nitro for the Intercontinental Championship . In the start of the match , Hardy gained the advantage over Nitro by countering his attacks . Hardy performed the Swanton Bomb , but Nitro put his foot on the rope to break a pinfall attempt by Hardy . Melina , however , hit Hardy with her boot , giving the upper hand to Nitro as he pinned Hardy and retained the title . 
 The match that followed was between Kane and Umaga . The match was taken to the outside of the ring . Kane performed a clothesline on Umaga into the crowd for a double countout called by the referee . The third match was for the World Tag Team Championship between the Spirit Squad ( Kenny and Mikey ) and The <unk> back and forth action was seen by both teams . The members of the Squad , who were at ringside , interfered in the match and gave the upper hand to their teammates , as Mikey was able to pin Rory after a Facebuster , thus able to retain the World Tag Team Championship . 
 = = = Main event matches = = = 
 The Hell in a Cell match between Shane , Vince McMahon , and the Big Show versus Triple H and Shawn Michaels ( DX ) was next . At first , DX was able to get the upper hand over the McMahons and Big Show . Back and forth action took place between the teams . During the match , Triple H wrapped a chair around Shane 's neck , which followed with Michaels hitting an elbow drop onto the chair , which resulted in Shane being injured . Michaels proceeded to perform Sweet Chin Music on Big Show . DX then pulled Big Show 's trunks down and shoved Vince 's head up Big Show 's buttocks . DX won the match , after Michaels performed Sweet Chin Music , which was followed by Triple H hitting McMahon over the back with a sledgehammer and covering him for the win . 
 The next singles match was between Trish Stratus and Lita for the WWE Women 's Championship . Stratus gained control early in the match , but Lita took it from her after she threw Stratus from the top rope . Stratus won the match after she locked in the Sharpshooter on Lita , who submitted to the move , and Stratus became Women 's Champion for the last time in her career . The sixth match was between Randy Orton and Carlito . As the match came to a start , Carlito spat on Orton and momentarily was followed by a dropkick . Mid @-@ way in the match , Carlito springboard <unk> from each side of the ring . His elbow caught Orton in the mouth on the second moonsault causing Orton to bleed from the mouth . After back and forth action , Carlito attempted an aerial maneuver , only to be countered into a mid @-@ air RKO . Orton then pinned Carlito for the win . 
 The final match of the night was for the WWE Championship between Edge and John Cena in a TLC match . At the start of the match , Cena took the advantage over Edge . Edge , however , countered Cena 's moves with a neckbreaker . The match saw Cena sandwich Edge in a ladder , as he applied the STFU hold on Edge , to which Edge tapped out . At one point , Cena began to climb the ladder , as he was moments away from retrieving the title , Lita , who interfered on behalf of Edge , tipped the ladder over , making Cena fall off the ladder and crash through a table at ringside . Lita 's interference was short , as Cena would later recover , and as Edge was climbing the ladder , Lita hits Cena with a steel chair to the back , only for him to inadvertently fall towards and push the ladder , making Edge fall off the ladder and crash through a table at ringside . Lita was then promptly dispatched by Cena , who performed an FU on her . Cena then began to make his way up the ladder , as did Edge when he re @-@ entered the ring . The two exchanged right @-@ hands , until Cena lifted Edge for the FU and dropped Edge through two tables that were stacked together by Cena . Cena then grabbed the belt down from the loop and became champion for the third time . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 On the edition of October 2 , 2006 of Raw , John Cena was scheduled to defend the WWE Championship against Edge in a Steel Cage match , after Edge invoked his rematch clause for the title . Cena defeated Edge to retain the title , as he was able to perform an FU for the win , and thus ended the feud between the two . Edge , however , would begin a feud with DX , after Edge blamed DX for costing him the title match against Cena , due to interference from DX the previous week . The following week , Edge used an edition of The Cutting Edge to join forces with Randy Orton to form a team and began a feud against DX . Edge cited Randy Orton 's lack of success after being kicked out of Evolution by Triple H and DX 's " stale " antics " taking up TV time " as reasons to join forces . The duo dubbed themselves Rated @-@ RKO . At Cyber Sunday , Edge and Orton became the first team to finally defeat DX since their reunion in June . 
 Kane and Umaga continued their feud , as both individuals interfered in one another 's matches . On the edition of October 9 , 2006 of Raw , Kane and Umaga were scheduled in a " Loser Leaves Raw match " ; Umaga defeated Kane and sent him to the SmackDown ! brand . Despite their separation into different brands , Umaga and Kane had one final match at Cyber Sunday . Umaga won again , after fans selected him to be Umaga 's opponent instead of Chris Benoit and The Sandman . The angle between Johnny Nitro and Jeff Hardy continued , as the two were involved in another Intercontinental Championship match where Nitro retained the title . Nitro , however , lost the title to Hardy , on the edition of October 2 of Raw . 
 The WWE Women 's Championship was vacated on September 18 , 2006 , following Trish Stratus ' win at Unforgiven . On the edition of September 25 of Raw , a Women 's title tournament began , and the first match was won by Lita , after she defeated Candice Michelle . The second tournament match was a Lingerie match between Mickie James and Victoria , which James won . On the edition of October 9 of Raw , Melina defeated Torrie Wilson in a Lumberjill match to advance in the tournament match . The following week , Maria won a Fatal Four @-@ Way Bra and Panties match against Victoria , Candice Michelle , and Torrie Wilson to advance to the semi @-@ finals . On the edition of October 23 of Raw , James defeated Melina to advance in the semi @-@ finals . The following week on Raw , Lita advanced in the tournament , after she defeated Maria . At Cyber Sunday , Lita and Mickie James advanced to the seventh match of the tournament . Lita won the vacant Women 's title , after she pinned James with a Swinging snap DDT . 
 John Cena was placed in an inter @-@ brand angle to determine the " Champion of Champions " – or who was the most dominant champion in WWE 's three brands . Cena , King Booker ( SmackDown ! ' s World Heavyweight Champion ) , and Big Show ( ECW 's World Champion ) engaged in a feud leading to a triple threat match at Cyber Sunday in November ; viewers chose which championship would be placed on the line . At the same time , Cena became involved in a storyline with non @-@ wrestler Kevin Federline when he began appearing on Raw with Johnny Nitro and Melina . After getting into a worked physical altercation with Federline on Raw , Federline helped King Booker retain his title at Cyber Sunday in the Triple Threat match by hitting Cena with the World Heavyweight Title belt . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The event received mostly positive reviews from critics . Writing for Canadian Online Explorer , Brian Elliott stated that the event was " a card of averages , with nothing excellent and little poor " . He rated the overall event 7 out 10 stars . The main event between Edge and John Cena for the WWE Championship was rated 9 out of 10 stars , the Hell in a Cell match was rated 9 and a half out of 10 with the Sun saying it was an extreme bloodbath that lived up to its hype , the World Tag Team Championship between the Spirit Squad and the Highlanders was rated a 5 out of 10 stars , and the Intercontinental Championship match between Johnny Nitro and Jeff Hardy was rated a 7 out of 10 stars . 
 = = Results = = 
 = Typhoon Mamie ( 1985 ) = 
 Typhoon Mamie was the worst tropical cyclone to affect China in 26 years . Originating from an area of disturbed weather near the Philippines in mid @-@ August 1985 , the system gradually became better organized , and was upgraded into a tropical storm early on August 16 . It continued to deepen , and late on August 17 , Mamie attained typhoon intensity . Around this time , Typhoon Mamie reached its peak intensity of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , which it maintained for 12 hours . After making landfall in Shanghai , the storm steadily weakened . However , after turning north and crossing the Shanghai Peninsula and the Yellow Sea , Mamie made a second landfall near Yantai as a tropical storm . After turning northwest and re @-@ entering the Yellow Sea , Mamie moved ashore for the third and final time near Dairen . On August 21 , Mamie dissipated inland over northeastern China . 
 Due to both Mamie and Nelson , widespread flooding was reported across much of northern China , with 19 rivers overflowing . The typhoon forced around 1 @,@ 000 factories to temporarily close , and toppled approximately 6 @.@ 5 million trees . Moreover , about 8 @,@ 000 homes were flooded and 120 @,@ 000 houses received damage Nearly 1 million people were directly affected by the typhoon . The typhoon killed more than 120 @,@ 000 animals and sank more than 200 boats . Overall , 17 fatalities occurred and 165 were injured . Losses totaled $ 172 million ( 1985 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Typhoon Mamie originated from the southwesterly monsoonal flow near the Philippines . The monsoon flow was situated near Tropical Storm Lee , which was situated east of Taiwan at that time . At 0000 UTC on August 14 , banding features were noted via satellite imagery . The system was first monitored by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) at 0600 UTC on August 14 ; the JTWC noted that the chances of significant development were poor . Throughout the day , the system became better organized while turning north and at 1800 UTC that day , the Japan Meteorological Agency ( JMA ) started watching the disturbance . Early on August 15 , the JTWC remarked that the storm had a " fair " chance at potential development . As such , Hurricane Hunter aircraft was requested . Following an increase in banding features and outflow , a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert ( TCFA ) was issued by the JTWC that afternoon . Thereafter , the cyclone began to strengthen as interaction with Tropical Storm Lee diminished . At 2300 UTC on August 15 , the aircraft discovered a closed low @-@ level circulation , as well as tropical storm @-@ force winds . Based on this , both agencies designated the system as Tropical Storm Mamie early on August 16 . 
 On August 16 , the tropical storm began to turn northwest in response to the strengthening of a subtropical ridge north of Mamie and a westward @-@ moving mid @-@ latitude cyclone . At 0000 UTC on August 17 , the JTWC classified Mamie as a typhoon while the JMA reported winds of 105 km / h ( 65 mph ) , a severe tropical storm . Around midday , the JTWC estimated winds of 130 km / h ( 80 mph ) , equivalent to a Category 1 hurricane on the United States @-@ based Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Wind Scale . However , the aforementioned ridge was not strong enough to prevent the storm from turning north @-@ northwest on August 17 . That evening , the JMA upgraded Mamie to typhoon status . Simultaneously , the JMA estimated peak winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) , and a minimum barometric pressure of 975 mbar ( 28 @.@ 8 inHg ) . According to the JMA , the typhoon held on to peak intensity for 12 hours while moving onshore near Shanghai on August 18 . Mamie only gradually weakened overland , but according to the JMA , the storm 's winds had decreased to 105 km / h ( 65 mph ) midday on August 18 . Typhoon Mamie moved offshore at 0200 UTC on August 19 ; subsequently , the JTWC estimated winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) while the JMA estimated winds of 95 km / h ( 60 mph ) . After crossing the Shanghai Peninsula , Mamie entered the Yellow Sea while turning north along the western periphery of a subtropical ridge , and at 0600 UTC , struck Yantai as a minimal tropical storm . Following a turn towards the northwest , Tropical Storm Mamie briefly emerged into the Yellow Sea before making a third and final landfall just west of Dairen at noon . At the time of landfall , both the JMA and the JTWC reported winds of 70 km / h ( 45 mph ) . Due to interaction with the mountainous terrain of China , Mamie began to dissipate over land , and by 0000 UTC on August 20 , the JTWC ceased watching the cyclone . The JMA followed suit 42 hours later . 
 = = Preparations , impact , and aftermath = = 
 Roughly 24 hours prior to Mamie 's third landfall , all ships were warned in the port of Dalian to evacuate ; however , 152 ships stayed at the port . Shortly after making landfall , Mamie was considered the worst storm to affect northeastern China in 26 years . The nation was already inundated by significant flooding earlier in the summer of 1985 , especially from Typhoon Nelson . 
 After making landfall , Typhoon Mamie dropped 420 mm ( 17 in ) of rain in Liaoning , where the storm flooded 300 @,@ 000 ha ( 741 @,@ 315 acres ) of farmland . Due to a combination of Mamie and previous flooding , 19 rivers overflowed . The typhoon forced 1 @,@ 000 factories to temporarily close , and toppled about 6 @.@ 5 million trees . Over 8 @,@ 000 dwellings were flooded . More than 3 @,@ 000 residents were evacuated in the Jilin province . At least 36 @,@ 400 villagers necessitated rescue . Nearly 1 million individuals were directly affected by the typhoon . Elsewhere , in Yantai , the typhoon killed more than 120 @,@ 000 animals , damaged 120 @,@ 000 homes , and sank more than 200 boats . Waves up to 8 m ( 26 ft ) in height pounded the Bohai Bay shoreline , forcing more than 200 ships to be evacuated . Cables securing an oil rig were snapped . One person died while trying to fasten steel products on a ship . In all , 17 people perished and 165 were injured due to Mamie . Loses totaled $ 172 million . 
 After the passage of Typhoon Mamie , more than 800 @,@ 000 civilians and 9 @,@ 000 soldiers were organized in order to protect reservoirs from flooding . By August 28 , 150 @,@ 000 civilians and 10 @,@ 000 soldiers were fighting against flooding along the Liao River on a daily basis . Additionally , local military forces were called in to assist relief workers . The government organized buses and boats to carry flood victims . Some schools were used as shelter while restaurants and hospitals sent food and medicine . 
 = Oppenheimer security hearing = 
 The Oppenheimer security hearing was a 1954 proceeding by the United States Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) that explored the background , actions , and associations of J. Robert Oppenheimer , the American scientist who had headed the Los Alamos Laboratory during World War II , where he played a key part in the Manhattan Project that developed the atomic bomb . The hearing resulted in Oppenheimer 's Q clearance being revoked . This marked the end of his formal relationship with the government of the United States , and generated considerable controversy regarding whether the treatment of Oppenheimer was fair , or whether it was an expression of anti @-@ Communist McCarthyism . 
 Doubts about Oppenheimer 's loyalty dated back to the 1930s , when he was a member of numerous Communist front organizations , and was associated with Communist Party USA members , including his wife and his brother . These associations were known to Army Counter @-@ intelligence at the time he was made director of the Los Alamos Laboratory in 1942 , and chairman of the influential General Advisory Committee of the AEC in 1947 . In this capacity Oppenheimer became involved in bureaucratic conflict between the Army and Air Force over the types of nuclear weapons the country required , technical conflict between the scientists over the feasibility of the hydrogen bomb , and personal conflict with AEC commissioner Lewis Strauss . 
 The proceedings were initiated after Oppenheimer refused to voluntarily give up his security clearance while working as an atomic weapons consultant for the government , under a contract due to expire at the end of June 1954 . Several of his colleagues testified at the hearings . As a result of the two to one decision of the hearing 's three judges , he was stripped of his security clearance one day before his consultant contract was due to expire . The panel found that he was loyal and discreet with atomic secrets , but did not recommend that his security clearance be reinstated . 
 The loss of his security clearance ended Oppenheimer 's role in government and policy . He became an academic exile , cut off from his former career and the world he had helped to create . The reputations of those who had testified against Oppenheimer were tarnished as well , and Oppenheimer 's reputation was later partly rehabilitated by Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson . The brief period when scientists were hailed as heroes uniquely qualified to comment on public policy was ended , and scientists working within the government were on notice that dissent was no longer tolerated . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Robert Oppenheimer = = = 
 Before World War II , J. Robert Oppenheimer had been professor of physics at the University of California , Berkeley . The scion of a wealthy New York family , he was a graduate of Harvard University , and had studied in Europe at the University of Cambridge in England , the University of Göttingen in Germany ( where he had earned his doctorate in physics under the supervision of Max Born at the age of 23 ) , and the University of Leiden in the Netherlands . As one of the few American physicists with a deep understanding of the new field of quantum mechanics , he was hired by the University of California in 1929 . 
 As a theoretical physicist , Oppenheimer had considerable achievements . In a 1930 paper on the Dirac equation , he had predicted the existence of the positron . A 1938 paper co @-@ written with Robert Serber explored the properties of white dwarf stars . This was followed by one co @-@ written with one of his students , George Volkoff , in which they demonstrated that there was a limit , the so @-@ called Tolman @-@ Oppenheimer @-@ Volkoff limit , to the mass of stars beyond which they would not remain stable as neutron stars and would undergo gravitational collapse . In 1939 , with another of his students , Hartland Snyder , he went further and predicted the existence of what are today known as black holes . It would be decades before the significance of this was appreciated . 
 Still , Oppenheimer was not well known before the war , and certainly not as renowned as his friend and colleague Ernest O. Lawrence , who was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1939 for his invention of the cyclotron . But as an experimental physicist , Lawrence had come to rely on Oppenheimer , and it was Lawrence who brought Oppenheimer into the effort to develop an atomic bomb , which became known as the Manhattan Project . Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , who became director of the Manhattan Project on September 8 , 1942 , met Oppenheimer at Berkeley , where Oppenheimer briefed Groves on his work on the " Super " ( thermonuclear ) bomb . Oppenheimer told Groves on October 8 that the Manhattan Project needed a dedicated weapons development laboratory . Groves agreed , and after a second meeting with Oppenheimer on a train on October 15 , decided that Oppenheimer was the man he needed to head what became the Los Alamos Laboratory , despite Oppenheimer 's lack of a Nobel Prize or administrative experience . 
 The end of the war in the wake of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki made scientists into heroes . Oppenheimer became a celebrity , with his face gracing front pages of newspapers and the covers of magazines . Life magazine described him as " one of the most famous men in the world , one of the most admired , quoted , photographed , consulted , glorified , well @-@ nigh deified as the fabulous and fascinating archetype of a brand new kind of hero , the hero of science and intellect , originator and living symbol of the new atomic age . " 
 = = = Chevalier incident = = = 
 Many of Oppenheimer 's associates in the years before World War II were Communist Party USA members . They included his wife Kitty , whose first husband Joe Dallet had been killed fighting with the Lincoln Battalion in the Spanish Civil War ; his brother Frank Oppenheimer and Frank 's wife Jackie ; and his girlfriend Jean Tatlock . One of his Communist associates was a colleague at the University of California , an assistant professor of French literature named Haakon Chevalier . The two had met during a rally for Spanish Loyalists , and had co @-@ founded a branch of the American Federation of Teachers at Berkeley known as Local 349 . The Federal Bureau of Investigation ( FBI ) had opened a file on Oppenheimer in March 1941 , after he had attended a December 1940 meeting at Chevalier 's home that was also attended by the Communist Party 's California state secretary William Schneiderman and its treasurer Isaac <unk> , both of whom were targets of FBI surveillance and wiretaps . Agents had recorded the license plate of Oppenheimer 's car . The FBI noted that Oppenheimer was on the Executive Committee of the American Civil Liberties Union , which it considered a Communist front . Shortly thereafter , the FBI added Oppenheimer to its <unk> Detention Index , for arrest in case of national emergency . 
 In January or February 1943 , Chevalier had a brief conversation with Oppenheimer in the kitchen of his home . Chevalier told Oppenheimer that there was a scientist , George Eltenton , who could transmit information of a technical nature to the Soviet Union . Oppenheimer rejected the overture , but failed to report it until August 1943 , when he volunteered to Manhattan Project security officers that three men at Berkeley had been solicited for nuclear secrets on behalf of the Soviet Union , by a person he did not know who worked for Shell Oil , and who had Communist connections . He gave that person 's name as George Eltenton . When pressed on the issue in later interviews at Los Alamos in December 1943 with Groves , who promised to keep the identity of the three men from the FBI , Oppenheimer identified the contact who had approached him as Chevalier , and told Groves that only one person had been approached : his brother Frank . Groves considered Oppenheimer too important to the ultimate Allied goals of building atomic bombs and winning the war to oust him over this suspicious behavior . He ordered that Oppenheimer be given a security clearance " without delay , irrespective of the information which you have concerning Mr. Oppenheimer . He is absolutely essential to the project . " 
 Oppenheimer was interviewed by the FBI on September 5 , 1946 . He related the " Chevalier incident " , and he gave contradictory and equivocating statements , telling government agents that only he had been approached , by Chevalier , who at the time had supposedly said that he had a potential conduit through Eltenton for information which could be passed to the Soviets . Oppenheimer claimed to have invented the other contacts to conceal the identity of Chevalier , whose identity he believed would be immediately apparent if he named only one contact , but whom he believed to be innocent of any disloyalty . The 1943 fabrication and the shifting nature of his accounts figured prominently in the 1954 inquiry . 
 The McMahon Act that established the Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) required all employees holding wartime security clearances issued by the Manhattan Project to be investigated by the FBI and re @-@ certified . This provision had come in the wake of the February 16 , 1946 , defection of Igor Gouzenko in Canada , and the subsequent arrest of 22 people . President Harry S. Truman appointed Oppenheimer to the AEC General Advisory Committee ( GAC ) on December 10 , 1946 , so the FBI interviewed two dozen of Oppenheimer 's associates , including Robert Bacher , Ernest Lawrence , Enrico Fermi and Robert Gordon Sproul . Groves and the Secretary of War Robert P. Patterson supplied written statements supporting Oppenheimer . AEC chairman David Lilienthal and Vannevar Bush discussed the matter with Truman 's sympathetic aide Clark Clifford at the White House . They found John Lansdale , Jr. particularly persuasive ; he had interrogated Oppenheimer over the Chevalier incident in 1943 , and strongly supported him . On August 11 , 1947 , they unanimously voted to grant Oppenheimer a Q clearance . At the first meeting of the GAC on January 3 , 1947 , Oppenheimer was unanimously elected its chairman . 
 = = = Postwar conflicts = = = 
 The FBI was willing to furnish Oppenheimer 's political enemies with incriminating evidence about Communist ties . These included Lewis Strauss , an AEC commissioner who resented Oppenheimer for his humiliation before Congress regarding opposition to the export of radioactive isotopes to other nations , which Strauss believed had military applications . As GAC chairman , Oppenheimer was called before the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy ( <unk> ) over the issue in June 1949 . The other four AEC commissioners had opposed Strauss , so he had gone to the <unk> in an attempt to get the decision overturned . The result was a stunning humiliation for the thin @-@ skinned Strauss . Oppenheimer testified that : 
 No one can force me to say that you cannot use these isotopes for atomic energy . You can use a shovel for atomic energy , in fact you do . You can use a bottle of beer for atomic energy , in fact you do . But to get some perspective , the fact is that during the war and after the war these materials played no significant part , and in my knowledge , no part at all ... My own rating of the importance of isotopes in this broad sense is that they are far less important than electronic devices but far more important than , let us say , vitamins , somewhere in between . 
 This came on the heels of controversies about whether some of Oppenheimer 's students , including David Bohm , Ross Lomanitz and Bernard Peters , had been Communists at the time they had worked with him at Berkeley . Oppenheimer was called to testify in front of the House Un @-@ American Activities Committee , where he admitted that he had associations with the Communist Party in the 1930s , and named some of his students as being Communists or closely associated with them . Bohm and Peters eventually left the country , while Lomanitz was forced to work as a laborer . Frank Oppenheimer was fired from his university position , and could not find work in physics for a decade . He and his wife Jackie became cattle ranchers in Colorado . Their reputations were rehabilitated in 1959 , and they founded the San Francisco Exploratorium in 1969 . 
 David Kaiser noted that : 
 These dozen or so theoretical physicists surely came under fire for many reasons ; with hindsight their troubles appear almost overdetermined . Most were Jewish ; several had been active in labor organizing before or during the war ; a few had flirted with the Communist Party in their youth ; many were active in other leftwing political organizations after the war . Perhaps most important , however , they had close and long @-@ standing ties with Robert Oppenheimer ... 
 From 1949 to 1953 , Oppenheimer had also found himself in the middle of a controversy over the development of the " Super " . In 1949 , the Soviet Union detonated an atomic bomb . This came as a shock to many Americans , and it fell to Oppenheimer to check the evidence and confirm that the explosion had taken place . In response , Strauss recommended that the United States retain nuclear superiority by developing the " Super " . This had been under consideration at Los Alamos for several years . Brigadier General James McCormack told the AEC commissioners that while thermonuclear weapons could potentially be thousands of times as powerful as fission weapons , as of 1949 there was no design that worked , and no certainty that a practical bomb could be built if there was one . He cautioned that the " Super " would probably require large amounts of tritium , which could only be acquired by diverting the AEC 's nuclear reactors from plutonium production . 
 Strauss found allies in Lawrence and Edward Teller , who had headed the " Super " group at Los Alamos during the war . When the matter was referred to the GAC , it unanimously voted against a crash program to develop the " Super " . Without a workable design , it seemed foolish to divert resources from atomic bombs . Nor was there an obvious military need . Despite this , Truman authorized the crash program on January 31 , 1950 . Teller , Fermi , John von Neumann , and Stan Ulam struggled to find a working design , and in February 1951 , Ulam and Teller finally devised one . After reviewing the design and data gathered by the Operation Greenhouse tests in May 1951 , Oppenheimer 's attitude completely changed , and he became convinced that the " New Super " was practical . Teller left Los Alamos to help found , with Lawrence , a second weapons laboratory , the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory , in 1952 . 
 Thermonuclear " strategic weapons " ( military targets and city @-@ destroyers ) delivered by long @-@ range jet bombers would necessarily be under control of the relatively new United States Air Force . By contrast , Oppenheimer pushed for smaller " tactical " nuclear weapons which would be more useful in a limited theater against enemy troops , and which would be under control of the Army . These two branches of the service fought for control of nuclear weapons , often allied with different political parties . The Air Force , with Teller pushing its program , gained ascendency in the Republican @-@ controlled government , after the election of Dwight D. Eisenhower as president in 1952 . 
 = = = Claims made in the Borden letter = = = 
 In November 1953 , J. Edgar Hoover was sent a letter concerning Oppenheimer by William <unk> Borden , former executive director of Congress ' Joint Atomic Energy Committee . In the letter , Borden stated his opinion " based upon years of study , of the available classified evidence , that more probably than not J. Robert Oppenheimer is an agent of the Soviet Union . " The letter was based upon the government 's massive investigative dossier on Oppenheimer , which had included " eleven years ' minute surveillance of the scientist 's life . " His office and home had been bugged , his telephone tapped and his mail opened . 
 Borden 's letter stated as follows : 
 This opinion considers the following factors , among others . 
 1 . The evidence indicating that as of April 1942 : ( a ) He was contributing substantial monthly sums to the Communist Party ; ( b ) His ties with communism had survived the Nazi @-@ Soviet Pact and the Soviet attack upon Finland ; ( c ) His wife and younger brother were Communists ; ( d ) He had no close friends except Communists ; ( e ) He had at least one Communist mistress ; ( f ) He belonged only to Communist organizations , apart from professional affiliations ; ( g ) The people whom he recruited into the early wartime Berkeley atom project were exclusively Communists ; ( h ) He had been instrumental in securing recruits for the Communist Party , and ( i ) He was in frequent contact with Soviet Espionage agents . 
 2 . The evidence indicating that : ( a ) In May 1942 , he either stopped contributing funds to the Communist Party or else made his contributions though a new channel not yet discovered ; ( b ) In April 1943 his name was formally submitted for security clearance ; ( c ) He himself was aware at the time that his name had been so submitted and ( d ) He thereafter repeatedly gave false information to General Groves , Manhattan District , and the FBI concerning the 1939 – April 1942 period . 
 3 . The evidence indicating that : ( a ) He was responsible for employing a number of Communists , some of them not technical , at wartime Los Alamos ; ( b ) He selected one such individual to write the official Los Alamos history ; ( c ) He was a vigorous supporter of the H @-@ bomb program until August 6 , 1945 , ( Hiroshima ) , on which day he personally urged each senior individual working in this field to desist ; and ( d ) He was an enthusiastic sponsor of the A @-@ bomb program until the war ended , when he immediately and outspokenly advocated the Los Alamos Laboratory be disbanded . 
 4 . The evidence indicating that : ( a ) He was remarkably instrumental in influencing the military authorities and the Atomic Energy Commission essentially to suspend H @-@ bomb development from mid @-@ 1946 through January 31 , 1950 [ the date of President Truman 's public announcement that the United States , in answer to the new Soviet atomic bomb , would seek to build an H @-@ bomb ] ( b ) He has worked tirelessly , from January 31 , 1950 , onward to retard the United States H @-@ bomb program ; ( c ) He has used his potent influence against every postwar effort to expand capacity for producing A @-@ bomb material ; ( d ) He has used his potent influence against every postwar effort directed at obtaining larger supplies of uranium raw material ; and ( e ) He has used his potent influence against every major postwar effort toward atomic power development , including the nuclear @-@ powered submarine and aircraft programs as well as industrial power projects . 
 The letter also pointed out that Oppenheimer had worked against development of the hydrogen bomb , and had worked against postwar atomic energy development , including nuclear power plants and nuclear submarines . The letter concluded : 
 1 . Between 1939 and mid @-@ 1942 , more probably than not , J. Robert Oppenheimer was a sufficiently hardened Communist that he either volunteered espionage information to the Soviets or complied with a request for such information . ( This includes the possibility that when he singled out the weapons aspect of atomic development as his personal speciality , he was acting under Soviet instructions . ) 2 . More probably than not , he has since been functioning as an espionage agent ; and 3 . More probably than not , he has since acted under a Soviet directive in influencing United States military , atomic energy , intelligence , and diplomatic policy . 
 The contents of the letter were not new , and some had been known when Oppenheimer was first cleared for atomic war work . Yet that information had not prompted anyone to seek his removal from government service . Despite the lack of new evidence , Eisenhower ordered that a " blank wall " be placed between Oppenheimer and the nation 's atomic secrets . 
 = = Hearing = = 
 = = = Board composition and procedures = = = 
 On December 21 , 1953 , Oppenheimer was told by Lewis Strauss that his security file had been subject to two recent re @-@ evaluations because of new screening criteria , and because a former government official had drawn attention to Oppenheimer 's record . Strauss said that his clearance had been suspended , pending resolution of a series of charges outlined in a letter , and discussed his resigning . Given only a day to decide , and after consulting with his lawyers , Oppenheimer chose not to resign , and requested a hearing instead . The charges were outlined in a letter from Kenneth D. Nichols , general manager of the AEC . Pending resolution of the charges , Oppenheimer 's security clearance was suspended . Oppenheimer told Strauss that some of what was in Nichols ' letter was correct , some incorrect . 
 The hearing was held at a temporary building near the Washington Monument housing offices of the AEC . It began on April 12 , 1954 , and lasted four weeks . The AEC was represented by Roger Robb , an experienced prosecutor in Washington , and Arthur <unk> , while Oppenheimer 's legal team was headed by Lloyd K. Garrison , a prominent New York attorney . The chairman of the Personnel Security Board was Gordon Gray , president of the University of North Carolina . The other members of the hearing panel were Thomas Alfred Morgan , a retired industrialist , and Ward V. Evans , chairman of the chemistry department at Northwestern University . 
 The hearing was not open to the public and initially was not publicized . At the commencement of the hearing , Gray stated the hearing was " strictly confidential " , and pledged that no information related to the hearing would be released . Contrary to this assurance , a few weeks after the conclusion of the hearing a verbatim transcript of the hearing was released by the AEC . Oppenheimer and Garrison also breached the confidentiality of the hearing , by communicating with New York Times journalist James Reston , who wrote an article on the hearing that appeared on the second day of the hearing . 
 Garrison applied for an emergency security clearance prior to the hearing , as one had been granted to Robb , but no clearance was granted during the course of the hearing , which meant that Oppenheimer 's attorneys had no access to the secrets that Robb was able to see . On at least three occasions , Garrison and his co @-@ counsel were barred from the hearing room for security reasons , leaving Oppenheimer unrepresented , in violation of AEC regulations . During the course of the hearing , Robb repeatedly cross @-@ examined Oppenheimer 's witnesses utilizing top @-@ secret documents unavailable to Oppenheimer 's lawyers . He often read aloud from those documents , despite their secret status . 
 The AEC 's former general counsel Joseph Volpe had urged Oppenheimer to retain a tough litigator as his attorney ; Garrison 's demeanor was gentle and cordial , but Robb was adversarial . Garrison voluntarily provided the board and Robb with a list of his witnesses , but Robb refused to extend the same courtesy . This gave Robb a clear advantage in his cross @-@ examination of Oppenheimer 's witnesses . One observer commented that Robb " did not treat Oppenheimer as a witness in his own case , but as a person charged with high treason . " 
 Members of the hearing panel met with Robb prior to the hearing to review the contents of Oppenheimer 's FBI file . The 1946 Administrative Procedure Act included a legal principle known as " the exclusivity of the record " or the " blank pad rule " . This meant that a hearing could only consider information that had been formally presented under the established rules of evidence . However , while the act applied to the courts and to administrative hearings held by agencies like the Federal Trade Commission and Federal Communications Commission , it did not apply to the AEC . Garrison asked for the opportunity to review the file with the panel , but this was rejected . 
 = = = Scope of testimony = = = 
 As outlined in the 3 @,@ 500 @-@ word Nichols letter , the hearing focused on 24 allegations , 23 of which dealt with Oppenheimer 's Communist and left @-@ wing affiliations between 1938 and 1946 , including his delayed and false reporting of the Chevalier incident to authorities . The twenty @-@ fourth charge related to his opposition to the hydrogen bomb . By including the hydrogen bomb , the AEC changed the character of the hearing , by opening up an inquiry into his activities as a postwar government adviser . 
 Oppenheimer testified for a total of 27 hours . His demeanor was far different than it had been in his previous interrogations , such as his appearance before the House Un @-@ American Activities . Under cross @-@ examination by Robb , who had access to top @-@ secret information such as surveillance recordings , Oppenheimer was " often anguished , sometimes surprisingly inarticulate , frequently apologetic about his past and even self @-@ castigating . " 
 One of the key elements in this hearing was Oppenheimer 's earliest testimony about Eltenton 's approach to various Los Alamos scientists , a story that Oppenheimer confessed he had fabricated to protect his friend Chevalier . Unknown to Oppenheimer , both versions were recorded during his interrogations of a decade before , and he was surprised on the witness stand with transcripts that he had no chance to review . Under questioning by Robb , he admitted that he had lied to Boris Pash , an Army counterintelligence officer , concerning the approach from Chevalier . Asked why he had fabricated a story that three people had been approached for espionage , Oppenheimer responded , " Because I was an idiot . " 
 Much of the questioning of Oppenheimer concerned his role in the hiring for Los Alamos of his former students Ross Lomanitz and Joseph Weinberg , both members of the Communist Party . The questions probed into Oppenheimer 's private life , including his affair with Jean Tatlock , a Communist with whom he stayed the night while he was married . Lansdale had concluded at the time that his interest in Tatlock was romantic rather than political . Nonetheless , this innocuous affair may have played more heavily in the minds of the review panel . 
 Groves , testifying as a witness for the AEC and against Oppenheimer , reaffirmed his decision to hire Oppenheimer . Groves said that Oppenheimer 's refusal to report Chevalier was " the typical American school boy attitude that there is something wicked about telling on a friend . " Under questioning from Robb , Groves said that under the security criteria in effect in 1954 , he " would not clear Dr. Oppenheimer today . " 
 The official position of the Air Force was to support the suspension of the security clearance , which was given during testimony by its chief scientist , David T. Griggs . Although his testimony was not pivotal in the decision , many physicists viewed Griggs as the " Judas who had betrayed their god " , the brilliant theoretical physicist who led the successful wartime development of the atomic bomb . 
 Many top scientists , as well as government and military figures , testified on Oppenheimer 's behalf . Among them were Fermi , Isidor Isaac Rabi , Hans Bethe , John J. McCloy , James B. Conant and Bush , as well as two former AEC chairmen and three former commissioners . Also testifying on behalf of Oppenheimer was Lansdale , who was involved in the Army 's surveillance and investigation of Oppenheimer during the war . Lansdale , a lawyer , was not intimidated by Robb . He testified that Oppenheimer was not a Communist , and that he was " loyal and discreet " . Ernest Lawrence said he was unable to testify at the hearing because of illness . On April 26 , Lawrence suffered his most severe colitis attack yet . The next day , Lawrence called Lewis Strauss and told him that his brother , a doctor , had ordered him to return home and that he would not be testifying . Lawrence suffered with colitis until his death during colostomy surgery , on August 27 , 1958 . 
 Edward Teller was opposed to the hearing , feeling it was improper to subject Oppenheimer to a security trial , but was torn by longstanding grievances against him . He was called by Robb to testify against Oppenheimer , and shortly before he appeared Robb showed Teller a dossier of items unfavorable to Oppenheimer . Teller testified that he considered Oppenheimer loyal , but that " in a great number of cases , I have seen Dr. Oppenheimer act – I understand that Dr. Oppenheimer acted – in a way which for me was exceedingly hard to understand . I thoroughly disagreed with him in numerous issues and his actions frankly appeared to me confused and complicated . To this extent I feel that I would like to see the vital interests of this country in hands which I understand better , and therefore trust more . " Asked whether Oppenheimer should be granted a security clearance , Teller said that " if it is a question of wisdom or judgement , as demonstrated by actions since 1945 , then I would say one would be wiser not to grant clearance . " This led to outrage by many in the scientific community and Teller 's ostracism and virtual expulsion from academic science . 
 = = The board 's decision = = 
 Oppenheimer 's clearance was revoked by a 2 – 1 vote of the panel . Gray and Morgan voted in favor , Evans against . The board rendered its decision on May 27 , 1954 , in a 15 @,@ 000 @-@ word letter to Nichols . It found that 20 of the 24 charges were either true or substantially true . The board found that while he had been opposed to the bomb and that his lack of enthusiasm for it had affected the attitude of other scientists , he had not actively discouraged scientists from working on the H @-@ bomb , as had been alleged in Nichols ' letter . It found that " there is no evidence that he was a member of the [ Communist ] party in the strict sense of the word , " and concluded that he is a " loyal citizen " . It said that he " had a high degree of discretion , reflecting an unusual ability to keep to himself vital secrets , " but that he had " a tendency to be coerced , or at least influenced in conduct , for a period of years . " 
 The board found that Oppenheimer 's association with Chevalier " is not the kind of thing that our security system permits on the part of one who customarily has access to information of the highest classification " , and concluded that " Oppenheimer 's continuing conduct reflects a serious disregard for the requirements of the security system , " that he was susceptible " to influence which could have serious implications for the security interests of the country , " that his attitude toward the H @-@ bomb program raised doubt about whether his future participation " would be consistent with the best interests of security , " and that Oppenheimer had been " less than candid in several instances " in his testimony . The majority therefore did not recommend that his security clearance be reinstated . 
 In a brief dissent , Evans argued that Oppenheimer 's security clearance should be reinstated . He pointed out that most of the AEC charges had been in the hands of the AEC when it cleared Oppenheimer in 1947 , and that " to deny him clearance now for what he was cleared for in 1947 , when we must know he is less of security risk now than he was then , seems to be hardly the procedure to be adopted in a free country . " Evans said that his association with Chevalier did not indicate disloyalty , and that he did not hinder development of the H @-@ bomb . Evans said he personally thought that " our failure to clear Dr. Oppenheimer will be black mark on the escutcheon of our country , " and expressed concern about the effect an improper decision might have on the country 's scientific development . 
 = = = Nichols findings and AEC decision = = = 
 In a harshly worded memorandum to the AEC on June 12 , 1954 , Nichols recommended that Oppenheimer 's security clearance not be reinstated . In five " security findings " , Nichols said that Oppenheimer was " a Communist in every sense except that he did not carry a party card , " and that the Chevalier incident indicated that Oppenheimer " is not reliable or trustworthy " , and that his misstatements might have represented criminal conduct . He said that Oppenheimer 's " obstruction and disregard for security " showed " a consistent disregard of a reasonable security system . " The Nichols memorandum was not made public nor provided to Oppenheimer 's lawyers , who were not allowed to appear before the AEC . 
 On June 29 , 1954 , the AEC upheld the findings of the Personnel Security Board , with five commissioners voting in favor and one opposed . The decision was rendered 32 hours before Oppenheimer 's consultant contract , and with it the need for a clearance , was due to expire . In his majority opinion , Strauss said that Oppenheimer had displayed " fundamental character defects " . He said that Oppenheimer " in his associations had repeatedly exhibited a willful disregard of the normal and proper obligations of security , " and that he " has defaulted not once but many times upon the obligations that should and must be willingly borne by citizens in the national service . " 
 Despite the promise of confidentiality , the AEC released an edited transcript of the hearing in June 1954 , after press publicity of the hearing . The unredacted transcripts were released in 2012 . 
 = = Aftermath and legacy = = 
 The loss of his security clearance ended Oppenheimer 's role in government and policy . Although he was not fired from his job at the Institute for Advanced Study , as he had feared he might be , he became an academic exile , cut off from his former career and the world he had helped to create . He gave public lectures , and spent several months of each year on the small island of Saint John in the Caribbean . Kai Bird and Martin J. Sherwin considered the Oppenheimer case " a defeat for American liberalism " . Summing up the fallout from the case , they wrote that : 
 In a few years after World War II , scientists had been regarded as a new class of intellectuals , members of a public @-@ policy priesthood who might legitimately offer expertise not only as scientists but as public philosophers . With Oppenheimer 's defrocking , scientists knew that in the future they would serve the state only as experts only on narrow scientific issues . As sociologist Daniel Bell later observed , Oppenheimer 's ordeal signified that the postwar " messianic role of the scientists " was now at an end . Scientists working within the system could not dissent from government policy , as Oppenheimer had done by writing his 1953 Foreign Affairs essay , and still expect to serve on government advisory boards . The trial thus represented a watershed in the relations of the scientist to the government . The narrowest version of how American scientists should serve their country had triumphed . 
 Oppenheimer was seen by many in the scientific community as a martyr to McCarthyism , a modern Galileo or Socrates , an intellectual and progressive unjustly attacked by warmongering enemies , symbolic of the shift of scientific creativity from academia into the military . Patrick McGrath noted that " Scientists and administrators such as Edward Teller , Lewis Strauss and Ernest Lawrence , with their full @-@ throated militarism and anti @-@ communism pushed American scientists and their institutions toward a nearly complete and subservient devotion to American military interests . " Scientists continued to work for the AEC , but they no longer trusted it . 
 Loyalty and security tests spread through the federal government . At these inquiries , federal employees were asked questions such as : 
 Is it proper to mix white and Negro blood plasma ? 
 There is a suspicion in your record that you are in sympathy with the underprivileged . Is that true ? 
 What were your feelings at that time concerning race equality ? 
 Have you ever made statements about the " downtrodden masses " and " underprivileged people " ? 
 Strauss , Teller , Borden , and Robb would never escape the public identification of them with the case . In a 1962 television interview , Eric F. Goldman asked Teller whether he favored restoring Oppenheimer 's security clearance . Teller was struck dumb , unable to find an answer . The question was deleted from the version that was aired , but the news got out and made headlines . President John F. Kennedy decided that the time had come to rehabilitate Oppenheimer . Teller nominated Oppenheimer for the 1963 Enrico Fermi Award . The nomination was unanimously approved by the GAC and AEC , and announced on April 5 , 1963 . On November 22 , the White House confirmed that Kennedy would personally present the award , but he was assassinated later that day . The award was presented by President Lyndon B. Johnson instead . Oppenheimer died of cancer on February 18 , 1967 . 
 Wernher von Braun summed up his opinion about the matter with a quip to a Congressional committee : " In England , Oppenheimer would have been knighted . " 
 = = = Recent allegations = = = 
 Time magazine literary critic Richard Lacayo , in a 2005 review of two new books about Oppenheimer , said of the hearing : " As an effort to prove that he had been a party member , much less one involved in espionage , the inquest was a failure . Its real purpose was larger , however : to punish the most prominent American critic of the U.S. move from atomic weapons to the much more lethal hydrogen bomb . " After the hearing , Lacayo said , " Oppenheimer would never again feel comfortable as a public advocate for a sane nuclear policy . " 
 Cornell University historian Richard Polenberg noted that Oppenheimer testified about the left @-@ wing behavior of his colleagues and speculated that if his clearance had not been stripped , he would have been remembered as someone who had " named names " to save his own reputation . In a book Brotherhood of the Bomb : The Tangled Lives and Loyalties of Robert Oppenheimer , Ernest Lawrence , and Edward Teller ( 2002 ) , Gregg Herken , a senior historian at the Smithsonian Institution , contended , based on newly discovered documentation , that Oppenheimer was a member of the Communist Party . 
 In a seminar at the Woodrow Wilson Institute on May 20 , 2009 , and based on an extensive analysis of the Vassiliev notebooks taken from the KGB archives , John Earl Haynes , Harvey Klehr , and Alexander Vassiliev concluded that Oppenheimer never was involved in espionage for the Soviets . The KGB tried repeatedly to recruit him , but were never successful . Allegations that he had spied for the Soviets are unsupported , and in some instances , contradicted by voluminous KGB and Venona documentation released after the fall of the Soviet Union . In addition , he had several persons removed from the Manhattan project who had sympathies to the Soviet Union . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Most popular depictions of Oppenheimer view his security struggles as a confrontation between right @-@ wing militarists ( symbolized by Edward Teller ) and left @-@ wing intellectuals ( symbolized by Oppenheimer ) over the moral question of weapons of mass destruction . Many historians have contested this as an oversimplification . 
 The hearing was dramatized in a 1964 play by German playwright <unk> Kipphardt , In the Matter of J. Robert Oppenheimer . Oppenheimer objected to the play , threatening suit and decrying " improvisations which were contrary to history and to the nature of the people involved " , including its portrayal of him as viewing the bomb as a " work of the devil " . His letter to Kipphardt said , " You may well have forgotten Guernica , Dachau , Coventry , Belsen , Warsaw , Dresden and Tokyo . I have not . " Of his security hearing , he said , " The whole damn thing was a farce , and these people are trying to make a tragedy out of it . " 
 In a response , Kipphardt offered to make corrections but defended the play , which premiered on Broadway in June 1968 , with Joseph Wiseman in the Oppenheimer role . New York Times theater critic Clive Barnes called it an " angry play and a partisan play " that sided with Oppenheimer but portrayed the scientist as a " tragic fool and genius " . 
 The hearing also figured prominently in the 1980 BBC TV movie Oppenheimer , with Sam Waterston as the title character and David Suchet as Edward Teller . 
 = Winfield Scott Hancock = 
 Winfield Scott Hancock ( February 14 , 1824 – February 9 , 1886 ) was a career U.S. Army officer and the Democratic nominee for President of the United States in 1880 . He served with distinction in the Army for four decades , including service in the Mexican @-@ American War and as a Union general in the American Civil War . Known to his Army colleagues as " Hancock the Superb " , he was noted in particular for his personal leadership at the Battle of Gettysburg in 1863 . One military historian wrote , " No other Union general at Gettysburg dominated men by the sheer force of their presence more completely than Hancock . " As another wrote , " his tactical skill had won him the quick admiration of adversaries who had come to know him as the ' Thunderbolt of the Army of the Potomac ' . " His military service continued after the Civil War , as Hancock participated in the military Reconstruction of the South and the Army 's presence at the Western frontier . 
 Hancock 's reputation as a war hero at Gettysburg , combined with his status as a Unionist and supporter of states ' rights , made him a potential presidential candidate . His noted integrity was a counterpoint to the corruption of the era , for as President Rutherford B. Hayes said , " ... [ i ] f , when we make up our estimate of a public man , conspicuous both as a soldier and in civil life , we are to think first and chiefly of his manhood , his integrity , his purity , his singleness of purpose , and his unselfish devotion to duty , we can truthfully say of Hancock that he was through and through pure gold . " When the Democrats nominated him for President in 1880 , he ran a strong campaign , but was narrowly defeated by Republican James A. Garfield . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Winfield Scott Hancock and his identical twin brother Hilary Baker Hancock were born on February 14 , 1824 , in Montgomery Square , Pennsylvania , a hamlet just northwest of Philadelphia in present @-@ day Montgomery Township . The twins were the sons of Benjamin Franklin Hancock and Elizabeth <unk> Hancock . Winfield was named after Winfield Scott , a prominent general in the War of 1812 . 
 The Hancock and <unk> families had lived in Montgomery County for several generations , and were of English , Scottish and Welsh descent . Benjamin Hancock was a schoolteacher when his sons were born . A few years after their birth , he moved the family to Norristown , the county seat , and began to practice law . Benjamin was also a deacon in the Baptist church and participated in municipal government ( as an avowed Democrat ) . 
 Hancock was at first educated at Norristown Academy , but removed to the public schools when the first one opened in Norristown in the late 1830s . In 1840 , Joseph <unk> , the local Congressman , nominated Hancock to the United States Military Academy at West Point . Hancock 's progress at West Point was average . He graduated 18th in his class of 25 in 1844 , and he was assigned to the infantry . 
 = = Starting a military career = = 
 = = = Mexican War = = = 
 Hancock was commissioned a brevet second lieutenant in the 6th U.S. Infantry regiment , and initially was stationed in Indian Territory in the Red River Valley . The region was quiet at the time , and Hancock 's time there was uneventful . Upon the outbreak of war with Mexico in 1846 , Hancock worked to secure himself a place at the front . Initially assigned to recruiting duties in Kentucky , he proved so adept at signing up soldiers that his superiors were reluctant to release him from his post . By July 1847 , however , Hancock was permitted to join his regiment in Puebla , Mexico , where they made up a part of the army led by his namesake , General Winfield Scott . 
 Scott 's army moved farther inland from Puebla unopposed and attacked Mexico City from the south . During that campaign in 1847 , Hancock first encountered battle at Contreras and Churubusco . He was appointed a brevet first lieutenant for gallant and meritorious service in those actions . Hancock was wounded in the knee at Churubusco and developed a fever . Although he was well enough to join his regiment at Molino del Rey , fever kept Hancock from participating in the final breakthrough to Mexico City , something he would regret for the rest of his life . After the final victory , Hancock remained in Mexico with the 6th Infantry until the treaty of peace was signed in 1848 . 
 = = = Marriage and peacetime = = = 
 Hancock served in a number of assignments as an army quartermaster and adjutant , mostly in Fort Snelling , Minnesota and St. Louis , Missouri . It was in St. Louis that he met Almira ( " Allie " ) Russell and they married on January 24 , 1850 . Allie gave birth to two children , Russell in 1850 and Ada in 1857 , but both children died before their parents . Hancock was promoted to captain in 1855 and assigned to Fort Myers , Florida . Hancock 's young family accompanied him to his new posting , where Allie Hancock was the only woman on the post . 
 Hancock 's tour in Florida coincided with the end of the Third Seminole War . His duties were primarily those of a quartermaster , and he did not see action in that campaign . As the situation in Florida began to settle down , Hancock was reassigned to Fort Leavenworth , Kansas . He served in the West during the partisan warfare of " Bleeding Kansas " , and in the Utah Territory , where the 6th Infantry arrived after the Utah War . Following the resolution of that conflict , Hancock was stationed in southern California in November 1858 . He remained there , joined by Allie and the children , until the Civil War broke out in 1861 , serving as a captain and assistant quartermaster under future Confederate General Albert Sidney Johnston . In California , Hancock became friendly with a number of southern officers , most significantly Lewis A. Armistead of Virginia . At the outbreak of the Civil War , Armistead and the other southerners left to join the Confederate States Army , while Hancock remained in the service of the United States . 
 = = Civil War = = 
 = = = Joining the Army of the Potomac = = = 
 Hancock returned east to assume quartermaster duties for the rapidly growing Union Army , but was quickly promoted to brigadier general on September 23 , 1861 , and given an infantry brigade to command in the division of Brig. Gen. William F. " Baldy " Smith , Army of the Potomac . He earned his " Superb " nickname in the Peninsula Campaign , in 1862 , by leading a critical counterattack in the Battle of Williamsburg ; army commander Maj. Gen. George B. McClellan telegraphed to Washington that " Hancock was superb today " and the appellation stuck . McClellan did not follow through on Hancock 's initiative , however , and Confederate forces were allowed to withdraw unmolested . 
 In the Battle of Antietam , Hancock assumed command of the 1st Division , II Corps , following the mortal wounding of Maj. Gen. Israel B. Richardson in the horrific fighting at " Bloody Lane . " Hancock and his staff made a dramatic entrance to the battlefield , galloping between his troops and the enemy , parallel to the Sunken Road . His men assumed that Hancock would order counterattacks against the exhausted Confederates , but he carried orders from McClellan to hold his position . He was promoted to major general of volunteers on November 29 , 1862 . He led his division in the disastrous attack on Marye 's Heights in the Battle of Fredericksburg the following month and was wounded in the abdomen . At the Battle of Chancellorsville , his division covered Maj. Gen. Joseph Hooker 's withdrawal and Hancock was wounded again . His corps commander , Maj. Gen. Darius N. Couch , transferred out of the Army of the Potomac in protest of actions Hooker took in the battle and Hancock assumed command of II Corps , which he would lead until shortly before the war 's end . 
 = = = Gettysburg = = = 
 Hancock 's most famous service was as a new corps commander at the Battle of Gettysburg , July 1 to 3 , 1863 . After his friend , Maj. Gen. John F. Reynolds , was killed early on July 1 , Maj. Gen. George G. Meade , the new commander of the Army of the Potomac , sent Hancock ahead to take command of the units on the field and assess the situation . Hancock thus was in temporary command of the " left wing " of the army , consisting of the I , II , III , and XI Corps . This demonstrated Meade 's high confidence in him , because Hancock was not the most senior Union officer at Gettysburg at the time . Hancock and the more senior XI Corps commander , Maj. Gen. Oliver O. Howard , argued briefly about this command arrangement , but Hancock prevailed and he organized the Union defenses on Cemetery Hill as more numerous Confederate forces drove the I and XI Corps back through the town . He had the authority from Meade to withdraw the forces , so he was responsible for the decision to stand and fight at Gettysburg . At the conclusion of the day 's action , Maj. Gen. Henry Warner Slocum arrived on the field and assumed command until Gen. Meade arrived after midnight . 
 On July 2 , Hancock 's II Corps was positioned on Cemetery Ridge , roughly in the center of the Union line , while Confederate General Robert E. Lee launched assaults on both ends of the line . On the Union left , Lt. Gen. James Longstreet 's assault smashed the III Corps and Hancock sent in his 1st Division , under Brig. Gen. John C. Caldwell , to reinforce the Union in the Wheatfield . As Lt. Gen. A.P. Hill 's corps continued the attack toward the Union center , Hancock rallied the defenses and rushed units to the critical spots . First , he issued the Third Brigade of his Third Division under Colonel George Willard into the fray to stop the advance of Confederate Brigadier General William Barksdale 's Brigade . In one famous incident , he sacrificed a regiment , the 1st Minnesota Volunteer Infantry Regiment , by ordering it to advance and charge a Confederate brigade four times its size , causing the Minnesotans to suffer 87 % casualties . While costly to the regiment , this heroic sacrifice bought time to organize the defensive line and saved the day for the Union army . Following the action toward his right , he met the 13th Vermont Volunteer Infantry Regiment , a First Corps unit which had come from Cemetery Hill to help quell the crisis . Hancock sent them out to recover some artillery pieces Confederates had taken and were pulling away . The Vermonters were successful . Having stabilized his line , he turned his attention to the sound of fighting on East Cemetery Hill . There , with darkness falling , Confederates from Major General Jubal Early 's Division had gotten into Union batteries and were fighting the cannoneers hand @-@ to @-@ hand . Hancock sent the First Brigade of his Third Division , under Colonel Samuel S. Carroll , to the fighting . The brigade was crucial in flushing the enemy out of the batteries and dispatching them back down the face of East Cemetery Hill . 
 On July 3 , Hancock continued in his position on Cemetery Ridge and thus bore the brunt of Pickett 's Charge . During the massive Confederate artillery bombardment that preceded the infantry assault , Hancock was prominent on horseback in reviewing and encouraging his troops . When one of his subordinates protested , " General , the corps commander ought not to risk his life that way , " Hancock is said to have replied , " There are times when a corps commander 's life does not count . " During the infantry assault , his old friend , now Brig. Gen. Lewis A. Armistead , leading a brigade in Maj. Gen. George Pickett 's division , was wounded and died two days later . Hancock could not meet with his friend because he had just been wounded himself , a severe wound caused by a bullet striking the pommel of his saddle , entering his inner right thigh along with wood fragments and a large bent nail . Helped from his horse by aides , and with a tourniquet applied to <unk> the bleeding , he removed the saddle nail himself and , mistaking its source , remarked wryly , " They must be hard up for ammunition when they throw such shot as that . " News of Armistead 's mortal wounding was brought to Hancock by a member of his staff , Captain Henry H. Bingham . Despite his pain , Hancock refused evacuation to the rear until the battle was resolved . He had been an inspiration for his troops throughout the three @-@ day battle . Hancock later received the thanks of the U.S. Congress for " ... his gallant , meritorious and conspicuous share in that great and decisive victory . " 
 = = = Virginia and the end of the war = = = 
 Hancock suffered from the effects of his Gettysburg wound for the rest of the war . After recuperating in Norristown , he performed recruiting services over the winter and returned in the spring to field command of the II Corps for Lt. Gen. Ulysses S. Grant 's 1864 Overland Campaign , but he never regained full mobility and his former youthful energy . Nevertheless , he performed well at the Battle of the Wilderness and commanded a critical breakthrough assault of the Mule Shoe at the " Bloody Angle " in the Battle of Spotsylvania Court House on May 12 , shattering the Confederate defenders in his front , including the Stonewall Brigade . His corps suffered enormous losses during a futile assault Grant ordered at Cold Harbor . 
 After Grant 's army slipped past Lee 's army to cross the James River , Hancock found himself in a position from which he might have ended the war . His corps arrived to support William Farrar Smith 's assaults on the lightly held Petersburg defensive lines , but he deferred to Smith 's advice because Smith knew the ground and had been on the field all day , and no significant assaults were made before the Confederate lines were reinforced . One of the great opportunities of the war was lost . After his corps participated in the assaults at Deep Bottom , Hancock was promoted to brigadier general in the regular army , effective August 12 , 1864 . 
 Hancock 's only significant military defeat occurred during the Siege of Petersburg . His II Corps moved south of the city , along the Wilmington and Weldon Railroad , tearing up track . On August 25 , Confederate Maj. Gen. Henry Heth attacked and overran the faulty Union position at Reams 's Station , shattering the II Corps , capturing many prisoners . Despite a later victory at Hatcher 's Run , the humiliation of Reams 's Station contributed , along with the lingering effects of his Gettysburg wound , to his decision to give up field command in November . He left the II Corps after a year in which it had suffered over 40 @,@ 000 casualties , but had achieved significant military victories . His next assignment was to command the ceremonial First Veteran Corps . He performed more recruiting , commanded the Middle Department , and relieved Maj. Gen. Philip Sheridan in command of forces in the now @-@ quiet Shenandoah Valley . He was promoted to brevet major general in the regular army for his service at Spotsylvania , effective March 13 , 1865 . 
 = = Post @-@ war military service = = 
 = = = Execution of Lincoln assassination conspirators = = = 
 At the close of the war , Hancock was assigned to supervise the execution of the Lincoln assassination conspirators . Lincoln had been assassinated on April 14 , 1865 , and by May 9 of that year , a military commission had been convened to try the accused . The actual assassin , John Wilkes Booth , was already dead , but the trial of his co @-@ conspirators proceeded quickly , resulting in convictions . President Andrew Johnson ordered the executions to be carried out on July 7 . Although he was reluctant to execute some of the less @-@ culpable conspirators , especially Mary Surratt , Hancock carried out his orders , later writing that " every soldier was bound to act as I did under similar circumstances . " 
 = = = Service on the Plains = = = 
 After the executions , Hancock was assigned command of the newly organized Middle Military Department , headquartered in Baltimore . In 1866 , on Grant 's recommendation , Hancock was promoted to major general and was transferred , later that year , to command of the military Department of the Missouri , which included the states of Missouri , Kansas , Colorado , and New Mexico . Hancock reported to Fort Leavenworth , Kansas , and took up his new posting . Soon after arriving , he was assigned by General Sherman to lead an expedition to negotiate with the Cheyenne and Sioux , with whom relations had worsened since the Sand Creek massacre . The negotiations got off to a bad start , and after Hancock ordered the burning of an abandoned Cheyenne village in central Kansas , relations became worse than when the expedition had started . There was little loss of life on either side , but the mission could not be called a success . 
 = = = Reconstruction = = = 
 Hancock 's time in the West was brief . President Johnson , unhappy with the way Republican generals were governing the South under Reconstruction , sought replacements for them . The general who offended Johnson the most was Philip Sheridan , and Johnson soon ordered General Grant to switch the assignments of Hancock and Sheridan , believing that Hancock , a Democrat , would govern in a style more to Johnson 's liking . Although neither man was pleased with the change , Sheridan reported to Fort Leavenworth and Hancock to New Orleans . 
 Hancock 's new assignment found him in charge of the Fifth Military District , covering Texas and Louisiana . Almost immediately upon arriving , Hancock ingratiated himself with the white conservative population by issuing his General Order Number 40 of November 29 , 1867 . In that order , written while traveling to New Orleans , Hancock expressed sentiments in support of President Johnson 's policies , writing that if the residents of the district conducted themselves peacefully and the civilian officials perform their duties , then " the military power should cease to lead , and the civil administration resume its natural and rightful dominion . " The order continued : 
 The great principles of American liberty are still the lawful inheritance of this people , and ever should be . The right of trial by jury , the habeas corpus , the liberty of the press , the freedom of speech , the natural rights of persons and the rights of property must be preserved . Free institutions , while they are essential to the prosperity and happiness of the people , always furnish the strongest inducements to peace and order . 
 Hancock 's order encouraged white Democrats across the South who hoped to return to civilian government more quickly , but discomforted blacks and Republicans in the South who feared a return to the antebellum ways of conservative white dominance . 
 Hancock 's General Order Number 40 was quickly condemned by Republicans in Washington , especially by the Radicals , while President Johnson wholeheartedly approved . <unk> of the situation in Washington , Hancock soon put his words into action , refusing local Republican politicians ' requests to use his power to overturn elections and court verdicts , while also letting it be known that open insurrection would be suppressed . Hancock 's popularity within the Democratic party grew to the extent that he was considered a potential presidential nominee for that party in the 1868 election . Although Hancock collected a significant number of delegates at the 1868 convention , his presidential possibilities went unfulfilled . Even so , he was henceforth identified as a rare breed in politics : one who believed in the Democratic Party 's principles of states ' rights and limited government , but whose anti @-@ secessionist sentiment was unimpeachable . 
 = = = Return to the Plains = = = 
 Following General Grant 's 1868 presidential victory , the Republicans were firmly in charge in Washington . As a result , Hancock found himself transferred , this time away from the sensitive assignment of reconstructing the South and into the relative backwater that was the Department of Dakota . The Department covered Minnesota , Montana , and the Dakotas . As in his previous Western command , Hancock began with a conference of the Indian chiefs , but this time was more successful in establishing a peaceful intent . Relations worsened in 1870 , however , as an army expedition committed a massacre against the Blackfeet . Relations with the Sioux also became contentious as a result of white encroachment into the Black Hills , in violation of the Treaty of Fort Laramie . Still , war was averted , for the time being , and most of Hancock 's command was peaceful . 
 It was during this tour that Hancock had the opportunity to contribute to the creation of Yellowstone National Park . In August 1870 , he ordered the 2nd Cavalry at Fort Ellis to provide a military escort for General Henry D. Washburn 's planned exploration of the Yellowstone Region . The expedition , which was a major impetus in creating the park , became known as the Washburn @-@ Langford @-@ Doane Expedition . Hancock 's order led to the assignment of Lt. Gustavus Cheyney Doane and a troop of 5 cavalrymen from Fort Ellis to escort the expedition . In 1871 , Captain John W. Barlow during his exploration of the Yellowstone region formally named a summit on what would become the southern boundary of the park Mount Hancock to honor the general 's decision to provide the escort . 
 = = = Command in the East and political ambitions = = = 
 In 1872 , General Meade died , leaving Hancock the army 's senior major general . This entitled him to a more prominent command , and President Grant , still desirous to keep Hancock from a Southern post , assigned him command of the Division of the Atlantic , headquartered at Fort Columbus on Governors Island , in New York City . The vast department covered the settled northeast area of the country and was militarily uneventful with the exception of the army 's involvement in the Great Railroad Strike of 1877 . When railroad workers went on strike to protest wage cuts , the nation 's transportation system was paralyzed . The governors of Pennsylvania , West Virginia , and Maryland asked President Hayes to call in federal troops to re @-@ open the railways . Once federal troops entered the cities , most of the strikers melted away , but there were some violent clashes . 
 All the while Hancock was posted in New York , he did his best to keep his political ambitions alive . He received some votes at the Democrats ' 1876 convention , but was never a serious contender as New York governor Samuel J. Tilden swept the field on the second ballot . The Republican candidate , Rutherford B. Hayes , won the election , and Hancock refocused his ambition on 1880 . The electoral crisis of 1876 and the subsequent end to Reconstruction in 1877 convinced many observers that the election of 1880 would give the Democrats their best chance at victory in a generation . 
 = = Election of 1880 = = 
 = = = Democratic convention = = = 
 Hancock 's name had been proposed several times for the Democratic nomination for president , but he never captured a majority of delegates . In 1880 , however , Hancock 's chances improved . President Hayes had promised not to run for a second term , and the previous Democratic nominee , Tilden , declined to run again due to poor health . Hancock faced several competitors for the nomination , including Thomas A. Hendricks , Allen G. Thurman , Stephen Johnson Field , and Thomas F. Bayard . Hancock 's neutrality on the monetary question , and his lingering support in the South ( owing to his General Order Number 40 ) meant that Hancock , more than any other candidate , had nationwide support . When the Democratic convention assembled in Cincinnati in June 1880 , Hancock led on the first ballot , but did not have a majority . By the second ballot , Hancock received the requisite two @-@ thirds , and William Hayden English of Indiana was chosen as his running mate . 
 = = = Campaign against Garfield = = = 
 The Republicans nominated James A. Garfield , a Congressman from Ohio and a skillful politician . Hancock and the Democrats expected to carry the Solid South , but needed to add a few of the Northern states to their total to win the election . The practical differences between the parties were few , and the Republicans were reluctant to attack Hancock personally because of his heroic reputation . The one policy difference the Republicans were able to exploit was a statement in the Democratic platform endorsing " a tariff for revenue only . " Garfield 's campaigners used this statement to paint the Democrats as unsympathetic to the plight of industrial laborers , a group that would benefit by a high protective tariff . The tariff issue cut Democratic support in industrialized Northern states , which were essential in establishing a Democratic majority . In the end , the Democrats and Hancock failed to carry any of the Northern states they had targeted , with the exception of New Jersey . Hancock lost the election to Garfield . Garfield polled only 39 @,@ 213 more votes than Hancock , the popular vote being 4 @,@ 453 @,@ 295 for Garfield and 4 @,@ 414 @,@ 082 for Hancock . The electoral count , however , had a much larger spread : Garfield polled 214 electoral votes and Hancock only 155 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Hancock took his electoral defeat in stride and attended Garfield 's inauguration . Following the election , Hancock carried on as commander of the Division of the Atlantic . He was elected president of the National Rifle Association in 1881 , explaining that " The object of the NRA is to increase the military strength of the country by making skill in the use of arms as prevalent as it was in the days of the Revolution . " Hancock was a Charter Director and the first president of the Military Service Institution of the United States from 1878 until his death in 1886 . He was commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Military Order of the Loyal Legion of the United States veterans organization from 1879 until his death in 1886 . He was the author of Reports of Major General W. S. Hancock upon Indian Affairs , published in 1867 . Hancock 's last major public appearance was to preside over the funeral of President Grant in 1885 , although he also made a less publicized trip that year to Gettysburg . 
 Hancock died in 1886 at Governors Island , still in command of the Military Division of the Atlantic , the victim of an infected carbuncle , complicated by diabetes . He is buried in Montgomery Cemetery in West <unk> Township , Montgomery County , Pennsylvania , near Norristown , Pennsylvania . Although he outlived both of his children , he was survived by the three grandchildren fathered by his son , Russell . Hancock 's wife , Almira , published Reminiscences of Winfield Scott Hancock in 1887 . 
 In 1893 , Republican General Francis A. Walker wrote , " Although I did not vote for General Hancock , I am strongly disposed to believe that one of the best things the nation has lost in recent years has been the example and the influence of that chivalric , stately , and splendid gentleman in the White House . Perhaps much which both parties now recognize as having been unfortunate and mischievous during the past thirteen years would have been avoided had General Hancock been elected . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Winfield Scott Hancock is memorialized in a number of statues : 
 An equestrian statue on East Cemetery Hill on the Gettysburg Battlefield . 
 A portrait statue as part of the Pennsylvania Memorial at Gettysburg . 
 An alto @-@ <unk> representing Hancock 's wounding during Pickett 's Charge , on the New York State Monument at Gettysburg . 
 An equestrian statue located at Pennsylvania Avenue and 7th Street , NW in Washington , D.C. 
 An equestrian statue atop the Smith Memorial Arch in Fairmount Park , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . 
 A monumental bronze bust in Hancock Square , New York City , by sculptor James Wilson Alexander MacDonald . 
 The original Winfield Scott Hancock Elementary School , located at Arch and East Spruce Streets in Norristown , Pennsylvania , was built in 1895 in memory of the General who grew up not far from the site . It was replaced in 1962 by a new building still in use by the Norristown Area School District only a few blocks away at Arch and Summit Streets , which is also named after General Hancock . The original 1895 building still stands and is used by a community non @-@ profit organization . 
 Hancock 's portrait adorns U.S. currency on the $ 2 Silver Certificate series of 1886 . Approximately 1 @,@ 500 to 2 @,@ 500 of these bills survive today in numismatic collections . Hancock 's bill is ranked number 73 on a list of " 100 Greatest American Currency Notes " . 
 = = Popular media = = 
 Hancock was an important character in the historical novels about the Civil War by the Shaara family : The Killer Angels by Michael Shaara and Gods and Generals and The Last Full Measure by Jeffrey Shaara . In the films Gettysburg ( 1993 ) and Gods and Generals ( 2003 ) , based on the first two of these novels , Hancock is portrayed by Brian Mallon and is depicted in both films in a very favorable light . A number of scenes in the novel Gods and Generals that depict Hancock and his friend Lewis Armistead in Southern California before the war have been omitted from the film . Hancock 's Washington D.C. equestrian statue is featured in the opening to the Netflix series House of Cards . 
 = Colley Cibber = 
 Colley Cibber ( 6 November 1671 – 11 December 1757 ) was an English actor @-@ manager , playwright and Poet Laureate . His colourful memoir Apology for the Life of Colley Cibber ( 1740 ) describes his life in a personal , anecdotal and even rambling style . He wrote 25 plays for his own company at Drury Lane , half of which were adapted from various sources , which led Robert Lowe and Alexander Pope , among others , to criticise his " miserable mutilation " of " crucified Molière [ and ] hapless Shakespeare " . He regarded himself as first and foremost an actor and had great popular success in comical fop parts , while as a tragic actor he was persistent but much ridiculed . Cibber 's brash , extroverted personality did not sit well with his contemporaries , and he was frequently accused of tasteless theatrical productions , shady business methods , and a social and political opportunism that was thought to have gained him the laureateship over far better poets . He rose to ignominious fame when he became the chief target , the head Dunce , of Alexander Pope 's satirical poem The Dunciad . 
 Cibber 's poetical work was derided in his time , and has been remembered only for being poor . His importance in British theatre history rests on his being one of the first in a long line of actor @-@ managers , on the interest of two of his comedies as documents of evolving early 18th @-@ century taste and ideology , and on the value of his autobiography as a historical source . 
 = = Life = = 
 Cibber was born in Southampton Street , in Bloomsbury , London . He was the eldest child of Caius Gabriel Cibber , a distinguished sculptor originally from Denmark . His mother , Jane née Colley , came from a family of gentry from Glaston , Rutland . He was educated at the King 's School , Grantham , from 1682 until the age of 16 , but failed to win a place at Winchester College , which had been founded by his maternal ancestor William of Wykeham . In 1688 , he joined the service of his father 's patron , Lord Devonshire , who was one of the prime supporters of the Glorious Revolution . After the revolution , and at a loose end in London , he was attracted to the stage and in 1690 began work as an actor in Thomas Betterton 's United Company at the Drury Lane Theatre . " Poor , at odds with his parents , and entering the theatrical world at a time when players were losing their power to businessmen @-@ managers " , on 6 May 1693 Cibber married Katherine Shore , the daughter of Matthias Shore , sergeant @-@ trumpeter to the King , despite his poor prospects and insecure , socially inferior job . 
 Cibber and Katherine had 12 children between 1694 and 1713 . Six died in infancy , and most of the surviving children received short shrift in his will . Catherine , the eldest surviving daughter , married Colonel James Brown and seems to have been the dutiful one who looked after Cibber in old age following his wife 's death in 1734 . She was duly rewarded at his death with most of his estate . His middle daughters , Anne and Elizabeth , went into business . Anne had a shop that sold fine wares and foods , and married John <unk> . Elizabeth had a restaurant near Gray 's Inn , and married firstly Dawson Brett , and secondly ( after Brett 's death ) Joseph Marples . His only son to reach adulthood , Theophilus , became an actor at Drury Lane , and was an embarrassment to his father because of his scandalous private life . His other son to survive infancy , James , died in or after 1717 before reaching adulthood . Colley 's youngest daughter Charlotte followed in her father 's theatrical footsteps , but she fell out with him and her sister Catherine , and she was cut off by the family . 
 After an inauspicious start as an actor , Cibber eventually became a popular comedian , wrote and adapted many plays , and rose to become one of the newly empowered businessmen @-@ managers . He took over the management of Drury Lane in 1710 and took a highly commercial , if not artistically successful , line in the job . In 1730 , he was made Poet Laureate , an appointment which attracted widespread scorn , particularly from Alexander Pope and other Tory satirists . Off @-@ stage , he was a keen gambler , and was one of the investors in the South Sea Company . 
 In the last two decades of his life , Cibber remained prominent in society , and summered in Georgian spas such as Tunbridge , Scarborough and Bath . He was friendly with the writer Samuel Richardson , the actress Margaret <unk> and the memoirist – poet Laetitia Pilkington . Aged 73 in 1745 , he made his last appearance on the stage as <unk> in his own " deservedly unsuccessful " Papal Tyranny in the Reign of King John . In 1750 , he fell seriously ill and recommended his friend and protégé Henry Jones as the next Poet Laureate . Cibber recovered and Jones passed into obscurity . Cibber died suddenly at his house in Berkeley Square , London , in December 1757 , leaving small pecuniary legacies to four of his five surviving children , £ 1 @,@ 000 each ( the equivalent of approximately £ 180 @,@ 000 in 2011 ) to his granddaughters Jane and Elizabeth ( the daughters of Theophilus ) , and the residue of his estate to his eldest daughter Catherine . He was buried on 18 December , probably at the Grosvenor Chapel on South Audley Street . 
 = = Autobiography = = 
 Cibber 's colourful autobiography , An Apology for the Life of Colley Cibber ( 1740 ) , was chatty , meandering , anecdotal , vain and occasionally inaccurate . At the time of writing the word " apology " meant an apologia , a statement in defence of one 's actions rather than a statement of regret for having transgressed . 
 The text virtually ignores his wife and family , but Cibber wrote in detail about his time in the theatre , especially his early years as a young actor at Drury Lane in the 1690s , giving a vivid account of the cut @-@ throat theatre company rivalries and chicanery of the time , as well as providing pen portraits of the actors he knew . The Apology is vain and self @-@ serving , as both his contemporaries and later commentators have pointed out , but it also serves as Cibber 's rebuttal to his harshest critics , especially Pope . For the early part of Cibber 's career , it is unreliable in respect of chronology and other hard facts , understandably , since it was written 50 years after the events , apparently without the help of a journal or notes . Nevertheless , it is an invaluable source for all aspects of the early 18th @-@ century theatre in London , for which documentation is otherwise scanty . Because he worked with many actors from the early days of Restoration theatre , such as Thomas Betterton and Elizabeth Barry at the end of their careers , and lived to see David Garrick perform , he is a bridge between the earlier mannered and later more naturalistic styles of performance . 
 The Apology was a popular work and gave Cibber a good return . Its self @-@ complacency , however , infuriated some of his contemporaries , notably Pope , but even the usually critical Samuel Johnson had to admit that it was " very entertaining and very well done " . It went through four editions in his lifetime , and more after his death , and generations of readers have found it an amusing and engaging read , projecting an author always " happy in his own good opinion , the best of all others ; teeming with animal spirits , and uniting the self @-@ sufficiency of youth with the <unk> of age . " 
 = = Actor = = 
 Cibber began his career as an actor at Drury Lane in 1690 , and had little success for several years . " The first Thing that enters into the Head of a young Actor " , he wrote in his autobiography half a century later , " is that of being a Hero : In this Ambition I was soon <unk> 'd by the <unk> of my Voice ; to which might be added an uninform 'd meagre Person ... with a dismal pale Complexion . Under these Disadvantages , I had but a melancholy Prospect of ever playing a Lover with Mrs. Bracegirdle , which I had flatter 'd my Hopes that my Youth might one Day have recommended me to . " At this time the London stage was in something of a slump after the glories of the early Restoration period . The King 's and Duke 's companies had merged into a monopoly , leaving actors in a weak negotiating position and much at the mercy of the dictatorial manager Christopher Rich . When the senior actors rebelled and established a cooperative company of their own in 1695 , Cibber — " wisely " , as the Biographical Dictionary of Actors puts it — stayed with the remnants of the old company , " where the competition was less keen " . After five years , he had still not seen significant success in his chosen profession , and there had been no heroic parts and no love scenes . However , the return of two @-@ company rivalry created a sudden demand for new plays , and Cibber seized this opportunity to launch his career by writing a comedy with a big , flamboyant part for himself to play . He scored a double triumph : his comedy Love 's Last Shift , or The Fool in Fashion ( 1696 ) was a great success , and his own uninhibited performance as the <unk> fop Sir Novelty Fashion ( " a coxcomb that loves to be the first in all foppery " ) delighted the audiences . His name was made , both as playwright and as comedian . 
 Later in life , when Cibber himself had the last word in casting at Drury Lane , he wrote , or patched together , several tragedies that were tailored to fit his continuing hankering after playing " a Hero " . However , his performances of such parts never pleased audiences , which wanted to see him typecast as an affected fop , a kind of character that fitted both his private reputation as a vain man , his exaggerated , mannered style of acting , and his habit of ad libbing . His most famous part for the rest of his career remained that of Lord Foppington in The Relapse , a sequel to Cibber 's own Love 's Last Shift but written by John Vanbrugh , first performed in 1696 with Cibber reprising his performance as Sir Novelty Fashion in the newly ennobled guise of Lord Foppington . Pope mentions the audience jubilation that greeted the small @-@ framed Cibber donning Lord Foppington 's enormous wig , which would be ceremoniously carried on stage in its own sedan chair . Vanbrugh reputedly wrote the part of Lord Foppington deliberately " to suit the eccentricities of Cibber 's acting style " . 
 His tragic efforts , however , were consistently ridiculed by contemporaries : when Cibber in the role of Richard III made love to Lady Anne , the Grub Street Journal wrote , " he looks like a pickpocket , with his shrugs and grimaces , that has more a design on her purse than her heart " . Cibber was on the stage in every year but two ( 1727 and 1731 ) between his debut in 1690 and his retirement in 1732 , playing more than 100 parts in all in nearly 3 @,@ 000 documented performances . After he had sold his interest in Drury Lane in 1733 and was a wealthy man in his sixties , he returned to the stage occasionally to play the classic fop parts of Restoration comedy for which audiences appreciated him . His Lord Foppington in Vanbrugh 's The Relapse , Sir Courtly Nice in John Crowne 's Sir Courtly Nice , and Sir <unk> Flutter in George <unk> 's Man of Mode were legendary . Critic John Hill in his 1775 work The actor , or , A treatise on the art of playing , described Cibber as " the best Lord Foppington who ever appeared , was in real life ( with all due respect be it spoken by one who loves him ) something of the coxcomb " . These were the kind of comic parts where Cibber 's affectation and mannerism were desirable . In 1738 – 39 , he played Shallow in Shakespeare 's Henry IV , Part 2 to critical acclaim , but his Richard III ( in his own version of the play ) was not well received . In the middle of the play , he whispered to fellow actor Benjamin Victor that he wanted to go home , perhaps realising he was too old for the part and its physical demands . Cibber also essayed tragic parts in plays by Shakespeare , Ben Jonson , John Dryden and others , but with less success . By the end of his acting career , audiences were being entranced by the innovatively naturalistic acting of the rising star David Garrick , who made his London debut in the title part in a production of Cibber 's adaptation of Richard III in 1741 . He returned to the stage for a final time in 1745 as Cardinal <unk> in his play Papal Tyranny in the Reign of King John . 
 = = Playwright = = 
 = = = Love 's Last Shift = = = 
 Cibber 's comedy Love 's Last Shift ( 1696 ) is an early herald of a massive shift in audience taste , away from the intellectualism and sexual frankness of Restoration comedy and towards the conservative certainties and gender @-@ role backlash of exemplary or sentimental comedy . According to Paul Parnell , Love 's Last Shift illustrates Cibber 's opportunism at a moment in time before the change was assured : fearless of self @-@ contradiction , he puts something for everybody into his first play , combining the old outspokenness with the new preachiness . 
 The central action of Love 's Last Shift is a celebration of the power of a good woman , Amanda , to reform a rakish husband , Loveless , by means of sweet patience and a daring bed @-@ trick . She masquerades as a prostitute and seduces Loveless without being recognised , and then confronts him with logical argument . Since he enjoyed the night with her while taking her for a stranger , a wife can be as good in bed as an illicit mistress . Loveless is convinced and stricken , and a rich choreography of mutual <unk> , risings and <unk> follows , generated by Loveless ' penitence and Amanda 's " submissive eloquence " . The première audience is said to have wept at this climactic scene . The play was a great box @-@ office success and was for a time the talk of the town , in both a positive and a negative sense . Some contemporaries regarded it as moving and amusing , others as a sentimental tear @-@ jerker , incongruously interspersed with sexually explicit Restoration comedy jokes and semi @-@ nude bedroom scenes . 
 Love 's Last Shift is today read mainly to gain a perspective on Vanbrugh 's sequel The Relapse , which has by contrast remained a stage favourite . Modern scholars often endorse the criticism that was levelled at Love 's Last Shift from the first , namely that it is a blatantly commercial combination of sex scenes and drawn @-@ out sentimental reconciliations . Cibber 's follow @-@ up comedy Woman 's Wit ( 1697 ) was produced under hasty and unpropitious circumstances and had no discernible theme ; Cibber , not usually shy about any of his plays , even elided its name in the Apology . It was followed by the equally unsuccessful tragedy Xerxes ( 1699 ) . Cibber reused parts of Woman 's Wit for The School Boy ( 1702 ) . 
 = = = Richard III = = = 
 Perhaps partly because of the failure of his previous two plays , Cibber 's next effort was an adaptation of Shakespeare 's Richard III . Neither Cibber 's adaptations nor his own original plays have stood the test of time , and hardly any of them have been staged or reprinted after the early 18th century , but his popular adaptation of Richard III remained the standard stage version for 150 years . The American actor George <unk> wrote in the 1870s that Richard III was : 
 a hodge @-@ podge concocted by Colley Cibber , who cut and transposed the original version , and added to it speeches from four or five other of Shakespeare 's plays , and several really fine speeches of his own . The speech to Buckingham : " I tell thee , <unk> , I 've lately had two spiders crawling o 'er my startled hopes " — the well @-@ known line " Off with his head ! So much for Buckingham ! " the speech ending with " Conscience , <unk> ! Richard 's himself again ! " — and other lines of power and effect were written by Cibber , who , with all due respect to the ' divine bard , ' improved upon the original , for acting purposes . 
 Richard III was followed by another adaptation , the comedy , Love Makes a Man , which was constructed by splicing together two plays by John Fletcher : The Elder Brother and The Custom of the Country . Cibber 's confidence was apparently restored by the success of the two plays , and he returned to more original writing . 
 = = = The Careless Husband = = = 
 The comedy The Careless Husband ( 1704 ) , generally considered to be Cibber 's best play , is another example of the retrieval of a straying husband by means of outstanding wifely tact , this time in a more domestic and genteel register . The easy @-@ going Sir Charles Easy is chronically unfaithful to his wife , seducing both ladies of quality and his own female servants with insouciant charm . The turning point of the action , known as " the <unk> scene " , comes when his wife finds him and a maidservant asleep together in a chair , " as close an approximation to actual adultery as could be presented on the 18th @-@ century stage " . His <unk> has fallen off , an obvious suggestion of intimacy and abandon , and an opening for Lady Easy 's tact . <unk> to herself about how sad it would be if he caught cold , she " takes a <unk> off her Neck , and lays it gently on his Head " ( <unk> ) . ( A " steinkirk " was a loosely tied lace collar or scarf , named after the way the officers wore their <unk> at the Battle of <unk> in 1692 . ) She steals away , Sir Charles wakes , notices the steinkirk on his head , marvels that his wife did not wake him and make a scene , and realises how wonderful she is . The <unk> go on to have a reconciliation scene which is much more low @-@ keyed and tasteful than that in Love 's Last Shift , without <unk> and risings , and with Lady Easy shrinking with feminine delicacy from the coarse subjects that Amanda had broached without blinking . Paul Parnell has analysed the manipulative nature of Lady Easy 's lines in this exchange , showing how they are directed towards the sentimentalist 's goal of " ecstatic self @-@ approval " . 
 The Careless Husband was a great success on the stage and remained a repertory play throughout the 18th century . Although it has now joined Love 's Last Shift as a forgotten curiosity , it kept a respectable critical reputation into the 20th century , coming in for serious discussion both as an interesting example of doublethink , and as somewhat morally or emotionally insightful . In 1929 , the well @-@ known critic F. W. Bateson described the play 's psychology as " mature " , " plausible " , " subtle " , " natural " , and " affecting " . 
 = = = Other plays = = = 
 The Lady 's Last Stake ( 1707 ) is a rather bad @-@ tempered reply to critics of Lady Easy 's wifely patience in The Careless Husband . It was coldly received , and its main interest lies in the glimpse the prologue gives of angry reactions to The Careless Husband , of which we would otherwise have known nothing ( since all contemporary published reviews of The Careless Husband approve and endorse its message ) . Some , says Cibber sarcastically in the prologue , seem to think Lady Easy ought rather to have strangled her husband with her steinkirk : 
 Yet some there are , who still arraign the Play , 
 At her tame Temper shock 'd , as who should say — 
 The Price , for a dull Husband , was too much to pay , 
 Had he been strangled sleeping , Who <unk> 'd hurt ye ? 
 When so provok 'd — Revenge had been a Virtue . 
 Many of Cibber 's plays , listed below , were hastily cobbled together from borrowings . Alexander Pope said Cibber 's drastic adaptations and patchwork plays were stolen from " crucified Molière " and " hapless Shakespeare " . The Double Gallant ( 1707 ) was constructed from Burnaby 's The Reformed Wife and The Lady 's Visiting Day , and <unk> 's Love at a Venture . In the words of Leonard R. N. Ashley , Cibber took " what he could use from these old failures " to cook up " a palatable hash out of unpromising leftovers " . The Comical Lovers ( 1707 ) was based on Dryden 's Marriage à la Mode . The Rival Fools ( 1709 ) was based on Fletcher 's Wit at Several Weapons . He rewrote Corneille 's Le Cid with a happy ending as Ximena in 1712 . The Provoked Husband ( 1728 ) was an unfinished fragment by John Vanbrugh that Cibber reworked and completed to great commercial success . 
 The <unk> ( 1717 ) was adapted from Molière 's Tartuffe , and features a Papist spy as a villain . Written just two years after the Jacobite Rising of 1715 , it was an obvious propaganda piece directed against Roman Catholics . The Refusal ( 1721 ) was based on Molière 's Les Femmes <unk> . Cibber 's last play , Papal Tyranny in the Reign of King John was " a miserable mutilation of Shakespeare 's King John " . Heavily politicised , it caused such a storm of ridicule during its 1736 rehearsal that Cibber withdrew it . During the Jacobite Rising of 1745 , when the nation was again in fear of a Popish pretender , it was finally acted , and this time accepted for patriotic reasons . 
 = = Manager = = 
 Cibber 's career as both actor and theatre manager is important in the history of the British stage because he was one of the first in a long and illustrious line of actor @-@ managers that would include such luminaries as Garrick , Henry Irving , and Herbert Beerbohm Tree . Rising from actor at Drury Lane to advisor to the manager Christopher Rich , Cibber worked himself by degrees into a position to take over the company , first taking many of its players — including Thomas Doggett , Robert Wilks , and Anne Oldfield — to form a new company at the Queen 's Theatre in the Haymarket . The three actors squeezed out the previous owners in a series of lengthy and complex manoeuvres , but after Rich 's letters patent were revoked , Cibber , Doggett and Wilks were able to buy the company outright and return to the Theatre Royal by 1711 . After a few stormy years of power @-@ struggle between the prudent Doggett and the extravagant Wilks , Doggett was replaced by the upcoming actor Barton Booth and Cibber became in practice sole manager of Drury Lane . He set a pattern for the line of more charismatic and successful actors that were to succeed him in this combination of roles . His near @-@ contemporary Garrick , as well as the 19th @-@ century actor @-@ managers Irving and Tree , would later structure their careers , writing , and manager identity around their own striking stage personalities . Cibber 's forte as actor @-@ manager was , by contrast , the manager side . He was a clever , innovative , and unscrupulous businessman who retained all his life a love of appearing on the stage . His triumph was that he rose to a position where , in consequence of his sole power over production and casting at Drury Lane , London audiences had to put up with him as an actor . Cibber 's one significant mistake as a theatre manager was to pass over John Gay 's The Beggar 's Opera , which became an outstanding success for John Rich 's theatre at Lincoln 's Inn Fields . When Cibber attempted to mimic Gay 's success with his own ballad @-@ opera — Love in a Riddle ( 1729 ) — it was shouted down by the audience and Cibber cancelled its run . He rescued its comic subplot as Damon and Phillida . 
 Cibber had learned from the bad example of Christopher Rich to be a careful and approachable employer for his actors , and was not unpopular with them ; however , he made enemies in the literary world because of the power he wielded over authors . Plays he considered non @-@ commercial were rejected or ruthlessly reworked . Many were outraged by his sharp business methods , which may be exemplified by the characteristic way he abdicated as manager in the mid @-@ 1730s . In 1732 , Booth sold his share to John Highmore , and Wilks ' share fell into the hands of John Ellys after Wilks ' death . Cibber leased his share in the company to his scapegrace son Theophilus for 442 pounds , but when Theophilus fell out with the other managers , they approached Cibber senior and offered to buy out his share . Without consulting Theophilus , Cibber sold his share for more than 3 @,@ 000 pounds to the other managers , who promptly gave Theophilus his notice . According to one story , Cibber encouraged his son to lead the actors in a walkout and set up for themselves in the Haymarket , rendering worthless the commodity he had sold . On behalf of his son , Cibber applied for a letters patent to perform at the Haymarket , but it was refused by the Lord Chamberlain , who was " disgusted at Cibber 's conduct " . The Drury Lane managers attempted to shut down the rival Haymarket players by conspiring in the arrest of the lead actor , John Harper , on a charge of vagrancy , but the charge did not hold , and the attempt pushed public opinion to Theophilus ' side . The Drury Lane managers were defeated , and Theophilus regained control of the company on his own terms . 
 = = Poet = = 
 Cibber 's appointment as Poet Laureate in December 1730 was widely assumed to be a political rather than artistic honour , and a reward for his untiring support of the Whigs , the party of Prime Minister Robert Walpole . Most of the leading writers , such as Jonathan Swift , Alexander Pope , and Henry Fielding , were excluded from contention for the laureateship because they were Tories . Cibber 's verses had few admirers even in his own time , and Cibber acknowledged cheerfully that he did not think much of them . His 30 birthday odes for the royal family and other duty pieces incumbent on him as Poet Laureate came in for particular scorn , and these offerings would regularly be followed by a flurry of anonymous parodies , some of which Cibber claimed in his Apology to have written himself . In the 20th century , D. B. Wyndham @-@ Lewis and Charles Lee considered some of Cibber 's laureate poems funny enough to be included in their classic " anthology of bad verse " , The Stuffed Owl ( 1930 ) . However , Cibber was at least as distinguished as his immediate four predecessors , three of whom were also playwrights rather than poets . 
 = = Dunce = = 
 = = = Pamphlet wars = = = 
 From the beginning of the 18th century , when Cibber first rose to be Rich 's right @-@ hand man at Drury Lane , his perceived opportunism and brash , thick @-@ skinned personality gave rise to many barbs in print , especially against his patchwork plays . The early attacks were mostly anonymous , but Daniel Defoe and Tom Brown are suggested as potential authors . Later , Jonathan Swift , John Dennis and Henry Fielding all lambasted Cibber in print . The most famous conflict Cibber had was with Alexander Pope . 
 Pope 's animosity began in 1717 when he helped John Arbuthnot and John Gay write a farce , Three Hours After Marriage , in which one of the characters , " <unk> " was modelled on Cibber . Notwithstanding , Cibber put the play on at Drury Lane with himself playing the part of <unk> , but the play was not well received . During the staging of a different play , Cibber introduced jokes at the expense of Three Hours After Marriage , while Pope was in the audience . Pope was infuriated , as was Gay who got into a physical fight with Cibber on a subsequent visit to the theatre . Pope published a pamphlet satirising Cibber , and continued his literary assault for the next 25 years . 
 In the first version of his landmark literary satire Dunciad ( 1728 ) , Pope referred contemptuously to Cibber 's " past , vamp 'd , future , old , <unk> 'd , new " plays , produced with " less human genius than God gives an ape " . Cibber 's elevation to laureateship in 1730 further inflamed Pope against him . Cibber was selected for political reasons , as he was a supporter of the Whig government of Robert Walpole , while Pope was a Tory . The selection of Cibber for this honour was widely seen as especially cynical coming at a time when Pope , Gay , Thomson , Ambrose Philips , and Edward Young were all in their prime . As one epigram of the time put it : 
 In merry old England it once was a rule , 
 The King had his Poet , and also his Fool : 
 But now we 're so frugal , I 'd have you to know it , 
 That Cibber can serve both for Fool and for Poet . " 
 Pope , mortified by the elevation of Cibber to laureateship and incredulous at what he held to be the vainglory of his Apology ( 1740 ) , attacked Cibber extensively in his poetry . 
 Cibber replied mostly with good humour to Pope 's aspersions ( " some of which are in conspicuously bad taste " , as Lowe points out ) , until 1742 when he responded in kind in " A Letter from Mr. Cibber , to Mr. Pope , inquiring into the motives that might induce him in his <unk> Works , to be so frequently fond of Mr. Cibber 's name " . In this pamphlet , Cibber 's most effective ammunition came from a reference in Pope 's Epistle to Arbuthnot ( 1735 ) to Cibber 's " whore " , which gave Cibber a pretext for retorting in kind with a scandalous anecdote about Pope in a brothel . " I must own " , wrote Cibber , " that I believe I know more of your whoring than you do of mine ; because I don 't recollect that ever I made you the least Confidence of my <unk> , though I have been very near an Eye @-@ Witness of Yours . " Since Pope was around four and a half feet tall and hunchbacked due to a tubercular infection of the spine he contracted when young , Cibber regarded the prospect of Pope with a woman as something humorous , and he speaks mockingly of the " little @-@ tiny manhood " of Pope . For once the <unk> were on Cibber 's side , and the story " raised a universal shout of merriment at Pope 's expense " . Pope made no direct reply , but took one of the most famous <unk> in literary history . In the revised Dunciad that appeared in 1743 , he changed his hero , the King of Dunces , from Lewis Theobald to Colley Cibber . 
 = = = King of Dunces = = = 
 The derogatory allusions to Cibber in consecutive versions of Pope 's mock @-@ heroic Dunciad , from 1728 to 1743 , became more elaborate as the conflict between the two men escalated , until , in the final version of the poem , Pope crowned Cibber King of Dunces . From being merely one symptom of the artistic decay of Britain , he was transformed into the demigod of stupidity , the true son of the goddess Dulness . Apart from the personal quarrel , Pope had reasons of literary appropriateness for letting Cibber take the place of his first choice of King , Lewis Theobald . Theobald , who had embarrassed Pope by contrasting Pope 's impressionistic Shakespeare edition ( 1725 ) with Theobald 's own scholarly edition ( 1726 ) , also wrote Whig propaganda for hire , as well as dramatic productions which were to Pope abominations for their mixing of tragedy and comedy and for their " low " pantomime and opera . However , Cibber was an even better King in these respects , more high @-@ profile both as a political opportunist and as the powerful manager of Drury Lane , and with the crowning circumstance that his political allegiances and theatrical successes had gained him the laureateship . To Pope this made him an epitome of all that was wrong with British letters . Pope explains in the " Hyper @-@ critics of Ricardus Aristarchus " prefatory to the 1743 Dunciad that Cibber is the perfect hero for a mock @-@ heroic parody , since his Apology exhibits every trait necessary for the inversion of an epic hero . An epic hero must have wisdom , courage , and chivalric love , says Pope , and the perfect hero for an anti @-@ epic therefore should have vanity , impudence , and debauchery . As wisdom , courage , and love combine to create magnanimity in a hero , so vanity , impudence , and debauchery combine to make buffoonery for the satiric hero . His revisions , however , were considered too hasty by later critics who pointed out inconsistent passages that damaged his own poem for the sake of personal vindictiveness . 
 Writing about the degradation of taste brought on by theatrical effects , Pope quotes Cibber 's own <unk> in the Apology : 
 Of that Succession of monstrous <unk> that have so long infested the Stage , and which arose upon one another alternately , at both Houses [ London 's two playhouses , Cibber 's Drury Lane and John Rich 's domain Lincoln 's Inn 's Fields ] ... If I am ask 'd ( after my condemning these <unk> myself ) how I came to assent or continue my Share of <unk> to them ? I have no better Excuse for my Error than confessing it . I did it against my Conscience ! and had not Virtue enough to starve . 
 Pope 's notes call Cibber a hypocrite , and in general the attacks on Cibber are conducted in the notes added to the Dunciad , and not in the body of the poem . As hero of the Dunciad , Cibber merely watches the events of Book II , dreams Book III , and sleeps through Book IV . 
 Once Pope struck , Cibber became an easy target for other satirists . He was attacked as the epitome of morally and aesthetically bad writing , largely for the sins of his autobiography . In the Apology , Cibber speaks daringly in the first person and in his own praise . Although the major figures of the day were jealous of their fame , self @-@ promotion of such an overt sort was shocking , and Cibber offended Christian humility as well as gentlemanly modesty . Additionally , Cibber consistently fails to see fault in his own character , praises his vices , and makes no apology for his misdeeds ; so it was not merely the fact of the autobiography , but the manner of it that shocked contemporaries . His diffuse and chatty writing style , conventional in poetry and sometimes incoherent in prose , was bound to look even worse in contrast to stylists like Pope . Henry Fielding satirically tried Cibber for murder of the English language in the 17 May 1740 issue of The Champion . The Tory wits were altogether so successful in their satire of Cibber that the historical image of the man himself was almost obliterated , and it was as the King of Dunces that he came down to posterity . 
 = = Plays = = 
 The plays below were produced at the Theatre Royal , Drury Lane , unless otherwise stated . The dates given are of first known performance . 
 Love 's Last Shift ( Comedy , January 1696 ) 
 Woman 's Wit ( Comedy , 1697 ) 
 Xerxes ( Tragedy , Lincoln 's Inn Fields , 1699 ) 
 The Tragical History of King Richard III ( Tragedy , 1699 ) 
 Love Makes a Man ( Comedy , December 1700 ) 
 The School Boy ( Comedy , advertised for 24 October 1702 ) 
 She Would and She Would Not ( Comedy , 26 November 1702 ) 
 The Careless Husband ( Comedy , 7 December 1704 ) 
 <unk> and <unk> ( Tragedy , 3 December 1705 ) 
 The Comical Lovers ( Comedy , Haymarket , 4 February 1707 ) 
 The Double Gallant ( Comedy , Haymarket , 1 November 1707 ) 
 The Lady 's Last Stake ( Comedy , Haymarket , 13 December 1707 ) 
 The Rival Fools ( Comedy , 11 January 1709 ) 
 The Rival <unk> ( Comical @-@ Tragedy , Haymarket , 29 June 1710 ) , a parody of Nathaniel Lee 's The Rival Queens . 
 Ximena ( Tragedy , 28 November 1712 ) 
 Venus and Adonis ( Masque , 12 March 1715 ) 
 <unk> ( Pastoral , 5 November 1715 ) 
 The Non @-@ Juror ( Comedy , 6 December 1717 ) 
 The Refusal ( Comedy , 14 February 1721 ) 
 Cæsar in Egypt ( Tragedy , 9 December 1724 ) 
 The Provoked Husband ( with Vanbrugh , comedy , 10 January 1728 ) 
 Love in a Riddle ( Pastoral , 7 January 1729 ) 
 Damon and Phillida ( Pastoral Farce , Haymarket , 16 August 1729 ) 
 Papal Tyranny in the Reign of King John ( Tragedy , Covent Garden , 15 February 1745 ) 
 Bulls and Bears , a farce performed at Drury Lane on 2 December 1715 , was attributed to Cibber but was never published . The Dramatic Works of Colley Cibber , Esq . ( London , 1777 ) includes a play called Flora , or Hob in the Well , but it is not by Cibber . Hob , or the Country Wake . A Farce . By Mr. Doggett was attributed to Cibber by William <unk> in his General History of the Stage ( 1749 ) , but John Genest in Some Account of the English Stage ( 1832 ) thought it was by Thomas Doggett . Other plays attributed to Cibber but probably not by him include Cinna 's Conspiracy , performed at Drury Lane on 19 February 1713 , and The Temple of <unk> of 1745 . 
 = New York State Route 345 = 
 New York State Route 345 ( NY 345 ) is a state highway located entirely within St. Lawrence County in the North Country of New York in the United States . It is a north – south route connecting the towns of Waddington and Potsdam by way of the town of Madrid . The southern terminus of NY 345 is at an intersection with U.S. Route 11 ( US 11 ) in the village of Potsdam . Its northern terminus is at a junction with NY 37 in the village of Waddington by the St. Lawrence River . 
 NY 345 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York ; however , it originally followed a different alignment south of the hamlet of Madrid . At the time , what is now NY 345 between Madrid and Potsdam was part of NY 56A . The NY 56A designation was eliminated in 1980 . NY 345 was realigned two years later to follow old NY 56A to Potsdam as a result of a highway maintenance swap between the state of New York and St. Lawrence County . Ownership and maintenance of NY 345 's original routing south of Madrid was transferred from the state to the county and the village of Canton as part of the exchange . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 345 begins at an intersection with US 11 in the village of Potsdam , just north of Clarkson University . The route heads northwestward on Pine Street and Madrid Avenue as a village @-@ maintained , state @-@ numbered highway , crossing the CSX Transportation @-@ owned St. Lawrence Subdivision by way of a grade crossing as it heads through a commercial and residential area . It exits the village shortly afterward , at which point the route becomes maintained by the New York State Department of Transportation . It heads northwestward on a linear path through the town of Potsdam , passing through mostly undeveloped areas comprising open fields and forests . NY 345 curves slightly northward at Burnham Corners before crossing Trout Brook and entering the town of Madrid , where it traverses the New York and Ogdensburg Railway by way of a grade crossing just outside the hamlet of Madrid . 
 The highway continues into the community , where the route becomes Bridge Street and intersects NY 310 on the eastern bank of the Grasse River . It continues across the river to Main Street , at which point NY 345 turns to the northeast and follows Main Street out of the hamlet . North of Madrid , NY 345 curves back to the northwest as it enters another rural area . It passes by the isolated Madrid – Waddington Central School just before crossing into the town of Waddington . The rural surroundings continue to the village of Waddington , where the amount of development along the route increases after the highway crosses Sucker Brook south of the village center . NY 345 ends shortly afterward at an intersection with NY 37 in the village center near the southern bank of the St. Lawrence River . 
 = = History = = 
 When NY 345 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , it began at US 11 in Canton . From there , NY 345 followed modern County Route 27 ( CR 27 ) and CR 14 north to Madrid , where it joined its modern alignment north to Waddington . At the same time , the current alignment of NY 345 from modern NY 310 in Madrid to Potsdam was designated as the southern half of NY 56A . The short piece of Bridge Street not part of NY 56A in Madrid was a state @-@ maintained reference route . 
 On April 10 , 1980 , the NY 56A designation was deleted . The portion of former NY 56A from Madrid to Potsdam , as well as the state @-@ maintained Bridge Street connector , became part of a rerouted NY 345 on September 1 , 1982 , as a result of a highway maintenance swap between the state of New York and St. Lawrence County . As part of the swap , the pre @-@ 1982 routing of NY 345 between the Canton village line and Bridge Street in Madrid was turned over to the county while the portion of former NY 345 within Canton was transferred to the village . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in St. Lawrence County . 
 = Surtsey = 
 Surtsey ( " Surtr 's island " in Icelandic , pronounced <unk> ̥ <unk> ) is a volcanic island located in the Vestmannaeyjar archipelago off the southern coast of Iceland . At 63 @.@ 303 ° N 20 @.@ 605 ° W ﻿ / 63 @.@ 303 ; <unk> , Surtsey is the southernmost point of Iceland . It was formed in a volcanic eruption which began 130 metres ( 426 ft ) below sea level , and reached the surface on 14 November 1963 . The eruption lasted until 5 June 1967 , when the island reached its maximum size of 2 @.@ 7 km2 ( 1 @.@ 0 sq mi ) . Since then , wave erosion has caused the island to steadily diminish in size : as of 2012 , its surface area was 1 @.@ 3 km2 ( 0 @.@ 50 sq mi ) . The most recent survey ( 2007 ) shows the island 's maximum elevation at 155 m ( 509 ft ) above sea level . 
 The new island was named after Surtr , a fire jötunn or giant from Norse mythology . It was intensively studied by volcanologists during its eruption , and afterwards by botanists and other biologists as life forms gradually colonised the originally barren island . The undersea vents that produced Surtsey are part of the Vestmannaeyjar submarine volcanic system , part of the fissure of the sea floor called the Mid @-@ Atlantic Ridge . Vestmannaeyjar also produced the famous eruption of <unk> on the island of Heimaey in 1973 . The eruption that created Surtsey also created a few other small islands along this volcanic chain , such as Jólnir and unnamed other peaks . Most of these eroded away fairly quickly . 
 = = Geology = = 
 = = = Formation = = = 
 The eruption was unexpected , and almost certainly began some days before it became apparent at the surface . The sea floor at the eruption site is 130 metres ( 426 ft ) below sea level , and at this depth volcanic emissions and explosions would be suppressed , quenched and dissipated by the water pressure and density . Gradually , as repeated flows built up a mound of material that approached sea level , the explosions could no longer be contained , and activity broke the surface . 
 The first noticeable indications of volcanic activity were recorded at the seismic station in <unk> , Iceland from 6 to 8 November , which detected weak tremors emanating from an epicentre approximately west @-@ south @-@ west at a distance of 140 km ( 87 mi ) , the location of Surtsey . Another station in Reykjavík recorded even weaker tremors for ten hours on 12 November at an undetermined location , when seismic activity ceased until 21 November . That same day , people in the coastal town of <unk> 80 km ( 50 mi ) away noticed a smell of hydrogen sulphide . On 13 November , a fishing vessel in search of herring , equipped with sensitive thermometers , noted sea temperatures 3 @.@ 2 km ( 2 @.@ 0 mi ) SW of the eruption center were 2 @.@ 4 ° C ( 4 @.@ 3 ° F ) higher than surrounding waters . 
 = = = = Eruption at the surface = = = = 
 At 07 : 15 UTC on 14 November 1963 , the cook of <unk> II , a trawler sailing these same waters spotted a rising column of dark smoke southwest of the boat . The captain thought it might have been a boat on fire , and ordered the vessel to investigate . Instead , they encountered explosive eruptions giving off black columns of ash , indicating that a volcanic eruption had begun to penetrate the surface of the sea . By 11 : 00 the same day , the eruption column had reached several kilometres in height . At first the eruptions took place at three separate vents along a northeast by southwest trending fissure , but by the afternoon the separate eruption columns had merged into one along the erupting fissure . Over the next week , explosions were continuous , and after just a few days the new island , formed mainly of scoria , measured over 500 metres ( 1640 ft ) in length and had reached a height of 45 metres ( 147 ft ) . 
 As the eruptions continued , they became concentrated at one vent along the fissure and began to build the island into a more circular shape . By 24 November , the island measured about 900 metres by 650 metres ( <unk> by 2130 ft ) . The violent explosions caused by the meeting of lava and sea water meant that the island consisted of a loose pile of volcanic rock ( scoria ) , which was eroded rapidly by North Atlantic storms during the winter . However , eruptions more than kept pace with wave erosion , and by February 1964 , the island had a maximum diameter of over 1300 metres ( <unk> ft ) . 
 The explosive phreatomagmatic eruptions caused by the easy access of water to the erupting vents threw rocks up to a kilometre ( 0 @.@ 6 mi ) away from the island , and sent ash clouds as high as 10 km ( 6 mi ) up into the atmosphere . The loose pile of unconsolidated tephra would quickly have been washed away had the supply of fresh magma dwindled , and large clouds of dust were often seen blowing away from the island during this stage of the eruption . 
 The new island was named after the fire jötunn Surtur from Norse mythology ( <unk> is the genitive case of Surtur , plus <unk> , island ) . Three French journalists representing the magazine Paris Match notably landed there on 6 December 1963 , staying for about 15 minutes before violent explosions encouraged them to leave . The journalists jokingly claimed French sovereignty over the island , but Iceland quickly asserted that the new island belonged to it . 
 = = = = Permanent island = = = = 
 By early 1964 , though , the continuing eruptions had built the island to such a size that sea water could no longer easily reach the vents , and the volcanic activity became much less explosive . Instead , lava fountains and flows became the main form of activity . These resulted in a hard cap of extremely erosion @-@ resistant rock being laid down on top of much of the loose volcanic pile , which prevented the island from being washed away rapidly . Effusive eruptions continued until 1965 , by which time the island had a surface area of 2 @.@ 5 km2 ( 0 @.@ 97 sq mi ) . 
 On 28 December 1963 , submarine activity 2 @.@ 5 km ( 1 @.@ 5 mi ) to the northeast of Surtsey caused the formation of a ridge 100 m ( 328 ft ) high on the sea floor . This seamount was named <unk> , but never reached sea level . Eruptions at <unk> ended on 6 January 1964 , and it has since been eroded from its minimum depth of 23 m ( 75 ft ) to 47 m ( 154 ft ) below sea level . 
 = = = = Subsequent volcanic activity = = = = 
 In 1965 , the activity on the main island diminished , but at the end of May that year an eruption began at a vent 0 @.@ 6 km ( 0 @.@ 37 mi ) off the northern shore . By 28 May , an island had appeared , and was named Syrtlingur ( Little Surtsey ) . The new island was washed away during early June , but reappeared on 14 June . Eruptions at Syrtlingur were much smaller in scale than those that had built Surtsey , with the average rate of emission of volcanic materials being about a tenth of the rate at the main vent . Activity was short @-@ lived , continuing until the beginning of October 1965 , by which time the islet had an area of 0 @.@ 15 km2 ( 0 @.@ 058 sq mi ) . Once the eruptions had ceased , wave erosion rapidly wore the island away , and it disappeared beneath the waves on 24 October . 
 During December 1965 , more submarine activity occurred 0 @.@ 9 km ( 0 @.@ 56 mi ) southwest of Surtsey , and another island was formed . It was named Jólnir , and over the following eight months it appeared and disappeared several times , as wave erosion and volcanic activity alternated in dominance . Activity at Jólnir was much weaker than the activity at the main vent , and even weaker than that seen at Syrtlingur , but the island eventually grew to a maximum size of 70 m ( 230 ft ) in height , covering an area of 0 @.@ 3 km2 ( 0 @.@ 12 sq mi ) , during July and early August 1966 . Like Syrtlingur , though , after activity ceased on 8 August 1966 , it was rapidly eroded , and dropped below sea level during October 1966 . 
 Effusive eruptions on the main island returned on 19 August 1966 , with fresh lava flows giving it further resistance to erosion . The eruption rate diminished steadily , though , and on 5 June 1967 , the eruption ended . The volcano has been dormant ever since . The total volume of lava emitted during the three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year eruption was about one cubic kilometre ( 0 @.@ 24 cu mi ) , and the island 's highest point was 174 metres ( 570 ft ) above sea level at that time . 
 Since the end of the eruption , erosion has seen the island diminish in size . A large area on the southeast side has been eroded away completely , while a sand spit called <unk> ( north point ) has grown on the north side of the island . It is estimated that about 0 @.@ 024 km3 ( 0 @.@ <unk> cu mi ) of material has been lost due to erosion — this represents about a quarter of the original above @-@ sea @-@ level volume of the island . Its maximum elevation has diminished to 155 m ( 509 ft ) . 
 = = = Recent development = = = 
 Following the end of the eruption , scientists established a grid of benchmarks against which they measured the change in the shape of the island . In the 20 years following the end of the eruption , measurements revealed that the island was steadily subsiding and had lost about one metre in height . The rate of subsidence was initially about 20 cm ( 8 in ) per year but slowed to 1 – 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 0 @.@ 8 in ) a year by the 1990s . It had several causes : settling of the loose tephra forming the bulk of the volcano , compaction of sea floor sediments underlying the island , and downward warping of the lithosphere due to the weight of the volcano . 
 The typical pattern of volcanism in the Vestmannaeyjar archipelago is for each eruption site to see just a single eruption , and so the island is unlikely to be enlarged in the future by further eruptions . The heavy seas around the island have been eroding it ever since the island appeared , and since the end of the eruption almost half its original area has been lost . The island currently loses about 1 @.@ 0 hectare ( 2 @.@ 5 acres ) of its surface area each year . 
 = = = Future = = = 
 This island is unlikely to disappear entirely in the near future . The eroded area consisted mostly of loose tephra , easily washed away . Most of the remaining area is capped by hard lava flows , which are much more resistant to erosion . In addition , complex chemical reactions within the loose tephra within the island have gradually formed highly erosion resistant tuff material , in a process known as <unk> . On Surtsey this process has happened quite rapidly , due to high temperatures not far below the surface . 
 Estimates of how long Surtsey will survive are based on the rate of erosion seen up to the present day . Assuming that the current rate does not change , the island will be mostly at or below sea level by 2100 . However , the rate of erosion is likely to slow as the tougher core of the island is exposed : an assessment assuming that the rate of erosion will slow exponentially suggests that the island will survive for many centuries . An idea of what it will look like in the future is given by the other small islands in the Vestmannaeyjar archipelago , which formed in the same way as Surtsey several thousand years ago , and have eroded away substantially since they were formed . 
 = = Biology = = 
 = = = Settlement of life = = = 
 A classic site for the study of <unk> from founder populations that arrive from outside ( allochthonous ) , Surtsey was declared a nature reserve in 1965 , while the eruption was still in active progress . Today only a few scientists are permitted to land on Surtsey ; the only way anyone else can see it closely is from a small plane . This allows the natural ecological succession for the island to proceed without outside interference . In 2008 , UNESCO declared the island a World Heritage Site , in recognition of its great scientific value . 
 = = = = Plant life = = = = 
 In the spring of 1965 , the first vascular plant was found growing on the northern shore of Surtsey , mosses became visible in 1967 , and lichens were first found on the Surtsey lava in 1970 . Plant colonisation on Surtsey has been closely studied , the vascular plants in particular as they have been of far greater significance than mosses , lichens and fungi in the development of vegetation . 
 Mosses and lichens now cover much of the island . During the island 's first 20 years , 20 species of plants were observed at one time or another , but only 10 became established in the nutrient @-@ poor sandy soil . As birds began nesting on the island , soil conditions improved , and more vascular plant species were able to survive . In 1998 , the first bush was found on the island — a tea @-@ leaved willow ( Salix <unk> ) , which can grow to heights of up to 4 metres ( 13 ft ) . By 2008 , 69 species of plant had been found on Surtsey , of which about 30 had become established . This compares to the approximately 490 species found on mainland Iceland . More species continue to arrive , at a typical rate of roughly 2 – 5 new species per year . 
 = = = = Birds = = = = 
 The expansion of bird life on the island has both relied on and helped to advance the spread of plant life . Birds use the plants for nesting material , but also continue to assist in the spreading of seeds , and fertilize the soil with their guano . Birds first began nesting on Surtsey three years after the eruptions ended , with fulmar and guillemot the first species to set up home . Twelve species are now regularly found on the island . 
 A gull colony has been present since 1984 , although gulls were seen briefly on the shores of the new island only weeks after it first appeared . The gull colony has been particularly important in developing the plant life on Surtsey , and the gulls have had much more of an impact on plant colonisation than other breeding species due to their abundance . An expedition in 2004 found the first evidence of nesting Atlantic puffins , which are extremely common in the rest of the archipelago . 
 As well as providing a home for some species of birds , Surtsey has also been used as a stopping @-@ off point for migrating birds , particularly those en @-@ route between Europe and Iceland . Species that have been seen briefly on the island include whooper swans , various species of geese , and common ravens . Although Surtsey lies to the west of the main migration routes to Iceland , it has become a more common stopping point as its vegetation has improved . In 2008 , the 14th bird species was detected with the discovery of a common raven 's nest . 
 According to a 30 May 2009 report , a golden plover was nesting on the island with four eggs . 
 = = = = Marine life = = = = 
 Soon after the island 's formation , seals were seen around the island . They soon began basking there , particularly on the northern spit , which grew as the waves eroded the island . Seals were found to be breeding on the island in 1983 , and a group of up to 70 made the island their breeding spot . Grey seals are more common on the island than harbour seals , but both are now well established . The presence of seals attracts orcas , which are frequently seen in the waters around the Vestmannaeyjar archipelago and now frequent the waters around Surtsey . 
 On the submarine portion of the island , many marine species are found . Starfish are abundant , as are sea urchins and limpets . The rocks are covered in algae , and seaweed covers much of the submarine slopes of the volcano , with its densest cover between 10 and 20 metres ( 33 to 66 ft ) below sea level . 
 = = = = Other life = = = = 
 Insects arrived on Surtsey soon after its formation , and were first detected in 1964 . The original arrivals were flying insects , carried to the island by winds and their own power . Some were believed to have been blown across from as far away as mainland Europe . Later insect life arrived on floating driftwood , and both live animals and carcasses washed up on the island . When a large , grass @-@ covered tussock was washed ashore in 1974 , scientists took half of it for analysis and discovered 663 land invertebrates , mostly mites and springtails , the great majority of which had survived the crossing . 
 The establishment of insect life provided some food for birds , and birds in turn helped many species to become established on the island . The bodies of dead birds provide sustenance for carnivorous insects , while the fertilisation of the soil and resulting promotion of plant life provides a viable habitat for herbivorous insects . 
 Some higher forms of land life are now colonising the soil of Surtsey . The first earthworm was found in a soil sample in 1993 , probably carried over from Heimaey by a bird . However , the next year earthworms were not found . Slugs were found in 1998 , and appeared to be similar to varieties found in the southern Icelandic mainland . Spiders and beetles have also become established . 
 = = Human impact = = 
 The only other significant human impact is a small prefabricated hut which is used by researchers while staying on the island . The hut includes a few bunk beds and a solar power source to drive an emergency radio and other key electronics . All visitors check themselves and belongings to ensure no seeds are accidentally introduced by humans to this ecosystem . It is believed that some young boys tried to introduce potatoes , which were promptly dug up once discovered . An improperly handled human defecation resulted in a tomato plant taking root which was also destroyed . In 2009 a weather station for weather observations and a webcam were installed on Surtsey . 
 = Mr. Monk and the Candidate = 
 " Mr. Monk and the Candidate " is the two @-@ part pilot episode of the American comedy @-@ drama detective television series Monk . It introduces the character of Adrian Monk ( Tony Shalhoub ) , a private detective with obsessive – compulsive disorder and multiple phobias , and his assistant Sharona Fleming ( Bitty Schram ) , as well as police officers Leland Stottlemeyer ( Ted Levine ) and Randy Disher ( Jason Gray @-@ Stanford ) . In this episode , Monk investigates an assassination attempt on a mayoral candidate . 
 First envisioned in 1998 , Monk went through development hell due to difficulties to find an actor to the main role . After successfully casting Shalhoub , the series ' first episode was shot in Vancouver , British Columbia in 2001 . " Mr. Monk and the Candidate " was written by Andy Breckman and directed by Dean Parisot . When the episode first aired in the United States on the USA Network on July 12 , 2002 , it was watched by 4 @.@ 8 million viewers . The episode was generally well received by critics , with most of the praise regarding Shalhoub 's performance as the title character . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the past , Adrian Monk ( Tony Shalhoub ) was a San Francisco Police Department 's investigator , but the death of his wife , Trudy , led him to develop depression , obsessive – compulsive disorder and multiple phobias . Now , as a private detective , Monk investigates the murder of Nicole Vasquez ( Michelle Addison ) . Later , a shooting occurs during a campaign rally , resulting in the bodyguard of mayoral candidate Warren St. Claire ( Michael Hogan ) getting killed . The incumbent mayor orders Captain Stottlemeyer ( Ted Levine ) to bring Monk in on the case , and , as Monk 's former supervisor , reluctantly , he does . 
 Monk meets St. Claire , his wife Miranda ( Gail O 'Grady ) , and their advisor Gavin Lloyd ( Ben Bass ) , and walks to the site where assassination attempt occurred . He discovers Vasquez was a volunteer for the St. Claire 's campaign . When he goes to St. Claire campaign headquarters and questions a volunteer about Vasquez , that volunteer later dies under suspicious circumstances , enhancing Monk 's suspicion about a link between the Vasquez and St. Claire cases . 
 Monk 's assistant Sharona Fleming ( Bitty Schram ) suspects that St. Claire 's wife Miranda was the person who ordered her husband 's assassination . Sharona 's theory is supported by the fact that St. Claire is worth $ 150 million , but Monk thinks about other hypotheses , including one in which Miranda is having an affair with one of St. Claire 's assistants . Things become clearer in Monk 's mind when he watches a news report on the assassination attempt . Monk regroups everyone at the place of the campaign rally to recreate what happened that day . 
 He explains that the assassin was not hired to kill Warren St. Claire , but to kill the bodyguard instead . When Vasquez had discovered that Lloyd was embezzling campaign funds , he approached the bodyguard about murdering Vasquez . As the bodyguard refused to carry out the murder , Lloyd had him killed . To prove his theory , Monk shows a photograph of Lloyd looking at the direction of the shooter just after the shots were fired . Monk proves that Lloyd 's sight line was obstructed , and that the gunshot 's echo would have masked the direction of the shot . As such , it was impossible that Lloyd could have known where the shots were coming from unless he already knew where the gunman would be . 
 = = Production = = 
 Monk was originally envisioned as an Inspector Clouseau type of show by an American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) executive . Learning about it , co @-@ creator David Hoberman came up with the idea of a detective with obsessive – compulsive disorder in 1998 . This was inspired by his own bout with self @-@ diagnosed obsessive – compulsive disorder . Initially , Michael Richards was considered , but ABC and Touchstone ( now ABC Studios ) worried that the audience would typecast him for more comedic roles after his previous work as Cosmo Kramer on the sitcom series Seinfeld . Hoberman revealed that the casting sessions were " depressing " . USA Network 's executive vice president Jeff Wachtel stated that looking for the right actor to portray Monk was " casting hell " . After two years of search , the producers still had not found an actor to play the part . 
 As distributors of the show , ABC and Touchstone , could not find a lead actor , it entered in development hell . This situation remained until Jackie Lyons , a former ABC 's executive who joined USA , recommended Monk to her boss , Wachtel . Trying to change USA 's reputation of " a muscles @-@ and @-@ mayhem " network , Wachtel and then USA president Doug Herzog , decided to charge on Monk , " a cerebral series " . <unk> wanted to cast Tony Shalhoub , " someone who could bring the humor and passion of Monk to life " , as Monk . Shalhoub initially was not interested , but after his manager 's insistence and the fact the pilot director was Dean Parisot , he accepted . Parisot declared , " The pilot was a strong collaboration between myself , David Hoberman , Andy Breckman and Tony Shalhoub . " 
 Sharona 's character was originally written as an African @-@ American , but Bitty Schram , who " had this great maternal thing crossed with an East Coast @-@ type " , according to Shalhoub , was cast instead . Ted Levine was cast in an audition in Vancouver , British Columbia as " the main cop " . Jason Gray @-@ Stanford accepted to work on it when he became aware of Shalhoub and Parisot 's involvement . He originally auditioned for the role of deputy mayor and , as he was not cast , Parisot invited him to read for Disher . Gray @-@ Stanford agreed as he became excited to try for the role of Levine 's sidekick . The pilot , originally developed as a TV film , was written by Breckman and filmed in the fall of 2001 in Vancouver . Originally shot in 35 mm film , it was changed to Super 16mm for budget reasons when USA acquired it . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Mr. Monk and the Candidate " was first broadcast in the United States on the USA Network at 9 pm EST on July 12 , 2002 . According to Nielsen Media Research , the episode was viewed by an estimated number of 4 @.@ 8 million viewers with a 3 @.@ 5 household rating . This rating made it the highest rated program on cable television that night . Although Judith S. Gillies , writing for Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette , pointed it debuted in a period when other networks offer less competition , Broadcasting & Cable 's writer Allison Romano said the numbers were " impressive " . 
 Traylor Howard , who replaced Schram as Monk 's assistant in the middle of the third season , elected it as her favorite episode along with " Mr. Monk vs. the Cobra " . In The Futon Critic 's Brian Ford Sullivan ranking of the fifty best episodes of 2002 , it was placed 17th . David Bianculli , a writer for New York Daily News , said the pilot " not only establishes the character of Monk , it establishes the perfect tone for the show , a delicate but deft blend of wry humor and tender drama . " United Feature Syndicate 's critic Kevin McDonough praised the " whimsical " direction , and added " Monk is not easy to love , but shines as a funny and fresh alternative to summer reruns . " It was also called " fresh and funny " by Entertainment Weekly 's Bruce Fretts , and a " invigorating " " fresh spring breeze in the middle of summer " by The Washington Post 's Tom Shales . Variety 's Phil Gallo praised the " breezy gait of the storytelling , the nicely explained quirks of a brilliant mind and Tony Shalhoub 's sterling characterization " in his review . Tom Gliatto , a People 's critic , declared " This is probably not a clinically accurate portrayal of an OCD sufferer , but Shalhoub 's gentle earnestness keeps it from being gimmicky . " San Francisco Chronicle 's Tim Goodman praised how OCD was used " creatively from humor to sadness . " Chris Hicks of Deseret News declared , " this pilot episode is good enough to be a theatrical film ; in fact , it 's better than most features — funny , warm , character @-@ driven and loaded with hilarious vignettes . " 
 Ethan Alter of Media Life stated " [ t ] here is one funny scene in the pilot " , while criticizing the writing and direction . He also said the plot is unveiled in a " plodding , visually dull " way , especially when Shalhoub is not present . However , Alter wrote Monk is " far from a bad show " , calling Shalhoub " the best thing " about it . David Zurawik , in a review for the The Baltimore Sun , said the major problem of it is trying to combine comedy and drama with detective fiction . Zurawik , however , praised Breckman and <unk> who " combine to deliver one of the most weirdly appealing television sleuths since Richard Belzer 's Detective John Munch of Homicide : Life on the Street . " Anita Gates from The New York Times declared , " There is a breakthrough of sorts in this episode , and it 's disappointing in its predictability " . Shalhoub " is not the only reason to watch " Monk , according to Gates who praised the series for a joke " that even Six Feet Under might hesitate to do . " Although said " Story @-@ wise , there 's nothing in Monk that makes the show terribly different " from other shows of the genre , Rob Owen of Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette praised Shalhoub 's portrayal of Monk as well as Monk itself , calling him " welcome addition to TV 's eccentric sleuths " . 
 = Mike Hudema = 
 Micheal George Henry ( Mike ) Hudema is a Canadian activist who has worked for advocacy organizations including Greenpeace , Global Exchange , the University of Alberta Students ' Union , and the Ruckus Society . He is best known for his work opposing the development of the Alberta tar sands and reliance on fossil fuels in general , but has also engaged in civil liberties and student activism . He is also the published author of a book on direct action tactics . 
 = = Background = = 
 Mike Hudema was born in Medicine Hat , Alberta in 1976 from Ukrainian and English origin parents and attended Crescent Heights High School . He graduated from the University of Alberta with a bachelor of education , majoring in drama , and a bachelor of law degree , specializing in labour and environmental law . During his university career , he went on an exchange to southern India , which he credits with awakening him politically . During the exchange , he recalls seeing 20 @,@ 000 people " getting together to debate the village budget for the next year " , and says that the contrast between that and the models of representative democracy in use in Canada affected him and shaped his views on political involvement . 
 = = Environmental activism = = 
 Hudema is best known as an environmental activist . He protested the opening of the Cheviot mine near Hinton , Alberta in 2004 by setting up a mock open pit mine on the lawn of Deputy Prime Minister Anne McLellan 's constituency office . He has also opposed the harvesting of Alberta 's boreal forest , and in 2004 followed logging executives down the Athabasca River as the executives took a boat trip as part of a logging conference . 
 In 2005 , Hudema was hired as the Freedom From Oil Director for Global Exchange , and relocated from Edmonton to San Francisco . In this capacity , he helped lead the " <unk> Ford " campaign ( a joint initiative between Global Exchange , the Rainforest Action Network , and the Ruckus Society ) which pressured Ford Motors to eliminate tailpipe emissions from its vehicles by 2020 . The campaign was later expanded to include all automakers , and renamed " Freedom From Oil " . As part of this campaign , Hudema interrupted General Motors CEO Richard Wagoner at the keynote address of a Los Angeles automotive show and asked him to sign a commitment to make General Motors vehicles the most fuel efficient in the world by 2010 ( Wagoner refused to sign , saying that his " speech spoke for itself " ) . 
 In 2006 , Hudema implored Canadians to " save hockey " by fighting climate change , which he called " the biggest threat to hockey since the NHL labor talks " . 
 In July 2007 , Hudema returned to Edmonton to work as the Climate and Energy Campaigner for Greenpeace Canada at its newly opened Edmonton office , which was created to lobby for an end to the Alberta oil sands , which Hudema called " one of the dirtiest , <unk> projects in the world " . In this capacity , he ambushed Premier Ed Stelmach several times during the 2008 provincial election . He also made headlines after the election when he and two other Greenpeace volunteers lowered a banner - reading " $ <unk> , the best premier oil money can buy " - behind Stelmach at a fundraising dinner . 
 In January 2008 , he was briefly banned from the University of Alberta campus after he and a group of fellow radical cheerleaders performed a number of anti @-@ fossil fuels musical routines at an on @-@ campus Shell Canada recruiting session . After a meeting with the head of the university 's campus security service , the ban was reduced to probation . 
 In September 2009 , Hudema and 24 other Greenpeace activists occupied two tar sands heavy haulers and one shovel in Shell 's Albian Sands . The action shut down the entire mine for a short period and a portion of the mine for over 30 hours . The action proceeded two other actions by Greenpeace in the tar sands region . The first was at Suncor 's Millennium project , and the second at Shell 's upgrading facility in Fort Saskatchewan . The actions prompted comments from then Premier Ed Stelmach about whether terrorism charges should be used to prosecute such activities . 
 In December 2009 , Hudema and Greenpeace made headlines again when they scaled Canada 's Parliament buildings and unfurled several banners with messages to Canada 's Prime Minister Stephen Harper and then Liberal Leader Michael <unk> . 
 In September 2011 , Hudema helped organize the largest climate @-@ related civil disobedience action in Canadian history when more than 200 people risked arrest on Parliament Hill by crossing a police line set @-@ up to bar public entry into the building . 
 October 2012 saw Hudema in Victoria where he helped craft another mass action this time against tar sands pipelines namely Enbridge Northern Gateway and <unk> TransCanada . The action saw thousands descend on the BC legislature building many willing to risk arrest to stop the pipelines . 
 Hudema has been given several accolades for his work . In 2013 he was named ' Edmontonian of the Year ' by online blogsite <unk> . Alberta Venture named him one of their ' Top 50 : Most Influential People ' in 2014 . The Edmonton Journal named Hudema one of their ' Power 30 ' and the Globe and Mail named him one of nine people to leave their mark on the oil sands . 
 Hudema is a " climb trainer " for the Ruckus Society , and has held activist training camps which teach aspiring activists skills ranging from climbing to blockades . 
 = = = Criticism = = = 
 Hudema 's actions at the General Motors car show were described as " stupid " by automotive journalist Mike Magda . 
 = = Student activism = = 
 In 2002 , Hudema was elected president of the University of Alberta Students ' Union , defeating six opponents ( two of whom were , as " joke candidates " , ineligible to win ) after campaigning on a more militant approach to tuition and on increased interaction between the Students ' Union 's elected officials and its members . His candidacy came after his activities as a member of the Student Worker Action Group , which had been critical of the previous president 's more moderate approach to opposing tuition increases , including efforts to support the reduction of tuition increases , rather than insisting on their elimination . 
 As president , Hudema opposed the university administration 's proposed tuition increase , and particularly the portion of the increase that would see students in some programs pay more than those in others . Despite his opposition , the basic increase was approved as proposed , and two of the three program @-@ based differentials were also approved . He also opposed the extension of degree granting powers ( which were only granted to universities at the time ) to colleges , advocated against the inclusion of education in the General Agreement on Trade in Services and Free Trade Agreement of the Americas , and unsuccessfully lobbied the City of Edmonton to stop assessing property taxes on university residences . He expanded the Students ' Union 's involvement in environmental issues - creating a Students ' Union environmental office , spearheading an energy audit of the Students ' Union 's building , passing an ethical buying and purchasing policy , helping to open a Women 's Centre on campus , and founding a car pool registry . He also created the Revolutionary Speaker Series ; the speakers that Hudema brought to the series included consumer candidate and American presidential candidate Ralph Nader , environmentalist David Suzuki , author Inga <unk> , and Palestinian activist Younis al Khatib . 
 Despite claiming at the end of his term that he would stay out of the limelight in student politics , Hudema was vocally critical of Mat <unk> , his successor , for what he claimed was excessive compromise on tuition @-@ related issues . He also helped create a new university course on citizenship and activism , which he suggested should become mandatory for all undergraduate students . 
 = = = Criticism = = = 
 Hudema was criticized during his time as president for being too focused on tuition and for fostering an adversarial relationship with the university administration . He was also criticized for <unk> historically apolitical events , opposing an increase in law school tuition despite support for the increase from the law students ' association , and for using the campus food bank to make political points . His support for the " U @-@ Pass " , a proposed discounted transit pass that would be mandatory for all students , was also controversial . 
 = = Civil liberties activism = = 
 In 2001 , Hudema was spokesperson of a group of about twenty people who staged a sit @-@ in at the constituency office of Justice Minister Anne McLellan to protest the government 's proposed anti @-@ terrorism and security laws , which Hudema claimed would " greatly impinge on civil liberties in Canada . " The group " evicted " McLellan from her office - moving her furniture to the front lawn - changed her sign to read " Minister of In @-@ Justice " , held community workshops and forums in the area , and set up a hot tub with a banner that read " these bills put us all in hot water " . After four days , Hudema and the rest of the protesters were removed by police and charged with trespassing . 
 = = Democracy activism = = 
 During the 2000 Canadian federal election , Hudema was part of a group calling itself the Edible Ballot Society , the members of which ate their ballots ( Hudema stir @-@ fried his ) as a protest against what they saw as a lack of true democracy and a system that only asked for individuals ' participation once every four years . He was charged , along with other members of the EBS , with " unlawfully and willfully altering , defacing or destroying a ballot or the initials of the Deputy Returning Officer signed on a ballot contrary to section 167 ( 2 ) ( a ) of the Canada Elections Act thereby committing an offence under subsection 489 ( 3 ) ( e ) " . The charges were eventually dropped . 
 In March 2004 , Hudema said that he was unsure whether he was going to vote in the 2004 federal election , saying that he went " back and forth " on the question of whether it was more useful to perform a " theatrical " stunt to draw attention to problems with the electoral system or to work to get progressive candidates elected . 
 = = Other activism = = 
 Hudema was critical of the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq , which he called " an occupation by a rogue state " . He has also attributed the invasion to North America 's " addiction to oil " . 
 Hudema opposes most trade liberalization , and protested at both the Free Trade Agreement of the Americas negotiations in Quebec City with the theatre troupe FUNK ( Fighting <unk> Naughty <unk> ) in 2001 and the G8 summit in Kananaskis in 2002 . 
 During the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , Hudema travelled to China to participate in protests in favour of Tibetan independence . In what he alleges was a pre @-@ emptive move , Chinese authorities entered the apartment he was sharing with fellow activists and expelled him from the country . 
 = = Writing and journalism = = 
 Hudema is the author of An Action a Day Keeps Global Capitalism Away ( ISBN <unk> ) , which was published in 2004 . It is described as " fifty @-@ two tried and tested actions , one for every <unk> action guide for the 21st century . " 
 Hudema was featured in the 2011 Canadian documentary Peace Out where he discussed impacts of Alberta 's Athabasca oil sands . 
 He is also co @-@ founder and former co @-@ host and co @-@ producer of Rise Up : Radio Free Edmonton , a current affairs show on <unk> , the University of Alberta 's campus @-@ community radio station . 
 = = Electoral politics = = 
 Hudema ran in the 2001 Alberta election as a candidate for the Alberta New Democrats in the riding of Edmonton Meadowlark . He finished third of four candidates with 5 @.@ 1 % of the vote , well behind winner Bob Maskell of the Progressive Conservatives and incumbent Karen <unk> of the Alberta Liberal Party . 
 = Lithium ( Nirvana song ) = 
 " Lithium " is a song by American rock band Nirvana . Written by frontman Kurt Cobain , the song is about a man who turns to religion amid thoughts of suicide . Nirvana first recorded " Lithium " in 1990 but then re @-@ recorded the song the following year for the group 's second album Nevermind ( 1991 ) . 
 Released as the third single from Nevermind in July 1992 , " Lithium " peaked at number 64 on the US Billboard Hot 100 and number 11 on the UK Singles Chart . The accompanying music video , directed by Kevin Kerslake , is a montage of concert footage . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 Nirvana singer / guitarist Kurt Cobain described " Lithium " as " one of those songs I actually did finish while trying to write it instead of taking pieces of my poetry and other things . " Nirvana recorded " Lithium " with producer Butch Vig at Smart Studios in Madison , Wisconsin during April 1990 . The material recorded at Smart Studios was intended for the group 's second album for the independent record label Sub Pop . The book Classic Rock Albums : Nevermind ( 1998 ) stated that observers considered the session for " Lithium " as a key event in the developing rift between Cobain and drummer Chad Channing . Cobain was dissatisfied with Channing 's drumming as their musical styles were inconsistent . Cobain told Channing to perform the drum arrangement he had devised for the song . According to Vig , Cobain overexerted his voice while recording vocals for " Lithium , " which forced the band to halt recording . The songs from these sessions were placed on a demo tape and circulated within the music industry , generating interest in the group among major record labels . 
 After signing to DGC Records , Nirvana reconvened with Vig in May 1991 to work on its major label debut , Nevermind , at Sound City Studios in Van Nuys , California . Between the sessions , bassist Krist Novoselic simplified the bassline ; he said , " I enriched the bass @-@ playing a little more but that was about all that we changed . " The recording session for " Lithium " was one of the most arduous for Vig and the group at Sound City . The band repeatedly sped up while recording the song , so Vig resorted to using a click track to maintain a consistent tempo . The producer suggested that new drummer Dave Grohl use simpler fills and patterns for the song , which resulted in a satisfactory instrumental take . Cobain 's guitar track was more difficult to record . " Kurt wanted to be able to play the guitar very . . . not methodical — it needed to have this space , " Vig recalled . " It had to be relaxed . " Every time Cobain sped up , Vig called for another take . During the first day of recording the song , Cobain became so frustrated at the slow progress that the band instead began playing an instrumental jam it had been working on . Vig recorded the jam , later titled " Endless , Nameless , " and it was inserted as a hidden track at the end of Nevermind . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Lithium " is representative of the musical style Nirvana had developed during work on Nevermind , alternating between quiet and loud sections . In the song , Cobain fingers chord shapes on his guitar but varies between playing single notes and double stops on the instrument , giving the track a loose feel . 
 Nirvana biographer Michael Azerrad described the song 's title as a reference to Karl Marx 's statement that religion is the " opiate of the masses . " Cobain said the song is about a man who , after the death of his girlfriend , turns to religion " as a last resort to keep himself alive . To keep him from suicide . " While Cobain said the narrative of " Lithium " was fictional , he said , " I did infuse some of my personal experiences , like breaking up with girlfriends and having bad relationships . " Cobain acknowledged that the song was possibly inspired in part by the time he spent living with his friend Jesse Reed and his born @-@ again Christian parents . He explained to Azerrad , " I 've always felt that some people should have religion in their lives [ . . . ] That 's fine . If it 's going to save someone , it 's okay . And the person in [ ' Lithium ' ] needed it . " 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Lithium " was released as the third single from Nevermind on July 13 , 1992 . Featuring a cover photo by Cobain , the single contained a sonogram of the musician 's then @-@ unborn child Frances Bean Cobain , as well as full lyrics for all the songs on Nevermind . Cassette , CD , 12 @-@ inch vinyl , and British 12 @-@ inch vinyl picture disc editions included " Curmudgeon " and a live version of " Been a Son " ( performed on Halloween the previous year ) as B @-@ sides . The British 7 @-@ inch and cassette featured only " Curmudgeon " as an extra track , while the UK CD release added a cover of the Wipers ' " D @-@ 7 " recorded for BBC Radio 1 disc jockey John Peel 's program in 1990 . 
 In the United States , the single charted at number 64 on the Billboard Hot 100 single chart . " Lithium " peaked at number 16 and 25 on the Billboard Mainstream Rock and Modern Rock Tracks airplay charts , respectively . The song was tied at number 20 with singles by Ministry , Lisa Stansfield , and Utah Saints in the 1992 Village Voice Pazz & Jop critics ' poll . In 2012 , NME ranked Lithium at number 52 on its list of the " 100 Best Tracks Of The ' 90s " in 2012 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Lithium " was the second Nirvana video directed by Kevin Kerslake . Cobain originally wanted the video to feature an animated story about a girl named <unk> who discovers some eggs that hatch . When Cobain and Kerslake discovered the animation would take four months to produce , they instead created a film collage of Nirvana performing in concert . Among the concert footage used was material from the trio 's 1991 Halloween performance and scenes from the film 1991 : The Year Punk Broke ( 1992 ) . Nirvana biographer Michael Azerrad commented , " Although [ the video ] was enlivened by Kerslake 's neat trick of using more violent footage during the quiet parts of the song and vice versa , it was something of a disappointment from a band and a song that promised so much . " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written by Kurt Cobain , except where noted . 
 US 12 @-@ inch , cassette , CD , and UK 12 @-@ inch vinyl picture disc 
 " Lithium " – 4 : 16 
 " Been a Son " ( live - Seattle - 31 @.@ 10 @.@ 1991 ) – 2 : 14 
 " Curmudgeon " – 2 : 58 
 UK 7 @-@ inch vinyl and cassette 
 " Lithium " – 4 : 16 
 " Curmudgeon " – 2 : 58 
 UK CD 
 " Lithium " – 4 : 16 
 " Been a Son " ( live ) – 2 : 14 
 " Curmudgeon " – 2 : 58 
 " D @-@ 7 " ( John Peel Radio Session ) ( Greg Sage ) – 3 : 45 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Ranked number 20 in Kerrang ! magazines " 100 Greatest Rock Tracks Ever ! " ( 1999 ) . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Kurt Cobain : vocals , guitar 
 Krist Novoselic : bass guitar 
 Dave Grohl : drums 
 Butch Vig : recording and mixing engineer , producer 
 = The Marriages Between Zones Three , Four and Five = 
 The Marriages Between Zones Three , Four and Five is a 1980 science fiction novel by Doris Lessing . It is the second book in her five @-@ book Canopus in Argos series , the first being Shikasta ( 1979 ) . It was first published in the United States in January 1980 by Alfred A. Knopf , and in the United Kingdom in May 1980 by Jonathan Cape . 
 The novel takes place in three of six metaphysical Zones that encircle the planet Shikasta ( an allegorical Earth ) , and concerns two ordained marriages that link the patriarchal and militaristic Zone Four with the matriarchal and egalitarian Zone Three , and the tribal and barbaric Zone Five . The story is told from the point of view of the matriarchal utopian Zone Three , and is about gender conflict and the breaking down of barriers between the sexes . Lessing called the Canopus in Argos series " space fiction " , but The Marriages Between Zones Three , Four and Five is generally referred to as feminist science fiction . 
 In the mid @-@ 1960s Lessing had become interested in Sufism , an Islamic belief system , and she used many Sufi concepts in the Canopus in Argos series . In The Marriages Between Zones Three , Four and Five , the zones are said to correspond to Sufism 's different levels of consciousness , and symbolise the " Sufi ladder to enlightenment " . Lessing was criticised for abandoning her traditional fiction and switching to science fiction with spiritual and mystical themes . Notwithstanding this criticism , The Marriages Between Zones Three , Four and Five was generally well received by critics , with some reviewers calling it one Lessing 's best works on the topic of gender conflict . 
 The Marriages Between Zones Three , Four and Five was also adapted as an opera by composer Philip Glass with story @-@ libretto by Lessing , and premiered in Heidelberg , Germany in May 1997 . The US premiere was performed in Chicago in June 2001 . 
 = = Zones = = 
 First described in the opening book of the series , Shikasta , six metaphysical Zones ( akin to cosmological planes ) encircle the planet Shikasta ( an allegorical Earth ) . These " concentric shells " ( numbered One to Six ) each represent different " levels of spiritual being . " Shikasta only deals with Zone Six , the innermost and least pure of the Zones , which is " a kind of purgatory in which humans wait out the time between incarnations on earth " . 
 In The Marriages Between Zones Three , Four and Five , Lessing describes some of the higher Zones in this " spiritual landscape " as self @-@ contained " countries " , each with their own " societies " that have evolved independently of the others over time . Adjacent Zones in the sequence border each other , from Zone Six ( the lowest ) up to Zone One ( the highest and purest ) , each with " increasingly mountainous topography . " 
 Crossing the frontiers from one Zone to another is possible , but generally avoided as straying too close to the border leaves one feeling ill @-@ at @-@ ease and sometimes even physically sick . For those who need to move into another Zone , special shields are provided for protection against the debilitating effects of the foreign atmosphere ( both physical and ideological ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story opens when the Providers , the invisible and unidentified rulers of all the Zones , order Al • Ith , queen of the peaceful paradise of Zone Three , to marry Ben Ata , king of the militarised and repressive Zone Four . Al • Ith is repulsed by the idea of consorting with a barbarian , and Ben Ata does not want a righteous queen disturbing his military campaigns . Nevertheless , Al • Ith descends to Zone Four and they reluctantly marry . Ben Ata is not used to the company of women he cannot control , and Al • Ith has difficulty relating to this ill @-@ bred man , but in time they grow accustomed to each other and gain new insights into each other 's Zones . Al • Ith is appalled that all of Zone Four 's wealth goes into its huge armies , leaving the rest of its population poor and underdeveloped ; Ben Ata is astounded that Zone Three has no army at all . 
 The marriage bears a son , Arusi , future heir to the two Zones . Some of the women of Zone Four , led by Dabeeb , step in to help Al • Ith . Suppressed and downtrodden , these women relish being in the presence of the queen of Zone Three . But soon after the birth of Arusi , the Providers order Al • Ith to return to Zone Three without her son , and Ben Ata to marry Vahshi , queen of the primitive Zone Five . Al • Ith and Ben Ata have grown fond of each other , and are devastated by this news . 
 In Zone Three , Al • Ith finds that her people have forgotten her , and her sister , Murti • has taken over as queen . Disturbed by the changes she sees in Al • Ith , Murti • exiles her to the frontier of Zone Two . Al • Ith , drawn by its allure , tries to enter Zone Two , but finds an unworldly and inhospitable place and is told by invisible people that it is not her time yet . At the frontier of Zone Five , Ben Ata reluctantly marries Vahshi , a tribal leader of a band of nomads who terrorise the inhabitants of her zone . But Ben Ata 's marriage to Al • Ith has changed him , and he disbands most of his armies in Zone Four , sending the soldiers home to rebuild their towns and villages and uplift their communities . He also slowly wins over Vahshi 's confidence and persuades her to stop plundering Zone Five . 
 When Arusi is old enough to travel , Dabeeb and her band of women decide to take him to Zone Three to see Al • Ith . This cross @-@ border excursion is not ordered by the Providers , and Ben Ata has grave misgivings about their decision . In Zone Three the women are shocked to find the deposed Al • Ith working in a stable near Zone Two . While Al • Ith is pleased to see her son , she too has misgivings about Dabeeb 's action . The bumptious women 's travels through Zone Three evoke feelings of xenophobia in the locals . 
 After five years of silence , the Providers instruct Ben Ata to go and see Al • Ith in Zone Three . At the border , he is surprised to find a band of youths armed with crude makeshift weapons blocking his way . Clearly they want no more incursions from Zone Four . Ben Ata returns with a large army and enters Zone Three unchallenged . He is not well received , but finds Al • Ith with a small band of followers who have moved to the frontier of Zone Two to be close to her . Ben Ata and Al • Ith reunite ; he tells her of the reforms he has introduced in Zone Four and his taming of the " wild one " from Zone Five . 
 One day Al • Ith enters Zone Two and does not return . But the changes set in motion by the two marriages are now evident everywhere . The frontiers between Zones Three , Four and Five are open , and people and knowledge are flowing between them . Previously stagnant , the three Zones are now filled with enquiry , inspiration and renewal . 
 = = Background = = 
 When Lessing published Shikasta in 1979 , the first book in her Canopus in Argos series , it represented a major shift of focus for the author . In her earlier books , Lessing had established a name for herself as a writer of realistic fiction ; in Shikasta she introduced her readers to the spiritual and mystical themes in Sufism . In the mid @-@ 1960s Lessing had become interested in Sufism , an Islamic belief system , after reading The Sufis by Idries Shah . She described The Sufis as " the most surprising book [ she ] had read " , and said it " changed [ her ] life " . Lessing later met Shah , who became " a good friend [ and ] teacher " . In the early 1970s Lessing began writing " inner space " fiction , which included the novels Briefing for a Descent into Hell ( 1971 ) and Memoirs of a Survivor ( 1974 ) , and in the late 1970s she turned to science fiction when she wrote Shikasta , in which she used many Sufi concepts . Shikasta was intended to be a " single self @-@ contained book " , but as Lessing 's fictional universe developed , she found she had ideas for more than just one book , and ended up writing a series of five . 
 Lessing 's switch to science fiction was not well received by all . By the late 1970s Lessing was considered " one of the most honest , intelligent and engaged writers of the day " , and Western readers unfamiliar with Sufism were dismayed that Lessing had abandoned her " rational worldview " . George Stade of The New York Times complained that " our Grand Mistress of lumpen realism has gone religious on us " . The reaction of reviewers and readers to the first two books in the series , Shikasta and The Marriages Between Zones Three , Four and Five , prompted Lessing to write in the Preface to the third book in the series , The Sirian Experiments ( 1980 ) : 
 I would so like it if reviewers and readers could see this series , Canopus in Argos : Archive , as a framework that enables me to tell ( I hope ) a beguiling tale or two ; to put questions , both to myself and to others ; to explore ideas and sociological possibilities . 
 Further criticism of the Canopus series followed , which included this comment by New York Times critic John Leonard : " One of the many sins for which the 20th century will be held accountable is that it has discouraged Mrs. Lessing . [ ... ] She now <unk> on behalf of our insignificance in the cosmic <unk> . " Lessing replied by saying : " What they didn 't realize was that in science fiction is some of the best social fiction of our time . I also admire the classic sort of science fiction , like Blood Music , by Greg Bear . He 's a great writer . " Lessing said in 1983 that she would like to write stories about red and white dwarves , space rockets powered by anti @-@ gravity , and charmed and coloured quarks , " [ b ] ut we can 't all be physicists " . 
 In an interview published in 1996 , Lessing spoke passionately of The Marriages Between Zones Three , Four and Five : " Something happened when I wrote the book . I hit some other level . And is it a legend or a myth or a fairy tale or a fantasy ? That isn 't the word for what I ’ ve written , I think . You see , only I could have written The Golden Notebook , but I think Anon wrote this other book . " Lessing considered Marriages one of her better books , and said , " this book goes down into me pretty deep ... it will never happen again " . 
 = = Genre and themes = = 
 The Marriages Between Zones Three , Four and Five is told largely from the point of view of the matriarchal utopian Zone Three , which places the novel in the category of feminist utopias or feminist science fiction . The Canopus in Argos series in general falls under the banner of soft science fiction , or " space fiction " as Lessing called it , due to its focus on characterisation and social and cultural issues , and the de @-@ emphasis of science and technology . Comparative literature professor Robert Alter suggested that this kind of writing belongs to a genre that literary critic Northrop Frye called the " anatomy " , which is " a combination of fantasy and morality " . Author Gore Vidal placed Lessing 's " science fiction " " somewhere between John Milton and L. Ron Hubbard " . 
 The Marriages Between Zones Three , Four and Five differs from the other books in the Canopus in Argos series in that it reads like a fable and is set in a metaphysical , or " psychic " space , outside the rest of the series ' " normal " space / time universe . The story concerns two ordained marriages that link the patriarchal and militaristic Zone Four with the matriarchal and egalitarian Zone Three , and the tribal and barbaric Zone Five . It focuses on , what Time magazine reviewer Paul Gray calls , the " struggles between men and women and the dimensions of sex and love " . Literary critic Diana Sheets says that the book is about overcoming gender differences and opening up new possibilities . She argues that the premise of the story is that " cosmic order is ideally realized when men and women cross the gender divide and attempt genuine communication — sexually , emotionally , [ ... ] thereby setting the preconditions for the attainment of enlightened consciousness . " 
 The marriages were ordained by the Providers because the zones had stagnated and the birth rate of both humans and animals had fallen . Lessing does not identify the Providers , but some reviewers and critics have assumed that they are the Canopeans from the benevolent galactic empire Canopus , introduced in the first book of the series , Shikasta . Author Thelma J. Shinn says that , as in Shikasta , Lessing 's " pessimistic view of human capabilities still keeps control in a benevolent power rather than in the hands of the individual " . But after a push in the right direction , the individual triumphs : Al • Ith and Ben Ata initiate changes in both their own and their neighbouring zones . 
 Literature academic Jayne Ashleigh Glover says that while Zone Three on the surface appears to be a feminist utopia , Lessing shows that it is far from idyllic . The story narrators , the Chroniclers of Zone Three , question their zone 's behaviour and attitudes , and warn of the dangers of stagnation . Al • Ith , upon returning to Zone Three , is shunned by its inhabitants for failing to attend to their zone 's needs , and Zone Three 's stasis manifests itself in xenophobia when Al • Ith brings back new perspectives , followed by visitors from Zone Four . 
 Glover sees Al • Ith , Ben Ata and Vahshi as allegories for their respective zones , and the marriages between them as marriages between the zones , as stated by the title of the book . Author <unk> Galin says that Al • Ith functions according to the nature of Zone Three rather than as an individual . Galin also argues that the six zones correspond to Sufism 's different levels of consciousness . Both Al • Ith and Ben Ata are able to experience other levels of consciousness when they travel to each other 's zones , but Al • Ith can perceive and experience the neighbouring zone far deeper than Ben Ata because she is from a higher zone / level of consciousness . Galin says that on the " Sufi ladder to enlightenment " , those on higher rungs must pull up those on lower rungs . Thus Al • Ith can only move to Zone Two after she has pulled Ben Ata up to Zone Three . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In a review of The Marriages Between Zones Three , Four and Five in Time magazine , Paul Gray described the novel as " part fertility myth , part comedy of manners " . Gray said that Lessing often wrote about gender conflict , but " never with more sweetness , compassion and wisdom " as she has in this novel . Writing in HuffPost Culture , University of Bristol academic Tom <unk> called the book " a legend " and listed it amongst his " Five Doris Lessing Books to Read " . Critic John Leonard in a review in The New York Times called The Marriages Between Zones Three , Four and Five " an act of magic " , and " a remarkable recovery " from Shikasta , which Leonard called a " disaster " . 
 British writer Graham Sleight in a review of the Canopus in Argos series in Locus magazine said The Marriages Between Zones Three , Four and Five comes closest to Ursula K. Le Guin 's works in the way that both Lessing and Le Guin scrutinise societies . Sleight compared The Marriages to Le Guin 's The Dispossessed , saying that each revolves around conflicts between differing worldviews , namely the Zones in The Marriages , and <unk> and <unk> in The Dispossessed . 
 Kirkus Reviews said that Lessing often tackled the subject of sexual politics , but The Marriages Between Zones Three , Four and Five is her " most humane and loving variation on the theme " . While the review was critical of Lessing 's prose style , saying its " <unk> [ ... ] has never been more conspicuous " , and called her descriptions of the Zone Four war economy " a silly cartoon sketch " , it said that " there is a sweetness and generosity about this work not quite like anything she has done " . 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 The Marriages Between Zones Three , Four and Five was adapted for the opera in 1997 by composer Philip Glass with story @-@ libretto by Doris Lessing . The two @-@ act opera for orchestra , chorus and soloists first premiered in Heidelberg , Germany in May 1997 under the direction of Thomas Kalb ( music ) and Birgitta <unk> ( stage ) . Lessing said that for the opera she expanded her allegory about gender relations : " There was room for two festivals : a woman 's festival and a marriage festival . There are a lot of lyrics not in the novel . " The libretto was translated by Saskia M. <unk> into German . The first US premiere was in June 2001 at the Merle Reskin Theatre in Chicago , Illinois , and was directed by Harry Silverstein . 
 The German premiere was not well received by the press , and Chicago Tribune music critic John von Rhein found faults in the US production . He said that the novel " falls flat as music theater " , there is " no compelling dramatic narrative " , and the music " drifts along <unk> " . Von Rhein also complained that " score breaks no new stylistic ground , nor does it define the characters dramatically " . 
 In 1986 , Glass adapted another book from the Canopus in Argos series , The Making of the Representative for Planet 8 , into a three @-@ act opera with story @-@ libretto by Lessing . It premiered in Houston , Texas in July 1988 . 
 = Bosa of York = 
 Bosa ( died c . 705 ) was an Anglo @-@ Saxon Bishop of York during the 7th and early 8th centuries . He was educated at Whitby Abbey , where he became a monk . Following Wilfrid 's removal from York in 678 the diocese was divided into three , leaving a greatly reduced see of York , to which Bosa was appointed bishop . He was himself removed in 687 and replaced by Wilfrid , but in 691 Wilfrid was once more ejected and Bosa returned to the see . He died in about 705 , and subsequently appears as a saint in an 8th @-@ century liturgical calendar . 
 = = Life = = 
 Bosa was a Northumbrian , educated at Whitby Abbey under the abbess Hilda . He subsequently joined the monastery as a monk , and became one of five men educated at Whitby who went on to become bishops . 
 In 678 , after Wilfrid was removed from the bishopric of York and banished from Northumbria , the diocese of York was divided into three . Bosa was appointed to the now greatly reduced diocese of York , which included the sub @-@ kingdom of Deira , thanks to the support of King Ecgfrith of Northumbria and Theodore of Tarsus , the Archbishop of Canterbury . Bosa was consecrated in his cathedral at York in 678 by Theodore , but Wilfrid declared that he was unable to work with Bosa because he did not consider him to be a member of the Catholic Church . Bosa 's episcopate lasted nine years , but with Wilfrid back in favour , in 687 Bosa was removed just as his predecessor had been . He returned to York in 691 , after Wilfrid was once again expelled . While bishop , Bosa introduced a communal life for the clergy of the cathedral , and set up a continuous liturgy in the cathedral . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 The date of Bosa 's death is unknown ; he was still alive in 704 but must have died before 706 , when his successor was named . His successor at York was John of Beverley , the Bishop of Hexham . A contemporary writer , Bede , praised Bosa as a man of " singular merit and sanctity " . Bede also praised Bosa 's humility . Bosa was also responsible for the early education of Acca , later Bishop of Hexham , who grew up in his household . 
 Bosa appears as a saint in an 8th @-@ century liturgical calendar from York , the only sign that he was venerated as a saint before the Norman Conquest of England . The 16th @-@ century English antiquary John Leland included Bosa in his list of saint 's resting places in England , giving it as York . Bosa 's feast day is 9 March . 
 = Colross = 
 Colross , ( also historically known as Belle Air and Grasshopper Hall ) , is a Georgian mansion in Princeton , New Jersey ; it was built as the center of an estate in the Old Town neighborhood of Alexandria , Virginia . Colross is currently the administration building of Princeton Day School . The Colross property originally occupied the entire 1100 block of Oronoco Street ; Alexandria merchant John Potts developed it as a plantation and began building the mansion in 1799 – 1800 . In 1803 , Jonathan Swift — also an Alexandria merchant and a city councilman — purchased the property and during his ownership continued constructing the mansion . After Swift 's death in 1824 , Colross was <unk> by Thomson Francis Mason ( 1785 – 1838 ) , son of Thomson Mason ( 1759 – 1820 ) and grandson of Founding Father George Mason ( 1725 – 1792 ) of Gunston Hall . Mason served as a judge of the Criminal Court of the District of Columbia and as mayor of Alexandria . During his ownership , Mason made Colross his chief homestead ; he substantially modified and added to the mansion . After successive ownerships , the area around Colross became heavily industrialized . The mansion was bought by John Munn in 1929 ; between that year and 1932 it was transported brick @-@ by @-@ brick to Princeton , where in 1958 it was sold to Princeton Day School , which uses it as a school administration building housing its admission and advancement offices . 
 The Colross mansion is a two @-@ story , brick , Georgian @-@ style structure that features an architectural plan similar to those of Mount Vernon and Woodlawn , and was originally flanked by two wings . The front entrance is covered by a spacious Neoclassical portico supported by wooden doric columns . The roof is topped by a balustraded deck and is further embellished by three Dormer windows . 
 Following the 2005 purchase of the original Colross site by a real estate development company , an archaeological excavation was undertaken between March and June that year at the behest of the city of Alexandria . Archaeologists uncovered an underground domed brick cistern and evidence of slave outbuildings , in addition to the foundations of the estate 's peripheral walls and several ancillary structures . The excavation of the Colross site resulted in 79 condominium buyers abandoning their purchase agreements because of the delay in construction of a luxury Monarch Condominium project . 
 Colross served as the venue for several significant Mason family events , including the wedding ceremonies of Thomson Francis Mason 's daughters Sarah Elizabeth Mason ( 1819 – 1907 ) and Virginia Mason ( 1830 – 1919 ) . According to local tradition , two children in the Mason family died on the property and were interred in the estate 's burial vault . Successive owners of the Colross estate claimed it was haunted by the deceased Mason children . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Virginia = = = 
 The land on which Colross was first located was originally part of the Northern Neck Proprietary , a land grant that Charles II of England awarded to seven of his supporters in 1649 and renewed by an official patent in 1688 . One of these seven supporters , Thomas Colepeper , 2nd Baron Colepeper , acquired the entire area in 1681 ; his grandson , Thomas Fairfax , 6th Lord Fairfax of Cameron , inherited it in 1719 . 
 John Potts , a prominent Alexandria merchant , developed the Colross property as a plantation . He began building a brick mansion on the property between 1799 and 1800 . Potts encountered financial difficulties and placed the unfinished mansion on the market in 1801 . In December 1803 , Jonathan Swift , a merchant and Freemason , bought the property for $ 9 @,@ 000 . Swift purchased Colross for his bride , Anne Roberdeau , daughter of Brigadier General Daniel Roberdeau ( 1727 – 1795 ) . Some sources say Swift 's wife reportedly named the estate Belle Air ; according to other sources , Swift referred to his estate as both " Belle Air " and " Grasshopper Hall " . Swift presided over Alexandria City Council from 1822 through 1823 . His wife , two daughters , and three sons lived with him at the mansion . As Alexandria expanded , Colross evolved from a rural plantation into an urban estate . Between 1791 and 1847 , the city of Alexandria was a part of Alexandria County within the District of Columbia . Swift continued to construct the mansion . After his death in 1824 , the estate transferred to the ownership of Lee Massey Alexander and his sister , Mrs. Chapman . The Alexander family owned the estate for a brief period ; they renamed it " Colross " . 
 Colross was then purchased by Thomson Francis Mason ( 1785 – 1838 ) , a prominent jurist , lawyer , councilman , judge of the Criminal Court of the District of Columbia , and mayor of Alexandria between 1827 and 1830 . Mason was the eldest son of Thomson Mason ( 1759 – 1820 ) , and was the grandson of U.S. Founding Father George Mason ( 1725 – 1792 ) of Gunston Hall . According to Mason 's daughter Virginia Mason Davidge , her father won Colross " at a game of cards " from Lee Massey Alexander . Mason used Colross as his chief homestead and made substantial modifications and additions to it . Mason built a 10 ft ( 3 @.@ 0 m ) high brick wall around the exterior of the Colross property . Around the same time Mason acquired Colross , he built Huntley in Fairfax County , Virginia as a rural retreat and summer villa . Mason 's son , Arthur " Pen " Pendleton Mason ( 1835 – 1893 ) , later inherited the Colross estate . Pen Mason was married to Mary Ellen Campbell , a daughter of John Archibald Campbell ( 1811 – 1889 ) , an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States . Orlando B. Willcox , who later served as a Union Army general , visited Colross on several occasions around 1851 ; he described it as a " fine house and ground and the chief residence of the Masons of Alexandria , much frequented by officers of the army " . Willcox also remarked on the " hospitality and civility of the head of the house " , Pen Mason 's mother , Elizabeth " Betsey " Clapham Price ( 1802 – 1873 ) . 
 During the American Civil War , Colross was seized by Union authorities . According to local tradition and to Alexandria resident Julian Taylor , at least two Union deserters were executed with their backs against the estate 's high brick exterior wall . In addition , a " famous ' bounty jumper ' " by the name of Downey was also shot and killed against the wall after being captured by his own soldiers . Local traditions also tell of the ghost of a soldier who haunts the former location of the estate 's brick perimeter wall . 
 William Albert Smoot , a lumber merchant and coal businessman , purchased Colross from the Mason family and lived there with his family between 1885 and 1917 . Smoot 's wife was a member of the Alexander family , and was therefore a descendant of the estate 's former owners . While there , the <unk> ' daughter Betty wrote , " the grounds included a whole square block and were enclosed with an ancient brick wall ten feet in height " . The <unk> ' son William Albert later served as mayor of Alexandria from 1922 to 1930 . 
 The parents of Cornell University professor and activist Alice Cook ( 1903 – 1998 ) lived at the then @-@ dilapidated Colross with her father 's superior from the Southern Railway . Her father worked for the railroad 's bookkeeping department . Cook spent her early childhood at the house . In c . 1913 , when Cook was about ten , her mother took her to Colross for a visit . She remarked that Colross " had no gaslights , and running water only in the kitchen " , and that the house " stood in the midst of railroad tracks " . Cook also said the house 's adjacent stables still had horses , the " elegant plaster ceilings " remained intact , and " great oak doors " still stood within the house 's main doorway behind the white columns of the front portico . 
 In 1917 , another lumber merchant , William Hoge , acquired ownership of the mansion . Under similar circumstances to those of nearby Abingdon , properties surrounding Colross underwent industrialization with the construction of a warehouse complex and ancillary industrial buildings associated with Alexandria Hay & Grain . The mansion at Colross became a storage facility within a lumber yard operated by another planing mill owner . In 1927 , the mansion and the adjacent warehouses were substantially damaged by a tornado , making the mansion uninhabitable . 
 = = = New Jersey = = = 
 Between 1929 and 1932 , John Munn purchased the mansion , dismantled it , and shipped the structure brick @-@ by @-@ brick to Princeton , New Jersey , where it was restored . Following Munn 's death in 1956 , Colross was purchased by Dr. Geoffrey W. Rake . After Rake died in 1958 , Colross was sold to Princeton Day School . The mansion became the school 's administrative building , which it remains to this day . As of 2015 , Colross houses the admission and advancement offices of Princeton Day School , and serves as a venue for the institution 's events . 
 In Alexandria , the mansion 's remaining brick foundation was buried beneath a slab of reinforced concrete for over 50 years . After the mansion 's relocation , its site was the location — among other structures — of a large 50 @-@ truck garage , Andy 's Car Wash , a Dominion Virginia Power substation , and the <unk> Creative Printers facility . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The mansion at Colross was built in the Georgian architectural style between 1799 and 1800 . It is a two @-@ story brick house featuring a rectangular architectural plan , which was originally flanked by two wings . Colross features wide halls and spacious rooms . One wing housed facilities for the estate 's service staff ; the other wing served as a carriage shed . Colross ' architectural plan is similar to that of nearby estates Mount Vernon and Woodlawn , and is an example of the country house style of American colonial architecture common in Maryland and Virginia . It has been described as the " largest and most beautiful mansion ever erected in Alexandria " . The Colross property originally occupied the entire 1100 block of Oronoco Street . The grounds of the estate also contained ancillary outbuildings . 
 The exterior brick walls of the mansion are laid in a Flemish bond pattern , exhibiting a " well proportioned width " of mortar joint between the bricks . Two sets of double inside chimneys extend above the roofline on each side of the mansion 's main structure . The front façade of the mansion 's main structure , which originally faced Oronoco Street in Alexandria , is five bays wide and contains the house 's front entrance at the first floor 's center bay . The front entrance is covered by a spacious Neoclassical architecture style portico , which is supported by two sets of double wooden doric columns at the front and engaged columns on the brick façade . The portico 's frieze is subordinated to the architrave . The mansion 's front door is topped by a leaded fanlight in the shape of a segmented arch . Leaded sidelights flank both sides of the main doorway . All of the mansion 's windows feature colonial @-@ style lintels . 
 The mansion 's roof is covered by gray slate and is further embellished with three dormer windows facing from the home 's front façade . The roof is topped by a balustraded deck . Similar moulding contours were used at varying scales throughout the mansion 's exterior construction . The mansion 's cornice is composed of ornamented moldings . 
 To the north of the mansion was a garden , which was purportedly well known for its boxwoods , lilacs , and roses . The garden remained through the ownership of the Smoot family . A winding path led from the mansion to a large burial vault , which was closed by a great iron lock . According to members of the Smoot family , the lock to the burial vault would " never stay locked more than three days " at a time . A vase of urn stood in the front lawn of the mansion ; according to tradition this marked the location where Pocahontas was baptized . The urn remained in its location throughout the American Civil War and was later acquired by the Association for the Preservation of Virginia Antiquities . 
 = = Archeological excavation = = 
 The former Colross land tract on the 1100 block of Oronoco Street , which is bounded by North Fayette , Oronoco , Henry , and Pendleton streets , was purchased in 2003 by Diamond Properties , a real estate development company with plans to build a mixed @-@ use mid @-@ rise luxury condominium project called Monarch Condominium . In 2005 , Alexandria 's Archaeological Protection Code requirement forced Diamond Properties to halt its construction to allow for an archaeological excavation of the Colross site . The excavation occurred between March and June 2005 , as mandated by the city of Alexandria . Diamond Properties paid R. Christopher Goodwin & Associates Inc . , a cultural resource management firm , approximately $ 100 @,@ 000 to explore the site for historical artifacts and to ensure all burial plots had been removed . 
 While only a few artifacts were recovered , historians said the dig offered a clearer view of early 19th @-@ century life at Colross . Discoveries included an underground domed brick cistern that served as a water purification system and evidence that slaves lived in outbuildings on the Colross estate . Archaeologists also discovered the mansion 's original basement floor , which was laid in a herringbone bond . Evidence of the estate 's exterior walls , the foundations of the smokehouse , stables , and a burial vault were also unearthed . In the northwestern portion of the property , what is thought to have been the foundation of a rectangular burial vault was found . No burial remains were discovered . All interments were presumably removed in the early 20th century . Thomson Francis Mason was originally interred at the Colross graveyard in 1838 , as were two of his daughters . Subsequent residents had their remains reinterred at Christ Church Episcopal Cemetery in Alexandria . According to the Alexandria Economic Development Partnership , the delay in <unk> caused 79 condominium buyers to abandon their purchases . 
 = = Significant Mason family events = = 
 The Colross estate was the location for several significant events involving the Mason family . Sarah Elizabeth Mason ( 1819 – 1907 ) , a daughter of Thomson Francis Mason and his wife Elizabeth Clapham Price , married St. George Tucker Campbell at Colross on November 17 , 1841 . Virginia Mason ( 1830 – 1919 ) , another daughter of Thomson and Elizabeth married William <unk> Stewart Davidge at Colross on February 1 , 1853 . Colross was also the venue for the funeral of Mrs. Virginia King , wife of Dr. Benjamin King , on December 31 , 1850 . Mrs. King was a sister of Mrs. Judge Mason . 
 According to local tradition , two small Mason children , William and Ann , were playing in the estate 's yard when a storm arrived . William took shelter in the estate 's chicken coop but the wind toppled the structure , killing him . Soon after William 's death , his sister Ann drowned in a bathtub at Colross . Both children were interred in the estate 's burial vault in the garden . Successive residents at Colross , including members of the Smoot family , claimed the estate was haunted by the deceased Mason children ; they reported hearing children " giggling , singing , and talking " , and witnessed apparitions of children in pre @-@ Civil War attire . 
 = Political career of John C. Breckinridge = 
 The political career of John C. Breckinridge included service in the state government of Kentucky , the United States federal government , and the government of the Confederate States of America . In 1857 , at 36 years old , he was inaugurated as James Buchanan 's vice president , and remains the youngest person to ever hold the office . Four years later , he ran as the presidential candidate of a dissident group of Southern Democrats , but lost the election to the Republican candidate , Abraham Lincoln . 
 A member of the Breckinridge political family , in 1849 John C. Breckinridge became the first Democrat to represent Fayette County in the Kentucky House of Representatives , and in 1851 , he was the first Democrat to represent Kentucky 's 8th congressional district in over 20 years . A champion of strict constructionism , states ' rights , and popular sovereignty , he supported Stephen A. Douglas 's Kansas – Nebraska Act as a means of addressing slavery in the territories acquired by the U.S. in the Mexican – American War . Considering his re @-@ election to the House of Representatives unlikely in 1854 , he returned to private life and his legal practice . He was nominated for vice president at the 1856 Democratic National Convention , and although he and Buchanan won the election , he enjoyed little influence in Buchanan 's administration . 
 In 1859 , the Kentucky General Assembly elected Breckinridge to a U.S. Senate term that would begin in 1861 . In the 1860 presidential contest , he captured the electoral votes of most of the Southern states , but finished a distant second among four candidates . Lincoln 's election as president prompted the secession of the Southern states to form the Confederate States of America . Though Breckinridge sympathized with the Southern cause , in the Senate he worked futilely to reunite the states peacefully . After the Confederates fired on Fort Sumter , beginning the Civil War , he opposed allocating resources for Lincoln to fight the Confederacy . Fearing arrest after Kentucky sided with the Union , he fled to the Confederacy , joined the Confederate States Army , and was subsequently expelled from the Senate . He served in the Confederate Army from October 1861 to February 1865 , when Confederate President Jefferson Davis appointed him Confederate States Secretary of War . Concluding that the Confederate cause was hopeless , he encouraged Davis to negotiate a national surrender . Davis 's capture in April , 1865 ended the war , and Breckinridge fled to Cuba , then Great Britain , and finally Canada , remaining in exile until President Andrew Johnson 's offer of amnesty in 1868 . Returning to Kentucky , he refused all requests to resume his political career and died of complications related to war injuries in 1875 . 
 = = Formative years = = 
 Historian James C. Klotter has speculated that , had John C. Breckinridge 's father , Cabell , lived , he would have steered his son to the Whig Party and the Union , rather than the Democratic Party and the Confederacy , but the Kentucky Secretary of State and former Speaker of the Kentucky House of Representatives died of a fever on September 1 , 1823 , months before his son 's third birthday . Burdened with her husband 's debts , widow Mary Breckinridge and her children moved to her in @-@ laws ' home near Lexington , Kentucky , where John C. Breckinridge 's grandmother taught him the political philosophies of his late grandfather , U.S. Attorney General John Breckinridge . John Breckinridge believed the federal government was created by , and subject to , the co @-@ equal governments of the states . As a state representative , he introduced the Kentucky Resolutions of 1798 and 1799 , which denounced the Alien and Sedition Acts and asserted that states could nullify them and other federal laws that they deemed unconstitutional . A strict constructionist , he held that the federal government could only exercise powers explicitly given to it in the Constitution . 
 Most of the Breckinridges were Whigs , but John Breckinridge 's posthumous influence inclined his grandson toward the Democratic Party . Additionally , John C. Breckinridge 's friend and law partner , Thomas W. Bullock , was from a Democratic family . In 1842 , Bullock told Breckinridge that by the time they opened their practice in Burlington , Iowa , " you were two @-@ thirds of a Democrat " ; living in heavily Democratic Iowa Territory further distanced him from <unk> . He wrote weekly editorials in the Democratic Iowa Territorial Gazette and Advisor , and in February 1843 , he was named to the Des Moines County Democratic committee . A letter from Breckinridge 's brother @-@ in @-@ law related that , when Breckinridge 's uncle William learned that his nephew had " become loco @-@ foco " , he said , " I felt as I would have done if I had heard that my daughter had been dishonored . " On a visit to Kentucky in 1843 , Breckinridge met and married Mary Cyrene Burch , ending his time in Iowa . 
 = = Views on slavery = = 
 Slavery issues dominated Breckinridge 's political career , although historians disagree about Breckinridge 's views . In Breckinridge : Statesman , Soldier , Symbol , William C. Davis argues that , by adulthood , Breckinridge regarded slavery as evil ; his entry in the 2002 Encyclopedia of World Biography records that he advocated voluntary emancipation . In Proud Kentuckian : John C. Breckinridge 1821 – 1875 , Frank Heck disagrees , citing Breckinridge 's consistent advocacy for slavery protections , beginning with his opposition to emancipationist candidates — including his uncle , Robert Jefferson Breckinridge — in the state elections of 1849 . 
 = = = Early influences = = = 
 See also John C. Breckinridge : Early life 
 Breckinridge 's grandfather , John , owned slaves , believing it was a necessary evil in an agrarian economy . He hoped for gradual emancipation but did not believe the federal government was empowered to effect it ; Davis wrote that this became " family doctrine " . As a U.S. Senator , John Breckinridge insisted that decisions about slavery in Louisiana Territory be left to its future inhabitants , essentially the " popular sovereignty " advocated by John C. Breckinridge prior to the Civil War . John C. Breckinridge 's father , Cabell , embraced gradual emancipation and opposed government interference with slavery , but Cabell 's brother Robert , a Presbyterian minister , became an abolitionist , concluding that slavery was morally wrong . Davis recorded that all the Breckinridges were pleased when the General Assembly refused to repeal the ban on importing slaves to Kentucky in 1833 . 
 John C. Breckinridge encountered conflicting influences as an undergraduate at Centre College and in law school at Transylvania University . Centre President John C. Young , Breckinridge 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , believed in states ' rights and gradual emancipation , as did George Robertson , one of Breckinridge 's instructors at Transylvania , but James G. Birney , father of Breckinridge 's friend and Centre classmate William Birney , was an abolitionist . In an 1841 letter to Robert Breckinridge , who became his surrogate father after Cabell Breckinridge 's death , John C. Breckinridge wrote that only " ignorant , foolish men " feared abolition . In an Independence Day address in Frankfort later that year , he decried the " unlawful dominion over the bodies ... of men " . An acquaintance believed that Breckinridge 's move to Iowa Territory was motivated , in part , by the fact that it was a free territory under the Missouri Compromise . 
 After returning to Kentucky , Breckinridge became friends with abolitionists Cassius Marcellus Clay , Garrett Davis , and Orville H. Browning . He represented freedmen in court and loaned them money . He was a Freemason and member of the First Presbyterian Church , both of which opposed slavery . Nevertheless , because blacks were educationally and socially disadvantaged in the South , Breckinridge concluded that " the interests of both races in the Commonwealth would be promoted by the continuance of their present relations " . He supported the new state constitution adopted in 1850 , which forbade the immigration of freedmen to Kentucky and required emancipated slaves to be expelled from the state . Believing it was best to relocate freedmen to the African colony of Liberia , he supported the Kentucky branch of the American Colonization Society . The 1850 Census showed that Breckinridge owned five slaves , aged 11 to 36 . Heck recorded that his slaves were well @-@ treated but noted that this was not unusual and proved nothing about his views on slavery . 
 = = = Moderate reputation = = = 
 Because Breckinridge defended both the Union and slavery in the General Assembly , he was considered a moderate early in his political career . In June 1864 , Pennsylvania 's John W. Forney opined that Breckinridge had been " in no sense an extremist " when elected to Congress in 1851 . Of his early encounters with Breckinridge , Forney wrote : " If he had a conscientious feeling , it was hatred of slavery , and both of us , ' Democrats ' as we were , frequently confessed that it was a sinful and an anti @-@ Democratic institution , and that the day would come when it must be peaceably or forcibly removed . " Heck discounts this statement , pointing out that Forney was editor of a pro @-@ Union newspaper and Breckinridge a Confederate general at the time it was published . As late as the 1856 presidential election , some alleged that Breckinridge was an abolitionist . 
 By the time he began his political career , Breckinridge had concluded that slavery was more a constitutional issue than a moral one . Slaves were property , and the Constitution did not empower the federal government to interfere with property rights . From Breckinridge 's constructionist viewpoint , allowing Congress to legislate emancipation without constitutional sanction would lead to " unlimited dominion over the territories , excluding the people of the slave states from emigrating thither with their property " . As a private citizen , he supported the slavery protections in the Kentucky Constitution of 1850 and denounced the Wilmot Proviso , which would have forbidden slavery in territory acquired in the Mexican – American War . As a state legislator , he declared slavery a " wholly local and domestic " matter , to be decided separately by the residents of each state and territory . Because Washington , D.C. , was a federal entity and the federal government could not interfere with property rights , he concluded that forced emancipation there was unconstitutional . As a congressman , he insisted on Congress 's " perfect non @-@ intervention " with slavery in the territories . Debating the 1854 Kansas – Nebraska Act , he explained , " The right to establish [ slavery in a territory by government sanction ] involves the correlative right to prohibit ; and , denying both , I would vote for neither . " 
 = = = Later views = = = 
 Davis notes that Breckinridge 's December 21 , 1859 , address to the state legislature marked a change in his public statements about slavery . He decried the Republicans ' desire for " negro equality " , his first public indication that he may have believed blacks were biologically inferior to whites . He declared that the Dred Scott decision showed that federal courts afforded adequate protection for slave property , but advocated a federal slave code if future courts failed to enforce those protections ; this marked a departure from his previous doctrine of " perfect non @-@ interference " . Asserting that John Brown 's raid on Harpers Ferry proved Republicans intended to force abolition on the South , he predicted " resistance [ to the Republican agenda ] in some form is inevitable " . He still urged the Assembly against secession — " God forbid that the step shall ever be taken ! " — but his discussion of growing sectional conflict bothered some , including his uncle Robert . 
 Klotter wrote that Breckinridge 's sale of a female slave and her six @-@ week @-@ old child in November 1857 probably ended his days as a slaveholder . Slaves were not listed among his assets in the 1860 Census , but Heck noted that he had little need for slaves at that time , since he was living in Lexington 's Phoenix Hotel after returning to Kentucky from his term as vice president . Some slavery advocates refused to support him in the 1860 presidential race because he was not a slaveholder . Klotter noted that Breckinridge fared better in rural areas of the South , where there were fewer slaveholders ; in urban areas where the slave population was higher , he lost to Constitutional Unionist candidate John Bell , who owned 166 slaves . William C. Davis recorded that , in most of the South , the combined votes for Bell and Illinois Senator Stephen Douglas exceeded those cast for Breckinridge . 
 After losing the election to Abraham Lincoln , Breckinridge worked for adoption of the Crittenden Compromise — authored by fellow Kentuckian John J. Crittenden — as a means of preserving the Union . Breckinridge believed the Crittenden proposal — restoring the Missouri Compromise line as the separator between slave and free territory in exchange for stricter enforcement of the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 and federal non @-@ interference with slavery in the territories and Washington , D.C. — was the most extreme proposal to which the South would agree . Ultimately , the compromise was rejected and the Civil War soon followed . 
 = = Early political career = = 
 A supporter of the annexation of Texas and " manifest destiny " , Breckinridge campaigned for James K. Polk in the 1844 presidential election , prompting a relative to observe that he was " making himself very conspicuous here by making flaming loco foco speeches at the <unk> " . He decided against running for Scott County clerk after his law partner complained that he spent too much time in politics . In 1845 , he declined to seek election to the U.S. House of Representatives from the Eighth District but campaigned for Alexander Keith Marshall , his party 's unsuccessful nominee . He supported Zachary Taylor for the presidency in mid @-@ 1847 but endorsed the Democratic ticket of Lewis Cass and William O. Butler after Taylor became a Whig in 1848 . 
 = = = Kentucky House of Representatives = = = 
 In October 1849 , Kentucky voters called for a constitutional convention . <unk> , including Breckinridge 's uncles William and Robert , his brother @-@ in @-@ law John C. Young , and his friend Cassius Marcellus Clay , nominated " friends of emancipation " to seek election to the convention and the state legislature In response , Breckinridge , who opposed " impairing [ slavery protections ] in any form " , was nominated by a bipartisan pro @-@ slavery convention for one of Fayette County 's two seats in the Kentucky House of Representatives . With 1 @,@ 481 votes , 400 more than any of his opponents , Breckinridge became the first Democrat elected to the state legislature from Fayette County , which was heavily Whig . 
 When the House convened in December 1849 , a member from Mercer County nominated Breckinridge for Speaker against two Whigs . After receiving 39 votes — 8 short of a majority — on the first three ballots , he withdrew , and the position went to Whig Thomas Reilly . Assigned to the committees on the Judiciary and Federal Relations , Breckinridge functioned as the Democratic floor leader during the session . Davis wrote that his most important work during the session was bank reform . 
