 Breckinridge 's first speech favored allowing the Kentucky Colonization Society to use the House chamber ; later , he advocated directing Congress to establish an African freedmen colony , and to meet the costs of transporting settlers there . Funding internal improvements was traditionally a Whig stance , but Breckinridge advocated conducting a state geologic survey , making the Kentucky River more navigable , chartering a turnpike , incorporating a steamboat company , and funding the Kentucky Lunatic Asylum . As a reward for supporting these projects , he presided over the approval of the Louisville and Bowling Green Railroad 's charter and was appointed director of the asylum . 
 Resolutions outlining Kentucky 's views on the proposed Compromise of 1850 were referred to the Committee on Federal Relations . The committee 's Whig majority favored one calling the compromise a " fair , equitable , and just basis " for dealing with slavery in the territories and urging Congress not to interfere with slavery there or in Washington , D.C. Feeling this left open the issue of Congress 's ability to legislate emancipation , Breckinridge asserted in a competing resolution that Congress could not establish or abolish slavery in states or territories . Both resolutions , and several passed by the state Senate , were laid on the table without being adopted . 
 Breckinridge left the session on March 4 , 1850 , three days before its adjournment , to tend to John Milton Breckinridge , his infant son who had fallen ill ; he died on March 18 . To distract from his grief , he campaigned for ratification of the new constitution , objecting only to its difficult amendment process . He declined renomination , citing concerns " of a private and imperative nature " . Davis wrote that the problem was money , since his absence from Lexington had hurt his legal practice , but his son 's death was also a factor . 
 = = U.S. House of Representatives = = 
 At an October 17 , 1850 , barbecue celebrating the Compromise of 1850 , Breckinridge toasted its author , Whig Party founder Henry Clay . Clay reciprocated by praising Breckinridge 's grandfather and father , expressing hope that Breckinridge would use his talents to serve his country , then embracing him . Some observers believed that Clay was endorsing Breckinridge for higher office , and Whig newspapers began referring to him as " a sort of half @-@ way Whig " and implying that he voted for Taylor in 1848 . 
 = = = First term ( 1851 – 1853 ) = = = 
 Delegates to the Democrats ' January 1851 state convention nominated Breckinridge to represent Kentucky 's Eighth District in the U.S. House of Representatives . Called the " Ashland district " because it contained Clay 's Ashland estate and much of the area he once represented , Whigs typically won there by 600 to 1 @,@ 000 votes . A Democrat had not represented it since 1828 , and in the previous election no Democrat had sought the office . Breckinridge 's opponent , Leslie Combs , was a popular War of 1812 veteran and former state legislator . As they campaigned together , Breckinridge 's eloquence contrasted with Combs ' plainspoken style . Holding that " free thought needed free trade " , Breckinridge opposed Whig protective tariffs . He only favored federal funding of internal improvements " of a national character " . Carrying only three of seven counties , but bolstered by a two @-@ to @-@ one margin in Owen County , Breckinridge garnered 54 % of the vote , winning the election by a margin of 537 . 
 Considered for Speaker of the House , Breckinridge believed his election unlikely and refused to run against fellow Kentuckian Linn Boyd . Boyd was elected , and despite Breckinridge 's gesture , assigned him to the lightly @-@ regarded Foreign Affairs Committee . Breckinridge resisted United States Democratic Review editor George Nicholas Sanders ' efforts to recruit him to the Young America movement . Like Young Americans , Breckinridge favored westward expansion and free trade , but he disagreed with the movement 's support of European revolutions and its disdain for older statesmen . On March 4 , 1852 , Breckinridge made his first speech in the House , defending presidential aspirant William Butler against charges by Florida 's Edward Carrington Cabell , a Young American and distant cousin , that Butler secretly sympathized with the Free Soilers . He denounced Sanders for his vitriolic attacks on Butler and for calling all likely Democratic presidential candidates except Stephen Douglas " old <unk> " . 
 The speech made Breckinridge a target of Whigs , Young Americans , and Douglas supporters . Humphrey Marshall , a Kentucky Whig who supported incumbent President Millard Fillmore , attacked Breckinridge for claiming Fillmore had not fully disclosed his views on slavery . Illinois ' William Alexander Richardson , a Douglas backer , tried to distance Douglas from Sanders ' attacks on Butler , but Breckinridge showed that Douglas endorsed the Democratic Review a month after it printed its first anti @-@ Butler article . Finally , Breckinridge 's cousin , California 's Edward C. Marshall , charged that Butler would name Breckinridge Attorney General in exchange for his support and revived the charge that Breckinridge broke party ranks , supporting Zachary Taylor for president . Breckinridge ably defended himself , but Sanders continued to attack him and Butler , claiming Butler would name Breckinridge as his running mate , even though Breckinridge was too young to qualify as vice president . 
 After his maiden speech , Breckinridge took a more active role in the House . In debate with Ohio 's Joshua Reed Giddings , he defended the Fugitive Slave Law 's constitutionality and criticized Giddings for hindering the return of fugitive slaves . He opposed Tennessee Congressman Andrew Johnson 's Homestead Bill , fearing it would create more territories that excluded slavery . Although generally opposed to funding local improvements , he supported the repair of two Potomac River bridges to avoid higher costs later . Other minor stands included supporting measures to benefit his district 's hemp farmers , voting against giving the president ten more appointments to the U.S. Naval Academy , and opposing funds for a sculpture of George Washington because the sculptor proposed depicting Washington in a toga . 
 Beginning in April , Breckinridge made daily visits to an ailing Henry Clay . Clay died June 29 , 1852 , and Breckinridge garnered nationwide praise and enhanced popularity in Kentucky after eulogizing Clay in the House . Days later , he spoke in opposition to increasing a subsidy to the Collins Line for carrying trans @-@ Atlantic mail , noting that Collins profited by carrying passengers and cargo on mail ships . In wartime , the government could commandeer and retrofit Collins 's steamboats as warships , but Breckinridge cited Commodore Matthew C. Perry 's opinion that they would be useless in war . Finally , he showed Cornelius Vanderbilt 's written statement promising to build a fleet of mail ships at his expense and carry the mail for $ 4 million less than Collins . Despite this , the House approved the subsidy increase . 
 = = = Second term ( 1853 – 1855 ) = = = 
 With Butler 's chances for the presidential nomination waning , Breckinridge convinced the Kentucky delegation to the 1852 Democratic National Convention not to nominate Butler until later balloting when he might become a compromise candidate . He urged restraint when Lewis Cass 's support dropped sharply on the twentieth ballot , but Kentucky 's delegates would wait no longer ; on the next ballot , they nominated Butler , but he failed to gain support . After Franklin Pierce , Breckinridge 's second choice , was nominated , Breckinridge tried , unsuccessfully , to recruit Douglas to Pierce 's cause . Pierce lost by 3 @,@ 200 votes in Kentucky — one of four states won by Winfield Scott — but was elected to the presidency , and appointed Breckinridge governor of Washington Territory in recognition of his efforts . Unsure of his re @-@ election chances in Kentucky , Breckinridge had sought the appointment , but after John J. Crittenden , rumored to be his challenger , was elected to the Senate in 1853 , he decided to decline it and run for re @-@ election . 
 = = = = Election = = = = 
 The Whigs chose Attorney General James Harlan to oppose Breckinridge , but he withdrew in March when some party factions opposed him . Robert P. Letcher , a former governor who had not lost in 14 elections , was the Whigs ' second choice . Letcher was an able campaigner who combined oratory and anecdotes to entertain and energize an audience . Breckinridge focused on issues in their first debate , comparing the Whig Tariff of 1842 to the Democrats ' lower Walker tariff , which increased trade and yielded more tax revenue . Instead of answering Breckinridge 's points , Letcher appealed to party loyalty , claiming Breckinridge would misrepresent the district " because he is a Democrat " . Letcher appealed to Whigs " to protect the grave of Mr. [ Henry ] Clay from the impious tread of Democracy " , but Breckinridge pointed to his friendly relations with Clay , remarking that Clay 's will did not mandate that " his ashes be exhumed " and " thrown into the scale to influence the result of the present Congressional contest " . 
 Cassius Clay , Letcher 's political enemy , backed Breckinridge despite their differences on slavery . Citing Clay 's support and the abolitionism of Breckinridge 's uncle Robert , Letcher charged that Breckinridge was an abolitionist . In answer , Breckinridge quoted newspaper accounts and sworn testimony , provided by John L. Robinson , of a speech Letcher made in Indiana for Zachary Taylor in 1848 . In the speech , made alongside Thomas Metcalfe , another former Whig governor of Kentucky , Letcher predicted that the Kentucky Constitution then being drafted would provide for gradual emancipation , declaring , " It is only the ultra men in the extreme South who desire the extension of slavery . " 
 When Letcher confessed doubts about his election chances , Whigs began fundraising outside the district , using the money to buy votes or pay Breckinridge supporters not to vote . Breckinridge estimated that the donations , which came from as far away as New York and included contributions from the Collins Line , totaled $ 30 @,@ 000 ; Whig George Robertson believed it closer to $ 100 @,@ 000 . Washington , D.C. , banker William Wilson Corcoran contributed $ 1 @,@ 000 to Breckinridge , who raised a few thousand dollars . Out of 12 @,@ 538 votes cast , Breckinridge won by 526 . He received 71 % of the vote in Owen County , which recorded 123 more votes than registered voters . Grateful for the county 's support , he nicknamed his son , John Witherspoon Breckinridge , " Owen " . 
 = = = = Service = = = = 
 Of 234 representatives in the House , Breckinridge was one of 80 re @-@ elected to the Thirty @-@ third Congress . His relative seniority , and Pierce 's election , increased his influence . He was rumored to have Pierce 's backing for Speaker of the House , but he again deferred to Boyd ; Maryland 's Augustus R. <unk> spoiled Boyd 's unanimous election by voting for Breckinridge . Still not given a committee chairmanship , he was assigned to the Ways and Means Committee , where he secured passage of a bill to cover overspending in fiscal year 1853 – 1854 ; it was the only time in his career that he solely managed a bill . His attempts to increase Kentucky 's allocation in a rivers and harbors bill were unsuccessful but popular with his Whig constituents . 
 In January 1854 , Douglas introduced the Kansas – Nebraska Act to organize the Nebraska Territory . Southerners had thwarted his previous attempts to organize the territory because Nebraska lay north of parallel 36 ° 30 ' north , the line separating slave and free territory under the Missouri Compromise . They feared that the territory would be organized into new free states that would vote against the South on slavery issues . The Kansas – Nebraska Act allowed the territory 's settlers to decide whether or not to permit slavery , an implicit repeal of the Missouri Compromise . Kentucky Senator Archibald Dixon 's amendment to make the repeal explicit angered northern Democrats , but Breckinridge believed it would move the slavery issue from national to local politics , and he urged Pierce to support it . Breckinridge wrote to his uncle Robert that he " had more to do than any man here , in putting [ the Act ] in its present shape " , but Heck notes that few extant records support this claim . The repeal amendment made the act more palatable to the South ; only 9 of 58 Southern congressmen voted against it . No Northern Whigs voted for the measure , but 44 of 86 Northern Democrats voted in the affirmative , enough to pass it . The Senate quickly concurred , and Pierce signed the act into law on May 30 , 1854 . 
 During the debate on the bill , New York 's Francis B. Cutting demanded that Breckinridge retract or explain a statement he had made , which Breckinridge understood as a challenge to duel . Under the code duello , the challenged party selected the weapons and the distance between combatants ; Breckinridge chose rifles at 60 paces and suggested the duel be held in Silver Spring , Maryland , on his friend , Francis Preston Blair 's estate . Cutting had not meant his remark as a challenge , but insisted that he was now challenged and selected pistols at 10 paces . While their representatives tried to clarify matters , Breckinridge and Cutting made amends , averting the duel . Had it taken place , Breckinridge could have been removed from the House ; the 1850 Kentucky Constitution prevented <unk> from holding office . 
 In the second session of the 33rd Congress , Breckinridge acted as spokesman for Ways and Means Committee bills , including a bill to assume and pay the debts Texas incurred prior to its annexation . Breckinridge 's friends , W. W. Corcoran and Jesse D. Bright , were two of Texas 's major creditors . The bill , which was approved , paid only those debts related to powers Texas surrendered to Congress upon annexation . Breckinridge was disappointed that the House defeated a measure to pay the Sioux $ 12 @,@ 000 owed them for the 1839 purchase of an island in the Mississippi River ; the debt was never paid . Another increase in the subsidy to the Collins Line passed over his opposition , but Pierce vetoed it . 
 = = = Retirement from the House = = = 
 In February 1854 , the General Assembly 's Whig majority gerrymandered the Eighth District , removing over 500 Democratic voters and replacing them with several hundred Whig voters by removing Owen and Jessamine counties from the district and adding Harrison and Nicholas counties to it . The cooperation of the Know Nothing Party — a relatively new nativist political entity — with the faltering Whigs further hindered Breckinridge 's re @-@ election chances . With his family again in financial straits , his wife wanted him to retire from national politics . 
 Pierre Soulé , the U.S. Minister to Spain , resigned in December 1854 after being unable to negotiate the annexation of Cuba and angering the Spanish by drafting the Ostend Manifesto , which called for the U.S. to take Cuba by force . Pierce nominated Breckinridge to fill the vacancy , but did not tell him until just before the Senate 's January 16 confirmation vote . After consulting Secretary of State William L. Marcy , Breckinridge concluded that the salary was insufficient and Soulé had so damaged Spanish relations that he would be unable to accomplish anything significant . In a February 8 , 1855 , letter to Pierce , he cited reasons " of a private and domestic nature " for declining the nomination . On March 17 , 1855 , he announced he would retire from the House . 
 Breckinridge and Minnesota Territory 's Henry Mower Rice were among the speculators who invested in land near present @-@ day Superior , Wisconsin . Rice disliked Minnesota 's territorial governor , Willis A. Gorman , and petitioned Pierce to replace him with Breckinridge . Pierce twice investigated Gorman , but found no grounds to remove him from office . Breckinridge fell ill when traveling to view his investments in mid @-@ 1855 and was unable to campaign in the state elections . Know Nothings captured every state office and six congressional districts — including the Eighth District — and Breckinridge sent regrets to friends in Washington , D.C. , promising to take a more active role in the 1856 campaigns . 
 = = U.S. vice president = = 
 Two Kentuckians — Breckinridge 's friend , Governor Lazarus W. Powell and his enemy , Linn Boyd — were potential Democratic presidential nominees in 1856 . Breckinridge — a delegate to the national convention and designated as a presidential elector — favored Pierce 's re @-@ election but convinced the state Democratic convention to leave the delegates free to support any candidate the party coalesced behind . To a New Yorker who proposed that Breckinridge 's nomination could unite the party , he replied " Humbug " . 
 = = = Election = = = 
 Pierce was unable to secure the nomination at the national convention , so Breckinridge switched his support to Stephen Douglas , but the combination of Pierce and Douglas supporters did not prevent James Buchanan 's nomination . After Douglas 's floor manager , William Richardson , suggested that nominating Breckinridge for vice president would help Buchanan secure the support of erstwhile Douglas backers in the general election , Louisiana 's J. L. Lewis nominated him . Breckinridge declined in deference to Linn Boyd but received 51 votes on the first ballot , behind Mississippi 's John A. Quitman with 59 , but ahead of third @-@ place Boyd , who garnered 33 . On the second ballot , Breckinridge received overwhelming support , and opposition delegates changed their votes to make his nomination unanimous . 
 The election was between Buchanan and Republican John C. Frémont in the north and between Buchanan and Millard Fillmore , nominated by a pro @-@ slavery faction of the Know Nothings , in the South . Tennessee Governor Andrew Johnson and Congressional Globe editor John C. Rives promoted the possibility that Douglas and Pierce supporters would back Fillmore in the Southern states , denying Buchanan a majority in the Electoral College and throwing the election to the House of Representatives . There , Buchanan 's opponents would prevent a vote , and the Senate 's choice for vice president — certain to be Breckinridge — would become president . There is no evidence that Breckinridge countenanced this scheme . Defying contemporary political convention , Breckinridge spoke frequently during the campaign , stressing Democratic fidelity to the constitution and charging that the Republican emancipationist agenda would tear the country apart . His appearances in the critical state of Pennsylvania helped allay Buchanan 's fears that Breckinridge desired to throw the election to the House . " Buck and Breck " won the election with 174 electoral votes to Frémont 's 114 and Fillmore 's 8 , and Democrats carried Kentucky for the first time since 1828 . Thirty @-@ six at the time of his inauguration on March 4 , 1857 , Breckinridge remains the youngest vice president in U.S. history . 
 = = = Service = = = 
 When Breckinridge asked to meet with Buchanan shortly after the inauguration , Buchanan told him to come to the White House and ask to see the hostess , Harriet Lane . Offended , Breckinridge refused to do so ; Buchanan 's friends later explained that asking to see Lane was a secret instruction to take a guest to the president . Buchanan apologized for the misunderstanding , but the event portended a poor relationship between the two men . Resentful of Breckinridge 's support for both Pierce and Douglas , Buchanan allowed him little influence in the administration . Breckinridge 's recommendation that former Whigs and Kentuckians — Powell , in particular — be included in Buchanan 's cabinet went unheeded . Kentuckians James B. Clay and Cassius M. Clay were offered diplomatic missions to Berlin and Peru , respectively , but both declined . Buchanan often asked Breckinridge to receive and entertain foreign dignitaries , but in 1858 , Breckinridge declined Buchanan 's request that he resign and take the again @-@ vacant position as U.S. Minister to Spain . The only private meeting between the two occurred near the end of Buchanan 's term , when the president summoned Breckinridge to get his advice on whether to issue a proclamation declaring a day of " <unk> and Prayer " over the divided state of the nation ; Breckinridge affirmed that Buchanan should make the proclamation . 
 As vice president , Breckinridge was tasked with presiding over the debates of the Senate . In an early address to that body , he promised , " It shall be my constant aim , gentlemen of the Senate , to exhibit at all times , to every member of this body , the courtesy and impartiality which are due to the representatives of equal States . " Historian Lowell H. Harrison wrote that , while Breckinridge fulfilled his promise to the satisfaction of most , acting as moderator limited his participation in debate . Five tie @-@ breaking votes provided a means of expressing his views . Economic motivations explained two — forcing an immediate vote on a <unk> tariff and limiting military pensions to $ 50 per month ( $ 1367 @.@ 5 in present @-@ day currency ) . A third cleared the floor for a vote on Douglas 's motion to admit Oregon to the Union , and a fourth defeated Johnson 's Homestead Bill . The final vote effected a wording change in a resolution forbidding constitutional amendments that empowered Congress to interfere with property rights . The Senate 's move from the Old Senate Chamber to a more spacious one on January 4 , 1859 , provided another opportunity . Afforded the chance to make the last address in the old chamber , Breckinridge encouraged compromise and unity among the states to resolve sectional conflicts . 
 Despite irregularities in the approval of the Lecompton Constitution by Kansas voters , Breckinridge agreed with Buchanan that it was legitimate , but he kept his position secret , and some believed he agreed with his friend , Stephen Douglas , that Lecompton was invalid . Breckinridge 's absence from the Senate during debate on admitting Kansas to the Union under Lecompton seemed to confirm this , but his leave — to take his wife from Baton Rouge , Louisiana , where she was recovering from an illness , to Washington , D.C. — had been planned for months . The death of his grandmother , Polly Breckinridge , prompted him to leave earlier than planned . During his absence , both houses of Congress voted to re @-@ submit the Lecompton Constitution to Kansas voters for approval . On <unk> , it was overwhelmingly rejected . 
 By January 1859 , friends knew Breckinridge desired the U.S. Senate seat of John J. Crittenden , whose term expired on March 3 , 1861 . The General Assembly would elect Crittenden 's successor in December 1859 , so Breckinridge 's election would not affect any presidential aspirations he might harbor . Democrats chose Breckinridge 's friend Beriah Magoffin over Linn Boyd as their gubernatorial nominee , bolstering Breckinridge 's chances for the senatorship , the presidency , or both . Boyd was expected to be Breckinridge 's chief opponent for the Senate , but he withdrew on November 28 , citing ill health , and died three weeks later . The Democratic majority in the General Assembly elected Breckinridge to succeed Crittenden by a vote of 81 to 53 over Joshua Fry Bell , who Magoffin had defeated for the governorship in August . 
 After Minnesota 's admission to the Union in May 1858 , opponents accused Breckinridge of rigging a random draw so that his friend , Henry Rice , would get the longer of the state 's two Senate terms . Senate Secretary Asbury Dickins blunted the charges , averring that he alone handled the instruments used in the drawing . Republican Senator Solomon Foot closed a special session of the Thirty @-@ sixth Congress in March 1859 by offering a resolution praising Breckinridge for his impartiality ; after the session , the Republican @-@ leaning New York Times noted that while the star of the Buchanan administration " falls lower every hour in prestige and political consequence , the star of the Vice President rises higher " . 
 = = Presidential election of 1860 = = 
 Breckinridge 's lukewarm support for Douglas in his 1858 senatorial re @-@ election bid against Abraham Lincoln convinced Douglas that Breckinridge would seek the Democratic presidential nomination , but in a January 1860 letter to his uncle , Breckinridge averred he was " firmly resolved not to " . Douglas 's political enemies supported Breckinridge , and Buchanan reluctantly dispensed patronage to Breckinridge allies , further alienating Douglas . After Breckinridge left open the possibility of supporting a federal slave code in 1859 , Douglas wrote to Robert Toombs that he would support his enemy and fellow Georgian Alexander H. Stephens for the nomination over Breckinridge , although he would vote for Breckinridge over any Republican in the general election . 
 = = = Nomination = = = 
 Breckinridge asked James Clay to protect his interests at the 1860 Democratic National Convention in Charleston , South Carolina . Clay , Lazarus Powell , William Preston , Henry Cornelius Burnett , and James B. Beck desired to nominate Breckinridge for president , but in a compromise with Kentucky 's Douglas backers , the delegation went to Charleston committed to former Treasury Secretary James Guthrie of Louisville . Fifty Southern Democrats , upset at the convention 's refusal to include slavery protection in the party 's platform , walked out of the convention ; the remaining delegates decided that nominations required a two @-@ thirds majority of the original 303 delegates . For 35 ballots , Douglas ran well ahead of Guthrie but short of the needed majority . Arkansas 's lone remaining delegate nominated Breckinridge , but Beck asked that the nomination be withdrawn because Breckinridge refused to compete with Guthrie . Twenty @-@ one more ballots were cast , but the convention remained deadlocked . On May 3 , the convention adjourned until June 18 in Baltimore , Maryland . 
 Breckinridge 's communication with his supporters between the meetings indicated greater willingness to become a candidate , but he instructed Clay to nominate him only if his support exceeded Guthrie 's . Many believed that Buchanan supported Breckinridge , but Breckinridge wrote to Beck that " The President is not for me except as a last necessity , that is to say not until his help will not be worth a damn . " After a majority of the delegates , most of them Douglas supporters , voted to replace Alabama and Louisiana 's walk @-@ out delegates with new , pro @-@ Douglas men in Baltimore , Virginia 's delegation led another walk @-@ out of Southern Democrats and Buchanan @-@ controlled delegates from the northeast and Pacific coast ; 105 delegates , including 10 of Kentucky 's 24 , left , and the remainder nominated Douglas . The walk @-@ outs held a rival nominating convention , styled the National Democratic Convention , at the Maryland Institute in Baltimore . At that convention on June 23 , Massachusetts ' George B. Loring nominated Breckinridge for president , and he received 81 of the 105 votes cast , the remainder going to Daniel S. Dickinson of New York . Oregon 's Joseph Lane was nominated for vice @-@ president . 
 Breckinridge told Beck he would not accept the nomination because it would split the Democrats and ensure the election of Republican Abraham Lincoln . On June 25 , Mississippi Senator Jefferson Davis proposed that Breckinridge should accept the nomination ; his strength in the South would convince Douglas that his own candidacy was futile . Breckinridge , Douglas , and Constitutional Unionist John Bell would withdraw , and Democrats could nominate a compromise candidate . Breckinridge accepted the nomination , but maintained that he had not sought it and that he had been nominated " against my expressed wishes " . Davis 's compromise plan failed when Douglas refused to withdraw , believing his supporters would vote for Lincoln rather than a compromise candidate . 
 = = = Election = = = 
 The election effectively pitted Lincoln against Douglas in the North and Breckinridge against Bell in the South . Far from expectant of victory , Breckinridge told Davis 's wife , Varina , " I trust I have the courage to lead a forlorn hope . " Caleb Cushing oversaw the publication of several Breckinridge campaign documents , including a campaign biography and copies of his speeches on the occasion of the Senate 's move to a new chamber and his election to the Senate . After making a few short speeches during stops between Washington , D.C. and Lexington , Breckinridge stated that , consistent with contemporary custom , he would make no more speeches until after the election , but the results of an August 1860 special election to replace the deceased clerk of the Kentucky Court of Appeals convinced him that his candidacy could be faltering . He had expressed confidence that the Democratic candidate for the clerkship would win , and " nothing short of a defeat by 6 @,@ 000 or 8 @,@ 000 would alarm me for November " . Constitutional Unionist Leslie Combs won by 23 @,@ 000 votes , prompting Breckinridge to make a full @-@ length campaign speech in Lexington on September 5 , 1860 . 
 Breckinridge 's three @-@ hour speech was primarily defensive ; his moderate tone was designed to win votes in the north but risked losing Southern support to Bell . He denied charges that he had supported Zachary Taylor over Lewis Cass in 1848 , that he had sided with abolitionists in 1849 , and that he had sought John Brown 's pardon for the Harpers Ferry raid . Reminding the audience that Douglas wanted the Supreme Court to decide the issue of slavery in the territories , he pointed out that Douglas then denounced the Dred Scott ruling and laid out a means for territorial legislatures to circumvent it . Breckinridge supported the legitimacy of secession but insisted it was not the solution to the country 's sectional disagreements . In answer to Douglas 's charge that there was not " a <unk> in America who is not a Breckinridge man " , he challenged the assembled crowd " to point out an act , to disclose an utterance , to reveal a thought of mine hostile to the constitution and union of the States " . He warned that Lincoln 's insistence on emancipation made him the real <unk> . 
 Breckinridge finished third in the popular vote with 849 @,@ 781 votes to Lincoln 's 1 @,@ 866 @,@ 452 , Douglas 's 1 @,@ 379 @,@ 957 , and Bell 's 588 @,@ 879 . He carried 12 of the 15 Southern states and the border states of Maryland , Delaware and North Carolina but lost his home state to Bell . His greatest support in the Deep South came from areas that opposed secession . Davis pointed out that only Breckinridge garnered nearly equal support from the Deep South , the border states , and the free states of the North . His 72 electoral votes bested Bell 's 59 and Douglas 's 12 , but Lincoln received 180 , enough to win the election . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Three weeks after the election , Breckinridge returned to Washington , D.C. , to preside over the Senate 's lame duck session . Lazarus Powell , now a senator , proposed a resolution creating a committee of thirteen members to respond to the portion of Buchanan 's address regarding the disturbed condition of the country . Breckinridge appointed the members of the committee which , in Heck 's opinion , formed " an able committee , representing every major faction " . John J. Crittenden proposed a compromise by which slavery would be forbidden in territories north of parallel 36 ° 30 ′ north — the demarcation line used in the Missouri Compromise — and permitted south of it , but the committee 's five Republicans rejected the proposal . On December 31 , the committee reported that it could come to no agreement . Writing to Magoffin on January 6 , Breckinridge complained that the Republicans were " rejecting everything , proposing nothing " and " pursuing a policy which ... threatens to plunge the country into ... civil war " . 
 One of Breckinridge 's final acts as vice @-@ president was announcing the vote of the Electoral College to a joint session of Congress on February 13 , 1861 . Rumors abounded that he would tamper with the vote to prevent Lincoln 's election . Knowing that some legislators planned to attend the session armed , Breckinridge asked Winfield Scott to post guards in and around the chambers . One legislator raised a point of order , requesting that the guards be ejected , but Breckinridge refused to sustain it ; the electoral vote proceeded , and Breckinridge announced Lincoln 's election as president . After Lincoln 's arrival in Washington , D.C. , on February 24 , Breckinridge visited him at the Willard Hotel . After making a valedictory address on March 4 , he swore in Hannibal Hamlin as his successor as vice president ; Hamlin then swore in Breckinridge and the other incoming senators . 
 = = U.S. Senate = = 
 Because Republicans controlled neither house of Congress , nor the Supreme Court , Breckinridge did not believe Lincoln 's election was a mandate for secession . Ignoring James Murray Mason 's contention that no Southerner should serve in Lincoln 's cabinet , Breckinridge supported the appointment of Virginian Montgomery Blair as Postmaster General . He also voted against a resolution to remove the names of the senators from seceded states from the Senate roll . 
 Working for a compromise that might yet save the Union , Breckinridge opposed a proposal by Ohio 's Clement Vallandigham that the border states unite to form a " middle confederacy " that would place a buffer between the U.S. and the seceded states , nor did Breckinridge desire to see Kentucky as the southernmost state in a northern confederacy ; its position south of the Ohio River left it too vulnerable to the southern confederacy should war occur . Urging that federal troops be withdrawn from the seceded states , he insisted " their presence can accomplish no good , but will certainly produce incalculable mischief " . He warned that , unless Republicans made some concessions , Kentucky and the other border states would also secede . 
 When the legislative session ended on March 28 , Breckinridge returned to Kentucky and addressed the state legislature on April 2 , 1861 . He urged the General Assembly to push for federal adoption of the Crittenden Compromise and advocated calling a border states convention which would draft a compromise proposal and submit it to the Northern and Southern states for adoption . Asserting that the states were coequal and free to choose their own course , he maintained that , if the border states convention failed , Kentucky should call a sovereignty convention and join the Confederacy as a last resort . 
 The Battle of Fort Sumter , which began the Civil War , occurred days later , before the border states convention could be held . Magoffin called a special legislative session on May 6 , and the legislature authorized creation of a six @-@ man commission to decide the state 's course in the war . Breckinridge , Magoffin , and Richard Hawes were the states ' rights delegates to the conference , while Crittenden , Archibald Dixon , and Samuel S. Nicholas represented the Unionist position . The delegates were only able to agree on a policy of armed neutrality , which Breckinridge believed impractical and ultimately untenable , but preferable to more drastic actions . In special elections held June 20 , 1861 , Unionists won 9 of Kentucky 's 10 House seats , and in the August 5 state elections , Unionists gained majorities in both houses of the state legislature . 
 When the Senate convened for a special session on July 4 , 1861 , Breckinridge stood almost alone in opposition to the war . Labeled a traitor , he was removed from the Committee on Military Affairs . He demanded to know what authority Lincoln had to blockade Southern ports or suspend the writ of habeas corpus . He reminded his fellow senators that Congress had not approved a declaration of war and maintained that Lincoln 's enlistment of men and expenditure of funds for the war effort were unconstitutional . If the Union could be persuaded not to attack the Confederacy , he predicted that " all those sentiments of common interest and feeling ... might lead to a political reunion founded upon consent " . On August 1 , he declared that if Kentucky supported Lincoln 's prosecution of the war , " she will be represented by some other man on the floor of this Senate . " Asked by Oregon 's Edward Dickinson Baker how he would handle the secession crisis , he responded , " I would prefer to see these States all reunited upon true constitutional principles to any other object that could be offered me in life ... But I infinitely prefer to see a peaceful separation of these States , than to see endless , aimless , devastating war , at the end of which I see the grave of public liberty and of personal freedom . " 
 In early September , Confederate and Union forces entered Kentucky , ending her neutrality . On September 18 , Unionists shut down the pro @-@ Southern Louisville Courier newspaper and arrested former governor Charles S. Morehead , who was suspected of having Confederate sympathies . Learning that Colonel Thomas E. Bramlette was under orders to arrest him , Breckinridge fled to Prestonsburg , Kentucky , where he was joined by Confederate sympathizers George W. Johnson , George Baird Hodge , William E. Simms , and William Preston . The group continued to Abingdon , Virginia , where they took a train to Confederate @-@ held Bowling Green , Kentucky . 
 On October 2 , 1861 , the Kentucky General Assembly passed a resolution declaring that neither of the state 's U.S. Senators — Breckinridge and Powell — represented the will of the state 's citizens and requesting that both resign . Governor Magoffin refused to endorse the resolution , preventing its enforcement . Writing from Bowling Green on October 8 , Breckinridge declared , " I exchange with proud satisfaction a term of six years in the Senate of the United States for the musket of a soldier . " Later that month , he was part of a convention in Confederate @-@ controlled Russellville , Kentucky , that denounced the Unionist legislature as not representing the will of most Kentuckians and called for a sovereignty convention to be held in that city on November 18 . Breckinridge , George W. Johnson , and Humphrey Marshall were named to the planning committee , but Breckinridge did not attend the convention , which created a provisional Confederate government for Kentucky . On November 6 , Breckinridge was indicted for treason in a federal court in Frankfort . The Senate passed a resolution formally expelling him on December 2 , 1861 ; Powell was the only member to vote against the resolution , claiming that Breckinridge 's statement of October 8 amounted to a resignation , rendering the resolution unnecessary . 
 = = Confederate Secretary of War = = 
 Breckinridge served in the Confederate Army from November 2 , 1861 , until early 1865 . In mid @-@ January 1865 , Confederate President Jefferson Davis summoned Breckinridge to the Confederate capital at Richmond , Virginia , and rumors followed that Davis would appoint Breckinridge Confederate States Secretary of War , replacing James A. Seddon . Breckinridge arrived in Richmond on January 17 , and some time in the next two weeks , Davis offered him the appointment . Breckinridge made his acceptance conditional upon the removal of Lucius B. Northrop from his office as Confederate Commissary General . Most Confederate officers regarded Northrop as inept , but Davis had long defended him . Davis relented on January 30 , allowing Seddon to replace Northrop with Breckinridge 's friend , Eli Metcalfe Bruce , on an interim basis ; Breckinridge accepted Davis 's appointment the next day . 
 Some Confederate congressmen were believed to oppose Breckinridge because he had waited so long to join the Confederacy , but his nomination was confirmed unanimously on February 6 , 1865 . At 44 years old , he was the youngest person to serve in the Confederate president 's cabinet . Klotter called Breckinridge " perhaps the most effective of those who held that office " , but Harrison wrote that " no one could have done much with the War Department at that late date " . While his predecessors had largely served Davis 's interests , Breckinridge functioned independently , assigning officers , recommending promotions , and consulting on strategy with Confederate generals . 
 Breckinridge 's first act as secretary was to meet with assistant secretary John Archibald Campbell , who had opposed Breckinridge 's nomination , believing he would focus on a select few of the department 's bureaus and ignore the rest . During their conference , Campbell expressed his desire to retain his post , and Breckinridge agreed , delegating many of the day @-@ to @-@ day details of the department 's operation to him . Breckinridge recommended that Davis appoint Isaac M. St. John , head of the Confederate Nitre and Mining Bureau , as permanent commissary general . Davis made the appointment on February 15 , and the flow of supplies to Confederate armies improved under St. John . With Confederate ranks plagued by desertion , Breckinridge instituted a draft ; when this proved ineffective , he negotiated the resumption of prisoner exchanges with the Union in order to replenish the Confederates ' depleted manpower . 
 By late February , Breckinridge had concluded that the Confederate cause was hopeless . He opposed the use of guerilla warfare by Confederate forces and urged a national surrender . Meeting with Confederate senators from Virginia , Kentucky , Missouri , and Texas , he urged , " This has been a magnificent epic . In God 's name let it not terminate in a farce . " In April , with Union forces approaching Richmond , Breckinridge organized the escape of the other cabinet officials to Danville , Virginia . Afterward , he ordered the burning of the bridges over the James River and ensured the destruction of buildings and supplies that might aid the enemy . During the surrender of the city , he helped preserve the Confederate government and military records housed there . 
 After a brief rendezvous with Robert E. Lee 's retreating forces at Farmville , Virginia , Breckinridge moved south to Greensboro , North Carolina , where he , Naval Secretary Stephen Mallory , and Postmaster General John Henninger Reagan joined Generals Joseph E. Johnston and P. G. T. Beauregard to urge surrender . Davis and Secretary of State Judah P. Benjamin initially resisted , but eventually asked Major General William T. Sherman to parley . Johnston and Breckinridge negotiated terms with Sherman , but President Andrew Johnson ( who had assumed the presidency on Lincoln 's assassination on April 15 ) rejected them as too generous . On Davis ' orders , Breckinridge told Johnston to meet Richard Taylor in Alabama , but Johnston , believing his men would refuse to fight any longer , surrendered to Sherman on similar terms to those offered to Lee at Appomattox . 
 After the failed negotiations , Confederate Attorney General George Davis and Confederate Treasury Secretary George <unk> resigned . The rest of the Confederate cabinet — escorted by over 2 @,@ 000 cavalrymen under Basil W. Duke and Breckinridge 's nephew William Campbell Preston Breckinridge — traveled southwest to meet Taylor at Mobile . Believing that the Confederate cause was not yet lost , Davis convened a council of war on May 2 in Abbeville , South Carolina , but the cavalry commanders told him that the only cause for which their men would fight was to aid Davis 's escape from the country . Informed that gold and silver coins and bullion from the Confederate treasury were at the train depot in Abbeville , Breckinridge ordered Duke to load it onto wagons and guard it as they continued southward . En route to Washington , Georgia , some members of the cabinet 's escort threatened to take their back salaries by force . Breckinridge had intended to wait until their arrival to make the payments , but to avoid mutiny , he dispersed some of the funds immediately . Two brigades deserted immediately after being paid ; the rest continued to Washington , where the remaining funds were deposited in a local bank . 
 Discharging most of the remaining escort , Breckinridge left Washington with a small party on May 5 , hoping to distract federal forces from the fleeing Confederate president . Between Washington and Woodstock , the party was overtaken by Union forces under Lieutenant Colonel Andrew K. Campbell ; Breckinridge ordered his nephew to surrender while he , his sons Cabell and Clifton , James B. Clay , Jr . , and a few others fled into the nearby woods . At <unk> , he sent Clay and Clifton home , announcing that he and the rest of his companions would proceed to Madison , Florida . On May 11 , they reached Milltown , Georgia , where Breckinridge expected to rendezvous with Davis , but on May 14 , he learned of Davis 's capture days earlier . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Besides marking the end of the Confederacy and the war , Davis 's capture left Breckinridge as the highest @-@ ranking former Confederate still at large . Fearing arrest , he fled to Cuba , Great Britain , and Canada , where he lived in exile . Andrew Johnson issued a proclamation of amnesty for all former Confederates in December 1868 , and Breckinridge returned home the following March . Friends and government officials , including President Ulysses S. Grant , urged him to return to politics , but he declared himself " an extinct volcano " and never sought public office again . He died of complications from war @-@ related injuries on May 17 , 1875 . 
 = Mmm Papi = 
 " Mmm Papi " is a song by American singer @-@ songwriter Britney Spears . The song was written by Spears and Nicole Morier , while additional writing and song production were done by Canadian band Let 's Go to War , whose members are Henry Walter , Adrien Gough and Peter @-@ John Kerr , for Spears ' sixth studio album , Circus ( 2008 ) . " Mmm Papi " is noted for having a Latin pop influence , similar to Madonna 's " La Isla Bonita " ( 1987 ) . The lyrics of the song tell about a woman who has an attraction to a man , longing for him to come and take her away . 
 " Mmm Papi " received generally unfavorable reviews from contemporary critics . Many said the song represents Spears ' trouble with men , and speculated that its lyrics deal to either her father James Spears or paparazzi Adnan Ghalib . The speculations were later denied by co @-@ writer Morier . The song was also compared to Rosemary Clooney 's " Come On @-@ a My House " ( 1951 ) . Despite not being released as a single , " Mmm Papi " managed to peak at number ninety @-@ four on Billboard Pop 100 , due to moderate airplay on mainstream top 40 radio stations , singles sales , and digital downloads . 
 = = Background = = 
 It was confirmed in 2008 that Spears was in the process of recording her sixth studio album . Spears manager Larry Rudolph confirmed the singer would spend " her summer in the recording studio " to work on it . Despite no official album confirmation at the time , Rudolph revealed they were happy with her progress and that she had been working with a range of producers , such as Sean Garrett , Guy Sigsworth , Danja and Bloodshy & Avant . " Mmm Papi " was written by Spears and Nicole Morier during Summer and Spring of 2008 . Among the songs they worked on were " Mmm Papi " , " Rock Me In " and " Whiplash " . Both wanted to do something that Spears had not done before . " Mmm Papi " and " Rock Me In " were included in Spears ' sixth studio album , Circus ( 2008 ) ; however , " Whiplash " failed to make the cut . Morier explained , " There ’ s a couple songs we started that were great ideas but just incomplete . Maybe we ’ ll hear them with fresh ears someday and put them out , but I usually just like to start anew . " 
 Additional writing and song production were done by Canadian band Let 's Go to War , whose members are Henry Walter , Adrien Gough and Peter @-@ John Kerr . In an interview with The Canadian Press , Walter revealed they first sent several demos to Jive Records for Circus . After selecting it , Spears ' management required several changes to the song , making " Mmm Papi " " substantially different from what was submitted . " Walter revealed they had no contact with the singer for the song production , and considered " Mmm Papi " as " something different for Britney " and " a fun track and is not trying to be anything it 's not . " Spears recorded her vocals for the song in 2008 at Train Tracks Studios and Conway Recording Studios in Los Angeles , California , with Walter and Eric Eylands . Guitar was provided by Chris Worthy , and audio mixing was done by Tony Maserati . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 " Mmm Papi " is a latin pop song that lasts for three minutes and twenty @-@ two seconds . The song has dancehall elements and a 1960s go @-@ go vibe , and incorporates into its melody handclaps and a rock guitar . Anna Dimond of TV Guide perceived influences of Madonna 's " La Isla Bonita " ( 1987 ) in the song , and called it an " ode to the tropical life ( and perhaps its masculine fruits ) " . It has been suggested that its lyrics deal with either her father Jamie Spears or paparazzi Adnan Ghalib . However , this was denied by Morier , who said " the song is definitely not about Adnan and in the whole time I worked with [ Spears ] last spring and summer I never once saw that guy . " Morier described " Mmm Papi " as a fun upbeat song , while saying the title " came out of [ the line ] Mmm Papa Luv U. " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Mmm Papi " received generally unfavorable reviews from contemporary critics . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian said the track was fun , but panned for appearing on Circus to " revisit the Lolita persona of ... Baby One More Time " . Chris Willman of Entertainment Weekly said the song " giddily sets [ Spears ] littlest @-@ girl voice against a guitar right out of 1960s go @-@ go rock . " John Murphy of musicOMH said that " any indication of her chat @-@ up lines [ in " Mmm Papi " ] may explain her recent trouble with men , " while Caryn Ganz of Rolling Stone said the singer " shows she has psychodrama to spare on [ the song ] , " and considered it " a go @-@ go romp with daddy issues . " Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine commented , " the jaw @-@ dropping " Mmm Papi " is the nexus of cock @-@ <unk> . " Chris Richards of The Washington Post said the song " tries to replicate the strutting come @-@ ons of " Toxic " , but quickly goes rancid as Spears indulges in some of the most cloying singing of her career , " while Ann Powers of Los Angeles Times compared its style to Rosemary Clooney 's " Come On @-@ a My House " ( 1951 ) . Powers also said Spears have " a fairly horrific pan @-@ Latin accent " in the song . 
 Jim DeRogatis of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times criticized " Mmm Papi " as the " most disturbing [ song ] of [ Circus ] . " Cameron Adams of the Herald Sun called " Mmm Papi " " an attempt at Gwen Stefani 's new wave sound that doesn 't work . " Ben Rayner of the Toronto Star called it " awful , " along with " My Baby " , and a " baby @-@ talk horror . " Poppy Cosyns of The Sun criticized the song 's lyrics , deeming it as " bizarre lyrics which reference [ Spears ] love / hate father @-@ daughter turmoil . " Pete Paphides of The Times said " Mmm Papi " " couldn 't be less sexy if Christine Hamilton were singing them , " while a review by The Independent said the song portrays " the former Mouseketeer as some kind of robotic nymphomaniac doll – groaning and grunting " let 's make out " with the chilly distance of a future @-@ sex cyborg unit . " Darryl Sterdan of Jam ! gave " Mmm Papi " a positive review , saying , " between the hip @-@ swivelling groove , the twangy guitar , the surfy organ lines and the silly vocals , this might be the most enjoyable cut on the disc . Pure fun . " Despite not being released as a single , " Mmm Papi " did manage to peak at number ninety @-@ four on Billboard Pop 100 , on the week of December 10 , 2008 , due to moderate airplay on mainstream top 40 radio stations , singles sales , and digital downloads . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for " Mmm Papi " are adapted from Circus liner notes . 
 Technical 
 Recorded at Train Tracks Studios in Los Angeles , California . 
 Additional recording at Conway Recording Studios in Los Angeles , California . 
 Mixed for Two Chord Music , Inc. at Canaan Road Studios and Looking Glass Studios in New York City , New York . 
 Personnel 
 = Trondheim Airport , Værnes = 
 Trondheim Airport , Værnes ( Norwegian : Trondheim lufthavn , Værnes ; IATA : TRD , ICAO : <unk> ) is an international airport serving Trondheim , a city and municipality in Sør @-@ Trøndelag county , Norway . The airport is located in Værnes , a village in the municipality of Stjørdal in Nord @-@ Trøndelag county , 10 nautical miles ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) east of Trondheim . Operated by the state @-@ owned Avinor , it shares facilities with Værnes Air Station of the Royal Norwegian Air Force . In 2014 , the airport had 4 @,@ 416 @,@ 681 passengers and 60 @,@ 934 air movements , making it the fourth @-@ busiest in the country . The airport has two terminals ; A dates from 1994 and is used for domestic traffic , while B is the renovated former main terminal from 1982 , and is used for international traffic . The airport features a main east – west 2 @,@ 999 @-@ metre ( 9 @,@ 839 ft ) runway , a disused northwest – southeast 1 @,@ 472 @-@ metre ( 4 @,@ 829 ft ) runway , an integrated railway station and an airport hotel . 
 The main airlines at the airport are Scandinavian Airlines ( SAS ) , Norwegian Air Shuttle and Widerøe , for all of which Værnes is a focus city . The main route is the service to Oslo , operated by both SAS and Norwegian , which is the tenth @-@ busiest route in Europe . Both airlines operate services also using Boeing 737 aircraft to Bergen , Bodø and Tromsø ; SAS has some additional domestic services while Norwegian has a number of low @-@ frequency international services . Widerøe operates regional Dash 8 aircraft to six airports in Helgeland , in addition to Sandefjord . Krohn Air provides services to Molde . Daily international services to Copenhagen is provided by SAS and to Amsterdam is provided by KLM . The airport also serves charter services , mainly to the Mediterranean . In total , it connects to 17 domestic and 21 international destinations , as well as 18 charter destinations . 
 Værnes was taken into use by the Royal Norwegian Army in 1887 . The first flight was made in 1914 , and aerodrome facilities were gradually installed . The first main installations , including three concrete runways , were built during World War II by Luftwaffe . After the war , the Air Force Pilot School moved to Værnes , although in 1954 most of the other air force activities for Central Norway were moved to Ørland Main Air Station . Civilian aviation started in 1951 , when half a barracks was taken into use as a terminal , with the whole building being utilized from 1958 . Jet aircraft started serving Værnes from 1963 , and the second terminal opened in 1965 . The third ( the current international Terminal B ) was opened in 1982 , and the fourth , Terminal A , was opened in 1994 , along with the train station . From 1956 to 2004 , Braathens was one of the largest airlines at the airport . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 Trondheim Airport is a joint military and civilian airport located in the municipality of Stjørdal in Nord @-@ Trøndelag , with the northern part of the airport bordering the town of Stjørdalshalsen . To the west , the airport borders the Trondheimsfjord , and to the south the Stjørdal River . Combining the functions as an international , domestic and regional airport , it is located 10 nautical miles ( 19 km ; 12 mi ) east of Trondheim . Most of the airport area is owned by the Norwegian Ministry of Defence , although the civilian facilities and the air traffic control are owned and operated by Avinor , a subsidiary of the Norwegian Ministry of Transport and Communications . 
 = = = Terminals = = = 
 The civilian sector consists of two terminals — A and B — which combined are 20 @,@ 000 square metres ( 220 @,@ 000 sq ft ) , of which 13 @,@ 500 square metres ( 145 @,@ 000 sq ft ) is passenger facilities . Terminal A is used for domestic traffic , while Terminal B is used for international services . Both terminals have their own check @-@ in facilities , but the check @-@ in for scheduled international services is done from Terminal A. It is possible to walk between the two terminals both within and outside the secure area . The terminal contains an array of stores and dining places ; these include a book store , convenience stores ( including Narvesen and 7 @-@ Eleven ) , clothing , crafts and cosmetics ; diners , restaurants and pubs ; and a 560 square metres ( 6 @,@ 000 sq ft ) duty @-@ free store . The airport also has three automatic teller machines and a Radisson Blu hotel with 180 rooms and 11 conference rooms . Rica operates another hotel , the 400 @-@ room Rica Hell Hotel , within walking distance of the airport . The airport administration is located in Terminal B , while the administration for airlines and handling agents is located in annexes of Terminal A. 
 The terminal has stands for 18 aircraft , of which seven at Terminal A have jetbridges . Two stands ( one at each terminal ) is size code D ( large enough for an Airbus A330 or a Boeing 757 ) , while 11 are for size category C ( large enough for an Airbus A320 or Boeing 737 ) . Fourteen of the stands are large enough for commercial traffic . Domestic jets normally use the seven <unk> stands ( gates 31 – 37 ) , while the two non @-@ bridged gates at Terminal A ( gates 38 – 39 ) are used for domestic regional aircraft . International flights all use the five non @-@ bridged gates at Terminal B. The Air Force has six stands for military freight planes up to the size of a Lockheed C @-@ 5 Galaxy ( code F ) , although one is permanently used for deicing . 
 = = = Cargo , general aviation and VIP = = = 
 Southeast of Terminal B is a collection of hangars and facilities belonging to various airlines . The largest is a 2 @,@ 750 square metres ( 29 @,@ 600 sq ft ) hangar belonging to Scandinavian Airlines , dating from 1979 , and a 1 @,@ 440 square metres ( 15 @,@ 500 sq ft ) hangar from 1992 which is used by SAS Cargo . The airline also has two smaller buildings , at 200 and 300 square metres ( 2 @,@ 200 and 3 @,@ 200 sq ft ) . This area contains the main gate , which is also used for VIP passengers . There are six additional hangars , used by Helitrans ( 780 and 1 @,@ 650 square metres or 8 @,@ 400 and 17 @,@ 800 square feet ) , built in 1984 and 1991 , a 500 @-@ square @-@ metre ( 5 @,@ 400 sq ft ) hangar belonging to <unk> , a 300 @-@ square @-@ metre ( 3 @,@ 200 sq ft ) hangar belonging to Hilmar Tollefsen and two smaller hangars , one of which belongs to Værnes flyklubb . Værnes handles the largest amount of general aviation in Central Norway , including executive jets . 
 = = = Runway and air control = = = 
 The main runway is 2 @,@ 999 metres ( 9 @,@ 839 ft ) long , and runs east – west at 09 / 27 . It is 45 metres ( 148 ft ) wide , plus shoulders of 7 @.@ 5 metres ( 25 ft ) on each side . The runway is equipped with instrument landing system category 1 . The main radar , a combined primary and secondary , is placed at <unk> , 9 nautical miles ( 17 km ; 10 mi ) south of the airport . Other radars are located at <unk> , <unk> and Gråkallen . The taxiway runs the parallel the full length of the main runway . It is 23 metres ( 75 ft ) wide , with 7 @.@ 5 metres ( 25 ft ) wide shoulders on each side . The center @-@ distance between the runway and taxiway is 184 metres ( 604 ft ) , allowing simultaneous use by code E aircraft ( such as Boeing 747 ) . Værnes has a theoretical capacity of 40 air movements per hour , but this is reduced during bad weather , so the airport has a registered capacity of 25 . 
 The airport also has a diagonal runway , which runs 14 / 32 , roughly northwest – southeast . It is 1 @,@ 035 metres ( 3 @,@ 396 ft ) long , plus end section of 293 metres ( 961 ft ) on Runway 14 and 126 metres ( 413 ft ) on Runway 32 . The runway is closed for traffic , in part because of bad asphalt quality . The current control tower is 55 metres ( 180 ft ) tall and dates from 2005 . 
 = = = Military = = = 
 Værnes Air Station is one of two air stations in Central Norway , the other being Ørland Main Air Station . There are no aircraft permanently stationed at Værnes , but the station serves the Home Guard , including its training center and the headquarters of the Trøndelag District ( HV @-@ 12 ) . Most of the military installations are located on the north side of the runway , although some are also located on the south side , to the east of the civilian terminal . Værnes also serves as a storage base for the United States Armed Forces as part of the Marine Corps <unk> Program Norway . The military owns the runways and taxiways , but these are operated by Avinor . Three to four hundred military aircraft are handled at the air station each year . The military installations contain places for up to six aircraft of the size of a C @-@ 5 Galaxy and barracks to house 1 @,@ 200 soldiers . The Ring Road connects the northern to the southern installations and passes the main runway on the east side . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Military establishment = = = 
 Værnes is first recorded in the 10th century as the seat for one of eight chieftains in Trøndelag . The first military activity in the area was as a base for leidang . After the Viking Age , the farm at Værnes was taken over by the king and became the seat of the <unk> . From 1671 , the farm was owned by a series of military officers and public servants . In 1887 , the farm was bought by the Royal Norwegian Army and converted to a camp . The first aircraft to use Værnes was a military Farman MF.7 Longhorn , which took off on 26 March 1914 . It was part of the plan to establish the Norwegian Army Air Service , for which Værnes was chosen as the initial station for Central Norway . Radio equipment was installed in 1919 and the first hangar was built in 1920 . By 1922 , the grass field serving as runway has become insufficient for newer planes , both in terms of length and level , but an extension was not performed until 1925 . In 1927 , parliament passed legislation to move the division to <unk> from 1930 , but this was later annulled . With the delivery of Fokker aircraft in 1930 , the runway was again upgraded and extended . 
 Værnes was surrendered to Luftwaffe on 9 April 1940 , during the German occupation of Norway . On 24 April 350 civilians started construction at Værnes , and within a few days 2 @,@ 000 people were hired . On 28 April , a new 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 600 ft ) wooden runway was completed . The expansion was part of the plans for Festung Norwegen and was used as a bomber base for attacks on Northern Norway . By May , there were 200 aircraft stationed at Værnes . During the war , particularly in April 1940 , the airport was subject to several bombings from the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) . In June , work was started to clear the forests near the airport , and graves from the Viking Age were found . Construction was halted for several weeks while German and Norwegian archaeologists conducted research . In July , work started on building concrete runways , and by 1942 all three runways were finished . The east – west was made 1 @,@ 620 metres ( 5 @,@ 310 ft ) long , the north – south was made 1 @,@ 300 metres ( 4 @,@ 300 ft ) while the northwest – southeast was made 1 @,@ 275 metres ( 4 @,@ 183 ft ) long . A number of taxiways were also constructed and a branch line of the railway was built to the hangars . By 1945 , Luftwaffe had built about 100 buildings at Værnes . The land expropriated was estimated at between 1 @.@ 6 and 3 @.@ 0 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 62 and 1 @.@ 16 sq mi ) . Luftwaffe had also finished the control tower that had been under construction since 1939 . 
 After the war ended , the airport was initial taken over by the Royal Air Force , but they soon withdrew leaving the Norwegian military in charge . Numerous squadrons , including 332 , 331 and 337 were stationed at Værnes in the post @-@ war years . In 1952 , the pilot school was moved to Værnes , but in 1954 Ørland Main Air Station became the main air force base in Central Norway , and the majority of the armed air forces ( with the exception of the school ) moved to Ørland . 
 = = = Previous airports = = = 
 Civilian aviation in Trøndelag started in 1937 , when Norwegian Air Lines ( DNL ) started seaplane services from <unk> and <unk> in Trondheim . These were terminated during World War II , but taken up again by the Royal Air Force and the Royal Norwegian Air Force during the summer of 1945 . They were terminated in November due to the weather and RAF 's withdrawal . The following year , DNL started services again , this time from Hommelvik . During winter , the route was not operated . The service was operated with a Short Sandringham flying boat to Oslo and Northern Norway , and a Junkers Ju @-@ 52 to Western Norway . The southbound and northbound <unk> and the Junkers all met at <unk> to exchange passengers . There was only room for two planes at the quay , so the third aircraft had to be anchored in the fjord . In 1947 , the airport had 3 @,@ 500 passengers . On 2 October 1948 , the <unk> <unk> Accident occurred , where a Sandringham aircraft crashed during landing , killing 19 people . In 1949 , a reserve airport was built at Skogn , and people were transported from Hommelvik to Skogn along the Nordland Line in case the reserve airport was used . DNL became part of Scandinavian Airlines System ( SAS ) in 1951 — the last year it used Hommelvik . Vestlandske Luftfartsselskap continued to use Hommelvik for some more year . Braathens SAFE started their route from Oslo Airport , Fornebu via Hamar Airport , Stafsberg and Røros Airport on 18 August 1953 . However , they chose to operate their de Havilland Herons from Trondheim Airport , Lade , just a few kilometers outside of the city center , in days with clear weather . Braathens SAFE moved all services to Værnes in 1956 . 
 = = = Civilian establishment = = = 
 After World War II , there was only general aviation at Værnes , organized by two clubs , Værnes flyklubb and <unk> flyklubb . From 1 August 1946 to 31 July 1947 , there were 1 @,@ 221 take @-@ offs from Værnes , mostly during the summer . During parts of 1946 and 1947 , the airport was used as a pasture for sheep . The first scheduled service was introduced with a Douglas DC @-@ 3 operated to Oslo by DNL during the winter of <unk> – 48 . While there were initially many customers , the lack of sufficient deicing caused low regularity and fewer customers through the season . The route was not reopened the following year . 
 The air traffic control at Værnes was established in 1946 , after the air force had sent personnel to the United Kingdom for training . The Telecommunications Administration took over the responsibility for the radio installations , and the responsibility for the meteorological services became the responsibility of the Norwegian Meteorological Institute . Trondheim Air Traffic Control Center was also established to monitor all air space over Central Norway . In 1955 , a glass dome was built on top of the control tower , giving a much better view of the air field . 
 Prior to World War II , Heimdal had been proposed as a location for the primary airport for Trondheim . Construction had started with drainage and ground works , but this work was interrupted by the war . Because of the large investments made to Værnes by Luftwaffe , a commission was established in 1947 to look into if Værnes or Lade instead should be selected . The commission was unanimous in recommending Værnes , highlighting that the airport was of a sufficient size to handle all civilian and military needs in the foreseeable future , and emphasized the proximity to the railway and highway . However , the commission recommended that Heimdal and Lade be kept as possibilities for future expansion . When the issue was discussed in Parliament , several members of the Standing Committee on Transport and Communications focused on the long distance to Trondheim , but the low investment needs ( stipulated to NOK 1 @.@ 3 million for necessary navigation and air control investments ) convinced parliament , who passed legislation in favor of Værnes on 10 June 1952 . 
 In 1956 , NATO approved the plans for Værnes to be financed through its infrastructure investment plan , after rejecting proposals for Heimdal . The costs were estimated at NOK 27 @.@ 4 million and would allow the runway to be extended to support jet aircraft . Such an extension had already been done at Ørland Main Air Station , but NATO wanted to have two military air station of such dimensions in Central Norway . The east – west runway was to be extended to 2 @,@ 400 metres ( 7 @,@ 900 ft ) ; initial proposals had called for the extension to occur on the east side , but the Ministry of Defence instead wanted the expansion of the fjord @-@ side to reduce expropriation costs . This called for a complex civil engineering program , as the railway and highway would have to pass under the runway in tunnels and an artificial island would have to be built in the fjord and the mouth of the Stjørdal River be diverted . 
 SAS moved its seaplane services to Værnes in 1952 , and two @-@ year later started flying the route from Oslo Airport , Fornebu via Trondheim to Bodø Airport using Saab 90 Scandia aircraft . The first terminal was half a 100 @-@ square @-@ metre ( 1 @,@ 100 sq ft ) barracks located beside a military hangar . In 1956 , Braathens SAFE moved its services from Lade to Værnes , making the terminal too small for the needs . The whole barracks was taken into use in 1958 , doubling the area . Braathens SAFE initially served flights to Trondheim from Oslo Airport , Fornebu with stop @-@ overs at Hamar Airport , Stafsberg , and from 1957 at Røros Airport , using de Havilland Heron aircraft . Concession for the route from Bergen via the new Ålesund Airport , Vigra to Trondheim was granted to Braathens SAFE from 1958 . Braathens SAFE then also started using Fokker F @-@ 27 turboprops , at first on the Oslo @-@ route , but later also on the West Coast route . When they were taken fully into use , the service to Hamar was terminated . 
 In 1957 , parliament started a new process to consider Heimdal as the primary airport , in part because the airlines and the Civil Aviation Administration stated that they felt Værnes was insufficient . However , higher costs — due to bad ground conditions and existing infrastructure at Værnes , valuated at NOK 150 million — caused parliament to support Værnes . Construction of the new runway therefore commenced in January 1959 , with the work subcontracted to Selmer . First the artificial peninsula was built , then the delta of the Stjørdal River was moved , before a tunnel was built around the highway and railway . Finally , the runway could be built on top , and construction completed on 21 October 1961 . In 1963 , the airport had 115 @,@ 000 passengers , increasing to 195 @,@ 000 the following year . That year , SAS started using the Sud Aviation Caravelle jet aircraft on their route . 
 Parliament passed legislation for the construction of a new 2 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ metre ( 22 @,@ 000 sq ft ) terminal in 1964 , which opened on 5 December 1965 @.@ the following year , Widerøe started a seaplane route from Værnes to Namsos , Rørvik , Brønnøysund , Sandnessjøen , Mo i Rana and Bodø . To serve the seaplanes , a quay was established at Hell . On 1 July 1968 , four airports in Helgeland opened : Namsos Airport , Høknesøra , Brønnøysund Airport , Brønnøy , Sandnessjøen Airport , Stokka and Mo i Rana Airport , <unk> . These were served by Widerøe with the land planes de Havilland Canada DHC @-@ 6 Twin Otter . From 1 April 1967 , Braathens SAFE was permitted to extend their West Coast service north to Bodø and Tromsø . Starting in 1969 , Braathens introduced Boeing 737 @-@ 200 jet aircraft on the Oslo services and Fokker F @-@ 28 jet aircraft on the West Coast services . In 1975 , a third control tower was built , located right in front of ( the yet to be built ) Terminal A. 
 In 1976 , charter planes started operating to Trondheim , after a barracks was rebuilt to facilitate a border control . Several plans for a lager terminal were made , but these were delayed . In the late 1970s , the tarmac was expanded and a new taxiway built . Braathens SAFE opened a new 2 @,@ 750 square metres ( 29 @,@ 600 sq ft ) hangar in 1979 . The third terminal opened as an extension of the old one in May 1982 . It was 5 @,@ 500 square metres ( 59 @,@ 000 sq ft ) and the old terminal was converted to a cafeteria . Due to a heavy increase in traffic , the new terminal quickly became too small . During 1985 and 1986 , a major overhaul of the main runway was made ; it was dismantled and a new foundation and surface was laid . A number of new military buildings were constructed , along with six stands for large cargo aircraft and a new fuel system . In 1988 , smaller adjustments , including new washrooms and longer baggage belts , were installed at the terminal . From 1986 , Braathens SAFE retired its Fokker F @-@ 28 , and the West Coast route to Molde was subcontracted to Busy Bee , who started to serve Værnes with their Fokker F @-@ 27 , and later Fokker 50 , aircraft . In 1992 , SAS Cargo built a 1 @,@ 440 @-@ square @-@ metre ( 15 @,@ 500 sq ft ) facility . After Busy Bee 's bankruptcy , the regional services were taken over by Norwegian Air Shuttle from 22 January 1993 . 
 = = = Fourth terminal and deregulation = = = 
 The fourth and current domestic terminal was opened on 15 November 1994 . With 15 @,@ 000 square metres ( 160 @,@ 000 sq ft ) of floor space it had seven gates , of which five had jetbridges . The two remaining gates were fitted with jetbridges in July 2012 . Værnes became the first airport in the Nordic Countries with a train station in the terminal , when Trondheim Airport Station opened . In March 1996 , the old terminal was named Terminal B and all international flights were moved there . A new taxiway , which extended the full length of the runway , was opened in 1999 , after more artificial land has been created and a second tunnel built for the highway and railway . 
 Oslo Airport , Gardermoen opened on 8 October 1998 , replacing the congested Fornebu . For the first time , an airline could receive sufficient landing slots to challenge SAS and Braathens on domestic routes . The low @-@ cost carrier Color Air was established , and started flights from Oslo to Trondheim using Boeing 737 @-@ 300 aircraft . SAS and Braathens also saw the opportunity to increase the frequency on the route , and the three airlines between them introduced 39 daily flights . This made the route the fourth @-@ busiest in Europe in terms of the number of aircraft . During this period , there were 84 daily departures to all destinations from Værnes . Color Air filed for bankruptcy on 27 September 1999 , ending a price war which had cost the airlines NOK 3 billion . 
 By April 2000 , the number of services by the main airlines was reduced to less than the level before the opening of Gardermoen , with 75 daily departures . Braathens had 33 daily departures , SAS had 22 and Widerøe had 20 . Of Braathens ' services , 14 were to Oslo , 15 to cities on the West Coast ( of which four were operated by Norwegian Air Shuttle ) and four were to Bodø , Harstad / Narvik and Tromsø . SAS operated 15 daily flights to Oslo , while eight were operated to Bodø , Harstad / Narvik and Tromsø . One flight was to their main hub in Copenhagen . This was the last year that SAS used DC @-@ 9s to Trondheim , phasing in Boeing 737 Next Generation aircraft , supplemented by occasional MD @-@ 80s . Widerøe had 15 daily flights to <unk> in Helgeland , and five flights to Sandefjord . 
 In 2002 , SAS acquired Braathens , and the two companies coordinated their routes . All flights from Trondheim to Oslo @-@ Gardermoen were taken over by SAS , who increased to 23 departures per day in each direction . This included a 30 @-@ minute headway from 06 : 30 to 09 : 30 and from 15 : 30 to 19 : 00 . This made the route Trondheim – Oslo the busiest in the country . The routes northwards were taken over by Braathens , who increased to six daily trips to Bodø with connections northwards . The daily trip with Braathens to Harstad / Narvik was replaced by a two round trips with SAS Commuter . Braathens retained the routes to the West Coast , with two flights to Ålesund and seven to Bergen . In addition , Norwegian Air Shuttle continued with two flights to Molde . In 2004 , SAS and Braathens merged to form SAS Braathens . The airline changed its name back to Scandinavian Airlines in 2007 . 
 From 1 September 2002 , Norwegian Air Shuttle converted from a regional airline to a low @-@ cost carrier and started competing on the route to Oslo . From 5 May 2003 , Norwegian started a daily domestic service to Tromsø , from 17 April 2004 , they introduced two weekly services to Prague , Czech Republic , and from 26 June to Dubrovnik , Croatia . From 30 October , Norwegian introduced one weekly flight to Murcia , Spain , from 4 November , they introduced five weekly services to London Stansted Airport , United Kingdom . In 2005 , Terminal B received a major upgrade , increasing the passenger area with 1 @,@ 000 square metres ( 11 @,@ 000 sq ft ) . The airport was also rebuilt to 100 % security control . The terminal received a new border control for flights to countries outside the Schengen Area and a duty @-@ free store for both departing and arriving passengers . A new 55 @-@ metre ( 180 ft ) tall control tower was also built . 
 From 7 January 2006 , Norwegian started a seasonal winter service to Salzburg , Austria ; from 7 May 2006 , they introduced one weekly service to Nice , France ; On 1 April 2008 , they started two weekly round trips to Warsaw , Poland ; and from 1 June 2008 , Norwegian introduced one daily evening flight to Bodø and Tromsø . In 2009 , a new indoor parking lot opened , with a capacity of 1 @,@ 200 cars . It replaced a site with 225 parking places and cost NOK 125 million . The same year saw the opening of the Radisson Blu hotel , costing NOK 220 million , and a new fire station for NOK 80 million . From 31 October 2009 , Norwegian started a weekly service to Las Palmas , Spain . On 31 January 2010 , SAS operated its last service to Molde . To compensate , the Molde @-@ based Krohn Air was established to start flights between Værnes and Molde Airport , Årø on 3 February , using Dornier 328 aircraft operated by Sun Air of Scandinavia . 
 On 22 February 2010 , <unk> commenced two daily round trips to <unk> Östersund Airport and Stockholm @-@ Bromma Airport in Sweden . From 28 March 2010 , Norwegian moved its three weekly services to London from Stansted to London Gatwick Airport . From 10 June to 30 August 2010 , Icelandair will operate two weekly services to their hub Keflavík International Airport using Boeing 757 aircraft . 
 = = Future = = 
 In a master plan from 2006 , Avinor has identified several key development issues to increase the capacity of the airport . For Terminal A , the plans call to keep the existing structure , and gradually expand it westwards , eventually passing over the railway on a culvert . Along the area between the railway and the highway , a south pier is planned to be constructed , with the inside facing immediately towards the railway and the outside having aircraft stands . In the short term , this is planned with six stands for regional aircraft , with a single @-@ story building . The remaining stands currently used for regional aircraft will then be converted to international gates . While Avinor states that there is need for an expansion of Terminal B , no concrete solution has been found , in part because of the lack of space in the area , although this can partially be fixed by removing the general aviation from the area . 
 At both ends of the runway , the taxiway ends 150 metres ( 490 ft ) from the start of the runway , forcing aircraft which need the full length to backtrack . An extension of the taxiways would help with this problem . Both at Terminal A and B , there will be a need for double taxiways . This will result in insufficient space for general aviation at its current location , and this has been proposed moved eastwards past the military installations . Several airlines , in particular Helitrans , has indicated need for more space . Proposals have been made to establish a heliport to allow flight to oil platforms on the Norwegian continental shelf . The military has suggested to fill in a large section of the river delta at the west end of the runway , and move some of the cargo and helicopter operations there , but environmental concerns have been raised by among others Avinor . The cost of establishing access to the artificial land is also high . By 2050 , there may be need for a second , parallel runway to meet demand , and initial plans call for a 1 @,@ 199 metres ( 3 @,@ 934 ft ) runway which would be used by general aviation , regional airlines and helicopters . 
 Between 2009 and 2011 , Avinor is extending the runway with 150 metres ( 490 ft ) into the fjord . The masses used for this are coming from the construction of the nearby Gevingåsen Tunnel on the Nordland Line , which will help shorten the travel time of the airport rail link to Trondheim and increase frequency . Once finished , the line may be electrified . Plans have been launched to construct a high @-@ speed railway from Trondheim to Steinkjer , which would allow a high @-@ speed connection to Trondheim Central Station in 13 minutes . This may be part of a project to build a high @-@ speed , which could cannibalize ridership from the airport . Work has commenced on building the E6 northwards to a four @-@ lane highway 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 mi ) from Værnes past Stjørdal . This is scheduled for completion in 2013 . 
 = = Airlines and destinations = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Scandinavian Airlines is the airline with the most domestic services to Trondheim . The main route is to its hub at Oslo ; additional services are operated to Bergen , Bodø , Stavanger , Tromsø and Ålesund , all with Boeing 737 and ATR 72 aircraft . Internationally , it provides a weekly flight to Alicante , Spain , 5 times weekly to Stockholm and daily flights to its hub in Copenhagen . Norwegian Air Shuttle is a low @-@ cost airline which operates the main domestic services to Oslo , Bergen , Harstad / Narvik and Tromsø , using Boeing 737 aircraft . It provides a range of international flights . Most operate only a few times a week . Norwegian flies to eleven European destinations in seven countries . 
 Widerøe is a regional airline and was subsidiary of SAS . It uses Dash 8 Q400 aircraft to operate to Sandefjord . Northwards , Widerøe uses Trondheim Airport as a hub to serve six airports in Nord @-@ Trøndelag and <unk> on public service obligation contracts with the Norwegian Ministry of Transport and Communications . KLM operates three daily flights to its hub at Amsterdam by its regional subsidiary KLM <unk> using Embraer 190 aircraft . The airport is also served by numerous charter airlines . 
 Ground handling is provided by Røros <unk> , SAS Ground Services and Spirit Air Cargo Handling . 
 = = = Scheduled = = = 
 ^ a Widerøe 's flight to Copenhagen makes a stop in Sandefjord or Kristiansand before continuing , making the first leg of the flight domestic . This is why it flies from terminal A and not B. 
 = = = Charter = = = 
 = = Statistics = = 
 Trondheim Airport is the only primary airport in Trøndelag , and has a catchment area of 310 @,@ 000 people , including most of Nord @-@ Trøndelag and Sør @-@ Trøndelag . For international flights , the catchment area is slightly larger , and includes part of Nordmøre , Helgeland , and Jämtland in Sweden . In 2009 , Trondheim Airport served 3 @,@ 926 @,@ 461 passengers , 4 @,@ 898 tonnes ( 4 @,@ 821 long tons ; 5 @,@ 399 short tons ) of cargo and 57 @,@ 912 aircraft movements , down from 2008 . The airport ranks fourth in Norway , after Oslo Airport , Gardermoen , Bergen Airport , Flesland and Stavanger Airport , Sola . The busiest route is to Oslo , which was the busiest domestic route and the tenth @-@ busiest route within the European Economic Area in 2008 . 
 = = Ground transport = = 
 = = = Rail = = = 
 Rail transport is offered from Trondheim Airport Station . The platform is about 190 metres ( 620 ft ) from the check @-@ in at the terminal , and the station is 33 @.@ 0 kilometres ( 20 @.@ 5 mi ) from Trondheim Central Station . There is no manned ticket sale , but a vending machine for tickets is located in the airport terminal . 
 The Norwegian State Railways operates both commuter and express trains to and from Trondheim Airport . In each direction , there are three daily express trains , one to Mo i Rana and two to Bodø . One of the Bodø @-@ trains is a night train . Travel time to Mo i Rana is 6 hours and travel time to Bodø is 9 hours and 5 minutes . The Mo i Rana @-@ service is operated with Class 93 trains , while the Bodø @-@ services are operated with Di 4 @-@ hauled trains . 
 The Trøndelag Commuter Rail offers hourly services in each direction : northbound to Steinkjer and southbound to Trondheim and Lerkendal . During peak hours , the frequency is doubled . Travel time to Trondheim is 38 minutes and to Lerkendal 51 minutes . Northwards , travel time to Levanger is 48 minutes , to Verdal 1 @-@ hour and 2 minutes , and to Steinkjer 1 @-@ hour and 26 minutes . The commuter rail is operated with Class 92 trains . 
 Trains from Östersund , Sweden ( Meråker Line / Central Line ) stop at Hell station , where passengers can change trains or walk 1 @.@ 5 km ( 1 mile ) to the airport terminal . 
 = = = Road = = = 
 The airport is located along European Route E6 and E14 . The airports connects to Norwegian National Road 705 via a roundabout , which again connects with the E6 in a grade @-@ separated intersection 300 metres ( 980 ft ) away . The E6 run concurrently northwards in an aircraft bridge under the runway ; southwards the E6 run as a two @-@ lane motorway as a toll road past Trondheim . The E14 diverts from the E6 at Stjørdal , 2 km north of the airport . The airport has 3 @,@ 000 paid parking places , operated by <unk> , both indoor and outdoor . Car rental is available , as are taxis . 
 Nettbuss operates the <unk> Airport Express Coaches four to six times hourly ( every 10 minutes during rush hours ) .to Downtown Trondheim , stopping at major hotels , Trondheim Central Station and the <unk> Terminal . <unk> operates the competing <unk> . Nettbuss operates city and regional buses to <unk> and Oppdal from the bus stop at Hell Center — five minutes walk from the airport . TrønderBilene operates NOR @-@ WAY Bussekspress coaches to Namsos . Rica Hell Hotel operates a shuttle bus from the terminal to the hotel , although the hotel is within walking distance ( 800 m / 2500 ft ) . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 Braathens SAFE Flight 139 occurred on 21 June 1985 , when a Boeing 737 @-@ 200 from Braathens SAFE en route from Værnes to Oslo Airport , Fornebu was hijacked by a drunk student who demanded to talk to the prime minister and minister of justice . The plane landed at Fornebu , and the hijacker eventually surrendered his gun in exchange for more beer . No @-@ one was injured in the incident . 
 On 23 February 1987 , a Douglas DC @-@ 9 from Scandinavian Airlines landing at Værnes en route from Bodø Airport was written off after a hard landing on the runway . This was caused by a high sink rate caused by the pilot interrupting the landing checklist and forgetting to arm the spoilers . No @-@ one was killed in the accident . 
 = Party ( Beyoncé song ) = 
 " Party " is a song recorded by American singer Beyoncé for her fourth studio album , 4 ( 2011 ) . It features guest vocals from American rapper André 3000 and uncredited vocals from Kanye West , and was released by Columbia Records as the fourth single from 4 on August 30 , 2011 . The song was written by Kanye West , Jeff Bhasker , Beyoncé , Dexter Mills , Douglas Davis and Ricky Walters and produced by Beyoncé and West and co @-@ produced by Bhasker . A midtempo R & B song , " Party " exhibits elements of the 1980s funk and soul music , and samples the 1985 song " La Di Da Di " . It recalls the work of New Edition and Prince , among others . Built on a 808 @-@ retro beat , multi @-@ tracked harmonies , and a smooth groove , the song 's instrumentation includes slow @-@ bouncing synthesizers , keyboard tones , and drums . Lyrically , " Party " gives ode to political themes such as feminism and sexual empowerment . In his rap verses , André 3000 references milk and gets philosophical about his own career . " Party " was nominated for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration at the 54th Grammy Awards . 
 " Party " was acclaimed by contemporary music critics , who praised André 3000 's verses , as well as the production handled by West and Beyoncé 's emphatic , yet sensual vocals . Following the release of 4 , " Party " charted at number 19 on the South Korea Gaon International Singles Chart . It debuted on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart in July 2011 , and peaked at number 2 on the chart for three consecutive weeks . The song reached number 50 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart based on radio support . " Party " was part of Beyoncé 's set list for her 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé and the Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live residency shows . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 " Party " was written by Kanye West , Jeff Bhasker , Beyoncé , André Lauren Benjamin , Dexter Mills , Douglas Davis and Ricky Walters . Production was handled by Beyoncé , West , and Bhasker . " Party " was the first song on which Beyoncé worked for her @-@ then upcoming album , 4 . In May 2010 , Jordan Young aka DJ Swivel started working with Beyoncé at Rock The Mic Studio in New York City . They initially recorded the beginning stages of " Party " to see what kind of a working relationship might form . Young was introduced to Beyoncé by Omar Grant , who was an A & R at Epic Records and used to work with Destiny 's Child . Beyoncé was satisfied with Young 's work and commended him for being " a fast engineer " . Beyoncé then decided to give him the opportunity to work with her through the whole production and recording processes of her album . 
 She later told Gabriel Alvarez of Complex magazine that she was very happy and keen to work with Kanye West who handled the production of " Party " . This was because West 's single " Runaway " ( 2010 ) drove her to the edge of tears the first time she heard . She further said : " The fact that he 's belting out his pain , his confusion , and his anger , with no pre @-@ written lyrics , was so moving . He 's singing his heart out for five minutes . He is so vulnerable . I love when an artist can be so honest . " On May 25 , 2011 , it was revealed by Rap @-@ Up that American rapper André 3000 , who had been keeping his features to a minimum in recent years , would appear as a featuring artist on fifth song featured on the track @-@ listing of Beyoncé 's then fourth upcoming studio album , 4 . This was the only collaboration present on the final track @-@ list of the record . Later on June 4 , 2011 , it was revealed that " Party " samples " La Di Da Di " ( 1985 ) as performed by Doug E. Fresh and the Get Fresh Crew featuring MC Ricky D. , and written by Douglas Davis and Ricky Walters . The original record contains the lyrics , " La di da di , we like to party " , which the songwriters included on " Party " . 
 On June 6 , 2011 , " Party " leaked on the internet followed by the whole album , three weeks prior to its official release date , which was scheduled for June 28 , 2011 . Speaking of his collaboration with Beyoncé , André 3000 said : " I 've always felt Beyoncé was one of the best performers of our time , so to collaborate with her was an honor and a pleasure . " " Party " was added to United States urban contemporary radio by Columbia Records on August 30 , 2011 . 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Party " is a mid @-@ paced R & B song that exhibits elements of funk and soul music . It is written in the key of B ♭ major and set in common time with the sequence of Cm7 – Dm7 – F7 ( sus ) – <unk> ( sus ) – Cm7 – Dm7 . According to David Amidon of PopMatters , the song 's music " is largely reminiscent of late 1980s diva histrionics " ; it is built on scooping and gliding multi @-@ tracked 1990 girl @-@ ground harmonies , midtempo bounces , a 808 @-@ retro beat and a 1980s @-@ style smooth hip hop groove . The instrumentation of " Party " consists of slow @-@ bouncing synthesizers , bubbly keyboard tones , and a drum machine . 
 Gil Kaufman of MTV News commented that the synthesizers and drum machine used in " Party " create a groove reminiscent of " a New Jack Swing seduction . " Jon Caramainca of The New York Times wrote that the production of " Party " recalls the early work of New Edition . James Reed of The Boston Globe commented that its music arrangement sounds like a parody by The Lonely Island or Flight of the Conchords . Roberts Randall of the Los Angeles Times found that " Party " sounds like a half @-@ speed remix of a Human League song , and Kevin O 'Donnell of Spin magazine found the song to be reminiscent of Prince in his 1980s prime . Priya Elan of NME commented that " Party " is the first indication that 4 was influenced by the likes of Teena Marie . 
 Lyrically , " Party " features Beyoncé as the female protagonist " in the mood for some loving " as she references to a get @-@ together for two persons . West rhymes about " swag sauce " and " <unk> " in the introductory lines , " You a bad girl , your friends bad too / You got the swag sauce , you 're <unk> ' <unk> " , before passing the torch to Beyoncé , who begins to sing the first verse slowly and steadily , " I may be young but I 'm ready / To give you all my love / I told my girls you can get it / Don 't slow it down , just let it go / So in love / I 'll give it all away / Just don 't tell nobody tomorrow " . In the chorus lines , she harmonizes over the sample from " La Di Da Di " , " Cause tonight 's the night that I give you everything / Music knocking until the morning light / ' Cause we like to party " . In the second verse , Beyoncé belts out " in a thick stack of smooth , layered vocals " . After chanting the chorus for a second time , André 3000 surfaces around the 2 : 15 mark with " some very naughty references " to milk on the verses he raps , " ... another homeboy , that nigga named Cheese / Fuck wit ' me baby , I make it milk ' til it drip down yo ' knees " , before switching gears altogether and getting philosophical about his own career , " <unk> say he looks up to me , this just makes me feel old / Never thought that we could become someone else 's hero / Man , we were just in the food court eating our gyros " , and finally adopting a " multi @-@ syllabic tongue twister " to rap some of the finishing lines . The song runs out with Beyoncé reiterating the lines , " Cause we like to party , hey , hey , hey , hey , hey " , and West then reprises the opening lines . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received acclaim by critics . Matthew Perpetua of Rolling Stone appreciated André 3000 's performance and the song itself , writing : " André 3000 is sharp and effortlessly charismatic on his rapped verse , but the real attraction here is the track itself . " Similarly , David Amidon of PopMatters commented that the song features " one of those rare ' look how effortless rapping is for me ' . " This was echoed by Ryan Dombal of Pitchfork Media , who wrote that " [ 4 's ] carefree retro sensibility pops up on three more highlights , including ' Party ' , which combines a pitch @-@ perfect André 3000 guest verse , a Slick Rick sample , [ ... ] while its bounce provides prime summer barbecue background . " Rich Juzwiak of The Village Voice was also positive : " ' Party ' sounds right out of The SOS Band 's catalog ( its plodding tempo is the only thing that lets you know she isn 't quoting a particularly poetic , desperately meth @-@ seeking <unk> <unk> ad [ ... ] ) " . Jon Caramainca of The New York Times wrote that Beyoncé sings the song " in her best impression of naughtiness . " Chris Coplan of Consequence of Sound praised the minimal production and simplistic lyrics of " Party " further describing the song as being as " simple as a Beyoncé song gets : a low @-@ key , synth @-@ y beat paired with inspired vocals by Beyoncé and a killer , fluid verse by Mr. Benjamin [ André 3000 ] . " 
 Cameron Adams of the Herald Sun called " Party " the most throwaway moment on 4 . Adam Markovitz of Entertainment Weekly wrote that " the promisingly named ' Party ' [ ... ] turns out to be a slow @-@ jam invitation to an after @-@ work mixer with light refreshments . " Chicago Sun @-@ Times 's Thomas Conner complimented the harmonies " scooping , gliding multi @-@ tracked harmonies that almost make moot the idea of a Destiny 's reunion . " Gil Kaufman of MTV News was also positive , writing that " [ ... ] unlike the at @-@ points frantic ' Run the World ( Girls ) ' [ Party ] takes its time , lyrically and musically , with Beyoncé <unk> over her vocals and singing about the beauty of nice and slow . " Describing " Party " as " a proudly retro slice of R & B " , James Reed of The Boston Globe wrote that the song is " an irresistible summer jam that I haven 't been able to stop humming for a week straight . " Jim Farber of Daily News echoed Reed 's sentiments , writing that " Party " would surely be " a top @-@ down anthem for months to come . " Similarly , Joanne Dorken of MTV UK described " Party " as a " dance @-@ floor filler ... with that Sasha Fierce edge " , before adding that is bound to be a " monster hit " and is a " stand out tune on the album " . Ricky Schweitzer of One Thirty BPM also applauded " Party " , writing : 
 The majority of 4 consists of mid @-@ tempo pieces , but unlike the filler that might have occupied this pacing on previous albums , many of this album ’ s greatest strengths lie in this realm . Perhaps best exemplifying this spirit is the André 3000 and Kanye West assisted , ' Party ' in which Beyoncé relaxes into a beat that , while not be easy to grind to , still works perfectly as a party anthem . Beyoncé reminds us that a party is not only meant for dancing . It is a place where you go to enjoy the company of others and oftentimes , that involves real human conversation and interaction . Echoing this sentiment , André ’ s verse is tranquilized from his customarily rapid @-@ fire delivery to a drawl more reminiscent of Lil ’ Wayne than his traditional work with Outkast . ' Party ' like much of 4 , is a conversation , and André 3000 wants to be heard . 
 However , Matthew Horton of BBC Online viewed " Party " as one of the " less successful interruptions " on 4 . Similarly , Embling of Tiny Mix Tapes gave the song a mixed review , writing : " [ ... ] the less said about the phrase ' swag goo ' the better ; ' Party ' , the song on which those unfortunate words appear — Kanye West providing that unfortunate pun — is otherwise wonderful , but yet some errors are too grievous to forgive . " Andy Kellman from Allmusic stated , " [ ... ] What 's most surprising is that a song titled ' Party ' quickly settles into a low @-@ watt groove and remains there . " Bill Lamb from About.com added , " Kanye West and Andre 3000 provide interesting vocal color for ' Party ' but the song itself is just a variant on the ' this is my night to be bad ' theme . " A negative review came from Al Shipley of The Village Voice who wrote that " Party " and " Best Thing I Never Had " were " among the album 's worst and most unrepresentative songs " . 
 On The Village Voice 's year @-@ end Pazz & Jop singles list , " Party " was ranked at number 177 and 439 in 2011 and 2012 respectively . The writers of Rap @-@ Up included the song at number 8 on their list of 10 Best Songs of 2011 . " Party " was nominated for Best Rap / Sung Collaboration at the 54th Grammy Awards , which was held on February 12 , 2012 , but lost to Kanye West 's " All of the Lights " . At the 2013 ASCAP Rhythm & Soul Awards " Party " was one of the songs to win in the category for Award @-@ Winning R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Without being released as a single , the album version " Party " debuted at number 29 on the South Korea Gaon International Singles Chart for the week ending July 2 , 2011 , selling 17 @,@ 460 digital downloads . The following week , it sold 17 @,@ 995 downloads , which enabled it to ascend to number 19 where it peaked . The album version also debuted at number 90 on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart issue dated July 21 , 2011 . The following week , " Party " moved to number 72 on the chart , and one week later , it climbed to number 57 . For the week ending September 10 , 2011 , " Party " moved from number 55 to number 50 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . 31 US urban radios added " Party " to the playlist for the week ending October 1 , 2011 . As a result , " Party " was the most played song on US urban radios , gaining 517 spins in seven days , as reported by the Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems ( BDS ) urban airplay chart issued dated October 8 , 2011 . Subsequently , the song received the airplay greatest gainer title and moved from number 33 to number 20 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . The following week , " Party " debuted at number 71 on the US Radio Songs chart and subsequently moved to number 16 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . 
 For the week ending October 1 , 2011 , the album version of " Party " debuted at number 25 on the US Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart . After two weeks , it ascended from number 11 to number 4 on the chart . For the week ending October 22 , 2011 , " Party " debuted at number 95 on the US Billboard Hot 100 chart . It also moved to number 9 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , receiving the airplay gainer title for the second non @-@ consecutive time . " Party " escalated to number 87 on the Hot 100 chart and to number 7 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart issued dated October 29 , 2011 . For the same week ending , Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems reported that " Party " was the most played song on Urban radios for the second non @-@ consecutive time , gaining 464 spins in seven days . It ascended to number 5 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart and to number 75 on the Hot 100 chart for the week ending November 5 , 2011 . " Party " surged to number 57 on the Hot 100 , climbing 18 places , for the week ending November 12 , 2011 . For the week ending November 19 , 2011 , it further ascended to 54 on the Hot 100 chart and moved from number 5 to number 4 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . 
 For the week ending November 26 , 2011 , " Party " remained at number 54 on the Hot 100 chart and climbed to number 2 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . The following , Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems reported that " Party " reached the top spot of the BDS Urban National airplay chart , having amassed <unk> spins , which transitioned into 31 @.@ 288 million listener impressions . It later peaked at number 50 on the Hot 100 chart and maintained its high point of number 2 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart for four consecutive weeks . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Beyoncé performed the song live for first time on August 14 , 2011 during her 4 Intimate Nights with Beyoncé in Roseland Ballroom , New York City . Wearing a gold dress , she performed the song in front of 3 @,@ 500 people and she was backed by her all @-@ female band and her backing singers , called the " Mamas " . Erika Ramirez of Billboard magazine commented that " [ Beyoncé ] slow @-@ winded to ' Party ' as the crowd swayed their arms back and forth and stretched out the ' y ' to every other verse . " Jody Rosen of Rolling Stone said that the live performance of " Party " was " beatific and lovely . " 
 Jon Caramanica of The New York Times , who apparently had not received " Party " positively while reviewing 4 , however wrote that " [ Beyoncé ] is an outrageously nimble entertainer , enough so that it compensated for this album ’ s awkward or halfhearted choices : the too @-@ goofy Kanye West hook on ' Party ' . " Yolanda Sangweni of Essence magazine stated that " on songs like ' Rather Die Young ' and ' Party ' , [ Beyoncé ] reminds us her vocal chops are what got her here . " Brad Wete of Entertainment Weekly stated that " Party " was among the several highlights of the show . Jocelyn Vena of MTV News concluded that " it was [ Beyoncé 's ] ability to throw a party during faster jams like ' Party ' , ' Countdown ' , ' End of Time ' and ' Run the World ( Girls ) ' that put on full display her range as a performer , dancing and singing live the entire night . " During the ITV special A Night With Beyoncé which aired on December 4 in the United Kingdom , Beyoncé performed " Party " to a selected crowd of fans . 
 In May 2012 , Beyoncé performed " Party " during her Revel Presents : Beyoncé Live revue in Atlantic City , New Jersey , United States ' entertainment resort , hotel , casino and spa , Revel . Rebecca Thomas of MTV News described the performance , " For one of our favorite numbers , ' Party , ' the 4 singer donned full @-@ on showgirl regalia in a heady rendition that saw confetti coming from the roof and dice @-@ shaped beach balls being tossed through the crowd as dancers in large feathered headdresses magically turned up in the aisles . " Both , Maura Johnston of The Village Voice and Tris McCall of New Jersey On @-@ Line noted that the confetti should have been dropped during the first or the last song . Dan DeLuca of The Philadelphia Inquirer wrote that " Party " was one of the " beat @-@ savvy booty @-@ shaking workouts " performed during the show . 
 Party is on the setlist of Beyoncé 's Formation World Tour ( As of May 30th ) 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 On October 11 , 2011 , English singer – songwriter Eliza Doolittle posted a video of herself covering " Party " , on her official website and other online media . In January 2012 , American rapper Common sang a freestyle rap over the instrumental of Beyoncé 's " Party " adding the lyrics , " We can put it all together / You know the weather / Me and Jasmine we can find forever " . In February 2012 , American band Chairlift and Kool A.D. covered the song on Triple J 's Like a Version series . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits for the album version of " Party " are adapted from 4 liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Remix featuring J. Cole = = 
 " Party " was officially remixed with vocals from American rapper J. Cole , replacing those of André 3000 . The verses of André 3000 were supplanted by those from Cole ; all other elements of the remix are identical to the original . His rap is much shorter than that of André 3000 . In his verse , Cole thanks God and Ice Cube for Friday , references Sade and Petey Pablo and name @-@ drops the Bugatti brand . Cole revealed that he was originally supposed to appear on the album version and that Beyoncé later enlisted him to appear on the official " Party " remix . It was released worldwide as a digital download on October 24 , 2011 as a single . 
 Critics complimented the remix , stating that anyone could sound good over the beat of the mid @-@ tempo R & B song . An accompanying music video for " Party " was shot in New Jersey and was directed by Beyoncé . Cole replaced André 3000 in the clip , which takes viewers back to an old @-@ school backyard celebration full of colorful bikinis , freestyle dancing and a few cameo appearances , including sister Solange Knowles and former Destiny 's Child bandmate Kelly Rowland . Music critics generally praised the retro @-@ themed visuals , further commending the fact that she proves she can " bring a party " without elaborate choreography , high fashion or cinematic elements . 
 = = = Development and release = = = 
 It was reported on October 8 , 2011 that Cole would feature on the official remix of " Party " . It premiered online on October 21 , 2011 and its cover art was unveiled the same day . The remix of " Party " was released as a digital download on October 24 , 2011 ; as a single it was released in the United States and several other European countries . It was not made available for purchase in Oceania and Germany , among others . Cole 's verse , which replaces André 3000 's from the original , is much shorter ; all other elements of the remix are identical to the original . In his verse , Cole thanks God and Ice Cube for Friday , references Sade and Petey Pablo and name @-@ drops the Bugatti brand . 
 During an interview with <unk> ( 106 @.@ 3 MHz FM " Hot 106 " ) Rise & Grind Morning Show , Cole revealed that he was originally supposed to appear on the album version and that Beyoncé later enlisted him when she was ready to release " Party " as a single . He also explained why his verse was cut short and recalled his " unforgettable " experience of working with Beyoncé : 
 You know how many verses I did for that song . I did a version of that before her album [ 4 ] even came out . I did two verses . I love these verses too , but they ended up going with André 's verse and André killed it . [ ... ] Then [ Beyoncé ] reached out to me and she wanted me to get on the remix . I did two more verses . Out of the second set that I did , she picked the first verse . But my second verse , I just gotta say for the record … It was just too long , I think she was looking for something shorter and more to the point . [ ... ] It 's just a blessing to even be able to work with [ Beyoncé ] . I 'm on my defensive rapper , like yo man . When you follow in André 's 3000 's shoes , you 're expected to really go in . Just the fact to even be on the song with her and shoot the video with her and just be in her presence . She 's such a hard working , incredible artist . I ’ ll never forget that day we shot the video , I 'll never forget being able to be on that song , and hopefully we got more as time goes on . [ ... ] . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Andrew Martin of Prefix Magazine complimented the remix stating : " [ The remix ] might replace André 3000 's typically great guest feature with one from J. Cole , but hey , anyone can sound good over this beat . And not only that , but Cole 's vocals , however brief , are a welcome complement . " Making reference to its music video , Entertainment Weekly 's Erin Strecker commented : " I 'm assuming it was shot mid @-@ summer , which is when this really should have been put out . Releasing this track at the end of October seems like an odd choice , as the video involves a <unk> and trailer @-@ park pool party that would have sparkled mid @-@ July . " The remix was nominated in the category for Best Collaboration at the 2012 BET Awards . For the week ending November 5 , 2011 , " Party " debuted at number two on the South Korean International Singles Chart , selling 85 @,@ 143 digital downloads . It became the seventy third best @-@ selling single in South Korea in 2011 . 
 = = = Music video = = = 
 = = = = Filming and release = = = = 
 The music video for " Party " was directed by Beyoncé and Alan Ferguson . As reported by Rap @-@ Up , Beyoncé filmed the clip in the Oakdale Mobile Home Park in South Brunswick Township , New Jersey , on August 2 , 2011 . The video shoot called for multiple flashy fashions , a red muscle car , and colorfully dressed dancers . Solange Knowles , Beyoncé 's younger sister , and Kelly Rowland , former Destiny 's Child member , both made cameos . Rowland elaborated a bit about her role in the video in an interview with <unk> : " I 'm just doing a cameo . We just had a really good time [ ... ] While filming the video , we noticed that we were doing certain stuff that we used to do as kids . We kinda felt a little goofy for a second , so we stopped . But we just had a good time . " . Model Shaun Ross also makes a cameo in the video . 
 As the video utilizes the remix featuring Cole , André 3000 did not appear in the clip ; Cole , who replaced him , shot his cameo on October 7 , 2011 ; Beyoncé also came to the set that day to film extra scenes with Cole . A 32 @-@ second preview of the music video was shown on BET 's 106 & Park on October 24 , 2011 . The retro @-@ themed visuals showed Beyoncé throwing a backyard bash with her friends . Sporting bikinis , girls , including rapper Dai Burger , were basking in the sun and splashing in the pool as Beyoncé 's sister Solange was working the turntables . Cole swept through in his blue Bugatti to join the old school festivities . Although it was reported that the full music video would premiere on October 25 , 2011 , it premiered on October 26 during an episode of 106 & Park and on Beyoncé 's Vevo account . " Party " is the sixth video released from 4 . 
 On November 22 , 2011 , the behind @-@ the @-@ scenes footage of the video was posted online . In the footage , her stylist said that the inspiration for the video was " trailer @-@ trash , ghetto fabulous , out @-@ there , [ and ] edgy . " During the footage Beyoncé said " I like this video . It 's no choreography , no pressure . All I have to do is party and have a good time . " She also revealed that the video is supposed to reflect her simplistic childhood , adding : " Growing up , I had really amazing parents and I had a great childhood . We went from nicer homes to being in apartments with our lights cutting off . It didn 't matter where we were ' cause we had love and we had so much fun . It 's great when you don 't have as much how you improvise and you have more fun . " 
 = = = = Synopsis = = = = 
 <unk> up by James Dinh of MTV News , " [ The music video for ] ' Party ' takes viewers back to an old @-@ school backyard celebration full of colorful bikinis , freestyle dancing and a few familiar faces . Throughout the video , [ Beyoncé ] lets loose , playing a sort of party host . If she is not lounging in beach chairs , she is dancing among her friends or mowing the lawn . " The clip is centered around a trailer park hood and a subsequent soiree . It starts with a dog barking behind a fencing , followed by multiple intercut scenery , which includes two men engaged in a conversation , a woman leaning against a car , a little girl riding a bicycle and a saucepan caught in fire . Then , Beyoncé appears , dressed in bright colored as well as flashy garments , sporting neon @-@ colored oval shaped nails , and bright @-@ colored lipstick . She is cooking in a skillet while one of her neighbors drinks from a hose . As she sings , looking into the camera , she highlights and plays with her hair . The action shifts from the double wide to a sunny summer backyard barbecue , where Beyoncé and her friends dance as Solange is deejaying . This is followed by scenes of Beyoncé , floating in an above ground pool while singing and entertaining her guests . She is wearing a pink one @-@ piece swimsuit , dropping earrings and her hair looks crimped . Other girls bask in the sun and splash in the pool as Solange works the turntables . 
 Once outside the pool , Beyoncé , now in a ruffled blue and white bikini , is sitting on a chaise longue and eating a lollipop . Beyoncé then shifts to another chaise longue where she relaxes with a bowl of snack food in her hand . Now wearing sunglasses , a black butterfly turban , and a furry green vest , Beyoncé lounges on a plastic chair around an inflatable pool toys next to lawn flamingos and beer bottle @-@ filled kiddie pools . As she sings , she throws some snack food towards the camera . Cole arrives in a blue Bugatti to rap his verse in the parking lot . In a different scene , he sits on the bumper of a truck with Beyoncé on his left hand @-@ side . They swing by the festivities once they hit the hotel room for a little after @-@ hours . Later , Beyoncé is seen doing a retouch of her make up , sitting on the toilet . Kelly Rowland and Beyoncé are then shown , propped up against a red muscle car . Beyoncé sports a big bird style , yellow feather coat while Rowland wears a short dark @-@ red dress , and they are both seen smiling and dancing . Beyoncé then <unk> the lawn and the video ends when Rowland and Beyoncé smiling into the camera . 
 = = = = Reception = = = = 
 Marc Hogan of Spin magazine wrote that the video for " Party " , isn 't " Beyoncé 's best video recently " adding that it had a lot of competition . A writer of Daily Mirror compared the set in the video with American series Baywatch and described Beyoncé 's look as " sexy " . Laura Schreffler of Daily Mail concluded that " one very big thing is noticeably missing " in the video , referring to Beyoncé 's pregnancy . However , Schreffler praised her look and outfits which were getting " racier and racier " . Amanda Dobbins of New York magazine wrote that Beyoncé " host [ s ] a trailer @-@ park fiesta in crazy technicolor fur getups and still look [ s ] amazing . " Matt Donnelly of Los Angeles Times concluded : " In a glorious mess of fanny packs , headpieces , blender drinks , dice @-@ throwing and dance circles , Beyonce reminds us that even without elaborate choreography , high fashion or cinematic elements she brings one heck of a party . " That was somehow echoed by Entertainment Weekly 's Erin Strecker who wrote that " Beyoncé isn 't dancing this time around . Instead , she 's strutting her stuff with neon makeup and costumes straight out of the Day @-@ Glo ' 90s . " <unk> Williams of BET praised the " flashy looks Beyoncé chose to get her ' Party ' on " . Sarah Anne Hughes of The Washington Post praised the " pretty glamorous trailer park affair " and the party in the video saying that it 's a " party you wish you were invited to . " A writer of VH1 found a " delectable , candy @-@ colored , bling @-@ adorned party scene " with " retro @-@ ghetto fab outfits " and a very simple <unk> . 
 Marina <unk> of AOL 's The Boombox said " from her neon nails , scintillating bathing suits , sequined mini @-@ dresses , big hair , bright make @-@ up to the sexy shimmying of her still slim physique , all eyes are on Beyonce as she serenades a promise to ' give it all away , just don 't tell nobody tomorrow . ' " Jenna Gregory of Marie Claire wrote that Beyoncé shows an " amazing bod in <unk> @-@ there clothes which you definitely wouldn 't find in the maternity section . " Chris Coplan of Consequence of Sound found a 1980s vibe similar to the song 's sound , adding that the only thing the " family affair is missing is Jay @-@ Z wearing sunscreen on his nose and a shirt from Tommy Bahama . " Ted <unk> of the same publication , noted that Beyoncé " adds some luster to the rusty surroundings , shining through as the beautiful pop icon that she has become . It just goes to show it doesn 't matter where Beyonce is , or where her music is playing , she can turn any spot into a <unk> . " A writer of OK ! said that Beyoncé " don [ s ] an unbelievable amount of cool <unk> , all of which we need in our lives . " Rap @-@ Up commented " Summer may be over , but Beyoncé gives us another reason to celebrate with the vibrant video " adding " This is one party you won 't want to miss . " Andrew Martin of Prefix Magazine described " Party " ' s video as a " fittingly <unk> @-@ centric affair . " Jessica <unk> of The Huffington Post praised the fashion used in the video saying that Beyoncé had a lot of " chic looks " . Another writer of the same publication praised the decision to make a simple party set . He further described the video as " a gorgeous boast of her beauty as well as a helpful reminder that , even in these down economic times , one can party like a rock star . " At the 2012 BET Awards , Beyoncé and Alan Ferguson won in the category for Video Director of the Year after they collaborated on the music video for " Party " . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = = = Release history = = = 
 = Ron & Tammy : Part Two = 
 " Ron & Tammy : Part Two " ( sometimes referred to as " Ron and Tammy II " ) is the fourth episode of the third season of the American comedy television series Parks and Recreation , and the 34th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on NBC in the United States on February 10 , 2011 . In the episode , Tom tries to make Ron jealous by dating Ron 's ex @-@ wife Tammy , causing the two to resume their unhealthy relationship . Meanwhile , Leslie and Ben ask the police to provide security for the harvest festival , and April is assigned to be Chris 's secretary . 
 Written by Emily Kapnek and directed by Tucker Gates , the episode is considered a sequel to the second season episode " Ron and Tammy " . Megan Mullally , the real @-@ life wife of actor Nick Offerman , reprises her role as Tammy . Mullally and Offerman were permitted a great deal of improvisation during their scenes . " Ron & Tammy : Part Two " also features guest appearances by Eric Pierpoint as Pawnee Police Chief Trumple and Jama Williamson in the last of several guest performances as Tom 's ex @-@ wife , Wendy . 
 When the episode first broadcast , NBC ran a commercial advertising " April and Andy 's wedding registry " on the official Parks and Recreation website . Although apparently a mistake intended to refer to Ron and Tammy 's registry , some commentators suggested it could be indicative of future events in the series . According to Nielsen Media Research , " Ron & Tammy : Part Two " was seen by 5 @.@ 03 million household viewers , a slight increase from the previous episode , " Time Capsule " . It received critical acclaim , with several commentators praising the repairing of Ron and Tammy , as well as Nick Offerman 's performance . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Ron 's ( Nick Offerman ) ex @-@ wife Tammy ( Megan Mullally ) continues her efforts to sabotage his life , but the normally susceptible Ron easily resists her seductions because he is now in a solid relationship with Tom 's ( Aziz Ansari ) ex @-@ wife Wendy ( Jama Williamson ) , much to Tom 's jealousy . Later , however , Wendy and Ron break up after she announces she is moving back to Canada . Meanwhile , Leslie ( Amy Poehler ) and the parks department throw a party for the Pawnee police department , where they hope to ask them to provide security for the upcoming Harvest Festival . During the party , Ben ( Adam Scott ) awkwardly fails to get Chief Trumple 's ( Eric Pierpoint ) favor . Tom , unaware of Ron and Wendy 's breakup , arrives at the party with Tammy to make him jealous . After bickering loudly , Ron and Tammy both decide to leave the party together to talk and try to make amends . However , a night filled with drunken sex and mayhem ensues , ending with the two getting remarried and ending up in jail . 
 After getting Ron released , the parks department holds an intervention for him about Tammy , even playing a previously recorded tape of Ron warning himself to stay away from her . Ron ignores the warnings and prepares to take Tammy to his cabin for a sex @-@ filled honeymoon after her bridal shower . Leslie blames Tom for the dilemma and , although he initially claims to be unfazed , Tom later arrives at the bridal shower to stop Ron from going on the honeymoon . He reveals the whole marriage is a ploy by Tammy to once again make him miserable . Tammy attacks and mercilessly beats Tom , prompting Ron to remember what a monster she truly is and dump her . He literally carries Tom away , and the two later make amends . Despite the bad impression he made the day before , Ben asks Trumple for the Harvest Festival favor . The chief unconditionally agrees out of respect for Leslie , who he said always helps everyone , and because Leslie once dated his friend Dave ( Louis C.K. ) . Ben seems relieved Leslie and Dave are no longer together , and he later asks Leslie out to eat . 
 In the B story , April ( Aubrey Plaza ) is working as Chris ' ( Rob Lowe ) assistant until he goes back to Indianapolis . April 's cynical personality clashes with Chris ' relentless optimism and happiness . In an attempt to get fired , April purposely neglects to tell Ann ( Rashida Jones ) that Chris cannot make a lunch date . When Ann arrives to confront Chris , she quickly realizes April 's ploy . Ann reveals she is very happy dating Chris , and would even probably move with him to Indianapolis if asked . Andy ( Chris Pratt ) , who is still trying to win back April 's affections , gives Chris an obviously forged letter from the FBI claiming April must immediately return to the parks department . Chris sees through the ruse and tells April she can go back , but that remaining his assistant may provide her career opportunities . He invites her to return with him to Indianapolis and she seems interested , leaving both Ann and Andy stunned and jealous . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Ron & Tammy : Part Two " , sometimes informally referred to as " Ron and Tammy II " , was written by Parks consulting producer Emily Kapnek and directed by Tucker Gates , who has previously directed episodes of The Office , another comedy series created by Parks co @-@ creator Greg Daniels . Like all of the first six third season episodes , it was written and filmed almost immediately after the second season ended as part of an early shooting schedule needed to accommodate Amy Poehler 's pregnancy . However , although finished early in anticipation of a September 2010 release date , Parks was ultimately placed on hiatus until early 2011 , many months after production on " Ron & Tammy : Part Two " was finished . The episode is considered a sequel to the second season episode " Ron and Tammy " , which introduced the character of Ron Swanson 's ex @-@ wife , Tammy , and their unhealthy relationship with each other . Megan Mullally , the real @-@ life wife of actor Nick Offerman , reprises her role as Tammy . " Ron and Tammy " was one of the most well @-@ received episodes of the second season , so the writers immediately started contemplating ways to bring the character back . 
 Offerman said he worked well with Mullally , and that the two both enjoy " pushing the envelope and testing our boundaries , both of physical ability and good taste " . He jokingly said of filming the episode : 
 " They tell me it 's quite something . I honestly don 't remember much of what took place during the filming of that episode because it was like a crazy peyote fever dream . I remember there was lots of howling , and I came away very sore and scarred . Parts of my anatomy were alarmingly chafed . They say it turned out well . I 'm excited to see it . " 
 Offerman and Mullally were allowed to improvise a great deal during filming . The episode features a montage of various clips showing how Ron and Tammy gradually go from fighting with each other to getting married over the course of a particularly wild night . Long sequences of footage were shot — including Ron and Tammy loudly arguing on the sidewalk and the two making out atop a police car — but little more than a few seconds ultimately made the final episode . Offerman said it took about a half hour for the hair department to give him his cornrows haircut . He said he enjoyed the process , saying it " felt like a stiff head massage " . 
 Mullally said Tammy is expected to appear again in future episodes : " It seems like it 's sort of a once a season @-@ ish kind of event . When Tammy shows up , it pretty much brings Ron to a screeching halt . " Mullally and Parks co @-@ star Adam Scott also starred together in the Starz comedy series Party Down . " Ron & Tammy : Part Two " featured the last of several guest performances of Jama Williamson as Wendy , who revealed she was returning to her home country of Canada to care for her aging parents . Pawnee Police Chief Trumple was portrayed by Eric Pierpoint , who has played several police officers throughout his career , including an alien police officer in the science fiction series Alien Nation and a police chief in the superhero drama series The Cape . 
 Immediately after " Ron & Tammy : Part Two " first aired on February 10 , 2011 , NBC ran a commercial advertising " April and Andy 's wedding registry " on the official Parks and Recreation website . This seemed inconsistent with the show 's storyline because , although April and Andy had previously expressed romantic interest in each other , the two had separated and were not yet reconciled at the time of the episode . Shortly after the episode aired , HitFix television reviewer Alan Sepinwall wrote that the commercial mistakenly used the wrong names and was actually referring to Ron and Tammy 's wedding registry , which was mentioned in " Ron & Tammy : Part Two " and was indeed featured on the Parks and Recreation website . However , while images of both April and Andy were featured in the commercial , Tammy herself was not , and some commentators suggested the error could be indicative of future events in the series . Andy and April eventually did marry in the episode " Andy and April 's Fancy Party " . Afterward , Parks co @-@ creator Michael Schur admitted the commercial was intended to run with that episode , but ran with " Ron & Tammy : Part Two " due to an error by NBC employees : 
 " In an effort to undo the spoiler , we publicly stated , in a number of interviews , that NBC had just accidentally gotten the character names wrong , and that there was no upcoming Andy @-@ April wedding . We sincerely hope that fans of the show are cool with us gently lying to them , in an effort to maintain the surprise nuptials as much as we could . Now if you 'll excuse us , we have to go shoot the season finale surprise Jerry @-@ Donna wedding scene . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Ron & Tammy : Part Two " was seen by an estimated 5 @.@ 03 million household viewers , according to Nielsen Media Research , with an overall 3 @.@ 0 rating / 5 share , and a 2 @.@ 5 rating / 7 share among viewers between ages 18 and 49 . It marked a slight increase in viewership compared to the previous episode , " Time Capsule " . The night " Ron & Tammy : Part Two " was broadcast , Parks and Recreation was outperformed in its timeslot by the CBS crime drama series CSI : Crime Scene Investigation , which was seen by 12 @.@ 78 million households ; the ABC medical drama series Grey 's Anatomy , which was seen by 10 @.@ 4 million household viewers ; and the Fox comedy @-@ drama series Bones , which was seen by 9 @.@ 5 million households . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Ron & Tammy : Part Two " received highly positive reviews , with several commentators praising the repairing of Ron and Tammy , Nick Offerman 's performance and , in particular , the line in which Ron explains how part of his mustache became shaved off : " It rubbed off ... from friction . " Entertainment Weekly writer Hillary Busis said she feared Megan Mullally could not live up to her performance in " Ron and Tammy " , but she said the follow @-@ up episode " gave Parks and Rec fans everything they could hope for and more " . Busis also praised the pairing of the enthusiastic Chris and the apathetic April . Alan Sepinwall of HitFix enjoyed that the script did not simply rehash the original " Ron and Tammy " story , but instead played it well off the Tom , Wendy and Ron love triangle . Sepinwall also praised the Chris / April pairing and the fact that Adam Scott got to do more than play his usual straight man role . He added that he hoped each season would have a Ron and Tammy @-@ centric episode , but limit it to once a year in the style of Cheers Bar Wars episodes . 
 The A.V. Club writer Steve Heisler said the episode was " just about as good as it gets " , with several great moments revolving around Nick Offerman 's deadpan comedic delivery . Heisler also said making the police department part of the script was a good way to better flesh out Pawnee and its townspeople . New York magazine writer Steve Kandell praised the performances of Offerman and Aubrey Plaza , and referred to Tammy as Pawnee 's equivalent of Sideshow Bob in The Simpsons ' Springfield . Kandell also liked that the episode " had heart " because the Tammy subplot was resolved by Ron standing up for Tom . TV Squad writer Joel Keller said the episode did not reach the level of the original " Ron and Tammy " , but that " it still had more than enough funny , cringeworthy and downright gross moments to be very satisfying " . He declared Mullally " one of the best sitcom creations this side of Colonel Flagg on M * A * S * H " . The Atlantic writer Scott Meslow praised Ron Swanson as the show 's " breakout character " , and said " Ron & Tammy : Part Two " was so good that he hoped for another sequel episode in the next season . 
 Rick Porter of Zap2it said the episode featured several great scenes between Ron and Tammy and called it a " tour de force " for Nick Offerman , but also appreciated that the episode featured strong moments outside that main plotline . He called it the best comedic showcase for Adam Scott so far in the season , and praised both the pairing of April and Chris , and the way that subplot led to Ann 's confusion about her future with Chris . Eric Sundermann of Hollywood.com said the subplot with April and Chris demonstrated how Parks often succeeds in pairing two characters that often seem to have little connection to each other . Sundermann also enjoyed how Ben 's awkwardness around the police chief illustrated how " the show is becoming more and more clear on who understands and fits in Pawnee , versus who doesn 't " . TV Fanatic writer Matt Richenthal said the dynamic between Ron and Tammy worked well not only due to their real @-@ life relationship , but also because of the balance between " the couple 's over @-@ the @-@ top antics and the heart it showed in other areas " . Richenthal also complimented the performance of Chris Pratt as the " sweet , well @-@ intentioned , air @-@ headed Andy " . 
 = United States Senate election in Ohio , 1898 = 
 On January 12 , 1898 , the Ohio General Assembly met in joint convention to elect a United States Senator . The incumbent , Mark Hanna , had been appointed by Governor Asa Bushnell on March 5 , 1897 , to fill the vacancy caused by the resignation of John Sherman to become Secretary of State to President ( and former Ohio governor ) William McKinley . Hanna 's appointment was only good until the legislature met and made its own choice . The legislature elected Hanna over his fellow Republican , Cleveland Mayor Robert McKisson , both for the remainder of Sherman 's original term ( expiring in 1899 ) and for a full six @-@ year term to conclude in 1905 . 
 Hanna , a wealthy industrialist , had successfully managed McKinley 's 1896 presidential campaign . The Ohio Republican Party was bitterly divided between the faction led by McKinley , Hanna and Sherman , and one led by Ohio 's other senator , Joseph B. Foraker . Bushnell was a Foraker ally , and it was only under pressure from McKinley and others that he agreed to appoint Hanna to fill Sherman 's Senate seat . After Hanna gained the appointment , Republican legislators kept their majority in the November 1897 election , apparently ensuring Hanna 's election once the new body met in January 1898 . However , before the legislative session , the Democrats allied with a number of Republicans , mostly from the Foraker faction , hoping to take control of the legislature and defeat Hanna . 
 The coalition was successful in taking control of both houses of the legislature ; with the Senate election to be held just over a week later , intense politicking took place . Some lawmakers went into hiding for fear they would be pressured by the other side . The coalition decided on McKisson as their candidate the day before the balloting began . Three Republican state representatives who had voted with the Democrats to organize the legislature switched sides and voted for Hanna , who triumphed with a bare majority in both the short and long term elections . Bribery was alleged ; legislative leaders complained to the United States Senate , which took no action against Hanna . McKisson lost a re @-@ election bid as mayor in 1899 ; Hanna remained a powerful figure in the Senate until his death in 1904 . 
 = = Background and appointment of Hanna = = 
 The members of the Constitutional Convention of 1787 , in drafting the Constitution , empowered state legislatures , not the people , to choose United States Senators . Federal law prescribed that the senatorial election was to take place beginning on the second Tuesday after the legislature which would be in place when the senatorial term expired first met and chose officers . On the designated day , balloting for senator would take place in each of the two chambers of the legislature . If a majority of each house voted for the same candidate , then at the joint convention held the following day at noon , the candidate would be declared elected . Otherwise , there would be a roll @-@ call vote of all legislators , with a majority of those present needed to elect . If a vacancy occurred when the legislature was not in session , the governor could make a temporary appointment to serve until lawmakers convened . 
 Beginning in about 1888 , there were rival factions seeking control of the Republican Party of Ohio . In 1896 , one faction was led by Senator John Sherman , former governor William McKinley , and McKinley 's political manager , Cleveland industrialist Mark Hanna . The other grouping was led by former governor Joseph Foraker , who had the support of Ohio 's current governor , Asa S. Bushnell . A truce was reached for the 1896 election campaign whereby McKinley 's supporters would vote for Foraker in the Ohio Legislature 's January 1896 senatorial election , while Foraker would support McKinley 's presidential ambitions . Foraker was elected and in June , the senator @-@ elect placed McKinley 's name in nomination at the 1896 Republican National Convention . In the November election , McKinley defeated Democrat William Jennings Bryan to win the presidency ; Hanna served as his campaign manager and chief fundraiser . The industrialist raised millions for McKinley 's campaign but was bitterly attacked by Democratic newspapers for allegedly trying to buy the presidency , with McKinley as his easily dominated agent . In the 1896 election , the issue of the nation 's monetary standard was a major issue , with McKinley advocating the gold standard , while Bryan favored " free silver " , that is , to inflate the money supply by accepting all silver presented to the government and returning the bullion to the depositor in the form of coin , even though the silver in a dollar coin was worth only about half that . 
 After the election , McKinley offered Hanna the post of Postmaster General , which he turned down , hoping to become a senator if Sherman ( whose term was to expire in 1899 ) was appointed to the Cabinet . McKinley did not believe the rumors , which proved accurate , that the 73 @-@ year @-@ old Sherman 's mental faculties were failing , and offered him the position of Secretary of State on January 4 , 1897 . Sherman 's acceptance meant that , once he resigned , one of Ohio 's Senate seats would be in the gift of Bushnell , with the appointee to serve until the legislature reconvened in January 1898 . 
 Foraker was astonished when he learned that Hanna was seeking the Senate seat , not knowing that the industrialist had political ambitions . He felt that Hanna 's campaign activities did not qualify him for legislative service . Hanna and his allies applied considerable pressure on the governor , though initially McKinley did not participate . 
 Bushnell did not want to appoint Hanna , and offered the seat to Congressman Theodore Burton , a member of neither faction , who turned it down . Historian Wilbur Jones speculates that the seat was refused because of Burton 's unwillingness to alienate Hanna 's supporters , an action which might sacrifice a career in the House of Representatives for the sake of a few months in the Senate . The governor considered other options , such as arranging to get the position himself or calling a special session of the legislature and have them elect a new senator . However , Bushnell eventually decided that appointing someone else was not worth risking the wrath of the new presidential administration , and of Hanna ( who was chairman of the Republican National Committee ) . In late February 1897 , McKinley sent a personal emissary , his old friend Judge William R. Day , to Bushnell , and the governor yielded . Hanna was given his commission by Governor Bushnell in the lobby of Washington 's Arlington Hotel on the morning of March 5 , 1897 . 
 Hanna 's associates alleged that Bushnell had delayed the appointment of Hanna so that Foraker could be Ohio 's senior senator . Herbert Croly , in his biography of Hanna , agreed , and McKinley biographer H. Wayne Morgan also states that Bushnell delayed Hanna 's commission for this reason . Hanna biographer William Horner considers this motive possible . In his memoirs , Foraker denied this , stating that Sherman had not resigned from the Senate until the afternoon of March 4 , 1897 ( the date on which the president and Congress were sworn in ) so that Sherman could formally introduce Foraker to the Senate . Sherman , according to Foraker , was also unwilling to resign until he had been confirmed as Secretary of State , which took place on the afternoon of March 4 . Foraker noted that he had been senator @-@ elect since his selection by the legislature in January 1896 " and there was no vacancy for which Mr. Hanna could be qualified , except only that to be created by the retirement of Mr. Sherman , and Mr. Sherman refused to retire until I was sworn and in my seat " . 
 = = 1897 state legislative campaign = = 
 Hanna obtained endorsement for election as senator by the 1897 Republican state convention during June in Toledo , and by local conventions in 84 of Ohio 's 88 counties . Republicans expressed little opposition to Hanna 's candidacy for senator prior to the November state elections , at which Ohioans elected a governor , other statewide officials , and a legislature . There was much national interest in the legislative campaign , which was seen as a rematch of 1896 and a forerunner of the 1900 presidential campaign , and as a referendum on Mark Hanna . President McKinley both campaigned on Hanna 's behalf in Ohio and recruited speakers for him ; for the Democrats , Bryan was the leading orator . Democrats hoped that by gaining a majority in the legislature and frustrating Hanna 's election bid , they could claim a reversal of the voters ' verdict in the 1896 presidential race , and exact revenge on the man who had helped orchestrate their defeat . While the question of whether Hanna should continue in the Senate was central to the campaign , also discussed was whether McKinley 's policies , including the Dingley Tariff , had brought prosperity , as well as the issue of free silver versus the gold standard . The Democrats , as was their custom , did not endorse a specific candidate for Senate , but Cincinnati publisher John R. McLean was widely spoken of as the party 's rival for Hanna 's seat until strategists decided that his wealth and business background did not provide adequate contrast to Hanna , and McLean was forced into the background . 
 During the campaign , William Randolph Hearst 's New York Journal renewed the savage attacks on Hanna which had marked the 1896 presidential campaign ; Hanna was depicted as a bloated <unk> , frequently trampling a skull marked " Labor " and dominating a shrunken , childlike McKinley . Foraker was not prominent in support of Hanna ; he did endorse his junior colleague in mid @-@ September , and made several speeches soon after the announcement , but thereafter maintained a public silence which would continue until after the vote for senator by the newly elected legislature in January 1898 . 
 Hanna made speeches across the state , much to the curiosity of Ohioans , who had heard a great deal about him for his activities on behalf of McKinley , but who did not know him well . He had rarely been called upon to make public addresses . McKinley recommended his personal technique of thoroughly laying out a speech in advance , but Hanna found it did not work well for him . Instead , he preferred to compose a brief introduction and then speak extemporaneously , not always even being certain of what topics he would address . According to his biographer , Herbert Croly , the informality of Hanna 's speeches won over many in his audience , and he became known as a very effective public speaker . According to Philip Warken in his thesis on the 1898 Senate election , " The campaign probably worked to Hanna 's advantage . The shadowy figure in the background took on shape and form , the candidate 's public appearances tending to break down [ Davenport 's ] popular but distorted image of him . " When Democrats attacked Hanna , who had considerable financial interests in industry , as a " labor crusher " , he gave speeches inviting listeners to ask his workers whether they were well treated . Subsequently , several union leaders and workmen 's committees confirmed that they had no complaint against Hanna . 
 In the November election , 62 Republicans and 47 Democrats were elected to the Ohio House of Representatives , while in the Ohio Senate there were 18 Democrats , 17 Republicans , and 1 Independent Republican elected . This meant a majority of 15 for the Republicans on joint ballot , ample , it was thought , to secure Hanna 's election . 
 = = Senate election = = 
 = = = Political turmoil = = = 
 The first public inkling that there might still be a serious contest for Hanna 's Senate seat came the day after the November vote , when Governor Bushnell declared that the party 's majority in the legislature was sufficient to elect a Republican as senator , but refrained from mentioning Hanna by name . Newspapers took note of the fact that while Bushnell had won a second term by 28 @,@ 000 votes in the election , the balloting for the legislature had gone Republican by only 9 @,@ 000 . Soon after the election , a number of Republicans announced that they intended to ally with the Democrats and defeat Hanna . 
 Croly lists Bushnell , Cleveland Mayor Robert McKisson , and former Republican state chairman Charles L. Kurtz as among those involved in what he called a conspiracy against Hanna . Kurtz had been defeated in his re @-@ election bid to the chairmanship by Hanna forces at the 1897 Republican state convention , while McKisson had unsuccessfully sought Hanna 's support in his first election run in 1895 , and according to Hanna biographer William T. Horner , held a grudge as a result . Hanna had also opposed his re @-@ election in the municipal elections held in early 1897 , speaking highly of McKisson 's opponent to a reporter , and asking the reporter whether it was true that McKisson had secured renomination as mayor through fraud . Despite poor treatment by the Hanna campaign — McKisson had been relegated to obscure rallies , except when called upon to introduce the candidate at a huge Cleveland event , and the Hanna supporters had sought to remove McKisson men from election positions — McKisson had publicly supported Hanna for senator , making several speeches on the night before election day urging Republicans to vote the straight party ticket . Nevertheless , sample ballots were sent to Cleveland voters , telling them how best to cast their ballots so as to minimize Hanna 's chances , and Warken speculated that these had to come from McKisson , as the only person with motive and opportunity . 
 Charles Dick , then Hanna 's aide and later his successor as senator , recounted , " The opposition developed immediately after the election . I might say the plotting , so far as the <unk> were concerned , began before the election ... The fifteen majority melted away . " According to Horner , " as men elected to the Ohio legislature who were pledged to support Hanna continued to turn up opposing him ... the chances of Hanna retaining his seat began to look rather grim " . Kurtz disavowed the Toledo convention 's endorsement of Hanna , describing the gathering as controlled by the senator 's paid agents . He stated his case against Hanna : " The returns of the recent election show that he is not wanted by the party . The days of Mr. Hanna 's bossism are over . The people here are against him , and that settles it . " 
 Several of the men who opposed Hanna came from Cleveland and elsewhere in Cuyahoga County , where Mayor McKisson was influential . The situation in Cincinnati 's Hamilton County ( home to Foraker ) was complicated by the fact that the Republican legislators from there had run on a fusion ticket with the Democrats in order to defeat the local Republican bosses . These men were " Silver Republicans " , as was the Independent Republican elected from Cincinnati , supporting " free silver " in opposition to McKinley , and had not pledged during the campaign to vote for Hanna if elected . 
 Foraker was not actively involved in the controversy , and in the sole interview he gave , said he was doing his best to keep out of it . Nevertheless , most of Hanna 's Republican opponents were from Foraker 's wing of the party . Ohio 's senior senator did , however , state his belief that Hanna would have a difficult time being elected . When asked by Hanna supporters to intercede with the insurgents , Foraker responded , " I will not antagonize lifetime friends for Hanna , " and that Hanna was " not honorable enough " to go to Bushnell and Kurtz and work out a solution . 
 The new legislature convened in Columbus on Monday , January 3 , 1898 . In the state House of Representatives , nine anti @-@ Hanna Republicans aligned with the Democrats , electing one of the nine as Speaker . In the state Senate , an anti @-@ Hanna Republican did not initially attend , allowing the Democrats to organize the chamber and elect one of their own as president of the body . The various legislative offices were divided between the Democrats and the insurgent Republicans . Democratic forces in the Ohio Senate were boosted when the absent Republican appeared and voted with them . A margin of three in the House and two in the Senate translated into a likely margin of five against Hanna on the senatorial vote , meaning that three legislators would have to switch sides for him to retain his position . 
 = = = Contest in Columbus = = = 
 After the combine 's success in the legislature , the Hanna @-@ controlled Republican state committee called on local activists to come to Columbus . A rally took place on the day of Governor Bushnell 's second inauguration , and many in the streets booed him . Much of the indignation focused on Bushnell as the only statewide official linked with the insurgents . Meetings were held across the state and petitions circulated , for the most part supporting Hanna and denouncing Bushnell , Kurtz , and McKisson . Croly described the scene in the days leading up to the vote for senator : 
 Columbus came to resemble a mediaeval city given over to an angry feud between armed partisans . Everybody was worked up to a high pitch of excitement and resentment . Blows were exchanged in the hotels and on the streets . There were threats of assassination . Timid men feared to go out after dark . Certain members of the Legislature were supplied with body @-@ guards . Many of them never left their rooms . Detectives and spies , who were trying to track down various stories of bribery and corruption , were scattered everywhere . 
 Hanna 's forces went to great lengths to pick up the votes he needed for his election . According to Croly , they received word that state Representative John Griffith of Union County was under constant guard at the Great Southern Hotel , but was considering switching to Hanna 's side . Hanna operatives aided his escape , and he was kept with his wife at Hanna headquarters at the Neil House until the vote . However , Warken related that Griffith " seemed to align himself with the group that talked to him last " , repeatedly changing his position and eventually supporting Hanna . Hanna supporters sought to persuade other coalition Republicans to return to the fold — by one account , a Cleveland Republican tearfully refused , stating that if he voted for Hanna , McKisson would cut him off as a supplier of brick pavers to the city . President McKinley did his best to help Hanna , sending a letter to one Republican whose vote was doubtful , delivered by a soldier . 
 On January 9 , newspapers printed allegations that Hanna had arranged to bribe John Otis , one of the Silver Republicans from Cincinnati . Otis alleged that he was offered $ 10 @,@ 000 and was actually paid $ 1 @,@ 750 . The individual said to have offered the money , a New Yorker named Henry H. Boyce , had met with Hanna adviser Estes Rathbone at least twice . Boyce denied trying to bribe Otis , though he did admit to giving a retainer payment to Otis 's lawyer , and fled the state when the matter became public . Hanna denied any involvement . His opponents hoped that the incident would preface his defeat , while his supporters feared the story would prompt a public outcry . Croly and Horner agree that the allegations had little impact on public opinion . 
 The legislative leaders had not settled on a candidate to stand against Hanna , and discussions continued until January 10 , a day before the houses would vote . Democrats had tentatively agreed to vote for a Republican for senator , but were unwilling to consider a supporter of the gold standard . They considered giving a " complimentary " vote ( that is , to honor the recipient ) to Cincinnati publisher John R. McLean , a Democrat , before switching to a Republican . There being no requirement that the same person be elected for both the short and long Senate terms , Democrats also tried to negotiate for one of their party to be elected at least for the short term expiring in 1899 . Under the latter scenario , Governor Bushnell was proposed in the long term election , but Bushnell was unwilling to support silver . At last , McKisson was decided on by the insurgents for both the short and long terms . The plan was announced on January 10 , together with a statement from McKisson , which he soon disavowed : that though he would if elected remain in name a Republican , he would support the 1896 pro @-@ silver " Chicago Platform " of Bryan and his Democrats . 
 Ultimately , the contest came down to the votes of two Cincinnati Silver Republicans . The Hanna campaign at last secured the votes of both men ; Croly related that one of them , Charles F. Droste , had initially sought to advance the candidacy of a free silver Republican , Col. <unk> Garrard of Cincinnati , and when it was clear that no one else supported Garrard , agreed to give Hanna his vote . Warken deemed the combine 's failure to support Garrard " the greatest blunder of the anti @-@ Hanna coalition . If they had pushed the Colonel 's candidacy they might have secured the support of the free silver men among the Cincinnati fusionists " . After the vote , McKisson rejected such criticisms : the combine would never have held together to vote for a silver @-@ supporting candidate . A contemporary account calls the men 's decision to support Hanna " unexplained " , and that " each of these Cincinnati members had been offered the <unk> if he would withdraw from Mr. Hanna . Whether this offer could have been made good or not is doubtful " . 
 The balloting in the separate chambers of the legislature took place on January 11 , 1898 . In the Ohio House , Hanna received 56 votes to 49 for McKisson , with Columbus Congressman John J. Lentz , state Representative Aquila Wiley and former congressman <unk> J. Warner receiving one each . The vote was the same for the short and the long term . Hanna 's 56 votes were all from Republicans ; McKisson received the ballots of 43 Democrats and six Republicans . The other three votes were cast by Democrats unwilling to support a Republican . One Democratic representative was absent due to illness on both days of the voting . In the Senate , there were identical votes for short and long term . McKisson received the votes of 18 Democrats and one Republican , while Hanna won the vote of 16 Republicans and the one Independent Republican . The split between the two houses meant that there would be a roll @-@ call vote of the two houses in joint convention the following day . Nevertheless , if Hanna held all 73 votes cast for him , he would be elected . 
 According to Alfred Henry Lewis of Hearst 's Journal , writing on January 12 , " The opposition to Hanna was utterly disorganized by the history of yesterday , and practically speaking , went into joint session today somewhat like a routed army might take up some battle it could not avoid . " The 73 men pledged to Hanna went to the State House together under the protection of Hanna adherents . Croly related : " Armed guards were stationed at every important point . The State House was filled with desperate and determined men . " In the joint convention , held in the House Chamber , the journals of the two houses were read , detailing the tallies from the previous day . The clerks of the two houses then called the rolls . The only votes to change were those which had gone to Warner and Wiley ; both were switched to McKisson . Representative Aquila Wiley was the last person to vote ; with Hanna having already received the 73 ballots he needed for election , Wiley maintained his vote for Lentz . The final tally , both for the short and long term was Hanna 73 , McKisson 70 , and Lentz 1 . Before the joint convention adjourned , Hanna appeared before it , thanking the legislators for his election . He stated , " I doubly thank you because under the circumstances it comes to me as an assurance of your confidence " . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Newspaper reaction to the result was generally along partisan lines . The Cincinnati Commercial Tribune , a Republican paper , stated of Hanna , " And this is the man against whom has been waged a war than which political history furnishes none more venomous , vicious , and relentlessly vituperative . It is a disgraceful story , known of all men . " The Blade , another Republican paper , agreed , writing , " The fight against Mr. Hanna was the most <unk> traitorous contest ever waged in the political annals of Ohio . " The Cincinnati Enquirer , a Silver Democratic paper , argued , " The Republican contingent which stuck to the last against Hanna has made a record which the victorious faction might well envy ... Their fight was ... against the chairman of the national committee and all its forces and resources ; against the president of the United States , with his tremendous party influence and more influential patronage . Against all this they have cut down the man who a year ago was , next to the president , the leading Republican of the United States , to a pitiful majority of one in his ambition to be elected to the Senate , and that obtained under circumstances not creditable to him . They chased him so hard that he dare not stop to have the gravest charges investigated . " Hearst 's New York Journal noted , " And so it is to be ' Senator Hanna ' for seven years . Well , the senatorship can add nothing to its holder 's power for evil . As long as Hanna has his money he can control <unk> , whether he occupies them or not . Perhaps it is best to have him in the open . " 
 McKisson " had recognized that to lose the fight meant political death " . In June 1898 , McKisson and his Cuyahoga County delegation were excluded from the Republican state convention in favor of a Hanna @-@ backed delegation . Hanna forces had lost at the county level , but , alleging irregularities , had met and sent a rival delegation . McKisson ran for a third term as mayor in 1899 . He survived a bitter battle in the Republican primary , but was defeated in the general election , leading to a decade of dominance by the Democrats in Cleveland . McKisson returned to his career as an attorney , continuing to practice law in Cleveland until his death in 1915 at age 52 . 
 Both houses of the legislature voted to form committees to investigate alleged bribery in the result , though most Republicans abstained from voting on the resolutions . The House committee investigation ended inconclusively . The Ohio Senate committee declined to allow Hanna 's attorney to participate in the proceedings . Relying on legal advice , Hanna refused to testify and asked supporters not to cooperate . The state Senate committee reported that an attempt to bribe Otis had been made by an unknown agent of Hanna ; three Hanna aides , including Charles Dick , were implicated . The report was sent to the US Senate in May 1898 , which referred it to the Committee on Privileges and Elections . The Republican majority of the committee reported in February 1899 that while it accepted that an attempt had been made to bribe Otis , the matter had been known before the vote , Otis had voted for McKisson anyway , and that there was no evidence linking Hanna to the attempt . The report did mildly admonish Hanna and his associates for not cooperating with the Ohio Senate committee . Democrats on the Privileges and Elections Committee urged further investigation , but the US Senate ordered the committee 's report to be printed , and took no further action . Hanna remained a power in the Senate until his death in 1904 . 
 The extent to which money or patronage affected the outcome of the election is unclear . Congressman Burton stated , " I never saw any evidence of the use of money in Columbus and don 't believe that any money was used corruptly . " In an interview after Hanna 's death , James Rudolph Garfield , son of the late president and floor leader of the Hanna forces in the Ohio Senate , recalled that the senator " had been asked to shut his eyes to some things . But he declined to do it . " However , Garfield also noted , " I have never been sure as to what some of the men who called themselves Senator Hanna 's friends really did do . " Croly believed that Hanna did not personally authorize bribes of legislators , but concedes that Hanna 's supporters " may have been willing to spend money in Mr. Hanna 's interest and without his knowledge . " The biographer suggested , " If Mr. Hanna had himself planned to purchase the vote of John C. Otis , it is reasonable to believe that the business would have been better managed . " Horner believes it impossible to ascertain if corruption took place , but if Hanna bribed legislators , it was because it was a common practice on both sides . He notes of Hanna , " his career as a senator continued , but accusations of wrongdoing remain a part of his legacy well over a century later . " Public dismay at what was seen as a corrupt means of choosing federal lawmakers was a major factor in the ratification of the Seventeenth Amendment to the United States Constitution in 1913 , which took the privilege of electing senators out of state legislators ' hands and gave it to the people . 
 = Jacques Plante = 
 Joseph Jacques Omer Plante ( French pronunciation : ​ [ <unk> <unk> ̃ t ] ; January 17 , 1929 – February 27 , 1986 ) was a Canadian professional ice hockey goaltender . During a career lasting from 1947 to 1975 , he was considered to be one of the most important innovators in hockey . He played for the Montreal Canadiens from 1953 to 1963 ; during his tenure , the team won the Stanley Cup six times , including five consecutive wins . 
 Plante retired in 1965 but was persuaded to return to the National Hockey League to play for the expansion St. Louis Blues in 1968 . He was later traded to the Toronto Maple Leafs in 1970 and to the Boston Bruins in 1973 . He joined the World Hockey Association as coach and general manager for the Quebec Nordiques in 1973 – 74 . He then played goal for the Edmonton Oilers in 1974 – 75 , ending his professional career with that team . 
 Plante was the first NHL goaltender to wear a goaltender mask in regulation play on a regular basis . He developed and tested many versions of the mask ( including the forerunner of today 's mask / helmet combination ) with the assistance of other experts . Plante was the first NHL goaltender to regularly play the puck outside his crease in support of his team 's defencemen , and he often instructed his teammates from behind the play . Plante was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1978 , was chosen as the goaltender of the Canadiens ' " dream team " in 1985 , and was inducted into the Quebec Sports Pantheon in 1994 . The Montreal Canadiens retired Plante 's jersey , # 1 , the following year . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Plante was born on a farm near Notre @-@ Dame @-@ du @-@ Mont @-@ Carmel , in <unk> , Quebec , the first of 11 children born to Palma and Xavier Plante . The family moved to Shawinigan Falls , where his father worked in one of the local factories . In 1932 , Plante began to play hockey , <unk> and with a tennis ball , using a goaltender 's hockey stick his father had carved from a tree root . When he was five years old , Plante fell off a ladder and broke his hand . The fracture failed to heal properly and affected his playing style during his early hockey career ; he underwent successful corrective surgery as an adult . Plante suffered from asthma starting in early childhood . This prevented him from skating for extended periods so he gravitated to playing goaltender . As his playing progressed , Jacques received his first regulation goaltender 's stick for Christmas of 1936 . His father made Plante 's first pads by stuffing potato sacks and reinforcing them with wooden panels . As a child , Plante played hockey outdoors in the bitterly cold Quebec winters . His mother taught him how to knit his own tuques to protect him from the cold . Plante continued knitting and embroidering throughout his life and wore his hand @-@ knitted tuques while playing and practicing until entering the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . 
 Plante 's first foray into organized hockey came at age 12 . He was watching his school 's team practice , when the coach ordered the goaltender off the ice after a heated argument over his play , and Plante asked to replace him . The coach permitted him to play since there was no other available goaltender ; it was quickly apparent that Plante could hold his own , despite the other players being many years older than he was . He impressed the coach and stayed on as the team 's number one goaltender . 
 Two years later , Plante was playing for five different teams - the local factory team , and teams in the midget , juvenile , junior and intermediate categories . Plante demanded a salary from the factory team 's coach after his father told him that the other players were being paid because they were company employees . The coach paid Plante 50 cents per game to retain him and maintain the team 's popularity . Afterwards , Plante began to receive various offers from other teams ; he was offered $ 80 per week — a considerable sum in those days — to play for a team in England , and a similar offer to play for the Providence Reds of the American Hockey League . Plante passed them up because his parents wanted him to finish high school . He graduated with top honours in 1947 . Upon graduation , he took a job as a clerk in a Shawinigan factory . A few weeks later , the Quebec <unk> offered Plante $ 85 per week to play for them ; he accepted , marking the beginning of his professional career . 
 His nickname was " Jake the Snake " . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues = = = 
 Jacques joined the Quebec Citadelles in 1947 . It was while playing for the Citadelles that Plante started to play the puck outside his crease . He developed this technique when he recognized that the team 's defense was performing poorly . Fans found Plante 's unconventional playing style to be exciting , but it angered his managers . They believed that a goaltender should stay in net and let his players recover the puck . Plante had come to the conclusion that as long as he was in control of the puck , the opponents could not shoot it at him - this is now standard practice for goaltenders . The same season , the Citadelles beat the Montreal Junior Canadiens in the league finals , with Plante being named most valuable player on his team . The Montreal Canadiens ' general manager , Frank J. Selke , became interested in acquiring Plante as a member of the team . In 1948 , Plante received an invitation to the Canadiens ' training camp . On August 17 , 1949 , Selke offered Plante a contract with the Canadiens ' organization . Plante played for Montreal 's affiliate Royal Montreal Hockey Club , earning $ 4 @,@ 500 for the season , and an extra $ 500 for practicing with the Canadiens . 
 In 1949 , he married Jacqueline Gagné ; they had two sons , Michel and Richard . 
 In January 1953 , Plante was called up to play for the Canadiens . Bill Durnan , the goaltender who played for Montreal when Plante first began , had retired , and Gerry McNeil — their top goaltender — had fractured his jaw . Plante played for three games , but in that short time , he generated controversy . Coach Dick Irvin , Sr. did not wish his players to stand out by any addition to their regular uniforms . Plante always wore one of his tuques while playing hockey , and after an argument with Irvin , all of Plante 's tuques had vanished from the Montreal locker room . Even without his good luck charm , Plante gave up only four goals in the three games he played , all of them wins . 
 Later during the 1952 – 53 NHL season , Plante played in the playoffs against the Chicago Black Hawks . He won his first playoff game with a shutout . Montreal won that series and eventually the Stanley Cup . Plante 's name was engraved on the Cup for the first time . 
 At the beginning of 1953 , McNeil was still the starting goaltender for the Canadiens . Selke assigned Plante to the Buffalo Bisons of the AHL so fans in the United States would get to know him . Plante was instantly successful ; Fred Hunt , the general manager of the Bisons , told Kenny Reardon , Montreal 's recruiting manager , that , " he 's [ Plante ] the biggest attraction since the good old days of Terry Sawchuk . " 
 = = = Montreal Canadiens = = = 
 By the end of the 1953 – 54 NHL season , Plante was well @-@ entrenched within the NHL . In the spring of 1954 , he underwent surgery to correct his left hand , which he had broken in his childhood . He could not move the hand well enough to catch high shots and compensated by using the rest of his body . The operation was successful . 
 On February 12 , 1954 , Plante was called up to the Canadiens and established himself as their starting goaltender - he did not return to the minor leagues for many years . Plante was the Canadiens ' number one goaltender at the beginning of the 1954 – 55 NHL season . On March 13 , 1955 , with only four games left in the season , an on @-@ ice brawl resulted in the suspension of Montreal 's leading scorer , Maurice Richard , for the rest of the season and the playoffs . Four nights later , playing in Montreal in front of an angry crowd , Plante was witness to the riot that followed . It began at the Forum by angry hockey game spectators and spread along Montreal 's Ste . Catherine Street , causing injuries to police and fans and extensive damage to businesses and property . The Canadiens subsequently lost to the Detroit Red Wings in the finals . 
 For the 1955 – 56 season , Plante was the unchallenged starting goaltender of the Canadiens ; Gerry McNeil had not played the previous season and was sent to the Montreal Royals . Charlie Hodge , Plante 's backup the previous season , was sent to a Canadiens ' farm team in Seattle . Later that season , Montreal won the Stanley Cup — the first of what would be five consecutive Stanley Cup championship seasons . The next season , Plante missed most of November because of chronic bronchitis , a consequence of the asthma that had affected him since childhood . During the 1957 – 58 NHL season , the Canadiens won their third straight Stanley Cup despite injuries to Plante and other members of the team . Plante 's asthma was getting worse . He sustained a concussion with just a few weeks left in the season and missed three games of the playoffs . In the sixth game of the Stanley Cup finals , Plante 's asthma was making him dizzy , and he was having difficulty concentrating ; he collapsed at the end of the game after teammate Doug Harvey scored the series @-@ winning goal . The Canadiens went on to win the Stanley Cup again at the close of the 1958 – 59 season . 
 = = = = Mask = = = = 
 During the 1959 – 60 NHL season , Plante wore a goaltender mask for the first time in a regular season game . Although Plante had used his mask in practice since 1956 after missing 13 games because of sinusitis , head coach Toe Blake did not permit him to wear it during regulation play . However , on November 1 , 1959 , Plante 's nose was broken when he was hit by a shot fired by Andy Bathgate three minutes into a game against the New York Rangers , and he was taken to the dressing room for stitches . When he returned , he was wearing the crude home @-@ made goaltender mask that he had been using in practices . Blake was livid , but he had no other goaltender to call upon and Plante refused to return to the goal unless he wore the mask . Blake agreed on the condition that Plante discard the mask when the cut healed . The Canadiens won the game 3 – 1 . During the following days Plante refused to discard the mask , and as the Canadiens continued to win , Blake was less vocal about it . The unbeaten streak stretched to 18 games . Plante did not wear the mask , at Blake 's request , against Detroit on March 8 , 1960 ; the Canadiens lost 3 – 0 , and the mask returned for good the next night . That year the Canadiens won their fifth straight Stanley Cup , which was Plante 's last . 
 Plante subsequently designed his own and other goaltenders ' masks . He was not the first NHL goaltender known to wear a face mask . Montreal Maroons ' Clint Benedict wore a crude leather version in 1929 to protect a broken nose , but Plante introduced the mask as everyday equipment , and it is now mandatory equipment for goaltenders . 
 = = = Trade to New York and first retirement = = = 
 Hampered by terrible pain in his left knee during the 1960 – 61 NHL season , Plante was sent down to the minor league Montreal Royals . Torn cartilage was found in his knee , and the knee was surgically repaired during the summer of 1961 . The next season Plante became only the fourth goaltender to win the Hart Memorial Trophy - he also won the Vezina Trophy for the sixth time . The 1962 – 63 season was unsettling for Plante . His asthma had worsened , and he missed most of the early season . His relationship with his coach , Toe Blake , continued to deteriorate because of Plante 's persistent health problems . Later , Plante was at the center of a major controversy when he claimed that net sizes in the NHL were not uniform , thus giving a statistical advantage to goaltenders playing for the Chicago Black Hawks , Boston Bruins , and New York Rangers . His claim was later confirmed as the result of a manufacturing error . 
 After the Canadiens were eliminated for the third straight year in the first playoff round during the spring of 1963 , there was mounting pressure for change from their fans and media . Growing tension between Plante and Blake because of Plante 's inconsistent work ethic and demeanor caused Blake to declare that for the 1963 – 64 season either he or Plante must go . On June 4 , 1963 , Plante was traded to the New York Rangers , with Phil Goyette and Don Marshall in exchange for Gump Worsley , Dave <unk> , Leon Rochefort , and Len Ronson . Plante played for the Rangers for one full season and part of a second . He retired in 1965 while playing for the minor @-@ league Baltimore Clippers of the American Hockey League . His wife was ill at the time , and he required surgery on his right knee . 
 Upon retirement , Plante took a job with Molson as a sales representative but remained active in the NHL . In 1965 , Scotty Bowman asked Plante to play for the Montreal Jr . Canadiens in a game against the Soviet National Team . Honoured to represent his country , Plante agreed , and after receiving permission from both the Rangers ( who owned his rights ) and Molson , he began practicing . The Canadiens won 2 – 1 , and Plante was named first star of the game . 
 = = = Comeback to professional hockey = = = 
 At the beginning of the 1967 – 68 NHL season , Plante received a call from his ex @-@ teammate Bert Olmstead seeking some help coaching the expansion Oakland Seals . Plante coached mainly by example , and after the three @-@ week training camp he returned home to Montreal . Plante also played an exhibition game with the Seals . Rumours swirled that Plante was planning a comeback . 
 In June 1968 , Plante was drafted by the St. Louis Blues and signed for $ 35 @,@ 000 for the 1968 – 69 season . In his first season with the Blues , Plante split the goaltending duties with Glenn Hall . He won the Vezina Trophy that season for the seventh time , surpassing Bill Durnan 's record . While playing for the Blues in the 1969 – 70 playoffs against the Boston Bruins , a shot fired by Fred Stanfield and redirected by Phil Esposito hit Plante in the forehead , knocking him out and breaking his fibreglass mask . The first thing Plante said after he regained consciousness at the hospital was that the mask saved his life . That game proved to be his last for the Blues , and he was traded in the summer of 1970 to the Toronto Maple Leafs . He led the NHL with the lowest goals against average ( GAA ) during his first season with the Maple Leafs . At season 's end , he was named to the NHL 's second All @-@ Star team , his seventh such honour . He continued to play for the Leafs until he was traded to the Boston Bruins late in the 1972 – 73 season , recording a shutout against the Black Hawks in his debut for the Bruins . He played eight regular season and two playoff games for the Bruins to finish that season , his last in the NHL . 
 Plante accepted a $ 10 million , 10 @-@ year contract to become coach and general manager of the Quebec Nordiques of the World Hockey Association in 1973 . He was highly dissatisfied with his and the team 's performance and resigned at the end of the 1973 – 74 season . Coming out of retirement once more , Plante played 31 games for the Edmonton Oilers of the WHA in the 1974 – 75 season . Plante retired during the Oilers ' training camp in 1975 – 76 after receiving news that his youngest son had died . 
 = = Hockey analysis and coaching = = 
 Plante had a well @-@ earned reputation for his ability to analyse the game of hockey . He began shouting directions to his teammates during games in his first stint in the minor leagues ( the goaltender usually has the best view of the game ) . He kept extensive notes on opposing players and teams throughout his career . He made his debut in the broadcasting booth during his first retirement in the 1960s as a colour commentator for broadcasts of Quebec Junior League games alongside Danny Gallivan of Hockey Night in Canada fame . Radio Canada , the French language branch of the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation , brought Plante aboard as on @-@ air analyst for its television broadcasts of the 1972 Summit Series between the national team of the Soviet Union and a Canadian team made up of professional players from the NHL . Plante was one of the few North American analysts who dissented from the widely held belief in the superiority of the Canadian team . 
 Plante also wrote extensively on hockey . He wrote hockey columns starting early in his career and was published in La Voix de Shawinigan , Le Samedi , and Sport Magazine . He alienated local reporters by writing a column for the local paper during his time as coach of the Quebec Nordiques . His seminal work , Goaltending , was published in 1972 in English , with the French edition ( entitled Devant le filet ) published in 1973 . In his book , Plante outlined a program of goaltender development that included off @-@ ice exercises , choice of equipment , styles of play , and game @-@ day preparation . He also advised on best coaching methods for both young and advanced goaltenders . His book remained popular with coaches and players and was reprinted in both French and English in 1997 , 25 years after it was first published . 
 Starting in 1967 , Plante was one of the instructors at École moderne de hockey , a summer hockey school for young players . His reputation as a teacher spread , and he traveled to Sweden in 1972 at the invitation of the Swedish Hockey Federation , teaching the top goaltenders in the country and their coaches and trainers . During his first and second retirements , Plante also coached goaltenders and consulted for several NHL teams , including the Oakland Seals , Philadelphia Flyers , Montreal Canadiens and St. Louis Blues . 
 = = Retirement and death = = 
 Plante finally retired from hockey in 1975 , after the death of his youngest son . He moved to Switzerland with his second wife , Raymonde <unk> , but remained active on the North American hockey scene as an analyst , adviser and goaltender trainer . He was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1978 . In the fall of 1985 , Plante was diagnosed with terminal stomach cancer . He died in a Geneva hospital in February 1986 and was buried in Sierre , Switzerland . When his coffin was carried from the church following the funeral mass , it passed under an arch of hockey sticks held high by a team of young hockey players from Quebec , visiting Switzerland for a tournament . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Plante was one of the first goaltenders to skate behind the net to stop the puck . He also was one of the first to raise his arm on an icing call to let his defencemen know what was happening . He perfected a stand @-@ up , positional style , cutting down the angles ; he became one of the first goaltenders to write a how @-@ to book about the position . He was a pioneer of stickhandling the puck ; before that time , goaltenders passively stood in the net and simply deflected pucks to defencemen or <unk> forwards . 
 Plante was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1978 , and into the Quebec Sports Pantheon in 1994 . His jersey , # 1 , was retired in 1995 by the Montreal Canadiens . The Jacques Plante Memorial Trophy was established in his honor as an award to the top goaltender in the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League . The Jacques Plante Trophy was established in Switzerland after Plante 's death ; it is given out annually to the top Swiss goaltender . The main arena in Shawinigan the town he grew up in , was renamed to Aréna Jacques Plante . 
 Plante was selected by Sports Illustrated magazine to its 1991 all @-@ time All @-@ Star team . 
 His injury and subsequent donning of a mask was depicted in an installment of Canada 's Heritage Minute series . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season = = = 
 = = = Post season = = = 
 = = = Coaching statistics = = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = Maryland Route 235 = 
 Maryland Route 235 ( MD 235 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Maryland . Known as Three Notch Road , the state highway runs 30 @.@ 63 miles ( 49 @.@ 29 km ) between its southern intersection with MD 5 in Ridge and its northern intersection with MD 5 near Mechanicsville . While the southern part of the state highway is a quiet rural road , the northern part of MD 235 is a four- to six @-@ lane divided highway connecting Naval Air Station Patuxent River ( NAS Patuxent River ) and the Washington , D.C. , metro area in conjunction with MD 5 . Three Notch Road has been the main highway between northern St. Mary 's County and Point Lookout since the colonial era . The highway was reconstructed as the modern MD 235 between 1923 and 1938 . The state highway was then completely rebuilt during World War II to serve the recently established NAS Patuxent River . Between 1960 and 1985 , MD 235 was converted into a four @-@ lane divided highway to the west and north of the military base . In the face of increasing activity at the base , the highway adjacent to NAS Patuxent River was expanded to six lanes in the early 2000s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 MD 235 begins at an intersection with MD 5 ( Point Lookout Road ) in Ridge . The state highway heads north as a two @-@ lane road that passes through the community of Dameron and to the west of The Elms Wildlife Management Area . MD 235 meets the eastern end of MD 489 ( Park Hall Road ) , a connector between MD 235 and MD 5 , east of Park Hall Estates . The state highway passes a section of old alignment , Poplar Ridge Road , on the east , then curves northwest and intersects MD 712 ( Forest Park Road ) and Hermanville Road in the hamlet of Hermanville at the southern edge of NAS Patuxent River . MD 235 expands to a four @-@ lane road with center turn lane and the highway runs along the western edge of the military base . The state highway intersects MD 246 ( Great Mills Road ) , which serves the main gate of NAS Patuxent River , in the center of Lexington Park . 
 MD 235 continues northwest along the boundary of NAS Patuxent River as a six @-@ lane divided highway . Beyond Pegg Road , which heads east to another entrance to the military base , the highway leaves the vicinity of the naval air station . MD 235 continues into California , where the highway meets the northern end of MD 237 ( Chancellors Run Road ) . A short distance to the north , MD 235 intersects MD 4 , which heads west as St. Andrew 's Church Road and east as Patuxent Beach Road toward the Governor Thomas Johnson Bridge over the Patuxent River to Calvert County . Beyond MD 4 , the highway reduces to a four @-@ lane divided highway and passes to the east of St. Mary 's County Regional Airport . The first of several sections of old alignment , ( Mervell Dean Road ) , splits to the north ; the northern portion of the old highway is MD 944 . MD 235 continues past Clarks Landing Road , which is unsigned MD <unk> , before it receives the northern end of MD 944 a little south of the main road 's intersection with MD 245 ( Hollywood Road / <unk> Road ) in Hollywood . 
 MD 235 receives Old Three Notch Road as it leaves Hollywood , then it parallels another of its former courses , Clover Hill Road , as the highway passes through Hillville . Beyond the intersection with MD 472 ( North <unk> Road ) , MD 235 passes through Oakville , where another old alignment , Oakville Road , splits to the north before the main road intersects MD 247 ( Loveville Road ) . Mt . Zion Church Road , yet another old alignment , splits to the north in the hamlet of Laurel Grove before MD 235 intersects the eastern terminus of MD 6 ( New Market – Turner Road ) and Morganza – Turner Road in Oraville . The final old alignment of MD 235 , Harpers Corner Road , splits to the west shortly before the state highway reaches its northern terminus at MD 5 near Mechanicsville . MD 5 heads southwest as two @-@ lane Point Lookout Road toward Leonardtown . Northbound MD 5 continues straight on the divided highway as Three Notch Road toward Charlotte Hall and Waldorf . 
 MD 235 is part of the main National Highway System from MD 246 in Lexington Park to its northern junction with MD 5 in Mechanicsville . The highway is also a National Highway System principal arterial between MD 712 and MD 246 in Lexington Park . 
 = = History = = 
 MD 235 follows the path of what was the first major long @-@ distance highway in St. Mary 's County , the Patuxent Main Road . The road , established by 1692 , connected Point Lookout and northern St. Mary 's County along the drainage divide between the Potomac River and Chesapeake Bay . The Patuxent Main Road later became known as the Three Notch Road based on a 1704 law that stated " three notches of equal distance marked on the trees indicated a road leading to a ferry . " The whereabouts of the ferry to which this road led are unknown . After 200 years of little improvement , reconstruction of the Three Notch Road by the Maryland State Roads Commission began in 1923 when the highway was rebuilt as a 15 @-@ foot ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) wide gravel road from MD 5 near Mechanicsville south to MD 472 in Oakville . The gravel road was extended south from Oakville 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to Friendship School Road in 1924 . 
 Construction on Three Notch Road resumed in 1926 when two sections were placed under construction . A 1 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) segment of gravel highway was constructed south from MD 246 in Jarboesville ( now Lexington Park ) toward Hermanville in 1926 and 1927 . The northern segment of MD 235 was extended to Hillville in 1928 and to Hollywood in 1929 . The southern gravel section of the highway was extended 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) south to Hermanville in 1930 . Also in 1930 , construction on the 6 @.@ 5 @-@ mile ( 10 @.@ 5 km ) gap between Hollywood and Jarboesville began and a new segment of MD 235 was started from Ridge north 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) to Dameron . The Ridge – Dameron segment was completed in 1932 and the gravel highway from Hollywood to Jarboesville was finished in 1933 . The gravel section constructed from Ridge reached Bay Forest Road by 1935 and Hermanville in 1938 , completing MD 235 . 
 Immediately after the beginning of U.S. involvement in World War II , the U.S. Navy made plans to construct a naval air station on the Cedar Point peninsula near Jarboesville . MD 235 was marked for an upgrade from MD 5 to Jarboesville both to connect the new military installation with Washington and to allow the road to handle the heavy military traffic that would travel the highway during the military base 's construction and operations . The highway was under construction by the end of 1942 . The highway 's gravel surface was widened as a first layer and surface treated in autumn 1943 to help heavy traffic during the winter . In spring 1944 the first layer was <unk> and the top 4 inches ( 10 cm ) were mixed with asphalt to form a base . This base was covered with a 2 @-@ inch ( 5 @.@ 1 cm ) wearing surface of bituminous concrete . MD 235 was also reconstructed in this manner from Jarboesville to Hermanville in 1944 and 1945 ; included in that project was the construction of MD 712 to provide a modern highway to the naval air station 's South Gate . During the reconstruction of MD 235 , the highway was relocated in many places between Mechanicsville and Hollywood to remove substandard curves and avoid grade crossings with the southern extension of the Washington , Brandywine and Point Lookout Railroad that the U.S. Navy constructed contemporaneously to provide a rail link to the military base . Many of the bypassed stretches of highway — which included Harpers Corner Road in Oraville , Mount Zion Church Road in Laurel Grove , Oakville Road in Oakville , Clover Hill Road in Hillville , Old Three Notch Road in Hollywood , and the southernmost portion of Mervell Dean Road — were designated as sections of MD 722 . 
 The next major project along MD 235 was the reconstruction of the 1930s gravel highway between Ridge and Hermanville . Construction began in 1957 from Hermanville and was completed south to Park Hall in 1959 , with the remainder of the highway completed around 1960 . MD 235 was relocated between Park Hall and Hermanville , leaving behind Poplar Ridge Road as an old alignment . Also in 1960 , the state highway was expanded to a divided highway from Hermanville to Lexington Park . MD 235 was widened to a divided highway from Hollywood to Hillville in 1968 , from Mechanicsville to Oakville in 1969 , and from MD 246 in Lexington Park to Town Creek Drive in California in 1973 . Two sections of divided highway were completed in 1982 : from Town Creek Drive to just north of the newly constructed MD 4 intersection in California ; and from Oakville to Hillville . The final segment of MD 235 between Hermanville and Mechanicsville to be expanded to a divided highway was completed from California to Hollywood in 1985 . The portion of the state highway from just north of St. Mary 's County Regional Airport to just south of MD 245 in Hollywood was relocated to the west along the right @-@ of @-@ way of the Washington , Brandywine and Point Lookout Railroad , which had earlier been abandoned . The bypassed highway was renamed as a northward extension of Mervell Dean Road and designated MD 944 . 
 MD 235 was widened in Lexington Park and California between 2000 and 2004 due to increased activity at the military base and its supporting industries . The state highway was widened to six lanes from north of Pegg Road to Town Creek Drive in 2000 and from Town Creek Drive to just north of MD 4 in 2001 . Expansion to six lanes occurred from FDR Boulevard to north of Pegg Road in 2003 . The final section of widening occurred in 2004 when the six @-@ lane section was extended south from FDR Boulevard to MD 246 . MD 235 between MD 712 and MD 246 was transformed from a four @-@ lane divided highway to a five @-@ lane road with center turn lane in 2004 as well . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 The entire route is in St. Mary 's County . 
 = Columbia University = 
 Columbia University ( officially Columbia University in the City of New York ) is a private Ivy League research university in Upper Manhattan , New York City . It was established in 1754 as King 's College by royal charter of George II of Great Britain . Columbia is the oldest college in New York and the fifth chartered institution of higher learning in the country , making it one of nine colonial colleges founded before the Declaration of Independence . After the American Revolutionary War , King 's College briefly became a state entity , and was renamed Columbia College in 1784 . A 1787 charter placed the institution under a private board of trustees before it was renamed Columbia University in 1896 when the campus was moved from Madison Avenue to its current location in Morningside Heights occupying 32 acres ( 13 ha ) of land . Columbia is one of the fourteen founding members of the Association of American Universities , and was the first school in the United States to grant the M.D. degree . 
 The university is organized into twenty schools , including Columbia College , the School of Engineering and Applied Science , and the School of General Studies . The university also has global research outposts in Amman , Beijing , Istanbul , Paris , Mumbai , Rio de Janeiro , Santiago , Asunción and Nairobi . It has affiliations with several other institutions nearby , including Teachers College , Barnard College , and Union Theological Seminary , with joint undergraduate programs available through the Jewish Theological Seminary of America , University College London , Sciences Po , and the Juilliard School . 
 Columbia annually administers the Pulitzer Prize . Notable alumni and former students ( counting those from King 's College ) include five Founding Fathers of the United States ; nine Justices of the United States Supreme Court ; 20 living billionaires ; 29 Academy Award winners ; and 29 heads of state , including three United States Presidents . Additionally , 104 Nobel laureates have been affiliated with Columbia as students , researchers , faculty , or staff . Columbia is second only to Harvard University in the number of Pulitzer Prize winning alumni and former students , with over 100 recipients as of 2015 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = King 's College ( 1754 – 1784 ) = = = 
 Discussions regarding the founding of a college in the Province of New York began as early as 1704 , at which time Colonel Lewis Morris wrote to the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts , the missionary arm of the Church of England , persuading the society that New York City was an ideal community in which to establish a college ; however , not until the founding of Princeton University across the Hudson River in New Jersey did the City of New York seriously consider founding a college . In 1746 an act was passed by the general assembly of New York to raise funds for the foundation of a new college . In 1751 , the assembly appointed a commission of ten New York residents , seven of whom were members of the Church of England , to direct the funds accrued by the state lottery towards the foundation of a college . 
 Classes were initially held in July 1754 and were presided over by the college 's first president , Dr. Samuel Johnson . Dr. Johnson was the only instructor of the college 's first class , which consisted of a mere eight students . Instruction was held in a new schoolhouse adjoining Trinity Church , located on what is now lower Broadway in Manhattan . The college was officially founded on October 31 , 1754 , as King 's College by royal charter of King George II , making it the oldest institution of higher learning in the state of New York and the fifth oldest in the United States . 
 In 1763 , Dr. Johnson was succeeded in the presidency by Myles Cooper , a graduate of The Queen 's College , Oxford , and an ardent Tory . In the charged political climate of the American Revolution , his chief opponent in discussions at the college was an undergraduate of the class of 1777 , Alexander Hamilton . The American Revolutionary War broke out in 1776 , and was catastrophic for the operation of King 's College , which suspended instruction for eight years beginning in 1776 with the arrival of the Continental Army . The suspension continued through the military occupation of New York City by British troops until their departure in 1783 . The college 's library was looted and its sole building requisitioned for use as a military hospital first by American and then British forces . Loyalists were forced to abandon their King 's College in New York , which was seized by the rebels and renamed Columbia College . The Loyalists , led by Bishop Charles Inglis fled to Windsor , Nova Scotia , where they founded King 's Collegiate School . 
 = = = Columbia College ( 1784 – 1896 ) = = = 
 After the Revolution , the college turned to the State of New York in order to restore its vitality , promising to make whatever changes to the school 's charter the state might demand . The Legislature agreed to assist the college , and on May 1 , 1784 , it passed " an Act for granting certain privileges to the College heretofore called King 's College . " The Act created a Board of Regents to oversee the resuscitation of King 's College , and , in an effort to demonstrate its support for the new Republic , the Legislature stipulated that " the College within the City of New York heretofore called King 's College be forever hereafter called and known by the name of Columbia College , " a reference to Columbia , an alternative name for America . The Regents finally became aware of the college 's defective constitution in February 1787 and appointed a revision committee , which was headed by John Jay and Alexander Hamilton . In April of that same year , a new charter was adopted for the college , still in use today , granting power to a private board of 24 Trustees . 
 On May 21 , 1787 , William Samuel Johnson , the son of Dr. Samuel Johnson , was unanimously elected President of Columbia College . Prior to serving at the university , Johnson had participated in the First Continental Congress and been chosen as a delegate to the Constitutional Convention . For a period in the 1790s , with New York City as the federal and state capital and the country under successive Federalist governments , a revived Columbia thrived under the auspices of Federalists such as Hamilton and Jay . Both President George Washington and Vice President John Adams attended the college 's commencement on May 6 , 1789 , as a tribute of honor to the many alumni of the school who had been involved in the American Revolution . 
 The college 's enrollment , structure , and academics stagnated for the majority of the 19th century , with many of the college presidents doing little to change the way that the college functioned . In 1857 , the college moved from Park Place to a primarily Gothic Revival campus on 49th Street and Madison Avenue , where it remained for the next forty years . During the last half of the 19th century , under the leadership of President <unk> Barnard , the institution rapidly assumed the shape of a modern university . By this time , the college 's investments in New York real estate became a primary source of steady income for the school , mainly owing to the city 's expanding population . 
 = = = Columbia University ( 1896 – present ) = = = 
 In 1896 , the trustees officially authorized the use of yet another new name , Columbia University , and today the institution is officially known as " Columbia University in the City of New York . " At the same time , university president Seth Low moved the campus again , from 49th Street to its present location , a more spacious campus in the developing neighborhood of Morningside Heights . Under the leadership of Low 's successor , Nicholas Murray Butler , who served for over four decades , Columbia rapidly became the nation 's major institution for research , setting the " <unk> " model that later universities would adopt . 
 Research into the atom by faculty members John R. Dunning , I. I. Rabi , Enrico Fermi and Polykarp Kusch placed Columbia 's Physics Department in the international spotlight in the 1940s after the first nuclear pile was built to start what became the Manhattan Project . In 1947 , to meet the needs of GIs returning from World War II , University Extension was reorganized as an undergraduate college and designated the Columbia University School of General Studies . 
 During the 1960s Columbia experienced large @-@ scale student activism , which reached a climax in the spring of 1968 when hundreds of students occupied buildings on campus . The incident forced the resignation of Columbia 's President , Grayson Kirk and the establishment of the University Senate . 
 Though several schools within the university had admitted women for years , Columbia College first admitted women in the fall of 1983 , after a decade of failed negotiations with Barnard College , the all @-@ female institution affiliated with the university , to merge the two schools . Barnard College still remains affiliated with Columbia , and all Barnard graduates are issued diplomas authorized by both Columbia University and Barnard College . 
 = = Campus = = 
 Along with NYU and the Catholic Church , Columbia University is one of the top 3 largest landowners in New York City . 
 = = = Morningside Heights = = = 
 The majority of Columbia 's graduate and undergraduate studies are conducted in Morningside Heights on Seth Low 's late @-@ 19th century vision of a university campus where all disciplines could be taught in one location . The campus was designed along Beaux @-@ Arts principles by architects McKim , Mead , and White . Columbia 's main campus occupies more than six city blocks , or 32 acres ( 13 ha ) , in Morningside Heights , New York City , a neighborhood that contains a number of academic institutions . The university owns over 7 @,@ 800 apartments in Morningside Heights , housing faculty , graduate students , and staff . Almost two dozen undergraduate dormitories ( purpose @-@ built or converted ) are located on campus or in Morningside Heights . Columbia University has an extensive underground tunnel system more than a century old , with the oldest portions predating the present campus . Some of these remain accessible to the public , while others have been cordoned off . 
 The Nicholas Murray Butler Library , commonly known simply as Butler Library , is the largest single library in the Columbia University Library System , and is one of the largest buildings on the campus . Proposed as " South Hall " by the university 's former President Nicholas Murray Butler as expansion plans for Low Memorial Library stalled , the new library was funded by Edward Harkness , benefactor of Yale 's residential college system , and designed by his favorite architect , James Gamble Rogers . It was completed in 1934 and renamed for Butler in 1946 . The library design is neo @-@ classical in style . Its facade features an arcade of columns in the Ionic order above which are inscribed the names of great writers , philosophers , and thinkers , most of whom are read by students engaged in the Core Curriculum of Columbia College . As of 2012 , Columbia 's library system includes over 11 @.@ 9 million volumes , making it the eighth largest library system and fifth largest collegiate library system in the United States . It has also been ranked among the United States ' most beautiful libraries . 
 Several buildings on the Morningside Heights campus are listed on the National Register of Historic Places . Low Memorial Library , a National Historic Landmark and the centerpiece of the campus , is listed for its architectural significance . Philosophy Hall is listed as the site of the invention of FM radio . Also listed is Pupin Hall , another National Historic Landmark , which houses the physics and astronomy departments . Here the first experiments on the fission of uranium were conducted by Enrico Fermi . The uranium atom was split there ten days after the world 's first atom @-@ splitting in Copenhagen , Denmark . 
 A statue by sculptor Daniel Chester French called Alma Mater is centered on the front steps of Low Memorial Library . McKim , Mead & White invited French to build the sculpture in order to harmonize with the larger composition of the court and library in the center of the campus . Draped in an academic gown , the female figure of Alma Mater wears a crown of laurels and sits on a throne . The scroll @-@ like arms of the throne end in lamps , representing <unk> and <unk> . A book signifying knowledge , balances on her lap , and an owl , the attribute of wisdom , is hidden in the folds of her gown . Her right hand holds a scepter composed of four sprays of wheat , terminating with a crown of King 's College which refers to Columbia 's origin as a Royalist institution in 1754 . A local actress named Mary Lawton was said to have posed for parts of the sculpture . The statue was dedicated on September 23 , 1903 , as a gift of Mr. & Mrs. Robert Goelet , and was originally covered in golden leaf . During the Columbia University protests of 1968 a bomb damaged the sculpture , but it has since been repaired . The small hidden owl on the sculpture is also the subject of many Columbia legends , the main legend being that the first student in the freshmen class to find the hidden owl on the statue will be valedictorian , and that any subsequent Columbia male who finds it will marry a Barnard student , given that Barnard is a women 's college . 
 " The Steps " , alternatively known as " Low Steps " or the " Urban Beach " , are a popular meeting area for Columbia students . The term refers to the long series of granite steps leading from the lower part of campus ( South Field ) to its upper terrace . With a design inspired by the City Beautiful movement , the steps of Low Library provides Columbia University and Barnard College students , faculty , and staff with a comfortable outdoor platform and space for informal gatherings , events , and ceremonies . McKim 's classical facade epitomizes late 19th century new @-@ classical designs , with its columns and portico marking the entrance to an important structure . On warm days when the weather is favorable , the Low Steps often become a popular gathering place for students to sunbathe , eat lunch , or play frisbee . 
 = = = Other campuses = = = 
 In April 2007 , the university purchased more than two @-@ thirds of a 17 acres ( 6 @.@ 9 ha ) site for a new campus in Manhattanville , an industrial neighborhood to the north of the Morningside Heights campus . Stretching from 125th Street to 133rd Street , the new campus will house buildings for Columbia 's Business School , School of International and Public Affairs , and the Jerome L. Greene Center for Mind , Brain , and Behavior , where research will occur on neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson 's and Alzheimer 's . The $ 7 billion expansion plan includes demolishing all buildings , except three that are historically significant , eliminating the existing light industry and storage warehouses , and relocating tenants in 132 apartments . Replacing these buildings will be 6 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 square feet ( 630 @,@ 000 m2 ) of space for the university . Community activist groups in West Harlem fought the expansion for reasons ranging from property protection and fair exchange for land , to residents ' rights . Subsequent public hearings drew neighborhood opposition . Most recently , as of December 2008 , the State of New York 's Empire State Development Corporation approved use of eminent domain , which , through declaration of Manhattanville 's " blighted " status , gives governmental bodies the right to appropriate private property for public use . On May 20 , 2009 , the New York State Public Authorities Control Board approved the <unk> expansion plan and the first buildings are under construction . 
 New York @-@ Presbyterian Hospital is affiliated with the medical schools of both Columbia University and Cornell University . According to U.S. News & World Report 's " America 's Best Hospitals 2009 " , it is ranked sixth overall and third among university hospitals . Columbia 's medical school has a strategic partnership with New York State Psychiatric Institute , and is affiliated with 19 other hospitals in the U.S. and four hospitals overseas . Health @-@ related schools are located at the Columbia University Medical Center , a 20 acres ( 8 @.@ 1 ha ) campus located in the neighborhood of Washington Heights , fifty blocks uptown . Other teaching hospitals affiliated with Columbia through the New York @-@ Presbyterian network include the Payne Whitney Clinic in Manhattan , and the Payne Whitney Westchester , a psychiatric institute located in White Plains , New York . On the northern tip of Manhattan island ( in the neighborhood of Inwood ) , Columbia owns 26 @-@ acre ( 11 ha ) Baker Field , which includes the Lawrence A. Wien Stadium as well as facilities for field sports , outdoor track , and tennis . There is a third campus on the west bank of the Hudson River , the 157 @-@ acre ( 64 ha ) Lamont @-@ Doherty Earth Observatory and Earth Institute in Palisades , New York . A fourth is the 60 @-@ acre ( 24 ha ) Nevis Laboratories in Irvington , New York for the study of particle and motion physics . A satellite site in Paris , France holds classes at Reid Hall . 
 = = = Sustainability = = = 
 In 2006 , the university established the Office of Environmental Stewardship to initiate , coordinate and implement programs to reduce the university 's environmental footprint . The U.S. Green Building Council selected the university 's Manhattanville plan for the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design ( LEED ) Neighborhood Design pilot program . The plan commits to incorporating smart growth , new urbanism and " green " building design principles . Columbia is one of the 2030 Challenge Partners , a group of nine universities in the city of New York that have pledged to reduce their greenhouse emissions by 30 % within the next ten years . Columbia University adopts LEED standards for all new construction and major renovations . The University requires a minimum of Silver , but through its design and review process seeks to achieve higher levels . This is especially challenging for lab and research buildings with their intensive energy use ; however , the university also uses lab design guidelines that seek to maximize energy efficiency while protecting the safety of researchers . 
 Every Thursday and Sunday of the month , Columbia hosts a <unk> where local farmers can sell their produce to residents of the city . In addition , from April to November Hodgson 's farm , a local New York gardening center , joins the market bringing a large selection of plants and blooming flowers . The market is one of the many operated at different points throughout the city by the non @-@ profit group <unk> . Dining services at Columbia spends 36 percent of its food budget on local products , in addition to serving sustainably harvested seafood and fair trade coffee on campus . Columbia has been rated " B + " by the 2011 College Sustainability Report Card for its environmental and sustainability initiatives . 
 = = Academics = = 
 = = = Undergraduate admissions and financial aid = = = 
 Columbia University received 36 @,@ 292 applications for its undergraduate class of 2020 ( entering 2016 ) . In early decision , 620 out of 3 @,@ 520 applicants were admitted , for an acceptance rate of 17 @.@ 61 % . In regular decision , 1 @,@ 573 out of 32 @,@ 772 applicants were admitted , for an acceptance rate of 4 @.@ 79 % . In total , 2 @,@ 193 out of 36 @,@ 292 applicants were admitted for an overall acceptance rate of 6 @.@ 04 % , making Columbia the third most selective college in the United States by admission rate behind Stanford and Harvard . The undergraduate yield rate for the class of 2019 was 63 @.@ 2 % . According to the 2012 college selectivity ranking by U.S. News & World Report , which factors admission and yield rates among other criteria , Columbia was tied with Yale , Caltech and MIT as the most selective colleges in the country . Columbia is a racially diverse school , with approximately 52 % of all students identifying themselves as persons of color . Additionally , 50 % of all undergraduates received grants from Columbia . The average grant size awarded to these students is $ 46 @,@ 516 . In 2015 @-@ 2016 , annual undergraduate tuition at Columbia was $ 50 @,@ 526 with a total cost of attendance of $ 65 @,@ 860 ( including room and board ) . 
 On April 11 , 2007 , Columbia University announced a $ 400m to $ 600m donation from media billionaire alumnus John Kluge to be used exclusively for undergraduate financial aid . The donation is among the largest single gifts to higher education . Its exact value will depend on the eventual value of Kluge 's estate at the time of his death ; however , the generous donation has helped change financial aid policy at Columbia . Annual gifts , fund @-@ raising , and an increase in spending from the university 's endowment have allowed Columbia to extend generous financial aid packages to qualifying students . As of 2008 , undergraduates from families with incomes as high as $ 60 @,@ 000 a year will have the projected cost of attending the university , including room , board , and academic fees , fully paid for by the university . That same year , the university ended loans for incoming and current students who were on financial aid , replacing loans that were traditionally part of aid packages with grants from the university . However , this does not apply to international students , transfer students , visiting students , or students in the School of General Studies . In the fall of 2010 , admission to Columbia 's undergraduate colleges Columbia College and the Fu Foundation School of Engineering and Applied Science ( also known as SEAS or Columbia Engineering ) began accepting the Common Application . The policy change made Columbia one of the last major academic institutions and the last Ivy League university to switch to the Common Application . 
 Scholarships are also given to undergraduate students by the admissions committee . Designations include John W. Kluge Scholars , John Jay Scholars , C. Prescott Davis Scholars , Global Scholars , <unk> Scholars , and Science Research Fellows . Named scholars are selected by the admission committee from first @-@ year applicants . According to Columbia , the first four designated scholars " distinguish themselves for their remarkable academic and personal achievements , dynamism , intellectual curiosity , the originality and independence of their thinking , and the diversity that stems from their different cultures and their varied educational experiences . " 
 = = = Organization = = = 
 Columbia University is an independent , privately supported , nonsectarian institution of higher education . Its official corporate name is " The Trustees of Columbia University in the City of New York . " The university 's first Charter was granted in 1754 by King George II ; however , its modern Charter was first enacted in 1787 and last amended in 1810 by the New York State Legislature . The university is governed by 24 Trustees , customarily including the President , who serves ex officio . The Trustees themselves are responsible for choosing their successors . Six of the 24 are nominated from a pool of candidates recommended by the Columbia Alumni Association . Another six are nominated by the Board in consultation with the Executive Committee of the University Senate . The remaining 12 , including the President , are nominated by the Trustees themselves through their internal processes . The term of office for Trustees is six years . Generally , they serve for no more than two consecutive terms . The Trustees appoint the President and other senior administrative officers of the university , and review and confirm faculty appointments as required . They determine the university 's financial and investment policies , authorize the budget , supervise the endowment , direct the management of the university 's real estate and other assets , and otherwise oversee the administration and management of the university . 
 The University Senate was established by the Trustees after a university @-@ wide referendum in 1969 . It succeeded to the powers of the University Council , which was created in 1890 as a body of faculty , deans , and other administrators to regulate inter @-@ Faculty affairs and consider issues of university @-@ wide concern . The University Senate is a unicameral body consisting of 107 members drawn from all constituencies of the university . These include the president of the university , the Provost , the Deans of Columbia College and the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences , all who serve ex officio , and five additional representatives , appointed by the President , from the university 's administration . The President serves as the Senate 's presiding officer . The Senate is charged with reviewing the educational policies , physical development , budget , and external relations of the university . It oversees the welfare and academic freedom of the faculty and the welfare of students . 
 The President of Columbia University , who is selected by the Trustees in consultation with the Executive Committee of the University Senate and who serves at the Trustees ' pleasure , is the chief executive officer of the university . Assisting the President in administering the University are the Provost , the Senior Executive Vice President , the Executive Vice President for Health and Biomedical Sciences , several other vice presidents , the General Counsel , the Secretary of the University , and the deans of the Faculties , all of whom are appointed by the Trustees on the nomination of the President and serve at their pleasure . Lee C. Bollinger became the 19th President of Columbia University on June 1 , 2002 . A prominent advocate of affirmative action , he played a leading role in the twin Supreme Court cases — Grutter v Bollinger and Gratz v Bollinger — that upheld and clarified the importance of diversity as a compelling justification for affirmative action in higher education . A leading First Amendment scholar , he is widely published on freedom of speech and press , and serves on the faculty of Columbia Law School . 
 Columbia has three official undergraduate colleges : Columbia College ( CC ) , the liberal arts college offering the Bachelor of Arts degree , the Fu Foundation School of Engineering and Applied Science ( also known as SEAS or Columbia Engineering ) is the engineering and applied science school offering the Bachelor of Science degree , and The School of General Studies ( GS ) , the liberal arts college offering the Bachelor of Arts degree to non @-@ traditional students undertaking full- or part @-@ time study . The university is affiliated with Teachers College , Barnard College , and Union Theological Seminary , all located nearby in Morningside Heights . Joint undergraduate programs are available through the Jewish Theological Seminary of America as well as through the Juilliard School . Affiliated institutions – Barnard College , Teachers College , and Union Theological Seminary – are also Faculties of the university . One affiliated institution — Teachers College — is likewise an academic department of the university . 
 = = = Research and rankings = = = 
 Columbia was the first North American site where the uranium atom was split . It was the birthplace of FM radio and the laser . The MPEG @-@ 2 algorithm of transmitting high quality audio and video over limited bandwidth was developed by Dimitris <unk> , a Columbia professor of electrical engineering . Biologist Martin Chalfie was the first to introduce the use of Green Fluorescent Protein ( GFP ) in labeling cells in intact organisms . Other inventions and products related to Columbia include Sequential Lateral Solidification ( SLS ) technology for making LCDs , System Management Arts ( SMARTS ) , Session Initiation Protocol ( SIP ) ( which is used for audio , video , chat , instant messaging and <unk> ) , <unk> , <unk> ( software for computational chemistry ) , a new and better recipe for glass concrete , Blue LEDs , and <unk> ( used in photonics ) . Columbia scientists have been credited with about 175 new inventions in the health sciences each year . More than 30 pharmaceutical products based on discoveries and inventions made at Columbia are on the market today . These include <unk> ( for arthritis ) , <unk> ( for blood clot complications ) , <unk> ( for glaucoma ) , <unk> , <unk> ( a glaucoma treatment ) , shoulder prosthesis , homocysteine ( testing for cardiovascular disease ) , and <unk> ( for cancer therapy ) . Columbia Technology Ventures ( formerly Science and Technology Ventures ) , as of 2008 , manages some 600 patents and more than 250 active license agreements . Patent @-@ related deals earned Columbia more than $ 230 million in the 2006 fiscal year , according to the university , more than any university in the world . 
 Columbia University was ranked 4th overall among U.S. national universities for 2016 by U.S. News & World Report . Individual colleges and schools were also nationally ranked by U.S. News & World Report for its 2016 edition . The Columbia Law School was ranked tied for 4th , the Mailman School of Public Health 5th , the School of Social Work 5th , the Teachers College ( Columbia Graduate School of Education ) 7th , the Columbia Business School 8th , the College of Physicians and Surgeons tied for 8th for research ( and tied for 52nd for primary care ) , the Graduate School of Arts 10th , the School of Nursing tied for 11th , and the Fu Foundation School of Engineering and Applied Science ( graduate ) was ranked 14th . 
 In 2015 , Columbia was ranked 8th in the world by Academic Ranking of World Universities , 22nd in the world by QS World University Rankings , and 15th globally by Times Higher Education World University Rankings in the world . 
 Rankings by other organizations include the Graduate School of Architecture , Planning and Preservation # 2 , and its Graduate School of Journalism # 1 . 
 Between 1996 and 2008 , 18 Columbia affiliates have won Nobel Prizes , of whom nine are faculty members while one is an adjunct senior research scientist ( Daniel Tsui ) and the other a Global Fellow ( Kofi Annan ) . Columbia faculty awarded the Nobel Prize include Richard Axel , Martin Chalfie , Eric Kandel , Tsung @-@ Dao Lee , Robert Mundell , Orhan Pamuk , Edmund S. Phelps , Joseph Stiglitz , and Horst L. Stormer . Other awards and honors won by faculty include 30 MacArthur Foundation Award winners , 4 National Medal of Science recipients , 43 National Academy of Sciences Award winners , 20 National Academy of Engineering Award winners , 38 Institute of Medicine of the National Academies Award recipients and 143 American Academy of Arts and Sciences Award winners . 
 In 2015 , Columbia University was ranked the first in the state by average professor salaries . In 2011 , the Mines <unk> : Professional Ranking World Universities ranked Columbia 3rd best university for forming CEOs in the US and 12th worldwide . 
 = = Student life = = 
 = = = Students = = = 
 In fall 2014 , Columbia University 's student population was 29 @,@ 870 ( 8 @,@ 559 students in undergraduate programs and 21 @,@ 311 in postgraduate programs ) , with 39 % of the student population identifying themselves as a minority and 28 % born outside of the United States . Twenty @-@ six percent of students at Columbia have family incomes below $ 60 @,@ 000 , making it one of the most socioeconomically diverse top @-@ tier colleges . Sixteen percent of students at Columbia receive Federal Pell Grants , which mostly go to students whose family incomes are below $ 40 @,@ 000 . Fifteen percent of students are the first member of their family to attend a four @-@ year college . 
 On @-@ campus housing is guaranteed for all four years as an undergraduate . Columbia College and the Fu Foundation School of Engineering and Applied Science ( also known as SEAS or Columbia Engineering ) share housing in the on @-@ campus residence halls . First @-@ year students usually live in one of the large residence halls situated around South Lawn : Hartley Hall , Wallach Hall ( originally Livingston Hall ) , John Jay Hall , <unk> Hall or Carman Hall . <unk> participate in a room selection process , wherein students can pick to live in a mix of either <unk> or apartment @-@ style housing with their friends . The Columbia University School of General Studies and graduate schools have their own apartment @-@ style housing in the surrounding neighborhood . 
 Columbia University is home to many fraternities , sororities , and co @-@ educational Greek organizations . Approximately 10 – 15 % of undergraduate students are associated with Greek life . There has been a Greek presence on campus since the establishment in 1836 of the Delta Chapter of Alpha Delta Phi . The <unk> Council is the self @-@ governing student organization that provides guidelines and support to its member organizations within each of the three councils at Columbia , the Interfraternity Council , Panhellenic Council , and Multicultural Greek Council . The three council presidents bring their affiliated chapters together once a month to meet as one Greek community . The <unk> Council meetings provide opportunity for member organizations to learn from each other , work together and advocate for community needs . 
 = = = = Publications = = = = 
 Columbia University is home to a rich diversity of undergraduate , graduate , and professional publications . The Columbia Daily Spectator is the nation 's second @-@ oldest student newspaper ; and The Blue and White , a monthly literary magazine established in 1890 , has recently begun to delve into campus life and local politics in print and on its daily blog , dubbed the <unk> . 
 Political publications include The Current , a journal of politics , culture and Jewish Affairs ; the Columbia Political Review , the multi @-@ partisan political magazine of the Columbia Political Union ; and <unk> , which denotes itself as the " progressive " campus magazine and deals largely with local political issues and arts events . 
 Arts and literary publications include the Columbia Review , the nation 's oldest college literary magazine ; Columbia , a nationally regarded literary journal ; the Columbia Journal of Literary Criticism ; and The Mobius Strip , an online arts and literary magazine . Inside New York is an annual guidebook to New York City , written , edited , and published by Columbia undergraduates . Through a distribution agreement with Columbia University Press , the book is sold at major retailers and independent bookstores . 
 Columbia is home to numerous undergraduate academic publications . The Journal of Politics & Society , is a journal of undergraduate research in the social sciences , published and distributed nationally by the Helvidius Group ; Publius is an undergraduate journal of politics established in 2008 and published biannually ; the Columbia East Asia Review allows undergraduates throughout the world to publish original work on China , Japan , Korea , Tibet , and Vietnam and is supported by the Weatherhead East Asian Institute ; and The Birch , is an undergraduate journal of Eastern European and Eurasian culture that is the first national student @-@ run journal of its kind ; the Columbia Political Review , the undergraduate magazine on politics operated by the Columbia Political Union ; the Columbia Economics Review , the undergraduate economic journal on research and policy supported by the Columbia Economics Department ; and the Columbia Science Review is a science magazine that prints general interest articles , faculty profiles , and student research papers . 
 The Fed a <unk> satire and investigative newspaper , and the Jester of Columbia , the newly ( and frequently ) revived campus humor magazine both inject humor into local life . Other publications include The Columbian , the undergraduate colleges ' annually published yearbook the Gadfly , a biannual journal of popular philosophy produced by undergraduates ; and Rhapsody in Blue , an undergraduate urban studies magazine . Professional journals published by academic departments at Columbia University include Current Musicology and The Journal of Philosophy . During the spring semester , graduate students in the Journalism School publish The Bronx Beat , a bi @-@ weekly newspaper covering the South Bronx . Teachers College publishes the Teachers College Record , a journal of research , analysis , and commentary in the field of education , published continuously since 1900 . 
 Founded in 1961 under the auspices of Columbia University 's Graduate School of Journalism , Columbia Journalism Review ( <unk> ) examines day @-@ to @-@ day press performance as well as the forces that affect that performance . The magazine is published six times a year , and offers a reporting , analysis , criticism , and commentary . <unk> , its web site , delivers real @-@ time criticism and reporting , giving <unk> a presence in the ongoing conversation about the media . 
 = = = = Broadcasting = = = = 
 Columbia is home to two pioneers in undergraduate campus radio broadcasting , WKCR @-@ FM and CTV . WKCR , the student run radio station that broadcasts to the Tri @-@ State area , claims to be the oldest FM radio station in the world , owing to the university 's affiliation with Major Edwin Armstrong . The station went operational on July 18 , 1939 , from a 400 @-@ foot antenna tower in Alpine , New Jersey , broadcasting the very first FM transmission in the world . Initially , WKCR wasn 't a radio station , but an organization concerned with the technology of radio communications . As membership grew , however , the nascent club turned its efforts to broadcasting . Armstrong helped the students in their early efforts , donating a microphone and turntables when they designed their first makeshift studio in a dorm room . The station has its studios on the second floor of Alfred Lerner Hall on the Morningside campus with its main transmitter tower at 4 Times Square in Midtown Manhattan . Columbia Television ( CTV ) is the nation 's second oldest Student television station and home of CTV News , a weekly live news program produced by undergraduate students . 
 = = = = Debate and Model UN = = = = 
 The Philolexian Society is a literary and debating club founded in 1802 , making it the oldest student group at Columbia , as well as the third oldest collegiate literary society in the country . The society annually administers the Joyce Kilmer Bad Poetry Contest . The Columbia Parliamentary Debate Team competes in tournaments around the country as part of the American Parliamentary Debate Association , and hosts both high school and college tournaments on Columbia 's campus , as well as public debates on issues affecting the university . 
 The Columbia International Relations Council and Association ( <unk> ) , oversees Columbia 's Model United Nations activities . <unk> hosts college and high school Model UN conferences , hosts speakers influential in international politics to speak on campus , trains students from underprivileged schools in New York in Model UN and oversees a competitive team , which travels to colleges around the country and to an international conference every year . The competitive team consistently wins best and outstanding delegation awards and is considered one of the top teams in the country . 
 = = = Technology and entrepreneurship = = = 
 The Columbia University Organization of Rising Entrepreneurs ( CORE ) was founded in 1999 . The student @-@ run group aims to foster entrepreneurship on campus . Each year CORE hosts dozens of events , including talks , # <unk> , a conference and venture competition for $ 250 @,@ 000 , and Ignite @ CU , a weekend for <unk> interested in design , engineering , and entrepreneurship . Notable speakers include Peter Thiel , Jack Dorsey , Alexis Ohanian , Drew Houston , and Mark Cuban . By 2006 , CORE had awarded graduate and undergraduate students over $ 100 @,@ 000 in seed capital . 
 <unk> , an on @-@ campus social networking site called Campus Network that preceded Facebook , was created and popularized by Columbia engineering student Adam Goldberg in 2003 . Mark Zuckerberg later asked Goldberg to join him in Palo Alto to work on Facebook , but Goldberg declined the offer . The Fu Foundation School of Engineering and Applied Science offers a minor in Technical Entrepreneurship through its Center for Technology , Innovation , and Community Engagement . SEAS ' entrepreneurship activities focus on community building initiatives in New York and worldwide , made possible through partners such as Microsoft Corporation . 
 Columbia is a top supplier of young engineering entrepreneurs for New York City . Over the past 20 years , graduates of Columbia established over 100 technology companies . Mayor Bloomberg has provided over $ 6 @.@ 7 million towards entrepreneurial programs that partner with Columbia and other universities in New York . Professor Chris Wiggins of the Fu Foundation School of Engineering and Applied Science is working in conjunction with Professors Evan <unk> of New York University and Hilary Mason , chief scientist at bit.ly to facilitate the growth of student tech @-@ startups in an effort to transform a traditionally financially centered New York City into the next Silicon Valley . Their website , <unk> , is a gathering ground of ideas and discussions for New York 's young entrepreneurial community , the Silicon Alley . 
 On June 14 , 2010 , Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg launched the NYC Media Lab to promote innovations in New York 's media industry . Situated in the Polytechnic Institute of New York University , the lab is a consortium of Columbia University , New York University , and New York City Economic Development Corporation acting to connect companies with universities in new technology research . The Lab is modeled after similar ones at MIT and Stanford . A $ 250 @,@ 000 grant from the New York City Economic Development Corporation was used to establish the NYC Media Lab . Each year , the lab will host a range of roundtable discussions between the private sector and academic institutions . It will support research projects on topics of content format , next @-@ generation search technologies , computer animation for film and gaming , emerging marketing techniques , and new devices development . The lab will also create a media research and development database . Columbia University will coordinate the long @-@ term direction of the media lab as well as the involvement of its faculty and those of other universities . 
 = = = Athletics = = = 
 A member institution of the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) in Division I FCS , Columbia fields varsity teams in 29 sports and is a member of the Ivy League . The football Lions play home games at the 17 @,@ 000 @-@ seat Robert K. Kraft Field at Lawrence A. Wien Stadium . One hundred blocks north of the main campus at Morningside Heights , the Baker Athletics Complex also includes facilities for baseball , softball , soccer , lacrosse , field hockey , tennis , track and rowing , as well as the new Campbell Sports Center opened in January 2013 . The basketball , fencing , swimming & diving , volleyball and wrestling programs are based at the Dodge Physical Fitness Center on the main campus . 
 Columbia University athletics has a long history , with many accomplishments in athletic fields . In 1870 , Columbia played against Rutgers University in the second football game in the history of the sport . Eight years later , Columbia crew won the famed Henley Royal Regatta in the first @-@ ever defeat for an English crew rowing in English waters . In 1900 , Olympian and Columbia College student Maxie Long set the first official world record in the 400 meters with a time of 47 @.@ 8 seconds . In 1983 , Columbia men 's soccer went 18 @-@ 0 and was ranked first in the nation , but lost to Indiana 1 @-@ 0 in double overtime in the NCAA championship game ; nevertheless , the team went further toward the NCAA title than any Ivy League soccer team in history . The football program unfortunately is best known for its record of futility set during the 1980s : between 1983 and 1988 , the team lost 44 games in a row , which is still the record for the NCAA Football Championship Subdivision . The streak was broken on October 8 , 1988 , with a 16 @-@ 13 victory over archrival Princeton University . That was the Lions ' first victory at Wien Stadium , which had been opened during the losing streak and was already four years old . A new tradition has developed with the Liberty Cup . The Liberty Cup is awarded annually to the winner of the football game between Fordham and Columbia Universities , two of the only three NCAA Division I football teams in New York City . The tradition began in 2002 , a year after the Fordham @-@ Columbia game was postponed due to the September 11 attacks . 
 Former students include Baseball Hall of Famers Lou Gehrig and Eddie Collins , football Hall of Famer Sid Luckman , Marcellus Wiley , and world champion women 's weightlifter Karyn Marshall . On May 17 , 1939 , fledgling NBC broadcast a doubleheader between the Columbia Lions and the Princeton Tigers at Columbia 's Baker Field , making it the first televised regular athletic event in history . 
 = = = World Leaders Forum = = = 
 Established in 2003 by university president Lee C. Bollinger , the World Leaders Forum at Columbia University provides the opportunity for undergraduate and graduate students alike to listen to world leaders in government , religion , industry , finance , and academia . The World Leaders Forum is a year @-@ around event series that strives to provide a platform for uninhibited speech among nations and cultures , while educating students about problems and progress around the globe . 
 All Columbia undergraduates and graduates as well as students of Barnard College and other Columbia affiliated schools can register to participate in the World Leaders Forum using their student IDs . Even for individuals who do not have the privilege to attend the event live , they can watch the forum via online videos on Columbia University 's website . 
 Past forum speakers include former President of the United States Bill Clinton , the Prime Minister of India Atal Bihari Vajpayee , Former President of Ghana John <unk> <unk> , President of Afghanistan Hamid Karzai , Prime Minister of Russia Vladimir Putin , President of the Republic of Mozambique Joaquim Alberto Chissano , President of the Republic of Bolivia Carlos Diego Mesa <unk> , President of the Republic of Romania Ion <unk> , President of the Republic of Latvia Vaira Vīķe @-@ Freiberga , the first female President of Finland Tarja Halonen , President Yudhoyono of Indonesia , President Pervez Musharraf of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan , Iraq President Jalal Talabani , the 14th Dalai Lama , President of the Islamic Republic of Iran Mahmoud Ahmadinejad , financier George Soros , Mayor of New York City Michael R. Bloomberg , President Václav Klaus of the Czech Republic , President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner of Argentina , former Secretary @-@ General of the United Nations Kofi Annan , and Al Gore . 
 = = = Other = = = 
 The Columbia University Orchestra was founded by composer Edward MacDowell in 1896 , and is the oldest continually operating university orchestra in the United States . Undergraduate student composers at Columbia may choose to become involved with Columbia New Music , which sponsors concerts of music written by undergraduate students from all of Columbia 's schools . 
 There are a number of performing arts groups at Columbia dedicated to producing student theater , including the Columbia Players , King 's Crown Shakespeare Troupe ( <unk> ) , Columbia Musical Theater Society ( <unk> ) , <unk> ( New and Original Material Authored and Directed by Students ) , <unk> Theatre , Columbia University Performing Arts League ( <unk> ) , Black Theatre Ensemble ( <unk> ) , sketch comedy group <unk> , and improvisational troupes Alfred and Fruit <unk> . The Columbia University Marching Band tells jokes during the campus tradition of Orgo Night . 
 The Columbia Queer Alliance is the central Columbia student organization that represents the lesbian , gay , transgender , and questioning student population . It is the oldest gay student organization in the world , founded as the Student Homophile League in 1967 by students including lifelong activist Stephen Donaldson . Columbia University campus military groups include the U.S. Military Veterans of Columbia University and Advocates for Columbia ROTC . In the 2005 – 06 academic year , the Columbia Military Society , Columbia 's student group for ROTC cadets and Marine officer candidates , was renamed the Hamilton Society for " students who aspire to serve their nation through the military in the tradition of Alexander Hamilton " . 
 The university also houses an independent nonprofit organization , Community Impact , which strives to serve disadvantaged people in the Harlem , Washington Heights , and Morningside Heights communities . From its earliest inception as a single service initiative formed in 1981 by Columbia University undergraduates , Community Impact has grown into Columbia University 's largest student service organization . CI provides food , clothing , shelter , education , job training , and companionship for residents in its surrounding communities . CI consists of a dedicated corps of about 950 Columbia University student volunteers participating in 25 community service programs , which serve more than 8 @,@ 000 people each year . 
 = = Student activism = = 
 = = = Protests of 1968 = = = 
 Students initiated a major demonstration in 1968 over two main issues . The first was Columbia 's proposed gymnasium in neighboring Morningside Park ; this was seen by the protesters to be an act of aggression aimed at the black residents of neighboring Harlem . A second issue was the Columbia administration 's failure to resign its institutional membership in the Pentagon 's weapons research think @-@ tank , the Institute for Defense Analyses ( IDA ) . Students barricaded themselves inside Low Library , Hamilton Hall , and several other university buildings during the protests , and New York City police were called onto the campus to arrest or forcibly remove the students . 
 The protests achieved two of their stated goals . Columbia disaffiliated from the IDA and scrapped the plans for the controversial gym , building a subterranean physical fitness center under the north end of campus instead . A popular myth states that the gym 's plans were eventually used by Princeton University for the expansion of its athletic facilities , but as Jadwin Gymnasium was already 50 % complete by 1966 ( when the Columbia gym was announced ) this was clearly not correct . At least 30 Columbia students were suspended by the administration as a result of the protests . Many of the Class of ' 68 walked out of their graduation and held a <unk> on Low Plaza with a picnic following at Morningside Park , the place where the protests began . The protests hurt Columbia financially as many potential students chose to attend other universities and some alumni refused to donate money to the school . Allan Bloom , a professor of philosophy at the University of Chicago , believed that the protest efforts at Columbia were responsible for pushing higher education further toward the liberal left . As a result of the protests , Bloom stated , " American universities were no longer places of intellectual and academic debate , but rather places of ' political correctness ' and liberalism . " 
 = = = Protests against racism and apartheid = = = 
 Further student protests , including hunger strike and more barricades of Hamilton Hall and the Business School during the late 1970s and early 1980s , were aimed at convincing the university trustees to divest all of the university 's investments in companies that were seen as active or tacit supporters of the apartheid regime in South Africa . A notable upsurge in the protests occurred in 1978 , when following a celebration of the tenth anniversary of the student uprising in 1968 , students marched and rallied in protest of university investments in South Africa . The Committee Against Investment in South Africa ( <unk> ) and numerous student groups including the Socialist Action Committee , the Black Student Organization and the Gay Students group joined together and succeeded in pressing for the first partial divestment of a U.S. university . 
 The initial ( and partial ) Columbia divestment , focused largely on bonds and financial institutions directly involved with the South African regime . It followed a year @-@ long campaign first initiated by students who had worked together to block the appointment of former United States Secretary of State Henry Kissinger to an endowed chair at the university in 1977 . 
 Broadly backed by student groups and many faculty members the Committee Against Investment in South Africa held teach @-@ ins and demonstrations through the year focused on the trustees ties to the corporations doing business with South Africa . Trustee meetings were picketed and interrupted by demonstrations culminating in May 1978 in the takeover of the Graduate School of Business . 
 = = = Ahmadinejad speech controversy = = = 
 The School of International and Public Affairs extends invitations to heads of state and heads of government who come to New York City for the opening of the fall session of the United Nations General Assembly . In 2007 , Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad was one of those invited to speak on campus . Ahmadinejad accepted his invitation and spoke on September 24 , 2007 , as part of Columbia University 's World Leaders Forum . The invitation proved to be highly controversial . Hundreds of demonstrators swarmed the campus on September 24 and the speech itself was televised worldwide . University President Lee C. Bollinger tried to allay the controversy by letting <unk> speak , but with a negative introduction ( given personally by Bollinger ) . This did not mollify those who were displeased with the fact that the Iranian leader had been invited onto the campus . Columbia students , though , turned out en masse to listen to the speech on the South Lawn . An estimated 2 @,@ 500 undergraduates and graduates came out for the historic occasion . 
 During his speech , Ahmadinejad criticized Israel 's policies towards the Palestinians ; called for research on the historical accuracy of the Holocaust ; raised questions as to who initiated the 9 / 11 attacks ; defended Iran 's nuclear power program , criticizing the UN 's policy of sanctions on his country ; and attacked U.S. foreign policy in the Middle East . In response to a question about Iran 's treatment of women and homosexuals , he asserted that women are respected in Iran and that " In Iran , we don 't have homosexuals like in your country ... In Iran , we do not have this phenomenon . I don 't know who told you this . " The latter statement drew laughter from the audience . The Manhattan District Attorney 's Office accused Columbia of accepting grant money from the Alavi Foundation to support faculty " sympathetic " to Iran 's Islamic republic . 
 = = = ROTC controversy = = = 
 Beginning in 1969 , during the Vietnam War , the university did not allow the U.S. military to have Reserve Officers ' Training Corps ( ROTC ) programs on campus , though Columbia students could participate in ROTC programs at other local colleges and universities . At a forum at the university during the 2008 presidential election campaign , both John McCain and Barack Obama said that the university should consider reinstating ROTC on campus . After the debate , the President of the University , Lee C. Bollinger , stated that he did not favor reinstating Columbia 's ROTC program , because of the military 's anti @-@ gay policies . In November 2008 , Columbia 's undergraduate student body held a referendum on the question of whether or not to invite ROTC back to campus , and the students who voted were almost evenly divided on the issue . ROTC lost the vote ( which would not have been binding on the administration , and did not include graduate students , faculty , or alumni ) by a fraction of a percentage point . In April 2010 during Admiral Mike Mullen 's address at Columbia , President Lee C. Bollinger stated that the ROTC would be readmitted to campus if the admiral 's plans for revoking the don 't ask , don 't tell policy were successful . In February 2011 during one of three town @-@ hall meetings on the ROTC ban , former Army staff sergeant Anthony <unk> , a Purple Heart recipient for injuries sustained during his service in Iraq , was booed and hissed at by some students during his speech promoting the idea of allowing the ROTC on campus . In April 2011 the Columbia University Senate voted to welcome the ROTC program back on campus . Secretary of the Navy Ray <unk> and Columbia University President Lee C. Bollinger signed an agreement to reinstate Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps ( NROTC ) program at Columbia for the first time in more than 40 years on May 26 , 2011 . The agreement was signed at a ceremony on board the USS Iwo Jima , docked in New York for the Navy 's annual Fleet Week . 
 = = Traditions = = 
 = = = Orgo Night = = = 
 On the day before the Organic Chemistry exam — which is often on the first day of finals — at precisely the stroke of midnight , the Columbia University Marching Band occupies Butler Library to distract diligent students from studying . After a forty @-@ five minutes or so of jokes and music , the procession then moves out to the lawn in front of Hartley , Wallach and John Jay residence halls to entertain the residents there . The band then plays at other locations around Morningside Heights , including the residential quadrangle of Barnard College , where students of the all @-@ women 's school , in mock @-@ consternation , rain trash – including notes and course packets – and water balloons upon them from their dormitories above . The band tends to close their Orgo Night performances before <unk> Hall , known among students as the more studious and reportedly " anti @-@ social " residence hall , where the underclassmen in the band serenade the graduating seniors with an entertaining , though vulgar , mock @-@ hymn to Columbia , composed of quips that poke fun at the stereotypes about the Columbia student body . 
 = = = Tree @-@ Lighting and Yule Log ceremonies = = = 
 The campus Tree @-@ Lighting Ceremony was inaugurated in 1998 . It celebrates the illumination of the medium @-@ sized trees lining College Walk in front of Kent and Hamilton Halls on the east end and Dodge and Journalism Halls on the west , just before finals week in early December . The lights remain on until February 28 . Students meet at the sun @-@ dial for free hot chocolate , performances by a cappella groups , and speeches by the university president and a guest . 
 Immediately following the College Walk festivities is one of Columbia 's older holiday traditions , the lighting of the Yule Log . The Christmas ceremony dates to a period prior to the American Revolutionary War , but lapsed before being revived by University President Nicholas Murray Butler in the early 20th century . A troop of students dressed as Continental Army soldiers carry the eponymous log from the sun @-@ dial to the lounge of John Jay Hall , where it is lit amid the singing of seasonal carols . The Christmas ceremony is accompanied by a reading of A Visit From St. Nicholas by Clement Clarke Moore and Yes , Virginia , There is a Santa Claus by Francis <unk> Church . 
 = = = The Varsity Show = = = 
 The Varsity Show is an annual musical written by and for students and was established in 1894 , making it one of Columbia 's oldest traditions . Past writers and directors have included Columbians Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein , Lorenz Hart , <unk> Diamond , and Herman Wouk . The show has one of the largest operating budgets of all university events . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 As of 2011 , Columbia alumni included three United States Presidents , 26 foreign Heads of State , nine Justices of the Supreme Court of the United States ( including three Chief Justices ) and 39 Nobel winners . As of 2011 , alumni also have received more than 35 National Book Awards and 123 Pulitzer Prizes . Today , two United States Senators and 16 Chief Executives of Fortune 500 companies hold Columbia degrees , as do three of the 25 richest Americans and 20 living billionaires . Attendees of King 's College , Columbia 's predecessor , included five Founding Fathers . 
 Former U.S. Presidents Theodore Roosevelt and Franklin Delano Roosevelt attended the law school . Other more recent political figures educated at Columbia include U.S President Barack Obama , Associate Justice of the U.S. Supreme Court Ruth Bader Ginsburg , former U.S. Secretary of State Madeleine Albright , former chairman of the U.S. Federal Reserve Bank Alan Greenspan , U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder , and U.S. Solicitor General Donald Verrilli Jr . Dwight D. Eisenhower served as the thirteenth president of Columbia University from 1948 to 1953 . The university has also educated 26 foreign heads of state , including President of Georgia Mikheil Saakashvili , President of East Timor Jose Ramos Horta , President of Estonia Toomas Hendrik Ilves and other historical figures such as Wellington Koo , Radovan Karadžić , Gaston Eyskens , and T. V. Soong . The author of India 's constitution and Dalit leader Dr. B. R. Ambedkar was also an alumnus of Columbia . 
 Alumni of Columbia have occupied top positions in Wall Street and the rest of the business world . Notable members of the Astor family attended Columbia , while some recent business graduates include investor Warren Buffett , former CEO of PBS and NBC Larry Grossman , and chairman of Wal @-@ Mart S. Robson Walton . CEO 's of top Fortune 500 companies include James P. Gorman of Morgan Stanley , Robert J. Stevens of Lockheed Martin , Philippe Dauman of Viacom , Ursula Burns of Xerox , and Vikram Pandit of Citigroup . Notable labor organizer and women 's educator Louise Leonard McLaren received her degree of Master of Arts from Columbia . 
 In science and technology , Columbia alumni include : founder of IBM Herman <unk> ; inventor of FM radio Edwin Armstrong ; Francis Mechner ; integral in development of the nuclear submarine Hyman Rickover ; founder of Google China Kai @-@ Fu Lee ; scientists Stephen Jay Gould , Robert Millikan , Helium – neon laser inventor Ali Javan and Mihajlo Pupin ; chief @-@ engineer of the New York City Subway , William Barclay Parsons ; philosophers Irwin <unk> and Robert Nozick ; economist Milton Friedman ; and psychologist Harriet Babcock . 
 Many Columbia alumni have gone on to renowned careers in the arts , such as the composers Richard Rodgers , Oscar Hammerstein II , Lorenz Hart , and Art Garfunkel . Four United States Poet Laureates received their degrees from Columbia . Columbia alumni have made an indelible mark in the field of American poetry and literature , with such people as Jack Kerouac and Allen Ginsberg , pioneers of the Beat Generation , and Langston Hughes , a seminal figure in the Harlem Renaissance , all having attended the university . Other notable writers who attended Columbia include authors Isaac Asimov , J.D. Salinger , Upton Sinclair , and the journalist Hunter S. Thompson , primarily known for his works in the American magazine Rolling Stone . 
 University alumni have also been very prominent in the film industry , with 28 alumni and former students winning a combined 39 Academy Awards ( as of 2011 ) , second in the world only to New York University ( NYU ) . Some notable Columbia alumni that have gone on to work in film include directors Sidney Lumet ( 12 Angry Men ) and Kathryn Bigelow ( The Hurt Locker ) , screenwriters Howard Koch ( Casablanca ) and Joseph L. Mankiewicz ( All About Eve ) , and actors James Cagney and Ed Harris . 
 Notable Columbia University alumni include : 
 = Victoria Louise @-@ class cruiser = 
 The Victoria Louise class of protected cruisers was the last class of ships of that type built for the German Imperial Navy . The class design introduced the combined clipper and ram bow and the blocky sides that typified later German armoured cruisers . The class comprised five vessels , Victoria Louise , the lead ship , Hertha , Freya , Vineta , and Hansa . The ships were laid down in 1895 – 1896 , and were launched in 1897 – 1898 and commissioned into the fleet over the following year . 
 The first three ships were 110 @.@ 60 meters ( 362 ft 10 in ) long and displaced 6 @,@ 491 metric tons ( 6 @,@ 388 long tons ) at combat load ; Vineta and Hansa were a slightly modified design . They were 110 @.@ 50 m ( 362 ft 6 in ) long and displaced 6 @,@ 705 t ( 6 @,@ 599 long tons ) at full load . All five ships were armed with a main battery of two 21 @-@ centimeter ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) guns and eight 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) guns . The first three ships had a top speed of 19 @.@ 5 knots ( 36 @.@ 1 km / h ; 22 @.@ 4 mph ) ; the last two were slightly slower , at 18 @.@ 5 knots ( 34 @.@ 3 km / h ; 21 @.@ 3 mph ) . Problems with the Niclausse boilers installed on Freya prompted the Navy to standardize boiler types in future warships . 
 The ships of the class served in various units in the German fleet , including on the America Station , in the East Asia Squadron , and with the home fleet . Hertha and Hansa participated in the suppression of the Boxer Rebellion in China in 1900 , and Vineta was involved in the Venezuela Crisis of 1902 – 1903 . All five ships were modernized between 1905 and 1911 , after which they served as training ships for naval cadets . They were mobilized into the 5th Scouting Group at the outbreak of World War I in August 1914 , but were quickly withdrawn from front @-@ line service . They served in various secondary roles for the rest of the war . After the end of the conflict , Victoria Louise was converted into a merchant ship , but was broken up in 1923 . The other four ships were scrapped in 1920 – 1921 . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = General characteristics = = = 
 The first three ships of the Victoria Louise class — Victoria Louise , Hertha , and Freya — were 109 @.@ 10 meters ( 357 ft 11 in ) long at the waterline and 110 @.@ 60 m ( 362 ft 10 in ) long overall . They had a beam of 17 @.@ 40 m ( 57 ft 1 in ) and a draft of 6 @.@ 58 m ( 21 ft 7 in ) forward and 6 @.@ 93 m ( 22 ft 9 in ) . These ships displaced 5 @,@ 660 metric tons ( 5 @,@ 570 long tons ) as designed and 6 @,@ 491 t ( 6 @,@ 388 long tons ) at full combat load . Vineta and Hansa had slightly different dimensions ; they were 109 @.@ 80 m ( 360 ft 3 in ) long at the waterline and 110 @.@ 50 m ( 362 ft 6 in ) overall . Their beam was 17 @.@ 60 m ( 57 ft 9 in ) and drew 7 @.@ 08 m ( 23 ft 3 in ) forward and 7 @.@ 34 m ( 24 ft 1 in ) aft . Their displacement was also higher than the first three ships , at 5 @,@ 885 t ( 5 @,@ 792 long tons ) as designed and 6 @,@ 705 t ( 6 @,@ 599 long tons ) at combat load . 
 The ships ' hulls were constructed with longitudinal and transverse steel frames ; a single layer of wood planks were used for the hull . A later of Muntz metal sheathing extended up to 1 m ( 3 ft 3 in ) above the waterline to protect against fouling of the hull . This sheathing was later removed from Victoria Louise , Hertha , and Freya . The hull was divided into twelve watertight compartments , which were later reduced to eleven , with the exception of Freya . The hull also incorporated a double bottom that extended for 60 percent of the length of the hull . The ships ' design set a precedent for later armored cruisers , with large , bulky sides and a combined clipper bow and ram . 
 The ships ' standard crew was 31 officers and 446 enlisted men , with an additional 9 officers and 41 enlisted while serving as a second command flagship . After their reconstruction into training ships , the crew was substantially enlarged to incorporate the trainees , with 26 officers and 658 sailors , 75 of whom were naval cadets and 300 others were cabin boys . The ships carried a number of smaller boats , including three picket boats , one launch , one pinnace , two cutters , two yawls , and three dinghies . After their modernization , the boats were significantly revised ; the number of picket boats was reduced to one , a barge and a launch were added , the dinghies were removed , and five more cutters were added . 
 The ships were good sea boats ; they had an easy motion and were dry as a result of their high forecastles . They had a tendency to pitch when steaming downwind , however , and made severe leeway in heavy winds because of their large superstructures . They were difficult to maneuver without the center shaft engaged . They lost only around ten percent speed in a head sea or with the rudder hard over . In addition , as the lower coal bunkers were emptied , the ships became increasingly unstable ; with empty bunkers , the ships could heel over as much as fifteen degrees in a hard turn . The modernization of the ships between 1905 and 1911 rectified this problem . They had a transverse metacentric height of <unk> to <unk> m ( 1 ft 10 in to 2 ft 5 in ) . As built , the ships were very hot , and ventilation had to be improved before they were commissioned . 
 = = = Machinery = = = 
 The propulsion system of all five ships consisted of three vertical 4 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines built by AG Vulcan . Steam was provided by twelve coal @-@ fired boilers from different manufacturers , with the exception of Hansa . Victoria Louise and Vineta had boilers from Dürr AG , Freya had Niclausse boilers , and Hertha had Belleville boilers . Hansa was equipped with eighteen transverse Belleville boilers . The Niclausse boilers in Freya proved to be particularly troublesome , which led the Navy to use only Schulz @-@ Thornycroft or Marine @-@ type boilers in future vessels . In the modernizations between 1905 and 1911 , the ships were re @-@ equipped with transverse Marine @-@ type boilers . The ships originally had three funnels , but after their refits , the boilers were trunked into two funnels . 
 The ships ' engines were rated at 10 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 500 kW ) top speed of 19 @.@ 5 knots ( 36 @.@ 1 km / h ; 22 @.@ 4 mph ) for the first three ships and 18 @.@ 5 knots ( 34 @.@ 3 km / h ; 21 @.@ 3 mph ) for the last two vessels . As built , the ships carried up to 950 t ( 930 long tons ; 1 @,@ 050 short tons ) of coal , which gave them a cruising range of 3 @,@ 412 nautical miles ( 6 @,@ 319 km ; 3 @,@ 926 mi ) at a speed of 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . The more efficient Marine @-@ type boilers installed in 1905 – 1911 increased cruising range to 3 @,@ 840 nmi ( 7 @,@ 110 km ; 4 @,@ 420 mi ) at the same speed . Victoria Louise and Hertha were equipped with four electricity generators with a combined output of 224 to 271 kilowatts ( 300 to 363 hp ) at 110 Volts ; the last three ships had three generators with a total output of 169 to 183 kW ( 227 to 245 hp ) at 110 V. Steering was controlled by a single large rudder . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 The ships ' primary armament consisted of two 21 cm SK L / 40 guns in single gun turrets , one forward and one aft . The guns were supplied with 58 rounds of ammunition each . They had a range of 16 @,@ 300 m ( 53 @,@ 500 ft ) . Eight 15 cm SK L / 40 guns rounded out the offensive gun armament . Four of these guns were mounted in turrets amidships and the other four were placed in casemates . These guns had a range of 13 @,@ 700 m ( 44 @,@ 900 ft ) . Two of the 15 cm guns were removed in the refit . 
 The ships also carried ten 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 30 guns , and an eleventh was added during the modernization . Three longer @-@ barreled 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 35 guns were also added at that time . The gun armament was rounded out by ten machine guns , which were removed during the refit . The ships were also equipped with three 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes with eight torpedoes , two launchers were mounted on the broadside and the third was in the bow , all below the waterline . In 1916 , all of the ships of the class were disarmed , with the exception of Freya , which was re @-@ equipped with a single 15 cm gun , four 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns , and fourteen 8 @.@ 8 cm guns of both the L / 30 and L / 35 versions , for use as a gunnery training ship . 
 Armor protection for the ships was composed of Krupp steel . The main deck was 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick with 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick slopes . The forward conning tower had 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides and a 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick roof . The aft conning tower was given only splinter protection , with just 12 mm ( 0 @.@ 47 in ) thick sides . The 21 cm and 15 cm gun turrets had 100 mm thick sides and 30 mm thick roofs . The casemate guns were also given 100 mm worth of armor protection . The ships were also equipped with cork cofferdams . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Victoria Louise was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen in 1895 , under construction number 116 . She was launched on 29 March 1897 and was commissioned into the fleet on 20 February 1899 . She cost the Imperial government 10 @,@ 714 @,@ 000 gold marks . Construction of Hertha began in 1895 at the AG Vulcan dockyard in Stettin , under construction number 233 . She was launched on 14 April 1897 and was commissioned on 23 July 1898 , the first ship of the class to enter service . Her construction cost 9 @,@ 932 @,@ 000 marks . The keel @-@ laying of Freya followed in 1895 at the Imperial Dockyard in Danzig . She was launched on 27 April 1897 and was commissioned on 20 October 1898 , at the cost of 11 @,@ 094 @,@ 000 marks . 
 Vineta was laid down at the Imperial Dockyard in Danzig in 1896 . She was launched on 9 December 1897 and was commissioned into the fleet on 13 September 1899 . She cost 10 @,@ 714 @,@ 000 marks . Hansa , the last ship of the class , was laid down in 1896 at AG Vulcan under construction number 235 . She was launched on 12 March 1898 and was commissioned on 20 April 1899 , at the cost of 10 @,@ 270 @,@ 000 marks . Victoria Louise and Hansa were rebuilt at the Imperial Dockyard in Kiel in 1906 – 1908 and 1907 – 1909 , respectively . The other three ships were modernized at the Imperial Dockyard in Danzig : Hertha in 1906 – 1908 , Freya in 1905 – 1907 , and Vineta in 1909 – 1911 . Freya was again modified at the Imperial Dockyard in Danzig in 1911 – 1913 , and Hansa was rebuilt in 1915 at the Imperial Dockyard in Kiel . 
 = = Service history = = 
 = = = Victoria Louise = = = 
 Victoria Louise served with the fleet for the first seven years of her career . During this time , she represented Germany during the funeral of Queen Victoria in 1901 . In 1906 , she was modernized and after 1908 , used as a training ship for naval cadets . In 1909 , she visited the United States , and at the outbreak of World War I , was mobilized into the 5th Scouting Group . She was attacked unsuccessfully by the British submarine HMS E1 in October 1914 , and at the end of the year she was withdrawn from service . She was used as a minelayer and barracks ship based in Danzig for the rest of the war . Victoria Louise was sold in 1919 and converted into a freighter the following year , though she served in this capacity until 1923 , when she was broken up for scrap . 
 = = = Hertha = = = 
 Hertha served abroad in the German East Asia Squadron for the first six years of her career ; she served briefly as the Squadron flagship in 1900 . She contributed a landing party to the force that captured the Taku Forts during the Boxer Rebellion in 1900 . After returning to Germany in 1905 , she was modernized and used as a training ship in 1908 , following the completion of the refit . She conducted a series of training cruises , and several notable officers served aboard the ship as cadets , including Karl Dönitz and Ernst Lindemann . At the outbreak of World War I , Hertha was mobilized into the 5th Scouting Group , but served in front @-@ line duty only briefly . She was used as a barracks ship after 1915 , and ultimately sold for scrapping in 1920 . 
 = = = Freya = = = 
 Freya served in the German fleet for the initial years of her career , unlike her sister ships , all of which served abroad on foreign stations . As a result , she led a fairly uneventful career in the fleet . After a modernization in 1905 – 1907 , Freya was used as a school ship for cadets , one of whom was Günther Lütjens . While visiting Canada in 1908 , she accidentally rammed and sank a Canadian schooner , killing nine sailors . At the outbreak of World War I , Freya was mobilized into the 5th Scouting Group , but served in front @-@ line duty only briefly . She was used as a barracks ship after 1915 , and ultimately sold for scrapping in 1921 . 
 = = = Vineta = = = 
 Vineta served abroad in the American Station for the first several years of her career . While on station in the Americas , she participated in the Venezuela Crisis of 1902 – 1903 and bombarded several Venezuelan fortresses . She returned to Germany in 1905 and was used as a torpedo training ship in 1908 . She was modernized in 1909 – 1911 , after which she was used as a school ship for naval cadets . In November 1912 , she participated in an international naval protest of the First Balkan War . At the outbreak of World War I , Vineta was mobilized into the 5th Scouting Group like her sisters , but served in front @-@ line duty only briefly . She was used as a barracks ship after 1915 , and ultimately sold for scrapping in 1920 . 
 = = = Hansa = = = 
 Hansa served abroad in the East Asia Squadron for the first six years of her career . Along with Hertha , she contributed a landing party to the force that captured the Taku Forts during the Boxer Rebellion . In August 1904 , she participated in the internment of the Russian battleship Tsesarevich after the Battle of the Yellow Sea during the Russo @-@ Japanese War . After returning to Germany in 1906 , she was modernized and used as a training ship in 1909 , following the completion of the refit . At the outbreak of World War I , Hansa was mobilized into the 5th Scouting Group , but served in front @-@ line duty only briefly . She was used as a barracks ship after 1915 , and ultimately sold for scrapping in 1920 . 
 = Pride & Prejudice ( 2005 film ) = 
 Pride & Prejudice is a 2005 British romantic drama directed by Joe Wright and based on Jane Austen 's novel of the same name , published in 1813 . The film depicts five sisters from an English family of landed gentry as they deal with issues of marriage , morality and misconceptions . Keira Knightley stars in the lead role of Elizabeth Bennet , while Matthew Macfadyen plays her romantic interest Mr Darcy . Produced by Working Title Films in association with StudioCanal , the film was released on 16 September 2005 in the United Kingdom and Ireland and on 11 November in the United States . 
 Screenwriter Deborah Moggach initially attempted to make her script as faithful to the novel as possible , writing from Elizabeth 's perspective while preserving much of the original dialogue . Wright , who was directing his first feature film , encouraged greater deviation from the text , including changing the dynamics within the Bennet family . Wright and Moggach set the film in an earlier period and avoided depicting a " perfectly clean Regency world " , presenting instead a " muddy hem version " of the time . It was shot entirely on location in England on a 15 @-@ week schedule . Wright found casting difficult due to past performances of particular characters . The filmmakers had to balance who they thought was best for each role with the studio 's desire for stars . Knightley was well @-@ known in part from her work in the Pirates of the Caribbean film series , while Macfadyen had no international name recognition . 
 The film 's themes emphasise realism , romanticism and family . It was marketed to a younger , mainstream audience ; promotional items noted that it came from the producers of 2001 's romantic comedy Bridget Jones 's Diary before acknowledging its provenance as an Austen novel . Pride & Prejudice earned a worldwide gross of approximately $ 121 million , which was considered a commercial success . Pride & Prejudice earned a rating of 82 % from review aggregator Metacritic , labeling it universally acclaimed . It earned four nominations at the 78th Academy Awards , including a Best Actress nomination for Knightley . Austen scholars have opined that Wright 's work created a new hybrid genre by blending traditional traits of the heritage film with " youth @-@ oriented filmmaking techniques " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 During the late 18th century , the Bennet family , consisting of Mr. and Mrs. Bennet and their five daughters — Jane , Elizabeth , Mary , Kitty and Lydia — live in comparative financial independence as gentry on a working farm in rural England . As Longbourn is <unk> to be inherited by Mr. Bennet 's cousin , Mr. Collins , Mrs. Bennet is anxious to marry off her five daughters before Mr. Bennet dies . Wealthy bachelor Charles Bingley has recently moved into Netherfield , a large , nearby estate . He is introduced to local society at an assembly ball , along with his haughty sister Caroline and reserved friend , Mr. Darcy , who " owns half of Derbyshire . " Bingley is enchanted with the gentle and beautiful Jane , while Elizabeth takes an instant dislike to Darcy after he coldly rebuffs her attempts at conversation and she overhears him insult her . When Jane becomes sick on a visit to Netherfield , Elizabeth goes to stay with her , verbally sparring with Caroline and Darcy . 
 Later the Bennets are visited by Mr. Collins , a pompous clergyman who talks of little but his patroness , Lady Catherine de Bourgh . After learning from Mrs. Bennet that Jane is expected to become engaged soon , Collins decides to pursue Elizabeth . Meanwhile , the handsome and charming Lieutenant Wickham of the newly @-@ arrived militia captures the girls ' attention ; he wins Elizabeth 's sympathy by telling her that Darcy had cheated him of his inheritance . At a ball at Netherfield , Elizabeth , startled by Darcy 's abrupt appearance and request , accepts a dance with him , but vows to her best friend Charlotte Lucas that she has " sworn to loathe him for all eternity . " During the dance , she attacks him with witty sarcasm and Darcy responds in kind . At the same ball , Charlotte expresses concern to Elizabeth that Jane 's behaviour to Mr. Bingley is too reserved and that Bingley may not realise she loves him . The next day , at Longbourn , Collins proposes to Elizabeth , but she declines . When Bingley unexpectedly returns to London , Elizabeth dispatches a heartbroken Jane to the city to stay with their aunt and uncle , the Gardiners , in hopes of re @-@ establishing contact between Jane and Bingley . Later , Elizabeth is appalled to learn that Charlotte will marry Collins to gain financial security and avoid remaining a spinster . 
 Months later , Elizabeth visits the newly @-@ wed Mr. and Mrs. Collins at Rosings , Lady Catherine 's manor estate ; they are invited to dine there , and meet Darcy and Colonel Fitzwilliam , who it transpires are Lady Catherine 's nephews . Here Darcy shows greater interest in Elizabeth , especially when she replies to Lady Catherine 's jabs with spirited wit . The next day , not realizing that Jane is Elizabeth 's sister , Colonel Fitzwilliam lets slip to Elizabeth that Darcy had separated Bingley from Jane . Distraught , she flees outside , but Darcy chooses that moment to track her down and propose marriage . He claims that he loves her " most ardently , " despite her " lower rank . " Elizabeth refuses him , citing his treatment of Jane and Bingley and of Wickham ; they argue fiercely , with Darcy explaining that he had been convinced that Jane did not return Bingley 's love . Darcy leaves angry and heartbroken . He finds Elizabeth later and presents her with a letter , which alleges Wickham is a gambler who demanded and received cash in lieu of the position intended for him by Darcy 's father . It is further claimed that upon being refused more money , Wickham had attempted to elope with Darcy 's 15 @-@ year @-@ old sister , Georgiana , in order to obtain her £ 30 @,@ 000 inheritance , but abandoned her upon learning that he would never receive the money . 
 The Gardiners take Elizabeth on a trip to the Peak District and visit Darcy 's estate , Pemberley , believing that he is away travelling . Elizabeth is stunned by its wealth and beauty and hears nothing but good things about Darcy from his housekeeper . There , she accidentally runs into Darcy , who has arrived home early . He invites her and the Gardiners to meet his sister . His manners have softened considerably and Georgiana takes an instant liking to Elizabeth . When Elizabeth learns that her immature and flirtatious youngest sister Lydia has run away with Wickham , she tearfully blurts out the news to Darcy and the Gardiners before returning home . Her family expects social ruin for having a disgraced daughter , but they are soon relieved to hear that Mr. Gardiner had discovered the pair in London and that they had married . Lydia later reveals to Elizabeth that Darcy had found them and had paid for the marriage . 
 When Bingley and Darcy return to Netherfield , Jane accepts Bingley 's proposal . The same evening , Lady Catherine unexpectedly visits Elizabeth and insists that she renounce Darcy , as he is supposedly engaged to her own daughter , Anne . Elizabeth refuses and , unable to sleep , walks on the moor at dawn . There , she meets Darcy , also unable to sleep after hearing of his aunt 's behaviour . He admits his continued love and Elizabeth accepts his proposal . Mr. Bennet gives his consent after Elizabeth assures him of her love for Darcy . In the U.S. release of the film , an additional last scene shows the newlyweds outside of Pemberley showing affection for each other . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception and adaptation = = = 
 As with several recent Jane Austen adaptations , Pride & Prejudice was an Anglo @-@ American collaboration , between British studio Working Title Films ( in association with French company StudioCanal ) and its American parent company Universal Studios . Working Title at the time was known for mainstream productions like Bridget Jones 's Diary and Love Actually that drew international audiences , rather than films in the historical drama genre . Its co @-@ chairman Tim Bevan explained that the studio wanted to " bring Austen 's original story , concentrating on Lizzie , back in all its glory to the big screen for audiences everywhere to enjoy " . Given a " relatively inexpensive " budget of £ 22 million ( $ 28 million ) , the film was expected to excel at the box office , particularly based on the commercial successes of Romeo + Juliet ( 1996 ) and Shakespeare in Love ( 1998 ) as well as the resurgence of interest in Austen 's works . 
 Given little instruction from the studio , screenwriter Deborah Moggach spent over two years adapting Pride and Prejudice for film . She had sole discretion with the early script , and eventually wrote approximately ten drafts . Realising it held " a perfect three @-@ act structure " , Moggach attempted to be as faithful to the original novel as possible , calling it " so beautifully shaped as a story – the ultimate romance about two people who think they hate each other but who are really passionately in love . I felt , ' If it 's not broken , don 't fix it . ' " While she could not reproduce the novel 's " fiercely wonderful dialogue in its entirety " , she attempted to keep much of it . 
 Moggach 's first script was closest to Austen 's book , but later versions trimmed extraneous storylines and characters . Moggach initially wrote all scenes from Elizabeth 's point of view in keeping with the novel ; she later set a few scenes from the male perspective , such as when Bingley practices his marriage proposal , in order to " show Darcy and Bingley being close " and to indicate Darcy was a " human being instead of being stuck up " . Small details were inserted that acknowledged wider events outside of the characters ' circle , such as those then occurring in France . While Moggach is the only screenwriter credited for the film , playwright Lee Hall also made early additions to the script . 
 Television director Joe Wright was hired in early 2004 , making Pride & Prejudice his directional feature film debut . He was considered a surprising choice for a film in the romance drama genre due to his past work with social realism . Wright 's body of work had impressed the producers , who were looking for a fresh perspective ; they sent him a script despite the fact that Wright had not read the novel . He commented that at the time , " I didn 't know if I was really all that interested ; I thought I was a little bit more mainstream than this , a bit more edgy . But then I read the script and I was surprised I was very moved by it " . He next read the novel , which he called " an amazing piece of character observation and it really seemed like the first piece of British Realism . It felt like it was a true story ; had a lot of truth in it about understanding how to love other people , understanding how to overcome prejudices , understanding the things that separate us from other people ... things like that . " 
 The only adaptation of Pride and Prejudice Wright had seen was the 1940 production , which was the last time the novel had been adapted into a feature film . The director purposely did not watch the other productions , both out of fear he would inadvertently steal ideas and because he wanted to be as original as possible . He did , however , watch other period films , including Ang Lee 's Sense and Sensibility , Roger Michell 's Persuasion , and John Schlesinger 's Far from the Madding Crowd ; Wright cited this last film as the greatest influence on his own adaptation , calling it " very real and very honest – and it is quite romantic as well " . In trying to create an atmosphere of charged flirtation , the director also gained inspiration from teen romance films such as Sixteen Candles and The Breakfast Club . 
 Wright 's hire occurred while Moggach was on her third draft . Despite her desire to work closely with Austen 's dialogue , Wright made an effort to not " be too reverential to [ it ] . I don 't believe people spoke like that then ; it 's not natural . " While a few scenes , such as the discussion over accomplished women , aligned closely with the author 's original dialogue , many others " substituted instead a mixture of modern idiom and archaic @-@ sounding sentence structure " . One alteration concerned politeness ; Wright noted that while Austen 's work had characters waiting before speaking , he believed that " particularly in big families of girls , everyone tends to speak over each other , finishing each other 's sentences , etc . So I felt that the Bennet family 's conversations would be overlapping like that . " Sense and Sensibility actress and screenwriter Emma Thompson aided in script development , though she opted to be uncredited . She advised the nervous director about adapting Austen for the screen and made dialogue recommendations , such as with parts of the Collins @-@ Charlotte storyline . 
 Citing the year Austen first wrote a draft of the novel , Wright and Moggach changed the period setting from 1813 ( the novel 's publication date ) to the late eighteenth century ; this decision was partly because Wright wanted to highlight the differences within an England influenced by the French Revolution , as he was fascinated that it had " caused an atmosphere among the British aristocracy of fear " . Additionally , Wright chose the earlier period because he hated dresses with an empire silhouette , which were popular in the later period . The decision helped make the film visually distinct from other recent Austen adaptations . In comparison to the popular 1995 BBC version , which featured Colin Firth and Jennifer Ehle , producer Paul Webster desired to make an adaptation that " doesn 't conform to the television drama stereotypes of a perfect clean Regency world " . Wright and Moggach opted for a " muddy hem version " of Longbourn , presenting a more rural setting than in previous adaptations out of a desire to depict the Bennets in " very close proximity to their rural life " and to emphasise their relative poverty . While the degree of poverty was criticised by some critics , Wright felt that the " mess adds to the drama of the predicament that the family were in " , and helps contrast the Bennets , Darcys , and <unk> . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Wright found casting of the film to be difficult because he was very particular about " the types of people [ he ] wanted to work with " . While interviewing to direct , he insisted that the actors match the ages of the characters in the novel . Wright specifically cast actors that had rapport on and off screen , and insisted that they partake in three weeks of rehearsal in improvisation workshops . Wright also had to balance who he thought was best for each role with what the producers wanted – mainly a big name attraction . Though Wright had not initially pictured someone as attractive as English actress Keira Knightley for the lead role of Elizabeth Bennet , he cast her after realising that the actress " is really a tomboy [ and ] has a lively mind and a great sense of humour " . Knightley at the time was known for Bend It Like Beckham and the Pirates of the Caribbean film series . She had been an Austen fan since age 7 , but initially feared taking the role out of apprehension that she would be doing " an absolute copy of Jennifer Ehle 's performance " , which she deeply admired . Knightley believed Elizabeth is " what you aspire to be : she 's funny , she 's witty and intelligent . She 's a fully rounded and very much loved character . " For the period , the actress studied etiquette , history and dancing but ran into trouble when she acquired a short haircut while preparing for her role in the bounty hunter film Domino . 
 Webster found the casting of Darcy especially hard due to the character 's iconic status and because " Colin Firth cast a very long shadow " as the 1995 Darcy . Wright later commented that his choice of Knightley allowed him to cast comparative unknown Matthew Macfadyen , something that would have been impossible had he chosen a less well @-@ known actress for Elizabeth Bennet . Macfadyen at the time was known for his role in the British television spy series Spooks , but had no recognition internationally . A fan of the actor 's television work , Wright called Macfadyen " a proper manly man ... I didn 't want a pretty boy kind of actor . His properties were the ones I felt I needed [ for Darcy ] . Matthew 's a great big hunk of a guy . " Macfadyen did not read the novel before filming , preferring to rely solely on the script . 
 According to Wright , Rosamund Pike was cast as the eldest sister " because [ he ] knew she wasn 't going to play her as a nice , simple person . Jane has a real interior world , she has her heart broken . " Despite being Pike 's ex @-@ boyfriend , Simon Woods was cast as her romantic interest Mr Bingley . The other three Bennet sisters were played by <unk> Riley , Carey Mulligan , and Jena Malone , the only American actress among them . Wright believed Malone to have a " pretty faultless English accent " . Mulligan heard about the casting call at a dinner hosted by Julian Fellowes , to whom she had written a letter after failing to get into drama school ; she won the part after three auditions . <unk> Merchant appears as Georgiana Darcy ; she was hired despite having no previous acting experience after she wrote a letter to the casting director . In addition to Merchant , Pride & Prejudice was the feature film debut of both Mulligan and Riley . 
 Donald Sutherland reminded Wright of his own father and was cast as the Bennet patriarch ; Wright thought the actor possessed the " strength to handle those six women " . Brenda Blethyn was hired to play Mrs Bennet , whom Moggach believed to be the unsung heroine of the film ; Wright explained that it was " a tricky part [ to fill ] , as she can be very annoying ; you want to stop her chattering and shrieking . But Brenda has the humour and the heart to show the amount of love and care Mrs Bennet has for her daughters . " Wright convinced veteran actress Judi Dench to join the cast as Lady Catherine de Bourgh by writing her a letter that read " I love it when you play a bitch . Please come and be a bitch for me . " Dench had only one week available to shoot her scenes , forcing Wright to make them his first days of filming . 
 = = = Costume design = = = 
 Known for her BAFTA award @-@ winning work on the 2004 film Vera Drake , Jacqueline Durran was hired as the costume designer . She and Wright approached his film " as a difficult thing to tackle " because of their desire to distinguish it from the television adaptation . Due to Wright 's dislike of the high waistline , Durran focused on later eighteenth century fashions that often included a corseted , natural waistline rather than an empire silhouette ( which became popular after the 1790s ) . A generational divide was established : the older characters dress in mid @-@ eighteenth century fashions while the young wear " a sort of proto @-@ Regency style of hair and dress " . Mrs Bennet was of the older generation , and her dresses appeared to have been mended . 
 Durran 's costumes also helped emphasise social rank among the different characters ; Caroline Bingley for instance is introduced in an empire silhouetted dress , clothing that would have then been at the height of fashion . During her interview , Durran opined that all the women wear white at the Netherfield Ball due to its contemporary popularity , an idea that Wright credits as his reason for hiring her . All of the costumes were handmade , as clothing was at the time . However , costumes and hairstyles were adjusted to appeal to contemporary audiences , sacrificing historical accuracy . 
 To help differentiate the Bennet sisters , Durran viewed Elizabeth as the " tomboy " , clothing her in earthy colours because of her love of the countryside . For the other sisters , Durran remarked , " Jane was the most refined and yet it 's still all a bit slapdash and homemade , because the Bennets have no money . One of the main things Joe wanted was for the whole thing to have a provincial feel . Mary is the bluestocking : serious and practical . And then Lydia and Kitty are a bit Tweedledum and Tweedledee in a kind of teenage way . I tried to make it so that they 'd be sort of mirror images . If one 's wearing a green dress , the other will wear a green jacket ; so you always have a visual asymmetry between the two . " In contrast to the 1940 film , the 2005 production displayed the Bennet sisters in worn @-@ down but comfortable dresses that allowed the actors better <unk> . 
 Mr Darcy 's costume went through a series of phases . Durran noted : 
 " The first time we see him he 's at Meriton [ sic ] , where he has a very stiffly tailored jacket on and he 's quite contained and rigid . He stays in that rigid form for the first part of the film . By the time we get to the proposal that goes wrong in the rain , we move to a similar cut , but a much softer fabric . And then later he 's got a completely different cut of coat , not interlined and he wears it undone . The nth degree is him walking through the mist in the morning , completely undressed by 18th @-@ century standards . It 's absolutely unlikely , but then Lizzie 's in her <unk> , so what can you say ? " 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Moggach believed the novel was very filmable , " despite it containing no description and being a very <unk> book " . To Wright , many other period films had relied on paintings for inspiration rather than photographs , causing them to appear unreal . He thus used " Austen 's prose [ to give him ] many visual references for the people in the story " , including using close @-@ up shots of various characters . The filmmakers also changed several scenes to more romantic locales than those in the book . For instance , in the film , Darcy first proposes outdoors in a rainstorm at a building with neoclassical architecture ; in the book , this scene takes place inside a parsonage . In the film , his second proposal occurs on the misty moors as dawn breaks ; in the book , he and Elizabeth are walking down a country lane in broad daylight . Wright has acknowledged that " there are a lot of period film clichés ; some of them are in the film and some are not , but for me it was important to question them " . 
 During script development , the crew spent four to five months scouting locations , creating a " constant going back and forth between script and location " . The film was shot entirely on location within England on an 11 @-@ week schedule during the 2004 summer . Co @-@ producer Paul Webster noted that " it is quite unusual for a movie this size to be shot entirely on location . Part of Joe [ Wright ] ' s idea was to try to create a reality which allows the actors to relax and feel at one with their environment . " Working under production designer Sarah Greenwood and set decorator Katie Spencer , the crew filmed on seven estates in six different counties . Because " nothing exists in the United Kingdom that is untouched by the twenty @-@ first century " , many of the sites required substantial work to make them suitable for filming . Visual effects company Double Negative digitally restored several locations to make them contemporaneous ; they eradicated weeds , enhanced gold plating on window frames , and removed anachronisms such as gravel driveways and electricity pylons . Double Negative also developed the typeface used for the film 's title sequence . 
 Production staff selected particularly grand @-@ looking residences to better convey the wealth and power of certain characters . Locations included Chatsworth House in Derbyshire , the largest privately held country house in England . Chatsworth and Wilton House in Salisbury stood in for Pemberley . After a search of various sites in England , the moated manor house Groombridge Place in Kent was chosen for Longbourn . Location manager Adam Richards believed Groombridge had an " immense charm " that was " untouched by post @-@ 17th Century development " . Reflecting Wright 's choice of realism , Groombridge 's interior was designed to be " shabby chic " . Representing Netherfield Park was the late @-@ 18th century site Basildon Park in Berkshire , leading it to close for seven weeks to allow time for filming . Burghley House in Cambridgeshire stood in for Rosings , while the adjacent town of Stamford served as Meryton . Other locations included Haddon Hall ( for The Inn at Lambton ) , the Temple of Apollo and Palladian Bridge of Stourhead ( for the Gardens of Rosings ) , Hunsford ( for Collins ' parsonage and church ) and Peak District ( for Elizabeth and the Gardiners ' tour ) . The first dance scenes were shot on a set in a potato warehouse in Lincolnshire with the employment of local townspeople as extras ; this was the only set the crew built that was not already in existence . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Italian composer Dario Marianelli wrote the film score , the first of his four collaborations with Wright . Their relationship began when Paul Webster , who had worked with Marianelli on the 2001 film The Warrior , introduced him to Wright . In their first conversation , Marianelli and Wright discussed the early piano sonatas of Ludwig van Beethoven , which " became a point of reference " and " starting point " for the original score . In addition to Beethoven , pieces such as " Meryton Townhall " and " The Militia Marches In " ( featuring the flute ) were inspired by the film 's period , with the intention that they could conceivably have been heard during that time . " Meryton Townhall " and " Another Dance " contained actual dance cues that were fitting for the late eighteenth century . According to music critic William Ruhlmann , Marianelli 's score had a " strong Romantic flavour to accompany the familiar romantic plot " . 
 Multiple scenes feature actors playing pianos , forcing Marianelli to complete several of the pieces before filming began . According to him , " Those pieces already contained the seeds of what I developed later on into the score , when I abandoned historical correctness for a more intimate and emotional treatment of the story " . Marianelli was not present when the actors played his music due to the birth of his second daughter . The soundtrack featured French pianist Jean @-@ Yves Thibaudet , whom Wright considered one of the greatest piano players in the world . Thibaudet was accompanied by the English Chamber Orchestra . The soundtrack ultimately contained seventeen instrumental tracks of music organised in a different way from the film . 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 In contrast to the five @-@ hour BBC adaptation , Wright compressed his film into two hours and nine minutes of screen time . He remarked that the film is " obviously about Elizabeth and Darcy , following them and anything that detracts or diverts you from that story is what you have to cut " . Some of the most notable changes from the original book include time compression of several major sequences , including the departure of Wickham and the militia , Elizabeth 's visit to Rosings Park and Hunsford Parsonage , Elizabeth 's visit to Pemberley , Lydia 's elopement and subsequent crisis ; the elimination of several supporting characters , including Mr and Mrs Hurst , Mr and Mrs Phillips , Lady and Maria Lucas , Mrs Younge , several of Lydia 's friends ( including Colonel and Mrs Forster ) and various military officers and townspeople ; and the elimination of several sections in which characters reflect or converse on events that have recently occurred — for example , Elizabeth 's chapter @-@ long change of mind after reading Darcy 's letter . 
 Moggach and Wright debated how to end the film , but knew they did not want to have a wedding scene " because we didn 't want Elizabeth to come off as the girl who became a queen at this lavish wedding , or for it to be corny " . Shortly before the North American release , the film was modified to include a final scene ( not in the novel ) of the married Darcys enjoying a romantic evening and passionate kiss at Pemberley in an attempt to attract sentimental viewers ; this became a source of complaint for the Jane Austen Society of North America ( JASNA ) . After watching a preview of the film before its wide release , former JASNA president Elsa <unk> commented , " It has nothing at all of Jane Austen in it , is inconsistent with the first two @-@ thirds of the film , insults the audience with its banality and ought to be cut before release " . It had been removed from the British version after preview audiences found it unintentionally humorous ; however , later audiences complained that they were excluded from viewing this version , causing the film to be re @-@ released in the UK and Ireland 10 weeks after the original UK premiere date . The original British version ended with Mr Bennet 's blessing upon Elizabeth and Darcy 's union , thus circumventing the last chapter in the novel , which summarises the lives of the Darcys and the other main characters over the next several years . 
 = = Major themes and analysis = = 
 = = = Romanticism and realism = = = 
 Film , literary , and Austen scholars noted the appearance of romance and romanticism within Pride & Prejudice , especially in comparison to previous adaptations . Sarah <unk> marked the film as " an essentially Romantic interpretation of Austen 's novel " , citing as evidence Wright 's attention to nature as a means to " position Elizabeth and Darcy as Romantic figures ... Wright 's Pride & Prejudice takes as its central focus Austen 's concern with exploring the nature of the Romantic self and the possibilities for women and men to achieve individual self @-@ fulfillment within an oppressive patriarchal social and economic order . " Likewise , Catherine Stewart @-@ Beer of Oxford Brookes University called Elizabeth 's presence on the Derbyshire cliff a " stunning , magical evocation of Wright 's strong stylistic brand of Postmodern Romanticism " , but found this less like Austen and more reminiscent of Emily Brontë 's Wuthering Heights . In her analysis , University of Provence scholar Lydia Martin concluded that the " Romantic bias of the film is shown through the shifts in the characters ' relationships , the soundtrack and the treatment of landscape " . 
 Realism is a prominent aspect of the film , a theme confirmed by Wright in interviews as well as the DVD audio commentary . In a 2007 article , Ursinus College film studies professor Carole Dole argued that Pride & Prejudice is " a hybrid that embraces both an irreverent realism to which younger audiences are accustomed ( and which reflects the director 's realist aesthetic ) and the classic heritage film 's reverence for country houses , attractive landscapes and authentic period detail " . Such " irreverent realism " included the depiction of Longbourn as a working farm complete with chickens , cattle and pigs ; as Dole explains , " The agricultural realities of 1790s England are equally evident in the enclosed yard with barn and hay where Lizzie twirls barefoot over the mud on a rope swing " . Referring to recent adaptations such as 1999 's gritty Mansfield Park , Dole cited Pride & Prejudice as evidence that the heritage film is still around but has " been transformed into a more flexible genre " . Jessica Durgan agreed with this assessment , writing that the film " simultaneously reject [ s ] and <unk> [ es ] heritage to attract a larger audience " . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Raised with three sisters , Moggach was particularly interested in the story 's family dynamics . Brock University professor Barbara K. Seeber believed that in contrast to the novel , the 2005 adaptation emphasises the familial over the romantic . Evidence of this can be seen in how Pride & Prejudice " significantly recast the Bennet family , in particular its patriarch , presenting Mr Bennet as a sensitive and kind father whose role in the family 's misfortunes is continually downplayed . " Seeber further observed that the film is " the first to present Mrs Bennet in a sympathetic light " , with Mr Bennet displayed as " an attentive husband as well as a loving father . " 
 Stewart @-@ Beer and Austen scholar Sally B. Palmer noted alterations within the depiction of the Bennet family ; Stewart @-@ Beer remarked that while their family home " might be chaotic , in this version it is , at heart , a happy home — much happier and much less dysfunctional , than Austen 's original version of Longbourn ... For one , Mr and Mrs Bennet actually seem to like each other , even love each other , a characterisation which is a far cry from the source text . " Producer Paul Webster acknowledged the familial theme in the DVD featurette " A Bennet Family Portrait " , remarking " Yes , it 's a great love story between Elizabeth Bennet and Fitzwilliam Darcy , but underpinning it all is the kind of love that runs this family . " 
 = = = Depiction of Elizabeth Bennet = = = 
 Wright intended for the film to be " as subjective as possible " in being from Elizabeth 's perspective ; the audience first glimpses Darcy when she does . This focus on Elizabeth features some dramatic changes from the novel . Knightley 's Elizabeth has an " increasingly aloof and emotionally distant " relationship with her family . Evidence of this can be seen with Elizabeth 's gradual alienation from Jane as the film progresses ; this is in contrast to the book , where Elizabeth confides more of her feelings to Jane after difficult events . Wright wanted to create a " real " relationship between the two sisters and have them grow apart , as he thought the book depicted them as too " syrupy . " Moggach 's intent was for Elizabeth to " keep secrets to herself . They are a great burden to her ... As she keeps all this to herself , we feel for her more and more . The truest comedy , I believe , is born from pain . " 
 In her " feisty , impassioned " interactions with Darcy and " rebellious refusal to ' perform ' " for Lady Catherine , Stewart @-@ Beer sees Knightley 's depiction as " far removed from Austen 's original Elizabeth , who has a greater sense of grounded maturity , even though both Elizabeths have an occasional inclination to <unk> , fun and giggles . " According to George Washington University professor Laurie Kaplan , while Wright 's focus on Elizabeth is consistent with the novel , the screenplay removed her line of self @-@ recognition : " Till this moment , I never knew myself " . Kaplan characterises the sentence as Elizabeth 's " most important " , and believes its deletion " violates not only the spirit and the essence of Austen 's story but the viewer 's expectations as well . " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 After a string of Jane Austen semi @-@ adaptions in the late 1990s and early 2000s , Pride & Prejudice was positioned to take audiences " back into the world of period drama and what many saw as a more authentic version of Austen . " While the novel was known to audiences , the large number of related productions required the film to distinguish itself . It was marketed to attract mainstream , young viewers , with one observer referring to it as " the ultimate chick @-@ flick romance " and " more commercial than previous big @-@ screen Austen adaptations . " Another wrote that it brings " millennial girlhood to the <unk> ... If Ehle 's Lizzie is every <unk> , or fifty @-@ something 's favorite independent , even ' mature , ' Austen heroine , Knightley is every twenty @-@ something 's sexpot good girl . " An <unk> replaced the word " and " in the film title , similar to the 1996 postmodern film Romeo + Juliet . 
 Already a star at the time of release , Knightley 's appearance in the film was emphasised by featuring her in all promotional materials ( similar to Colin Firth 's prominent appearance in the 1995 adaptation ) . Several commentators likened the main poster of Pride & Prejudice to that of 1995 's Sense and Sensibility , which was seen as an attempt to attract the same demographic . Advertising noted that the film came " from the producers of Bridget Jones 's Diary " , a 2001 romantic comedy film , before mentioning Austen . Leading up to the release , fans were allowed to download pictures and screensavers online , which emphasised the differences between Pride & Prejudice and previous adaptations . Lydia Martin wrote that in contrast to past Pride and Prejudice productions , marketing materials downplayed the " suggested antagonism between the heroes " in favour of highlighting a " romantic relationship " , as can be seen with the positioning of the characters as well as with the tagline , " Sometimes the last person on earth you want to be with is the one you can 't be without . " 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 On 11 September 2005 , Pride & Prejudice premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival as a special Gala Presentation . The film was released in cinemas on 16 September in the United Kingdom and Ireland . It achieved the number one spot in its first week , earning £ 2 @.@ 5 million ( $ 4 @.@ 6 million ) while playing on 397 screens . The film stayed at the top for two more weeks , earning by then a total of over £ 9 million at the UK box office . It was featured on 412 screens at its widest domestic release . 
 On 11 November 2005 , the film debuted in the United States with an opening weekend of $ 2 @.@ 9 million on 215 screens . Two weeks later , it played on 1 @,@ 299 screens and box office returns increased to $ 7 @.@ 2 million ; the film left cinemas the week of 24 February 2006 with a total US gross of $ 38 @,@ 405 @,@ 088 . Jack Foley , the president of distribution of Focus Features , the film 's US distributor , attributed Pride & Prejudice 's success in America to Austen 's appeal to " the boomer market " and its status as a known " brand " . 
 Pride & Prejudice was released in an additional fifty @-@ nine countries between September 2005 and May 2006 by United International Pictures . With a worldwide gross of $ 121 @,@ 147 @,@ 947 , it was the 72nd highest grossing film of 2005 in the US and was the 41st highest internationally . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 In the US and UK , Universal Studios Home Entertainment released the standard VHS and DVD in February 2006 for both widescreen and <unk> ; attached bonus features included audio commentary by director Joe Wright , a look into Austen 's life and the ending scene of Elizabeth and Darcy kissing . On 13 November 2007 , Universal released the deluxe edition DVD to coincide with the theatrical arrival of Wright 's 2007 film Atonement . The deluxe edition included both widescreen and fullscreen features , the original soundtrack CD , a collectible book and booklet , as well as a number of special features not included in the original DVD . In the US , a Blu @-@ ray version of the film was released by Universal on 26 January 2010 , which also contained bonus features . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Pride & Prejudice was only the second faithful film version after " the famed , but oddly flawed , black @-@ and @-@ white 1940 adaptation , starring Greer Garson and Laurence Olivier " , and until 2005 , The Times considered the 1995 television adaptation " so dominant , so universally adored , [ that ] it has lingered in the public consciousness as a cinematic standard . " Wright 's film consequently met with some initial scepticism from fans , especially in relation to plot changes and casting choices . Comparing six major adaptations of Pride and Prejudice in 2005 , The Daily Mirror gave the only top marks of 9 out of 10 to the 1995 serial and the 2005 film , leaving the other adaptations behind with six or fewer points . The film received a " certified fresh " approval rating of 85 % , with an average rating of 7 @.@ 7 out of 10 , according to review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes . The website 's consensus reads : " Sure , it 's another adaptation of cinema 's fave Jane Austen novel , but key performances and a modern filmmaking sensibility make this familiar period piece fresh and enjoyable . " Metacritic reported an average score of 82 out of 100 , based on 37 reviews and classified the film as " universally acclaimed " . 
 Critics claimed the film 's time constraints did not capture the depth and complexity of the television serials and called Wright 's adaptation " obviously [ not as ] daring or revisionist " as the serial . JASNA president Joan <unk> Ray preferred the young age of Knightley and Macfadyen , saying that Jennifer Ehle had formerly been " a little too ' heavy ' for the role . " Peter Bradshaw of The Guardian , while praising Knightley for an outstanding performance " which lifts the whole movie " , considered the casting of the leads " arguably a little more callow than Firth and Ehle . " He does add that " Only a snob , a curmudgeon , or someone with necrophiliac loyalty to the 1995 BBC version with Colin Firth and Jennifer Ehle could fail to enjoy [ Knightley 's ] performance . " At the time , BBC film critic Stella Papamichael considered it Knightley 's " best performance yet . " Critics were divided about Macfadyen 's portrayal of Darcy , expressing pleasant surprise , dislike for his lack of gradual emotional shift as in the novel , and praise for his matching the insecure and sensitive personality of the book character better than Firth . 
 Critics also drew attention to other aspects of the film . Writing for The Sydney Morning Herald , Sandra Hall criticised Wright 's attention to realism for being " careless with the customs and conventions that were part of the fabric of Austen 's world . " In another review , Time Out magazine lamented the absence of Austen 's " brilliant sense of irony " , remarking that the film 's " romantic melodrama 's played up at the expense of her razor @-@ sharp wit . " More positively , Derek Elley of Variety magazine praised Wright and Moggach for " extracting the youthful essence " of the novel while also " providing a richly detailed setting " under Greenwood and Durran 's supervision . Equally pleased with the film was the San Francisco Chronicle 's Ruthe Stein , who wrote that Wright made a " spectacular feature film debut " that is " creatively reimagined and sublimely entertaining " . Claudia Puig of USA Today called it " a stellar adaptation , bewitching the viewer completely and <unk> with an exquisite blend of emotion and wit . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 Wright 's adaptation failed to have the same cultural impact as the 1995 serial and has since attracted sharply @-@ divided opinions . However , even three years after the release , Knightley was still associated with Elizabeth Bennet among a generation of young viewers who had not seen the 1995 production . Given the varied opinions about the film , JASNA published an edited special issue of its online journal Persuasions On @-@ Line in 2007 with the collaboration of nineteen Austen scholars from six countries ; the intent was to foster discussion and stimulate scholarly analysis . JASNA had done this only once before , for the 1996 film Emma . 
 Pride & Prejudice impacted later productions in the costume drama and heritage film genres . Literary critics protested that Wright 's adaptation effectively " popularized Austen 's celebrated romance and brought her novel to the screen as an easy visual read for an undemanding mainstream audience . " Carole Dole noted that the film 's success " only made it more likely that future adaptations of Austen will feature , if not necessarily mud , then at least youthful and market @-@ tested performers and youth @-@ oriented filmmaking techniques balanced with the visual pleasures of the heritage film . " She cited Anne Hathaway in the 2007 film Becoming Jane as an example . Jessica Durgan added that Pride & Prejudice conceived a new hybrid genre by rejecting the visual cues of the heritage film , which attracted " youth and mainstream audiences without alienating the majority of heritage fans . " 
 Production of Pride & Prejudice began Wright 's relationship with Working Title Films , the first of four collaborations . Many members of the film 's cast and crew joined Wright in his later directorial efforts . For his adaptation of Atonement , which he viewed as " a direct reaction to Pride & Prejudice " , Wright hired Knightley , Blethyn , Marianelli , Thibaudet , Greenwood , and Durran . Atonement employed themes similar to Austen 's , including the notion of a young writer living in " an isolated English country house " who " mixes up desires and fantasies , truths and fiction . " Wright 's 2009 film The Soloist included Hollander , Malone , and Marianelli , while Hollander was also featured in Hanna ( 2011 ) . Wright 's 2012 adaptation of Anna Karenina features Knightley , Macfadyen , Marianelli , Durran , and Greenwood and is produced by Bevan , Eric Fellner , and Webster . 
 = = = = Books = = = = 
 = = = = Essays and journals = = = = 
 = = = = Interviews = = = = 
 = = = = Newspaper and magazine articles = = = = 
 = = = = Online = = = = 
 = = = = Press releases = = = = 
 = = = = Visual media = = = = 
 = Michael the Brave = 
 Michael the Brave ( Romanian : Mihai <unk> ( l ) pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ̯ azu ( l ) ] or Mihai <unk> pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ] , Hungarian : Vitéz Mihály ; 1558 – 9 August 1601 ) was the Prince of Wallachia ( as Michael II , 1593 – 1601 ) , and of Moldavia ( 1600 ) . He is regarded as one of Romania 's greatest national heroes . 
 His rule over Wallachia began in the autumn of 1593 . Two years later , war with the Ottomans began , a conflict in which the Prince fought the Battle of Călugăreni , considered one of the most important battles of his reign . Although the Wallachians emerged victorious from the battle , Michael was forced to retreat with his troops and wait for aid from his allies , Prince Sigismund Báthory of Transylvania and Holy Roman Emperor Rudolf II . The war continued until a peace finally emerged in January 1597 , but this lasted for only a year and a half . Peace was again reached in late 1599 , when Michael was unable to continue the war due to lack of support from his allies . 
 In 1599 , Michael won the Battle of Şelimbăr and soon entered Alba Iulia , becoming the imperial governor ( i.e. de facto ruler ) of Transylvania . A few months later , Michael 's troops invaded Moldavia and reached its capital , Iaşi . The Moldavian leader Ieremia Movilă fled to Poland and Michael was declared Prince of Moldavia . Michael kept the control of all three provinces for less than a year before the nobles of Transylvania and certain boyars in Moldavia and Wallachia rose against him in a series of revolts . Thereafter , Michael allied with the Imperial General Giorgio Basta and defeated an uprising of the Hungarian nobility at <unk> in Transylvania . Immediately after this victory , Rudolf ordered the assassination of Michael , an action carried out on 9 August 1601 by Basta 's men . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Michael was born under the family name of Pătraşcu . In 1601 , during a stay in Prague , he was portrayed by the painter <unk> <unk> , who mentioned on the portrait the words aetatis XLIII ( " in the 43rd year of life " ) , which indicates 1558 as the year of Michael 's birth . Very little is known about his childhood and early years as an adult . He is argued by most historians to have been the illegitimate son of Wallachian Prince Pătraşcu cel Bun , ( <unk> the Good ) of the <unk> branch of the House of Basarab , while others believe he merely invented his descent in order to justify his rule . His mother was Theodora Kantakouzene , a member of the <unk> , a noble family present in Wallachia and Moldavia , and allegedly descended from the Byzantine Emperor John VI Kantakouzenos . 
 Michael 's political rise was quite spectacular , as he became the Ban of Mehedinţi in 1588 , <unk> at the court of Mihnea <unk> by the end of 1588 , and Ban of Craiova in 1593 – during the rule of Alexandru cel <unk> . The latter had him swear before 12 boyars that he was not of princely descent . Still , in May 1593 conflict did break out between Alexandru and Michael , who was forced to flee to Transylvania . He was accompanied by his half @-@ brother Radu Florescu , Radu <unk> and several other supporters . After spending two weeks at the court of Sigismund Báthory , he left for Constantinople , where with help from his cousin Andronikos Kantakouzenos ( the eldest son of Michael " <unk> " Kantakouzenos ) and Patriarch Jeremiah II he negotiated Ottoman support for his accession to the Wallachian throne . He was supported by the English ambassador in the Ottoman capital , Edward Barton , and aided by a loan of 200 @,@ 000 florins . Michael was invested Prince by Sultan Murad III in September 1593 and started his effective rule on 11 October . He was considered a traitor as he had been forced to purchase the title of Domnitor ( ruler ) . 
 = = Wallachia = = 
 Not long after Michael became Prince of Wallachia , he turned against the Ottoman Empire . The next year he joined the Christian alliance of European powers formed by Pope Clement VIII against the Turks , and signed treaties with his neighbours : Sigismund Báthory of Transylvania , Aron <unk> of Moldavia and the Holy Roman Emperor , Rudolf II ( see Holy League of Pope Clement VIII ) . He started a campaign against the Turks in the autumn of 1594 , conquering several citadels near the Danube , including Giurgiu , Brăila , <unk> , and Silistra , while his Moldavian allies defeated the Turks in Iaşi and other parts of Moldavia . Mihai continued his attacks deep within the Ottoman Empire , taking the forts of Nicopolis , <unk> , and Chilia and even reaching as far as Adrianople . At one point his forces were only 24 kilometers from Constantinople . 
 In 1595 , Sigismund Báthory staged an elaborate plot and had Aaron the Tyrant , voivode of Moldavia , removed from power . István <unk> ( Báthory 's chancellor and an ethnic Romanian ) masterminded the operation . Ştefan Răzvan arrested Aron on charges of treason on the night of 24 April ( 5 May ) and sent him to the Transylvanian capital at Alba Iulia ( Gyulafehérvár ) with his family and treasure . Aron would die poisoned by the end of May in the castle of <unk> . Sigismund was forced to justify his actions before the European powers , since Aron had played an active role in the anti @-@ Ottoman coalition . Later on , in the same city of Alba Iulia , Wallachian boyars signed a treaty with Sigismund on Michael 's behalf . From the point of view of Wallachian internal politics , the Treaty of Alba Iulia officialized what could be called a boyar regime , reinforcing the already important political power of the noble elite . According to the treaty , a council of 12 great boyars was to take part alongside the voivode in the executive rule of the country . 
 Boyars could no longer be executed without the knowledge and approval of the Transylvanian Prince and , if convicted for treason , their fortunes could no longer be confiscated . Apparently Michael was displeased with the final form of the treaty negotiated by his envoys , but was forced to comply . Prince Michael said in a conversation with the Polish envoy <unk> : ... they did not proceed as stated in their instructions but as their own good required and obtained privileges for themselves . He would try to avoid the obligations imposed on him for the rest of his reign . 
 During his reign , Michael relied heavily on the loyalty and support of a group of Oltenian lords , the most important of whom were <unk> Brothers ( Romanian : <unk> <unk> ) and his own relatives on his mother 's side , the Cantacuzinos . He consequently protected their interests throughout his reign ; for example , he passed a law binding serfs to lands owned by aristocrats . From the standpoint of religious jurisdiction , the Treaty of Alba Iulia had another important consequence : it placed all the Eastern Orthodox bishops in Transylvania under the jurisdiction of the Metropolitan Seat of Târgovişte . 
 During this period , the Ottoman army , based in Ruse , was preparing to cross the Danube and undertake a major attack . Michael was quickly forced to retreat and the Ottoman forces started to cross the Danube on 4 August 1595 . As his army was outnumbered , Michael avoided carrying the battle in open field , and decided to give battle on a marshy field located near the village of Călugăreni on the <unk> river . The Battle of Călugăreni started on 13 August and Michael defeated the Ottoman army led by Sinan Pasha . Despite the victory , he retreated to his winter camp in <unk> because he had too few troops to mount a full @-@ scale war against the remaining Ottoman forces . He subsequently joined forces with Sigismund Báthory 's 40 @,@ 000 @-@ man army ( led by István <unk> ) and counterattacked the Ottomans , freeing the towns of Târgovişte ( 8 October ) , Bucharest ( 12 October ) and Brăila , temporarily removing Wallachia from Ottoman suzerainty . 
 The fight against the Ottomans continued in 1596 when Michael made several incursions south of the Danube at Vidin , Pleven , Nicopolis , and Babadag , where he was assisted by the local Bulgarians during the First Tarnovo Uprising . 
 During late 1596 , Michael was faced with an unexpected attack from the Tatars , who had destroyed the towns of Bucharest and Buzău . By the time Michael gathered his army to counterattack , the Tatars had speedily retreated and so no battle was fought . Michael was determined to continue the war against the Ottomans , but he was prevented because he lacked support from Sigismund Báthory and Rudolf II . On 7 January 1597 Hasan Pasha declared the independence of Wallachia under Michael 's rule , but Michael knew that this was only an attempt to divert him from preparing for another future attack . Michael again requested Rudolf II 's support and Rudolf finally agreed to send financial assistance to the Wallachian ruler . On 9 June 1598 a formal treaty was reached between Michael and Rudolf II . According to the treaty , the Austrian ruler would give Wallachia sufficient money to maintain a 5 @,@ 000 @-@ man army , as well as armaments and supplies . Shortly after the treaty was signed , the war with the Ottomans resumed and Michael besieged Nicopolis on 10 September 1598 and took control of Vidin . The war with the Ottomans continued until 26 June 1599 , when Michael , lacking the resources and support to continue prosecuting the war , signed a peace treaty . 
 = = Transylvania = = 
 In April 1598 , Sigismund resigned as Prince of Transylvania in favor of the Holy Roman Emperor , Rudolf II ( who was also the King of Hungary ) ; reversed his decision in October 1598 ; and then resigned again in favor of Cardinal Andrew Báthory , his cousin . Báthory had strong ties to the Polish chancellor and hetman Jan Zamoyski and placed Transylvania under the influence of the King of Poland , Sigismund III Vasa . He was also a trusted ally of the new Moldavian Prince Ieremia Movilă , one of Michael 's greatest enemies . Movilă had deposed Ştefan <unk> with the help of Polish hetman Jan Zamoyski in August 1595 . 
 Having to face this new threat , Michael asked Emperor Rudolf to become the sovereign of Wallachia . On 25 September ( 5 October ) Báthory issued an ultimatum demanding that Michael abandon his throne . Michael decided to attack Andrew Cardinal Báthory immediately to prevent invasion . He would later describe the events : 
 I rose with my country , my children , taking my wife and everything I had and with my army [ marched into Transylvania ] so that the foe should not crush me here . 
 He left Târgovişte on 2 October , and 9 by October he had reached <unk> in southern Transylvania , where he met envoys from the city of Braşov . <unk> the city , he moved on to Cârţa where he joined forces with the Székelys . 
 On 18 October Michael won a decisive victory against the army of prince @-@ cardinal Andrew Báthory at the Battle of Şelimbăr , giving him control of Transylvania . As he retreated from the battle , Andrew Báthory was killed by anti @-@ Báthory Székely on 3 November near <unk> and Michael gave him a princely burial in the Roman Catholic Cathedral of Alba Iulia . With his enemy dead , Michael entered the Transylvanian capital at Alba Iulia and received the keys to the fortress from Bishop Demeter <unk> , later depicted as a seminal event in Romanian historiography . Historian István <unk> , keeper of the Archives at the time , recorded the event in great detail . He also wrote that two days before the Diet met on 10 October , Transylvanian nobles elected Michael the voivode as Prince of Transylvania . As the Diet was assembled , Michael demanded that the estates swear loyalty to Emperor Rudolf , then to himself and thirdly to his son . Even if he was recognized by the Transylvanian diet as only imperial governor subject to the Holy Roman Emperor , he was nonetheless ruler of Transylvania . 
 In Transylvania Michael used the following signature on official documents : Michael <unk> <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> Regiae <unk> <unk> per <unk> <unk> , cis <unk> partium eius super <unk> <unk> <unk> " . ( " Michael , voivode of Wallachia , the councillor of His Majesty the Emperor and the King , his deputy in Transylvania and General Captain of his troops from Transylvania . " ) 
 When Michael entered Transylvania , he did not immediately free or grant rights to the Romanian inhabitants , who were primarily peasants but , nevertheless , constituted a significant proportion of the population ( see estimations ) . Michael demonstrated his support by upholding the Union of the Three Nations , which recognized only the traditional rights and privileges of the Hungarians Székelys and Saxons , but he didn 't recognize the rights of the Romanians . There is no evidence that Michael wanted Transylvania 's Romanians to play a political role . Indeed , while he brought some of his Wallachian aides to Transylvania , he also invited some Székelys and other Transylvanian Hungarians to assist in the administration of Wallachia , where he wished to transplant Transylvania 's far more advanced feudal system . 
 Michael began negotiating with the Emperor over his official position in Transylvania . The latter wanted the principality under direct Imperial rule with Michael acting as governor . The Wallachian voivode , on the other hand , wanted the title of Prince of Transylvania for himself and equally claimed the Partium region . Michael was , nevertheless , willing to acknowledge Habsburg overlordship . 
 = = Moldavia = = 
 The Moldavian Prince Ieremia Movilă had been an old enemy of Michael , having incited Andrew Báthory to send Michael the ultimatum demanding his abdication . His brother , Simion Movilă , claimed the Wallachian throne for himself and had used the title of Voivode since 1595 . Aware of the threat the <unk> represented , Michael had created the Banate of Buzău and Brăila in July 1598 and the new ban was charged of keeping an alert eye on Moldavian , Tatar and Cossack moves , although Michael had been planning a Moldavian campaign for several years . 
 On 28 February Michael met with Polish envoys in Braşov . He was willing to recognise the Polish King as his sovereign in exchange for the crown of Moldavia and the recognition of his male heirs ' hereditary right over the three principalities , Transylvania , Moldavia and Wallachia . This did not significantly delay his attack however ; on 14 April 1600 Michael 's troops entered Moldavia on multiple routes , the Prince himself leading the main thrust to <unk> and Roman . He reached the capital of Iaşi on 6 May . The garrison surrendered the citadel the next day and Michael 's forces caught up with the fleeing Ieremia Movilă , who was saved from being captured only by the sacrifice of his rear @-@ guard . Movilă took refuge in the castle of Khotyn together with his family , a handful of faithful boyars and the former Transylvanian Prince , Sigismund Báthory . The Moldavian soldiers in the castle deserted , leaving a small Polish contingent as sole defenders . Under the cover of dark , sometime before 11 June , Movilă managed to sneak out of the walls and across the Dniester to hetman Stanisław Żółkiewski 's camp . 
 Neighboring states were alarmed by this upsetting of the balance of power , especially the Hungarian nobility in Transylvania , who rose against Michael in rebellion . With the help of Basta , they defeated Michael at the Battle of <unk> , forcing the prince to leave Transylvania together with his remaining loyal troops . A Polish army led by Jan Zamoyski drove the Wallachians from Moldavia and defeated Michael at <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> ( Battle of the <unk> River ) . The Polish army also entered eastern Wallachia and established Simion Movilă as ruler . Forces loyal to Michael remained only in Oltenia . 
 = = Last victory and the assassination = = 
 Michael asked again for assistance from Emperor Rudolf during a visit in Prague between 23 February and 5 March 1601 , which was granted when the emperor heard that General Giorgio Basta had lost control of Transylvania to the Hungarian nobility led by Sigismund Báthory , who accepted Ottoman protection . Meanwhile , forces loyal to Michael in Wallachia led by his son , Nicolae Pătraşcu , drove Simion Movilă out of Moldavia and prepared to reenter Transylvania . Michael , allied with Basta , defeated the Hungarian army in Battle of <unk> . A few days later Basta , who sought to control Transylvania himself , executed the assassination of Michael by the order of the <unk> Emperor ; it took place near <unk> <unk> on 9 August 1601 . According to Romanian historian Constantin C. <unk> : 
 = = = Seal of Michael the Brave = = = 
 The seal comprises the coats of arms of Moldavia , Wallachia , and Transylvania : in the middle , on a shield the Moldavian <unk> , above Wallachian eagle between sun and moon holding cross in beak , below Transylvanian coat of arms : two meeting , standing lions supporting a sword , treading on seven mountains . The Moldavian shield is held by two crowned figures . 
 There are two inscriptions on the seal . First , circular , in Slavonic using Romanian Cyrillic alphabet " IO <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> " , meaning " Io Michael Wallachian Voivode of Transylvanian and Moldavian Lands " . Second , placed along a circular arc separating the Wallachian coat from the rest of the heraldic composition , " I ML <unk> <unk> " , could be translated " Through The Very Grace of God " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The rule of Michael the Brave , with its break with Ottoman rule , tense relations with other European powers and the leadership of the three states , was considered in later periods as the precursor of a modern Romania , a thesis which was argued with noted intensity by Nicolae Bălcescu . This theory became a point of reference for nationalists , as well as a catalyst for various Romanian forces to achieve a single Romanian state . To Romanian Romantic nationalists , he was regarded as one of Romania 's greatest national heroes . 
 The prince , who managed for a short time in 1600 to rule the three territories that were to be united some three centuries later in modern Romania , begins to be perceived as a unifier only towards the middle of the 19th century . Such an interpretation is completely lacking in the historiography of the 17th @-@ century chroniclers , and even in that of the Transylvanian School around 1800 . What they emphasized , apart from the exceptional personality of Michael himself , were the idea of Christendom and his close relations with Emperor Rudolf . The conqueror 's ambition is likewise frequently cited as a motivation for his action , occupying in the interpretative schema the place which was later to be occupied by the Romanian idea . 
 In the writings of the Moldavian chronicler Miron Costin , Michael the Brave appears in the role of conqueror of Transylvania and Moldavia , " the cause of much spilling of blood among Christians " , and not even highly appreciated by his own Wallachians : " The Wallachians became tired of the <unk> rule of Voivode Mihai " . 
 The perspective of the Wallachians themselves is to be found in The History of the Princes of Wallachia , attributed to the chronicler Radu Popescu ( 1655 – 1729 ) , which bundles together all Michael 's adversaries without distinction . Romanians and foreigners alike : " He subjected the Turks , the Moldavians , and the Hungarians to his rule , as if they were his asses . " The picturesque flavor of the expression serves only to confirm the absence of any Romanian idea . 
 Samuil <unk> , a member of the Transylvanian School said in his work Short Explanation of the History of the Romanians ( written in the 1790s ) : " In the year 1593 , Michael , who is called the Brave , succeeded to the lordship of Wallachia . He was a great warrior , who fought the Turks and defeated the Transylvanians . And he took Transylvania and gave it to Emperor Rudolf " . 
 Petre P. <unk> states that in Mihai 's time , the concept of the Romanian nation and the desire for unification did not yet exist . A. D. Xenopol firmly states the absence of any national element in Michael 's politics , holding that Michael 's lack of desire to join the principalities ' administrations proved his actions were not motivated by any such concept . 
 Mihai Viteazul , a commune in Cluj County , was named after Michael the Brave . Michael is also commemorated by the monks of the <unk> <unk> Monastery for his great contributions in the form of land and money to rebuilding the monastery which had been destroyed by a fire . 
 Mihai Viteazul , a film by Sergiu Nicolaescu , a famous Romanian film director , is a representation of the life of the Wallachian ruler and his will to unite the three Romanian principalities ( Wallachia , Moldavia , and Transylvania ) in one country . 
 The Order of Michael the Brave , Romania 's highest military decoration , was named after Michael . 
 Mihai Viteazul name and portrait appear on at least 2 Romanian coins : 5 Lei 1991 which only 3 pieces of this type were minted and the coin was not entered into circulation , and on 100 Lei which circulated through the 1990s . 
 = Andrea Corr = 
 Andrea Jane Corr MBE ( born 17 May 1974 ) is an Irish musician , songwriter , and actress . Corr debuted in 1990 as the lead singer of the Celtic folk rock and pop rock group The Corrs along with her three elder siblings Caroline , Sharon , and Jim . Aside from singing lead vocals Corr plays the tin whistle , the ukulele , and the piano . 
 With the others , Corr has released six studio albums , two compilation albums , one remix album and two live albums . Andrea has also pursuing a solo career , releasing her debut album , Ten Feet High , in 2007 . The album moved away from the sound of the Corrs and features a dance @-@ pop sound . Her next album , released on 30 May 2011 , was entirely made up of covers of songs that were important to her when younger . 
 Andrea is involved in charitable activities . She has played charity concerts to raise money for the Pavarotti & Friends Liberian Children 's Village , Freeman Hospital in Newcastle upon Tyne , England , the victims of the Omagh bombing in Northern Ireland and The Prince 's Trust in 2004 . She is an ambassador for the Nelson Mandela 's " 46664 " campaign , raising awareness towards AIDS in Africa . During the Edinburgh Live 8 on 2 July 2005 The Corrs performed " When the Stars Go Blue " alongside Bono to promote the Make Poverty History campaign . Along with her siblings , she was appointed an honorary <unk> in 2005 by Queen Elizabeth II of Great Britain for her contribution to music and charity . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Andrea Corr was born to Gerry Corr , a manager of the payroll department of the Irish Electricity Supply Board ( the <unk> ) , and his wife , Jean , a housewife . She is the youngest of the four Corr children . The family was raised in Dundalk , Ireland . Gerry and Jean had their own band , Sound Affair , which played songs by ABBA and The Eagles in local pubs in Dundalk where they would often bring along their children . 
 With the encouragement of her parents , Andrea took up the tin whistle and was taught the piano by her father . Throughout their teenage years , she and her siblings would often practice in Jim 's bedroom at a house he had rented . Andrea sang lead vocals , Sharon played the violin and both Caroline and Jim played keyboards . Andrea took part in school plays at her school , Dundalk 's Dun <unk> convent . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = The Corrs = = = 
 In 1990 she and her siblings formed a quartet called The Corrs . Their career launched in 1991 when they auditioned for the film The Commitments in which Andrea gained a speaking role as Sharon <unk> . John Hughes noticed the quartet when they auditioned for the movie , and agreed to become their manager . The Corrs signed with Atlantic Records in 1995 and travelled to North America to record their debut album Forgiven , Not Forgotten . The album featured six instrumental selections among its Celtic @-@ influenced tracks . When released , it was successful in Ireland , Australia , Japan , and Spain . The album reached platinum status in the United Kingdom and Australia , and quadruple platinum in Ireland , which made it one of the most popular debuts by an Irish group . 
 Following on from the success of their debut album , they released Talk on Corners and In Blue in 1997 and 2000 respectively . Originally Talk on Corners met with lukewarm success , until a remix version was released , when it topped the charts in many countries , and reached platinum status in the United Kingdom and Australia . In Blue moved towards mainstream pop , placing heavy emphasis on electronic synthesisers . It was successful , and was No. 1 in its first sales week in the UK , Ireland , Australia , Germany , Switzerland , and Austria and debuted at No. 2 in France and Norway . It climbed to the top position during its second week in Sweden and Spain . 
 During the production of In Blue , their mother , Jean , died while waiting for a lung transplant in the Freeman Hospital in Newcastle , Britain . She was laid to rest at St. Patrick 's cemetery in Dundalk . Bono , Larry Mullen , Brian Kennedy and Paul Brady were among the attendees . " No More Cry " , written by Andrea and Caroline Corr for the album , was dedicated to their father hoping to help with his grief . 
 In 2003 , Andrea recorded " Time Enough For Tears " , a song written by Bono and Gavin Friday for the film In America . This track was featured on The Corrs ' 2004 album Borrowed Heaven . Borrowed Heaven was dedicated to their late mother , Jean , and their father , Gerry . The band also dedicated their 2005 tribute album Home to their deceased mother . The band covered many traditional Irish songs taken from their mother 's songbook to commemorate their 15 years as a band . 
 In an interview with Chris Evans in June 2015 , Andrea confirmed that The Corrs were working on a new album and would play the BBC Radio 2 ' Live in Hyde Park ' festival . Their sixth studio album , White Light , was released on 27 November 2015 , and was accompanied by a world tour . 
 = = = Solo career = = = 
 While her siblings were on hiatus to raise their families , Andrea launched a solo career . She released her first album , Ten Feet High , on 25 June 2007 . It was produced by Nellee Hooper , who has worked with Gwen Stefani and Madonna ; Bono was an executive producer . Her first single , " Shame on You " was an up @-@ tempo pop song about men and women going to war and leaving behind partners they may never see again . It received positive reviews from music critics ; IndieLondon described the song as a " slick package " that was " polished , well produced and with a message that 's difficult to ignore " . Losing Today 's David Adair gave the song a strong review , writing that Corr 's vocals were " crisp and uplifting " . Liverpool 's Daily Post gave the song a three @-@ star rating , commenting that it was " deceptively upbeat " , which masked its " heavier message about conscription and war " . 
 On 10 April 2009 Andrea announced on Claudia Winkleman 's BBC Radio 2 show that she would be releasing a second album of old songs and covers . She spoke of her disappointment and how ' gutted ' she had been when her 2007 album Ten Feet High had failed to gain commercial success . She also spoke at length of her experiences while acting in the play Dancing at Lughnasa and how it has given her hope for upcoming projects , including a second solo album of ' old songs ' : 
 I loved the play ; I saw its original production when I was a teenager so I really worked hard on it and tried to dispel any prejudices that might be there . I 'm sensitive about the idea of a singer @-@ turned @-@ actress , it could give across the impression that a celebrity gets bored and goes " hey , what 'll I do " and that 's really not where I 'm coming from , I 'm very passionate about this and I have been for a lot of years . 
 It 's a totally different experience , this is the real thing . Fortunately everybody ( in the play ) is incredibly talented ( and ) really lovely people too and it has been an incredible learning experience for me . It 's not my responsibility to draw ( the audience ) in , I just have to play the character . The way I would perform songs was always about the lyrics and always about trying to speak to everybody and make them watch and believe what I 'm saying and I suppose I 'm essentially doing that here but I 'm not looking at the audience I 'm obviously looking at the other actors . I 'm really happy to do this . I feel rejuvenated by it , I feel excited again . You 're very much alive , you 're very much in the moment , so I feel I 'm really living . After I released my solo record I felt really disappointed , I believed in the record I made but if you don 't have the back @-@ up of your record company investing and marketing it . It 's a really tough job and because I wrote the whole thing I really believed in this record , as did Nellee Hooper , I was jaded and disappointed . Last year I decided I 'm not doing music until I 'm excited again , then this came along and also I did end up making another record which I 'll release at some point . It 's just being mastered , it 's a lovely album ; I didn 't write this one , this is old songs and I have to sort out my <unk> I don 't want the same problem as before . 
 I think everybody 's enjoyed doing their own thing . Sharon and Caroline are young mothers , they have young children . Our mother and father were really were great parents and they hope to be as good a mother as mine , but Sharon 's making her own record and will hopefully release it at some point . But we ( the band ) never finished , we 'll keep it <unk> 
 In late January 2011 , her new album was announced for " early summer " , and a downloadable MP3 of her cover of John Lennon 's Number 9 Dream was made available to subscribers . Lifelines was released on 30 May . In the summer of 2012 , she re @-@ recorded the track " Pale Blue Eyes " ( which had first appeared on her album " Lifelines " ) with German electronic musician Christopher von <unk> , better known under his alias Schiller . It was released in Germany on 5 October on the Schiller album Sonne . 
 = = = Acting = = = 
 Andrea Corr entered the film industry in 1991 with Alan Parker 's film , The Commitments where she had a speaking part as Sharon <unk> . In 1996 , Parker was directing the film version of the rock opera Evita which starred Madonna . He was so keen on having Andrea in the film that he cast her as Juan Peron 's mistress . Corr provided the singing voice for <unk> in Warner Brothers ' first fully animated film , 1998 's The Quest for Camelot . 
 Corr resumed her acting career in 2003 where she was cast as Anne in The Boys from County Clare . The film was not a commercial success , but she won the Film Discovery Jury Award for Best Actress in the US Comedy Arts Festival and was nominated for Best Actress in the IFTA Awards . During the Corrs ' hiatus she was featured in the 2005 film The Bridge and the 2006 film Broken Thread . Corr appeared as Christina in the play Dancing at Lughnasa staged at The Old Vic theatre in London from February until May 2009 . 
 She played the title role in Jane Eyre by Alan Stanford at the Gate Theatre in Dublin which opened on 9 November 2010 . 
 = = Charitable activities = = 
 Andrea Corr and her siblings have played charity concerts to raise money for the Pavarotti & Friends Liberian Children 's Village , Freeman Hospital in Newcastle , the victims of the Omagh bombing in Northern Ireland , and The Prince 's Trust in 2004 . They are also ambassadors for the Nelson Mandela 's " 46664 " campaign , where they performed live to raise awareness towards AIDS in Africa . During the Edinburgh Live 8 on 2 July 2005 The Corrs performed " When the Stars Go Blue " alongside Bono to promote the Make Poverty History campaign . In recognition for their charity performances , The Corrs were made Honorary Members of the Order of the British Empire in 2005 by Queen Elizabeth II . 
 Corr also partook in a tribute single to the late member of The Dubliners , Ronnie Drew . Called " The Ballad of Ronnie Drew . " The song was released on 19 February 2008 and was performed by a number of famous Irish musicians . This included members of U2 , Sinéad O 'Connor Christy Dignam of Aslan , Robert Hunter of the Grateful Dead , who wrote the song , <unk> , Christy Moore , Moya Brennan , Shane MacGowan , Bob Geldof , Damien Dempsey , Gavin Friday , Iona Green , Jerry Fish , Paul Brady , Paddy Casey , Mick Pyro , Mundy , Chris de Burgh , Ronan Keating , Jack L , Eleanor Shanley , Mary Black , Declan O 'Rourke , Mary Coughlan , Joe Elliott of Def Leppard The Dubliners themselves and The Chieftains . The single was written to originally include Ronnie himself but was changed to be a tribute to him as his health was declining . Proceeds from sale of the single went to The Irish Cancer Society at the request of Drew himself . The song was performed live on The Late Late Show aired by <unk> Entertainment on 22 February with Ronnie Drew in attendance as an audience member , and entered the Irish Single Charts at No. 2 . 
 On 10 October 2010 , Corr , amongst others , contributed to the Kirsty MacColl tribute concert held at Shepherd 's Bush Empire to commemorate MacColl 's birthday and raise money for charity . She also wrote and sang the song ' Oh Brother ' on the album ' Music of Ireland – Welcome <unk> 
 On 30 November 2012 , Corr lent her support to Kate Winslet 's Golden Hat Foundation together with Tim Janis , Sarah McLachlan , Loreena McKennitt , Hayley Westenra , performing on " The American Christmas Carol " concert in Carnegie Hall . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Corr is married to Brett Desmond , son of billionaire Dermot Desmond . They married in St Joseph 's Church in Milltown <unk> , County Clare , Ireland on 21 August 2009 . 
 Sharon Corr and Caroline Corr sang " No Frontiers " at the wedding , and Damien Dempsey , Sharon Shannon and Seamus Begley also performed on stage in the church , as did Corr herself . In November 2011 , Corr 's first pregnancy was announced . Corr gave birth to daughter Jean on 28 April 2012 , and son Brett Jr. on 4 January 2014 . 
