 = = Reception = = 
 Geneforge received positive reviews , the game 's story and lack of bugs received praise in particular . <unk> ' Christopher Morin suggested that players interested in a " strong storyline and a unique take on magic " would be impressed , but not those who sought high quality graphics and sound . The game 's setting has been described as unique and fresh , the level of detail in Geneforge 's fictional world was praised by <unk> Green of Computer Gaming World praised the game for its " story and gameplay " as something that high @-@ budget games often lack . 
 The quality of the game 's graphics was rated poorly by most reviewers , reviewers noted that the overall quality of the game made up for this deficiency . GameSpy 's Carla Harker described the graphics as " ... dated by about seven years " and the game as a " technological pariah " , despite calling it one of the best role @-@ playing games released in the past year . Green similarly described graphics as dated and something to put up with in favor of gameplay . Website Just RPG 's Eric Arevalo described them as simplistic but noted the game 's story and the ability to control " fascinating mutant creatures " made up for this . The Entertainment Depot 's Nick Stewart differed , praising the graphics as " <unk> without being plain , lavish without being overdone " as well as the fluidity of character animation and detail of character designs . 
 The almost total lack of music , except for the title screen theme song , and complete lack of voice acting was noted by reviewers . This highlighted the game 's sound effects and environmental sounds , such as weapons clashing and the background noise of towns . Nick Stewart found " a fairly decent variety of effects and noises scattered throughout " , that they " added somewhat to the experience " , but became irritated by the amount of hissing and popping in the environmental sounds after extended play . Carla Harker described the sound as " Almost non @-@ existent " and Eric Arevalo found that there weren 't enough sound effects . <unk> 's Val <unk> noted that the music player Winamp could be played in the background , due to the game 's small memory requirements . 
 = Giant mouse lemur = 
 The giant mouse lemurs ( members of the genus Mirza ) are a genus of strepsirrhine primates . Two species have been formally described ; the northern giant mouse lemur ( Mirza zaza ) and Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur ( Mirza coquereli ) . Like all other lemurs , they are native to Madagascar , where they are found in the western dry deciduous forests and further to the north in the Sambirano valley and Sahamalaza Peninsula . First described in 1867 as a single species , they were grouped with mouse lemurs and dwarf lemurs . In 1870 , British zoologist John Edward Gray assigned them to their own genus , Mirza . The classification was not widely accepted until the 1990s , which followed the revival of the genus by American paleoanthropologist Ian Tattersall in 1982 . In 2005 , the northern population was declared a new species , and in 2010 , the World Wide Fund for Nature announced that a southwestern population might also be a new species . 
 Giant mouse lemurs are about three times larger than mouse lemurs , weighing approximately 300 g ( 11 oz ) , and have a long , bushy tail . They are most closely related to mouse lemurs within Cheirogaleidae , a family of small , nocturnal lemurs . Giant mouse lemurs sleep in nests during the day and forage alone at night for fruit , tree gum , insects , and small vertebrates . Unlike many other cheirogaleids , they do not enter a state of torpor during the dry season . The northern species is generally more social than the southern species , particularly when nesting , though males and females may form pair bonds . The northern species also has the largest testicle size relative to its body size among all primates and is atypical among lemurs for breeding year @-@ round instead of seasonally . Home ranges often overlap , with related females living closely together while males disperse . Giant mouse lemurs are vocal , although they also scent mark using saliva , urine , and secretions from the anogenital scent gland . 
 Predators of giant mouse lemurs include the Madagascar buzzard , Madagascar owl , fossa , and the narrow @-@ striped mongoose . Giant mouse lemurs reproduce once a year , with two offspring born after a 90 @-@ day gestation . Babies are initially left in the nest while the mother forages , but are later carried by mouth and parked in vegetation while she forages nearby . In captivity , giant mouse lemurs will breed year @-@ round . Their lifespan in the wild is thought to be five to six years . Both species are listed as endangered due to habitat destruction and hunting . Like all lemurs , they are protected under CITES Appendix I , which prohibits commercial trade . Despite breeding easily , they are rarely kept in captivity . The Duke Lemur Center coordinated the captive breeding of an imported collection of the northern species , which rose from six individuals in 1982 to 62 individuals by 1989 , but the population fell to six by 2009 and was no longer considered a breeding population . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The first species of giant mouse lemur was described by the French naturalist Alfred Grandidier in 1867 based on seven individuals he had collected near Morondava in southwestern Madagascar . Of these seven specimens , the lectotype was selected in 1939 as MNHN 1867 – 603 , an adult skull and skin . Naming the species after the French entomologist Charles Coquerel , Grandidier placed Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur ( M. coquereli ) with the dwarf lemurs in the genus Cheirogaleus ( which he spelled <unk> ) as C. coquereli . He selected this generic assignment based on similarities with fork @-@ marked lemurs ( Phaner ) , which he considered to also be members of Cheirogaleus . The following year , the German naturalist Hermann Schlegel and Dutch naturalist François Pollen independently described the same species and coincidentally gave it the same specific name , coquereli , basing theirs on an individual from around the Bay of Ampasindava in northern Madagascar . Unlike Grandidier , they placed their specimen in the genus Microcebus ( mouse lemurs ) ; however , these authors also listed all Cheirogaleus under Microcebus and based the classification of their species on similarities with the greater dwarf lemur ( M. <unk> , now C. major ) . 
 In 1870 , the British zoologist John Edward Gray placed Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur into its own genus , Mirza . This classification was widely ignored and later rejected in the early 1930s by zoologists Ernst Schwarz , Guillaume Grandidier , and others , who felt that its longer fur and bushy tail did not merit a separate genus and instead placed it in Microcebus . British anatomist William Charles Osman Hill also favored this view in 1953 , noting that despite its larger size ( comparable to Cheirogaleus ) , its first upper premolar was proportionally small as in Microcebus . In 1977 , French zoologist Jean @-@ Jacques Petter also favored the Microcebus classification , despite the threefold size difference between Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur and the other members of the genus . 
 The genus Mirza was resurrected in 1982 by American paleoanthropologist Ian Tattersall to represent an intermediate branch between Microcebus and Cheirogaleus , citing the Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur 's significantly larger size than the largest Microcebus and locomotor behavior more closely aligned with Cheirogaleus . Adoption of Mirza was slow , though in 1994 it was used in the first edition of Lemurs of Madagascar by Conservation International . In 1993 , primatologist Colin Groves initially favored the Microcebus classification in the second edition of Mammal Species of the World , but began supporting the resurrection of Mirza in 2001 . In 1991 , prior to adopting Mirza , Groves was the first to use the common name " giant mouse lemur " . Prior to that , they were popularly referred to as " Coquerel 's mouse lemur " . 
 In 2005 , Peter M. Kappeler and Christian Roos described a new species of giant mouse lemur , the northern giant mouse lemur ( M. zaza ) . Their studies compared the morphology , behavioral ecology , and mitochondrial cytochrome b sequences of specimens from both Kirindy Forest in central @-@ western Madagascar and around Ambato in northwestern Madagascar , part of the Sambirano valley . Their study demonstrated distinct differences in size , sociality , and breeding , as well as sufficient genetic distance to merit specific distinction between the northern and central @-@ western populations . Because Grandidier 's description was based on a southern specimen , they named the northern population as a new species . 
 The World Wide Fund for Nature ( WWF ) announced in 2010 that a biodiversity study from 2009 in the gallery forest of Ranobe near Toliara in southwestern Madagascar revealed a population of giant mouse lemurs previously unknown to science , and possibly a new species . They noted a significant difference in coloration between the two known species and the specimen they observed . However , further testing was required to confirm the discovery . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The etymology of Mirza puzzled researchers for many years . Gray often created mysterious and unexplained taxonomic names — a trend not only continued with his description of Mirza in 1870 , but also with the genera Phaner ( fork @-@ marked lemurs ) and Azema ( for M. rufus , now a synonym for Microcebus ) , both of which were described in the same publication . In 1904 , American zoologist Theodore Sherman Palmer attempted to document the etymologies of all mammalian taxa , but could not definitively explain these three genera . For Mirza , Palmer only noted that it derived from the Persian title <unk> ( " prince " ) , a view tentatively supported by Alex Dunkel , Jelle Zijlstra , and Groves in 2012 . However , because the reference to Persian princes might have come from Arabian Nights , a popular piece of literature at the time , Dunkel et al. also searched the general literature published around 1870 . The origin of all three names was found in a British comedy The Palace of Truth by W. S. Gilbert , which premiered in London on 19 November 1870 , nearly one and a half weeks prior to the date written on the preface of Gray 's manuscript ( also published in London ) . The comedy featured characters bearing all three names : King Phanor ( sic ) , Mirza , and Azema . The authors concluded that Gray had seen the comedy and then based the names of three lemur genera on its characters . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 Based on studies using morphology , immunology , repetitive DNA , SINE analysis , multilocus phylogenetic tests , and mitochondrial genes ( mtDNA ) , giant mouse lemurs are most closely related to mouse lemurs within the family Cheirogaleidae , and together they form a clade with the hairy @-@ eared dwarf lemur ( Allocebus ) . Both dwarf lemurs and fork @-@ marked lemurs are more distantly related , with fork @-@ marked lemurs being either a sister group of all cheirogaleids , or more closely related to sportive lemurs ( Lepilemur ) . 
 Although Mirza , Microcebus , and Allocebus form a clade within Cheirogaleidae , the three lineages are thought to have diverged during a narrow window of time , so the relationships within this clade are difficult to determine and may change with further research . All three are thought to have diverged at least 20 mya ( million years ago ) , although another estimate using mtDNA places the divergence between Mirza and Microcebus at 24 @.@ 2 mya . Divergence between the two recognized species of giant mouse lemur is estimated at 2 @.@ 1 mya . 
 = = Description = = 
 Though giant mouse lemurs are relatively small cheirogaleids , they are more than three times larger than the smallest members of the family , the mouse lemurs . Their body weight averages 300 g ( 11 oz ) . At around 300 mm ( 12 in ) , their bushy and long tail is longer than their head @-@ body length , which averages 233 mm ( 9 @.@ 2 in ) . Their forelimbs are shorter than the hind limbs ( with an intermembral index of 70 ) , a trait shared with mouse lemurs . The skull is similar to that of dwarf and mouse lemurs , and the auditory bullae are small . 
 Like other cheirogaleids , the dental formula for giant mouse lemurs is 2 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 32 @.@ 1 @.@ 3 @.@ 3 × 2 = 36 ; on each side of the mouth , top and bottom , there are two incisors , one canine , three premolars , and three molars — a total of 36 teeth . Their upper teeth converge towards the front of the mouth , but are straighter than those in mouse lemurs . The first upper premolar ( P2 ) is relatively small , but nearly as tall as the next premolar ( P3 ) . Unlike mouse lemurs and more like dwarf lemurs , giant mouse lemurs have a prominent anterior lower premolar ( P2 ) . Also more aligned with dwarf lemurs , the first two upper molars ( M1 – 2 ) have a more anterior hypocone that sits opposite the metacone , compared to the mouse lemurs ' more posterior hypocone , which is presumably a symplesiomorphic ( ancestral ) trait . Also on M1 and M2 , the cingulum ( a crest or ridge on the tongue side ) comprises two small cuspules . In all other dental characteristics , giant mouse lemurs are noticeably similar to both dwarf and mouse lemurs . 
 Giant mouse lemurs have two pairs of mammae , one on the chest ( pectoral ) and one on the abdomen ( abdominal ) . Their fur is typically grayish @-@ brown on the dorsal ( back ) side and more gray in color on the ventral ( front ) side . The tail is typically black @-@ tipped . The new population found by WWF in 2010 has an overall lighter color , along with reddish or rusty patches near the hands and feet on the dorsal side of the arms and legs . This population also has a red tail , which darkens at the end . Vibrissae are found above the eyes ( superciliary ) , above the mouth ( buccal ) , under the lower jaw ( genal ) , near the top of the jaw ( interramal ) , and on the wrist ( carpal ) . Like mouse lemurs , the ears are large and membranous . 
 Ear size is one differentiating factor between the northern giant mouse lemur and Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur , with the former having shorter , rounded ears , while the latter has relatively large ears . The northern giant mouse lemur is generally larger and also has a shorter tail and shorter canine teeth . This species also has the largest testicles relative to body size of any living primate , with an average volume of 15 @.@ 48 cm3 ( 0 @.@ 945 cu in ) , corresponding to 5 @.@ 5 % of its body weight . If human males had comparably sized testes , they would weigh 4 kg ( 8 @.@ 8 lb ) and be the size of a grapefruit . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur has a spotty distribution across western Madagascar 's dry deciduous forests due to the forest fragmentation throughout the region . The dry forests in this lowland region vary in elevation from sea level to 700 m ( 2 @,@ 300 ft ) . The range of this species is divided into northern and southern subpopulations , which are separated by several hundred kilometers . Both historical and current populations between these ranges are uncertain . The southern region is bound by the Onilahy River in the south and the <unk> River in the north , while the northern population is found in the northwestern corner of the island at <unk> de Namoroka National Park . They are most commonly found in forests near rivers and ponds . 
 The northern giant mouse lemur is found in isolated forest patches along the northwest coast in both the more humid Sambirano valley and Sahamalaza Peninsula , as well as the Ampasindava Peninsula . Its range extends from the <unk> River in the south to the <unk> River in the north . The new population reported by the WWF in 2010 is found in the gallery forests of Ranobe near Toliara in southwestern Madagascar . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 Giant mouse lemurs were first studied in the wild by Petter and colleagues in 1971 . His observations were secondary to his primary research interest , the fork @-@ marked lemurs north of Morondava . Both northern and southern populations were studied intermittently between 1978 and 1981 , and in 1993 , long @-@ term social and genetic studies began in Kirindy Forest . Behavioral studies of captive individuals have also been performed at the Duke Lemur Center ( DLC ) in Durham , North Carolina during the 1990s . 
 = = = Population density and territory = = = 
 Before the recognition of more than one species , differences in population density were noted between southern forests like Kirindy and northern forests near Ambanja . Later , it was recognized that Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur was found in lower densities than the northern giant mouse lemur . The former range between 30 and 210 individuals per square kilometer ( 250 acres ) , with lower densities in open areas of the forest , while the latter has been recorded with 385 to 1 @,@ 086 individuals per km2 . However , in the case of the northern giant mouse lemur , populations were found in more isolated forest fragments and it is thought that their consumption of introduced cashew and mango help sustain these higher populations . 
 According to studies of Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur , home ranges of both sexes vary from 1 to 4 hectares ( 2 to 10 acres ) with frequent overlap , particularly on the periphery of their range . Individuals most heavily use and aggressively defend a smaller core area within their range . Individuals can have up to eight neighbors . Home ranges of males tend to overlap with those of both females and other males , and typically expand to four times the size during the mating season . Female home ranges show no variability in size , and can remain stable for years . At Kirindy Forest , genetic studies showed that the home ranges of related females tend to clump closely together , while unrelated males may overlap their range , suggesting male dispersal and migration is responsible for gene flow . 
 = = = Activity patterns = = = 
 Both species are strictly nocturnal , leaving their nests around sunset to stretch and self @-@ groom for a few minutes . Both species typically forage between 5 and 10 m ( 16 and 33 ft ) above the forest floor , though Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur has been observed on the ground . They primarily move by quadrupedal running and occasionally leaping between branches , and use the same feeding postures as mouse lemurs , such as clinging to tree trunks . When moving through the trees , giant mouse lemurs scurry rapidly like mouse lemurs , unlike dwarf lemurs , which use more deliberate movement . Slow movements are usually seen in lower , denser foliage when hunting for insects , while more rapid motion and leaping is typically seen at moderate heights of 2 – 5 m ( 6 @.@ 6 – 16 ft ) . Surveillance of the home range involves slower movements in lighter foliage near the tops of large trees , while movements along the border of a home range is more rapid and occurs at a lower height . Similar movement patterns have been observed in captivity as well . 
 Giant mouse lemurs begin foraging moments before the sun disappears , occasionally participate in social activities during the last half of the night , and return to one of their nests prior to sunrise . Cold temperatures cause them to leave the nest later and return early , sometime during the second half of the night . During the first half of the night , giant mouse lemurs are more likely to rest for an hour or more , usually at the expense of social activities , but not feeding time . Rest periods are longer when temperatures are low . Unlike many other cheirogaleids , they remain active all year and do not enter daily or seasonal torpor . 
 = = = Nesting = = = 
 Both species sleep in round nests up to 50 cm ( 20 in ) across made of interlaced lianas , branches , leaves , and twigs gathered from nearby trees and woven using the mouth and hands . Nests are typically between 2 and 10 m ( 6 @.@ 6 and 33 ft ) above the ground in the fork of large tree branches or surrounded by dense lianas . Trees covered in thick lianas as well as trees with year @-@ round leaf cover ( e.g. Euphorbiaceae ) are favored for nest construction , though large bare trees may be used by building the nest higher . In addition to nesting in dense lianas , individual giant mouse lemurs will rotate between 10 and 12 nests every few days to avoid predators . Only females have been observed building nests in the wild , though males , females , and young have been observed building nests in captivity . Multiple nests are sometimes built in the same tree or in nearby trees and are shared by neighboring giant mouse lemurs , fork @-@ marked lemurs , and the introduced black rat ( Rattus rattus ) . Unlike most other nocturnal lemurs , giant mouse lemurs do not appear to sleep in tree holes . 
 = = = Social structure = = = 
 Both species usually are solitary foragers , although the northern giant mouse lemur tends to be the most social , possibly due to its higher population density . Up to eight ( typically four ) adult males , adult females , and juveniles may be found in a northern giant mouse lemur nest , whereas Coquerel 's giant mouse lemurs do not nest communally , except when females share their nest with their offspring . Males do groom and call to females when they come into contact , and according to radio @-@ tracking and direct observations at <unk> near Kirindy , they form pair bonds , sometimes briefly traveling together during the dry season . However , most interactions between adults are infrequent and typically occur later at night and particularly during the dry season in overlapping core areas , often involving chases and other agonistic behavior , and only rarely social grooming . During the mating season , males act aggressively towards one another , pulling out fur around the head and shoulders and biting the head . 
 Giant mouse lemurs use at least eight vocalizations , the most common of which are contact calls , which sound like " hum " or a " <unk> " and are used when moving and when meeting familiar individuals . A " mother @-@ infant meeting call " used at dawn before returning to the nest consists of short , modulated whistles . Both males and females have distinct single note calls used in territorial behavior ; the female call sounds like " <unk> " and the male call is a short , loud whistle . Both sexes use an alarm call , which sounds like a " croak " , and an agonistic call , which consists of repeated " tisk @-@ tisk @-@ tisk " sounds . Females exhibit a " waking call sequence " , sometimes referred to as " loud calls " , which start when foraging commences and then switch to quieter " hon " calls possibly to indicate their position to their neighbors . A long " sexual call sequence " consisting of soft whistle and several modulated , hoarse " <unk> " calls is used by both sexes during estrus . Studies of captive individuals have found other vocalizations , but their purpose has not been determined . The northern giant mouse lemur appears to be the most vocal of the two species . Although vocalizations are the primary form of social communication , they also scent mark using saliva , urine , and secretions from the anogenital scent gland on small branches and other objects . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Reproduction starts in November for Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur at Kirindy Forest ; the estrous cycle runs approximately 22 days , while estrus lasts only a day or less . The mating season in this southern population is limited to a few weeks , whereas the northern giant mouse lemur is thought to breed throughout the year , a trend seen in only two other species of lemur : the aye @-@ aye ( Daubentonia madagascariensis ) and the red @-@ bellied lemur ( Eulemur rubriventer ) . The northern giant mouse lemur had been observed breeding year @-@ round in captivity if their litter did not survive or was removed , but at the time this population was thought to be Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur . 
 One to three offspring ( typically two ) are born after 90 days of gestation , weighing approximately 12 g ( 0 @.@ 42 oz ) . Because they are poorly developed , they initially remain in their mother 's nest for up to three weeks , being transported by mouth between nests . Once they have grown sufficiently , typically after three weeks , the mother will park her offspring in vegetation while she forages nearby . After a month , the young begin to participate in social play and grooming with their mother , and between the first and second month , young males begin to exhibit early sexual behaviors ( including mounting , neck biting , and pelvic thrusting ) . By the third month , the young forage independently , though they maintain vocal contact with their mother and use a small part of her range . 
 Females start reproducing after ten months , while males develop functional testicles by their second mating season . Testicle size in the northern giant mouse lemur does not appear to fluctuate by season , and is so large relative to the animal 's body mass that it is the highest among all primates . This emphasis on sperm production in males , as well as the use of copulatory plugs , suggests a mating system best described as polygynandrous where males use scramble competition ( roaming widely to find many females ) . In contrast , male Coquerel 's giant mouse lemurs appear to fight for access to females ( contest competition ) during their breeding season . Males disperse from their natal range , and the age at which they leave varies from two years to several . Females reproduce every year , although postpartum estrus has been observed in captivity . In the wild , the lifespan of giant mouse lemurs is thought to rarely exceed five or six years , though in captivity they can live up to 15 years . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 Both species are omnivorous , eating fruit , flowers , buds , insect excretions , tree gums , large insects , spiders , frogs , chameleons , snakes , small birds , and eggs . Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur is thought to opportunistically prey on mouse lemurs after an individual was found with a half @-@ eaten gray mouse lemur ( M. murinus ) in a trap . During June and July , at the peak of the dry season , this species relies on sugary excretions from the larvae of hemipteran and cochineal insects as well as tree gums . The sugary excretions are obtained by either licking them from the back of the insect or collecting the crystallized sugars that accumulate beneath the insect colony . During this time of year , feeding on insect secretions can account for 60 % of feeding activity . In contrast , the northern giant mouse lemur relies on cashew fruits during the dry season . 
 Giant mouse lemurs are often sympatric with mouse lemurs , such as M. murinus , though they are typically found higher in the canopy and favor thicker , taller gallery forests . At the Marosalaza forest ( north of Morondava ) , Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur is sympatric with four other nocturnal lemurs ( mouse lemurs , sportive lemurs , dwarf lemurs , and fork @-@ marked lemurs ) , but manages niche differentiation by feeding at different times and specializing on insect secretions during the dry season . 
 Diurnal birds of prey such as the Madagascar buzzard ( Buteo brachypterus ) are their most significant predators . Other documented predators of giant mouse lemurs include the fossa ( Cryptoprocta ferox ) , Madagascar owl ( Asio madagascariensis ) , and the narrow @-@ striped mongoose ( <unk> <unk> ) . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 In 2012 , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) assessed both Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur and the northern giant mouse lemur as endangered . Prior to that , both species had been listed as vulnerable . Populations of both species are in decline due to habitat destruction , primarily for slash @-@ and @-@ burn agriculture and charcoal production . Also , they are both hunted for bushmeat . The population announced by the WWF in 2010 was found outside the limits of a nearby protected area , <unk> @-@ Ranobe , which was granted temporary protection status in December 2008 and is co @-@ managed by the WWF . Its forests were not included in the protected area due to existing concessions for mining activities . 
 As with all lemurs , giant mouse lemurs were first protected in 1969 when they were listed as " Class A " of the African Convention on the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources . This prohibited hunting and capture without authorization , which would only be given for scientific purposes or the national interest . In 1973 , they were also protected under CITES Appendix I , which strictly regulates their trade and forbids commercial trade . Although enforcement is patchy , they are also protected under Malagasy law . 
 Giant mouse lemurs are rarely kept in captivity , though they breed easily . In 1989 , the Duke Lemur Center held more than 70 % of the captive population ( 45 of 62 individuals ) . At the time , the DLC was coordinating a captive breeding program for Coquerel 's giant mouse lemur , and all individuals kept at American facilities were descended from six individuals imported by the DLC in 1982 from the region around Ambanja . As of 2009 , the International Species Information System ( ISIS ) recorded only six remaining individuals registered in the United States and Europe , all reclassified as northern giant mouse lemurs and considered a non @-@ breeding population ; and in 2015 , only a single female remained on record . 
 = Copper shark = 
 The copper shark , bronze whaler , or <unk> shark ( Carcharhinus brachyurus ) is a species of requiem shark , family Carcharhinidae , and the only member of its genus found mostly at temperate latitudes . It is distributed in a number of separate populations in the northeastern and southwestern Atlantic , off southern Africa , in the northwestern and eastern Pacific , and around Australia and New Zealand , with scattered reports from equatorial regions . This species can be found from brackish rivers and estuaries , to shallow bays and harbors , to offshore waters 100 m ( 330 ft ) deep or more . Females are found apart from males for most of the year , and conduct seasonal migrations . A large species reaching 3 @.@ 3 m ( 11 ft ) long , the copper shark is difficult to distinguish from other large requiem sharks . It is characterized by its narrow , hook @-@ shaped upper teeth , lack of a prominent ridge between the dorsal fins , and plain bronze coloration . 
 Feeding mainly on cephalopods , bony fishes , and other cartilaginous fishes , the copper shark is a fast @-@ swimming predator that has been known to hunt in large groups , utilizing their numbers to their advantage ; however for most of the time they remain solitary . Off South Africa , this species associates closely with the annual sardine run , involving millions of southern African pilchard ( Sardinops sagax ) . Like other requiem sharks , it is viviparous , with the developing embryos mainly nourished through a placental connection formed from the depleted yolk sac . Females bear litters of 7 to 24 pups every other year in coastal nursery areas , after a gestation period of 12 or perhaps as long as 21 months . It is extremely slow @-@ growing , with males and females not reaching maturity until 13 – 19 and 19 – 20 years of age respectively . 
 This species is valued by commercial and recreational fisheries throughout its range , and utilized as food . The species population size is unknown , but the <unk> 's Red List assesses the species as Near Threatened because it is very susceptible to population depletion due to its low growth and reproductive rates and because its numbers are believed to have declined in some areas . 
 Copper sharks only attack humans infrequently , but the species places sixth in the number of unprovoked attacks on people . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Because of its very patchy range , the copper shark has been scientifically described several times from different locales . The earliest valid description is presently considered to be British zoologist Albert Günther 's account of Carcharias brachyurus in the 1870 eighth volume of Catalogue of the fishes in the British Museum . The earliest name was once thought to be Auguste Duméril 's 1865 Carcharias remotus , until it was found that the type specimen associated with that name is actually a blacknose shark ( C. acronotus ) . Thus , this shark was often referred to as C. remotus in older literature . An even earlier name , Richard Owen 's 1853 Galeolamna <unk> , is of questionable taxonomic status as it was based solely on a set of now @-@ destroyed jaws that may or may not have belonged to a copper shark . Modern authors have assigned this species to the genus Carcharhinus . 
 The specific epithet brachyurus is derived from the Greek brachys ( " short " ) and oura ( " tail " ) . The name " whaler " originated in the 19th century , applied by the crews of whaling vessels in the Pacific who saw large sharks of various species congregating around harpooned whale carcasses . This species may also be referred to as black @-@ tipped whaler , cocktail shark or cocktail whaler , or New Zealand whaler , as well as by the shortened " bronze " , " <unk> " , or " cocktail " . Günther originally referred to four syntypes : a stuffed specimen from Antarctica and another from New Zealand , which have since been lost , and two fetuses from Australia that were later discovered to be bull sharks ( C. leucas ) . In the interests of taxonomic stability , in 1982 Jack Garrick designated a 2 @.@ 4 m ( 7 @.@ 9 ft ) long female caught off Whanganui , New Zealand as a new type specimen . 
 = = Phylogeny and evolution = = 
 The first efforts to determine the evolutionary relationships of the copper shark were based on morphology and returned inconclusive results : in 1982 Jack Garrick placed it by itself as a grouping within Carcharhinus , while in 1988 Leonard Compagno placed it in an informal " transitional group " that also contained the blacknose shark ( C. acronotus ) , the blacktip reef shark ( C. melanopterus ) , the nervous shark ( C. cautus ) , the silky shark ( C. falciformis ) , and the night shark ( C. signatus ) . Gavin Naylor 's 1992 allozyme study concluded that the closest relative of the copper shark is the spinner shark ( C. brevipinna ) , but could not resolve their wider relationships with the rest of the genus . Fossilized teeth from the copper shark have been recovered from the Pungo River in North Carolina , dating to the Miocene ( 23 – 5 @.@ 3 Ma ) , from Tuscany , dating to the Pliocene ( 5 @.@ 3 – 2 @.@ 6 Ma ) , and from Costa Mesa in California , dating to the Late Pleistocene ( 126 @,@ 000 – 12 @,@ 000 years ago ) . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The copper shark is the only member of its genus largely found in temperate rather than tropical waters , in temperatures above 12 ° C ( 54 ° F ) . It is widely distributed but as disjunct regional populations with little to no interchange between them . In the Atlantic , this shark occurs from the Mediterranean Sea to Morocco and the Canary Islands , off Argentina , and off Namibia and South Africa ( where there may be two separate populations ) , with infrequent records from Mauritania , the Gulf of Guinea , and possibly the Gulf of Mexico . In the Indo @-@ Pacific , it is found from the East China Sea to Japan ( excluding Hokkaido ) and southern Russia , off southern Australia ( mostly between Sydney and Perth but occasionally further north ) , and around New Zealand but not as far as the Kermadec Islands ; there are also unconfirmed reports from the Seychelles and the Gulf of Thailand . In the eastern Pacific , it occurs from northern Chile to Peru , and from Mexico to Point Conception , California , including the Gulf of California . The copper shark is common off parts of Argentina , South Africa , Australia , and New Zealand , and rare elsewhere ; in many areas its range is ill @-@ defined because of confusion with other species . 
 Copper sharks can be found from the surf zone to slightly beyond the continental shelf in the open ocean , diving to depths of 100 m ( 330 ft ) or more . This species commonly enters very shallow habitats , including bays , shoals , and harbors , and also inhabits rocky areas and offshore islands . It is tolerant of low and changing salinities , and has been reported from estuaries and the lower reaches of large rivers . Juveniles inhabit inshore waters less than 30 m ( 98 ft ) deep throughout the year , while adults tend to be found further offshore and regularly approach the coast only in spring and summer , when large aggregations can be readily observed in shallow water . 
 Populations of copper sharks in both hemispheres perform seasonal migrations , in response to temperature changes , reproductive events , and / or prey availability ; the movement patterns differ with sex and age . Adult females and juveniles spend winter in the subtropics and generally shift to higher latitudes as spring nears , with pregnant females also moving towards the coast to give birth in inshore nursery areas . Adult males remain in the subtropics for most of the year , except in late winter or spring when they also move into higher latitudes , in time to encounter and mate with post @-@ partum females dispersing from the nurseries . During migrations , individual sharks have been recorded traveling up to 1 @,@ 320 km ( 820 mi ) . It is philopatric , returning to the same areas year after year . 
 = = Description = = 
 The copper shark has a slender , streamlined body with a slightly arched profile just behind the head . The snout is rather long and pointed , with the nostrils preceded by low flaps of skin . The round , moderately large eyes are equipped with nictating membranes ( protective third eyelids ) . The mouth has short , subtle furrows at the corners and contains 29 – 35 upper tooth rows and 29 – 33 lower tooth rows . The teeth are serrated with single narrow cusps ; the upper teeth have a distinctive hooked shape and become more angled towards the corners of the jaw , while the lower teeth are upright . The upper teeth of adult males are longer , narrower , more curved , and more finely serrated than those of adult females and juveniles . The five pairs of gill slits are fairly long . 
 The pectoral fins are large , pointed , and falcate ( sickle @-@ shaped ) . The first dorsal fin is tall , with a pointed apex and a concave trailing margin ; its origin lies about even with the tips of the pectoral fins . The second dorsal fin is small and low , and positioned about opposite to the anal fin . There is usually no ridge between the dorsal fins . The caudal fin has a well @-@ developed lower lobe and a deep ventral notch near the tip of the upper lobe . This species is bronze to olive @-@ gray above with a metallic sheen and sometimes a pink cast , darkening towards the fin tips and margins but not conspicuously so ; the color fades quickly to a dull gray @-@ brown after death . The underside is white , which extends onto the flanks as a prominent band . The copper shark is easily mistaken for other large Carcharhinus species , particularly the dusky shark ( C. obscurus ) , but can be identified by its upper tooth shape , absent or weak <unk> ridge , and lack of obvious fin markings . It reportedly reaches a maximum length of 3 @.@ 3 m ( 11 ft ) and weight of 305 kilograms ( 672 lb ) . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 Fast and active , the copper shark may be encountered alone , in pairs , or in loosely organized schools containing up to hundreds of individuals . Some aggregations seem to form for reproductive purposes , while others form in response to concentrations of food . This species may fall prey to larger sharks . Known parasites of the copper shark include the tapeworms <unk> australis , Dasyrhynchus pacificus and D. <unk> , Floriceps <unk> , Phoreiobothrium robertsoni , and <unk> <unk> , the leech Stibarobdella macrothela , and the fluke Otodistomum <unk> . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The copper shark feeds more towards the bottom of the water column than the top , consuming cephalopods , including squid ( Loligo spp . ) , <unk> , and octopus ; bony fishes , including gurnards , flatfishes , hakes , catfishes , jacks , Australian salmon , mullets , sea breams , smelts , tunas , sardines , and anchovies ; and cartilaginous fishes , including dogfish sharks ( Squalus spp . ) , stingrays , skates , electric rays , and sawfishes . Cephalopods and cartilaginous fishes become relatively more important food for sharks over 2 m ( 6 @.@ 6 ft ) long . Young sharks also consume <unk> jellyfish and crustaceans , including mud shrimps ( Callianassa ) and penaeid prawns . It does not attack marine mammals , though has been known rarely to scavenge on dolphins that had succumbed to fishing nets . The predominant prey of this species off South Africa is the southern African pilchard ( Sardinops sagax ) , which comprise 69 – 95 % of its diet . Every winter , schools of copper sharks follow the " run " of the pilchard from the Eastern Cape to KwaZulu @-@ Natal . The gathering of millions of forage fish attract a multitude of predators , including several species of sharks , of which copper sharks are the most numerous . 
 Large numbers of copper sharks have been observed hunting together in a seemingly cooperative fashion . Small schooling fish are " herded " into a tight ball , whereupon each shark swims through in turn with its mouth open to feed . For groups of tuna and larger prey , the pursuing sharks may adopt a " wing " formation to force their quarry closer together , with each shark targeting a particular fish and attacking in turn . In False Bay , South Africa , this species reportedly follows seine net fishing vessels . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 Like other members of its family , the copper shark is viviparous , in which the yolk sac of the developing embryo , once depleted , is converted into a placental connection through which the mother delivers nourishment . Adult females have one functional ovary , on the right , and two functional uteruses . The male bites the female as a prelude to mating . In the Southern Hemisphere , mating takes place from October to December ( spring and early summer ) , when both sexes have migrated into offshore waters at higher latitudes . Birthing seems to occur from June to January , peaking in October and November . 
 Female copper sharks make use of shallow inshore habitats , varying from stretches of open coast to more sheltered bays and inlets , as nurseries . These nurseries provide abundant food and reduce the likelihood of predation by larger members of the species . Known and suspected nursery areas occur off northern North Island from Waimea Inlet to Hawke Bay for New Zealand sharks , off Albany , in and around Gulf St Vincent , and in Port Phillip Bay for Australian sharks , off Niigata ( Japan ) for northwestern Pacific sharks , off the Eastern Cape for South Africa sharks , off Rhodes ( Greece ) , Nice ( France ) , and Al Hoceima ( Morocco ) for Mediterranean sharks , off Río de Oro ( Western Sahara ) for northwest African sharks , off Rio de Janeiro ( Brazil ) and Buenos Aires and Bahía Blanca ( Argentina ) for southwestern Atlantic sharks , and off Paita and <unk> Cove ( Peru ) , in Sebastián Vizcaíno Bay ( Mexico ) , and in and around San Diego Bay for eastern Pacific sharks . 
 Most sources estimate a gestation period of 12 months , though some data support the interpretation of a 15 – 21 month long gestation period instead . Females produce litters every other year , with the number of pups ranging from 7 to 24 and averaging 15 or 16 . Females off California and the Baja Peninsula tend to bear fewer young relative to other parts of the world . The newborns measure 55 – 67 cm ( 22 – 26 in ) long . The copper shark is among the slowest @-@ growing Carcharhinus species : off South Africa , males reach sexual maturity at 2 @.@ 0 – 2 @.@ 4 m ( 6 @.@ 6 – 7 @.@ 9 ft ) long and an age of 13 – 19 years , while females mature at 2 @.@ 3 – 2 @.@ 5 m ( 7 @.@ 5 – 8 @.@ 2 ft ) long and an age of 19 – 20 years . Females off Australia mature at a comparable length of 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) , while females off Argentina mature at a slightly smaller length of 2 @.@ 2 m ( 7 @.@ 2 ft ) . The maximum lifespan is at least 30 years for males and 25 years for females . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 = = = Attacks on Humans = = = 
 Copper sharks attack humans infrequently , but the species places sixth in the number of unprovoked attacks on people . During the tracking period through 2013 , the University of Florida attributed 20 attacks to the species . ( In comparison , great white sharks topped the list , with 279 attacks . ) Though large and powerful , the copper shark is not particularly aggressive towards humans unless in the presence of food . Copper Sharks have been known to harass and attack spear fishers in an attempt to steal catches . Copper sharks have bitten several swimmers in Australia and New Zealand , where the species is common . ( The species is commonly called bronze whalers in this part of the world . ) 
 Fatal attacks attributed to the copper shark ( bronze whaler ) include the 2014 death of a swimmer in Tathra , New South Wales , Australia , and the 1976 death of a swimmer in Te Kaha , New Zealand . Three out of ten shark attacks in New Zealand are attributed to Copper sharks . Witnesses also attributed a fatal attack on September 2011 in Bunker Bay , Western Australia to a copper shark . 
 One problem with counting attacks on humans is that the copper shark is so similar to other requiem sharks . Victims and witnesses are unlikely to correctly identify which type of genus Carcharhinus shark is responsible for the attack . Experts trying to confirm shark attacks by species warn that their statistics undercount the number of attacks by requiem sharks like the copper . 
 = = = Captivity = = = 
 Like many large , active sharks , this species adapts poorly to captivity ; it tends to bump into the sides of its enclosure , and the resulting abrasions then become infected with often fatal consequences . 
 = = = Fishing = = = 
 Commercial fisheries for the copper shark exist off New Zealand , Australia ( though the " bronze whaler fishery " of Western Australia actually takes mostly dusky sharks ) , South Africa , Brazil , Uruguay , Argentina , Mexico , and China ; it also contributes to the bycatch of other commercial fisheries across its range . This species is caught in gillnets and on bottom longlines , and to a much lesser extent in bottom trawls and on pelagic longlines . The meat is sold for human consumption . The copper shark is also popular with recreational fishers in Namibia , New Zealand , Australia , South Africa , Argentina , Mexico and California , predominantly by anglers but also by <unk> and <unk> . In New Zealand , it is the Carcharhinus species most frequently caught by sport fishers and sustains a small , summer recreational fishery in northern North Island , that mainly captures pregnant and post @-@ partum females and for the most part practices tag and release . A tag and release program is also practiced in Namibia . 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed the copper shark as Near Threatened worldwide . While the global population is unknown , the long maturation time and low reproductive rate of this species render it highly susceptible to overfishing . Regionally , the IUCN has listed this species under Least Concern off Australia , New Zealand , and South Africa , where fisheries are generally well @-@ managed ; the local copper shark population for each of those three countries is contained almost entirely within their respective Exclusive Economic Zones ( EEZ ) . Reported catches by New Zealand have steadily declined from a peak of 40 tons in 1995 / 96 to 20 tons 2001 / 02 , though it is uncertain whether this reflects a genuine decline or changing fishing habits . 
 In the eastern Pacific , the copper shark is rare and little fishery information is available , leading to an assessment of Data Deficient . However , catch declines across all shark and ray species have been documented in the heavily @-@ fished Gulf of California . Off East Asia , the copper shark has been assessed as Vulnerable ; though species @-@ specific data is unavailable , shark populations overall have been decimated in the region . The number of large adults have been too low to sustain targeted fisheries since the 1970s , and most of the current shark catch consists of small juveniles . Additional threats to this species include the degradation and destruction of its coastal nurseries from development , pollution , and aquaculture , mortality from shark nets used to protect beaches in South Africa and Australia , and persecution by fish farmers in southern Australia . 
 = Fantastic ( magazine ) = 
 Fantastic was an American digest size fantasy and science fiction magazine , published from 1952 to 1980 . It was founded by Ziff Davis as a fantasy companion to Amazing Stories . Early sales were good , and Ziff Davis quickly decided to switch Amazing from pulp format to digest , and to cease publication of their other science fiction pulp , Fantastic Adventures . Within a few years sales fell , and Howard Browne , the editor , was forced to switch the focus to science fiction rather than fantasy . Browne lost interest in the magazine as a result and the magazine generally ran poor quality fiction in the mid @-@ 1950s , under Browne and his successor , Paul W. Fairman . 
 At the end of the 1950s Cele Goldsmith took over as editor of both Fantastic and Amazing , and quickly invigorated the magazines , bringing in many new writers and making them , in the words of one science fiction historian , the " best @-@ looking and brightest " magazines in the field . She helped to nurture the early careers of writers such as Roger Zelazny and Ursula K. Le Guin , but was unable to increase circulation , and in 1965 the magazines were sold to Sol Cohen , who hired Joseph Wrzos as editor and switched to a reprint @-@ only policy . This was financially successful , but brought Cohen into conflict with the newly formed Science Fiction Writers of America . After a turbulent period at the end of the 1960s , Ted White became editor and the reprints were phased out . 
 White worked hard to make the magazine successful , introducing artwork from artists who had made their names in comics , and working with new authors such as Gordon Eklund . His budget for fiction was low , but he was occasionally able to find good stories from well @-@ known writers which had been rejected by the other markets . Circulation continued to decline and in 1978 Cohen sold out his half of the business to his partner , Arthur Bernhard . White resigned shortly afterwards , and was replaced by Elinor Mavor , but within two years Bernhard decided to close down Fantastic , merging it with Amazing , which had always had slightly higher circulation . 
 = = Publishing history = = 
 In 1938 , Ziff @-@ Davis , a Chicago @-@ based publisher looking to expand into the pulp magazine market , acquired Amazing Stories . The number of science fiction magazines grew quickly ; several new titles appeared over the next few years , including Fantastic Adventures , which was launched by Ziff @-@ Davis in 1939 as a companion to Amazing . Under the editorship of Raymond Palmer the magazines were reasonably successful but published poor quality work , and when Howard Browne took over as editor of Amazing in January 1950 he decided to try to move the magazine upmarket . Ziff @-@ Davis agreed to back the new magazine , and Browne put together a sample copy , but when the Korean War broke out Ziff @-@ Davis cut their budgets and the project was abandoned . Browne did not give up , and in 1952 received the go @-@ ahead to try a new magazine instead , focused on high @-@ quality fantasy , a genre which had recently become more popular . The first issue of Fantastic , dated Summer 1952 , appeared on March 21 of that year . 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 Sales were very good , and Ziff @-@ Davis was sufficiently impressed to move the magazine from a quarterly to a bimonthly schedule after only two issues , and to switch Amazing from pulp format to digest @-@ size to match Fantastic . Shortly afterwards the decision was taken to eliminate Fantastic Adventures : the March 1953 issue was the last , and the May – June 1953 issue of Fantastic added a mention of Fantastic Adventures to the masthead , though this disappeared with the following issue . Payment started at two cents per word for all rights , but could go up to ten cents at the editor 's discretion ; this put Fantastic in the second echelon of magazines , behind markets such as Astounding and Galaxy . The experiment with quality fiction did not last ; circulation dropped , which led to budget cuts , and in turn the quality of the fiction fell . Browne had wanted to separate Fantastic from Amazing 's pulp roots , but now found he had to print more science fiction ( sf ) and less fantasy in order to attract Amazing 's readers to its sister magazine . Fantastic 's poor results were probably a consequence of the overloaded sf magazine market ; far more magazines appeared in the early 1950s than the market was able to support . Ziff @-@ Davis sales staff were able to help sell Fantastic and Amazing along with the technical magazines that it published , and the availability of a national sales network , even though it was not focused solely on Fantastic , undoubtedly helped the magazine to survive . 
 In May 1956 Browne left Ziff @-@ Davis to become a screenwriter . Paul W. Fairman took over as editor of both Fantastic and Amazing . In 1957 Bernard Davis left Ziff @-@ Davis ; it had been Davis who had suggested the acquisition of Amazing in 1939 , and he had stayed involved with the sf magazines throughout the time he spent there . With his departure Amazing and Fantastic stagnated ; they remained monthly but drew no attention from Ziff @-@ Davis 's management . 
 = = = Mid @-@ 1950s to late 1960s = = = 
 In November 1955 , Ziff @-@ Davis hired an assistant , Cele Goldsmith , who began by helping with two new magazines under development , Dream World and Pen Pals . She also read the slush piles for all the magazines , and was quickly given more responsibility . In 1957 she was made managing editor of both Amazing and Fantastic , doing the administrative chores and reading unsolicited manuscripts ; and at the end of 1958 she became editor , replacing Fairman , who left to edit Ellery Queen 's Mystery Magazine . Goldsmith ( who became Cele Lalli when she married in 1964 ) stayed as editor for six and a half years . 
 Circulation dropped for both Amazing and Fantastic ; in 1964 Fantastic had a paid circulation of only 27 @,@ 000 . In 1965 Sol Cohen , who at that time was Galaxy 's publisher , set up his own publishing company , Ultimate Publishing , and bought both Amazing and Fantastic from Ziff @-@ Davis . Cohen had decided to make the magazines as profitable as possible by filling them only with reprints . This was possible because Ziff @-@ Davis had acquired second serial rights for all stories they had published , and since Cohen had bought the backfile of stories he was able to reprint them using these rights . Using reprints in this way saved Cohen about $ 8 @,@ 000 a year between the two magazines . Lalli decided that she did not want to work for Cohen , and stayed with Ziff @-@ Davis . Her last issue was June 1965 . Cohen replaced Lalli with Joseph Wrzos , who used the name " Joseph Ross " on the magazines . Cohen had met Wrzos at the Galaxy offices not long before ; Wrzos was teaching English full @-@ time , but had worked for Gnome Press as an assistant editor in 1953 – 1954 . 
 Cohen also launched a series of reprint magazines , drawing from the backfile of both Amazing and Fantastic , again using the second serial rights he had acquired from Ziff @-@ Davis . The first reprint magazine was Great Science Fiction ; the first issue , titled Great Science Fiction from Amazing , appeared in August 1965 . By early 1967 this had been joined by The Most Thrilling Science Fiction Ever Told and Science Fiction Classics . These increased the workload on Wrzos , though Cohen made the selection of stories , and Wrzos found himself able to work on Fantastic and Amazing only part @-@ time . Cohen hired Herb <unk> to help with the other magazines . 
 Although Cohen felt that his deal with Ziff @-@ Davis gave him the reprint rights he needed , the newly formed Science Fiction Writers of America ( SFWA ) received complaints about Cohen 's refusal to pay anything for the reprints . He was also reportedly not responding to requests for reassignment of copyright . SFWA organized a boycott of Cohen 's magazines ; after a year Cohen agreed to pay a flat fee for the reprints , and in August 1967 he agreed to a graduated scale of payments , and the boycott was withdrawn . 
 Harry Harrison had been involved in the negotiations between SFWA and Cohen , and when the agreement was reached in 1967 Cohen asked Harrison if he would take over as editor of both magazines . Harrison was available because SF Impulse , which he had been editing , had ceased publication in early 1967 . Cohen agreed to phase out the reprints by the end of the year , and Harrison took the job . Cohen added Harrison 's name to the masthead of two issues of Great Science Fiction , although Harrison had had nothing to do with that magazine , but the reprints in Fantastic and Amazing continued and Harrison decided to quit in February 1968 . He recommended Barry Malzberg as his replacement . Cohen had worked with Malzberg at the Scott Meredith Literary Agency , and felt Malzberg would be more cooperative than Harrison . Malzberg , however , turned out to be just as unwilling as Harrison to work with Cohen if the reprints continued , and soon regretted taking the job . In October 1968 Cohen refused to pay for a cover that Malzberg had commissioned ; Malzberg insisted , threatening to resign if Cohen did not agree . Cohen contacted Robert Silverberg , then the president of SFWA , and told him ( falsely ) that Malzberg had actually resigned . Silverberg recommended Ted White as a replacement . Cohen secured White 's agreement and then fired Malzberg ; White took over in October 1968 , but because there was a backlog of stories Malzberg had acquired , the first issue on which he was credited as editor was the June 1969 issue . 
 = = = 1970s to Present = = = 
 Like his immediate predecessors , White took the job on condition that the reprints would be phased out . It was some time before this was achieved : there was at least one reprinted story in every issue until the end of 1971 . The February 1972 issue contained some artwork reprinted from 1939 , and after that the reprints ceased . 
 Fantastic 's circulation was about 37 @,@ 000 when White took over ; only about 4 percent of this was subscription sales . Cohen 's wife filled the subscriptions from their garage , and according to White , Cohen regarded this as a burden , and never tried to increase the subscription base . Despite White 's efforts , Fantastic 's circulation fell , from almost 37 @,@ 000 when he took over as editor to less than 24 @,@ 000 in the summer of 1975 . Cohen was rumored to be interested in selling both Fantastic and Amazing ; among other possibilities , both Roger Elwood , at that time an active science fiction anthology editor , and Edward Ferman , the editor of The Magazine of Fantasy & Science Fiction , approached Cohen with a view to acquiring the titles . Nothing came of it , however , and White was not aware of the possible sales . He was working at a low salary , with unpaid help from friends to read unsolicited submissions — at one point he introduced a 25 @-@ cent reading fee for manuscripts from unpublished writers ; the fee would be refunded if White bought the story . White sometimes found himself at odds with Cohen 's business partner , Arthur Bernhard , due to their different political views . White 's unhappiness with his working conditions culminated in his resignation after Cohen refused his proposal to publish Fantastic as a slick magazine , with larger pages and higher quality paper . White commented in an article in Science Fiction Review that he had brought to the magazines " a lot of energy and enthusiasm and a great many ideas for their improvement ... Well , I have put into effect nearly every idea which I was allowed to follow through on ... and have spent most of my energy and enthusiasm . " Cohen was able to persuade him to stay for another year ; in the event White stayed for another three . 
 White was unable to completely halt the slide in circulation , though it rose a little in 1977 . That year Cohen lost $ 15 @,@ 000 dollars on the magazines , and decided to sell . He spent some time looking for a new publisher — editor Roy <unk> was one of those interested — but on September 15 , 1978 , he sold his half of the business to Arthur Bernhard , his partner . White renewed his suggestions for improving the format of the magazine : he wanted to make Fantastic the same size as Time , and believed he could avoid the mistakes that had been made by other sf magazines that had tried that approach . White also proposed an increase in the budget and asked for a raise . Bernhard not only turned down White 's ideas , but also stopped paying him : White responded by resigning . His last official day as editor was November 9 ; the last issue of Fantastic under his control was the January 1979 issue . He returned all submissions to their authors , saying that he had been told to do so by Bernhard ; Bernhard denied this . 
 Bernhard brought in Elinor Mavor to edit both Amazing and Fantastic . Mavor had previously edited Bill of Fare , a restaurant trade journal , and was a long @-@ time science fiction reader , but she had little knowledge of the history of the magazines . She was unaware , for example , that she was not the first woman to edit them , and so adopted a male pseudonym — " Omar Gohagen " — for a while . She suggested a campaign to increase circulation , and went so far as to gather information about costs while on a trip to New York in 1979 . Bernhard decided instead to merge the two magazines . Circulation was continuing to drop ; the figures for the last two years are not available , but sf historian Mike Ashley estimates that Fantastic paid circulation may have been as low as 13 @,@ 000 . Bernhard felt that since Fantastic had never been profitable , whereas Amazing had made money , it was best to keep Amazing . Until the March 1985 issue , Amazing included a mention of Fantastic on the spine and on the contents page . In 1999 , the fiction magazine formerly known as Pirate Writings revived the Fantastic title and Cele Goldsmith @-@ era logotype for several issues , ultimately unsuccessfully , though this was not intended as a continuation of the original magazine . 
 In August 2014 , Warren Lapine , former editor of Absolute Magnitude , Realms of Fantasy , and Weird Tales , revived the Fantastic logotype of Fantastic Stories of the Imagination as a free webzine . 
 = = Contents and reception = = 
 = = = Browne and Fairman = = = 
 The first issue of Fantastic was impressive , with a cover that sf historian Mike Ashley has described as " one of the most captivating of all first issues " ; the painting , by Barye Phillips and Leo Summers , illustrated Kris Neville 's " The Opal Necklace " . The fiction included some stories by well known names ; in particular , Raymond Chandler 's " Professor Bingo 's Snuff " would have caught readers ' eyes — the story had appeared the year before in Park East magazine , but would have been new to most readers . It was a short mystery in which the fantasy element was invisibility , achieved by magical snuff . Isaac Asimov and Ray Bradbury also contributed stories , and the issue led with " Six and Ten Are Johnny " , by Walter M. Miller . The rear cover reprinted Pierre Roy 's painting " Danger on the Stairs " , which depicted a snake on a staircase ; it was an odd choice , but subsequent back covers were more natural fits for a fantasy magazine . The quality of the fiction continued to be high for the first year ; sf historian Mike Ashley comments that almost every story in the first seven issues was of high quality , and historian David Kyle regards it as an " outstandingly successful experiment " . Science fiction bibliographer Donald Tuck dissents , however , regarding the first few years as containing " little of note " , and James Blish wrote a contemporary review of the second issue which found it lacking : Blish dismissed three of the seven stories in the Fall 1952 issue as being essentially crime stories written for the sf market , and commented that of the remaining four , only two were " reasonably competent and <unk> " . 
 Other well @-@ known writers appeared in the early issues , including Shirley Jackson , B. Traven , Truman Capote and Evelyn Waugh . Mickey Spillane had written a story called " The Woman With Green Skin " , but had been unable to sell it ; Browne offered to buy it on condition that he had permission to rewrite it as he wished . This was agreed and Browne scrapped Spillane 's text completely , writing a new story called " The Veiled Woman " and publishing it as by Spillane in the November – December 1952 issue . The issue sold so well it was reprinted , with over 300 @,@ 000 copies sold . 
 The emphasis was on fantasy , and much of it was " slick " fantasy — the sort of genre fiction that the upmarket slick magazines , such as The Saturday Evening Post , were willing to buy . Some science fiction appeared as well in the first couple of years , including Isaac Asimov 's " Sally " , which portrays a world in which cars have been given robotic brains and are intelligent . In 1955 it was decided to move the focus from fantasy to sf : in Browne 's words , " Stories of straight fantasy were largely eliminated and straight science @-@ fiction substituted , cover subject matter became of a scientific nature , the words " science fiction " appeared under the title , interior artwork was tightened up to replace the loose , ' arty ' kind of drawing we had been using . " Sales rose 17 % within two issues . Browne was uninterested in science fiction , however , and the quality of the fiction soon dropped , with a small stable of writers producing much of Fantastic 's fiction under house names over the next couple of years . By the start of 1956 the fiction in Fantastic was , in the opinion of sf historian Mike Ashley , " [ in ] a trough of hack predictability " , but there was some inventiveness evident from newer writers such as Robert Silverberg , Harlan Ellison and Randall Garrett . 
 Although Browne had been unable to make Fantastic successful by specializing in fantasy , he was still interested in the fantasy genre , and experimented in the December 1955 issue with the theme of wish fulfilment . He dropped the words " Science Fiction " from the cover , and published five stories , all of which dealt with male fantasies in one form or another . The cover showed a man walking through a wall to find a woman undressing ; the art was by Ed Valigursky and illustrated Paul Fairman 's " All Walls Were Mist " . Reader reaction , according to Browne , was almost entirely favorable , and he continued to publish occasional stories on the wish @-@ fulfilment theme . The experiment was repeated with the October 1956 issue , which again ran without " Science Fiction " on the cover , and contained stories on the theme of " Incredible Powers " . Once again the cover illustrated a male fantasy : this time it showed a man materializing in a bath house where women were showering . Browne had left Ziff @-@ Davis by the time this issue appeared , but Browne 's plans for a magazine around these themes were well advanced , and Fairman , who by this time was editing both Fantastic and Amazing , was given Dream World to edit as well . It ran for three quarterly issues , starting in February 1957 , but proved too narrow a market to succeed . 
 Fairman devoted the July 1958 issue of Fantastic to the Shaver Mystery — a lurid set of beliefs propounded by Richard Shaver in the late 1940s that told of " detrimental robots " , or " <unk> " , who were behind many of the disasters that befell humanity . Most of these stories had run in Amazing , though the editor at that time , Ray Palmer , had been forced to drop Shaver by Ziff @-@ Davis when the stories began to attract ridicule in the press . Fantastic 's readers were no kinder , complaining vigorously . 
 = = = Goldsmith = = = 
 When Goldsmith took over as editor , there was some concern at Ziff @-@ Davis that she might not be able to handle the job . A consultant , Norman Lobsenz , was brought in to help her ; Lobsenz 's title was " editorial director " , but in fact Goldsmith made the story selections . Lobsenz provided blurbs and editorials , read the stories Goldsmith bought , and met with Goldsmith every week or so . Goldsmith was not a long @-@ time sf reader , and knew little about the field ; she simply looked for good quality fiction and bought what she liked . In Mike Ashley 's words , " the result , between 1961 and 1964 , was the two most exciting and original magazines in the field " . New writers whose first story appeared in Fantastic during this period included Phyllis <unk> , Larry Eisenberg , Ursula K. Le Guin , Thomas M. Disch , and Piers Anthony . The November 1959 issue was dedicated to Fritz Leiber ; it included " Lean Times in <unk> " , one of Leiber 's Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser stories . Goldsmith published another half @-@ dozen stories in the series over the next six years , along with other similar ( and sometimes imitative ) fiction such as early work by Michael Moorcock , and John Jakes ' early stories of Brak the Barbarian . This helped to invigorate the nascent sword and sorcery subgenre . Goldsmith obtained an early story by Cordwainer Smith , " The Fife of <unk> " , which ran in the June 1959 issue , but shortly thereafter Pohl at Galaxy reached an agreement to get first refusal on all Smith 's work . 
 During the early 1960s Goldsmith managed to make Fantastic and Amazing , in the words of Mike Ashley , " the best @-@ looking and brightest " magazines around . This applied both to the covers , where Goldsmith used artists such as Alex Schomburg and Leo Summers , and the content . Ashley also describes Fantastic as the " premier fantasy magazine " during Goldsmith 's tenure — at that time the only other magazine focused specifically on fantasy fiction was the British Science Fantasy . 
 Goldsmith 's tastes were too diverse for Fantastic to be limited to genre fantasy , however , and her willingness to buy fiction she liked , regardless of genre expectations , allowed many new writers to flourish on the pages of both Amazing and Fantastic . Writers such as Ursula K. Le Guin , Roger Zelazny and Thomas M. Disch sold regularly to her at the start of their careers Le Guin later commented that Goldsmith was " as enterprising and perceptive an editor as the science fiction magazines ever had " . Not all Goldsmith 's choices were universally popular with the magazine 's subscribers : she regularly published fiction by David R. Bunch , for example , to mixed reviews from the readership . 
 = = = Reprint era = = = 
 Wrzos persuaded Cohen that both Amazing and Fantastic should carry a new story in every issue , rather than running nothing but reprints ; Goldsmith had left a backlog of unpublished stories , and Wrzos was able to stretch these out for some time . One such story was Fritz Leiber 's " Stardock " , another Fafhrd and Gray Mouser story , which appeared in the September 1965 issue ; it was subsequently nominated for a Hugo Award . The reprints were well received by the fans , because Wrzos was able to find good quality stories that were unavailable except in the original magazines , meaning that to many of Fantastic 's readers they were fresh material . Wrzos also reprinted " The People of the Black Circle " , a Robert E. Howard story from Weird Tales , in 1967 , when Howard 's Conan stories were becoming popular . 
 In addition to the backlog of new stories from the Ziff @-@ Davis era , Wrzos was able to acquire some new material . He was especially glad to acquire " For a Breath I Tarry " , by Roger Zelazny ; however , he had to wait for Cohen 's approval for his acquisitions . Cohen , perhaps uncertain because of the story 's originality , delayed until it appeared in the British magazine New Worlds before agreeing to publish it . Wrzos commented years later that he would " never forgive him [ Cohen ] his timidity at that time " . Wrzos bought Doris <unk> 's first story , " Rocket to Gehenna " , and was the first editor to acquire a story by Dean Koontz . He had to work with Koontz to improve it , and the delay this caused , in addition to the slow publishing schedule for new material , meant that Koontz appeared in print with " Soft Come the Dragons " , in the August 1967 Fantasy & Science Fiction , before " A Darkness in My Soul " appeared in the January 1968 Fantastic . 
 After Wrzos 's departure , Harrison and Malzberg had little opportunity to reshape the magazine as between them they only took responsibility for a handful of issues before Ted White took over . However , Harrison did print James Tiptree 's first sale , " Fault " , in the August 1968 issue ; again the slow schedule meant that this was not Tiptree 's first appearance in print . Harrison added a science column by Leon Stover , but was unable to change Cohen 's position on the reprints , and so could not print much new fiction . When Malzberg took over from Harrison he published John Sladek , Thomas M. Disch , and James Sallis , all of whom were associated with New Wave science fiction , but his tenure was too short for him to have a significant impact on the magazine . 
 = = = White and Mavor = = = 
 White was only able to offer his writers one cent per word , which was substantially lower than the leading magazines in the field — Analog Science Fiction and Fact paid five cents , and Galaxy and Fantasy & Science Fiction paid three . Most stories would only be submitted to White once the higher @-@ paying markets had rejected them , but among the rejects White was sometimes able to find experimental material that he liked . For example , Piers Anthony had been unable to sell an early fantasy novel , Hasan ; White saw a review of the manuscript and promptly acquired it for Fantastic , where it was serialized starting in the December 1969 issue . White also took care to establish relationships with newer writers . White bought Gordon Eklund 's first story , " Dear Aunt Annie " , it appeared in the April 1970 issue and was nominated for a Nebula award . Eklund was unwilling to become a full @-@ time writer , despite this success , because of the financial risks , so White agreed to buy anything Eklund wrote , on condition that Eklund himself believed it was a good story . The result was that much of Eklund 's fiction appeared in Amazing and Fantastic over the next few years . In addition to experimental work , White was able to obtain material by some of the leading sf writers of the day , including Brian Aldiss and John Brunner . White also acquired some early work by writers who became better known in other fields : Roger Ebert sold two stories in the early 1970s to Fantastic ; the first , " After the Last Mass " , appeared in the February 1972 issue ; and in 1975 White bought Ian McEwan 's second story , " Solid Geometry " . It was included in First Love , Last Rites , McEwan 's first short story collection , which won the Somerset Maugham Award in 1976 . 
 White had been an active science fiction fan before he became professionally involved in the field , and although he estimated that only 1 in 30 readers were active sf fans , he tried to use this fan base to help by urging the readership to give him feedback and to help with distribution by checking local newsstands for the magazines . White wanted to introduce established artists from outside the sf field , such as Jeff Jones , Vaughn Bodé , and Steve Hickman ; however , the company was saddled with cheap artwork acquired from European magazines to be used for the cover and he was instructed to make use of them . He commissioned a comic strip from Vaughn Bodé , but was outbid by Judy @-@ Lynn Benjamin at Galaxy ; he subsequently told his readers that he 'd signed up Bodé again for interior artwork , but this never materialized . Instead a four @-@ page comic strip by Jay Kinney appeared in December 1970 ; a second strip , by Art Spiegelman , was planned , but never published . Eventually White was allowed to commission original cover art ; he published early work by Mike Hinge , and Mike Kaluta made his first professional sale to Fantastic . He tried to hire Hinge as art director , but this fell through and White filled the role himself , sometimes using the pseudonym " J. Edwards " . 
 Because of poor distribution , Fantastic was never able to benefit from the increasing popularity of the fantasy genre , though White was able to publish several stories by well @-@ known writers in the field , including a sword and sorcery novella by Dean R. Koontz , which appeared in the October 1970 issue , and an Elric story by Michael Moorcock in February 1972 . A revival of Robert E. Howard 's character Conan , in stories by L. Sprague de Camp and Lin Carter , was successful at increasing sales ; the first of these stories appeared in August 1972 , and White reported that sales of that issue were higher than for any other issue of Amazing or Fantastic that year . Each Conan story , according to White , increased sales of that issue by 10 @,@ 000 copies . White also published several of Fritz Leiber 's Fafhrd and the Gray Mouser stories , and added " Sword and Sorcery " to the cover in 1975 . In the same year a companion magazine , Sword & Sorcery Annual , was launched , but the first issue was the only one to appear . 
 The quality of the magazine remained high even as the financial stress was mounting in the late 1970s . White acquired cover artwork by Stephen Fabian and Douglas Beekman , and stories by some of the new generation of sf writers , such as George R. R. Martin and Charles Sheffield . White departed in November 1978 , but the first issue of Fantastic under Elinor Mavor 's editorial control was April 1979 . Because White had returned unsold stories she had very little to work with and was forced to fill the magazine with reprints . This led to renewed conflict with the sf community , which she did her best to defuse . At a convention in 1979 she met Harlan Ellison , who complained about the reprint policy ; she explained that it was temporary and was able to get him to agree to contribute stories , publishing two pieces by him in Amazing over the next three years . The January 1980 issue of Fantastic ( Mavor 's fourth issue ) was the last to contain reprinted stories . Once the reprints had been phased out , Mavor was able to find new writers to work with , including Brad <unk> and John E. Stith , both of whom sold their first stories to Fantastic . The last year of Fantastic showed " a steady improvement in content " , according to Mike Ashley , who cites in particular Daemon , a serialized graphic story , illustrated by Stephen Fabian . However , at the end of 1980 Fantastic 's independent existence ceased , and it was merged with Amazing . 
 = = Publication details = = 
 = = = Editors = = = 
 The list below gives the person who was acting as editor . In some cases , such as at the start of Cele Goldsmith 's stint , the official editor was not the same person ; details are given above . 
 Howard Browne ( Summer 1952 – August 1956 ) . 
 Paul Fairman ( October 1956 – November 1958 ) . 
 Cele Goldsmith ( December 1958 – June 1965 ) . Goldsmith used her married name , Cele G. Lalli , from July 1964 . 
 Joseph Ross ( September 1965 – November 1967 ) . 
 Harry Harrison ( January 1968 – October 1968 ) . 
 Barry N. Malzberg ( December 1968 – April 1969 ) . 
 Ted White ( June 1969 – January 1979 ) 
 Elinor Mavor ( April 1979 – October 1980 ) 
 = = = Other bibliographic details = = = 
 The title changed multiple times , and was frequently inconsistently given between the cover , spine , indicia , and masthead . 
 The following table shows which issues appeared from which publisher . 
 A British edition published by Thorpe & Porter ran for eight bimonthly issues from December 1953 to February 1955 ; the issues were not dated on the cover . These correspond to the US issues from September / October 1953 to December 1954 , and were numbered volume 1 , numbers 1 through 8 . 
 Fantastic was digest @-@ sized throughout its life . The page count began at 160 but dropped to 144 with the September / October 1953 issue , and then again to 128 pages with the very next issue , November / December 1953 . The July 1960 issue had 144 pages , but apart from that one issue the page count stayed at 128 until September 1965 , when it increased to 160 . In January 1968 it went back down to 144 pages , and it dropped to 128 pages from February 1971 through the end of its run . The first issue was priced at 35 cents ; thereafter the price went up as follows : 50 cents in May 1963 , 60 cents in December 1969 , 75 cents in July 1974 , $ 1 @.@ 00 in October 1975 , $ 1 @.@ 25 in April 1978 , and finally $ 1 @.@ 50 from April 1979 until the last issue . 
 = = = Derivative anthologies = = = 
 Three anthologies of stories from Fantastic have been published . Note that Time Untamed contains stories that were published in Fantastic during its reprint years , but which did not necessarily first appear there . 
 = Mountain of Madness = 
 " Mountain of Madness " is the twelfth episode of The Simpsons ' eighth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 2 , 1997 . In the episode , Mr. Burns tries to encourage more cooperation among his employees and forces the workers of Springfield Nuclear Power Plant to go for a team @-@ building hike in the mountains . Burns and Homer are paired together and trapped in a cabin that gets buried by multiple avalanches . 
 " Mountain of Madness " was directed by Mark Kirkland and written by John Swartzwelder . The script underwent many rewrites and the story was completely rewritten . Several new designs and backgrounds had to be created for the wilderness scenes . The episode received mostly positive reviews . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mr. Burns decides to hold a good old @-@ fashioned fire drill in order to excite things up around the plant . Upon hearing the bells ring , the employees panic and fail to clear the plant within 15 minutes . Outraged , Burns declares that everyone will be subjected to a teamwork competition at Mt . Useful . Homer brings his family to the mountain , not realizing it was only for employees , so he leaves them in the visitor center . Homer ends up being partnered with Burns while Smithers has to journey on his own , fuming that he was not paired with his boss . The object of this competition is to reach a cabin at the top of the mountain ; the last team to arrive will be fired . 
 Along the way , Burns talks Homer into cheating and they use a snowmobile ( which Burns refers to as a " horseless sleigh " ) to reach the cabin . Arriving several hours early , they settle down in the comfortable surroundings . Burns and Homer quickly become friends . However , while clinking their champagne glasses , they inadvertently cause an avalanche that buries the entire cabin . Despite Burns 's attempt to operate a telegraph machine or Homer 's attempt to dig a tunnel through the snow , they remain trapped . The pair attempt further tunneling escapes , but each time they speak , they cause more avalanches that place even more snow between them and freedom . Meanwhile , Bart and Lisa meet Smithers and offer to help him proceed to the cabin , though they cause more stalling than helping . 
 Back in the cabin , Burns and Homer are beset by cabin fever . They build snowmen to pass the time ( though Burns insists they build real men out of snow ) and clothe them at the expense of their own warmth . The other employees reach what appears to be their destination ; however , it is actually a ranger station and they begin to realize that something bad has happened to their colleagues . In the cabin , Homer and Burns stare at each other 's eyes , filling their minds with paranoia . They are both driven mad and attempt to kill each other . After a vicious struggle , Burns ignites the cabin 's propane tank , launching the building out of the snow and propelling it toward the horrified onlookers . Once it comes to a halt , Mr. Burns reminds everyone of the contest , and all the workers hurry inside . 
 Lenny is the last person in the cabin , and is told he is fired . Burns is informed the completion time of the competition has set a new record , and then decides that no one will be fired after all ( although Lenny , who is outside and falls into a crevasse , does not know that ) . The episode ends with Mr. Burns and Homer alternately laughing and glaring at each other . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Mountain of Madness " was written by John Swartzwelder , although the script underwent many rewrites . According to Josh Weinstein , " a Swartzwelder script is like a finely tooled crazy German machine and if you have the wrong engineers try to fix it , it blows up . And that 's the thing , ' cause it had great jokes but we sort of changed the story and went through a bunch of drafts . " The story was completely rewritten and as a result , the plot became odder and quirkier with the scenes of paranoia deriving from this . The original script was " really crazy " but a lot of the more insane material was cut . However , most of the rewrites were done during the script @-@ writing and did not require any major animation changes . One change was the ending , which was added after the animatic . The episode features several pairings of established characters who had previously interacted little , such as Smithers with Bart and Lisa . Weinstein feels that this was one of the first episodes to really feature the duo of Lenny Leonard and Carl Carlson and developed them more . 
 The episode was directed by Mark Kirkland and a lot of new designs and backgrounds had to be created for the wilderness scenes . The backgrounds were designed by animator Debbie Silver . The design of the forest ranger was based on then @-@ Vice President Al Gore . In the episode , Marge watches an old film which includes a comment from naturalist John Muir . The impression of Muir was done by Dan Castellaneta , who originally based the voice on an impersonator he met at Yosemite National Park . However , the producers asked him to make the voice older and crazier . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Mountain of Madness " finished 38 in ratings for the week of February 2 – 9 , 1997 , with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 8 , equivalent to approximately 8 @.@ 5 million viewing households . It was the second @-@ highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following King of the Hill . Since airing , the episode has received mostly positive reviews from television critics . The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , called it " an inventive episode , with several memorable moments " . Tim Raynor of <unk> said there are some " good , <unk> moments to say the least for this witty episode " . DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson called the episode " a good show " and praised it for the " snowy setting [ that ] allows the other characters to expand as well " . 
 = Descent : FreeSpace – The Great War = 
 Descent : FreeSpace – The Great War is a 1998 space combat simulation IBM PC compatible computer game developed by Volition , Inc. when it was split off from Parallax Software . Published by Interplay Entertainment , it is also known as Conflict : FreeSpace – The Great War in Europe . In 2001 , it was ported to the Amiga platform as FreeSpace : The Great War by Hyperion Entertainment . 
 The story places the player in the role of a human pilot in the Galactic Terran Alliance , as it engages in war with the alien Parliamentary Vasudan Empire . This war is interrupted by the appearance of the enigmatic and militant Shivans , who begin slaughtering Terrans and Vasudans alike . Putting aside their differences , the Terrans and Vasudans form an alliance , and the player is assigned to missions to stop the Shivans ' genocidal advance . The player pilots a starfighter , and alongside competent AI wingmen , completes these missions to determine the fate of two races . Important battles in the story feature capital ships , which dwarf the fighters piloted by the player , and explode spectacularly when destroyed . 
 Descent : FreeSpace was well received as a single @-@ player space simulation that integrated all the desired features of its genre , but its multiplayer mode was plagued by lag and inaccurate tracking of statistics . Its expansion , Silent Threat , which comprised additional missions , was also released in 1998 . Its sequel , FreeSpace 2 , was released to critical acclaim a year later in 1999 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Descent : FreeSpace – The Great War puts the player in a starfighter flying out on missions to investigate , protect , or destroy certain targets . Some have categorized it as a flight simulator , since it has more controls and commands than a typical arcade game . However , its flight model is simple , akin to that of the game TIE Fighter , though it incorporates some elements of Newtonian physics such as precise collision physics . In the single @-@ player mode , the player flies through a series of missions in a campaign . 
 Before flying a mission , the player goes through a briefing , which details relevant information and objectives . Ships and weapons are selected following the briefing , adding an element of strategy to the missions . When flying , the game 's perspective is a first @-@ person view from within the cockpit , but the only visible interface is that of the head @-@ up display ( HUD ) . The player can customize the HUD by changing its color , or by toggling the information displays . 
 Missions must be successfully completed for the campaign to advance . However , not all objectives must be met for a mission to be considered successful . Results of a mission can affect later missions ; for example , an enemy capital ship allowed to flee in a particular mission may return in a later mission . Completed missions can be replayed on the in @-@ game mission simulator . Training missions are mixed in with the regular missions ( and can be skipped ) , gradually introducing players to advanced commands and techniques as the missions become more sophisticated . The game has been said to be easily playable with the keyboard alone , or together with a mouse or joystick . 
 The game features multiplayer matches online or over a local area network ( LAN ) . Players can either band together to complete cooperative missions , or split up into teams to battle against one another . Voice chat is available , although reviewers advised it to be used only on broadband or LAN . Online gameplay was free over the services offered by Parallax Online , which also kept track of players ' statistics and rankings . 
 = = Setting = = 
 FreeSpace takes place in the 24th century when humanity has discovered interstellar travel by using interstellar subspace jump nodes which function the same way as wormholes , and have spread among the stars as the Galactic Terran Alliance ( GTA ) . The player character , a pilot in the GTA navy , is thrust into the game during the fourteenth year of war ( 2335 ) between the GTA and the alien Parliamentary Vasudan Empire ( PVE ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story begins in 2335 , 14 years after the start of the Terran – Vasudan war . A lone GTA pilot , Lt. Ash , calls out for aid while being chased by ships belonging to an unknown race of aliens , who attacked both the GTA and PVE without warning , yet despite his best efforts to alert anyone in the GTA , the unknown ships jump in and promptly destroy his fighter and the nearby GTA space station , Riviera . 
 GTA command tries to cover up the incident as nothing more than an unsubstantiated rumor , as the player character is assigned as a fighter pilot to the Terran Orion @-@ class destroyer Galatea . The player is tasked with engaging Vasudan forces in the contested Antares , <unk> , Beta Cygni and Betelgeuse systems . During these engagements between the GTA and PVE , the prototype of the Terran " Avenger " cannon is stolen by a rogue Terran officer , Lt. Alexander McCarthy , who promptly attempts to defect to the Vasudans . The player subdues McCarthy but as they attempt to return the prototypes to the GTA , the same unknown ships attack again . The unknowns ' attacks intensify and with their energy shielding technology making their fighters virtually invincible , the GTA and PVE are forced into a ceasefire , as the two sides attempt to reverse @-@ engineer the shield technology for their own purposes as well as adapting their pre @-@ existing weapons to be more effective against the shields . 
 This new species is dubbed " Shivans " , and the GTA has squadrons embark on several missions , alongside the Vasudans as allies , to catch up with the Shivans ' technological superiority by capturing Shivan supply depots , acquiring Shivan shield generator technology in the process , while fending off a Vasudan death cult , the Hammer of Light , who worship the Shivans and refuses to accept the peace between the GTA and PVE . During operations , the GTA @-@ PVE alliance manage to capture a Shivan cruiser , the SC Taranis . But its capture is only celebrated for a short time , as a Shivan warship , a super @-@ destroyer dubbed the Lucifer , suddenly appears , destroying the captured Taranis and many other allied ships , while spearheading an invasion into the Vasudan systems and Terran outer colonies . To the shock of the alliance , they find that the Lucifer utilizes a powerful shield that makes it immune to all conventional weaponry . While continuing to do what is possible to stop the Shivans and eliminate the Hammer of Light , a Shivan fighter , dubbed a Dragon , is captured , and used to scan vessels entering a Vasudan controlled system , providing much intel on the super @-@ destroyer . Yet despite all efforts , the GTA fail to stop the Lucifer 's journey to the Vasudan 's homeworld , losing the GTD Galatea in the process . The Lucifer enters the Vasudan home system and soon bombards the species ' homeworld into oblivion , killing 4 billion Vasudans . 
 However a small Vasudan refugee fleet that managed to escape , sends out a transmission revealing that they were forced to land on an uncharted planet in the Altair system where they had discover the remnants of an extinct alien civilization dubbed " the Ancients " which were destroyed by the Shivans long ago ; their backstory is told through cutscenes at various points in the game . The Vasudans discover that the Ancients knew how to penetrate the Lucifer 's shields as well as how to track ships travelling through subspace . Learning that shield systems do not work in subspace , but that the Ancients could not capitalize on this and were wiped out , the GTA and PVE launch a desperate assault on the Lucifer . 
 As the Lucifer begins heading for Earth through a jump node between the Sol and Delta Serpentis systems , squadrons of fighters and bombers follow it into subspace and manage to destroy the super @-@ destroyer while its shields are offline , by hitting its reactors . While the plan works , the destruction of the Lucifer in the jump node causes it to collapse , along with the other jump nodes in the system , cutting Sol off from the rest of the Terran colonies . 
 The expansion Silent Threat continues the story in a straightforward manner . The player joins the Galactic Terran Intelligence ( GTI ) while the Terran – Vasudan alliance is in a fragile state , and is told to preserve the alliance by ruthlessly pacifying rebellious elements and fending off remnants of the Shivan forces . However , it all turns out to be a cover @-@ up , as the GTI is plotting a coup , and has constructed a Terran – Shivan hybrid <unk> of their own , the GTD Hades , which the player must destroy . 
 = = Development = = 
 FreeSpace was Volition 's first project after the split from Parallax Software , which also spawned Outrage Entertainment . It is not part of the canon of the Descent computer game series , and contained none of its ideas and only small portions of its code . It was only prefixed with Descent to avoid trademark issues with <unk> Corporation 's " FreeSpace " , a disk compression utility . Volition also used the term " FreeSpace " in the game to initially describe what became later known as subspace . The game was conceived by Adam Pletcher , with all the features of space simulator games his team had found to be fun . The games TIE Fighter and Wing Commander were their primary inspirations , and those influences made their way into the game 's flight model , along with the influence of historical WWII dogfights . Themes from the fiction of Star Wars , Space : Above and Beyond , and Ender 's Game form a part in shaping the background and story of the FreeSpace world . The chaotic battles between masses of ships commonly found in science @-@ fiction anime became one of the features of FreeSpace . 
 Begun with a crew of five , the project grew to a staff of 17 . The game 's code was built from scratch . Most of the software modules were interlinked with each other , increasing the job 's complexity and difficulty . The code incorporated small portions of Descent 's code for specific functions . Kulas , who had worked on several versions of Flight Simulator and Descent , brought his experience into the game 's artificial intelligence ( AI ) . The game 's difficulty levels are based on advancing the enemy AI , rather than simply increasing damage and " hit points " of enemies . Some realism was incorporated into the game 's physics , such that an impact on one part of a starfighter 's body will send it spinning appropriately , unlike sphere @-@ based collision detection , in which an impact would simply ' push ' the starfighter in a particular direction . Due to time and budget constraints , many of the initially planned cutscenes and stories were cut from the final product . Examples of such cuts include a campaign path where the Terran @-@ Vasudan alliance goes on a retreat , and scenes of racial tension within the alliance . Despite the promise of a deathmatch mode for multiplayer , it was cut from the final product . The expansion Silent Threat also suffered the same fate of cuts due to budgetary and time concerns . 
 Apogee Software announced on December 12 , 1997 that they would be exclusively publishing FreeSpace for the first three months before handing the publishing rights back to Interplay Entertainment . This was part of their agreement with Interplay for the latter 's purchase of the rights to Descent , and Apogee decided to release FreeSpace as shareware , with themselves as the merchant of the registered version . Interplay , however , bought the full rights to FreeSpace from Apogee in late April , 1998 , keeping the ownership of the game solely to themselves . 
 Volition aimed for a quality release , and promised to deliver a product without major bugs . Minor bugs would be fixed in a prompt manner . The shipped game , however , had deficiencies admitted by the team , such as problems with the multiplayer code , and a few design issues . The game underwent four patches , which resolved most of the bugs , and improved the multiplayer performance . Complaints about an online mission giving unfair scores led to Volition removing the mission from scoring play . Another patch allowed EAX capability to be enabled for Creative Sound Blaster sound cards . Interplay played its part in drumming up the community 's interest by holding contests , and expanding material for the FreeSpace universe . Meanwhile , Volition created official star maps , and released Vasudan voice clips and story development notes . Interplay hired science @-@ fiction writers such as Fred <unk> , Simon Hawke , and Jeff Grubb to write weekly FreeSpace stories for two months . Preparing for Silent Threat 's release , Interplay held a contest from July 28 to August 25 , 1998 , in which the submitted fan @-@ designed missions could win their authors prizes such as free copies of Silent Threat , FreeSpace apparel , and gaming hardware . Entries were judged by a panel from PC Gamer , and qualified entries constituted half of the missions in Silent Threat . 
 On December 14 , 1999 , Hyperion Entertainment announced their acquisition of the license to port FreeSpace to the Amiga system . The publisher was changed to <unk> & Partner Computer on October 18 , 2001 . Despite the game 's official release being announced for December 2001 , the approval to do so could only be gotten on January 7 , 2002 . The game was shipped without a printed manual , but had additional German and French language support . Hyperion had stated they would port over Silent Threat if the FreeSpace port sold well . To date , Silent Threat has yet to be ported over to the Amiga platform . 
 = = Reception = = 
 FreeSpace — which was placed 20th in PC Gamer UK 's 1999 Top 100 Awards — was frequently compared to Wing Commander : Prophecy and X @-@ Wing vs. TIE Fighter in its reviews , and stood up well against them . It has been said to be a combination of the two games , possessing the better qualities of each ; the plot is fairly epic , but the player is still just a pilot caught up in it all , fighting amongst fleets of starships . As the game took inspiration from space simulation classics and offered comparatively little of its own innovation , it was called unoriginal by a few reviewers . 
 Most reviewers glossed over the game 's story , but a few found it lacking the depth needed to captivate the player . Some suggested that the game would have been better if the player had a greater role in controlling the outcome of the story . Without this impetus , these reviewers found themselves simply playing a " very sweet looking arcade title " , and felt detached from their wingmen and environment . This feeling was made worse in Silent Threat with its " cold and inhuman " briefings and non @-@ player characters . 
 Several reviewers praised FreeSpace 's graphics , claiming asteroids are realistically rendered against softly glowing nebulae , while galaxies and stars of varying colors lay in the background . Others felt differently , stating the 3D effects were less spectacular than those of the software rendered version , the nebulae were unconvincing , and the ships ' textures were blurry and lacking detail . However , reviewers unanimously agreed the explosions in FreeSpace were the most spectacular they had ever seen , and were impressed with the many small details of capital ships breaking up . Sharky Extreme was dismayed by the game 's inability to go beyond 640x480 screen size . The game 's AI also received praise from reviewers , as the player 's wingmen were competent on their own and could be trusted with orders , even to the extent of co @-@ ordinating attacks on capital ships . Likewise , the player 's enemies acted in concert with each other to achieve their squadron 's objectives . 
 Despite one reviewer 's glowing praise for the FreeSpace 's online multiplayer over cable modems , the majority at that time were on dial @-@ up access and roundly condemned the online multiplayer mode . The chief complaint was lag . GameSpot 's <unk> was amazed the game dared to advertise as being able to support 16 players online when it could not even support two players on <unk> modems . Combatsim.com 's Fitzgerald called the multiplayer " bug ridden " after experiencing many of his shots not registering hits or kills on enemy ships after over 40 minutes of play ; all of it due to lag . Other reviewers found their situations similar with their guns only firing seconds after depressing the trigger , and their ships randomly jumping over the playing area . 
 Silent Threat was judged to be a decent but uninspired add @-@ on . The campaign missions were either standard escort or destroy missions , and offered no new equipment which were unable to compete against the older equipment . The stand @-@ alone missions , however , were toasted for the way they were conceived . The contest @-@ winning entries gave breadth to the game 's variety of missions . This was made possible with the free editor FreeSpace Editor , or <unk> for short . With the ability to import personal audio and 3D animation files , the editor allows users the same capability as Volition to create their own missions . The possibilities offered by the editor resulted in a call to the community to stop the flood of " Battle of Endor " -type missions , and to design missions following Volition 's Jason <unk> ' Zen philosophy of accomplishing more with less . 
 = = See Also = = 
 <unk> 2 
 = Ontario Highway 72 = 
 King 's Highway 72 , commonly referred to as Highway 72 , is a provincially maintained highway in the northern half of the Canadian province of Ontario . The highway connects Highway 17 in Dinorwic with the town of Sioux Lookout , where there are connections with Highway 516 towards Savant Lake and Highway 642 towards Silver Dollar . 
 Highway 72 was built as a trunk route by 1920 , and became a provincial highway in 1937 . It has remained largely unchanged since then , aside from the reconstruction and realignment of the Frog Rapids bridge , and the renumbering of the fork towards Hudson as Highway 664 . The length of the highway is 68 @.@ 5 km ( 42 @.@ 6 mi ) , the entirety of which is situated in Kenora District . There are no significant settlements between its endpoints . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Highway 72 is a 68 @.@ 5 km ( 42 @.@ 6 mi ) route which serves to connect Sioux Lookout with the Trans @-@ Canada Highway . The route begins at Highway 17 , on the western edge of Dinorwic . From there it follows an old routing of Highway 17 along the northern edge of the village , but eventually turns to the north into the wilderness . Between this point and south of the Frog Rapids Narrows , where Highway 664 intersects the route , the highways passes through a remote forested region dotted with lakes and muskeg ; there is almost no human habitation . After crossing the Frog Rapids Narrows , the highway enters Sioux Lookout . It zig @-@ zags through the town , crossing the old Grand Trunk Railroad , now a Canadian National Railway line , next to a large rail depot . It exits Sioux Narrows , ending at an intersection with the Ed <unk> Bypass , Highway 516 and Highway 642 just east of the town . 
 = = History = = 
 Sioux Lookout and Hudson were both originally accessible only by rail and water when they were established as stops on the Grand Trunk Railway shortly after 1900 ; roads would not reach the remote area until 1920 . The road connecting Sioux Lookout and Hudson with the Ignace – Dryden Road was initially under the upkeep of the Department of Northern Development . On April 1 , 1937 , that department was merged into the Department of Highways ( DHO ) , after which the provincial highway network was expanded into northern Ontario . 
 Shortly after the merger , the DHO began to assume highways throughout northern Ontario . On October 6 , 1937 , Highway 72 was established , connecting Highway 17 with both Sioux Lookout and Hudson . On the 1938 – 39 Official Ontario Road Map , the distance from Dinorwic to Sioux Lookout is listed as 48 @.@ 0 miles ( 77 @.@ 2 km ) , and from Dinorwic to Hudson as 53 @.@ 0 miles ( 85 @.@ 3 km ) . This routing remained in place until at least 1953 . By 1954 , however , the branch leading to Hudson was renumbered as Highway 116 . Highway 72 has , aside from minor realignments , remained unchanged since then . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The following table lists the major junctions along Highway 72 , as noted by the Ministry of Transportation of Ontario . The entire route is located in Kenora District . 
 = Croatia – Serbia border dispute = 
 The Croatia – Serbia border dispute refers to differing views held by Croatia and Serbia regarding their border in the area of the Danube River . While Serbia holds the opinion that the thalweg of the Danube valley and the centerline of the river represents the international border between the two countries , Croatia disagrees and claims that the international border lies along the boundaries of the cadastral municipalities located along the river — departing from the course at several points along a 140 @-@ kilometre ( 87 mi ) section . The cadastre @-@ based boundary reflects the course of the Danube which existed in the 19th century , before meandering and hydraulic engineering works altered its course . The area size of the territory in dispute is reported variously , up to 140 square kilometres ( 54 square miles ) . 
 The dispute first arose in 1947 , but was left unresolved during the existence of the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia . It became a contentious issue after the breakup of Yugoslavia . Particular prominence was given to the dispute at the time of Croatia 's accession to the European Union . As of September 2014 the dispute remains unresolved , and the line of control mostly corresponds to Serbia 's claim . 
 = = Territorial claims = = 
 The Croatia – Serbia border dispute entails competing claims regarding the border at several points along the Danube River valley shared by the two countries . The disputed areas are located along a 140 @-@ kilometre ( 87 mi ) portion of the course , out of 188 @-@ kilometre ( 117 mi ) of the river course in the area . In that area , the border is defined differently by the neighbouring countries — either as following the course of the Danube , as claimed by Serbia , or following a line tracing the borders of cadastral municipalities having seat in either of the two countries , as claimed by Croatia . The cadastre @-@ based boundary also traces the former riverbed of the Danube , which was changed by meandering and hydraulic engineering works in the 19th century , after the cadastre was established . The border dispute involves up to 140 square kilometres ( 54 square miles ) of territory . Other sources specify somewhat different figures , indicating a Croatian claim over 100 square kilometres ( 39 square miles ) on the eastern bank of the river , in Bačka , while saying that the cadastre @-@ based boundary leaves 10 to 30 square kilometres ( 3 @.@ 9 to 11 @.@ 6 square miles ) of territory on the western bank of the Danube , in Baranja to Serbia . Yet another estimate cites a total area of 100 square kilometres ( 39 square miles ) in dispute , 90 % of which is located on the eastern bank of the Danube , controlled by Serbia . 
 The bulk of the territory in dispute is in the vicinity of the town of Apatin , while the Island of Šarengrad and the Island of Vukovar are cited as particularly contentious parts of the dispute . Further disputed areas are located near the town of Bačka Palanka , and in the municipality of Sombor , at the tripoint of Croatia , Hungary and Serbia . Croatia claims that the cadastre @-@ based boundary was adopted by the Đilas Commission , set up in 1945 to determine the borders between federal constituents of Yugoslavia , while Serbia claims that the same commission identified the boundary as the course of the Danube in 1945 . In 1991 , the Arbitration Commission of the Peace Conference on Yugoslavia ruled that the border between federal units of Yugoslavia became inviolable international borders , without referring to locations of any specific claim or line . The opinion was rendered at the request of Serbia . Prior to the ruling , Serbia asserted that the borders were subject to change following the breakup of Yugoslavia and the independence of Croatia . Since the Croatian War of Independence , the line of control coincides with the Serbian claim . 
 On 28 July 2002 , warning shots were fired by a patrol boat of the Yugoslav Army at four boats carrying the prefect of Vukovar @-@ Srijem County and the mayors of Vukovar and Bačka Palanka , as well as several other civilians to Bačka Palanka . The incident took place approximately 800 metres ( 2 @,@ 600 feet ) away from Šarengrad Island . Shots were also fired at a Croatian patrol boat after it attempted to approach the vessel carrying the prefect and the mayor . There were no casualties , but the passengers and crew of the civilian boat were arrested . Four elderly individuals and four children were released immediately , while the rest were interviewed at a Yugoslav military barracks for two hours before being set free . Yugoslav foreign minister Goran <unk> expressed regret over the incident , but Croatian Prime Minister Ivica Račan stated that Croatia was not satisfied with the gesture . The Serbian Army withdrew from the border in October 2006 , turning control over to the Serbian police . 
 = = = Recent developments = = = 
 In early 2000 , Croatia and Serbia set up a commission tasked with determining the border , but in its first ten years it convened only once or twice . Since 2010 , the issue has gained increasing prominence in the disputing countries . Plans for construction of a port in Apatin , on a piece of territory claimed by Croatia , added fuel to the dispute . After years of inactivity the inter @-@ governmental commission established to identify and determine the border between Croatia and Serbia met in Zagreb in April 2010 , only to conclude that there was a difference of opinions on the matter . Later that month , the Serbian Radical Party ( SRS ) proposed a National Assembly resolution which would require that Serbian officials resolve the dispute in compliance with the Serbian claim . Months later , Radoslav Stojanović , a former legal representative of Serbia and Montenegro in the Bosnian Genocide Case and former ambassador to the Netherlands , likened the dispute to the Croatia – Slovenia border dispute in the Gulf of Piran . Stojanović said that the position held by Croatia in its dispute with Slovenia was favourable for Serbia and warned that Serbia might be in a disadvantageous position if Croatia joined the European Union ( EU ) before Serbia — which would allow it to impose its conditions to the process of accession of Serbia to the EU . 
 By 2011 , Serbian diplomats made several requests to the EU , asking it to pressure Croatia to resolve the dispute before Croatia 's accession to the union out of fear that it might follow the Slovene example and stall Serbian accession similar to the impasse between Croatia and Slovenia over their border disputes and the subsequent blockade of the Croatian EU accession negotiation process . The request was denied by the EU . Croatian President Ivo Josipović said that the dispute was the most contentious issue of Croatia – Serbia relations but added that it should not be difficult to resolve . In 2012 , Josipović stated that Croatia should not block Serbia 's EU accession over the issue and suggested that the dispute should be resolved through arbitration , which is considered to be an acceptable solution by both countries . In 2014 , the Croatian ambassador to Serbia reiterated Josipović 's stance from 2012 . On the other hand , Zoran Milanović , the Prime Minister of Croatia , said that the resolution of the border dispute would be Croatia 's condition placed before Serbia in its EU accession negotiations . 
 = = = = Vukovar Island Agreement = = = = 
 In 2006 , representatives of the city of Vukovar and the municipality of Bač , located on the bank opposite Vukovar , reached an agreement on use of the Vukovar Island as a recreational facility and beach . The island is accessible to organised transport by boats sailing from Vukovar . No border controls are involved in the process . By 2012 , visits to the island reached 150 @,@ 000 persons per year . 
 = = = = Liberland and other claims = = = = 
 In 2015 , <unk> <unk> from the Czech Party of Free Citizens proclaimed the micronation Liberland on what he said is land left unclaimed by both Croatia and Serbia . 
 Shortly after Liberland , another micronation project , the Kingdom of <unk> , was declared , eventually claiming the second largest pocket as their territory , founded in November 2014 Principality of Ongal claimed the all others pockets . The Croatian Ministry of Foreign and European Affairs has rejected these claims , stating that the differing border claims between Serbia and Croatia do not involve terra nullius , and are not subject to occupation by a third party . However , the Serbian Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated on 24 April 2015 that while Serbia does not consider " Liberland " to be an important matter , the " new state " does not impinge upon the Serbian border , which is delineated by the Danube River . 
 = = Evolution of the border = = 
 = = = Until 1922 = = = 
 The evolution of the Croatia – Serbia border began in 1699 with the Treaty of Karlowitz , transferring Slavonia and a portion of Syrmia from the Ottoman Empire to the Habsburg Monarchy at the conclusion of the Great Turkish War . The rest of Syrmia was transferred to the Habsburg Monarchy through the Treaty of Passarowitz in 1718 . The transferred territories were organised within the monarchy into the Kingdom of Slavonia , with its eastern border established at the Danube , and the defensive belt of Military Frontier stretching along the Sava River , governed directly from Vienna . 
 Subsequent territorial changes in the region included the proclamation of the short @-@ lived Serbian Vojvodina during the Hungarian Revolution of 1848 , which included Syrmia as its territory . A year later Serbian Vojvodina was abolished and replaced by the crown land of the Voivodeship of Serbia and Temes Banat , which ceded Syrmia back to the Kingdom of Slavonia . In 1868 , following the Croatian – Hungarian Settlement , the Kingdom of Slavonia was incorporated into the Kingdom of Croatia @-@ Slavonia , before the Slavonian Military Frontier was fully annexed to Croatia @-@ Slavonia in 1881 . At the end of World War I in 1918 , Croatia @-@ Slavonia became a part of the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes ( renamed Yugoslavia in 1929 ) , as did Bačka and Baranja , which were formed after the division of Hungarian Baranya and Bács @-@ Bodrog Counties along the " Clemenceau line " established through the Treaty of Trianon of 1920 . The territory of southern Baranja was ceded to the Kingdom of Serbs , Croats and Slovenes on the premise that it formed a natural hinterland of the city of Osijek . The territory south of the " Clemenceau line " was not distributed to any administrative divisions in existence before the whole of the country was reorganised administratively in 1922 . 
 = = = After 1945 = = = 
 The first general outline of the post @-@ 1945 borders of Croatia was made by the Anti @-@ Fascist Council for the National Liberation of Yugoslavia on 24 February 1945 . Some issues regarding the border , such as Baranja , were left unresolved . The newly established Autonomous Province of Vojvodina , a part of the Socialist Republic of Serbia since April 1945 , sought to establish its border with the Socialist Republic of Croatia along the Drava River , thus including Baranja , the Danube and along the Vukovar – Županja line . To counter the claims made by Vojvodina , Croatian authorities staked counterclaims in the areas of Vukovar , Vinkovci , Baranja and in the area of Sombor . 
 In order to settle the matter , the federal authorities set up a five @-@ member commission presided over by Milovan Đilas in June 1945 . The commission identified three sets of disputed territories . Those were the districts of Subotica , Sombor , Apatin and <unk> in Bačka , districts of Batina and Darda in Baranja , and districts of Vukovar , Šid and Ilok in Syrmia . The districts in Bačka were awarded to Vojvodina , while those in Baranja were awarded to Croatia , both primarily along ethnic lines . The commission also noted that if Yugoslavia managed to acquire the region of Baja from Hungary , the decision regarding Bačka would be reviewed . The district of Vukovar was also awarded to Croatia , while Ilok and Šid were assigned to Vojvodina . In case of Ilok , the decision was specified to be provisional until authorities are consolidated on either side of the boundary , when the issue would be reexamined . 
 Subsequently , the Serbian Parliament enacted a law establishing Vojvodina 's borders . It referred to the boundary proposed by the Đilas commission explicitly noting that it was temporary . The law noted that the border follows the Danube from the Hungarian border to Ilok , crosses the Danube leaving Ilok , Šarengrad and <unk> in Croatia then moves south and leaves the cadastral municipalities of <unk> , Lovas , Tovarnik , <unk> , <unk> , Lipovac , <unk> and Jamena in Croatia , and everything east of the line in Vojvodina . The awarding of Ilok to Croatia was a departure from the findings of Đilas commission and it was based on a referendum held in the town on the matter in 1945 or 1946 , when its population voted to be added to Croatia . 
 = = = Start of the dispute = = = 
 In 1947 , Vojvodina 's Ministry of Agriculture complained to Serbia 's Ministry of Forestry that the authorities in Vukovar refused to hand over four river islands , and then to Croatia 's Ministry of Forestry regarding the same matter , asking for assistance . After Croatia refused the request , the Serbian authorities turned to the federal government . The federal authorities advised resolving the matter through mutual agreement and said that Vojvodina 's interpretation of the law on its borders — that the border runs along thalweg of the Danube valley , i.e. along the river 's midpoint — is erroneous because the law does not apply such wording . In a letter dated 18 April 1947 , Yugoslav authorities said that the disputed river islands were the territory of Vukovar district and that the territory could not be transferred to Vojvodina before the border was defined otherwise . 
 By May 1947 , authorities in Vojvodina noted that there was a dispute between them and the authorities in Croatia regarding the interpretation of the position of the border along the Danube , and that the federal authorities , who were asked to mediate in the dispute , supported the position of Croatia . At the same time , Vojvodina requested that Croatia return the territories on the right bank of the Danube that had previously been ceded to it ( Varoš @-@ Viza and Mala <unk> ) . While in the Yugoslav framework , the issue received little further attention as its resolution was discouraged by the federal authorities , and because the area involved had limited economic value , was uninhabited and frequently flooded . 
 By 1948 , Croatia and Serbia agreed on two modifications of the border — the village of <unk> was transferred to Croatia , while Jamena was turned over to Vojvodina . No further changes to the border were agreed upon . A map of the area issued by the Yugoslav People 's Army Military @-@ Geographic Institute in 1967 depicts the border along the cadastre @-@ based boundary , corresponding to the Croatian claim in the dispute . 
 = = External link = = 
 Media related to Principality of Ongal at Wikimedia Commons 
 = The Boat Race 1958 = 
 The 104th Boat Race took place on 5 April 1958 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . The race was umpired by former Cambridge rower Kenneth Payne and featured the first cox to follow his father in steering one of the boats . The reigning champions Cambridge won by three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths in a time of 18 minutes 15 seconds , the third @-@ fastest winning time in history , and took the overall record to 58 – 45 in their favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . First held in 1829 , the race takes place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities and followed throughout the United Kingdom and broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1957 race by two lengths , and led overall with 57 victories to Oxford 's 45 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge were coached by J. R. F. Best , James Crowden ( who rowed twice for Cambridge , in the 1951 and 1952 races ) , Charles Lloyd ( a three @-@ time Blue , rowing in the 1949 , 1950 and 1951 races ) , J. R. Owen ( who rowed in the 1959 and 1960 races ) and Harold Rickett ( three @-@ time Blue between 1930 and 1932 ) . Oxford 's coaches were Hugh " Jumbo " Edwards ( who rowed for Oxford in the 1926 and 1930 races ) , J. H. Page , C. F. Porter and L. A. F. Stokes ( who rowed in the 1951 and 1952 races . The race was umpired for the sixth time by the former British Olympian Kenneth Payne , who had rowed for Cambridge in the 1932 and 1934 races . 
 In the buildup to the race , Cambridge 's P. D. Rickett was struck down by influenza for a week and was unable to train . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 13 st 3 lb ( 83 @.@ 7 kg ) , 3 pounds ( 1 @.@ 4 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford 's crew had two rowers with Boat Race experience , including stroke G. Sorrell ( who was rowing in his third race ) and number four S. F. A. Miskin . Cambridge saw a single participant return in number three J. A. Pitchford . Two of the participants in the race were registered as non @-@ British . Oxford 's number six , Rodd Rubin , hailed from America while Cambridge 's number five R. B. Ritchie was Australian . 
 Cambridge 's James Sulley became the first cox to follow in his father 's footsteps : A. L. " Jimmy " Sulley steered the Light Blues in the 1928 race . Peter Rickett , the Light Blues ' number six , also followed his father ( and coach for this year ) Harold , while R. B. Ritchie 's father A. B. Ritchie and R. D. Carver 's father H. R. Carver also rowed for Cambridge , in the 1922 and 1925 races respectively . Oxford 's stroke , David Edwards was the son of Hugh " Jumbo " Edwards who rowed in the 1930 race while P. D. Rickett 's father and coach Harold rowed in three races for Cambridge , from 1930 to 1932 . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge , who went into the race as favourites , won the toss and elected to start from the Surrey station , handing the Middlesex side of the river to Oxford . In conditions described in The Times as " wretched " with fog and rain , the race started at 1 : 30 p.m. Although Oxford out @-@ rated Cambridge , the Light Blues ' length of stroke saw them hold a three @-@ quarter length lead after the first minute . Continuing to pull away , Cambridge were clear by Beverley Brook , half a length clear by the time the crews passed Craven Steps and increased this to a length @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half by the Mile Post . 
 A spurt from Oxford at the Crab Tree pub made no impression on the lead . Oxford were still out @-@ rating by Cambridge three strokes per minute as they passed below Hammersmith Bridge , two lengths adrift of the Light Blues . By Chiswick Steps , the lead was three lengths where Cambridge saw off another spurt , with Oxford now rowing six strokes per minute faster than their opponents . Able to relax , Cambridge passed the finishing post three and a half lengths clear of Oxford in a time of 18 minutes 15 seconds , the third fastest winning time in the event 's history . It was Cambridge 's fourth consecutive victory and the fastest winning time since the 1948 race . A correspondent writing in The Times described the victory as a " great success " and attributed the win to Cambridge 's " uniformity , precision , and properly covered blades ... not to the brilliance of any individuals in the boat . " Jack Beresford , writing in The Observer , suggested that Cambridge 's crew was " as good as any since the war " but that while Oxford " rowed gallantly and never gave up " , their technique was inadequate . 
 = She : A History of Adventure = 
 She — subtitled A History of Adventure — is a novel by H. Rider Haggard ( 1856 – 1925 ) , first serialised in The Graphic magazine from October 1886 to January 1887 . She is one of the classics of imaginative literature , and one of the best @-@ selling books of all time , with over 100 million copies sold in 44 different languages as of 2013 . She was extraordinarily popular upon its release and has never been out of print . According to literary historian Andrew M. Stauffer , " She has always been Rider Haggard 's most popular and influential novel , challenged only by King Solomon 's Mines in this regard " . 
 The story is a first @-@ person narrative that follows the journey of Horace Holly and his ward Leo Vincey to a lost kingdom in the African interior . There they encounter a primitive race of natives and a mysterious white queen named Ayesha who reigns as the all @-@ powerful " She " , or " She @-@ who @-@ must @-@ be @-@ obeyed " . In this work , Rider Haggard developed the conventions of the Lost World subgenre , which many later authors emulated . 
 She is placed firmly in the imperialist literature of nineteenth @-@ century England , and inspired by Rider Haggard 's experiences of South Africa and British colonialism . The story expresses numerous racial and evolutionary conceptions of the late Victorians , especially notions of degeneration and racial decline prominent during the fin de siècle . In the figure of She , the novel notably explored themes of female authority and feminine behaviour . It has received praise and criticism alike for its representation of womanhood . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 A young Cambridge University professor , Horace Holly , is visited by a colleague , Vincey , who reveals that he will soon die . Vincey proceeds to tell Holly a fantastical tale of his family heritage . He charges Holly with the task of raising his young son , Leo ( whom he has never seen ) and gives Holly a locked iron box , with instructions that it is not to be opened until Leo turns 25 . Holly agrees , and indeed Vincey is found dead the next day . Holly raises the boy as his own ; when the box is opened on Leo 's 25th birthday they discover the ancient and mysterious " <unk> of Amenartas " , which seems to corroborate Leo 's father 's story . Holly , Leo and their servant , Job , follow instructions on the <unk> and travel to eastern Africa but are shipwrecked . They alone survive , together with their Arab captain , Mahomed ; after a perilous journey into an uncharted region of the African interior , they are captured by the savage Amahagger people . The adventurers learn that the natives are ruled by a fearsome white queen , who is worshiped as Hiya or " She @-@ who @-@ must @-@ be @-@ obeyed " . The Amahagger are curious about the white @-@ skinned interlopers , having been warned of their coming by the mysterious queen . 
 Billali , the chief elder of one of the Amahagger tribes , takes charge of the three men , introducing them to the ways of his people . One of the Amahagger maidens , Ustane , takes a liking to Leo and , by kissing him and embracing him publicly , weds him according to Amahagger customs . Leo , likewise , grows very fond of her . 
 Billali tells Holly that he needs to go and report the white men 's arrival to She . In his absence , some of the Amahagger become restless and seize Mahomed , intending to eat him as part of a ritual " hotpot " . Realising what is about to happen , Holly shoots several of the Amahagger , killing Mahomed in the process ; in the ensuing struggle Leo is gravely wounded , but Ustane saves his life by throwing herself onto his prostrate body to shield him from spears . All seems lost as the Amahagger resolve to kill Ustane along with the white men but Billali returns in the nick of time and declares that the three men are under the protection of She . Leo 's condition , however , worsens and he nears death as Ustane faithfully tends to him . 
 They are taken to the home of the queen , which lies near the ruins of the lost city of Kôr , a once mighty civilisation that predated the Egyptians . The queen and her retinue live under a dormant volcano in a series of catacombs built as tombs for the people of Kôr . There , Holly is presented to the queen , a white sorceress named Ayesha . Her beauty is so great that it enchants any man who beholds it . She , who is veiled and lies behind a partition , warns Holly that the power of her splendour arouses both desire and fear , but he is dubious . When she shows herself , however , Holly is enraptured and <unk> himself before her . Ayesha reveals that she has learned the secret of immortality and that she possesses other supernatural powers including the ability to read the minds of others , a form of <unk> and the ability to heal wounds and cure illness ; she is also revealed to have a tremendous knowledge of chemistry , but is notably unable to see into the future . She tells Holly that she has lived in the realm of Kôr for more than two millennia , awaiting the reincarnated return of her lover , Kallikrates ( whom she had slain in a fit of jealous rage ) . Later , when Holly inadvertently and secretly discovers Ayesha in her hidden chamber , he learns that she may have some degree of power to reanimate the dead . 
 The next evening She visits Leo to heal him . But upon seeing his face , she is stunned and declares him to be the reincarnation of Kallikrates . She saves him and becomes jealous of Ustane . The latter is ordered to leave Leo and never to set her eyes on him again . Ustane refuses , however , and Ayesha eventually strikes her dead with magic . Despite the murder of their friend , Holly and Leo cannot free themselves from the power of Ayesha 's beauty and Leo becomes bewitched . In explaining her history , Ayesha shows Leo the perfectly preserved body of Kallikrates , which she has kept with her , but she then dissolves the remains with a powerful acid , confident that Leo is indeed the reincarnation of her former lover . 
 In the climax of the novel , Ayesha takes the two men to see the Pillar of Fire , passing through the ruined city of Kôr into the heart of the ancient volcano . She is determined that Leo should bathe in the fire to become immortal and remain with her forever , and that together they can become the immortal and all @-@ powerful rulers of the world . After a perilous journey , they come to a great cavern , but at the last Leo doubts the safety of entering the flame . To allay his fears , Ayesha steps into the Spirit of Life , but with this second immersion , the life @-@ preserving power is lost and Ayesha begins to revert to her true age . Holly speculates that it may be that a second exposure undoes the effects of the previous or the Spirit of Life spews death on occasion . Before their eyes , Ayesha withers away in the fire , and her body shrinks . The sight is so shocking that Job dies in fright . Before dying , She tells Leo , " Forget me not . I shall come again ! " 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 Horace Holly – protagonist and narrator , Holly is a Cambridge man whose keen intellect and knowledge was developed to compensate for his ape @-@ like appearance . Holly knows a number of ancient languages , including Greek , Arabic , and Hebrew , which allow him to communicate with the Amahagger ( who speak a form of Arabic ) and She ( who knows all three languages ) . Holly 's interest in archaeology and the origins of civilisation lead him to explore the ruins of Kôr . 
 Leo Vincey – ward of Horace Holly , Leo is an attractive , physically active young English gentleman with a thick head of blond hair . He is the confidant of Holly and befriends Ustane . According to She , Leo resembles Kallikrates in appearance and is his reincarnation . 
 Ayesha – the title character of the novel , called Hiya by the native Amahagger , or " She " ( She @-@ who @-@ must @-@ be @-@ obeyed ) . Ayesha was born over 2 @,@ 000 years ago amongst the Arabs , mastering the lore of the ancients and becoming a great sorceress . Learning of the Pillar of Life in the African interior , she journeyed to the ruined kingdom of Kôr , feigning friendship with a hermit who was the keeper of the Flame that granted immortality . She bathed in the Pillar of Life 's fire . 
 Job – Holly 's trusted servant . Job is a working @-@ class man and highly suspicious and judgmental of non @-@ English peoples . He is also a devout Protestant . Of all the travellers , he is especially disgusted by the Amahagger and fearful of She . 
 Billali – an elder of one of the Amahagger tribes . 
 Ustane – an Amahagger maiden . She becomes romantically attached to Leo , caring for him when he is injured , acting as his protector , and defying She to stay with him . 
 Kallikrates – an ancient Greek , the husband of Amenartas , and ancestor of Leo . Two thousand years ago , he and Amenartas fled Egypt , seeking a haven in the African interior where they met Ayesha . There , She fell in love with him , promising to give him the secret of immortality if he would kill Amenartas . He refused , and , enraged , She struck him down . 
 Amenartas – an ancient Egyptian priestess and ancestress of the Vincey family . As a priestess of Isis , she was protected from the power of She . When Ayesha slew Kallikrates , she expelled Amenartas from her realm . Amenartas gave birth to Kallikrates ' son , beginning the line of the <unk> ( Leo 's ancestors ) . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = South Africa = = = 
 In 1875 , Haggard was sent to Cape Town , South Africa as secretary to Sir Henry Bulwer , the lieutenant @-@ governor of Natal . Haggard wrote in his memoirs of his aspirations to become a colonial governor himself , and of his youthful excitement at the prospects . The major event during his time in Africa was Britain 's annexation of the Transvaal in 1877 . Haggard was part of the expedition that established British control over the Boer republic , and which helped raise the Union flag over the capital of Pretoria on 24 May 1877 . Writing of the moment , Haggard declared : 
 Haggard had advocated the British annexation of the Boer republic in a journal article entitled " The Transvaal " , published in the May 1877 issue of Macmillan 's Magazine . He maintained that it was Britain 's " mission to conquer and hold in subjection " lesser races , " not from thirst of conquest but for the sake of law , justice , and order " . However , Boer resistance to British rule and the resulting Anglo @-@ Zulu war caused the imperial government in London to withdraw from pursuing British sovereignty over the South African interior . Haggard considered this to be a " great betrayal " by Prime Minister Gladstone and the Liberal Party , which " no lapse of time ever can solace or even alleviate " . He became increasingly disillusioned with the realities of colonial Africa . Victorian scholar Patrick Brantlinger notes in his introduction to She : " Little that Haggard witnessed matched the romantic depictions of ' the dark continent ' in boys ' adventure novels , in the press , and even in such bestselling explorers ' journals as David Livingstone 's Missionary Travels and Researches in South Africa ( 1857 ) . " 
 During his time in South Africa , Haggard developed an intense hatred for the Boers , but also came to admire the Zulus . However , his admiration of the Zulus did not extend to other African peoples ; rather , he shared many of the assumptions that underlay contemporary Victorian politics and philosophy , such as those expressed by James Hunt , the President of the Anthropological Society of London : " the Negro is inferior intellectually to the European ... [ and ] can only be humanised and civilised by Europeans . The analogies are far more numerous between the Negro and apes , than between the European and apes . " The Victorian belief in the inherent inferiority of the ' darker races ' made them the object of a civilising impulse in the European Scramble for Africa . Although disenchanted with the colonial effort , Haggard remained committed to this ideology . He believed that the British " alone of all the nations in the world appear to be able to control coloured races without the exercise of cruelty " . 
 = = = Return to Britain = = = 
 Rider Haggard returned to Britain in 1881 . At the time , England was increasingly beset by the social and cultural anxieties that marked the fin de siècle . One of the most prominent concerns was the fear of political and racial decline , encapsulated in Max <unk> 's Degeneration ( 1895 ) . Barely half a century earlier , Thomas Babington Macaulay had declared " the history of England " to be " emphatically the history of progress " , but late @-@ Victorians living in the wake of Darwinian evolution had lost the earlier positivism of their age . Uncertainty over the immutability of Britain 's historical identity , what historian Tim Murray has called the " threat of the past " , was manifested in the Victorian obsession with ancient times and archaeology . Haggard was greatly interested in the ruins discovered at Zimbabwe in the 1870s . In 1896 , he provided the preface to a monograph that detailed a history of the site , declaring : 
 Haggard was strongly influenced by archaeology and evolutionary theories , especially ideas about the " <unk> " of historical decline prevalent during the fin de siècle . His distaste for the Boers stemmed in part from their depiction as a ' mixed ' race , descended from various European stock and intermarried with African locals . Lack of racial purity was seen as leading to evolutionary degeneration and national decline , a concept which he embodied in the Amahagger people . 
 By the time that Haggard began writing She , society had more anxiety about the role of women . Debates regarding " The Woman Question " dominated Britain during the fin de siècle , as well as anxieties over the increasing position and independence of the " New Woman " . Alarm over social degeneration and societal decadence further fanned concerns over the woman 's movement and female liberalisation , which challenged the traditional conception of Victorian womanhood . The role and rights of women had changed dramatically since the early part of the century , as they entered the workforce , received better education , and gained more political and legal independence . Writing in 1894 , Haggard believed that marriage was the natural state for women : " Notwithstanding the energetic <unk> of the fact that confront us at every turn , it may be taken for granted that in most cases it is the natural mission of women to marry ; that – always in most cases – if they do not marry they become narrowed , live a half life only , and suffer in health of body and of mind . " He created the character of She @-@ who @-@ must @-@ be @-@ obeyed " who provided a touchstone for many of the anxieties surrounding the New Woman in late @-@ Victorian England " . 
 = = Concept and creation = = 
 According to Haggard 's daughter Lilias , the phrase " She @-@ who @-@ must @-@ be @-@ obeyed " originated from his childhood and " the particularly hideous aspect " of one rag @-@ doll : " This doll was something of a fetish , and Rider , as a small child , was terrified of her , a fact soon discovered by an unscrupulous nurse who made full use of it to frighten him into obedience . Why or how it came to be called She @-@ Who @-@ Must @-@ Be @-@ <unk> he could not remember " . Haggard wrote that " the title She " was taken " from a certain rag doll , so named , which a nurse at <unk> used to bring out of some dark recess in order to terrify those of my brothers and sisters who were in her charge . " 
 In his autobiography , Haggard spoke of how he composed She within a six @-@ week period of February and March 1886 , having just completed Jess , which was published in 1887 . Haggard claimed that this period was an intensely creative moment : the text " was never rewritten , and the manuscript carries but few corrections " . Haggard went on to declare : " The fact is that it was written at white heat , almost without rest , and that is the best way to compose . " He admitted to having had no clear story in mind when he began writing : 
 Various scholars have detected a number of analogues to She in earlier literature . According to Brantlinger , Haggard certainly read and was aware of the stories of Edward Bulwer @-@ Lytton , in particular A Strange Story ( 1862 ) which includes a mysterious , veiled woman called " Ayesha " , and The Coming Race ( 1871 ) about the discovery of a subterranean civilisation . Similarly , the name of the underground civilisation in She , known as Kôr , is derived from Norse mythological romance , where the " deathbed " of the goddess Hel is called <unk> and means " disease " in Old Norse . In She , a plague destroyed the original inhabitants of Kôr . 
 According to Haggard , he wrote the final scene of Ayesha 's demise while waiting for his literary agent , A. P. Watt , to return to his offices . Upon completion , he entered Watt 's office and threw the manuscript " ... on the table with the remark : ' There is what I shall be remembered by ' " . 
 An interesting and obscure reference to She appears in Lieut . George Witton 's 1907 Book , <unk> of the Empire ; The True Story of the <unk> <unk> : 
 " By midday we reached the <unk> Valley , in the <unk> Mountains , inhabited by a powerful tribe of natives once ruled by a princess said to be the prototype of Rider Haggard 's ' She ' . " 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 She was first published as a serial story in the Graphic , a large folio magazine printed weekly in London , between October 1886 and January 1887 . The serialisation was accompanied with illustrations by E. K. Johnson . An American edition was published by Harper and Bros. in New York on 24 December 1886 ; this included the Johnson illustrations . On 1 January 1887 , an English edition was published by Longmans , Green , and Co . , but without any images . It was the first publication of She in book format , and featured significant textual revisions from the Graphic serial made by Haggard . He made further revisions for an 1888 edition , which included illustrations by Maurice <unk> and C. H. M. Kerr . In 2006 a Broadview publication of She became the first edition to reproduce the Graphic serial text since 1887 . 
 = = = Narrative revisions = = = 
 Haggard contended that romances such as She or King Solomon 's Mines were best left unrevised , because " wine of this character loses its bouquet when it is poured from glass to glass . " However , he made a number of alterations to the original Graphic version of She before its publication as a novel in 1887 . One of the most significant was to the third chapter concerning the sherd , which was substantially expanded from the original to include the tale of Amenartas in uncial and cursive Greek scripts . Facsimile illustrations were also included of an antique vase , made @-@ up by Haggard 's sister @-@ in @-@ law Agnes Barber to resemble the sherd of Amenartas . A number of footnotes were also included containing historical references from the narrator . Haggard was keen to stress the historicity of the narrative , improving some of the information about geography and the history of ancient civilisations in chapters 4 , 13 , and 17 . 
 The 1887 novel also featured a substantial rewrite of the " hotpot " scene in chapter eight , when Mahomed is killed . In the original serialisation of She , the cannibal Amahagger grow restless and hungry and place a large heated pot over the head of Mahomed , enacting the <unk> ritual before eating him . Haggard 's stories were criticised at the time for their violence , and he toned down this scene for the novel publication . The novel revised the <unk> incident , with Mahomed dying instead when Holly shoots him accidentally in the scuffle with the Amahagger . Comparing the serial and novel editions of She , Stauffer describes the more compact narrative of the original as a reflection of the intense but short burst of creativity in which Haggard composed the story , arguing that " the style and grammar of the Graphic [ edition ] is more energetic and immediate " , although as he noted , " sometimes more flawed " . 
 Haggard continued to revise She for later publications , with the " New Edition " of 1888 containing over 400 minor alterations . The last revision by Haggard to be published was in 1896 . 
 = = Genre = = 
 = = = Fantasy and science fiction = = = 
 She is one of the foundational works of fantasy literature , coming around the time of The Princess and the Goblin ( 1858 ) by George MacDonald , William Morris ' The Wood Beyond the World and The Well at the World 's End , and the short stories of Lord Dunsany . It is marked by a strong element of " the marvelous " in the figure of Ayesha , a two @-@ thousand @-@ year @-@ old sorceress , and the ' Spirit of the World ' , an undying fire that confers immortality . Indeed , Haggard 's story is one of the first in modern literature to feature " a slight intrusion of something unreal " into a very real world – a hallmark of the fantasy genre . Similarly , the carefully constructed " fantasy history " of She foreshadows the use of this technique that characterises later fantasies such as The Lord of the Rings and The Wheel of Time series , and which imparts a " degree of security " to the secondary world . However , the story of She is firmly ensconced in what fantasy theorists call ' primary world reality ' , with the lost kingdom of Kôr , the realm ruled by the supernatural She , a fantastic " Tertiary World " at once directly part of and at the same time indirectly set apart from normative " primary " reality . Along with Haggard 's prior novel , King Solomon 's Mines , She laid the blueprints for the " Lost World " subgenre in fantasy literature , as well as the convention of the " lost race " . As Brantlinger has noted of the novel 's importance to the development of the " secondary world " in fantasy literature : " Haggard may seem peripheral to the development of science fiction , and yet his African quest romances could easily be transposed to other planets and galaxies " . In his history of science fiction , Billion Year Spree , Brian Aldiss notes the frequency with which Ayesha 's death in the Pillar of Fire has been imitated by later science fiction and fantasy writers : " From Haggard on , crumbling women , priestesses , or empresses – all symbols of women as Untouchable and <unk> – fill the pages of many a scientific romance " . 
 = = = Adventure romance = = = 
 She is part of the adventure subgenre of literature which was especially popular at the end of the 19th century , but which remains an important form of fiction to the present day . Along with works such as Treasure Island ( 1883 ) and Prince Otto ( 1885 ) by Robert Louis Stevenson , and Jules Verne 's A Journey to the Centre of the Earth ( 1871 ) and Around the World in Eighty Days ( 1875 ) , She had an important formative effect on the development of the adventure novel . Indeed , Rider Haggard is credited with inventing the romance of archaeological exploration which began in King Solomon 's Mines and crystallised in She . One of the most notable modern forms of this genre is the Indiana Jones movie series , as well as the Tarzan novels by Edgar Rice Burroughs and recently Alan Moore 's The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen ( 2000 ) . In such fictional narratives the explorer is the hero , with the drama unfolding as they are cast into " the nostrum of the living past " . Holly and Leo are prototypes of the adventurer , who has become a critical figure in modern fiction . 
 = = = Imperial Gothic = = = 
 She is also one of the central texts in the development of Imperial Gothic . Many late @-@ Victorian authors during the fin de siècle employed Gothic conventions and motifs in their writing , stressing and alluding to the supernatural , the ghostly , and the demonic . As Brantlinger has noted , " Connected to imperialist adventure fiction , these interests often imply anxieties about the stability of Britain , of the British Empire , or , more generally , of Western civilisation " . Novels like Dracula and the Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde present depictions of repressed , foreign , and demonic forces at the heart of the imperial polity . In She the danger is raised in the form of Ayesha herself : 
 She 's threat to replace Queen Victoria with herself echoes the underlying anxiety over imperialism and European colonialism emblematic of the Imperial Gothic genre . Indeed , Judith Wilt characterises the narrative of She , in which British imperialist penetration of Africa ( represented by Holly , Leo , and Job ) suddenly suffers a potential " counter @-@ attack " ( from Ayesha ) , as one of the archetypal illustrations of the " reverse <unk> " motif in Victorian Gothic . Similarly , She marks one of the first fictional examples to raise the spectre of the natural decline of civilisation , and by extension , British imperial power , which would become an increasingly frequent theme in Gothic and invasion literature until the onset of World War I. 
 = = Style = = 
 Rider Haggard 's writing style was the source of much criticism in reviews of She and his other works . His harshest critic was Augustus Moore , who wrote " God help English literature when English people lay aside their Waverley novels , and the works of Defoe , Swift , Thackeray , Charlotte Brontë , George Eliot , and even Charles Reade for the penny dreadfuls of Mr Haggard " ; adding , " The man who could write ' he spoke to She ' can have no ear at all " . A more common sentiment was expressed by the review of She in Blackwood 's Edinburgh Magazine : " Mr. Rider Haggard is not an exquisite workman like Mr. [ Robert Louis ] Stevenson , but he has a great deal of power in his way , and rougher qualities which are more likely , perhaps , to ' take the town ' than skill more delicate " . 
 Modern literary criticism has tended to be more circumspect . As Victorian scholar Daniel Karlin has noted , " That Haggard 's style is frequently <unk> or clumsy cannot be denied ; but the matter is not so easily settled " . Stauffer cites the passage where Holly is meditating as he tries to fall asleep as emblematic of " the charges against " Haggard 's writing . In this scene , Holly lays down , 
 The passage concludes with a wry remark from Holly , " I at last managed to get to sleep , a fact for which anybody who reads this narrative , if anybody ever does , may very probably be thankful " . According to Stauffer , " the disarming deflation of the passage goes a long way toward redeeming it , and is typical of the winning contradictions of the narrator 's style " . Tom Pocock in Rider Haggard and the Lost Empire has also highlighted the " literary framework " that Haggard constructs throughout much of the narrative , referencing Keats , Shakespeare , and Classical literature to imbue the story with a " Gothic sensibility " . Yet as Stauffer notes , " Ultimately , however , one thinks of Haggard 's plots , episodes , and images as the source of his lasting reputation and influence . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Imperialism = = = 
 She is set firmly in the imperialist literature of the late @-@ Victorian period . The so @-@ called " New Imperialism " marking the last quarter of the 19th century witnessed a further expansion of British power , particularly on the African continent , and was characterised by a seemingly confident sentiment in the merits of empire and English civilisation . Thus She " invokes a particularly British view of the world " as Rider Haggard projects concepts of the English self against the foreign otherness of Africa . One such example occurs when Holly is first ushered into the presence of Ayesha , walking into the chamber behind a grovelling Billali who warns Holly to follow his example , or " a surety she will blast thee where thou <unk> " . Indeed , She is preoccupied with stressing quintessential British qualities through the " adventure " of empire , usually in contrast to foreign barbarism . However , the notion of imperialism is further compounded by the figure of She , who is herself a foreign colonising force . " In a sense then " , writes Stauffer , " a single property line divides the realm of Queen Victoria and that of She @-@ who @-@ must @-@ be @-@ obeyed , two white queens who rule dark @-@ skinned natives of the African continent " . 
 = = = Race and evolution = = = 
 Like many of his Victorian contemporaries , Rider Haggard " proceeds on the assumption that whites are naturally superior to blacks , and that Britain 's imperial extensions into Africa are a noble , civilising enterprise " . Although Haggard penned a number of novels that portrayed Africans in a comparatively realistic light , She was not among their number . Even in King Solomon 's Mines , the representation of <unk> ( who was based on an actual warrior ) and the <unk> , drew upon Haggard 's knowledge and understanding of the Zulus . In contrast , She makes no such distinctions . Ayesha , the English travellers , and the ancient inhabitants of Kôr are all white embodiments of civilisation , while the darker Amahagger , as a people , illustrate notions of savagery , barbarity , and superstition . Nonetheless , the " racial politics of the novel are more complex than they first appear " , given that Ayesha is in origin an ancient Arabian , Leo is descended from , and physically resembles a blond Hellenistic Greek , while Holly is said to resemble a baboon in facial appearance – an animal Victorians typically associated with black Africans . Whilst critics like Wendy Katz , Patricia Murphy , and Susan Gubar have analysed the strong racist undercurrent in She , Andrew Stauffer has taken note of the qualifications through which " the novel suggests deeper connections among the races , an ancient genealogy of ethnicities and civilizations in which every character is a hybrid " . 
 Indeed , there is a strong Darwinian undercurrent framing the representation of race in She , stemming from Haggard 's own interest in evolutionary theory and archaeological history . In particular the theme of racial degeneration is a prominent aspect in the novel . Moving into the fin de siècle , late @-@ Victorians were increasingly concerned about cultural and national decline resulting from racial decay . In She , this evolutionary concept of degeneration is manifested in Ayesha and the Amahagger . Haggard represents the Amahagger as a debased mixture of ethnicities , " a curious mingling of races " , originally descended from the inhabitants of Kôr but having intermarried with Arabs and Africans . Racial hybridisation of any kind " entailed degeneration " to Victorians , a " decline from the pure blood " of the initial races , and thus " an aspect of their degeneration is the idea that the Amahagger have lost whatever elements of civilization their Kôr ancestors may have imparted to them " . Thus , Ayesha proudly proclaims her own racial purity as a quality to be admired : " for Arabian am I by birth , even ' al Arab al <unk> ' ( an Arab of the Arabs ) , and of the race of our father <unk> , the son of <unk> [ ... ] of the true Arab blood " . However , the novel 's starkest evocation of the evolutionary principle occurs in the regressive demise of Ayesha . Stepping into the Pillar of Fire , the immortal She begins to wither and decay , undergoing as death what Judith Wilt describes as the " ultimate Darwinian nightmare " , evolution in reverse . 
 = = = Female authority and sexuality = = = 
 When Rider Haggard first conceived of She he began with the theme of " an immortal woman inspired by an immortal love " . Although ostensibly a romance , the novel is part of the wider discourse regarding women and womanhood in late @-@ Victorian Britain . Many scholars have noted how She was published as a book in 1887 , the year of Queen Victoria 's Golden Jubilee , and Adrienne Munich argues that Haggard 's story " could fittingly be considered an ominous literary monument to Victoria after fifty years of her reign " . Indeed , in her devotion to Kallikrates ( two thousand years after his death ) , Ayesha echoes the long @-@ lasting fidelity of Victoria to her husband , Albert . However , unlike the " benign " Victoria , the question of female authority is realised to the extreme in the figure of She @-@ who @-@ must @-@ be @-@ obeyed , whose autonomous will seemingly embodies Victorian anti @-@ feminist fears of New Women desiring ' absolute personal independence coupled with supreme power over men ' . Haggard constantly emphasises this anxiety over female authority in She , so that even the rationally minded and misogynistic Holly , who has put his " heart away from such vanity as woman 's loveliness " , ultimately falls upon his knees and worships Ayesha " as never woman was worshipped " . Similarly , although the masculine and chivalric Leo is determined to reject Ayesha for killing the devoted native girl Ustane , he too quickly falls under her will . In fact , Ayesha 's absolute command over the male sex is one of the most startling and unnerving aspects of the story . 
 In her role as the seductive femme fatale , Ayesha is part of " a long tradition of male fantasy that includes Homer 's Circe , Shakespeare 's Cleopatra , and Keats 's ' La Belle Dame sans Merci ' " . Brantlinger identifies the theme of " the white ( or at least light @-@ skinned ) queen ruling a black or brown @-@ skinned savage race " as " a powerfully erotic one " with its opposite being " the image of the helpless white woman captured by savages and threatened , at least , with rape " . The figure of She both inspires male desire and dominates male sovereignty , represented in her conquest of the enlightened Victorians Holly and Leo . The two Englishmen embody the powers of manhood , with Leo a reflection of masculine physicality and Holly a representation of man 's intellectual strength ; but both are conquered by the feminine powers of She , who rules as much through sex @-@ appeal as through sorcery , immortality , and will . Thus Steven Arata describes her as " the veiled woman , that ubiquitous nineteenth @-@ century figure of male desire and anxiety , whose body is Truth but a Truth that blasts " . Similarly , Sarah Gilbert sees the theme of feminine sexuality and authority realised in Ayesha as critical to the novel 's success : " Unlike the women earlier Victorian writers had idealised or excoriated , She was neither an angel nor a monster . Rather , She was an odd but significant blend of the two types – an <unk> chaste woman with monstrous powers , a monstrously passionate woman with angelic charms " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 After its publication in 1887 She became an immediate success . According to The Literary World " Mr. Rider Haggard has made for himself a new field in fiction " . Comparing the novel to King Solomon 's Mines the review declared : " The book before us displays all the same qualities , and we anticipate for it a similar popularity . There is even more imagination in the later than in the earlier story ; it contains scenes of greater sensuous beauty and also of more gruesome horror " . The Public Opinion was equally rapturous in its praise : 
 The fantasy of She received particular acclaim from Victorian readers and critics . The review appearing in The Academy on 15 January was impressed by the " grown @-@ up " vision of the novel , declaring " the more impossible it gets the better Mr. Haggard does it ... his astonishing imagination , and a certain <unk> [ " verisimilitude " ( French ) ] makes the most impossible adventures appear true " . This sentiment was echoed in The Queen : The Lady 's Newspaper , with the reviewer pronouncing that " this is a tale in the hands of a writer not so able as Mr. Haggard might easily have become absurd ; but he has treated it with so much vividness and picturesque power as to invest it with unflagging interest , and given to the mystery a port of philosophic possibility that makes us quite willing to submit to the illusion . 
 The Spectator was more equivocal in its appraisal of She . The review described the narrative as " very stirring " and " exciting " and of " remarkable imaginative power " , adding : " The ingenuity of the story ... is as subtle as ever <unk> invented , and from the day when Leo and Holly land on the coast of Africa , to the day when the Pillar of Fire is revealed to them by the all but immortal ' She @-@ who @-@ must @-@ be @-@ obeyed ' , the interest of the tale rises higher and higher with every new turn in its course " . However , the review took issue with the characterisation of She and the manner of her demise : " To the present writer there is a sense of the ludicrous in the end of She that spoiled , instead of concluding with imaginative fitness , the thread of the impossible worked into the substance of this vivid and brilliantly told story " . Haggard was moved to respond to the criticism of Ayesha 's death , writing that " in the insolence of her strength and loveliness , she lifts herself up against the Omnipotent . Therefore , at the appointed time she is swept away by It ... Vengeance , more heavy because more long delayed , strikes her in her proudest part – her beauty " . 
 A number of reviews were more critical of Haggard 's work . Although the reviewer of She in Blackwood 's Edinburgh Magazine considered it better than King Solomon 's Mines , he opined , " Mr. Rider Haggard has not proved as yet that he has anything that can be called imagination at all ... It might be wrought up into an unparalleled stage effect : but it is rather a failure in pen and ink . The more fearful and wonderful such circumstances are intended to be , the more absurd is the failure of them " . Even more scathing was Augustus Moore in the May edition of Time : A Monthly Miscellany , who declared : " In Mr Haggard 's book I find none of the powerful imagination , the elaborate detail , the vivid English which would entitle his work to be described as a romance ... [ rather ] it seems to me to be the method of the modern melodrama " . Moore was particularly dismissive of the novel 's style and prose : " Mr Haggard cannot write English at all . I do not merely refer to his bad grammar , which a boy at a Boarding School would deserve to be <unk> for ... It can only have been written by a man who not only knew nothing , but cared nothing for ' English undefiled ' . " Haggard 's English was a common source of criticisms , but Moore was even dismissive of the character of She who widely garnered universal praise . " Ayesha " , Moore declares , " is about as impressive as the singing chambermaid who represents the naughty fairy of a pantomime in tights and a tow wig " . Concluding his review , Moore wondered at the success that had greeted She : 
 Despite such criticism , the reception that met She was overwhelmingly positive and echoed the sentiments expressed by anthropologist and literary critic Andrew Lang before the story 's first publication : " I think She is one of the most astonishing romances I ever read . The more impossible it is , the better you do it , till it seems like a story from the literature of another planet " . 
 = = Modern interpretations = = 
 = = = Feminist = = = 
 Feminist literary historians have tended to define the figure of She as a literary manifestation of male alarm over the " learned and crusading new woman " . In this view , Ayesha is a terrifying and dominant figure , a prominent and influential rendering of the misogynistic " fictive explorations of female authority " undertaken by male writers that ushered in literary modernism . Ann Ardis , for instance , views the fears Holly harbours over Ayesha 's plan to return to England as being " exactly those voiced about the New Woman 's entrance in the public arena " . According to the feminist interpretation of the narrative , the death of She acts as a kind of teleological " judgement " of her transgression of Victorian gender boundaries , with Ardis likening it to a " witch @-@ burning " . However , to Rider Haggard , She was an investigation into love and immortality and the demise of Ayesha the moral end of this exploration : 
 Indeed , far from being a radical or threatening manifestation of womanhood , recent academics have noted the extent to which the character of She conforms to traditional conceptions of Victorian femininity ; in particular her deferring devotion to Kallikrates / Leo , whom she swears wifely obedience to at the story 's climax : " ' Behold ! ' and she took his [ Leo 's ] hand and placed it upon her shapely head , and then bent herself slowly down till one knee for an instant touched the ground – ' Behold ! in token of submission do I bow me to my lord ! Behold ! ' and she kissed him on the lips , ' in token of my wifely love do I kiss my lord ' . " Ayesha declares this to be the " first most holy hour of completed womanhood " . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 She is one of the most influential novels in modern literature , with authors like Rudyard Kipling , Henry Miller , Graham Greene , J.R.R. Tolkien , and Margaret Atwood all acknowledging the importance of the work to their own and others ' writing . With over 83 million copies sold , the work is one of the biggest selling fictional titles of all time and has been translated into 44 languages . According to Stauffer , " She has always been Rider Haggard 's most popular and influential novel , challenged only by King Solomon 's Mines in this regard " . Such was the popularity and influence of the novel that it was cited in the psychoanalytical theories of Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung , the latter describing the character of She as a manifestation of the anima figure . 
 The story is one of the most important texts of imaginative literature and had a lasting impact on the fantasy genre , directly giving rise to the ' lost civilisation ' tales of Edgar Rice Burroughs and Sir Arthur Conan Doyle , and the creation of mythologised locations such as Shangri @-@ la . Tolkien recognised the importance of She to his own fantasy works , especially in its foregrounding of a fictional history and narrative . The figure of She is also considered by many scholars to be a formative influence on Galadriel - Ayesha 's reflecting pool seems to be a direct precursor of Galadriel 's mirror . Other characters in Tolkien 's <unk> also seem to have been influenced , including Shelob ( who is referred to as " She " and " Her " in the text ) , and the escape across the chasm is highly reminiscent of the escape of the Fellowship across the chasm in Moria . Indeed , Haggard 's characterisation of Ayesha became the prototype of the female antagonist in modern fantasy literature , most famously realised in the figure of the White Witch , Jadis , from C. S. Lewis 's The Chronicles of Narnia . Kor and Ayesha appear in Alan Moore 's Nemo : Heart of Ice 
 = = = Adaptations = = = 
 She has been adapted for the cinema at least ten times , and was one of the earliest films to be made in 1899 as La Colonne de feu ( The Pillar of Fire ) , by Georges Méliès . A 1911 version starred Marguerite Snow , a British @-@ produced version appeared in 1916 and in 1917 <unk> <unk> appeared in a production for Fox which is lost . In 1925 a silent film of She , starring Betty Blythe , was produced with the active participation of Rider Haggard , who wrote the intertitles . The film combines elements from all the books in the series . 
 A decade later another cinematic version of the novel was released , featuring Helen Gahagan , Randolph Scott and Nigel Bruce . This 1935 adaptation was set in the Arctic , rather than Africa , and depicts the ancient civilisation of the story in an Art Deco style , with music by Max Steiner . 
 The 1965 film , She , was produced by Hammer Film Productions and starred Ursula Andress as Ayesha and John Richardson as her reincarnated love , with Peter Cushing and Bernard Cribbins as other members of the expedition . 
 In 2001 another adaption was released direct @-@ to @-@ video with Ian Duncan as Leo Vincey , <unk> Winter as Ayesha and Marie Bäumer as Roxane . 
 Tim McInnerny starred as Holly with Mia Soteriou as Ayesha and Oliver Chris as Leo in a two @-@ part adaptation on BBC Radio 4 's Classic Serial , originally broadcast on 2 July and 9 July 2006 . 
 In 2007 a rock @-@ opera / musical version of She was recorded live at the <unk> Theatre , Katowice , Poland by Clive Nolan and was released on DVD . In February 2012 the Nolan version of She had its first UK performance at the Playhouse in Cheltenham . 
 = Lynn Bomar = 
 Robert Lynn Bomar ( January 21 , 1901 – June 11 , 1964 ) was an American football end in the National Football League ( NFL ) . Bomar played college football , basketball and baseball for Vanderbilt University , following coach Wallace Wade and classmate Hek Wakefield there from prep school , and was a unanimous 1922 All @-@ Southern selection and a consensus 1923 All @-@ American selection in football . The latter season included a first @-@ team All @-@ American selection by Walter Camp , rare for a player in the South . A paralyzing injury ended Bomar 's college career , but he quickly recovered and sat on the bench for all of his team 's games . He played for the New York Giants in 1925 and 1926 , retiring abruptly after a separate injury . Bomar was nicknamed " the Blonde Bear " . 
 He had a later career in law enforcement . In his position as Tennessee 's Commissioner of Public Safety and Patrol chief , Bomar supervised the ransacking of black households during the 1946 Columbia race riot . He was the warden of Tennessee State Prison from 1955 until his death , and oversaw several executions . In 1956 , Bomar was the first Vanderbilt football player elected to the College Football Hall of Fame . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Bomar was born on January 21 , 1901 , in Bell Buckle , Tennessee to Oliver Eugene Bomar , a blacksmith , and Elizabeth May McAdams . Vanderbilt records indicate that he spent part of his youth in Gallatin . Bomar attended Webb School in his native Bell Buckle , and spent a year at Castle Heights Military Academy . 
 = = = Fitzgerald and Clarke = = = 
 Bomar then attended preparatory school at the Fitzgerald and Clarke Military Academy in Tullahoma , Tennessee . In 1920 , he was a member of teams which won the state prep @-@ school football and basketball championships . In both sports Bomar played under head coach Wallace Wade . While Wade coached at Fitzgerald and Clarke , the school 's overall football record was 15 – 2 . With him on the football team was future college teammate and All @-@ American Hek Wakefield . On March 14 , 1922 , while Bomar was in college , the school burned to the ground and was never rebuilt . 
 = = Vanderbilt University = = 
 = = = Football = = = 
 Bomar played for head coach Dan McGugin 's Vanderbilt Commodores football team at Vanderbilt University from 1921 to 1924 . Wallace Wade was hired as Vanderbilt football 's assistant and line coach for 1921 and head coach of the basketball and baseball teams for 1922 . Bomar and Wakefield enrolled at the school in the same class . 
 He was prominent on Commodore teams which compiled a win – loss – tie record of 26 – 5 – 4 ( .800 ) and three straight conference titles during his four seasons . Bomar was an All @-@ Southern and All @-@ American selection in 1922 and 1923 . In addition to playing end and tackle ( offense and defense ) , he made the kickoffs . Bomar 's play was described : 
 The Blonde Bear was one of the world 's greatest football players , who never missed an open field block . When one considers he made Walter Camp 's All @-@ America team when he was backing up the line on defense and blocking and catching passes on offense , his greatness is realized . 
 [ Bomar ] plucked passes out of the ozone that seemed impossible to get , and then raced through the enemy like they were tied . " Often he started games at fullback , shifted to halfback or end , and finished at tackle . In backing up the line , [ he ] hurled back all comers with the same savage vigor . 
 His favorite refrain to opponents was , " I hope you don 't like it . " 
 = = = = 1921 = = = = 
 During Bomar 's freshman season at Vanderbilt , he was already a standout player as a starting fullback . In a game against the Longhorns at the Texas State Fair in Dallas , the Commodores won 20 – 0 after they were expected to lose by two touchdowns . Texas had been undefeated in 1920 , winning the Southwest Conference . The 1921 squad was considered possibly the best in Longhorns history , and Vanderbilt football seemed to be in decline when Georgia Tech defeated the Commodores 44 – 0 the previous year . Dan McGugin gave a speech invoking late former Vanderbilt quarterback Irby Curry before the game . According to Edwin Pope 's Football 's Greatest Coaches , " The Texas game , sparked by McGugin 's unforgettable oratory , was the big one ; and Vandy got out of the year without a loss . " Bomar scored on a 40 @-@ yard interception return for a touchdown in the fourth quarter , increasing the Commodore lead to two touchdowns . In the sixth game of the season , Vanderbilt defeated the Alabama Crimson Tide 14 – 0 at Birmingham . The victory was expected by insiders ( then often called the " dope " ) , with Vanderbilt favored by two touchdowns . Early in the first quarter several runs by Jess Neely , a long pass from Neely to Tot McCullough and a 17 @-@ yard run by Neely brought the ball to the nine @-@ yard line . After a run by Frank Godchaux , Bomar bucked over the line for a touchdown . The game against the Georgia Bulldogs decided the Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Association ( SIAA ) championship that season , with Bomar excelling at linebacker . " Georgia would have trampled Vanderbilt to atoms but for Lynn Bomar , " wrote Nashville Tennessean sportswriter Blinkey Horn . " Lynn Bomar was the stellar performer of the game . In the first @-@ half he made two @-@ thirds of the tackles " , and reportedly prevented five Georgia touchdowns that day . The Commodores tied the Bulldogs 7 – 7 on a fourth @-@ quarter onside kick for a share of the SIAA title , finishing the season with a 7 – 0 – 1 record . 
 = = = = 1922 = = = = 
 Vanderbilt had its second straight undefeated season in 1922 , with Bomar playing his preferred position at end . He was a starter in the scoreless tie with Michigan at the dedication of Dudley Field , spending much of the game tackling Michigan runners . According to the school yearbook , Bomar " tore through the Wolverine line constantly , and always emerged after a play on the far side of the defense " and the game included a goal line stand . Another account read , " Thousands of cheering Vanderbilt fans inspired the surge of center Alf Sharp , guard Gus Morrow , tackle Tex Bradford , and end Lynn Bomar , who stopped Michigan cold in four attempts . " The next week against Texas at the Dallas State Fair , Vanderbilt won 20 – 10 . Bomar made an interception and caught a 23 @-@ yard pass from Jess Neely , running 20 yards to set up a Gil Reese touchdown . Against the Tennessee Volunteers , he scored the second of two touchdowns on a short pass from Neely in a 14 – 6 victory . 
 Bomar 's best offensive performance that year was against Georgia . Neely made a long pass from a few yards behind the line of scrimmage at the 45 @-@ yard line ; Bomar caught it near the seven @-@ yard line , and was tackled by Georgia halfback Loren Chester ( <unk> ) Randall at around the three @-@ yard line before Reese scored the touchdown . Neely and Bomar were among the best pass @-@ receiver combinations in Vanderbilt history : " Bomar , unquestionably , was Vanderbilt 's best receiver , snatching everything thrown at him . " 
 A similar play in the game 's second half scored another touchdown . Quarterback Doc Kuhn dropped back for a more than 40 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Bomar . The pass went 28 yards in the air , with Bomar running the rest of the way . Georgia running back Dave Collings tackled him as he crossed the goal line ( injuring himself ) , and Bomar also made an interception in the 12 – 0 Vanderbilt victory . The season 's final game , against Vanderbilt 's oldest rival Sewanee , had a trick play by the Commodores . A fake run ended with Kuhn tossing the ball to Bomar , who was left open behind the defense and easily ran it in ; Vanderbilt won , 26 – 0 . 
 After the season , Bomar received first @-@ team All @-@ American honors from Frank G. Menke . He was also chosen a second @-@ team All @-@ American by Walter Camp , a third @-@ team All @-@ American by Walter Eckersall and appeared on Billy Evans ' National Honor Roll . Bomar and Red Barron of Georgia Tech were the two unanimous All @-@ Southern selections . Grantland Rice wrote the next year , " There was no better end in the country last fall " and Camp described Bomar : 
 Bomar , of Vanderbilt , is only shaded a little by two other ends , largely through the experienced gained by his rivals against stronger opposition . He weighs 200 pounds , is tremendously fast , and a hardy , defensive player . On attack he is able to pick the forward pass out of the air on the full run , and , running with a high @-@ knee action quite like that of the redoubtable Ted Coy , if he cannot get by his man , runs him down and goes on over him , still on his feet . 
 = = = = 1923 = = = = 
 In 1923 , assistant coach Wallace Wade was hired as head coach at Alabama and was replaced by former star tackle Josh Cody . A rematch against the Michigan Wolverines at Ferry Field was a 3 – 0 Vanderbilt loss , with consensus All @-@ American center Jack Blott scoring Michigan 's field goal . According to the Michigan Alumnus , Harry Kipke could not return punts for fear of fumbling ; when he received the ball , Vanderbilt ends Hek Wakefield or Bomar would tackle him . In a diagram of the game 's plays , Vanderbilt 's only completed pass was from Bomar to Kuhn . Bomar excelled against Tulane , blocking a number of punts in a 17 – 0 victory . Times @-@ Picayune sportswriter Ed Hebert wrote , " Take Bomar out of the Vandy lineup and Tulane would have won the game by three touchdowns . " A postseason charity game was played against former and contemporary Princeton Tigers all @-@ stars . The game was a 7 – 7 tie , with Vanderbilt 's touchdown scored on an 18 @-@ yard pass from Kuhn to Bomar . 
 Vanderbilt and Washington and Lee finished the season as Southern Conference co @-@ champions . A sportswriters ' poll chose the Commodores as best team in the South , awarding them the Pickens Trophy ( awarded from 1923 to 1926 ) . Bomar was a consensus All @-@ American , receiving first @-@ team honors from Collier 's Weekly ( Walter Camp ) and second @-@ team honors from Athletic World magazine . He was one of the first players from the South to receive first @-@ team honors from Camp , who described the player : 
 Bomar of Vanderbilt is an experienced end of 200 pounds in weight , with speed , initiative , and an uncanny perception in diagnosing plays . Bomar can back up a line when needed , can not be swept out by swinging interference and is powerful enough to hold his own even when big guards and tackles come at him . 
 As a receiver of a forward pass , he has , besides the skill , the excellent quality of being very hard to knock off his feet , and when he and the defense both try for the pass at the same time , Bomar is far more likely to get the ball on account of the fact that he outweighs the majority of defensive players . He has been used in all sorts of positions this year , both in attack and defense and this had broadened his scope and increased his value . 
 = = = = 1924 = = = = 
 During Bomar 's senior season ( when he moved to halfback ) , the Commodores tied the Quantico Marines 13 – 13 . Bomar , picking up a fumble , ran 84 yards for a touchdown . According to a newspaper account , " It was Lynn Bomar 's gigantic figure that broke up what looked like a Marine cakewalk . After receiving the kickoff , the Marines drove steadily to Vanderbilt 's 10 @-@ yard line as Goettge repeatedly completed short passes . At the 10 , Groves dropped back . The pass from center was low . He missed it . He reached for the ball . It trickled off his fingers . The Commodores were boring in . Wakefield was in there . Then Bomar came charging through . He picked up the ball and with a twist was out of Groves ' grasp . He came out of the bunch with a long , charging run . Then he seemed a little undecided . One fleeting glance behind him and he struck out . Up came his free arm to brush off his headgear . His thin , yellow hair stood out . On he swept like a thundercloud of vengeance across the goal . Bedlam broke loose . " Captain and guard Tuck Kelly was injured during the game , making Bomar the interim captain two weeks later against the Georgia Bulldogs . 
 In the Georgia game Bomar had a brain hemorrhage after he was kicked in the chin , and half his body was paralyzed for two days . It was thought that he would never play football again : " Not a player on the team could talk of Bomar 's injury without tears coming to his eyes " , and Bomar sat on the bench for the rest of the season 's games . Known as a devastating blocker and " lightning fast , " he was the first Commodore football player elected to the College Football Hall of Fame in 1956 . At his induction Bomar said , " I just wish all the men who played with me at Vanderbilt between 1921 and 1924 could also receive this coveted award . They deserve it more than I do . After all , they made it possible for me to be chosen . " 
 He was a member of the Kappa Sigma fraternity . Nashville sportswriter Fred Russell , who entered Vanderbilt in 1924 , told a story about Bomar in his autobiography Bury Me In An Old Press Box : " As a freshman I had pledged Kappa Sigma fraternity , which at that time had many varsity athletes . Among them was Lynn Bomar , selected All @-@ American end in 1923 ... I also had the responsibility , as a freshman , of awakening Bomar in time for him to get to classes , and at the end of the school year I did this one morning by rolling the biggest lighted firecracker I ever saw under his bed . When it exploded I feared the whole corner of the fraternity house had been blown off , and I was so scared that even Bomar in his <unk> 's chasing me across the street and deep into the campus couldn 't catch me . " 
 According to Vanderbilt 's All @-@ Southern halfback and 1924 captain @-@ elect Gil Reese , " He would never let them jump on me . Whenever anyone would threaten me , Bomar was always right there to say ' Keep your hands off that boy ' . They always did , too . Bomar always looked after me , and he always called back to me when we started on end runs . No one could run interference like Bomar . " Bomar and Reese were on an all @-@ time Vanderbilt team in the school 's 1934 yearbook , and Bomar was chosen for an Associated Press Southeast Area all @-@ time football team for the era from 1920 to 1969 . 
 = = = Basketball = = = 
 Bomar also played baseball and basketball at Vanderbilt , and was a forward on the basketball team . He attracted large crowds at basketball games because of his football prowess . 
 = = = = 1922 – 23 = = = = 
 The 1922 – 23 team had a 16 – 8 record , beating the LSU Tigers but losing to the Virginia Tech Hokies in the Southern Intercollegiate Athletic Association tournament . An account of the LSU game read , " Either Vanderbilt was in rare form or <unk> has a good fighting team with no shooting ability . Fans were treated to the most one @-@ sided contest of opening day when these two clubs met , the Commodores scoring 13 points before the Louisianans had counted once , winning 36 to 10 . " Bomar scored two points in the game . 
 = = = = 1923 – 24 = = = = 
 The team , coached by Josh Cody , had a 7 – 15 record . In the SoCon tournament , Vanderbilt defeated Clemson 42 – 13 and Bomar scored seven points . According to one account , " Reese and Bomar used to be famous for their forward pass work . They are still using it in basketball . Most of Bomar 's passes to Reese are caught over the right shoulder with the recipient facing away from the passer . " Along with Reese , All @-@ Southern forward Alvin Bell was also a teammate . Vanderbilt lost the next game to the eventual tournament champions , Jack Cobb and Cartwright Carmichael @-@ led North Carolina , 37 – 20 . When Bomar was sidelined by a football injury in 1924 , Gil Reese became the basketball team captain . 
 = = = Baseball = = = 
 He was a catcher on the baseball team . Cliff Wheatley spoke of the many good catchers from which to choose for his 1922 All @-@ Southern baseball team , " And up at Vanderbilt , Lynn Bomar made a splendid record . " 
 = = New York Giants = = 
 = = = 1925 = = = 
 Bomar fully recovered from his injury and played professional football as an end for the inaugural 1925 New York Giants of the National Football League ( NFL ) with Jim Thorpe , Century Milstead , and Owen Reynolds . He was signed to the Giants by Harry March . 
 The first noteworthy game for Bomar was a 14 – 0 loss to the Frankford Yellow Jackets . After the Giants ' poor first half , the Yellow Jackets led by 14 points . During the second half the Giants recovered somewhat , with good passes from Jack McBride to Bomar but no chance of a comeback . In a 13 – 0 victory over the Rochester Jeffersons , McBride threw a 27 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Bomar . A 13 – 12 win over the Providence Steam Roller had a 24 @-@ yard touchdown pass from McBride to Bomar and an interesting ending . The Giants were backed up near their end zone , faced with a fourth down and leading 13 – 10 . Providence was set for a blitz on the punter , but when he caught the ball he knelt in the end zone for a safety ( not enough for Providence to win ) . Against the Kansas City Cowboys , several passes from McBride to Bomar netted 24 yards in a 67 @-@ yard touchdown drive for a 9 – 3 victory . Bomar had possibly his best day in a 23 – 0 victory over the Dayton Triangles before a crowd of 18 @,@ 000 . Six of McBride 's completed passes that day were to Bomar , including a 45 @-@ yarder for the Giants ' first touchdown . Bomar was selected to NFL president Joseph Carr 's all @-@ star team . 
 Although the Giants played well , the team experienced financial hardship during its first year . Player salaries were so low that most had to take additional jobs to support themselves . The team 's brief practices , held at 4 : 30 pm each day to accommodate outside @-@ work schedules , enabled little in @-@ season improvement . Overshadowed by baseball , boxing and college football , professional football was not a popular sport in 1925 and owner Tim Mara spent $ 25 @,@ 000 of his own money during the season to keep the team going . The financial struggle continued until the 11th game of the season , when the visiting Red Grange and the Chicago Bears drew more than 73 @,@ 000 fans ( a pro @-@ football record ) and an additional 20 @,@ 000 were turned away . This gave the Giants much @-@ needed revenue , possibly altering the team 's history . In the 19 – 7 Bears victory , Grange intercepted a pass intended for Bomar and returned it for a touchdown . 
 = = = 1926 = = = 
 In the season 's second week Bomar scored against Providence on a 15 @-@ yard pass from McBride , and he scored on a 37 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Walt <unk> against Kansas City . However , his football career ended abruptly when he dislocated his knee in a game against the Brooklyn Lions . 
 = = = = Longest pass = = = = 
 From the top of the American Radiator Building to the ground in Bryant Park , a drop of 324 feet ( 98 @.@ 75 m ) , Bomar completed a pass to Hinkey Haines for a record on November 12 . Haines caught the ball on the fifth attempt . On Bomar 's first attempt , the New York Times reported that the ball " hit the sidewalk and burst " and the third pass knocked Haines over . The stunt took place two days before a game with the Los Angeles Buccaneers . " It was as much as anything a playful jab at Brick Muller " ( the Buccaneers ' end ) , who caught a pass thrown from atop the Telephone Building — a drop of 320 feet ( 97 @.@ 5 m ) — in San Francisco the year before to advertise the first East @-@ West Shrine Game . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bomar married <unk> Edna Hicks on November 20 , 1927 in Williamson County , Tennessee . Their only son , Robert , was a resident surgeon at Vanderbilt Hospital . Bomar was a Baptist . 
 = = Law @-@ enforcement career = = 
 After football and marriage , Bomar was assistant manager of the Colonial Hotel in Springfield , Tennessee for seven years . He sold life insurance , but found it dull . Bomar then began a long career in law enforcement , beginning in the United States Marshals Service office from 1934 to 1939 . In 1939 he became a division chief with the Knoxville Highway Patrol and a year later became director of public safety , overseeing the city 's police and fire departments . For a few months the public @-@ safety position was eliminated , and Bomar was again the Highway Patrol division chief . Governor Prentice Cooper promoted him to chief on a trial basis in 1942 , when the incumbent went on active duty in World War II . 
 = = = Commissioner of Public Safety = = = 
 In 1945 , Bomar was appointed as both state commissioner of public safety and patrol chief . In this capacity he worked for the Tennessee Motor Transportation Association , Universal Tire and Appliance Company and the Tennessee Superintendent of Public Works . 
 = = = = Columbia Race Riots = = = = 
 In 1946 , Bomar supervised the ransacking of African @-@ American households in the Columbia Race Riot . A February 25 fight between James Stephenson , an African @-@ American Navy veteran , and a white shopkeeper reportedly ignited the unrest . Later that day there was gunfire , fighting and rioting between whites and African Americans in Mink Slide , Columbia 's African @-@ American business district . When black citizens shot out the street lights , three officers and a chief responded to the gunfire ; all four were shot . Bomar , described by one writer as commanding " the firing line of the State Highway Police , " led the team sent in after the shootings with permission from the state attorney general to search homes and businesses for weapons . None of the accused were granted bail or allowed legal counsel , and 12 were charged with attempted murder . 
 Under oath in court , Bomar said that he had no search warrant and anticipated that he would not have a warrant the next time he searched similar properties . He called journalist Vincent Sheean a " lying Communistic yellow — — . " According to a contemporary account , " In this situation , even though it ’ s fair to say [ Bomar ] was just doing his job , it ’ s equally clear that he was a loose cannon . His personality dominated the scene , and it was the personality of a bully . " 
 = = = Warden = = = 
 Bomar was warden of Tennessee State Prison from 1955 until his death . He oversaw the execution of several men including William Tines , an African American convicted of raping a 45 @-@ year @-@ old white woman , who was executed in the electric chair . Tines was the last man executed by electrocution in Tennessee , and the last person executed until Robert Glen Coe in 2000 . 
 = = = = The <unk> = = = = 
 Bomar supported the <unk> , a doo @-@ wop quintet of inmates who received a BMI award for their hit " Just Walkin ' in the Rain " in his office . A spoken @-@ word track on their album , Only Believe ... , was " Message from Prison Warden Lynn Bomar " . 
 = = Death = = 
 On June 11 , 1964 , Bomar died a few hours after a heart attack . In 1966 , he was posthumously inducted into the Tennessee Sports Hall of Fame . 
 = Sitting Bull = 
 Sitting Bull ( Lakota : <unk> <unk> in Standard Lakota Orthography , also nicknamed <unk> or " Slow " ; c . 1831 – December 15 , 1890 ) was a Hunkpapa Lakota holy man who led his people during years of resistance to United States government policies . He was killed by Indian agency police on the Standing Rock Indian Reservation during an attempt to arrest him , at a time when authorities feared that he would join the Ghost Dance movement . 
 Before the Battle of the Little Bighorn , Sitting Bull had a vision in which he saw many soldiers , " as thick as grasshoppers , " falling upside down into the Lakota camp , which his people took as a foreshadowing of a major victory in which a large number of soldiers would be killed . About three weeks later , the confederated Lakota tribes with the Northern Cheyenne defeated the 7th Cavalry under Lt. Col. George Armstrong Custer on June 25 , 1876 , annihilating Custer 's battalion and seeming to bear out Sitting Bull 's prophetic vision . Sitting Bull 's leadership inspired his people to a major victory . Months after their victory at the battle , Sitting Bull and his group left the United States for Wood Mountain , North @-@ West Territories ( now Saskatchewan ) , where he remained until 1881 , at which time he and most of his band returned to US territory and surrendered to U.S. forces . A small remnant of his band under <unk> <unk> decided to stay at Wood Mountain . 
 After working as a performer with Buffalo Bill 's Wild West show , Sitting Bull returned to the Standing Rock Agency in South Dakota . Because of fears that he would use his influence to support the Ghost Dance movement , Indian Service agent James McLaughlin at Fort Yates ordered his arrest . During an ensuing struggle between Sitting Bull 's followers and the agency police , Sitting Bull was shot in the side and head by Standing Rock policemen Lieutenant Bull Head ( <unk> Lakota : <unk> <unk> ) and Red Tomahawk ( <unk> <unk> Lakota : " <unk> <unk> " ) after the police were fired upon by Sitting Bull 's supporters . His body was taken to nearby Fort Yates for burial . In 1953 , his Lakota family exhumed what were believed to be his remains , <unk> them near <unk> , South Dakota , near his birthplace . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Sitting Bull was born in Dakota Territory . In 2007 , Sitting Bull 's great @-@ grandson asserted from family oral tradition that Sitting Bull was born along the Yellowstone River , south of present @-@ day Miles City , Montana . He was named Jumping Badger at birth , and nicknamed <unk> , or " Slow , " said to describe his careful and unhurried nature . When the boy was fourteen years old he accompanied a group of Lakota warriors ( which included his father and his uncle Four Horns ) in a raiding party to take horses from a camp of Crow warriors . Jumping Badger displayed bravery by riding forward and counting coup on one of the surprised Crow , which was witnessed by the other mounted Lakota . Upon returning to camp his father gave a celebratory feast at which he conferred his own name upon his son . The name , <unk> <unk> ( Tatanka <unk> ) , which in the Lakota language means " Buffalo Bull Who Sits Down " , would later be abbreviated to " Sitting Bull " . Thereafter , Sitting Bull 's father was known as Jumping Bull . At this ceremony before the entire band , Sitting Bull 's father presented his son with an eagle feather to wear in his hair , a warrior 's horse , and a hardened buffalo hide shield to mark his son 's passage into manhood as a Lakota warrior . 
 During the Dakota War of 1862 , in which Sitting Bull 's people were not involved , several bands of eastern Dakota people killed an estimated 300 to 800 settlers and soldiers in south @-@ central Minnesota in response to poor treatment by the government and in an effort to drive the whites away . Despite being embroiled in the American Civil War , the United States Army retaliated in 1863 and 1864 , even against bands which had not been involved in the hostilities . In 1864 , two brigades of about 2200 soldiers under Brigadier General Alfred Sully attacked a village . The defenders were led by Sitting Bull , Gall and <unk> . The Lakota and Dakota were driven out , but skirmishing continued into August . 
 In September , Sitting Bull and about one hundred Hunkpapa Lakota encountered a small party near what is now <unk> , North Dakota . They had been left behind by a wagon train commanded by Captain James L. Fisk to effect some repairs to an overturned wagon . When he led an attack , Sitting Bull was shot in the left hip by a soldier . The bullet exited out through the small of his back , and the wound was not serious . 
 = = Red Cloud 's War = = 
 From 1866 to 1868 , Red Cloud as a leader of the Oglala Lakota fought against US forces , attacking their forts in an effort to keep control of the Powder River Country of Montana . In support of him , Sitting Bull led numerous war parties against Fort Berthold , Fort Stevenson , and Fort Buford and their environs from 1865 through 1868 . Sitting Bull also made guerrilla attacks on emigrant parties and smaller forts throughout the upper Missouri River region . 
 By early 1868 , the U.S. government desired a peaceful settlement to Red Cloud 's War . It agreed to Red Cloud 's demands that the US abandon forts Phil Kearny and C.F. Smith . Gall of the Hunkpapa ( among other representatives of the Hunkpapa , Blackfeet , and Yankton Dakota ) signed a form of the Treaty of Fort Laramie on July 2 , 1868 at Fort Rice ( near Bismarck , North Dakota ) . Sitting Bull did not agree to the treaty . He told the Jesuit missionary , Pierre Jean De Smet , who sought him out on behalf of the government : “ I wish all to know that I do not propose to sell any part of part of my country . ” He continued his hit @-@ and @-@ run attacks on forts in the upper Missouri area throughout the late 1860s and early 1870s . 
 The events of 1866 @-@ 1868 mark a historically debated period of Sitting Bull 's life . According to historian Stanley Vestal , who conducted interviews with surviving Hunkpapa in 1930 , Sitting Bull was made " Supreme Chief of the whole Sioux Nation " at this time . Later historians and ethnologists have refuted this concept of authority , as the Lakota society was highly decentralized . Lakota bands and their elders made individual decisions , including whether to wage war . 
 = = The Great Sioux War of 1876 = = 
 Sitting Bull 's band of Hunkpapa continued to attack migrating parties and forts in the late 1860s . When in 1871 the Northern Pacific Railway conducted a survey for a route across the northern plains directly through Hunkpapa lands , it encountered stiff Lakota resistance . The same railway people returned the following year accompanied by federal troops . Sitting Bull and the Hunkpapa attacked the survey party , which was forced to turn back . In 1873 , the military accompaniment for the surveyors was increased again , but Sitting Bull 's forces resisted the survey " most vigorously . " The Panic of 1873 forced the Northern Pacific Railway 's backers ( such as Jay Cooke ) into bankruptcy . This halted construction of the railroad through Lakota , Dakota , and Nakota territory . 
 After the 1848 finding of gold in the Sierra Nevada and dramatic gains in new wealth from it , other men became interested in the potential for gold mining in the Black Hills . In 1874 , Lt. Col. George Armstrong Custer led a military expedition from Fort Abraham Lincoln near Bismarck , to explore the Black Hills for gold and to determine a suitable location for a military fort in the Hills . Custer 's announcement of gold in the Black Hills triggered the Black Hills Gold Rush . Tensions increased between the Lakota and whites seeking to move into the Black Hills . 
 Although Sitting Bull did not attack Custer 's expedition in 1874 , the US government was increasingly pressured by citizens to open the Black Hills to mining and settlement . Failing in an attempt to negotiate a purchase or lease of the Hills , the government in Washington had to find a way around the promise to protect the Sioux in their land , as specified in the 1868 Treaty of Fort <unk> was alarmed at reports of Sioux depredations ( encouraged by Sitting Bull ) . In November 1875 , President Grant ordered all Sioux bands outside the Great Sioux Reservation to move onto the reservation , knowing full well that not all would comply . As of February 1 , 1876 , the Interior Department certified as " hostile " those bands who continued to live off the reservation . This certification allowed the military to pursue Sitting Bull and other Lakota bands as " hostiles " . 
 Based on tribal oral histories , historian Margot Liberty theorizes many Lakota bands allied with the Cheyenne during the Plains Wars because they thought the other nation was under attack by the US . Given this connection , she suggests the major war should have been called " The Great Cheyenne War " . Since 1860 , the Northern Cheyenne had led several battles among the Plains Indians . Before 1876 , the U.S. Army had destroyed seven Cheyenne camps , more than those of any other nation . 
 Other historians , such as Robert M. Utley and Jerome Greene , also use Lakota oral testimony , but they have concluded that the Lakota coalition , of which Sitting Bull was the ostensible head , was the primary target of the federal government 's pacification campaign . 
 = = = Battle of the Little Bighorn = = = 
 During the period 1868 – 1876 , Sitting Bull developed into the most important of Native American political leaders . After the Treaty of Fort Laramie ( 1868 ) and the creation of the Great Sioux Reservation , many traditional Sioux warriors , such as Red Cloud of the Oglala and Spotted Tail of the Brulé , moved to reside permanently on the reservations . They were largely dependent for subsistence on the US Indian agencies . Many other chiefs , including members of Sitting Bull 's Hunkpapa band such as Gall , at times lived temporarily at the agencies . They needed the supplies at a time when white encroachment and the depletion of buffalo herds reduced their resources and challenged Native American independence . 
 In 1875 the Northern Cheyenne , Hunkpapa , Oglala , Sans Arc , and <unk> camped together for a Sun Dance , with both the Cheyenne medicine man White Bull or Ice and Sitting Bull in association . This ceremonial alliance preceded their fighting together in 1876 . Sitting Bull had a major revelation . 
 At the climactic moment , " Sitting Bull intoned , ' The Great Spirit has given our enemies to us . We are to destroy them . We do not know who they are . They may be soldiers . ' Ice too observed , ' No one then knew who the enemy were – of what tribe . ' ... They were soon to find out . " ( Utley 1992 : 122 – 24 ) 
 Sitting Bull 's refusal to adopt any dependence on the US government meant that at times he and his small band of warriors lived isolated on the Plains . When Native Americans were threatened by the United States , numerous members from various Sioux bands and other tribes , such as the North Cheyenne , came to Sitting Bull 's camp . His reputation for " strong medicine " developed as he continued to evade the European Americans . 
 After the January 1st ultimatum of 1876 , when the US Army began to track down as hostiles those Sioux and others living off the reservation , Native Americans gathered at Sitting Bull 's camp . He took an active role in encouraging this " unity camp " . He sent scouts to the reservations to recruit warriors , and told the Hunkpapa to share supplies with those Native Americans who joined them . An example of his generosity was Sitting Bull 's taking care of Wooden Leg 's Northern Cheyenne tribe . They had been impoverished by Captain Reynold 's March 17 , 1876 attack and fled to Sitting Bull 's camp for safety . 
 Over the course of the first half of 1876 , Sitting Bull 's camp continually expanded , as natives joined him for safety in numbers . His leadership had attracted warriors and families , creating an extensive village estimated at more than 10 @,@ 000 people . Lt. Col. Custer came across this large camp on June 25 , 1876 . Sitting Bull did not take a direct military role in the ensuing battle ; instead he acted as a spiritual leader . A week prior to the attack , he had performed the Sun Dance , in which he fasted and sacrificed over 100 pieces of flesh from his arms . 
 Custer ’ s 7th Cavalry advance party attacked Cheyenne and Lakota tribes at their camp on the Little Big Horn River ( known as the Greasy Grass River to the Lakota ) on June 25 , 1876 . The U.S. Army did not realize how large the camp was . More than 2 @,@ 000 Native American warriors had left their reservations to follow Sitting Bull . Inspired by a vision of Sitting Bull ’ s , in which he saw U.S. soldiers being killed as they entered the tribe ’ s camp , the Cheyenne and Lakota fought back . Custer 's badly outnumbered troops lost ground quickly and were forced to retreat . The tribes led a counter @-@ attack against the soldiers on a nearby ridge , ultimately annihilating them . 
 The Native Americans ' victory celebrations were short @-@ lived . Public shock and outrage at Custer 's death and defeat , and the government 's knowledge about the remaining Sioux , led them to assign thousands more soldiers to the area . Over the next year , the new American military forces pursued the Lakota , forcing many of the Native Americans to surrender . Sitting Bull refused to surrender and in May 1877 led his band across the border into the North @-@ West Territories , Canada . He remained in exile for four years near Wood Mountain , refusing a pardon and the chance to return . When crossing the border into Canadian territory , Sitting Bull was met by the Mounties of the region . During this meeting , James Morrow Walsh , commander of the North @-@ West Mounted Police , explained to Sitting Bull that the Lakota were now on British soil and must obey British law . Walsh emphasized that he enforced the law equally and that every person in the territory had a right to justice . Walsh became an advocate for Sitting Bull and the two became good friends for the remainder of their lives . 
 While in Canada , Sitting Bull also met with Crowfoot , who was a leader of the Blackfeet , long @-@ time powerful enemies of the Lakota and Cheyenne . Sitting Bull wished to make peace with the Blackfeet Nation and Crowfoot . As an advocate for peace himself , Crowfoot eagerly accepted the tobacco peace offering . Sitting Bull was so impressed by Crowfoot that he named one of his sons after him . Sitting Bull and his people stayed in Canada for 4 years . Due to the smaller size of the buffalo herds in Canada , Sitting Bull and his men found it difficult to find enough food to feed his people , who were starving and exhausted . Sitting Bull ’ s presence in the country led to increased tensions between the Canadian and the United States governments . Before Sitting Bull left Canada , he may have visited Walsh for a final time and left a ceremonial headdress as a memento . 
 = = = Surrender = = = 
 Hunger and desperation eventually forced Sitting Bull , and 186 of his family and followers , to return to the United States and surrender on July 19 , 1881 . Sitting Bull had his young son Crow Foot surrender his Winchester lever @-@ action carbine to Major David H. Brotherton , commanding officer of Fort Buford , Sitting Bull said to Major David H. Brotherton , " I , <unk> <unk> , wish it to be remembered that I was the last man of my tribe to surrender my rifle . " To the Oglala <unk> , Dakotas and Nakota , " to surrender my rifle " in this context meant " We have killed enough white men with your own rifles so I give this rifle back to you , for <unk> <unk> ( Grandfather Great Mystery ) will use a different way to help us overcome the white man . " In the parlor of the Commanding Officer 's Quarters in a ceremony the next day , he told the four soldiers , 20 warriors and other guests in the small room that he wished to regard the soldiers and the white race as friends but he wanted to know who would teach his son the new ways of the world . Two weeks later , after waiting in vain for other members of his tribe to follow him from Canada , the Army transferred Sitting Bull and his band to Fort Yates , the military post located adjacent to the Standing Rock Agency . This reservation straddles the present @-@ day boundary between North and South Dakota . 
 Sitting Bull and his band of 186 people were kept separate from the other Hunkpapa gathered at the agency . Army officials were concerned that he would stir up trouble among the recently surrendered northern bands . On August 26 , 1881 , he was visited by census taker William T. Selwyn , who counted twelve people in the Hunkpapa leader 's immediate family . Forty @-@ one families , totaling 195 people , were recorded in Sitting Bull 's band . 
 The military decided to transfer Sitting Bull and his band to Fort Randall , to be held as prisoners of war . Loaded onto a steamboat , the band of 172 people was sent down the Missouri River to Fort Randall ( near present @-@ day <unk> , South Dakota ) on the southern border of the state . There they spent the next 20 months . They were allowed to return north to the Standing Rock Agency in May 1883 . 
 In 1883 , rumors were reported that Sitting Bull had been baptized into the Catholic Church . James McLaughlin , Indian agent at Standing Rock Agency , dismissed these reports , saying that " The reported baptism of Sitting @-@ Bull is erroneous . There is no immediate prospect of such ceremony so far as I am aware . " 
 = = Meets Annie Oakley = = 
 In 1884 show promoter <unk> Allen asked Agent James McLaughlin to allow Sitting Bull to tour parts of Canada and the northern United States . The show was called the " Sitting Bull Connection . " It was during this tour that Sitting Bull met Annie Oakley in Minnesota . He was so impressed with Oakley 's skills with firearms that he offered $ 65 for a photographer to take a photo of the two together . The admiration and respect was mutual . Oakley stated that Sitting Bull made a " great pet " of her . In observing Oakley , Sitting Bull 's respect for the young sharpshooter grew . Oakley was quite modest in her attire , deeply respectful of others , and had a remarkable stage persona despite being a woman who stood only five feet in height . Sitting Bull felt that she was " gifted " by supernatural means in order to shoot so accurately with both hands . As a result of his esteem , he symbolically " adopted " her as a daughter in 1884 . He named her " Little Sure Shot " — a name that Oakley used throughout her career . 
 = = Wild West Show = = 
 In 1885 , Sitting Bull was allowed to leave the reservation to go Wild Westing with Buffalo Bill Cody ’ s Buffalo Bill 's Wild West . He earned about $ 50 a week for riding once around the arena , where he was a popular attraction . Although it is rumored that he cursed his audiences in his native tongue during the show , the historian Utley contends that he did not . Historians have reported that Sitting Bull gave speeches about his desire for education for the young , and reconciling relations between the Sioux and whites . The historian Edward Lazarus wrote that Sitting Bull reportedly cursed his audience in Lakota in 1884 , during an opening address celebrating the completion of the Northern Pacific Railway . 
 Sitting Bull stayed with the show for four months before returning home . During that time , audiences considered him a celebrity and romanticized him as a warrior . He earned a small fortune by charging for his autograph and picture , although he often gave his money away to the homeless and beggars . 
 = = Ghost Dance Movement = = 
 Sitting Bull returned to the Standing Rock Agency after working in Buffalo Bill 's Wild West show . Tension between Sitting Bull and Agent McLaughlin increased and each became more wary of the other over several issues including division and sale of parts of the Great Sioux Reservation . During that period , in 1889 Indian Rights Activist Caroline Weldon from Brooklyn , New York , a member of the National Indian Defense Association " NIDA " , reached out to Sitting Bull , acting to be his voice , secretary , interpreter and advocate . She joined him , together with her young son Christy at his compound on the Grand River , sharing with him and his family home and hearth . A Paiute Indian , named <unk> , spread a religious movement from Nevada eastward to the Plains in 1889 that preached a resurrection of the Native . This was a time of severe conditions of harsh winters and long droughts impacting the Sioux Reservation . It was known as the “ Ghost Dance Movement ” , because it called on the Indians to dance and chant for the rising up of deceased relatives and return of the buffalo . When the movement reached Standing Rock , Sitting Bull allowed the dancers to gather at his camp . Although he did not appear to participate in the dancing , he was viewed as a key instigator . Alarm spread to nearby white settlements as the Sioux added a new feature to the dance – shirts that were said to stop bullets . 
 = = Death and burial = = 
 In 1890 , James McLaughlin , the U.S. Indian Agent at Fort Yates on Standing Rock Agency , feared that the Lakota leader was about to flee the reservation with the Ghost Dancers , so he ordered the police to arrest him . On December 14 , 1890 , McLaughlin drafted a letter to Lt. Henry Bullhead ( noted as Bull Head in lead ) , an Indian agency policeman , that included instructions and a plan to capture Sitting Bull . The plan called for the arrest to take place at dawn on December 15 , and advised the use of a light spring wagon to facilitate removal before his followers could rally . Bullhead decided against using the wagon . He intended to have the police officers force Sitting Bull to mount a horse immediately after the arrest . 
 Around 5 : 30 a.m. on December 15 , 39 police officers and four volunteers approached Sitting Bull 's house . They surrounded the house , knocked and entered . Lt. Bull Head told Sitting Bull that he was under arrest and led him outside . Sitting Bull and his wife noisily stalled for time , the camp awakened and men converged at the house . As Lt. Bullhead ordered Sitting Bull to mount a horse , he said the Indian Affairs agent needed to see the chief , and then he could return to his house . When Sitting Bull refused to comply , the police used force on him . The Sioux in the village were enraged . Catch @-@ the @-@ Bear , a Lakota , shouldered his rifle and shot Lt. Bullhead , who reacted by firing his revolver into the chest of Sitting Bull . Another police officer , Red Tomahawk , shot Sitting Bull in the head , and he dropped to the ground . He died between 12 and 1 p.m. 
 A close @-@ quarters fight erupted , and within minutes several men were dead . The Lakota killed six policemen immediately and two more died shortly after the fight , including Lt. Bullhead . The police killed Sitting Bull and seven of his supporters at the site , along with two horses . 
 Sitting Bull 's body was taken to Fort Yates , where it was placed in a coffin ( made by the Army carpenter ) and buried . A monument was installed to mark his burial site after his remains were reportedly taken to South Dakota . 
 In 1953 Lakota family members exhumed what they believed to be Sitting Bull 's remains , transporting them for reinterment near <unk> , South Dakota , his birthplace . A monument to him was erected there . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Following Sitting Bull 's death , his cabin on the Grand River was taken to Chicago for use as an exhibit at the 1893 World 's Columbian Exposition . Native American dancers also performed at the Exposition . 
 On September 14 , 1989 , the United States Postal Service released a Great Americans series 28 ¢ postage stamp featuring a likeness of Sitting Bull . 
 On March 6 , 1996 , Standing Rock College was renamed Sitting Bull College in his honor . Sitting Bull College serves as an institution of higher education on Sitting Bull 's home of Standing Rock in North Dakota and South Dakota . 
 The American historian Gary Clayton Anderson of the University of Oklahoma published Sitting Bull and the Paradox of Lakota Nationhood ( 2010 ) , a revisionist examination of the Lakota medicine man . Anderson stresses the Little Big Horn in light of past successes of the Lakota Nation and the merits of Sitting Bull himself , rather than simply a mishap by Custer . 
 In August 2010 , a research team led by <unk> <unk> , an ancient DNA expert at the University of Copenhagen , announced their intention to sequence the genome of Sitting Bull , with the approval of his descendants , using a hair sample obtained during his lifetime . 
 = = Representation in popular culture = = 
 Sitting Bull was the subject of , or a featured character in , several Hollywood motion pictures and documentaries , which have reflected changing ideas about him and Lakota culture in relation to the United States . Among them are : 
 Sitting Bull : The Hostile Sioux Indian Chief ( 1914 ) 
 Sitting Bull at the Spirit Lake Massacre ( 1927 ) 
 Annie Oakley ( 1935 ) 
 Annie Get Your Gun ( 1950 ) 
 Sitting Bull ( 1954 ) , with J. Carrol Naish in the title role , Iron Eyes Cody as Crazy Horse ; with Dale Robertson and William Tannen . 
 Cheyenne ( 1957 ) , with Clint Walker in the title role of the episode " The Broken Pledge " ; Frank DeKova plays Sitting Bull , and Whit Bissell , George Custer 
 Buffalo Bill and the Indians , or Sitting Bull 's History Lesson ( 1976 ) 
 Buffalo Girls ( 1995 TV film ) 
 Into the West ( 2005 ) 
 Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee ( 2007 ) 
 Sitting Bull : A Stone in My Heart ( 2008 ) Documentary 
 As time passed , Sitting Bull has become a symbol and archetype of Native American resistance movements as well as a figure celebrated by descendants of his former enemies : 
 Legoland Billund , the first Legoland park , contains a Lego sculpture of Sitting Bull , the largest sculpture in the park . 
 Sitting Bull is featured as the leader for the Native American Civilization in the computer game Civilization IV . 
 Sitting Bull is lionized as one of 13 great Americans in President Barack Obama 's children 's book , Of Thee I Sing : A Letter to My Daughters . 
 Sitting Bull is a major character in Sharon Pollock 's play " Walsh " ( 1973 ) , in which he is depicted as a wise and tragic figure during the Lakota nation 's time at Fort Walsh in Saskatchewan . The play is sympathetic to the character of Sitting Bull and hostile to the legend of George Armstrong Custer , re @-@ presenting the General from the perspective of Native Americans as a butcher of women and children . 
 = The Boat Race 1905 = 
 The 62nd Boat Race took place on 1 April 1905 . Held annually , the Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing race between crews from the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge along the River Thames . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions having won the previous year 's race . In this year 's race , umpired by former rower Frederick I. Pitman , Oxford won by three lengths in a time of 20 minutes 35 seconds . The victory took the overall record to 34 – 27 in their favour . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Boat Race is a side @-@ by @-@ side rowing competition between the University of Oxford ( sometimes referred to as the " Dark Blues " ) and the University of Cambridge ( sometimes referred to as the " Light Blues " ) . The race was first held in 1829 , and since 1845 has taken place on the 4 @.@ 2 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 8 km ) Championship Course on the River Thames in southwest London . The rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities ; it is followed throughout the United Kingdom and , as of 2015 , broadcast worldwide . Cambridge went into the race as reigning champions , having won the 1904 race by four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half lengths , while Oxford led overall with 33 victories to Cambridge 's 27 ( excluding the " dead heat " of 1877 ) . 
 Cambridge were coached by John Edwards @-@ Moss who had rowed in the 1902 and 1903 races , Francis Escombe and David Alexander Wauchope ( who had rowed in the 1895 race ) . Oxford 's coaches were William Fletcher , who rowed for them in the 1890 , 1891 , 1892 and 1893 races and C. K. Philips who had represented the Dark Blues four times between 1895 and 1898 . The umpire for the third year was old Etonian and former Cambridge rower Frederick I. Pitman who rowed in the 1884 , 1885 and 1886 races . 
 = = Crews = = 
 The Cambridge crew weighed an average of 12 st 0 lb ( 76 @.@ 0 kg ) , 1 @.@ 375 pounds ( 0 @.@ 6 kg ) per rower more than their opponents . Oxford 's crew contained five rowers with Boat Race experience , including A. K. Graham who was rowing in his third consecutive race . Cambridge saw four rowers return to their crew , including P. H. Thomas who was making his fourth appearance in the event . All of the participants in the race were registered as British . 
 According to former Oxford rower and author George Drinkwater , the Dark Blues , while they " had no great difficulties in training ... never got really together or attained any great place " . Conversely , the Cambridge crew " suffered many misfortunes . " Old Etonian W. P. Wormald was forbidden from joining the crew by doctors , his replacement Stanley Bruce had to stand down soon after the Light Blues arrived at Putney , and he was replaced by novice P. H. Thomas who was unfit having recently returned from Africa . 
 = = Race = = 
 Cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the Middlesex station , handing the Surrey side of the river to Oxford . The race started at 11 : 30 a.m. under the command of umpire Pitman , and the Dark Blues took the lead . According to Drinkwater , they " had the race well in hand at the Mile " and " won as they liked it . " Oxford won by three lengths in a time of 20 minutes 35 seconds . It was their first victory in four years and the narrowest winning margin since the 1901 race . 
 = Tropical Storm Elena ( 1979 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Elena was a weak tropical storm that moved ashore along Texas in the 1979 Atlantic hurricane season . The sixth tropical storm of the season , Elena developed from a tropical wave to the south of Louisiana on August 29 . It tracked generally west @-@ northwest , strengthening little before making landfall on Matagorda Island on September 1 as a minimal tropical storm ; the storm quickly dissipated over land . Elena dropped moderate rainfall along its path , causing two direct deaths in Houston from drowning ; storm damage was minor , amounting to less than $ 10 million ( 1979 USD , $ 28 million 2007 USD ) . Lightning from the storm set fire to an oil supertanker in Houston , causing three indirect deaths and 13 injuries . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on August 17 . It tracked westward , passing through the Lesser Antilles on August 22 , and on August 27 the weak wave axis crossed through Florida . A tropical disturbance organized along the wave axis , with ship and buoy reports indicating the development of a low @-@ level circulation by August 29 . At <unk> GMT later that day , a Hurricane Hunters flight reported the existence of a tropical depression ; it was classified as Tropical Depression Thirteen , while located about 240 miles ( 390 km ) south of the mouth of the Mississippi River . With a ridge of high pressure located over the southeastern United States , the depression continued tracking generally westward and intensified into Tropical Storm Elena late on August 30 . Elena was the sixth tropical storm of the season , as Hurricane Frederic attained tropical storm status six hours prior to Elena . 
 Unfavorable northerly vertical wind shear persisted through much of Elena 's duration , which prohibited the development of convection . An approaching frontal trough weakened the high pressure system to its north , which resulted in Elena turning northwestward toward the Texas coastline . The storm remained poorly organized , failing to strengthen further , and on September 1 it made landfall on Matagorda Island as a minimal tropical storm . The cyclone rapidly weakened after moving ashore , and early on September 2 Elena degenerated into a remnant low pressure area over southeastern Texas . Trapped between two high pressure systems , the remnant mid @-@ level circulation drifted southwestward just inland for several days before dissipating on September 6 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 As Elena was upgraded to a tropical storm , the National Hurricane Center issued a gale warning from Port O 'Connor , Texas to Morgan City , Louisiana ; these remained in effect until the storm moved ashore . Winds were fairly minor in association with the storm ; a station in Galveston , Texas recorded a peak wind gust of 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) . As Elena moved ashore , it produced a 3 foot ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) storm tide at Galveston and Baytown . Rainfall from the storm was generally limited to the coastline , and peaked at 10 @.@ 3 inches ( 261 mm ) at Palacios ; light rainfall also extended along the coastline of Louisiana . Near Houston , 4 @.@ 6 inches ( 117 mm ) of precipitation was reported , which caused two drownings from flooding . Overall storm damage was fairly minor , totaling to less than $ 10 million ( 1979 USD , $ 28 million 2007 USD ) . 
 At a dock owned by Shell Oil Company in Deer Park near Houston , a lightning bolt from thunderstorms of Elena struck the oil supertanker SS Chevron Hawaii . The lightning started a fire on the ship , which expanded and wrecked one adjacent barge and burned nearby docks . The ship was nearly split in half from the lightning strike , and oil seeped into Houston Ship Channel for several hours . Firefighters combated the fire on the tanker in boats , but their efforts were hindered due to unsettled weather from Elena , as well as unsafe water to travel through . The fire caused three deaths and 13 injuries , and damage related to the incident totaled $ 27 million ( 1979 USD , $ 76 million 2007 USD ) . 
 Two Sperry Technicians that were dispatched to repair the radar on the ship were crossing the gangplank at the time of the explosion and were killed . Their names are David Strout and Don Wampler . 
 = Michigan State University = 
 Michigan State University ( MSU ) is a public research university in East Lansing , Michigan , United States . MSU was founded in 1855 and became the nation 's first land @-@ grant institution under the Morrill Act of 1862 , serving as a model for future land @-@ grant universities . The university was founded as the Agricultural College of the State of Michigan , one of the country 's first institutions of higher education to teach scientific agriculture . After the introduction of the Morrill Act , the college became coeducational and expanded its curriculum beyond agriculture . Today , MSU is the eighth @-@ largest university in the United States ( in terms of enrollment ) and has approximately 540 @,@ 000 living alumni worldwide . 
 MSU pioneered the studies of packaging , hospitality business , botany , supply chain management , criminal justice , music therapy , and communication sciences . Michigan State frequently ranks among the top 30 public universities in the United States and the top 100 research universities in the world . U.S. News & World Report ranks many of its graduate programs among the best in the nation , including African history , criminology , industrial and organizational psychology , educational psychology , elementary and secondary education , osteopathic medicine , nuclear physics , rehabilitation counseling , supply chain / logistics , and veterinary medicine . MSU is a member of the Association of American Universities , an organization of 62 leading research universities in North America . The university 's campus houses the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory , the W. J. Beal Botanical Garden , the Abrams Planetarium , the Wharton Center for Performing Arts , the Eli and Edythe Broad Art Museum , the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams , and the country 's largest residence hall system . 
 The Michigan State Spartans compete in the NCAA Division I Big Ten Conference . Michigan State Spartans football won the Rose Bowl Game in 1954 , 1956 , 1988 and 2014 , and a total of six national championships . Spartans men 's basketball won the NCAA National Championship in 1979 and 2000 , and has enjoyed a streak of seven Final Four appearances since the 1998 @-@ 1999 season . Spartans ice hockey won NCAA national titles in 1966 , 1986 and 2007 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Agriculture school = = = 
 The Michigan Constitution of 1850 called for the creation of an " agricultural school , " though it was not until February 12 , 1855 , that Michigan Governor Kinsley S. Bingham signed a bill establishing the United States ' first agriculture college , the Agricultural College of the State of Michigan . Classes began on May 13 , 1857 , with three buildings , five faculty members , and 63 male students . 
 The first president , Joseph R. Williams , designed a curriculum that required more scientific study than practically any undergraduate institution of the era . It balanced science , liberal arts , and practical training . The curriculum excluded Latin and Greek studies , since most applicants did not study any classical languages in their rural high schools . However , it did require three hours of daily manual labor , which kept costs down for both the students and the College . Despite Williams ' innovations and his defense of education for the masses , the State Board of Education saw Williams ' curriculum as elitist . They forced him to resign in 1859 and reduced the curriculum to a two @-@ year vocational program . 
 = = = Land Grant pioneer = = = 
 In 1860 , Williams became acting lieutenant governor and helped pass the Reorganization Act of 1861 . This gave the College a four @-@ year curriculum and the power to grant master 's degrees . Under the act , a newly created body , known as the State Board of Agriculture , took over from the State Board of Education in running the institution . The College changed its name to State Agricultural College , and its first class graduated in the same year . As the Civil War had just begun , there was no time for an elaborate graduation ceremony . The first alumni enlisted to the Union Army . Williams died , and the following year , Abraham Lincoln signed the First Morrill Act of 1862 to support similar colleges , making the Michigan school a national model . 
 = = = Co @-@ ed college = = = 
 The college first admitted women in 1870 , although at that time there were no female residence halls . The few women who enrolled boarded with faculty families or made the arduous stagecoach trek from Lansing . From the early days , female students took the same rigorous scientific agriculture courses as male students . In 1896 , the faculty created a " Women Course " that melded a home economics curriculum with liberal arts and sciences . That same year , the College turned the old Abbot Hall male dorm into a women 's dormitory . It was not until 1899 that the State Agricultural College admitted its first African American student , William O. Thompson . After graduation , he taught at what is now Tuskegee University . President Jonathan L. Snyder invited its president Booker T. Washington to be the Class of 1900 commencement speaker . A few years later , Myrtle Craig became the first woman African @-@ American student to enroll at the College . Along with the Class of 1907 , she received her degree from U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt , commencement speaker for the Semi @-@ Centennial celebration . The City of East Lansing was incorporated that same year , and two years later the college officially changed its name to Michigan Agricultural College ( M.A.C. ) . 
 = = = Big Ten university = = = 
 During the early 20th century , M.A.C. expanded its curriculum well beyond agriculture . By 1925 it had expanded enough that it changed its name to Michigan State College of Agriculture and Applied Science ( M.S.C. ) . In 1941 the Secretary of the State Board of Agriculture , John A. Hannah , became president of the College . He began the largest expansion in the institution 's history , with the help of the 1945 G.I. Bill , which helped World War II veterans to receive an education . One of Hannah 's strategies was to build a new dormitory building , enroll enough students to fill it , and use the income to start construction on a new dormitory . Under his plan , enrollment increased from 15 @,@ 000 in 1950 to 38 @,@ 000 in 1965 . 
 In 1957 , Hannah continued MSU 's expansion by co @-@ founding Michigan State University – Oakland , now Oakland University , with Matilda Dodge Wilson . Hannah also got the chance to improve the athletic reputation of M.S.C. when the University of Chicago resigned from the Big Ten Conference in 1946 . Hannah lobbied to take its place , gaining admission in 1949 . 
 Six years later , in its Centennial year of 1955 , the State of Michigan renamed the College as Michigan State University of Agriculture and Applied Science . Nine years after that , the University governing body changed its name from the State Board of Agriculture to the MSU Board of Trustees . The State of Michigan allowed the University to drop the words " Agriculture and Applied Science " from its name . Since 1964 the institution has gone by the name of Michigan State University . 
 = = = Oakland University = = = 
 In 1957 , the donation of 1 @,@ 500 acres ( 6 @.@ 1 km2 ) in Pontiac Township , Oakland County , Michigan prompted creation of Michigan State University – Oakland . That campus became the independent school , Oakland University , in 1970 . 
 = = = Global leader by 2012 = = = 
 Since the end of the Hannah era in 1969 , Michigan State has shifted its focus from increasing the size of its student body to advancing its national and global reputation . In September 2005 , president Lou Anna Simon called for MSU , one of the public ivy institutions , to become the global model leader for Land Grant institutions by the year 2012 . Her plans include creating a new residential college and increasing grants awarded from the National Institutes of Health past the US $ 100 million mark . While there are over 100 Land @-@ grant universities in the United States , she has stated she would like Michigan State University to be the leader . 
 Michigan State , the University of Michigan and Wayne State University created the University Research Corridor in 2006 . This alliance was formed to transform and strengthen Michigan 's economy by reaching out to businesses , policymakers , innovators , investors and the public to speed up technology transfer , make resources more accessible and attract new jobs to the state . 
 = = = Sexual assault investigation = = = 
 On May 1 , 2014 , Michigan State University was named one of fifty @-@ five higher education institutions under investigation by the Office of Civil Rights “ for possible violations of federal law over the handling of sexual violence and harassment complaints ” by Barack Obama 's White House Task Force To Protect Students from Sexual Assault . " The investigation at Michigan State involves its response to sexual harassment and sexual assault complaints involving students , " according to one reporter . It was later reported in the same paper that " An investigation by the U.S. Department of Education into how Michigan State University handles sexual assault complaints was spurred by an incident in Wonders Hall in August 2010 , a spokesman said . " 
 = = Campus = = 
 MSU 's sprawling campus is in East Lansing , Michigan . The campus is perched on the banks of the Red Cedar River . Development of the campus started in 1856 with three buildings : a multipurpose building called College Hall , a dormitory later called " Saints ' Rest " , and a barn . Today , MSU 's contiguous campus consists of 5 @,@ 200 acres ( 21 km2 ) , 2 @,@ 000 acres ( 8 @.@ 1 km2 ) of which are developed . There are 556 buildings : 100 for academics , 131 for agriculture , 166 for housing and food service , and 42 for athletics . Overall , the university has 22 @,@ 763 @,@ 025 square feet ( 2 @,@ 114 @,@ 754 @.@ 2 m2 ) of indoor space . Connecting it all is 26 miles ( 42 km ) of roads and 100 miles ( 160 km ) of sidewalks . MSU also owns 44 non @-@ campus properties , totaling 22 @,@ 000 acres ( 89 km2 ) in 28 different counties . 
 = = = North campus = = = 
 The oldest part of campus lies on the north bank of the Red Cedar . It includes Collegiate Gothic architecture , plentiful trees , and curving roads with few straight lines . The College built its first three buildings here , of which none survive . Other historic buildings north of the river include the president 's official residence , Cowles House , and Beaumont Tower , a carillon clock tower marking the site of College Hall , the original classroom building . To the east lies Eustace – Cole Hall , America 's first freestanding horticulture laboratory . Other landmarks include the bronze statue of former president John A. Hannah , the W. J. Beal Botanical Garden , and the painted boulder known as " The Rock " , a popular spot for theatre , tailgating , and candlelight vigils . On the campus 's northwest corner is the University 's hotel , the Kellogg Hotel and Conference Center . The university also has a museum , initiated in 1857 . MSU Museum is one of the Midwest 's oldest museums and is accredited by the American Alliance of Museums . 
 = = = South campus = = = 
 The campus south of the river consists mostly of post @-@ World War II International Style buildings , and is characterized by sparser foliage , relatively straight roadways , and many parking lots . The " 2020 Vision " Master Plan proposes replacing these parking lots with parking ramps and green space , but these plans will take many years to reach fruition . As part of the master plan , the University erected a new bronze statue of The Spartan in 2005 to be placed at the intersection of Chestnut and Kalamazoo , just south of the Red Cedar River . This replica replaced the original modernist terra cotta statue , which can still be seen inside Spartan Stadium . Notable academic and research buildings on the South Campus include the Cyclotron and the College of Law . 
 This part of campus is home to the MSU Horticulture Gardens and the adjoining 4 @-@ H Children 's Garden . South of the gardens lie the Canadian National and CSX railroads , which divide the main campus from thousands of acres of university @-@ owned farmland . The university 's agricultural facilities include the Horse , Dairy Cattle , Beef Cattle , Sheep , and Poultry Teaching and Research Farms , as well as the Air Quality Control Lab and the Diagnostics Center for Population and Animal Health . 
 = = = Kellogg Hotel and Conference Center = = = 
 The Kellogg Hotel and Conference Center doubles as a 4 @-@ star hotel and a business @-@ friendly conference center . It is on the northwest corner of Michigan State University 's campus , across from the Brody Complex , on Harrison Road just south of Michigan Avenue . The hotel 's 160 rooms and suites can accommodate anyone staying in East Lansing for a business conference , sporting event or an on @-@ campus visit , but it originally was a dormitory . Besides a lodging facility , the Kellogg Hotel and Conference Center is a " learning laboratory for the 300 – 400 students each year that are enrolled in The School of Hospitality Business and other majors . " The Kellogg Hotel and Conference Center strives to facilitate education by hosting conferences and seminars . 
 = = = Dubai Campus = = = 
 MSU runs a small campus at Dubai Knowledge Village , Dubai , United Arab Emirates . It first offered only one program , a master 's program in human resources and labor relations . In 2011 , it added a master 's program in Public Health . In April 2012 , MSU Dubai announced it hopes to begin in 2013 two programs in law : a <unk> program as well as a Master of Jurisprudence program . 
 Previously , MSU established an education center in Dubai offering six undergraduate programs , thereby becoming the first American university with a presence in Dubai International Academic City . The University attracted 100 students in 2007 , its first year , but the school was unable to achieve the 100 @-@ 150 new students per year needed for the program to be viable , and in 2010 MSU closed the program and the campus . 
 = = Academics = = 
 = = = Admissions = = = 
 Michigan State offers a rolling admissions system , with an early admission deadline in October . MSU is considered " more selective " by the U.S. News & World Report . Its admissions are difficult ; for 2009 's entering class , the 25th / 75th percentiles for the SAT were 1030 and 1240 / 1600 , and its 25th / 75th percentiles on the ACT were 23 and 27 / 36 . 
 For Fall 2014 , MSU received over 33 @,@ 000 freshman applications , which is a record for the school , and admitted 66 @.@ 1 % applicants . Incoming freshman had an average high school GPA of 3 @.@ 66 . 
 MSU has the seventh largest student body in the U.S. For the fiscal year of 2009 – 10 , the Office of the Registrar conferred 11 @,@ 140 degrees . The student body is 55 % female and 45 % male . While 89 % of students come from all 83 counties in the State of Michigan , also represented are all 50 states in the U.S. and about 130 other countries . 
 In 2011 – 2012 , 5 @,@ 898 international students enrolled at MSU . The top five countries represented : China , Korea , India , Taiwan and Canada . According to a Brookings Institution report analyzing foreign student visa approvals from 2008 @-@ 2012 , MSU has the third @-@ highest enrollment of Chinese international students in the United States , with roughly 4 @,@ 700 Chinese citizens enrolled during the period of the study . 
 MSU has about 4 @,@ 500 faculty and 6 @,@ 000 staff members , and a student / faculty ratio of 19 : 1 . Listed as a Public Ivy , Michigan State is a member of the Association of American Universities . Michigan State University Ombudsman is the longest continually operating ombudsman office at a college or university in the country . MSU 's study abroad program is the largest of any single @-@ campus university in the United States with 2 @,@ 461 students studying abroad in 2004 – 2005 in over 60 countries on all continents , including Antarctica . 
 MSU has six faculty members elected to the National Academy of Sciences ( NAS ) ; Martin Bukovac ( 1983 ) , James Dye ( 1989 ) , Pamela Fraker ( 2007 ) , Richard Lenski ( 2006 ) , Michael <unk> ( 2003 ) , and James <unk> ( 2003 ) . 
 = = = Rankings = = = 
 Michigan State ranks 99th in the world in 2015 , according to the Academic Ranking of World Universities . In its 2015 @-@ 16 rankings , Times Higher Education World University Rankings also ranked it 99th in the world . The 2015 QS World University Rankings placed Michigan State University at 164th internationally . In its 2016 edition , U.S. News & World Report ranked it as tied for the 29th @-@ best public university in the United States , tied for 75th nationally and tied for 82nd globally . 
 The university has over 200 academic programs . U.S. News ranked MSU 's graduate @-@ level programs in elementary teacher 's education , secondary teacher 's education , industrial and organizational psychology , and nuclear physics first in the nation for 2016 . U.S. News also ranks MSU third nationally for graduate education in African history and fourth nationally for graduate education in Educational Psychology . 
 The Eli Broad College of Business was ranked No. 42nd among undergraduate institutions nationally by Businessweek . Ninety @-@ four percent of the school 's graduates received job offers in 2014 . The 2016 U.S. News ranked Michigan State 's undergraduate supply chain management / logistics program in the Eli Broad College of Business 1st in the nation . In addition , the Eli Broad College of Business undergraduate accounting program is ranked 13th , the master 's accounting program is ranked 15th , and the doctoral program is ranked 11th , according to the 2013 Public Accounting Report 's Annual Survey of Accounting Professors . The MBA program is ranked 19th in the U.S. by Forbes magazine . 
 The College of Communication Arts and Sciences was established in 1955 and was the first of its kind in the United States . The college 's Media and Information Studies doctoral program was ranked No. 2 in 2007 by The Chronicle of Higher Education in the category of mass communication . The communication doctoral program was ranked No. 4 in a separate category of communication in The Chronicle of Higher Education 's 2005 Faculty Scholarly Productivity Index , published in 2007 . The college 's faculty and alumni include eight Pulitzer Prize winners and a two @-@ time Emmy Award winning recording mixer . 
 Other programs of note include criminal justice , hospitality business , packaging , political science , dietetics and communications . The Sustainable Endowments Institute awarded Michigan State with an overall grade of " B " on the 2009 Campus Sustainability Survey , including " A " s in the categories of Administration , Transportation , Endowment Transparency , and Investment Policies . 
 = = = Collections and Museum = = = 
 The Eli and Edythe Broad Art Museum is the university 's contemporary art museum . Michigan State University Libraries comprise North America 's 29th largest academic library system with over 4 @.@ 9 million volumes and 6 @.@ 7 million microforms . 
 = = = Research = = = 
 The university has a long history of academic research , and in 2013 – 14 spent $ 528 million toward it . In 1877 , botany professor William J. Beal performed the first documented genetic crosses to produce hybrid corn , which led to increased yields . MSU dairy professor G. Malcolm Trout invented the process for the homogenization of milk in the 1930s . In the 1960s , MSU scientists developed cisplatin , a leading cancer fighting drug . Albert <unk> , an Adjunct professor at MSU , was awarded the 2007 Nobel Prize in Physics together with Peter Grünberg . 
 Today , Michigan State continues its research with facilities such as the U.S. Department of Energy @-@ sponsored MSU @-@ DOE Plant Research Laboratory and a particle accelerator called the National Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory . The U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science named Michigan State University as the site for the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams ( <unk> ) . The $ 730 million facility will attract top researchers from around the world to conduct experiments in basic nuclear science , astrophysics , and applications of isotopes to other fields . 
 In 2004 , scientists at the Cyclotron produced and observed a new isotope of the element germanium , called Ge @-@ 60 In that same year , Michigan State , in consortium with the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and the government of Brazil , broke ground on the 4 @.@ 1 @-@ meter Southern Astrophysical Research Telescope ( SOAR ) in the Andes Mountains of Chile . The consortium telescope will allow the Physics & Astronomy department to study galaxy formation and origins . Since 1999 , MSU has been part of a consortium called the Michigan Life Sciences Corridor , which aims to develop biotechnology research in the State of Michigan . Finally , the College of Communication Arts and Sciences ' <unk> Center researches issues of information and communication management . 
 = = = = Big Ten Academic Alliance = = = = 
 Michigan State University is a participant in the Big Ten Academic Alliance . The Big Ten Academic Alliance ( BTAA ) is the academic consortium of the universities in the Big Ten Conference . Engaging in $ 10 billion in research in 2014 @-@ 2015 , BTAA universities provide powerful insight into important issues in medicine , technology , agriculture , and communities . Students at participating schools are also allowed " in @-@ house " borrowing privileges at other schools ' libraries . The BTAA uses collective purchasing and licensing , and has saved member institutions $ 19 million to date . Course sharing , professional development programs , study abroad and international collaborations , and other initiatives are also part of the BTAA . 
 = = = Endowment = = = 
 MSU 's ( private , non @-@ Morrill Act ) endowment started in 1916 when the Engineering Building burned down . Automobile magnate R.E. Olds helped the program stay afloat with a gift of $ 100 @,@ 000 . There was a time when MSU lagged behind peer institutions in terms of endowments . As recently as the early 1990s , MSU was last among the eleven Big Ten schools , with barely over $ 100 million in endowment funds . 
 This changed dramatically in the 2000s ( decade ) , when the University started a campaign to increase the size of the endowment . At the close of fiscal year 2004 – 2005 , the endowment had risen to $ 1 @.@ 325 billion , raising the University to sixth of the 11 Big Ten schools in terms of endowment ; within $ 2 million of the fifth @-@ rated school . The rapid increase in the size of the endowment will help to improve outdated facilities , such as the Music Building , which the College of Music hopes to soon replace with money from its alumni fundraising program . 
 = = Colleges = = 
 MSU has over 200 academic programs offered by 17 @-@ degree @-@ granting colleges . 
 = = = Residential colleges = = = 
 MSU has several residential colleges , based on the Oxbridge " living @-@ learning " model . By putting classes in student dormitories , these colleges improve student access to faculty and facilities . MSU 's first residential college , Justin Morrill College started in 1965 with an interdisciplinary curriculum . MSU closed Morrill College in 1979 , but today the university has three residential colleges , including the recent opening of the Residential College in Arts & Humanities ( <unk> ) located in Snyder and Phillips halls . 
 Established in 1967 , James Madison College is a smaller component residential college featuring multidisciplinary programs in the social sciences , founded on a model of liberal education . James Madison College is housed in Case Hall . Classes in the college are small , with an average of 25 students , and most instructors are tenure track faculty . James Madison College has about 1150 students total , with each freshman class containing about 320 students . Each of Madison 's four majors — Social Relations and Policy , International Relations , Political Theory and Constitutional Democracy , and Comparative Cultures and Politics — requires two years of foreign language and one semester of " field experience " in an internship or study abroad program . Although Madison students make up about 4 % of MSU graduates , they represent around 35 % of the MSU 's Phi Beta Kappa members . 
 Also established in 1967 , Lyman Briggs College teaches math and science within social , historical and philosophical contexts . Many Lyman Briggs students intend to pursue careers in medicine , but the school supports over 30 coordinate majors , from human biology to computer sciences . Lyman Briggs is one of the few colleges that lets undergraduates teach as " Learning Assistants . " 
 MSU 's newest residential college is the Residential College in Arts & Humanities . Founded October 21 , 2005 , the college provides around 600 undergraduates with an individualized curriculum in the liberal , visual and performing arts . Though all the students will graduate with the same degree , MSU encourages students in the college to get a second degree or specialization . The university houses the new college in a newly renovated Snyder @-@ Phillips Hall , the location of MSU 's first residential college , Justin Morrill College . 
 = = = Professional schools = = = 
 The Michigan State University College of Law is an independent , non @-@ profit corporation affiliated with the public institution . Founded in Detroit in 1891 as the Detroit College of Law , the law school moved to East Lansing in 1995 becoming an integral part of the university . Students attending MSU College of Law come from 42 states and 13 countries . The law school publishes the Michigan State Law Review , the Michigan State Journal of International Law , the Journal of Medicine Law , and the Journal of Business & Securities Law . The College of Law is the home of the Geoffrey <unk> Trial Practice Institute , the first trial practice institute in the United States . The Intellectual Property and Communications Law program was ranked seventeenth nationally , in 2006 . 
 The Eli Broad College of Business has programs in accounting , information systems , finance , general management , human resource management , marketing , supply chain management , and hospitality business . The school has 2 @,@ 066 admitted undergraduate students and 817 graduate students . The Eli Broad Graduate School of Management , which Businessweek magazine in 2012 ranked 35th in the nation and 14th among public institutions , offers three MBA programs , as well as joint degrees with the College of Law . The opening of the Eugene C. Eppley Center for Graduate Studies in Hotel , Restaurant and Institutional Management brought the first program in the United States to offer a Master of Business Administration degree in Hotel , Restaurant and Institutional Management to MSU . 
 The Michigan State University College of Nursing grants <unk> , <unk> , and PhD degrees . 
 The Michigan State University College of Osteopathic Medicine was the world 's first publicly funded college of osteopathic medicine . It has a long @-@ standing tradition of retaining its alumni in Michigan to practice – more than two @-@ thirds of the college 's graduates remain to practice in Michigan . In 2008 , the Michigan State University Board of Trustees approved a resolution endorsing the expansion of the College of Osteopathic Medicine to two sites in southeast Michigan , a move board members and college officials say will not only improve medical education in the state , but also address a projected physician shortage . 
 According to U.S. News & World Report 's 2016 rankings , the College of Osteopathic Medicine ( D.O. degree ) ranked tied for 12th among U.S. medical schools for primary care , and the College of Human Medicine ( MD degree ) was ranked 70th among the U.S. medical schools for primary care . 
 The College of Human Medicine graduates students with a Doctor of Medicine ( M.D. degree ) and is split into seven distinct campuses located in East Lansing , Kalamazoo , Flint , Saginaw , Marquette , Traverse City and Grand Rapids . Each campus is affiliated with local hospitals and other medical facilities professionals in the area . For example , the Lansing campus includes Sparrow Hospital and McLaren – Greater Lansing Hospital . The College of Human Medicine has recently gained attention for its expansion into the Grand Rapids area , with the new <unk> Center completed in the Fall of 2010 , that is expected to fuel the growing medical industry in that region . 
 Though Michigan State has offered courses in veterinary science since its founding , the College of Veterinary Medicine was not formally established as a four @-@ year , degree @-@ granting program until 1910 . In 2011 , the Michigan State University College of Veterinary Medicine was ranked No. 9 in the nation . The college has over 170 @,@ 000 square feet ( 16 @,@ 000 m2 ) of office , teaching , and research space , as well as a veterinary teaching hospital . 
 = = = Other academic units = = = 
 In recent years , MSU 's music program has grown substantially . Music major enrollment increased more than 97 % between 1991 and 2004 . In early 2007 , this growth led the university board of trustees to spin the music program off into its own college unit : The MSU College of Music . The new college faces many new challenges , such as working with limited space and funding . Nevertheless , MSU 's music college plans on continued success , placing an annual average of 25 graduate students in tenure stream university positions . 
 The College of Education at Michigan State University offers graduate and undergraduate degrees in several fields , including counseling , educational psychology , special education , teacher education and kinesiology . The graduate school has several programs ranked in the top five in the country by U.S. News & World Report for 2016 : elementary teacher education ( 1st ) , secondary teacher education ( 1st ) , curriculum and instruction ( 3rd ) , educational psychology ( 4th ) , and higher education administration ( 4th ) . The College of Education is housed in Erickson Hall . 
 Founded in 1956 , the MSU Honors College provides individualized curricula to MSU 's top undergraduate students . Though the college offers no majors of its own , it has its own dean and academic advisers to help Honors students with their educational pursuits . High school students starting at MSU may join the Honors College if they are in the top 5 % of their high school graduating class and have an ACT score of at least 30 or an SAT total score of at least 1360 . Students can also be admitted after their first semester , generally if they 're in the top 10 % of their College in GPA . Once admitted , students must maintain a 3 @.@ 20 GPA and complete eight approved honors courses to graduate with Honors College designation on their degree . If membership is relinquished , it cannot be reclaimed . 
 After three years of planning , The College of Engineering launched the first stages of its Residential Experience for Spartan Engineering , formally known as the Residential Option for Scientists and Engineers ( <unk> ) , the new program is in Wilson Hall after being housed in Bailey Hall for a number of years . The Residential program essentially combines with a brand new academic component , Cornerstone Engineering , where freshman engineering students not only get an overview of the engineering field ( s ) but get a hands @-@ on experience along with it . Global Engineering is a new subject that is of interest for not only the Cornerstone Engineering and Residential Experience programs but the entire College of Engineering at MSU . Engineering in today 's society has shown to have a monumental impact on the global economy due to advancements in education , interdependence on economics with infrastructure , computers , transportation , technology and other manufactured goods as well as Michigan State University 's study @-@ abroad program being ranked No. 1 in the nation , allowing for students to experience education and learn cultures in hundreds of countries . The newly established Cornerstone Engineering and Residential Experience programs for College of Engineering have started programs abroad for more courses in engineering including Study abroad seminars . 
 MSU offers a 30 credit graduate program for Masters in Educational Technology in 3 different formats ; completely online , hybrid in East Lansing , Michigan , or overseas . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 Michigan State 's NCAA Division I @-@ A program offers 12 varsity sports for men and 13 for women . Since their teams are called the Spartans , MSU 's mascot is a Spartan warrior named Sparty . The university participates in the Big Ten Conference in all varsity sports , including the new Big Ten hockey conference , featuring 6 teams . The current athletic director is Mark Hollis , who was promoted to the position on January 1 , 2008 . Hollis replaced Ron Mason , who served as head hockey coach from 1979 to 2002 , retiring with a record total of 924 wins , and a 635 – 270 – 69 record at MSU . 
 In 1888 Michigan State University ( then as known as Michigan Agricultural College ) along with Olivet , Albion and Hillsdale Colleges was a founding member of the nation 's oldest athletic conference , the Michigan Intercollegiate Athletic Association ( MIAA ) . MAC left the conference in 1907 . 
 = = = Football = = = 
 Football has a long tradition at Michigan State . Starting as a club sport in 1884 , football gained varsity status in 1896 . MSU football teams won the Rose Bowl in 1954 , 1956 , 1988 , and 2014 . They won national championships in 1951 , 1952 , 1955 , 1957 , 1965 and 1966 . The Spartans accounted for four of the top eight selections in the 1967 NFL Draft , the only time a college football program has accomplished such a feat . 
 Today , the football team competes in Spartan Stadium , a renovated 75 @,@ 005 seat football stadium near the center of campus . The current coach is Mark Dantonio , who was hired on November 27 , 2006 . He led the team in its first season to a 7 – 6 record . In 2010 , the Spartans finished 11 – 2 ( 7 @-@ 1 in conference play ) and were Co @-@ Big Ten Champion along with Wisconsin and Ohio State . In 2011 , the Spartans finished 1st in the Legends Division of the Big Ten with a 7 – 1 ( 11 – 3 ) conference record , logging back @-@ to @-@ back 11 win seasons for the first time in Spartan history . In 2014 , MSU achieved an 11 @-@ 2 overall record with losses only to the University of Oregon Ducks and The Ohio State Buckeyes , and ended the season ranked # 5 . 
 MSU 's traditional archrival is the University of Michigan , against whom they compete annually for the Paul Bunyan Trophy . Their overall record against the Wolverines currently stands at 32 – 67 – 5 and 23 – 34 – 2 since 1953 when the Paul Bunyan Trophy was established and MSU joined the Big Ten Conference . 
 = = = Men 's basketball = = = 
 MSU 's men 's basketball team has won the National Championship twice : in 1979 and again in 2000 . In 1979 , Earvin " Magic " Johnson , along with Greg Kelser , Jay Vincent and Mike Brkovich , led the MSU team to a 75 – 64 win against the Larry Bird @-@ led Indiana State Sycamores . In 2000 , three players from Flint , Morris Peterson , Charlie Bell and Mateen Cleaves , led the team to its second national title . Dubbed the " Flintstones " , they were the key to the Spartans ' win against the University of Florida . On December 13 , 2003 , Michigan State and Kentucky played in the <unk> , in which a record crowd of 78 @,@ 129 watched the game in Detroit 's Ford Field . Kentucky won 79 – 74 . The basketball team plays at the Jack Breslin Student Events Center under head coach Tom Izzo , who has a 403 – 166 record as of February 2012 ( 70 @.@ 8 % winning percentage ) . The student spirit section at Breslin is called the <unk> . Izzo 's coaching has helped the team make seven Final Fours since 1999 , winning the title in 2000 , and eighteen consecutive NCAA tournament appearances ( beginning in 1998 ) . In 2009 the Spartans made it to the National Championship game and lost 89 – 72 to North Carolina . 
 = = = Men 's ice hockey = = = 
 The Michigan State University men 's ice hockey team started in 1924 , though it has only been a varsity sport since 1950 . The team has since won national titles in 1966 , 1986 and 2007 . The Spartans came close to repeating the national title in 1987 , but lost the championship game to the University of North Dakota . They play at MSU 's Munn Ice Arena . Former head coach Ron Mason is college hockey 's winningest coach with 924 wins total and 635 at MSU . The current head coach is Tom <unk> . The MSU men 's ice hockey team competes in the Big Ten conference . They formerly competed in the Central Collegiate Hockey Association . Michigan State leads the CCHA in all @-@ time wins , is second in CCHA Conference championships with 7 , and is first in CCHA Tournament Championships with 11 . Along with the University of Michigan ( U @-@ M ) and the Ohio State University , it was one of three Big Ten schools in the CCHA . As with other sports , the hockey rivalry between MSU and U @-@ M is a fierce one , and on October 6 , 2001 , MSU faced U @-@ M in the Cold War , during which a world record crowd of 74 @,@ 554 packed Spartan Stadium to watch the game end in a 3 – 3 tie . In the 2006 – 2007 season , the Men 's Ice Hockey team defeated Boston College for its third NCAA hockey championship . 
 = = = Men 's cross country = = = 
 Between World War I and World War II , Michigan State College competed in the Central Collegiate Conference , winning titles in 1926 – 1929 , 1932 , 1933 and 1935 . Michigan State also experienced success in the <unk> , at New York 's Van Cortlandt Park , winning 15 team titles ( 1933 – 1937 , 1949 , 1953 , 1956 – 1960 , 1962 , 1963 and 1968 ) . Since entering the Big Ten in 1950 , Michigan State has won 14 men 's team titles ( 1951 – 1953 , 1955 – 1960 , 1962 , 1963 , 1968 , 1970 and 1971 ) . Michigan State hosted the inaugural NCAA cross country championships in 1938 and every year thereafter through 1964 ( there was no championship in 1943 ) . The Spartans won NCAA championships in 1939 , 1948 , 1949 , 1952 , 1955 , 1956 , 1958 and 1959 . 
 = = = Wrestling = = = 
 MSU Spartan Wrestling won their only team NCAA Championship in 1967 . The current Spartans Head coach is Tom Minkel in his 25th season . The team competes on campus at the Jenison Field House . Spartan Wrestling has over 50 Big Ten Conference Champions , over 100 All @-@ Americans , and 11 individual wrestlers have NCAA Division I Wrestling Championships . Notable former Spartan wrestlers include Rashad Evans and Gray Maynard . 
 = = Student life = = 
 East Lansing is very much a college town , with 60 @.@ 2 % of the population between the ages of 15 and 24 . President John A. Hannah 's push to expand in the 1950s and 1960s resulted in the largest residence hall system in the United States . Around 16 @,@ 000 students live in MSU 's 23 undergraduate halls , one graduate hall , and three apartment villages . Each residence hall has its own hall government , with representatives in the Residence Halls Association . Yet despite the size and extent of on @-@ campus housing , the residence halls are complemented by a variety of housing options . 58 % of students live off @-@ campus , mostly in the areas closest to campus , in either apartment buildings , former single @-@ family homes , fraternity and sorority houses , or in a co @-@ op . 
 In 2014 there were approximately 50 @,@ 085 students , 38 @,@ 786 undergraduate and 11 @,@ 299 graduate and professional . The students are from all 50 states and 130 countries around the world . 
 = = = Greek life = = = 
 With over 3 @,@ 000 members , Michigan State University 's Greek Community is one of the largest in the US . Started in 1872 and re @-@ established in 1922 by Lambda Chi Alpha Fraternity , Alpha Gamma Rho Fraternity , and Alpha Phi Sorority ; the MSU Greek system now consists of 55 Greek lettered student societies . These chapters are in turn under the jurisdiction of one of MSU 's four Greek governing councils : National Panhellenic Conference , North American Interfraternity Council , National Pan @-@ Hellenic Council , and Independent Greek Council . National Pan @-@ Hellenic Council is made up of 9 organizations , 5 Fraternities and 4 Sororities , that were founded on Historically Black College and Universities ( HBCU 's ) . The Interfraternity Council and the Women 's Panhellenic Council are each entirely responsible for their own budgets , giving them the freedom to hold large fundraising and recruitment events . MSU 's fraternities and sororities hold many philanthropy events and community fundraisers . For example , in April 2011 the Greek Community held Greek Week to raise over $ 260 @,@ 000 for the American Cancer Society , and $ 5 @,@ 000 for each of these charities : Big Brothers Big Sisters , The Listening Ear and previous charities include : the Make @-@ a @-@ Wish Foundation ( MSU Chapter ) , Share Laura 's Hope , The Mary Beth Knox Scholarship , and the Special Olympics , in which fraternity and sorority members get to help each other participate . 
 = = = Student organizations = = = 
 The Associated Students of Michigan State University ( ASMSU ) is the all @-@ university undergraduate student government of Michigan State University . It is unusual amongst university student governments for its decentralized bicameral structure , and the relatively non @-@ existent influence of the Greek system . The structure has since changed to a single General Assembly as part of reorganization in the late 2000s . ASMSU representatives are nonpartisan and many are elected in noncompetitive races . Their mission is to enhance the individual and collective student experience through education , empowerment , and advocacy by education to the needs and interest of students . Some services they offer include : free blue books , low cost copies and printing , free yearbooks , interest free loans , funding for student organizations , free legal consultation , and <unk> and graphing calculator rentals . 
 Students pay $ 18 per semester to fund the functions of the ASMSU , including stipends for the organization 's officers and activities throughout the year . Some students have criticized ASMSU for not having enough electoral participation to gain a student mandate . Turnout since 2001 has hovered between 3 and 17 percent , with the 2006 election bringing out 8 % of the undergraduate student body . 
 Student @-@ run organizations beyond student government also have a large impact on the East Lansing / Michigan State University community . Student Organizations are registered through the Department of Student Life , which currently has a registry of over 800 student organizations . The Eli Broad College of Business includes 27 student organizations . The three largest organizations are the Finance Association ( FA ) , the Accounting Student Association ( ASA ) , and the Supply Chain Management Association ( <unk> ) . The <unk> is the host of the university 's largest major specific career fair . The fair attracts over 100 companies and over 400 students each year . 
 = = = Activism = = = 
 Activists have played a significant role in MSU history . During the height of the Vietnam War , student protests helped create co @-@ ed residence halls , and blocked the routing of Interstate 496 through campus . In the 1980s , Michigan State students convinced the University to divest the stocks of companies doing business in apartheid South Africa from its endowment portfolio , such as Coca @-@ Cola . MSU has many student groups focused on political change . Graduate campus groups include the Graduate Employees Union and the Council of Graduate Students . Michigan State also has a variety of partisan groups ranging from liberal to conservative , including the College Republicans , the College Democrats and several third party organizations . Other partisan activist groups include Young Americans for Freedom and Young Americans for Liberty on the right ; Young Democratic Socialists , Students for Economic Justice , Young Communist League and <unk> on the left . Given MSU 's proximity to the Michigan state capital of Lansing , many politically inclined Spartans intern for state representatives . 
 = = = Sustainability = = = 
 The MSU Office of Sustainability works with the University Committee for a Sustainable Campus to " foster a collaborative learning culture that leads the community to heightened awareness of its environmental impact . " The University is a member of the Chicago Climate Exchange , the world 's first greenhouse gas emission registry , and boasts the lowest electrical consumption per square foot among Big Ten universities . The University has set a goal of reducing energy use by 15 % , reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 15 % , reducing landfill waste by 30 % by 2015 . 
 The university has also pledged to meet LEED @-@ certification standards for all new construction . In July 2009 , the University completed construction of a $ 13 @.@ 3 million recycling center , and hopes to double their 2008 recycling rate of 14 % by 2010 . The construction of Brody Hall , a residence hall of Michigan State University Housing , was completed in August 2011 and qualified for LEED Silver certification because the facility includes a rain water collection tank used for restroom fixtures , a white PVC roof , meters that will monitor utilities to make sure they are used efficiently , and the use of recycled matter and local sources for building materials . 
 The Environmental Steward 's program support 's president Simon 's " Boldness by Design " strategic vision to transform environmental stewardship on campus within the seven @-@ year time frame . Environmental stewards promote environmental changes among co @-@ workers and peers , be points of contact for their department for environment @-@ related concerns , and be liaisons between the Be Spartan Green Team and buildings . 
 The Student Organic Farm is a student @-@ run , four @-@ season farm , which teaches the principals of organic farming and through a certificate program and community supported agriculture ( CSA ) on ten acres on the MSU campus . The certificate program consists of year round crop production , course work in organic farming , practical training and management , and an off @-@ site internship requirement . 
 = = = Media = = = 
 MSU has a variety of campus media outlets . The student @-@ run newspaper is the The State News and free copies are available online or at East Lansing newsstands . The paper prints 28 @,@ 500 copies from Monday through Friday during the fall and spring semesters , and 15 @,@ 000 copies Monday through Friday during the summer . The paper is not published on weekends , holidays , or semester breaks , but is continually updated online at <unk> The campus yearbook is called the Red Cedar Log . Red Cedar Review , Michigan State University 's premier literary digest for over forty years , is the longest running undergraduate @-@ run literary journal in the United States . It is published annually by the Michigan State University Press . 
 MSU also publishes a student @-@ run magazine during the academic year called Ing Magazine . Created in 2007 by MSU alumnus Adam Grant , the publication is released at the beginning of each month and publishes 7 issues each school year . MSU also publishes a student @-@ run fashion and lifestyle magazine called VIM Magazine once a semester . 
 Electronic media include three radio stations and one public television station , as well as student @-@ produced television shows . MSU 's Public Broadcasting Service affiliate , WKAR @-@ TV , the station is the second @-@ oldest educational television station in the United States , and the oldest east of the Mississippi River . Besides broadcasting PBS shows , WKAR @-@ TV produces its own local programming , such as a high school quiz bowl show called " <unk> " . In addition , MSU has three radio stations ; WKAR @-@ AM plays National Public Radio 's talk radio programming , whereas WKAR @-@ FM focuses mostly on classical music programming . Michigan State 's student @-@ run radio station , <unk> , broadcasts mostly alternative music during weekdays and electric music programming nights and weekends . 
 = = People = = 
 The current president of the University is Lou Anna Simon who took over on January 1 , 2005 , after being appointed by MSU 's governing board , the Board of Trustees . The Board receives its mandate from the Michigan Constitution as MSU is a state @-@ owned school . The constitution allows for eight trustees who are elected by statewide referendum every two years . Trustees have eight @-@ year terms , with two of the eight elected every other year . As of 2007 , the Board is made up of three Republicans and five Democrats . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 Important College leaders in the 19th century include John C. Holmes , who kept the Agriculture School from being a part of the University of Michigan and is widely credited with being the prime mover for the school 's founding ; Joseph R. Williams , the first president ; and Theophilus C. Abbot , the third president who stabilized the College after the Civil War . Also of importance was botany professor William J. Beal , an early plant ( hybrid corn ) geneticist who championed the laboratory teaching method . Another distinguished faculty member of the era was the alumnus / professor Liberty Hyde Bailey . Bailey was the first to raise the study of horticulture to a science , paralleling botany , which earned him the title of " Father of American Horticulture " . William L. Carpenter , a jurist who was elected to the Third Judicial Circuit of Michigan in 1894 , and member of the Michigan Supreme Court from 1902 until 1904 . Other famous 19th @-@ century graduates include Ray Stannard Baker , a famed " muckraker " journalist and Pulitzer Prize winning biographer ; Minakata <unk> , a renowned environmental scientist ; and William Chandler Bagley , a pioneering education reformer . 
 = = = 20th and 21st centuries = = = 
 There are currently around 442 @,@ 000 living MSU alumni worldwide giving the school one of the largest number of alumni of any institution of higher learning . Famous MSU alumni include former Michigan governors James Blanchard and John Engler , U.S. Senators Debbie Stabenow and Tim Johnson , U.S. Ambassador to Brazil Donna <unk> , Prime Minister of South Korea Lee Wan @-@ koo , Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Director Richard Cordray , former Jordan prime minister Adnan Badran , billionaire philanthropists Tom Gores , Andrew Beal and Eli Broad , Chief Justice of the Texas Supreme Court Wallace B. Jefferson , trial lawyer Geoffrey <unk> , former Food and Drug Administration official Peter <unk> , Pulitzer Prize @-@ winning novelist Richard Ford , Teamsters president James P. Hoffa , Quicken Loans founder and billionaire Cleveland Cavaliers owner Dan Gilbert , Sergeant at Arms of the U.S. House of Representatives Wilson Livingood , former Michigan U.S. Senator and Secretary of Energy Spencer Abraham , former Vice President of the Republic of Liberia Harry <unk> , and former U.S. Ambassador to Italy Peter <unk> . 
 Alumni in Hollywood include actors such as James Caan , Anthony Heald , Robert Urich and William Fawcett ; comedian Dick Martin , comedian Jackie <unk> , film directors Michael Cimino and Sam Raimi , and film editor Bob Murawski , as well as screenwriter David Magee Puerto Rican comedian Sunshine <unk> ( who has played the occasional Hollywood movie ) was a graduate student at MSU . 
 Composer <unk> Newlin received her undergraduate degree from MSU , while lyricist , theatrical director and clinical psychologist Jacques Levy earned a doctorate in psychology . The university has also produced such jazz luminaries as pianist Henry Butler , vibraphonist Milt Jackson , and keyboardist / composer @-@ arranger Clare Fischer . 
 Journalists include NBC reporter Chris Hansen , AP White House correspondent <unk> Pickler , NPR Washington correspondent Don <unk> , and veteran Michigan Capitol correspondent and PBS 's Off the Record host Tim <unk> . Novelist Michael Kimball graduated in 1990 . Novelist and true crime author R. Barri Flowers , who in 1977 a bachelors and in 1980 a masters in criminal justice , was inducted in 2006 into the MSU Criminal Justice Wall of Fame . Author Erik <unk> graduated with honors in 1994 and was also Academic Big @-@ Ten in basketball . Susan K. Avery , the first woman president and director of the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution , received an MSU bachelor 's degree in physics . In addition , two of the Little Rock Nine attended Michigan State , including Ernest Green , the first black student to graduate from Little Rock Central High School , and Carlotta Walls <unk> . The University awarded an honorary degree to Robert Mugabe in 1990 , but revoked it in 2008 . 
 Spartans formerly or currently in the NBA include Earvin " Magic " Johnson , Greg Kelser , Jay Vincent , Steve Smith , Scott Skiles , Jason Richardson , Mateen Cleaves , Alan Anderson , Zach Randolph , Morris Peterson , Charlie Bell , Johnny Green , Maurice Ager , Shannon Brown , Draymond Green , Denzel Valentine and <unk> Davis . 
 On the American Football League 's All @-@ Time Team are tight @-@ end Fred <unk> and safety George <unk> . 
 In the National Football League , MSU alumni include Carl Banks , who was a member of the Giants teams that won Super Bowls XXI and XXV . Banks was a standout in their Super Bowl XXI victory in which he recorded 14 total tackles , including ten solo tackles , as well as being part of the NFL 's 1980 's All @-@ Decade Team Morten Andersen , Plaxico Burress , Andre Rison , Derrick Mason , Muhsin Muhammad , T. J. Duckett , <unk> Adams , Julian Peterson , Charles Rogers , Jim Miller , Earl Morrall , Wayne Fontes , Bubba Smith and Drew Stanton . Former MSU quarterback Jeff Smoker now plays in the Arena Football League . 
 Former Michigan State players in the National Hockey League include All Star Defensemen Duncan Keith , Rod Brind 'Amour , Anson Carter , Donald McSween , Adam Hall , John @-@ Michael Liles , Justin Abdelkader , Corey <unk> , brothers Kelly Miller and Kip Miller , as well as their cousins , brothers Ryan Miller and Drew Miller . 
 Former Michigan State players in Major League Baseball include Hall of Fame inductee Robin Roberts , Kirk Gibson , Steve Garvey and Mark Mulder . Olympic gold medalists include <unk> <unk> and Fred Alderman . The Spartans are also contributing athletes to Major League Soccer , as Kevin Reiman , Doug <unk> , Dave Hertel , Greg <unk> , Kenzo Webster , <unk> McKenzie , John Minagawa @-@ Webster and Ryan <unk> have all played in Major League Soccer . In addition , Alex <unk> , Steve <unk> and Buzz <unk> played in the North American Soccer League , with <unk> playing in the 1972 Summer Olympics and the United States Men 's National Soccer Team in the 1970s . 
 Ryan Riess , 2013 World Series of Poker Main Event Champion , is a 2012 graduate of MSU . 
 Miss Michigan 2015 , Emily <unk> , is a 2013 graduate of MSU . Miss America 1961 , Nancy Fleming , is also a graduate of Michigan State . 
 NCAA Gymnastics Champion and former Sesame Street Muppet performer Toby Towson is an MSU graduate . 
 <unk> <unk> was an Indian social entrepreneur known as the " Father of the White Revolution " for his Operation Flood , the world 's largest agricultural development programme . He earned a Master of Science in Metallurgical Engineering from Michigan State University in 1948 . 
 = Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney − Justice for All = 
 Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney − Justice for All , known in Japan as Gyakuten Saiban 2 ( Japanese : <unk> , " Turnabout Trial 2 " ) , is a visual novel adventure video game developed and published by Capcom . It was originally released for the Game Boy Advance in 2002 in Japan , and has since been released on multiple platforms . The Nintendo DS version , initially released in 2006 in Japan , was released in English in the West in 2007 . The game is the second entry in the Ace Attorney series , following Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney . 
 The story follows Phoenix Wright , a defense attorney who defends his clients in four episodes . Among other characters are his partner Maya Fey , her cousin Pearl , and the rival prosecutor Franziska von Karma . The game is divided into two types of sections : courtroom sessions , where the player cross @-@ examines witnesses and tries to uncover contradictions in their testimonies , and investigations , where the player gathers evidence and talks to witnesses . 
 The game was directed and written by Shu Takumi , as the second entry in a planned Ace Attorney trilogy . It was originally intended to feature the first game 's prosecutor , Miles Edgeworth , in all episodes ; Franziska was created when the development team learned that Edgeworth had become popular among players , and Takumi wanted to use the character more carefully and sparingly . They only introduced one new gameplay mechanic in the game ; Takumi wanted to keep the game focused on the core concept of finding lies , and to keep it simple enough for his mother to play . The game was positively received by critics , who generally liked the writing , but criticized the game 's short length and the lack of the Nintendo DS @-@ exclusive gameplay mechanics that appeared in the previous game . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Justice for All is a visual novel adventure game in which the player takes the role of Phoenix Wright , a defense attorney who defends people accused of murder in four different episodes . At first , only one episode is available ; as the player solves a case , a new episode is unlocked to play . The episodes are all divided into chapters , consisting of courtroom sections and investigation sections . 
 During the investigation sections , the player investigates the case to gather evidence needed for the trial ; once enough evidence has been collected , the game moves on to the next chapter of the episode . During these sections , the player has access to a menu with four options : examine , move , present , and talk . By choosing " examine " , the player can move a cursor around the screen and look at various things in the environment ; by choosing " move " , the player reaches a sub @-@ menu with all locations they can choose to move to ; by choosing " present " , the player can choose to show a piece of evidence or a character profile to a character at the location ; and by choosing " talk " , the player is able to pick a topic to discuss with a character who is present at the location . As the player talks to a character , the topics they have already discussed get marked with a checkmark . 
 If the player chooses a topic the witnesses does not want to discuss , the player is shown locks and chains on top of the character , referred to as " psyche @-@ locks " ; additionally , a lock symbol is added to that topic in the talk menu . By presenting a <unk> to the character , the player is able to start breaking the psyche @-@ locks and unlock the topics ; this is done by showing the character evidence or character profiles that proves they are hiding something . The deeper the secret is that the character is hiding , the more psyche @-@ locks appear ; by breaking all the locks , the topic gets unlocked and the player is given access to new information . 
 During the courtroom sections , the player attempts to get the defendant declared innocent by questioning witnesses and presenting evidence to the judge and the prosecutor . Many witnesses lie during their testimonies ; the player is able to move back and forth through the testimony to try to find any inconsistencies . There are two options available during cross @-@ examinations : " press " , which makes the player question a particular statement , which sometimes makes the witnesses change their testimony ; and " present " , which is used to show a piece of evidence or a character profile that the player thinks shows a contradiction in the witness 's currently shown statement . In the upper right corner of the screen , the player 's health bar is shown , representing the judge 's patience . The bar decreases if the player makes mistakes , such as presenting the wrong piece of evidence ; if it reaches zero , the defendant is declared guilty , and the player loses the game . While the player cannot lose the game while trying to break a psyche @-@ lock , the bar will still decrease if the player presents the wrong evidence while trying to break psyche @-@ locks . 50 % of the bar is restored when the player manages to break a psyche @-@ lock , and 100 % is restored when an episode is completed . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game 's first episode involves defense attorney Phoenix Wright getting amnesia after being hit on the head by Richard Wellington , a witness in the case . Phoenix is forced to defend <unk> Byrde , a policewoman who has been accused of murdering her boyfriend , with no memory of the case . Phoenix regains his memory with help from Byrde and his partner , the spirit medium Maya Fey , and deduces that Wellington is the true killer . The second episode takes place before the first , and involves Dr. Turner Grey requesting a spirit channeling from Maya Fey at the Kurain Village . During the channeling , Grey is killed , and Maya is arrested on suspicion of murder . When defending her , Phoenix faces prosecutor Franziska von Karma , who has never lost a case and has come to America to defeat Phoenix in court . Phoenix discovers that Grey 's death was plotted by a nurse who once worked under him and Maya 's aunt , Morgan Fey , who sought to displace Maya as the master of Kurain Village to allow her own 8 @-@ year @-@ old daughter , Pearl Fey , to take the title instead . After the case , Morgan is arrested and placed into solitary confinement , and Maya and Phoenix step in to take care of Pearl . In the third episode , <unk> Galactica , a magician at the Berry Big Circus , is charged with the ringmaster 's murder . Phoenix successfully defends him against Franziska von Karma , and the real killer is revealed to be one of the circus 's trapeze artists , who accidentally killed the ringmaster while trying to murder the ringmaster 's daughter as revenge for his brother . 
 In the fourth episode , Maya is kidnapped after the actor Matt Engarde has been suspected of murdering his media rival Juan Corrida . The kidnapper , the infamous assassin Shelly de Killer , promises to let Maya go if Phoenix can get a complete acquittal for Engarde . Phoenix learns that Engarde , Corrida , and their managers had a complicated romantic relationship , and that Engarde had hired de Killer to force Phoenix to defend him in court . During the case , de Killer shoots Franziska , wounding her and forcing a new prosecutor in the case to step in : Miles Edgeworth , who had just returned to the country in time . Edgeworth picks up on Phoenix 's unusual behavior in court and recognizes that Maya is in trouble , and helps extend the case to give the police more time to rescue Maya . When Phoenix reveals to de Killer that Engarde has blackmail evidence on de Killer 's actions , de Killer reneges his loyalty to Engarde , promising to kill him next . Engarde , terrified by de Killer 's promise , pleads guilty in order to escape his wrath . Maya is freed and reunited with Phoenix and Pearl , while Franziska , recovering from her wounds , decides to return home . If the player presents the wrong evidence towards the end of the trial , an alternate ending ensues , in which Engarde is freed and his manager is tried and convicted of Juan 's murder , causing Phoenix to be shunned forever by Maya and abandon his profession . In the regular ending following Engarde 's conviction , Edgeworth follows Franziska to the airport . Franziska says that she had planned to take revenge on Phoenix after he had proved her father 's guilt in a trial in the first game , but that she has failed . With Edgeworth 's encouragement , she vows to return as a better prosecutor . 
