 = = = Trustees = = = 
 The regulations set down by Lord Stanley call for two Trustees , who had the sole , joint right to govern the Cup and the conditions of its awarding until 1947 , when they ceded control to the NHL . While the original regulations allow for a Trustee to resign , to date , all Cup Trustees have served until their deaths . In the event of a vacancy , the remaining trustee names the replacement for the deceased or resigned Trustee . 
 To date , nine men have served as Trustees of the Stanley Cup : 
 = = Engraving = = 
 Like the Grey Cup , awarded to the winner of the Canadian Football League , the Stanley Cup is engraved with the names of the winning players , coaches , management , and club staff . However , this was not always the case : one of Lord Stanley 's original conditions was that each team could , at their own expense , add a ring to the Cup to commemorate their victory . Initially , there was only one base ring , which was attached to the bottom of the original bowl by the Montreal Hockey Club . Clubs engraved their team names , usually in the form " TEAM <unk> " " YEAR <unk> " , on that one ring until it was full in 1902 . With no more room to engrave their names ( and unwilling to pay for a second band ) , teams left their mark on the bowl itself . The 1907 Montreal Wanderers became the first club to record their name on the bowl 's interior surface , and the first champion to record the name of every member of their team . 
 In 1908 , for reasons unknown , the Wanderers , despite having turned aside four challengers , did not record their names on the Cup . The next year , the Ottawa Senators added a second band onto the Cup . Despite the new room , the 1910 Wanderers and the 1911 Senators did not put their names on the Cup . The 1915 Vancouver Millionaires became the second team to engrave players ' names , this time inside the bowl along its sides . 
 The 1918 Millionaires eventually filled the band added by the 1909 Senators . The 1915 Ottawa Senators , the 1916 Portland Rosebuds and the 1918 Vancouver Millionaires all engraved their names on the trophy even though they did not officially win it under the new PCHA @-@ NHA system . They had only won the title of the previous champion 's league and would have been crowned as Cup champions under the old challenge rules . The winners in 1918 , 1920 to 1923 did not put their winning team name on it . 
 No further engraving occurred until 1924 , when the Canadiens added a new band to the Cup . Since then , engraving the team and its players has been an unbroken annual tradition . Originally , a new band was added each year , causing the trophy to grow in size . The " Stovepipe Cup " , as it was nicknamed because of its resemblance to the exhaust pipe of a stove , became unwieldy , so it was redesigned in 1948 as a two @-@ piece cigar @-@ shaped trophy with a removable bowl and collar . This Cup also properly honoured those teams that did not engrave their names on the Cup . Also included was 1918 – 19 No Decision Montreal Canadiens Seattle Metropolitans . 
 Since 1958 , the Cup has undergone several minor alterations . The original collar and bowl were too brittle , and were replaced in 1963 and 1969 , respectively . The modern one @-@ piece Cup design was introduced in 1958 , when the old barrel was replaced with a five @-@ band barrel , each of which could contain 13 winning teams . Although the bands were originally designed to fill up during the Cup 's centennial year , the names of the 1965 Montreal Canadiens were engraved over a larger area than allotted and thus there are 12 teams on that band instead of 13 . When the bands were all filled in 1991 , the top band of the large barrel was preserved in the Hockey Hall of Fame , and a new blank band was added to the bottom so the Stanley Cup would not grow further . 
 Another new band was scheduled to be added to the bottom of the cup following the 2004 – 05 season , but was not added because of the 2004 – 05 NHL lockout . After the 2005 – 06 champion Carolina Hurricanes were crowned , and the new bottom ring was finally added , the cancelled season was acknowledged with the words " 2004 – 05 Season Not Played " . Currently , the Cup stands at 89 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 35 ¼ inches ) tall and weighs 15 ½ kilograms ( 34 ½ lb ) . 
 = = = Name inscriptions = = = 
 Currently , a player must have played at least half of the regular season games ( usually 41 in current league format ) for the championship team ( provided the player remains with the team when they win the Cup ) or played in at least one game of the Stanley Cup Finals . However , since 1994 teams have been permitted to petition the NHL Commissioner , to be considered on a case @-@ by @-@ case basis , to engrave a player 's name on the cup if the player was unavailable to play due to " extenuating circumstances " . For example , the Detroit Red Wings received special permission from the NHL to inscribe the name of Vladimir Konstantinov , whose career ended after a car accident on June 13 , 1997 , on the Stanley Cup after Detroit defended their title in 1998 . 
 With the Montreal Canadiens having won by far the most Cup championships of any team , the list of the players who have been engraved on the Cup the most often is dominated by Montreal players . Henri Richard of the Canadiens , with his name engraved eleven times , played on more Stanley Cup champions than any other player . He is followed by Jean Beliveau and Yvan Cournoyer of the Canadiens with ten championships , Claude Provost of the Canadiens with nine , and three players tied with eight : Red Kelly ( four with the Red Wings , four with the Leafs , the most for any player who was not a member of the Canadiens ) and Canadiens players Jacques Lemaire , Maurice Richard . Beliveau 's name appears on the Cup more than any other individual , ten times as a player and seven times as management for a total of seventeen times . 
 Twelve women have had their names engraved on the Stanley Cup . The first woman to have her name engraved on the Stanley Cup is Marguerite Norris , who won the Cup as the President of the Detroit Red Wings in 1954 and 1955 . The only Canadian woman to have her name engraved on the Stanley Cup is Sonia Scurfield ( born in <unk> , Saskatchewan ) who won the Cup as a co @-@ owner of the Calgary Flames in 1989 . 
 In 2001 , Charlotte Grahame , the Colorado Avalanche 's Senior Director of Hockey Administration , had her name engraved on the trophy . Her son John later had his name engraved as a member of the Tampa Bay Lightning in 2004 . 
 = = = Engraving errors = = = 
 There are several misspellings and illegitimate names on the Cup . Many of them have never been corrected . Examples include : 
 Pat <unk> 's name is misspelled " <unk> " as a member of the 1941 Boston Bruins on the second cup created during the 1957 – 58 season . <unk> 's name was often misspelled as " <unk> " on team pictures of the Boston Bruins . When the Replica Cup was created in 1992 – 93 , the misspelling was not corrected . 
 Dickie Moore , who won six cups , had his name spelled differently five times ( D. Moore , Richard Moore , R. Moore , Dickie Moore , Rich Moore ) . 
 Glenn Hall 's name was misspelled as " <unk> " in 1951 – 52 . 
 Alex <unk> 's name was misspelled as " <unk> " in 1954 . 
 Bob Gainey was spelled " <unk> " when he was a player for Montreal in the 1970s . 
 Ted Kennedy was spelled " <unk> " in the 1940s . 
 Toronto Maple Leafs was spelled " <unk> " in 1963 . 
 Boston Bruins was spelled " <unk> " in 1972 . 
 New York Islanders was spelled " <unk> " in 1981 . 
 Justin Williams the Conn Smythe Trophy winner of the 2014 Los Angeles Kings was spelled " JUSTIN <unk> . " 
 One name was later scratched out : Peter Pocklington , a former Edmonton Oilers owner , put his father 's name , Basil , on the Stanley Cup in 1984 ; today , there is a series of " X " s over Basil 's name . 
 In 1996 , Colorado Avalanche 's Adam Deadmarsh 's last name was spelled " <unk> " . It was later corrected , marking the first correction on the Cup . Similar corrections were made in 2002 , 2006 and 2010 for the names of Detroit Red Wings goalie Manny Legace ( " <unk> " ) , Carolina Hurricanes forward Eric Staal ( " <unk> " ) and Chicago Blackhawks forward Kris Versteeg ( " <unk> " ) . 
 = = Traditions and anecdotes = = 
 There are many traditions associated with the Stanley Cup . One of the oldest , started by the 1896 Winnipeg Victorias , dictates that the winning team drink champagne from the top bowl after their victory . The Cup is also traditionally presented on the ice to the captain of the winning team after the series @-@ winning game ; each member of the victorious club carries the trophy around the rink . However , this has not always been the case ; prior to the 1930s , the Cup was not awarded immediately after the victory . The first time that the Cup was awarded on the ice may have been to the 1932 Toronto Maple Leafs , but the practice did not become a tradition until the 1950s . Ted Lindsay of the 1950 Cup champion Detroit Red Wings became the first captain , upon receiving the Cup , to hoist it overhead and skate around the rink . According to Lindsay , he did so to allow the fans to have a better view of the Cup . Since then , it has been a tradition for each member of the winning team , beginning with the captain , to take a lap around the ice with the trophy hoisted above his head . 
 The tradition of the captain first hoisting the Cup has been " breached " a few times . In 1993 after the Montreal Canadiens defeated the Los Angeles Kings , Guy Carbonneau handed the Cup to Denis Savard , as Savard had been the player that many fans had urged the Canadiens to draft back in 1980 . Another notable exception was in 1998 , after the Detroit Red Wings had defeated the Washington Capitals , when Steve Yzerman immediately passed the Cup to Vladimir Konstantinov , whose career with the Red Wings ended due to serious injuries in a traffic accident the previous year and had to be wheeled on the ice . The third was involving Joe Sakic and Ray Bourque when the Colorado Avalanche won the Cup in 2001 , as the seventh and deciding game of the Finals would be the last of Bourque 's 22 @-@ year NHL career , having never been on a Cup @-@ winning team until that time ( Bourque had , until being traded to the Avalanche on March 6 , 2000 , only ever played for the Boston Bruins ) . When Sakic received the trophy , he did not hoist it , but instead immediately handed it to Bourque ; Sakic then became the second player on the team to hoist the trophy . 
 The Stanley Cup championship team is allotted 100 days during off @-@ season to pass around the Cup including the team 's parade , days with sponsors and a day or so with each player and member of the team 's staff . It is always accompanied by at least one representative from the Hockey Hall of Fame . Although many players have unofficially spent a day in personal possession of the Cup , in 1994 the New York Rangers started a tradition wherein each member of the Cup @-@ winning team is allowed to retain the Cup for a day . Victors of the Cup have used it to baptize their children . Two players ( the New York Islanders ' Clark Gillies and the Anaheim Ducks ' Sean O 'Donnell ) even allowed their dogs to eat out of the Cup . 
 = = = Original , authenticated , and replica versions = = = 
 There are technically three versions of the " Stanley Cup " : the original 1892 bowl or Dominion Hockey Challenge Cup , the 1963 authenticated " Presentation Cup " , and the 1993 " Replica Cup " at the Hall of Fame . 
 The original 1892 Dominion Hockey Challenge Cup , purchased and donated by Lord Stanley , was physically awarded to the Champions until 1970 , and is now displayed in the Vault Room at the Hockey Hall of Fame in Toronto , Ontario . 
 The authenticated version or " Presentation Cup " was created in 1963 by Montreal silversmith Carl Petersen . NHL president Clarence Campbell felt that the original bowl was becoming too thin and fragile , and thus requested a duplicate trophy as a replacement . The Presentation Cup is authenticated by the seal of the Hockey Hall of Fame on the bottom , which can be seen when winning players lift the Cup over their heads , and it is the one currently awarded to the champions of the playoffs and used for promotions . This version was made in secret , and its production was only revealed three years later . 
 The replica trophy , called the " Replica Cup " , was created in 1993 by Montreal silversmith Louise St. Jacques to be used as a stand @-@ in at the Hockey Hall of Fame whenever the Presentation Cup is not available for display . There are very few differences between the authenticated version and the replica version . The surest way to identify one version from the other is to check the engraving for the 1984 Stanley Cup winning Edmonton Oilers . The authenticated version has x 's engraved over Basil Pocklington 's name whereas his name is completely missing from the replica version . 
 = = = As morale booster = = = 
 The Stanley Cup has served as a valuable morale booster for both American and Canadian troops , as well as their NATO allies . In 2004 , the Cup was displayed at MacDill Air Force Base , located near Tampa , Florida . The visit gave both American troops and a visiting Canadian unit the thrill of seeing the trophy at close hand . The event was later touted by officials at MacDill as " a huge morale booster for our troops " . In 2006 , the Cup toured Marine Corps Base Camp Lejeune , North Carolina , where wounded Marines were given the opportunity to view and be photographed with the Cup . 
 In 2007 , the Stanley Cup made its first trip into a combat zone . During the trip to Kandahar , Afghanistan from May 2 to May 6 , organized by the NHL , the Hockey Hall of Fame , the NHL Alumni and the Canadian Department of National Defence , the Cup was put on display for Canadian and other NATO troops . It briefly endured a rocket attack on May 3 , but emerged unscathed . 
 The Stanley Cup did a second tour in Afghanistan as part of a " Team Canada visit " in March 2008 . In the spring of 2010 the Stanley Cup made its fourth trip to Afghanistan , accompanied by ex @-@ players . 
 On June 27 , 2010 , Chicago Blackhawks defenceman Brent Sopel paid tribute to his friend , former Toronto Maple Leafs general manager Brian Burke and Burke 's late son , Brendan , by accompanying the Cup to the 2010 Chicago Gay Pride Parade . 
 = Secret ( Madonna song ) = 
 " Secret " is a song recorded by American singer and songwriter Madonna from her sixth studio album Bedtime Stories ( 1994 ) . It was released on September 27 , 1994 , as the lead single from the album by Warner Bros. Records as well as Maverick and Sire . The song was later included on her greatest hits compilations GHV2 ( 2001 ) and Celebration ( 2009 ) . " Secret " was developed based on a demo version created by producer Shep Pettibone , which was reworked by Dallas Austin , with whom Madonna was working on Bedtime Stories . Written and produced by the singer with Austin , an additional writer on the track was Pettibone . The song was a departure from the style of music that Madonna had previously released ; up to that point in her career her music had mostly been big @-@ sounding dance tracks or melodic ballads . " Secret " combined pop and R & B genres with instrumentation from acoustic guitar , drums and strings , while lyrically talking about a lover having a secret , as well as how Madonna realized that one 's happiness is under one 's control . 
 The song was released accompanied by eight different remixes by DJ Junior Vasquez , who just re @-@ used Madonna 's vocals , but changed the composition of the track completely . Unusual for the mid @-@ 1990s , Madonna talked about the new single on the Internet leaving an audio message for her fans , as well as a snippet of the song . " Secret " received favorable reviews from music critics , who praised Madonna 's vocal delivery and its mid @-@ tempo R & B groove , deeming it seductive and soulful . The song was also a commercial success . In the United States , it peaked at number three on the Billboard Hot 100 and was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . In the United Kingdom , it reached a peak of number five , becoming her record @-@ breaking 35th consecutive top @-@ ten single on the UK Singles Chart . Elsewhere , it reached number one in Canada , Finland and Switzerland , and the top five in Australia , Denmark , France , Italy , New Zealand and Spain . 
 With the single 's cover art and its accompanying music video , Madonna ushered in another image change , inspired by the look of Hollywood actress Jean Harlow . The black and white video was directed by photographer Melodie McDaniel who was chosen by the singer due to McDaniel 's previous short films . It features Madonna as a singer in a nightclub in Harlem , New York . Interspersed with scenes of daily life in the neighborhood , the video ends with Madonna uniting with her lover and their supposed child . The video sparked academic discussions on what can constitute the lyrical secret of the song . Madonna performed " Secret " on tour for the first time during her 2001 Drowned World Tour . It was later performed at the Houston stop of her Sticky and Sweet Tour in November 2008 as a fan request , and later on the Rebel Heart Tour in 2015 . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Following the release Madonna 's first book publication , Sex , the erotic thriller , Body of Evidence , her fifth studio album , Erotica , as well as a disastrous interview on David Letterman 's show in the early 1990s , the media and public 's backlash against Madonna 's overtly sexual image was at a peak . Madonna wanted to tone down her explicit image . Her first attempt was to release the tender ballad " I 'll Remember " from the soundtrack of the film With Honors . Musically she wanted to move in a new musical direction and started exploring new @-@ jack R & B styles with a generally mainstream , radio @-@ friendly sound . She incorporated it in her sixth studio album , Bedtime Stories , released in October 1994 . At first , it started as a collaboration with Shep Pettibone and was to be stylistically similar to Erotica , but due to Madonna 's wish to soften her public image at the time , she decided to move towards an R & B sound collaborating with well @-@ known R & B producers and took a more appropriate image for the general public . 
 After searching , Madonna chose to work with Babyface , whose previous collaborations with artists like Whitney Houston , Boyz II Men , and Toni Braxton had resulted in successful smooth R & B songs . Through him , she met with then upcoming young producer from Atlanta called Dallas Austin , who had become famous for his work on girl group TLC 's debut album , <unk> ... On the TLC Tip ( 1992 ) . Together they composed two songs for the album , " Secret " and " Sanctuary " . The former was originally produced in its demo form by Pettibone , under the name " Something 's Coming Over Me " , however Austin reworked the demo and made it a different song musically . On September 27 , 1994 , the song was released as the lead single from Bedtime Stories . The cover art of the single showed a new look for Madonna , with blonde hair and style compared to the look of 1930s American actress , Jean Harlow . Shot by photographer Patrick Demarchelier in black @-@ and @-@ white , the image showed the singer slouched on a sofa with her dress down and revealing her translucent brassiere . Unusual for the mid @-@ 1990s , Madonna talked about the new single on the Internet leaving an audio message for her fans , as well as a snippet of the song . 
 Hello , all you <unk> ! Welcome to the 90 's version of intimacy . You can hear me ... You can even see me ... But you can 't touch me ... do you recognize my voice ? ... It 's Madonna . Often imitated , but never duplicated . Or , should I say , often irritated ? If you feel like it , you can download the sound file of my new single " Secret " , from my new album , Bedtime Stories , which comes out next month . I just shot the video in New York , and will be premiering an exclusive sample of it online . So check back soon . In the meantime , why don 't you post me a message and let me know what you think of my new song . And by the way , don 't believe any of those online imposters pretending to be me ... ain 't nothing like the real thing . Peace out . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " Secret " was written and produced by Madonna and Austin , with Pettibone as co @-@ writer of the track . It was recorded from April to June 1994 at Axis Studios in New York and DARP Studios in Atlanta , GA . Alongside the production work , Austin also played the drums and the keyboards , while Tommy Martin played the acoustic guitars . Fred Jorio and Mark " Spike " Stent worked on the programming and engineering of the track while Tony Shimkin was the editor . Jon Gass and Alvin <unk> mixed the song and finally Jessie Leavey , Craig Armstrong and Susie Katiyama did the strings and conducting sessions . 
 " Secret " was a departure from the style of music that Madonna had previously released ; up to that point in her career her music had mostly been big @-@ sounding dance tracks or melodic ballads . In the track , she mixed pop and Contemporary R & B genres . It begins with the sound of an acoustic guitar and wah @-@ wah and just the sound of Madonna 's voice singing over it , before opening up to a sparse , retro rhythm section . A descending chord sequence follows and around the one minute mark , the drums start with Madonna singing the chorus " Something 's coming over , <unk> " . It is entirely supported by the strings and Madonna 's lower harmonies allude to songs by Kurt Cobain . According to Rikky Rooksby , author of The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna , the descending chords are supported by the ascending strings — an example of contrary motion used in music . During the middle section , another wah @-@ wah guitar solo is added alongside the strings . Near the end , the melodies add an upper harmony for differentiation with the verses . 
 According to Musicnotes.com , the song is set in the time signature of common time and progresses in 96 beats per minute . The composition is set in the key of E ♭ minor with Madonna 's vocal ranging from G ♭ 3 to G ♭ 4 . " Take a Bow " contains a basic sequence of B ♭ 7 – E ♭ m7 – D ♭ – Cm7 – C ♭ during the opening verses , and B7 – Em – D – C during the chorus its chord progression . Madonna 's voice remains at the center of the song 's production , as she sings lyrics such as " happiness lies in your own hand " . Lyrically it talks about a lover having a secret as well as how Madonna realized that one 's happiness is under one 's control . In Madonna the Companion : Two Decades of Commentary , authors Allen Metz and Carol Benson write that the tone that Madonna uses when singing these lyrics suggests that she is discussing " self @-@ determinism , not auto @-@ eroticism " . Throughout the song Madonna also sings the lyrics " My baby 's got a secret , " however , she never discloses what the secret may be . 
 = = Remixes = = 
 Madonna released more than eight remixes of the song in different formats . At the time , " Secret " was experiencing success on the US record charts , to keep the song current in dance clubs , Madonna requested remixes of the song from Junior Vasquez , who was a DJ at the Sound Factory nightclub in New York . According to him Madonna 's representatives " sent me a cassette of the song , just to get an idea what the song was ... [ A ] nd when it was 100 beats per minute I said , ' Oh god , what am I gonna do with this ? ' " Vasquez and his team of engineers first experimented with the track by making remixes closer to the original version . Then he used only Madonna 's vocals for the mixed versions , and re @-@ wrote and composed the music as brand new . He was sure of doing house mixes of the track but had to " speed @-@ up " Madonna 's vocals . Recording engineer Dennis Mitchell explained , " To do that we have to digitally manipulate her vocals , which is time compression ... It just digitally goes in and snipes out tiny little digital slices of the actual sound and squeezes it together so that her tempo is a new tempo but her pitch stays the same . " According to Vasquez , Madonna was " on top of everything " including the house mixes as well as the other mixes created . 
 The song also had dance mixes created by Vasquez . There are two versions of " Junior 's Luscious Mix " , those being a single edit and a longer version , which has a piano introduction and turns " Secret " into a dancefloor track . According to Larry Flick from Billboard these versions have " vibrant keyboards and an elastic bassline " . Like the house mixes , here also Madonna 's vocals were re @-@ edited to fit in with the faster beats . According to Jose F. Promis of AllMusic , the sped @-@ up vocals made Madonna 's voice have a " robotic , detached feel that the original doesn 't have . " Promis also noted that Vasquez 's " Sound Factory Mix " had " swirling instrumentals recalling flashing lights in a nightclub " . This remix also incorporated tribal percussion sounds and synth looping . Similarly he noted that the " Some Bizarre Mix " gave the song a " groovier , funkier spin " , while the " Allstar Mix " , gave it " a cold , hip @-@ hop feel " . Flick was positive towards all the remixes , noting that " this single is a promising preamble to what will likely be a cool , new chapter in the career of dance <unk> sic 's most successful graduate . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Secret " received generally positive reviews from music critics . In his book Madonna : An Intimate Biography , author J. Randy Taraborrelli described the song as " clever " , adding that no matter how many time one listens to it , " it never ceases to intrigue " . Chris Wade , author of The Music of Madonna recalled that " Secret " had been his favorite song , and commended the track 's production , Madonna 's vocals and mixing . He declared it as " one of Madonna 's finest cuts from the whole of her 90s output . " Wade described the chorus as " sinister and catchy ; a strange eeriness about it that only the mystery of the forbidden can conjure . " Matthew Rettenmund wrote in his Encyclopedia Madonnica that " Secret " paved way a new direction musically for Madonna ; he believed that the track was more haunting musically than Madonna 's previous single " Who 's That Girl " ( 1987 ) and comparable to " Justify My Love " ( 1990 ) . Rettenmund complimented the cover artwork , saying that " a dozen years into her career , it was one of her most arresting poses shot by Demarchelier , a testament to the durability of her star appeal " . Author Lucy O 'Brien described the song in her book , Madonna : Like an Icon : 
 With its chunky backbeat , gentle strings and funky guitar motif , ' Secret ' is both languid and tense at the same time . The song has the air of quiet revelation and a relaxation of spirit . Madonna insisted later that the song wasn 't just about love but also about spiritual self @-@ empowerment . [ Austin 's reworked demo ] brought out a new warm , soulful tone in her voice , and making her swoony humming sound a central feature of the track . 
 Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine gave the song a rating of A , and noted that " Secret " was probably the most naked performance of Madonna 's career , with " acoustic guitars , expertly sweetened vocals and producer Dallas Austin 's signature R & B beats [ which ] soulfully transport the listener into Madonna 's troubled yet soothing world . " Barbara O 'Dair from Rolling Stone called the song " infectiously funky " , adding that her delivery of the lyrics " Happiness lies in your own hand / It took me much too long to understand " shows a downbeat restraint in her vocals that proves the singer is " drawn to sadness " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic listed it as one of the best songs from Bedtime Stories , stating that along with other album tracks — " Take a Bow " , " Inside of Me " , " Sanctuary " and " Bedtime Story " — it slowly " works its melody into the subconscious as the bass pulses " . Paul Verna from Billboard described the song as a " pop smash " that is one of the most " seductive " songs from Bedtime Stories . Alex Needham of NME called the song an " underrated gem " , adding that the track has a " brilliant bluesy strut " . In his 2011 review of Bedtime Stories , Brett <unk> of the Detroit Metro Times called the song " spectacular " . Charlotte Robinson , writer from PopMatters , wrote that the gentle grooves of " Secret " , accompanied by acoustic guitar and delicate strings , make the song " seductive " . 
 NME magazine ranked " Secret " at number 30 in their list of the best songs of 1994 . Slant Magazine listed " Secret " as the 42nd " Best Singles of the 1990s " , stating that its " one of the most organic @-@ sounding singles of Madonna 's career , taking its sweet time to get where it 's going and not giving up too much along the way . The arrangement gets off on being withholding , and , at least for one glorious single , so does Madonna : When she sings , " You knew all along / What I never wanted to say , " she sounds positively rapturous . Scott Kearnan of The Boston Globe included the track at number 30 on his list of " Best Madonna Songs " , stating " its slinky R & B groove made ' Secret ' something special , even if it 's not remembered for an accompanying scandal or bawdy ' moment ' . We like to talk about her ability to produce controversy and headlines , but at the end of the day , here 's what Madonna makes best : pop music " . Louis Virtel of The Backlot listed the song at number 14 on his list of the " The 100 Greatest Madonna Songs " , calling it " meditative , moving " and " sexy as hell " . Rooksby concurred that " its a good track " but felt that the time could have been reduced from five minutes , which made it a little long . He also felt that the drums looping around the track made it a " bit monotonous " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 In the United States it debuted at number 30 on the Billboard Hot 100 issue dated October 8 , 1994 . It was the third highest debut of Madonna 's music career at that time , following " Erotica " at number 13 ( 1992 ) and " Rescue Me " at number 15 ( 1991 ) . According to journalist Liz Smith , " Secret " became the most requested song on US radios after it was sent for airplay , being spun on 152 radio stations and gaining around 1 @,@ 900 spins . Following the release of the commercial CD formats the next week , the song debuted on the Singles Sales chart at number 31 with 18 @,@ 000 units sold . Three weeks later it peaked on the chart at number three , staying for a total of 22 weeks ; 11 of those were spent within the top ten . It also peaked at number three on both the US Hot 100 Airplay and Mainstream Top 40 charts and at number two on the Adult Contemporary chart . On the Hot Dance Club Songs chart it peaked at number one for two weeks , aided by the remixes from Vasquez . At the Year @-@ end Hot 100 ranking for 1994 , " Secret " was placed at number 84 and for 1995 , it was ranked at number 71 . " Secret " was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on January 5 , 1995 , for shipment of 500 @,@ 000 copies of the single . In Canada the song debuted at number 91 on the RPM Singles Chart the week of October 3 , 1994 , eventually peaking at number one for three consecutive weeks starting from November 14 , 1994 . On the RPM 1994 Year @-@ End Chart , the song finished at number 23 . 
 In the United Kingdom " Secret " debuted and peaked at number five on the UK Singles Chart , staying on the chart for a total of ten weeks . According to the Official Charts Company , the song has sold a total of 117 @,@ 957 copies in that region as of 2008 . " Secret " became her 35th consecutive top @-@ ten single since " Like a Virgin " ( 1984 ) , which remains an unequaled record in British chart history . On the French Singles Chart , " Secret " peaked at number two for two weeks , staying on the chart for a total of 30 weeks . It placed at number 26 on the year @-@ end chart and was eventually certified silver by the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) for shipment of 125 @,@ 000 copies ; the song has sold a total of 255 @,@ 000 copies in France . The song also peaked at number one in Finland as well as Switzerland , charting on the Swiss Singles Chart for a total of 19 weeks . The song also placed within the top 10 on the charts in Italy , Spain , and Denmark , peaking at number three , number four , and number eight respectively . In Austria , the single missed the top 10 , peaking at number 11 , while in Ireland it peaked at number 16 on the Irish Singles Chart . In Sweden , the song peaked at number 12 and spent a total of 16 cumulative weeks on the chart . 
 " Secret " entered the ARIA Singles Chart at its peak of number five the week of October 23 , 1994 , eventually charting for a total of fourteen weeks . It later landed at number 46 position on the Australian singles year @-@ end chart . The Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) certified it gold for shipment of 35 @,@ 000 copies . In New Zealand , the song entered the New Zealand Singles Chart at number 31 the week of November 6 , 1994 , eventually peaked at number five , remaining on the chart for a total of eight weeks . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Conception and development = = = 
 According to O 'Brien , the general critical consensus about Bedtime Stories was " Madonna in retreat . Still smarting from criticism over the Sex book , she [ evolved ] into a softer , more gentle image . Yet despite the pastel tones of her new look , there was also a sense of grit . She combined this to startling effect with the music video for ' Secret ' . " Madonna knew that a lot was riding on her first visual after the Erotica era , and wanted to create an effect with it . The video was directed by Melodie McDaniel , who had previously gained acclaim as a photographer for album artwork and also as music video director for bands like The Cranberries and Porno for <unk> . However , Madonna was more interested in one of McDaniel 's earlier short films , where she portrayed baptism combining with voodoo rituals . She enlisted McDaniel and explained that she was " drawn to the rawness of [ McDaniel 's ] film " . Madonna wanted to tone down her image and according to McDaniel : 
 She was ready to go there ... Madonna had a blonde Jean Harlow look at the time . I wanted to combine that old classic Hollywood mix with the edginess of modern contemporary , but make it feel timeless . I was trying to think of something different , something real ... It was awesome I got this break , but I was freaked out . I was jumping from young artists to working with an icon ... I think she was drawn to the rawness of my work . 
 Before meeting with Madonna , McDaniel first listened to the song and found it inspiring . When asked by the singer about her references for the video , McDaniel presented her with pictures from her favorite 1970s photographer , Bill Burke , who took pictures of people considered as freaks or inbred . Another reference was the photography book , East 100 Street by Bruce Davidson , which showed pictures of people in Spanish Harlem . Madonna let the director live in her New York apartment to continue research and asked her to go through her book collections , including those by Helmut Newton and Richard Avedon . Madonna also started working with a stylist from McDaniel 's team called Brigitte Echols , for the fashion and wardrobes in the video . Echols had gone to a low @-@ rent mall called Crenshaw Swap Meet and bought a $ 180 gold necklace with the name " Madonna " in it , inside a jewelry box . Madonna liked it and together they decided on the wardrobe , including skirts and tops , vintage clothes from costume houses , La Perla bra , and two designs from then unknown Marc Jacobs . Echols described Madonna 's approach to style as " collaborative " . 
 = = = Filming and release = = = 
 The video was filmed during September 9 – 11 , 1994 at the Lenox Lounge and on location on Lenox Avenue in Harlem . McDaniel and her team scouted out low @-@ rent , speak @-@ easy locations and they did street @-@ casting , assembling off @-@ beat characters , from transvestites to card tricksters and edgy Harlem teenagers . However , when it came to filming there was a problem — McDaniel 's approach was to start the camera and let the cast improvise , but Madonna wanted direction . She would sit on the chair and when McDaniel said " Action " , she would still sit there saying impatiently , " What am I doing ? What am I doing ? Hello ? " In reality , McDaniel recalled that she was overawed by Madonna 's big entourage who had come to Harlem for the shoot , hence she held herself from speaking her mind about the singer 's look . When McDaniel explained to the singer that she wanted her to appear edgy like Jennifer Jason Leigh 's character in the 1990 drama film Last Exit to Brooklyn , the singer was annoyed . Madonna had her hair and makeup re @-@ done and it was the final look for the video . 
 Echols recalled that the first scenes shot were those of Madonna walking down Lenox Avenue . While filming , the singer noticed a black leather coat with fur trim , worn by Fatima , the assistant director . Madonna asked for the coat from Fatima and ended up wearing it in the video . Echols also noted that Madonna had a close relationship with the cinematographer , and knew from which angle her shots would be the best and which lights to be used . After the misunderstandings regarding looks , and the plot direction were cleared , the filming resumed and was finished within three days . The final scenes were with model Jason Olive in a <unk> house , with Madonna climbing steps and reaching him and their supposed child . 
 The video premiered on October 4 , 1994 , on MTV . It begins with showing the neighborhood of Harlem , with Madonna as a singer in a small jazz club . She simply sits in the club with her band and sings for her small , mostly black and Latino audience . Interspersed through out the video are scenes of people living in Harlem , doing their daily chores , including a supporting cast of transvestite prostitutes , a pimp , and a black gang member who shows off the scars on his body . During the intermediate verses , Madonna is shown writhing in the lap of an older , maternal woman , who symbolically baptizes her by splashing water on her forehead . Near the video 's end , Madonna walks through the neighborhood and climbs a set of stairs to have a reunion with her family , a young Latin man and their supposed son . The video ends with Madonna smiling towards the camera while sitting at the nightclub . 
 = = = Reception and aftermath = = = 
 The " Secret " music video was a hit on MTV , being played numerous times by the channel . It also generated discussions in academia regarding the supposed " secret " of the song . According to the book Madonna 's Drowned Worlds , author Santiago Fouz @-@ Hernández argues that the young son that is revealed at the end of the video is in actuality Madonna 's lover 's secret . Throughout the video , scenes of Madonna are interspersed with scenes of drag queens primping , and religious iconography such as rebirth and damnation . In his book From Hegel to Madonna , author Robert <unk> states that the music video for " Secret " is a departure from the various themes — repression and loss , anger and aggression — explored so vividly on Bedtime Stories . <unk> goes on to say that , although the video depicts images of cleansing rebirth , the fact that Madonna announced that she was pregnant in 1996 shows that , in retrospect , " Secret " may have been less about cleansing rebirth , and instead more about maternity as birth . 
 Rettenmund had a different interpretation of the video , calling it as a " subtly orchestrated story of the singer 's addiction to — and almost spiritual deliverance from — heroin " . He found contrast in Madonna 's white blonde character — with hyper @-@ glamor , heavy mascara , pierced nose and navel , a clingy blouse and vintage high heels — to the neighborhood of Harlem , where Madonna is portrayed as a " Billie Holiday @-@ esque singer in the jazz club " . At the end of the video , Madonna climbs up the stairs to her lover 's room , Rettenmund found references to the music videos for the singles " Like a Virgin " ( 1984 ) and " Papa Don 't Preach " ( 1986 ) , both of which had the singer climbing the stairs but never reaching the destination , unlike " Secret " . Rettenmund also observed that " Secret " could serve as a follow @-@ up to the music video for " Borderline " with the events happening ten years and Madonna all grownup . He concluded by saying that in lieu of the singer 's 1994 interview with The Face magazine , where she expressed her desire to have a family , the video emphasized on Madonna 's interest in a partner and a child . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 On February 18 , 1995 , Madonna arrived in Europe to promote Bedtime Stories . During the same day , she performed " Secret " and " Take a Bow " on German TV show Wetten , dass .. ? , while she was also interviewed on the program . " Secret " was performed on Madonna 's 2001 Drowned World Tour , during the cowgirl section of the show . The performance was accompanied by a video montage of riverside baptism , whirling dervishes ceremonies and Buddhist prayers ; the footage was taken from McDaniel 's film which had inspired Madonna for the performance as well as enlisting her . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian called the performance " a gorgeous acoustic reading . " Writing for The Victoria Advocate , Steve Dollar praised the performance , saying that the song " has grown in depth " over time . During the New York City performance of " Secret " , she dedicated the song to its inhabitants . The performance of the song on August 26 , 2001 , at The Palace of Auburn Hills was recorded and released in the live video album , Drowned World Tour 2001 . 
 In November 2008 , " Secret " was performed a cappella at the Houston stop of her Sticky & Sweet Tour as fan request . After the performance , Madonna said : " Alright Texas ! That was really good . I 'd forgotten that song " . During the Vancouver stop on her Rebel Heart Tour in 2015 , Madonna again performed an acoustic rendition of the song , dedicating it to a " special guest " in the audience , which was assumed by media to be her ex @-@ husband Sean Penn , who was in the audience . The singer admitted she had not practiced the performance , and according to Vancouver Sun , it " came across as charitably , unpracticed ( if well @-@ intentioned ) " . 
 = = Track listings and versions = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits and personnel adapted from Bedtime Stories album liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Valley of the Kings = 
 The Valley of the Kings ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> <unk> al <unk> ) , the Valley of the Gates of the Kings ( Arabic : <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> <unk> al <unk> ) , is a valley in Egypt where , for a period of nearly 500 years from the 16th to 11th century BC , tombs were constructed for the Pharaohs and powerful nobles of the New Kingdom ( the Eighteenth to the Twentieth Dynasties of Ancient Egypt ) . The valley stands on the west bank of the Nile , opposite Thebes ( modern Luxor ) , within the heart of the Theban Necropolis . The wadi consists of two valleys , East Valley ( where the majority of the royal tombs are situated ) and West Valley . With the 2005 discovery of a new chamber ( KV63 ) , and the 2008 discovery of two further tomb entrances , the valley is known to contain 63 tombs and chambers ( ranging in size from <unk> , a simple pit , to KV5 , a complex tomb with over 120 chambers ) . It was the principal burial place of the major royal figures of the Egyptian New Kingdom , as well as a number of privileged nobles . The royal tombs are decorated with scenes from Egyptian mythology and give clues to the beliefs and funerary rituals of the period . Almost all of the tombs seem to have been opened and robbed in antiquity , but they still give an idea of the opulence and power of the Pharaohs . This area has been a focus of archaeological and <unk> exploration since the end of the eighteenth century , and its tombs and burials continue to stimulate research and interest . In modern times the valley has become famous for the discovery of the tomb of Tutankhamun ( with its rumours of the Curse of the Pharaohs ) , and is one of the most famous archaeological sites in the world . In 1979 , it became a World Heritage Site , along with the rest of the Theban Necropolis . Exploration , excavation and conservation continues in the valley , and a new tourist centre has recently been opened . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The types of soil where the Valley of the Kings is located are an alternating sandwich of dense limestone and other sedimentary rock ( which form the cliffs in the valley and the nearby Deir el @-@ Bahri ) and soft layers of marl . The sedimentary rock was originally deposited between 35 – 56 million years ago during a time when the precursor to the Mediterranean Sea covered an area that extended much further inland than today . During the Pleistocene the valley was carved out of the plateau by steady rains . There is currently little year @-@ round rain in this part of Egypt , but there are occasional flash floods that hit the valley , dumping tons of debris into the open tombs . 
 The quality of the rock in the Valley is inconsistent , ranging from finely grained to coarse stone , the latter with the potential to be structurally unsound . The occasional layer of shale also caused construction and conservation difficulties , as this rock expands in the presence of water , forcing apart the stone surrounding it . It is thought that some tombs were altered in shape and size depending on the types of rock the builders encountered . 
 Builders took advantage of available geological features when constructing the tombs . Some tombs were quarried out of existing limestone clefts , others behind slopes of scree , or were at the edge of rock spurs created by ancient flood channels . 
 The problems of tomb construction can be seen with tombs of Ramesses III and his father Setnakhte . Setnakhte started to excavate <unk> but broke into the tomb of <unk> , so construction was abandoned and he instead usurped the tomb of <unk> , <unk> . When looking for a tomb , Ramesses III extended the part @-@ excavated tomb started by his father . The tomb of Ramesses II returned to an early style , with a bent axis , probably due to the quality of the rock being excavated ( following the Esna shale ) . 
 Between 1998 and 2002 the Amarna Royal Tombs Project investigated the valley floor using ground @-@ penetrating radar and found that , below the modern surface , the Valley 's cliffs descend beneath the scree in a series of abrupt , natural " shelves " , arranged one below the other , descending several metres down to the bedrock in the valley floor . 
 = = = Hydrology = = = 
 The area of the Theban hills is subject to infrequent violent thunder storms , causing flash floods in the valley . Recent studies have shown that there are at least 7 active flood stream beds , leading down into the central area of the valley . This central area appears to have been flooded at the end of the Eighteenth Dynasty and buried several tombs under metres of debris . The tombs KV63 , KV62 and KV55 are dug into the actual wadi bedrock rather than the debris , showing that the then level of the valley was 5 m below its present level . After this event later dynasties leveled the floor of the valley , making the floods deposit their load further down the valley , and the buried tombs were forgotten and only discovered in the early 20th century . This was the area that was the subject of the Amarna Royal Tombs Project ground scanning radar investigation , which showed several anomalies , one of which was proved to be KV63 . 
 = = History = = 
 The Theban Hills are dominated by the peak of al @-@ <unk> , known to the Ancient Egyptians as ta <unk> , or ' The Peak ' . It has a pyramid shaped appearance , and it is probable that this echoed the pyramids of the Old Kingdom , more than a thousand years prior to the first royal burials carved here . Its isolated position also resulted in reduced access , and special tomb police ( the <unk> ) were able to guard the necropolis . 
 While the iconic pyramid complexes of the Giza plateau have come to symbolize ancient Egypt , the majority of tombs were cut into rock . Most pyramids and mastabas contain sections which are cut into ground level , and there are full rock @-@ cut tombs in Egypt that date back to the Old Kingdom . 
 After the defeat of the Hyksos and the reunification of Egypt under Ahmose I , the Theban rulers began to construct elaborate tombs that would reflect their newfound power . The tombs of Ahmose and his son Amenhotep I ( their exact location remains unknown ) were probably in the Seventeenth Dynasty necropolis of Dra ' Abu el @-@ Naga ' . The first royal tombs in the valley were those of Amenhotep I ( although this identification is also disputed ) , and Thutmose I , whose advisor Ineni notes in his tomb that he advised his king to place his tomb in the desolate valley ( the identity of this actual tomb is unclear , but it is probably KV20 or KV38 ) . 
 The Valley was used for primary burials from approximately 1539 BC to 1075 BC , and contains at least 63 tombs , beginning with Thutmose I ( or possibly earlier , during the reign of Amenhotep I ) , and ending with Ramesses X or XI , although non @-@ Royal burials continued in usurped tombs . 
 Despite the name , the Valley of the Kings also contains the tombs of favorite nobles as well as the wives and children of both nobles and pharaohs , meaning that only about 20 of the tombs actually contain the burials of kings ; the burials of nobles and the royal family , together with unmarked pits and embalming caches make up the rest . Around the time of Ramesses I ( ca . 1301 BC ) construction commenced in the separate Valley of the Queens . 
 = = = Royal Necropolis = = = 
 The official name for the site in ancient times was The Great and Majestic Necropolis of the Millions of Years of the Pharaoh , Life , Strength , Health in The West of Thebes ( see below for the hieroglyphic spelling ) , or more usually , Ta @-@ <unk> @-@ ma 'at ( the Great Field ) . 
 At the start of the Eighteenth Dynasty , only the kings were buried within the valley in large tombs ; when a non @-@ royal was buried , it was in a small rock cut chamber , close to the tomb of their master . Amenhotep III 's tomb was constructed in the Western Valley , and while his son Akhenaten moved his tomb 's construction to Amarna , it is thought that the unfinished <unk> may have originally been intended for him . With the return to religious orthodoxy at the end of the Eighteenth Dynasty , Tutankhamun , Ay and then Horemheb returned to the royal necropolis . 
 The Nineteenth and Twentieth Dynasties saw an increase in the number of burials ( both here and in the Valley of the Queens ) , with Ramesses II and later Ramesses III constructing a massive tomb that was used for the burial of his sons ( KV5 and <unk> respectively ) . There are some kings that are not buried within the valley or whose tomb has not been located : Thutmose II may have been buried in Dra ' Abu el @-@ Naga ' ( although his mummy was in the Deir el @-@ Bahri tomb cache ) , <unk> 's burial has never been located , and Ramesses VIII seems to have been buried elsewhere . 
 In the Pyramid Age the tomb of the king was associated with a mortuary temple located close to the pyramid . As the tomb of the king was hidden , this mortuary temple was located away from the burial , closer to the cultivation facing towards Thebes . These mortuary temples became places visited during the various festivals held in the Theban necropolis , most notably the Beautiful festival of the valley , where the sacred barques of Amun @-@ Re , his consort Mut and son Khonsu left the temple at Karnak in order to visit the funerary temples of deceased kings on the West Bank and their shrines in the Theban Necropolis . 
 The tombs were constructed and decorated by the workers of the village of Deir el @-@ Medina , located in a small wadi between this valley and the Valley of the Queens , facing Thebes . The workers journeyed to the tombs via routes over the Theban hills . The daily lives of these workers are quite well known , recorded in tombs and official documents . Amongst the events document is perhaps the first recorded worker 's strike , detailed in the Turin strike papyrus . 
 = = Exploration of the valley = = 
 The area has been a major area of modern Egyptological exploration for the last two centuries . Before this the area was a site for tourism in antiquity ( especially during Roman times ) . This area illustrates the changes in the study of ancient Egypt , starting as antiquity hunting , and ending as scientific excavation of the whole Theban Necropolis . Despite the exploration and investigation noted below , only eleven of the tombs have actually been completely recorded . 
 Many of the tombs have graffiti written by these ancient tourists . Jules Baillet located over 2100 Greek and Latin graffiti , along with a smaller number in Phoenician , Cypriot , Lycian , Coptic , and other languages . The majority of the ancient graffiti are found in <unk> , which contains just under a thousand of them . The earliest positively dated graffiti dates to 278 B.C. 
 In 1799 , members of Napoleon 's expedition to Egypt ( especially Dominique Vivant ) drew maps and plans of the known tombs , and for the first time noted the Western Valley ( where Prosper <unk> and Édouard de Villiers du <unk> located the tomb of Amenhotep III , <unk> ) . The Description de l 'Égypte contains two volumes ( out a total of 24 ) on the area around Thebes . 
 European exploration continued in the area around Thebes during the nineteenth century , boosted by Champollion 's translation of hieroglyphs early in the century . Early in the century , the area was visited by Belzoni , working for Henry Salt , who discovered several tombs , including those of Ay in the West Valley ( <unk> ) in 1816 and Seti I ( KV17 ) the next year . At the end of his visits , Belzoni declared that all of the tombs had been found and nothing of note remained to be found . Working at the same time ( and a great rival of Belzoni and Salt ) was Bernardino Drovetti , the French Consul @-@ General . 
 When Gaston Maspero was reappointed to head the Egyptian Antiquities Service , the nature of the exploration of the valley changed again . Maspero appointed English archaeologist Howard Carter as the Chief Inspector of Upper Egypt and the young man discovered several new tombs and explored several others , clearing <unk> and KV20 . 
 Around the start of the 20th century , the American Theodore M. Davis had the excavation permit in the valley , and his team ( led mostly by Edward R. Ayrton ) discovered several royal and non @-@ royal tombs ( including KV43 , KV46 and KV57 ) . In 1907 they discovered the possible Amarna Period cache in KV55 . After finding what they thought was all that remained of the burial of Tutankhamun ( items recovered from <unk> and <unk> ) , it was announced that the valley was completely explored and no further burials were to be found , in Davis 's 1912 publication , The Tombs of <unk> and <unk> ; the book closes with the comment , " I fear that the Valley of Kings is now exhausted . " 
 After Davis 's death early in 1915 Lord Carnarvon acquired the concession to excavate the valley and he employed Carter to explore it . After a systematic search they discovered the actual tomb of Tutankhamun ( KV62 ) in November 1922 . 
 Various expeditions have continued to explore the valley , adding greatly to the knowledge of the area . In 2001 the Theban Mapping Project designed new signs for the tombs , providing information and plans of the open tombs . 
 = = Tomb development = = 
 Location 
 The earliest tombs were located in cliffs at the top of scree slopes , under storm @-@ fed waterfalls ( for example <unk> and KV43 ) . As these locations were soon used , burials then descended to the valley floor , gradually moving back up the slopes as the valley bottom filled up with debris . This explains the location of the tombs KV62 and KV63 buried in the valley floor . 
 Architecture 
 The usual tomb plan consisted of a long inclined rock @-@ cut corridor , descending through one or more halls ( possibly mirroring the descending path of the sun @-@ god into the underworld ) , to the burial chamber . In the earlier tombs the corridors turn through 90 degrees at least once ( such as KV43 , the tomb of Thutmose IV ) , and the earliest had cartouche @-@ shaped burial chambers ( for example , KV43 , the tomb of Thutmose IV ) . This layout is known as ' Bent Axis ' , and after the burial the upper corridors were meant to be filled with rubble , and the entrance to the tomb hidden . After the Amarna Period , the layout gradually straightened , with an intermediate ' <unk> Axis ' ( the tomb of Horemheb , KV57 is typical of this , and is one of the tombs that is sometimes open to the public ) , to the generally ' Straight Axis ' of the late Nineteenth and Twentieth Dynasty tombs ( Ramesses III 's and Ramesses IX 's tombs , <unk> and <unk> respectively ) . As the tomb 's axes straightened , the slope also lessened , and almost disappeared in the late Twentieth Dynasty . Another feature that is common to most tombs is the ' well ' , which may have originated as an actual barrier intended to stop flood waters entering the lower parts of the tombs . It later seems to have developed a ' magical ' purpose as a symbolic shaft . In the later Twentieth Dynasty , the well itself was sometimes not excavated , but the well room was still present . 
 Decoration 
 The majority of the royal tombs were decorated with religious texts and images . The early tombs were decorated with scenes from Amduat ( ' That Which is in the Underworld ' ) , which describes the journey of the sun @-@ god through the twelve hours of the night . From the time of Horemheb , tombs were decorated with the Book of Gates , which shows the sun @-@ god passing through the twelve gates that divide the night time , and ensure the tomb owner 's own safe passage through the night . These earliest tombs were generally sparsely decorated , and those of a non @-@ royal nature were totally undecorated . 
 Late in the Nineteenth Dynasty the Book of Caverns , which divided the underworld into massive caverns containing deities and the deceased waiting for the sun to pass through and restore them to life , was placed in the upper parts of tombs ; a complete version appears in the tomb of Ramesses VI . The burial of Ramesses III saw the Book of the Earth , where the underworld is divided into 4 sections , climaxing in the sun disc being pulled from the earth by <unk> . 
 The ceilings of the burial chambers were decorated ( from the burial of Seti I onwards ) with what become formalised as the Book of the Heavens , which again describes the sun 's journey through the twelve hours of night . Again from Seti I 's time , the Litany of Re , a lengthy hymn to the sun god began to appear . 
 Tomb equipment 
 Each burial was provided with equipment that would enable a continued existence in the afterlife in comfort . Also present in the tombs were ritual magical items , such as <unk> and divine figurines . Some equipment was that which the king may have used in their lifetime ( Tutankhamun 's sandals for example ) , and some was specially constructed for the burial . 
 = = = Tomb numbering = = = 
 The modern abbreviation " KV " stands for " Kings ' Valley " , and the tombs are numbered in the order of ' discovery ' from Ramesses VII ( <unk> ) to KV63 ( which was discovered in 2005 ) , although many of the tombs have been open since antiquity , and KV5 was only rediscovered in the 1990s ( after being dismissed as unimportant by previous investigators ) . The West Valley tombs often have the " WV " prefix but follow the same numbering system . A number of the tombs are unoccupied , the owners of others remain unknown , and others are merely pits used for storage . Most of the open tombs in the Valley of the Kings are located in the East Valley , and this is where most tourists and facilities can be found . 
 = = = Eighteenth Dynasty = = = 
 The Eighteenth Dynasty tombs within the valley vary a good deal in decoration , style and location . At first there seems to have been no fixed plan ; indeed the tomb of Hatshepsut is of a unique shape , twisting and turning down over 200 metres from the entrance so that the burial chamber is 97 metres below the surface . The tombs gradually became more regular and formalised , and the tombs of Thutmose III and Thutmose IV , <unk> and KV43 are good examples of Eighteenth Dynasty tombs , both with their bent axis , and simple decoration . 
 Perhaps the most imposing tomb of this period is that of Amenhotep III , <unk> located in the West Valley . It has been re @-@ investigated in the 1990s ( by a team from Waseda University , Japan ) but is not open to the public . 
 At the same time , powerful and influential nobles started to be buried with the royal family ; the most famous of these tombs is the joint tomb of Yuya and <unk> , KV46 . They were possibly the parents of Queen <unk> , and until the discovery of the tomb of Tutankhamun , this was the best preserved tomb to be found in the Valley . 
 = = = = Amarna Period = = = = 
 The return of royal burials to Thebes after the end of Amarna period marks a change to the layout of royal burials , with the intermediate ' jogged axis ' gradually giving way to the ' straight axis ' of later dynasties . In the Western valley , there is a tomb commencement that is thought to have been started for Akhenaten , but it is no more than a gateway and a series of steps . Close by to this tomb is the tomb of Ay , Tutankhamun 's successor . It is likely that this tomb was started for Tutankhamun ( its decoration is of a similar style ) but later usurped for Ay 's burial . This would mean that KV62 may have been Ay 's original tomb , which would explain the smaller size and unusual layout for a royal tomb . 
 The other Amarna period tombs are located in a smaller , central area in the centre of the East Valley , with a possible mummy cache ( KV55 ) that may contain the burials of several Amarna Period royals — <unk> and <unk> or Akhenaten . 
 Close to this is the burial of Tutankhamun , which is perhaps the most famous discovery of modern Western archaeology and was made here by Howard Carter on November 4 , 1922 , with clearance and conservation work continuing until 1932 . This was the first royal tomb to be discovered that was still largely intact ( although tomb robbers had entered it ) , and was , until the excavation of KV63 on 10 March 2005 , considered the last major discovery in the valley . The opulence of his grave goods notwithstanding , Tutankhamun was a rather minor king and other burials probably had more numerous treasures . 
 In the same central area as KV62 and KV63 , is ' <unk> ' , a radar anomaly believed to be a tomb or chamber announced on 28 July 2006 . It is not an official designation , and indeed the actual existence of a tomb at all is dismissed by the Supreme Council of Antiquities . 
 The nearby tomb of Horemheb , ( KV57 ) is rarely open for visitors , but it has many unique features , and is extensively decorated . The decoration shows a transition from the pre @-@ Amarna tombs to those of the 19th dynasty tombs that followed . 
 = = = Nineteenth Dynasty = = = 
 The Nineteenth Dynasty saw a further standardisation of tomb layout and decoration . The tomb of the first king of the dynasty Ramesses I was hurriedly finished due to the death of the king and is little more than a truncated descending corridor and a burial chamber ; however , <unk> has vibrant decoration , and still contains the sarcophagus of the king . Its central location means that it is one of the frequently visited tombs . It shows the development of the tomb entrance and passage and of decoration . 
 His son and successor , Seti I 's tomb , KV17 ( also known as Belzoni 's tomb , the tomb of Apis , or the tomb of <unk> , son of Necho ) is usually thought to be the finest tomb in the valley , with extensive relief work and paintings . When it was rediscovered by Belzoni in 1817 , he referred to it as " .. a fortunate day .. " 
 The son of Seti , Ramesses the Great constructed a massive tomb , <unk> , but it is in a ruinous state , and it is currently undergoing excavation and conservation by a Franco @-@ Egyptian team led by Christian Leblanc . It is a vast size , being about the same length , and a larger area , of the tomb of his father . 
 At the same time , and just opposite his own tomb , Ramesses enlarged the earlier small tomb of an unknown Eighteenth Dynasty noble ( KV5 ) for his numerous sons . With 120 known rooms and excavation work still underway , it is probably the largest tomb in the valley . Originally opened ( and robbed ) in antiquity , it is a low @-@ lying structure that has been particularly prone to the flash floods that sometimes hit the area , which washed in tonnes of debris and material over the centuries , ultimately concealing its vast size . It is not currently open to the public . 
 Ramesses II 's son and eventual successor , <unk> 's tomb has been open since antiquity ; it extends 160 metres , ending in a burial chamber that once contained a set of four nested sarcophagi . Well decorated , it is typically open to the public most years . 
 The last kings of the dynasty also constructed tombs in the valley , all of which follow the same general pattern of layout and decoration , notable amongst these is the tomb of <unk> , which is well decorated , especially the ceiling decoration . 
 = = = Twentieth Dynasty = = = 
 The first ruler of the dynasty , Setnakhte , actually had two tombs constructed for himself ; he started to excavate the eventual tomb of his son , Ramesses III , but broke into another tomb and abandoned it in order to usurp and complete the tomb of the Nineteenth Dynasty female pharaoh <unk> . This tomb therefore has two burial chambers , the later extensions making the tomb one of the largest of the Royal tombs , at over 150 metres . 
 The tomb of Ramesses III ( known Bruce 's Tomb or The Harper 's Tomb due to its decoration ) is one of the largest tombs in the valley and is open to the public ; it is located close to the central ' rest – area ' and its location and superb decoration usually makes this one of the tombs visited by tourists . 
 The successors and offspring of Ramesses III constructed tombs that had straight axes and were decorated in much the same manner as each other ; notable amongst these is <unk> , the tomb of Ramesses IV , which has been open since antiquity , containing a large amount of hieratic graffiti . The tomb is mostly intact and is decorated with scenes from several religious texts . The joint tomb of Ramesses V and Ramesses VI , <unk> ( also known as the Tomb of Memnon or La Tombe de la <unk> ) , is decorated with many sunk @-@ relief carvings , depicting illustrated scenes from religious texts . Open since antiquity , it contains over a thousand graffiti in ancient Greek , Latin and Coptic . The spoil from the excavation and later clearance of this tomb , together with later construction of workers huts , covered the earlier burial of KV62 and seems to have been what protected that tomb from earlier discovery and looting . 
 The tomb of Ramesses IX , <unk> , has been open since antiquity , as can be seen by the graffiti left on its walls by Roman and Coptic visitors . Located in the central part of the valley , it stands between and slightly above KV5 and KV55 . The tomb extends a total distance of 105 metres into the hillside , including extensive side chambers that were neither decorated nor finished . The hasty and incomplete nature of the rock @-@ cutting and decorations ( it is only decorated for a little over half its length ) within the tomb indicate that the tomb was not completed by the time of Ramesses ' death , with the completed hall of pillars serving as the burial chamber . 
 Another notable tomb from this dynasty is <unk> , the tomb of <unk> ( son of Ramesses IX ) . The tomb is small and is simply a converted , unfinished corridor , but the decoration is extensive and the tomb has been newly restored and open for visitors . 
 = = = Twenty @-@ first Dynasty and the decline of the necropolis = = = 
 By the end of the New Kingdom , Egypt had entered a long period of political and economic decline . The priests at Thebes grew in power and effectively administered Upper Egypt , while kings ruling from Tanis controlled Lower Egypt . Some attempt at using the open tombs was made at the start of the Twenty @-@ first Dynasty , with the High Priest of Amun , Pinedjem I , adding his cartouche to <unk> . The Valley began to be heavily plundered , so during the Twenty @-@ first Dynasty the priests of Amun opened most of the tombs and moved the mummies into three tombs in order to better protect them , even removing most of their treasure in order to further protect the bodies from robbers . Most of these were later moved to a single cache near Deir el @-@ Bari ( known as <unk> ) ; located in the cliffs overlooking Hatshepsut 's famous temple , this mass reburial contained a large number of royal mummies . They were found in a great state of disorder , many placed in other 's coffins , and several are still unidentified . Other mummies were moved to the tomb of Amenhotep II , where over a dozen mummies , many of them royal , were later relocated . 
 During the later Third Intermediate Period and later periods , intrusive burials were introduced into many of the open tombs . In Coptic times , some of the tombs were used as churches , stables and even houses . 
 = = = Minor tombs in the Valley of the Kings = = = 
 The majority of the 65 numbered tombs in the Valley of the Kings can be considered as being minor tombs , either because at present they have yielded little information or because the results of their investigation was only poorly recorded by their explorers , while some have received very little attention or were only cursorily noted . Most of these tombs are small , often only consisting of a single burial chamber accessed by means of a shaft or a staircase with a corridor or a series of corridors leading to the chamber , but some are larger , multiple chambered tombs . These minor tombs served various purposes : some were intended for burials of lesser royalty or for private burials , some contained animal burials and others apparently never received a primary burial . In many cases these tombs also served secondary functions and later intrusive material has been found related to these secondary activities . While some of these tombs have been open since antiquity , the majority were discovered in the 19th and early 20th centuries during the height of exploration in the valley . 
 = = = Tomb robbers = = = 
 Almost all of the tombs have been ransacked . Several papyri have been found that describe the trials of tomb robbers ; these date mostly from the late Twentieth Dynasty . One of these ( Papyrus Mayer B ) describes the robbery of the tomb of Ramesses VI and was probably written in Year 9 of Ramesses IX : 
 The foreigner <unk> took us up and showed us the tomb of King Ramesses VI ... And I spent four days breaking into it , we being present all five . We opened the tomb and entered it . ... We found a cauldron of bronze , three wash bowls of bronze ... 
 The valley also seems to have suffered an official plundering during the virtual civil war , which started in the reign of Ramesses XI . The tombs were opened , all the valuables removed , and the mummies collected into two large caches . One in the tomb of Amenhotep II , contained sixteen , and others were hidden within Amenhotep I 's tomb . A few years later most of them were moved to the Deir el @-@ Bahri cache , contained no less than forty royal mummies and their coffins . Only those tombs whose locations were lost ( KV62 , KV63 and KV46 , although both KV62 and KV46 were robbed soon after their actual closure ) were undisturbed in this period . 
 = = Tourism = = 
 Most of the tombs are not open to the public ( 18 of the tombs can be opened , but they are rarely open at the same time ) , and officials occasionally close those that are open for restoration work . The number of visitors to KV62 has led to a separate charge for entry into the tomb . The West Valley has only one open tomb — that of Ay — and a separate ticket is needed to visit this tomb . The tour guides are no longer allowed to lecture inside the tombs and visitors are expected to proceed quietly and in single file through the tombs . This is to minimize time in the tombs and prevent the crowds from damaging the surfaces of the decoration . Photography is no longer allowed in the tombs . 
 In 1997 , 58 tourists and four Egyptians were massacred at nearby Deir el @-@ Bahri by Islamist militants from Al @-@ Gama 'a al @-@ Islamiyya . This led to an overall drop in tourism in the area . 
 On most days of the week an average of four to five thousand tourists visit the main valley . On the days that the Nile Cruises arrive , the number can rise to over nine thousand . These levels are expected to rise to 25 @,@ 000 by 2015 . The West Valley is much less visited , as there is only one tomb that is open to the public . 
 = Plymouth , Massachusetts = 
 Plymouth / <unk> / ( historically known as Plimouth and Plimoth ) is a town in Plymouth County , Massachusetts , United States . Plymouth holds a place of great prominence in American history , folklore , and culture , and is known as " America 's Hometown . " Plymouth was the site of the colony founded in 1620 by the Pilgrims , passengers of the famous ship the Mayflower . Plymouth is where New England was first established . It is the oldest municipality in New England and one of the oldest in the United States . The town has served as the location of several prominent events , one of the more notable being the First Thanksgiving feast . Plymouth served as the capital of Plymouth Colony from its founding in 1620 until the colony 's merger with the Massachusetts Bay colony in 1691 . Plymouth is named after the English city of the same name . 
 Plymouth is the largest municipality in Massachusetts by area . The population is 58 @,@ 271 , according to the 2014 Demographics by Cubit . U.S. Census . Plymouth is one of two county seats of Plymouth County , the other being Brockton . 
 Plymouth is located approximately 40 miles ( 64 km ) south of Boston in a region of Massachusetts known as the South Shore . Throughout the 19th century , the town thrived as a center of ropemaking , fishing , and shipping , and once held the world 's largest ropemaking company , the Plymouth Cordage Company . It continues to be an active port , but today the major industry of Plymouth is tourism . Plymouth is served by Plymouth Municipal Airport , and contains Pilgrim Hall Museum , the oldest continually operating museum in the United States . 
 As one of the country 's first settlements , Plymouth is well known in the United States for its historical value . The events surrounding the history of Plymouth have become part of the ethos of the United States , particularly that relating to Plymouth Rock , the Pilgrims , and the First Thanksgiving . The town itself is a popular tourist spot during the Thanksgiving holiday . Plymouth is home to the Old Colony Club , one of the oldest Gentlemen 's clubs in the world . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ colonial era = = = 
 Prior to the arrival of the Pilgrims , the location of Plymouth was a village of 2 @,@ 000 Wampanoag Native Americans called Patuxet . This region that became Plymouth was visited twice by European explorers prior to the establishment of Plymouth Colony . In 1605 , Samuel de Champlain sailed to Plymouth Harbor , calling it Port St. Louis . Captain John Smith , a leader of the colony at Jamestown , Virginia , explored parts of Cape Cod Bay ; he is credited with naming the region " New Plimouth . " 
 Two plagues afflicted coastal New England in 1614 and 1617 , possibly transmitted from British and French fishermen to natives on the shore ( although no concrete evidence exists to prove such a connection ) . The plague killed between 90 % and 95 % of the local Wampanoag inhabitants . The near disappearance of the tribe from the site left their cornfields and cleared areas vacant for the Pilgrims to occupy ; it also meant that the Indians were in no condition to resist the arrival of the colonists . 
 = = = Colonial era = = = 
 Plymouth has played a very important role in American colonial history . It was the final landing site of the first voyage of the Mayflower , and the location of the original settlement of the Plymouth Colony . Plymouth was established in December 1620 by English separatist Puritans who had broken away from the Church of England , believing that the Church had not completed the work of the Protestant Reformation . Today , these settlers are much better known as " Pilgrims " , a term coined by William Bradford . 
 The Mayflower first anchored in what became the harbor of Provincetown , Massachusetts on November 11 , 1620 . The ship was headed for the mouth of the Hudson River near Manhattan , which was part of the Colony of Virginia at the time , but it eventually reached New England . 
 The Pilgrim settlers realized that they did not have a patent to settle in the region , so they signed the Mayflower Compact prior to disembarking . The Pilgrims explored various parts of Cape Cod , and eventually sought a suitable location for a permanent settlement to the westward in Cape Cod Bay . The Pilgrims eventually came across the sheltered waters of Plymouth Harbor on December 17 . The appealing protected bay led to a site in the present @-@ day Harbor District being chosen for the new settlement after three days of surveying . 
 The settlers officially disembarked on December 21 , 1620 . It is traditionally said that the Pilgrims first set foot in America at the site of Plymouth Rock , though no historical evidence can prove this claim . The settlers named their settlement " Plimouth " ( also historically known as " Plimoth " , an archaic English spelling of the name ) after the major port city in Devon , England from which the Mayflower ultimately sailed . ( Plymouth , Devon , United Kingdom was named after its location at mouth of the River Plym . ) 
 = = = = First Winter = = = = 
 Plymouth faced many difficulties during its first winter , the most notable being the risk of starvation and the lack of suitable shelter . From the beginning , the assistance of Indians was vital . One colonist 's journal reports : 
 We marched to the place we called Cornhill , where we had found the corn before . At another place we had seen before , we dug and found some more corn , two or three baskets full , and a bag of beans .... In all we had about ten bushels , which will be enough for seed . It is with God 's help that we found this corn , for how else could we have done it , without meeting some Indians who might trouble us . 
 During their earlier exploration of the Cape , the Pilgrims had come upon an Indian burial site which contained corn , and they had taken the corn for future planting . On another occasion , they found an unoccupied house and had taken corn and beans , for which they made restitution with the occupants about six months later . Even greater assistance came from Samoset and Tisquantum ( better known as Squanto ) , an Indian sent by Wampanoag Tribe Chief Massasoit as an ambassador and technical adviser . Squanto had been kidnapped in 1614 by an English slave raider and sold in Málaga , Spain . He learned English , escaped slavery , and returned home in 1619 . He taught the colonists how to farm corn , where and how to catch fish , and other helpful skills for the New World . He also was instrumental in the survival of the settlement for the first two years . 
 Squanto and another guide sent by Massasoit in 1621 named <unk> helped the colonists set up trading posts for furs . Chief Massasoit later formed a Peace Treaty with the Pilgrims . Upon growing a plentiful harvest in the fall of 1621 , the Pilgrims gathered with Squanto , Samoset , Massasoit , and ninety other Wampanoag men in a celebration of thanksgiving to God for their plentiful harvest . This celebration is known today as the First Thanksgiving , and is still commemorated annually in downtown Plymouth with a parade and a reenactment . Since 1941 , Thanksgiving has been observed as a federal holiday in the United States . 
 Plymouth served as the capital of Plymouth Colony ( which consisted of modern @-@ day Barnstable , Bristol , and Plymouth Counties ) from its founding in 1620 until 1691 , when the colony was merged with the Massachusetts Bay Colony and other territories to form the Province of Massachusetts Bay . Plymouth holds the unique distinction of being the first permanent settlement in New England , and one of the oldest settlements in the United States . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 In the 1800s , Plymouth remained a relatively isolated seacoast town whose livelihood depended on fishing and shipping . The town eventually became a regional center of shipbuilding and fishing . Its principal industry was the Plymouth Cordage Company , which became the world 's largest manufacturer of rope and cordage products . The company was founded in 1824 . At one point , the longest ropewalk in the world , a quarter @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 4 km ) in length , was found on the Cordage Company 's site on the North Plymouth waterfront . It thrived into the 1960s , but was forced out of business in 1964 due to competition from synthetic @-@ fiber ropes . The refurbished factory , known as Cordage Commerce Center , is home to numerous offices , restaurants and stores . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 In the last 30 years , Plymouth has experienced rapid growth and development . As in many South Shore towns , Plymouth became more accessible to Boston in the early 1970s with improved railroads , highways , and bus routes . Furthermore , the town 's inexpensive land costs and low tax rates were factors in the town 's significant population rise . Plymouth 's population grew from 18 @,@ 606 residents in 1970 to 45 @,@ 608 residents in 1990 , a 145 % increase in 20 years . The population has continued to expand in recent years . While Plymouth has already surpassed several Massachusetts cities in population , the town is still officially regarded as a town , as it has not been re @-@ chartered as a city and continues to be governed by a board of selectmen rather than a mayor . Plymouth has emerged as a major economic and tourist center of the South Shore . 
 One of the largest towns in Massachusetts , Plymouth spans several exits on its main highway , Route 3 . Plymouth boasts several larger shopping plazas and the nearby Independence Mall in Kingston , MA , much of which has been built in just the past 5 years . As it has grown , additional access is possible via a recent extension to Plymouth 's second largest highway , U.S. Route 44 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The latitude of Plymouth is 41 @.@ <unk> and its longitude is <unk> . According to the United States Census Bureau , the town has a total area of 134 @.@ 0 sq mi ( 347 km2 ) , of which 96 @.@ 5 sq mi ( 250 km2 ) is land , and 37 @.@ 5 sq mi ( 97 km2 ) ( 28 % ) is water . 
 With the largest land area of any municipality in Massachusetts , Plymouth consists of several neighborhoods and geographical sections . Larger localities in the town include Plymouth Center , North , West and South Plymouth , Manomet , Cedarville , and Saquish Neck . 
 Plymouth makes up the entire western shore of Cape Cod Bay . It is bordered on land by Bourne to the southeast , Wareham to the southwest , Carver to the west , and Kingston to the north . It also shares a small border with Duxbury at the land entrance of Saquish Neck . Plymouth 's border with Bourne makes up most of the line between Plymouth and Barnstable counties . The town is located roughly 44 miles ( 71 km ) southeast of Boston ( it is almost exactly 40 miles ( 64 km ) from Plymouth Rock to the Massachusetts State House ) and equidistantly east of Providence , Rhode Island . 
 Located in the Plymouth Pinelands , the town of Plymouth has many distinct geographical features . The town 's Atlantic coast is characterized by low plains , while its western sections are extremely hilly and forested . Plymouth contains several small ponds scattered throughout its western quadrant , the largest being the Great Herring Pond ( which is partly in the town of Bourne ) . A major feature of the town is the Myles Standish State Forest , which is in the southwestern region . Cachalot Scout Reservation , operated by the Cachalot District of the Narragansett Council of the Boy Scouts of America , lies adjacent to the state forest lands . There is also a smaller town forest , as well as several parks , recreation areas and beaches . 
 Plymouth has nine public beaches , the largest being Plymouth Beach . Plymouth Beach guards Plymouth Harbor and mostly consists of a three @-@ mile ( 5 km ) long , ecologically significant barrier beach . Clark 's Island , a small island in Plymouth Bay , is the only island in Plymouth . It is off the coast of Saquish Neck and has nine summer houses but no year @-@ round inhabitants . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Plymouth 's climate is a transitional humid continental / cold humid subtropical / marine type , which is the predominant climate for Massachusetts . Due to its location on the Atlantic Ocean , humidity levels can be very high year @-@ round . Plymouth 's coastal location causes it to experience warmer temperatures than many inland locations in New England . Summers are typically hot and humid , while winters are cold , windy and often snowy . 
 Plymouth 's warmest month is July , with an average high temperature of 80 @.@ 6 ° F ( 27 @.@ 0 ° C ) and an average low of 61 @.@ 6 ° F ( 16 @.@ 4 ° C ) . The coldest month is January , with an average high temperature of 38 @.@ 1 ° F ( 3 @.@ 4 ° C ) and an average low of 20 @.@ 1 ° F ( − 6 @.@ 6 ° C ) . 
 Much like the rest of the Northeastern seaboard , Plymouth receives ample amounts of precipitation year @-@ round . On average , summer months receive slightly less precipitation than winter months . Plymouth averages about 47 @.@ 4 inches ( 120 cm ) of rainfall a year . Plymouth , like other coastal Massachusetts towns , is very vulnerable to Nor 'easter weather systems . The town is sometimes vulnerable to Atlantic hurricanes and tropical storms , which infrequently threaten the Cape Cod region during the early autumn months . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 As of the census of 2010 , there were 56 @,@ 468 people , 21 @,@ 269 households , and 14 @,@ 742 families residing in the town ; by population it is the second – largest town in Massachusetts , after Framingham . It is also the 21st – largest municipality in the state . The population density was 536 @.@ 0 inhabitants per square mile ( 207 @.@ 0 / km2 ) . There are 21 @,@ 250 housing units , at an average density of 85 @.@ 1 / km2 ( 220 / sq mi ) . The racial makeup of the town was 93 @.@ 8 % White , 2 @.@ 0 % Black or African American , 0 @.@ 3 % Native American , 0 @.@ 9 % Asian , < 0 @.@ 1 % Pacific Islander , 0 @.@ 9 % from other races , and 1 @.@ 48 % from two or more races . Hispanic or Latino of any race were 1 @.@ 8 % of the population . 
 There are 21 @,@ 269 households out of which 29 @.@ 5 % have children under the age of 18 living with them , 54 @.@ 6 % were married couples living together , 10 @.@ 8 % had a female householder with no husband present , and 30 @.@ 7 % were non @-@ families . 23 @.@ 7 % of all households are made up of individuals , and 10 @.@ 0 % had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size is 2 @.@ 55 and the average family size is 3 @.@ 04 . 
 In the town the population is spread out with 24 @.@ 3 % under the age of 20 , 10 @.@ 7 % from 20 to 29 , 28 @.@ 8 % from 30 to 49 , 22 @.@ 2 % from 50 to 64 , and 14 @.@ 1 % who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 41 @.@ 4 years . 
 The median income for a household in the town was $ 54 @,@ 677 as of the 2000 census , and the median income for a family was $ 63 @,@ 266 . Males had a median income of $ 44 @,@ 983 versus $ 31 @,@ 565 for females . The per capita income for the town was $ 23 @,@ 732 . About 4 @.@ 4 % of families and 5 @.@ 4 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 7 @.@ 1 % of those under age 18 and 6 @.@ 9 % of those age 65 or over . 
 = = Government = = 
 Plymouth is represented in the Massachusetts House of Representatives as a part of the First and Twelfth Plymouth Districts . The town is represented in the Massachusetts Senate as a part of the Plymouth and Barnstable district , which also includes Bourne , Falmouth , Kingston , Pembroke , Plympton , Sandwich , and part of Barnstable . On the state level , primary but shared patrolling responsibility of the town 's limited access highways falls upon the Seventh ( Bourne ) Barracks of Troop D of the Massachusetts State Police . 
 On the national level , Plymouth is a part of Massachusetts 's 9th congressional district , and is currently represented by William R. Keating . The state 's senior ( Class I ) member of the United States Senate is Elizabeth Warren . The state 's current junior ( Class II ) Senator is Edward Markey . On the local level , the town uses the representative town meeting form of government , led by a town manager and a board of selectmen . The current town manager of Plymouth is Melissa Arrighi . 
 Plymouth has a centralized municipal police force , the Plymouth Police Department . The town also has a professional fire department , with seven firehouses spread around the town . There are also six post offices for the town 's five ZIP codes , with one in the downtown area , one in North Plymouth , one in Manomet , one in White Horse Beach , one near the Plymouth County Jail , and one near the town forest in " The Village Green " shopping area of The Pinehills . 
 The town has a public library , with a branch location in Manomet . Both libraries are a part of the Old Colony Library Network , which services 28 libraries throughout the South Shore . Additionally , as a seat of Plymouth County , there are several county facilities located in Plymouth . These include a County farm , the Registry of Deeds , two jails ( the Massachusetts Correctional Institution - Plymouth and the Plymouth County Correctional Facility ) and the County Courthouse .. 
 = = Economy = = 
 Plymouth is an economic and tourism center of the South Shore . The major industry is tourism , with healthcare , technical and scientific research , real estate , and telecommunications also being primary industries . The largest employer in the town is Jordan Hospital . 
 Plymouth has experienced commercial and industrial success , with the downtown area and North Plymouth each becoming commercial centers and an industrial park opening outside of the town center . A large commercial project titled Colony Place located near the Industrial Park was completed in late 2007 . It consists of several large retail stores , various chain restaurants , and contains one of the largest outdoor designer outlet malls in the South Shore . Another large retail development that has recently finished construction off Route 3 's exit 5 is The Shops at 5 . The only nuclear power plant in Massachusetts , Pilgrim Nuclear Generating Station , is located in Plymouth . 
 Plymouth has also recently seen the development of several residential projects , among them The Pinehills , which consists of over 1 @,@ 000 residential units , two golf courses , a country club , and a shopping village . When completed in 2010 , it is expected to contain 2 @,@ 877 homes . 
 = = Education = = 
 Plymouth operates a large school system , with an enrollment over 8 @,@ 000 students . The Plymouth School District is one of the largest in the state , operating fourteen schools . This is larger than the Massachusetts average of eight schools . The school district operates 86 school buses under contract with First Student bus company . 
 The schools in Plymouth include the Mount Pleasant Preschool , eight elementary schools ( Cold Spring , Federal Furnace , Hedge , Indian Brook , Manomet , Nathanial Morton , South and West <unk> ) which generally serve students from kindergarten to fifth grade , two middle schools that serve grades 5 – 8 , Plymouth Community Intermediate School ( <unk> ) and Plymouth South Middle School , and two high schools , Plymouth North and Plymouth South . Both high schools play in the Atlantic Coast League , and the two schools share a rivalry with each other . Students who decide to receive a technical education have the option of attending Plymouth South Technical School . There were also 120 home educated children in Plymouth as of 2011 . 
 There is also a charter school in the town , Rising Tide Charter Public School , which serves middle and high school @-@ aged students . Two special education schools , the Baird School and the Radius Pediatric School , are located in the town . 
 The town has two institutions of higher learning . Quincy College has a campus located in Cordage Park . The Plymouth campus opened in 1991 , and the college 's main campus is in Quincy . Curry College has a campus at the northern edge of Plymouth Center in the Citizens Bank building . The campus opened in 1994 , and the main campus is located in Milton . While the University of Massachusetts Boston does not have a campus in Plymouth , it offers some courses at another location in Cordage Park . 
 = = Healthcare = = 
 Plymouth is home to Beth Israel Deaconess - Plymouth Hospital ( Jordan Hospital ) , the largest hospital in the southern region of the South Shore . It is the only major healthcare provider in the town . The hospital is a community medical center serving twelve towns in Plymouth and Barnstable counties . It consists of more than 30 departments , with 150 patient beds . The hospital also offers a rehabilitation center in The Pinehills region . 
 While Beth Israel Deaconess - Plymouth Hospital ( Jordan Hospital ) is the only hospital in Plymouth . South Shore Hospital operates several offices and physician labs in South Pond . South Shore Hospital , in South Weymouth , is the largest hospital in southeastern Massachusetts . 
 = = Transportation = = 
 = = = Highways = = = 
 Plymouth lies along the " Pilgrims Highway " portion of Route 3 , which is the major route between Cape Cod and Boston . The town can be accessed from six exits on the highway , which is more than any other municipality along the Pilgrims Highway . Plymouth is also the eastern terminus of U.S. Route 44 . The route has changed recently , as a new divided highway section has linked it to Route 3 , before heading south and exiting at its old location before terminating at Route 3A , which more closely follows the shoreline and passes through Plymouth Center . Route 80 's western terminus is at its intersection with old Route 44 . Route 25 goes through a remote section of the town north of Buzzards Bay , but does not have an exit . Finally , the short Plimoth Plantation Highway allows easy access between Routes 3 and 3A , with an exit that allows direct entry to Plimoth Plantation 's parking area . The highway is north of Manomet and south of Plymouth Center . 
 = = = Rail = = = 
 Plymouth is one of two termini of the Kingston / Plymouth Old Colony Line of the Massachusetts Bay Transportation Authority 's commuter rail , providing non @-@ peak service to Braintree and as far north as Boston 's South Station . The Plymouth MBTA station is near Cordage Park in North Plymouth , along Route 3A . ( The other terminus is in Kingston and has more frequent train arrivals and departures . Its station is behind the Independence Mall . ) No other railroad lines pass through the town . 
 = = = Ferry = = = 
 There is a seasonal ferry to Provincetown and several other excursion lines that offer cruises of Plymouth Bay and Cape Cod Bay . The ferry is operated by Capt. John Boats and offers one round trip daily from June to September . The ferry leaves from the State Wharf in Plymouth Center . In addition to the ferry , Plymouth Harbor offers service for harbor excursions , whale watching tours , and deep sea fishing . 
 = = = Bus = = = 
 The Plymouth & Brockton Street Railway Company offers scheduled service to Logan Airport , downtown Boston , Hyannis , and Provincetown . Buses can be boarded at the commuter parking lot at exit 5 off Route 3 , behind the McDonald 's rest stop . The Greater Attleboro Taunton Regional Transit Authority ( <unk> ) operates public transportation buses known as the Plymouth Area Link ( PAL ) throughout much of Plymouth and Kingston . 
 = = = Air = = = 
 The town is home to the Plymouth Municipal Airport , which lies on the border between Plymouth and Carver . Founded in 1931 , it offers scheduled service to Nantucket , as well as private service . The airport features a local restaurant and gift shop , but does not have an on @-@ site traffic control tower . 
 Barnstable Municipal Airport , in Hyannis , offers additional scheduled carrier service . The airport offers scheduled flight services to Nantucket , Martha 's Vineyard , Boston and New York City . It is approximately 30 mi ( 48 km ) from Plymouth . 
 The nearest national and international airport is Logan International Airport in Boston , roughly 43 mi ( 69 km ) away . T.F. Green Airport , a state airport located in Warwick , Rhode Island , is about 63 mi ( 101 km ) away . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Plymouth is the home of the New England Collegiate Baseball League 's Plymouth Pilgrims , who play their home games at Forges Field . 
 = = Points of interest = = 
 Promoted as America 's Hometown , Plymouth is a tourist destination noted for its heritage . The town is home to several notable sites . 
 = = = Plymouth Rock = = = 
 Plymouth Rock is one of Plymouth 's most famous attractions . Traditionally , the rock is said to be the disembarkation site of the Pilgrims . However , there is no historical evidence to support this belief . The first identification of Plymouth Rock as the actual landing site was made in 1741 by 94 @-@ year @-@ old Thomas Faunce , whose father had arrived in Plymouth in 1623 , three years after the arrival of the Mayflower . The rock is located roughly 650 feet ( 200 m ) from where the initial settlement was thought to be built . 
 Plymouth Rock became very famous after its identification as the supposed landing site of the Pilgrims , and was subsequently moved to a location in Plymouth Center . During the process , the rock split in two . It was later moved to Pilgrim Hall and then to a location under a granite Victorian Canopy , where it was easily accessible and subject to souvenir hunters . The rock was finally moved back to its original location along the town 's waterfront in 1921 . " Plymouth Rock " , a large boulder , now sits under the historic Plymouth Rock Portico . The Neo @-@ Classical Revival structure was designed by the highly influential architectural firm of McKim , Mead and White , designers of the Boston Public Library , Rhode Island State House and the former Pennsylvania Station in New York City . Built in 1921 the existing granite portico replaced an earlier Gothic Revival style monument designed by <unk> Billings ( who also designed the National Monument to the Forefathers ) . In 1970 the Plymouth Rock Portico was listed in the National Register of Historic Places . The rock and portico are the centerpiece of Pilgrim Memorial State Park . The park is the smallest park in the Massachusetts state forest and park system , but is also the most heavily visited . 
 = = = Plimoth Plantation = = = 
 Plimoth Plantation is a living history museum located south of Plymouth Center . It consists of a re @-@ creation of the Plymouth settlement in 1627 , as well as a replica of a 17th @-@ century Wampanoag homesite . The museum features role playing tour guides , as well as a large crafts center . The Nye Barn , a replica of a 1627 farming homestead in Plymouth , is also part of the museum . The farm features several animals that would have been found in Plymouth Colony , but are very rare in modern times . 
 The museum opened in 1947 under the guidance of Henry Hornblower II , a wealthy Boston stockbroker who grew up in Plymouth . The museum originally consisted of the Mayflower II and a " First House " exhibit in Plymouth Center , but was expanded into a large fortified town and a Native American village by 1960 . 
 = = = Mayflower II = = = 
 The Mayflower II is a full @-@ size replica of the Mayflower , the ship which brought the Pilgrims to Plymouth in 1620 . It is located at the State Pier in Plymouth Center . The ship is open as a museum about the Pilgrims ' historic voyage from Plymouth , England , and is considered a faithful replica of the original Mayflower . It is officially a part of Plimoth Plantation . 
 The ship was built in Brixham , England in 1956 , and sailed to Plymouth across the Atlantic Ocean in 1957 by famous mariner Alan Villiers . The ship is still seaworthy , and routinely takes voyages around Plymouth Harbor . In the year 2007 , the Mayflower II celebrated the 50th anniversary of its arrival in Plymouth . 
 = = = Other sites = = = 
 = = = = Historic interest = = = = 
 In addition to the Plymouth Rock Memorial , several other monuments were constructed in celebration of Plymouth 's tricentennial . These include statues of Massasoit and William Bradford , and a sarcophagus containing the bones of the 51 Pilgrims who died in the winter of 1620 , which rests atop Cole 's Hill . 
 Pilgrim Hall Museum , founded in 1824 , is the oldest continually operating museum in the United States . It is located in Plymouth Center . Plymouth also features the National Monument to the Forefathers , which was dedicated in 1889 . Standing at 81 feet ( 25 m ) tall , it is the tallest free @-@ standing solid granite monument in the United States . Other notable historical sites include the Jenney Grist Mill , a working replica of an original mill built in 1636 , as well as the 1640 Richard Sparrow House , the oldest house still standing in Plymouth . At the edge of the town on Route 80 is Parting Ways , a 94 @-@ acre ( 380 @,@ 000 m2 ) site that is notable for containing the remains of four former slaves who fought in the American Revolutionary War and their families . Other historic houses include the Mayflower House Museum . 
 There are 21 locations in Plymouth that appear on the National Register of Historic Places , including Plymouth Rock , Cole 's Hill , and Pilgrim Hall . 
 = = = = Parks and recreation = = = = 
 Myles Standish State Forest , the Commonwealth 's second largest state forest , is located in Plymouth . It is a camping and hiking destination , and contains 16 freshwater lakes and ponds . <unk> Harbor State Park , located in the extreme southern portion of the town , contains a natural beach inside Cape Cod Bay . Plymouth is also home to 11 public and private golf courses , which include Squirrel Run , Pinehills , Plymouth Country Club , and <unk> Marsh , a course that runs through a series of actively maintained cranberry bogs . 
 = = = = Entertainment = = = = 
 Plymouth is also home to a vibrant music and arts community , including the Plymouth Center for the Arts , the Driftwood Folk Cafe , and three free summer concert series : The Project Arts Wednesday night series , the L. Knife and Son Thursday night series , and the Plymouth Independent Music Festival . 
 = = Notable people = = 
 Chris <unk> , television producer @-@ writer , born in Plymouth 
 Oliver Ames , Jr . , railroad official , former resident of Plymouth 
 John Bartlett , publisher of Bartlett 's Familiar Quotations , born in Plymouth 
 Amy Lynn Baxter , adult film star and nude model , born in Plymouth 
 Jamie P. Chandler , political commentator and author , born in Plymouth 
 David <unk> , actor , born in Plymouth 
 Ken Coleman , sportscaster , died in Plymouth 
 Nancy <unk> , WNBA Coach , current resident of Plymouth 
 Thomas <unk> , United States Representative from Maine , born in Plymouth 
 Gary <unk> , former shortstop for the California Angels and manager of the single @-@ A team Lowell Spinners , currently resides in Plymouth . 
 Dave Farrell , bassist with Linkin Park , born in Plymouth 
 Peter J. Gomes , preacher and theologian at Harvard Divinity School , resident of Plymouth 
 Glen Gray , saxophonist , leader of the Casa Loma Orchestra , born in Plymouth 
 Dick Gregory , comedian , activist and nutritionist , current resident of Plymouth 
 Pee Wee Hunt , trombonist and co @-@ founder of the Casa Loma Orchestra , died in Plymouth 
 Frederic Augustus Lucas , Brooklyn Institute of Arts and Sciences museum director , author of many scientific papers , born in Plymouth 
 Aaron Matson , a United States Representative from New Hampshire , born in Plymouth 
 Violet Mersereau , silent film actress , died in Plymouth 
 Warren G. Phillips , Inducted into the National Teachers Hall of Fame in 2010 , taught in Plymouth 
 Henry Picard , Professional golfer , won The Masters Tournament 
 Chris Raab , Member of the <unk> crew . 
 Beatrice Roberts , film actress 
 Michael Sweet , Stryper lead vocalist and lead and rhythm guitars , resident of Plymouth 
 James Warren , president of the Massachusetts provincial legislature and prominent colonial @-@ era politician . 
 = = Twin and sister cities = = 
 Since 2001 , Plymouth has shared a twin @-@ city status with : Plymouth , Devon , United Kingdom . In addition , since 1990 , Plymouth has shared a sister @-@ city status with <unk> , Miyagi Prefecture , Japan . 
 = Paul London and Brian Kendrick = 
 Paul London and Brian Kendrick were a professional wrestling tag team best known for their time together in World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) . They are former WWE Tag Team Champions and World Tag Team Champions . Their 2006 @-@ 2007 reign as WWE Tag Team Champions was the longest in the title 's history , until their record was broken by The New Day on July 20 , 2016 . 
 They first began teaming together in 2003 as a part of WWE , but Kendrick left the company shortly thereafter . When he returned in mid @-@ 2005 , he and London reunited as a tag team . In May 2006 the duo won the WWE Tag Team Championship from MNM ; it was Kendrick 's first title victory with the company , and London 's third . Their reign was the longest since WWE created the title in 2002 ( until their record was beaten by The New Day in 2016 ) , and they became the fourth longest @-@ reigning tag team champions in the company 's history , finally dropping the titles to Deuce ' n Domino in April 2007 . 
 Later in 2007 , London and Kendrick were drafted from SmackDown to the Raw brand , where they briefly held the World Tag Team Championship . They would continue to work together until Kendrick was drafted back to SmackDown in the 2008 supplemental draft , thus disbanding the team until 2010 , when they reunited in Pro Wrestling Guerrilla following their releases from WWE . They have since competed together on the independent circuit on several occasions . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Name = = = 
 The team never had an official team name , but were just referred to as " the tag team of London and Kendrick . " In 2006 London and Kendrick put the tag team name " The <unk> " on their wrestling attires and tried to convince the WWE management to start calling the team by that name , but were unsuccessful in their attempts . 
 = = = Beginnings = = = 
 Prior to teaming together on World Wrestling Entertainment ( WWE ) ' s SmackDown ! brand , both Paul London and Brian " Spanky " Kendrick along with Daniel Bryan were students at Shawn Michaels ' Texas Wrestling Academy , under the tutelage of Rudy Boy Gonzalez . From there they both went on to Ring of Honor , where they occasionally competed against each other and as a team . 
 = = = World Wrestling Entertainment = = = 
 = = = = SmackDown ! ( 2002 – 2007 ) = = = = 
 In late 2002 , Kendrick was hired by WWE , and in July 2003 London joined the company as well . Once in WWE together , and both on the SmackDown ! brand , London and Kendrick began teaming together . They became a mainstay on SmackDown ! ' s sister show Velocity until Kendrick left the company in February 2004 . 
 Kendrick returned in mid @-@ 2005 , using his real name , and in September 2005 London and Kendrick reformed as a tag team . Upon reuniting the team began competing in matching shorts and vests as well as wearing theatrical masks to the ring . Subsequently , they were quickly elevated into the WWE Tag Team Championship picture , receiving a non @-@ title match against WWE Tag Team Champions MNM ( Johnny Nitro and Joey Mercury ) on the February 10 , 2006 episode of SmackDown ! , which London and Kendrick lost . On the April 7 , 2006 episode of SmackDown ! London and Kendrick once again faced MNM , this time picking up a win in a non @-@ title match . London and Kendrick continued their winning streak against the champions , earning singles victories for Kendrick and London over Nitro and Mercury respectively , leading to a title match at Judgment Day , where London and Kendrick won their first WWE Tag Team Championship as a team ( London 's second WWE Tag Team Title reign and Kendrick 's first championship in WWE ) . 
 Their first main competition for the titles came when K. C. James and Idol Stevens defeated London and Kendrick in a non @-@ title match , in early August , igniting a storyline feud between the two teams . During the rivalry , WWE Diva Ashley Massaro began accompanying London and Kendrick to the ring , acting as a valet to the team while combating the actions of James and Stevens ' manager Michelle McCool . 
 On October 14 , 2006 they became the longest reigning WWE Tag Team Champions of all time , surpassing MNM 's previous record reign of 145 days . The team began a losing streak to the team of William Regal and Dave Taylor , with Regal defeating both London and Kendrick in singles matches and losing a non @-@ title tag team match to the pair on the December 8 episode of SmackDown ! . 
 A scheduled title match between the two teams at Armageddon was changed at the event to a four @-@ way ladder match , also involving The Hardys ( Matt and Jeff ) and MNM . In the match London and Kendrick were able to retrieve the belts to retain their championship . When a regular tag team rematch was signed with Regal and Taylor two weeks later , London and Kendrick were successful in defeating them . On the February 16 episode of SmackDown ! , General Manager Theodore Long scheduled another ladder match between the teams of London and Kendrick , Regal and Taylor , MNM , and The Hardys for the WWE Tag Team Championship at February 's pay @-@ per @-@ view event No Way Out , but WWE 's official website announced the match had changed to pit The Hardys and Chris Benoit against MNM and MVP , while London and Kendrick faced rookie team Deuce ' n Domino ( Deuce and Domino ) in a separate match ; they were booked to successfully retain the titles against Deuce ' n Domino . Their almost year @-@ long reign came to an end when they were defeated by Deuce ' n Domino for the title on the April 20 , 2007 episode of SmackDown ! in Milan , Italy . London picked up an injury , resulting in Kendrick challenging Deuce ' n Domino in singles matches , losing to Deuce , but defeating Domino . London returned on the May 11 episode of SmackDown ! , defeating Domino in a singles match . London and Kendrick then unsuccessfully attempted to regain the Tag Team Championship , losing to Deuce ' n Domino in a triple threat match also involving Regal and Taylor , and in a standard tag team match two weeks later . 
 = = = = Raw ( 2007 – 2008 ) = = = = 
 London and Kendrick were drafted to Raw as the first picks in the WWE Supplemental Draft on June 17 , 2007 and were successful on their Raw debut , defeating The World 's Greatest Tag Team ( Shelton Benjamin and Charlie Haas ) via a Sliced Bread # 2 performed on Haas . On the September 3 episode of Raw , London and Kendrick defeated The World 's Greatest Tag Team once again to earn a World Tag Team Championship match at Unforgiven against Lance Cade and Trevor Murdoch , in which they lost . Two days later , they defeated Cade and Murdoch for the title at a house show in South Africa . Three days later , at another house show , Cade and Murdoch regained the title in a rematch . 
 Near the end of 2007 , London suffered a foot injury and was unable to compete , and Kendrick was mainly used as a singles wrestler on Raw where he lost to the likes of Umaga and Mr. Kennedy . London made his return on February 4 in a loss to Santino Marella and Carlito . London and Kendrick returned as a tag team on the March 17 episode of Raw in a loss to Umaga when Kendrick walked out on London . The two reunited on Raw on March 31 with commentator Jim Ross explaining the two worked out their differences , and they got a win against the then @-@ World Tag Team Champions , Cody Rhodes and Hardcore Holly . On April 14 , they lost a number one contendership match to the team of Carlito and Marella . They competed sporadically on Raw in the following months , defeating Lance Cade and <unk> Murdoch , before receiving a World Tag Team title shot against Holly and Rhodes on the May 26 episode of Raw . They lost when Holly pinned London following an Alabama slam . 
 = = = = Split and aftermath = = = = 
 The team came to an end in June 2008 , when Kendrick was drafted to the SmackDown brand as part of the 2008 Supplemental Draft , while London stayed on Raw . He made his return to the brand on the July 18 , 2008 airing of SmackDown ! as a heel , with new ring attire defeating Jimmy Wang Yang with the help of his new bodyguard , Ezekiel Jackson . Kendrick was later given the name " The Brian Kendrick " . 
 London was utilised sparingly during the next few months , making his only television appearance in a loss to Lance Cade on the July 21 episode of Raw . London was subsequently released from his WWE contract on November 7 , 2008 . On July 31 , 2009 , Kendrick was also released . 
 = = = Independent circuit ( 2010 – 2014 ) = = = 
 Going into 2010 , the team made occasional reunions on the independent circuit . On January 30 the team completed at Pro Wrestling Guerrilla 's part of the aptly titled WrestleReunion 4 show . They defeated the PWG World Tag Team Champions Generation Me ( Jeremy and Max ) in a non @-@ title match in their first match back together . 
 On March 27 , London and Kendrick made an appearance in Dragon Gate USA , where Kendrick had already appeared in singles competition . However , their run as a tag team in the company was short @-@ lived due to losing a <unk> Loser Leaves Company match to Jimmy Jacobs and Jack Evans and as a result Kendrick , who tapped out to Jacobs , was forced to leave the company for good . 
 They <unk> once again on October 4 , 2012 , at the first Family Wrestling Entertainment 's PPV , Back 2 Brooklyn . They , along with Jay Lethal , defeated the team of The Young Bucks and Petey Williams . Londrick and The Young Bucks wrestled again on October 6 , 2012 , at the House of Hardcore 's first show , with Londrick winning the match . On June 23 , 2013 , Londrick were defeated by The Young Buck at House of Hardcore 2 . London and Kendrick were defeated at PWG 's Ten by Chuck Taylor and Johnny Gargano . 
 In 2014 , London and Kendrick travelled to Scotland to compete for Insane Championship Wrestling . On October 15 , the pair won the ICW Tag Team Championship by defeating The New Age Kliq ( BT Gunn and Chris Renfrew ) at Helter Skelter . On November 2 , 2014 , they lost the title to Polo Promotions ( Mark Coffey and Jackie Polo ) In Glasgow , Scotland . In 2014 , Kendrick returned to WWE , thus <unk> with London . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Dropsault ( London ) / Sunset flip ( Kendrick ) combination 
 Get Well Soon ( Reverse STO ( Kendrick ) / Jumping enzuigiri ( London ) combination ) 
 Kendrick performs Sliced Bread # 2 but remains on his knees afterwards , allowing London to jump off Kendrick 's back and perform an aided shooting star press 
 Tower of Londrick ( Sitout powerbomb ( London ) / Sliced Bread # 2 ( Kendrick ) combination ) 
 Signature moves 
 Assisted standing moonsault 
 Double dropkick 
 Double flapjack 
 Double hip toss 
 Double Japanese arm drag 
 Double superkick 
 London performs a hip toss on Kendrick , throwing him on to a prone opponent in the style of a front flip senton 
 London throws Kendrick overhead , allowing Kendrick to perform a double dropkick on two prone opponents 
 <unk> 
 Ashley Massaro 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Insane Championship Wrestling 
 ICW Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 Tag Team of the Year ( 2007 ) 
 World Wrestling Entertainment 
 World Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) 
 WWE Tag Team Championship ( 1 time ) 
 = Brooke Street Pier = 
 The Brooke Street Pier is a floating pontoon building at Sullivans Cove in the waterfront area of the city of Hobart , Tasmania , Australia . It was constructed in 2014 – 15 at a cost of A $ 13 million . It weighs 5 @,@ 300 tonnes ( 5 @,@ 216 long tons ) and was Australia 's largest floating building upon completion . It is connected to the Hobart shore at Franklin Wharf , near the base of Brooke Street . Primarily a ferry terminal , the architect has described it as a " tourism transport hub " . 
 = = History = = 
 A pier at Brooke Street has existed since the 1820s . The earliest renovation of it on record occurred in 1879 , after which the dimensions were 147 ft × 50 ft ( 45 m × 15 m ) . At the time , the pier was also known as Monarch Pier . Unlike the larger piers at the northern end of Franklin Wharf , Brooke Street Pier and the other piers in the vicinity did not have the capability for large volumes of cargo which would require overhead cranes . 
 In the 1960s , these piers were replaced with small freestanding jetties and were used for tourist cruise vessels . One of the larger companies providing these services is Navigators ( originally Roche Bros ) which has been operating from Brooke Street Pier since 1951 . 
 The number of ferry passenger in Hobart increased from 90 @,@ 000 in 2010 to over 300 @,@ 000 in 2014 . The old pier was unable to withstand this increase in traffic . One ferry operator suggested that the pier was " about to fall in the river " . 
 The Government of Tasmania twice called for expressions of interest from the private sector in redeveloping Brooke Street Pier . The first was in 2007 – the successful respondent was a consortium named Hunter Developments , which included Federal Hotels , Navigators and Simon Currant . Their proposal included multiple wharves , including a hotel . The design was considered out of character for the Sullivans Cove area and in January 2009 Hunter Developments announced the cancellation of the hotel proposal . 
 The second attempt came in 2010 . A development application was lodged with the Hobart City Council in April 2012 . In June 2012 , the state and federal governments agreed to contribute A $ 5 million to the redevelopment , and project commencement was announced in December 2013 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Construction started in April 2014 at <unk> , a ferry manufacturer based at Prince of Wales Bay . In November 2014 the partially completed structure , then weighing 4 @,@ 000 t ( 3 @,@ 937 long tons ) , was towed 8 km ( 5 mi ) down the river to be positioned at its final location . It is anchored to the sea @-@ bed by cables . The structure is 80 m ( 262 ft ) long by 20 m ( 66 ft ) wide and is four levels tall . One concrete basement level sits 4 m ( 13 ft ) below the water 's surface and includes services such as kitchen facilities , storage , toilets and <unk> heating and cooling systems . The three above @-@ water levels are enclosed in a semi @-@ translucent polycarbonate cladding injected with <unk> , creating a diaphanous skin and keeping the structure as light as possible . This cladding contains LED lights , which gives the pier a glowing effect in the evening . 
 Environmental considerations taken into account when designing the building include the polycarbonate cladding , used for natural light and passive heating ; and a <unk> heating and cooling system using the constant temperature of the sea water below the pontoon . As a floating structure , it will not be affected by rises in the sea level . The gabled roof design is intended to fit in with the other buildings in Sullivans Cove including <unk> , Elizabeth Street Pier and the <unk> Cruise Terminal – which themselves are based on the historic use of the area as a freight port . 
 = = Facilities = = 
 The pier is primarily a ferry terminal – key tenants are Navigators ( operator of the <unk> ferry ) and Peppermint Bay Cruises . There are also a public space and a market area for other tourism operators and suppliers of Tasmanian produce , such as seafood , dairy , wine and whisky . Outside of ferry operating hours , the terminal level can be used as an event space for up to 1 @,@ 200 people . 
 The largest permanent tenant is a restaurant , The Glass House , run by Islington Hotel 's David Meredith , and featuring <unk> <unk> as head chef . It also hosts a cafe ( " Adrift " ) , and an espresso bar ( " Bright Eyes " , run by the owners of Pilgrim Coffee ) . Trade stallholders selling Tasmanian products include Valhalla <unk> , Huon Aquaculture , <unk> , <unk> Cheeses , <unk> Estate and McHenry Distillery . The pier also offers free wifi for patrons visiting the terminal . 
 = Chough = 
 Two species of chough ( pronunciation : / ˈtʃʌf / " <unk> " ) constitute the genus Pyrrhocorax of the Corvidae ( crow ) family of birds . These are the red @-@ billed chough ( Pyrrhocorax pyrrhocorax ) , and the Alpine or yellow @-@ billed chough ( P. graculus ) . The white @-@ winged chough of Australia , despite its name , is a member of the family <unk> and only distantly related . 
 The choughs have black plumage and brightly coloured legs , feet , and bills , and are resident in the mountains of southern Eurasia and North Africa . They have long broad wings and perform spectacular aerobatics . Both species pair for life and display fidelity to their breeding sites , which are usually caves or crevices in a cliff face . They build a lined stick nest and lay three to five eggs . They feed , usually in flocks , on short grazed grassland , taking mainly invertebrate prey , supplemented by vegetable material or food from human habitation , especially in winter . 
 Changes in agricultural practices , which have led to local population declines and range fragmentation , are the main threats to this genus , although neither species is threatened globally . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The first member of the genus to be described was the red @-@ billed chough , named as Upupa pyrrhocorax by Linnaeus in his Systema Naturae in 1758 . His genus Upupa contained species that had a long curved bill and a short blunt tongue . These included the northern bald ibis and the hoopoe , birds now known to be completely unrelated to the choughs . 
 The Alpine chough was described as Corvus graculus by Linnaeus in the 1766 edition of the Systema Naturae . Although Corvus is the crow genus to which the choughs ' relatives belong , they were considered sufficiently distinctive to be moved to the new genus , Pyrrhocorax , by English ornithologist Marmaduke Tunstall in his 1771 Ornithologia Britannica , The genus name is derived from Ancient Greek purrhos ( <unk> , ‘ flame @-@ coloured ’ ) and korax ( κόραξ , ‘ Raven , crow ’ ) . " Chough " was originally an alternative onomatopoeic name for the jackdaw , Corvus monedula , based on its call . The similar red @-@ billed chough , formerly particularly common in Cornwall , became known initially as " Cornish chough " and then just " chough " , the name transferring from one species to the other . 
 The fossil record from the Pleistocene of Europe includes a form similar to the Alpine chough , and sometimes categorised as an extinct subspecies of that bird , and a prehistoric form of the red @-@ billed chough , P. p. primigenius . There are eight generally recognised extant subspecies of red @-@ billed chough , and two of Alpine , although all differ only slightly from the nominate forms . The greater subspecies diversity in the red @-@ billed species arises from an early divergence of the Asian and geographically isolated Ethiopian races from the western forms . 
 The closest relative of the choughs as indicated by a study of molecular phylogeny is the ratchet @-@ tailed <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) and they form a clade that is sister to the remaining living members of the <unk> . The genus Pyrrhocorax species differ from Corvus in that they have brightly coloured bills and feet , smooth , not scaled tarsi and very short , dense nasal feathers . Choughs have uniformly black plumage , lacking any paler areas as seen in some of their relatives . The two Pyrrhocorax are the main hosts of two specialist chough fleas , Frontopsylla frontalis and F. laetus , not normally found on other corvids . 
 The Australian white @-@ winged chough , Corcorax melanorhamphos , despite its similar shape and habits , is only distantly related to the true choughs , and is an example of convergent evolution . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Choughs breed in mountains , from Morocco and Spain eastwards through southern Europe and the Alps , across Central Asia and the Himalayas to western China . The Alpine chough is also found in Corsica and Crete , and the red @-@ billed chough has populations in Ireland , the UK , the Isle of Man , and two areas of the Ethiopian Highlands . Both species are non @-@ migratory residents throughout their range , only occasionally wandering to neighbouring countries . 
 These birds are mountain specialists , although red @-@ billed choughs also use coastal sea cliffs in Ireland , Great Britain , and Brittany , feeding on adjacent short grazed grassland or machair ; the small population on La Palma , one of the Canary Islands , is also coastal . The red @-@ billed chough more typically breeds in mountains above 1 @,@ 200 m ( 3 @,@ 900 ft ) in Europe , 2 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) in North Africa and 2 @,@ 400 m ( 7 @,@ 900 ft ) in the Himalayas . In that mountain range it reaches 6 @,@ 000 metres ( 20 @,@ 000 ft ) in the summer , and has been recorded at 7 @,@ 950 metres ( 26 @,@ 080 ft ) altitude on Mount Everest . The Alpine chough breeds above 1 @,@ 260 m ( 4 @,@ 130 ft ) in Europe , 2 @,@ 880 m ( 9 @,@ 450 ft ) in Morocco , and 3 @,@ 500 m ( 11 @,@ 500 ft ) in the Himalayas . It has nested at 6 @,@ 500 m ( 21 @,@ 300 ft ) , higher than any other bird species , and it has been observed following mountaineers ascending Mount Everest at an altitude of 8 @,@ 200 m ( 26 @,@ 900 ft ) . 
 Where the two species occur in the same mountains , the Alpine species tends to breed at a higher elevation than its relative , since it is better adapted for a diet at high altitudes . 
 = = Description = = 
 The choughs are medium @-@ sized corvids ; the red @-@ billed chough is 39 – 40 centimetres ( 15 – 16 in ) in length with a 73 – 90 centimetres ( 29 – 35 in ) wingspan , and the Alpine chough averages slightly smaller at 37 – 39 ( 14 @.@ 5 – 15 @.@ 5 in ) length with a 75 – 85 cm ( 30 – 33 in ) wingspan . These birds have black plumage similar to that of many Corvus crows , but they are readily distinguished from members of that genus by their brightly coloured bills and legs . The Alpine chough has a yellow bill and the red @-@ billed chough has a long , curved , red bill ; both species have red legs as adults . The sexes are similar , but the juvenile of each species has a duller bill and legs than the adult and its plumage lacks the glossiness seen in older birds . Other physical distinctions are summarised in the table below . 
 The two choughs are distinguishable from each other by their bill colour , and in flight the long broad wings and short tail of the red @-@ billed give it a silhouette quite different from its slightly smaller yellow @-@ billed relative . Both species fly with loose deep wing beats , and frequently use their manoeuvrability to perform acrobatic displays , soaring in the <unk> at cliff faces then diving and rolling with fanned tail and folded wings . 
 The red @-@ billed chough 's loud , ringing chee @-@ ow call is similar in character to that of other corvids , particularly the jackdaw , although it is clearer and louder than the call of that species . In contrast , the Alpine chough has rippling preep and whistled sweeeooo calls quite unlike the crows . Small subspecies of both choughs have higher frequency calls than larger races , as predicted by the inverse relationship between body size and frequency . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 Choughs are monogamous , and show high partner and site fidelity . Both species build a bulky nest of roots , sticks and plant stems lined with grass , fine <unk> or hair . It is constructed on a ledge , in a cave or similar fissure in a cliff face , or in man @-@ made locations like abandoned buildings , quarries or dams . Red @-@ billed will also sometimes use occupied buildings such as Mongolian monasteries . The choughs are not colonial , although in suitable habitat several pairs may nest in close proximity . 
 Both species lay 3 – 5 normally whitish eggs blotched with brown or grey , which are incubated by the female alone . The chicks hatch after two to three weeks . Red @-@ billed chough chicks are almost naked , but the chicks of the higher altitude Alpine chough hatch with a dense covering of natal down . The chicks are fed by both parents and fledge in 29 – 31 days after hatching for Alpine chough , and 31 – 41 days for red @-@ billed . 
 The Alpine chough lays its eggs about one month later than its relative , although breeding success and reproductive behaviour are similar . The similarities between the two species presumably arose because of the same strong environmental constraints on breeding behaviour . The first @-@ year survival rate of the juvenile red @-@ billed chough is 72 @.@ 5 percent , and for the Alpine it is 77 % . The annual adult survival rate is 83 – 92 % for Alpine , but is unknown for red @-@ billed . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 In the summer , both choughs feed mainly on invertebrates such as beetles , snails , grasshoppers , caterpillars , and fly larvae . Ants are a favoured food of the red @-@ billed chough . Prey items are taken from short grazed pasture , or in the case of coastal populations of red @-@ billed chough , areas where plant growth is hindered by exposure to coastal salt spray or poor soils . The chough 's bill may be used to pick insects off the surface , or to dig for grubs and other invertebrates . The red @-@ billed chough typically excavates to 2 – 3 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 – 1 @.@ 18 in ) in the thin soils of its feeding areas , but it may dig to 10 – 20 cm ( 3 @.@ 9 – 7 @.@ 9 in ) in suitable conditions . 
 Plant matter is also eaten , and red @-@ billed chough will take fallen grain where the opportunity arises ; it has been reported as damaging barley crops by breaking off the ripening heads to extract the corn . Alpine choughs rely more on fruit and berries at times of year when animal prey is limited , and will readily supplement their winter diet with food provided by tourist activities in mountain regions , including ski resorts , refuse dumps and picnic areas . Both Pyrrhocorax species feed in flocks on open areas , often some distance from the breeding cliffs , particularly in winter . Feeding trips may cover 20 km ( 12 mi ) distance and 1 @,@ 600 m ( 5 @,@ 200 ft ) in altitude . In the Alps , the development of skiing above 3 @,@ 000 m ( 9 @,@ 800 ft ) has enabled more Alpine choughs to remain at high levels in winter . 
 Where their ranges overlap , the two chough species may feed together in the summer , although there is only limited competition for food . An Italian study showed that the vegetable part of the winter diet for the red @-@ billed chough was almost exclusively Gagea bulbs , whilst the Alpine chough took berries and hips . In June , red @-@ billed choughs fed mainly on caterpillars whereas Alpine choughs ate cranefly pupae . Later in the summer , the Alpine chough consumed large numbers of grasshoppers , while the red @-@ billed chough added cranefly pupae , fly larvae and beetles to its diet . In the eastern Himalayas in November , Alpine choughs occur mainly in Juniper forests where they feed on juniper berries , differing ecologically from the red @-@ billed choughs in the same region and at the same time of year , which dig for food in the soil of the villages ' terraced pastures . 
 = = = Natural threats = = = 
 Predators of the choughs include the peregrine falcon , golden eagle and Eurasian eagle @-@ owl , while the common raven will take nestlings . In northern Spain , red @-@ billed choughs preferentially nest near lesser kestrel colonies ; the falcon , which eats only insects , provides a degree of protection against larger predators , and the chough benefits in terms of a higher breeding success . The red @-@ billed chough is occasionally parasitised by the great spotted cuckoo , a brood parasite for which the Eurasian magpie is the primary host . 
 The choughs host bird fleas , including two Frontopsylla species which are Pyrrhocorax specialist . Other parasites recorded on choughs include a cestode <unk> <unk> , and various species of chewing lice in the genera Brueelia , Menacanthus and Philopterus . Blood parasites such as Plasmodium have been found in red @-@ billed choughs , but this is uncommon , and apparently does little harm . Parasitism levels are much lower than in some other passerine groups . 
 = = Status = = 
 Both Pyrrhocorax species have extensive geographical ranges and large populations ; neither is thought to approach the thresholds for the global population decline criteria of the IUCN Red List ( i.e. , declining more than 30 % in ten years or three generations ) , and they are therefore evaluated as being of Least Concern . However , some populations , particularly on islands such as Corsica and La Palma are small and isolated . 
 Both choughs occupied more extensive ranges in the past , reaching to more southerly and lower altitude areas than at present , with the Alpine chough breeding in Europe as far south as southern Italy , and both the decline and range fragmentation continue . Red @-@ billed choughs have lost ground in most of Europe , and Alpine choughs have lost many breeding sites in the east of the continent . In the Canary Islands , the red @-@ billed chough is now extinct on two of the islands on which it formerly bred , and the Alpine was lost from the archipelago altogether . 
 The causes of the decline include the fragmentation and loss of open grasslands to scrub or human activities such as the construction of ski resorts , and a longer @-@ term threat comes from global warming which would cause the species ' preferred Alpine climate zone to shift to higher , more restricted areas , or locally to disappear entirely . 
 The red @-@ billed chough , which breeds at lower levels , has been more affected by human activity , and the declines away from its main Alpine breeding areas have seen it categorised as " vulnerable " in Europe . Only in Spain is it still common , and it has recently expanded its range in that country by nesting in old buildings in areas close to its traditional mountain breeding sites . 
 = = In culture = = 
 Further information : Red @-@ billed chough 
 Although these are mainly mountain species with limited interactions with humans , the red @-@ billed chough has a coastal population in the far west of its range , and has cultural connections particularly with Cornwall , where it appears on the Cornish Coat of Arms . A legend from that county says that King Arthur did not die but was transformed into a red @-@ billed chough , and hence killing this bird was unlucky . 
 The red @-@ billed chough was formerly reputed to be a habitual thief of small objects from houses , including burning wood or lighted candles , which it would use to set fire to haystacks or thatched roofs . 
 As a high altitude species with limited contact with humans until the development of mountain tourism activities , the Alpine chough has little cultural significance . It was , however , featured together with its wild mountain habitat in Olivier Messiaen ’ s Catalogue d 'oiseaux ( " Bird catalogue " ) , a piano piece written in 1956 – 58 . Le <unk> des <unk> ( " The Alpine Chough " ) is the opening piece of Book 1 of the work . 
 A group of choughs may be referred to fancifully or jocularly as a chattering or clattering . ( See also : List of collective nouns ) 
 = Bohor reedbuck = 
 The bohor reedbuck ( Redunca redunca ) is an antelope native to central Africa . The animal is placed under the genus Redunca and in the family Bovidae . It was first described by German zoologist and botanist Peter Simon Pallas in 1767 . The bohor reedbuck has five subspecies . The head @-@ and @-@ body length of this medium @-@ sized antelope is typically between 100 – 135 cm ( 39 – 53 in ) . Males reach approximately 75 – 89 cm ( 30 – 35 in ) at the shoulder , while females reach 69 – 76 cm ( 27 – 30 in ) . Males typically weigh 43 – 65 kg ( 95 – 143 lb ) and females 35 – 45 kg ( 77 – 99 lb ) . This sturdily built antelope has a yellow to grayish brown coat . Only the males possess horns which measure about 25 – 35 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 – 13 @.@ 8 in ) long . 
 A herbivore , the bohor reedbuck prefers grasses and tender reed shoots with high protein and low fiber content . This reedbuck is dependent on water , though green pastures can fulfill its water requirement . The social structure of the bohor reedbuck is highly flexible . Large aggregations are observed during the dry season , when hundreds of bohor reedbuck assemble near a river . Males become sexually mature at the age of three to four years , while females can conceive at just one year of age , reproducing every nine to fourteen months . Though there is no fixed breeding season , mating peaks in the rainy season . The gestation period is seven and a half months long , after which a single calf is born . The calves are weaned at eight to nine months of age . 
 The bohor reedbuck inhabits moist grasslands and swamplands as well as woodlands . The bohor reedbuck is native to Benin , Burkina Faso , Burundi , Cameroon , Central African Republic , Chad , Democratic Republic of Congo , Ethiopia , Gambia , Ghana , Guinea , Guinea @-@ Bissau , Kenya , Mali , Mauritania , Niger , Nigeria , Rwanda , Senegal , Sudan , Tanzania and Togo . The animal is possibly extinct in Ivory Coast and Uganda . Reckless hunting and loss of habitat as a result of human settlement have led to significant decline in the numbers of the bohor reedbuck , although this antelope tends to survive longer in such over @-@ exploited areas as compared to its relatives . The total populations of the bohor reedbuck are estimated to be above 100 @,@ 000 . Larger populations occur in eastern and central Africa than in western Africa . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) rates the bohor reedbuck as of Least Concern . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The scientific name of the bohor reedbuck is Redunca redunca . The animal is placed under the genus Redunca and in the family Bovidae . It was first described by German zoologist and botanist Peter Simon Pallas in 1767 . The three species of Redunca , including the bohor reedbuck , are the least derived members of the tribe <unk> ( except the genus Pelea ) . The order of size in the genus Redunca is an evidence supporting the descent of the reduncines from a small ancestor . 
 Five subspecies of the bohor reedbuck have been recognized : 
 R. r. bohor Rüppell , 1842 : Also known as the Abyssinian bohor reedbuck . It occurs in southwestern , western and central Ethiopia , and Blue Nile ( Sudan ) . 
 R. r. cottoni ( W. Rothschild , 1902 ) : It occurs in the <unk> ( Southern Sudan ) , northeastern Democratic Republic of Congo , and probably in northern Uganda . R. r. <unk> is a synonym . 
 R. r. nigeriensis ( Blaine , 1913 ) : This subspecies occurs in Nigeria , northern Cameroon , southern Chad and Central African Republic . 
 R. r. redunca ( Pallas , 1767 ) : Its range extends from Senegal east to Togo . It inhabits the northern savannas of Africa . The relationship of this subspecies to R. r. nigeriensis is not clear . 
 R. r. wardi ( Thomas , 1900 ) : Found in Uganda , eastern Democratic Republic of Congo and eastern Africa . R. r. <unk> and R. r. <unk> are synonyms . 
 = = Physical description = = 
 The bohor reedbuck is a medium @-@ sized antelope . The head @-@ and @-@ body length is typically between 100 – 135 cm ( 39 – 53 in ) . Males reach approximately 75 – 89 cm ( 30 – 35 in ) at the shoulder , while females reach 69 – 76 cm ( 27 – 30 in ) . Males typically weigh 43 – 65 kg ( 95 – 143 lb ) and females 35 – 45 kg ( 77 – 99 lb ) . The bushy tail is 18 – 20 cm ( 7 @.@ 1 – 7 @.@ 9 in ) long . This reedbuck is sexually dimorphic , with males 10 % to 20 % larger than females and showing more prominent markings . Of the subspecies , R. r. cottoni is the largest , whereas R. r. redunca is the smallest . 
 This sturdily built antelope has a yellow to grayish brown coat . Generally , the bohor reedbuck is yellower than other <unk> . The large and diffuse sebaceous glands present on the coat make the coat greasy and give it a strong odour . Juveniles are darker than the adults as well as long @-@ haired . While R. r. bohor appears yellowish gray , R. r. wardi is richly tinted . The undersides are white in color . A few distinct markings can be observed — such as a dark stripe on the front of each foreleg ; white markings under the tail ; and a pale ring of hair around the eyes and along the lips , lower jaw , and upper throat . However , R. r. redunca lacks dark stripes on its forelegs . The males have thicker necks . Its large , oval @-@ shaped ears distinguish it from other antelopes . There is a round bare spot below each ear . Apart from sebaceous glands , bohor reedbuck have a pair of inguinal glands and vestigial foot glands , and four nipples . A bohor reedbuck can survive for at least ten years . The tracks of the bohor reedbuck are slightly smaller than those of the southern reedbuck . 
 As a prominent sign of sexual dimorphism , only males possess a pair of short , stout horns , that extend backward from the forehead and hook slightly forward . The horns measure about 25 – 35 cm ( 9 @.@ 8 – 13 @.@ 8 in ) . However , some Senegalese individuals have longer and wide @-@ spreading horns . In comparison to the other <unk> , the bohor reedbuck has the shortest and most hooked horns . The longest horns are observed in R. r. cottoni , which are hooked less than normal and may curve inwards . In contrast to R. r. cottoni , R. r. bohor has short and stout horns , with hooks pointing forward . The length of the horns of an individual of a certain region seems to be related to the population density in that region to some extent . While short horns are observed in individuals of eastern Africa , where populations are dispersed , longer and wide @-@ spreading horns are found on animals in the Nile valley , where populations are concentrated . 
 = = = Ticks and parasites = = = 
 The bohor reedbuck is host to several parasites . The most notable helminths found in the bohor reedbuck are <unk> <unk> ( in the rumen ) , <unk> <unk> ( in the small intestine ) , Trichuris <unk> ( in the caecum ) , Setaria species ( in the abdominal cavity ) , <unk> species ( in the lungs ) and Taenia cysts ( in the muscles ) . Other parasites include Schistosoma bovis , Cooperia rotundispiculum , Haemonchus contortus , species of <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . The common ticks found on the bohor reedbuck are Amblyomma species and Rhipicephalus evertsi . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 Bohor reedbuck are active throughout the day , seeking cover during the daytime and grazing in the night . A large proportion of the whole day is spent on feeding and vigilance . They can easily camouflage in grasses and reeds , and hide themselves rather than running from danger . When threatened , they usually remain motionless or retreat slowly into cover for defense , but if the threat is close , they flee , whistling shrilly to alert the others . It hides from predators rather than forming herds in defense . Many predators , including lions , leopards , spotted hyenas , African wild dogs and Nile crocodiles , prey on the reedbuck . 
 If shade is available , females remain solitary ; otherwise they , along with their offspring , congregate to form herds of ten animals . Female home ranges span over 15 – 40 hectares ( 37 – 99 acres ; 0 @.@ 058 – 0 @.@ 154 sq mi ) , while the larger territories of males cover 25 – 60 hectares ( 62 – 148 acres ; 0 @.@ 097 – 0 @.@ 232 sq mi ) . These home ranges keep overlapping . As the daughters grow up , they distance themselves from their mothers ' home ranges . Territorial males are much tolerant ; they may even associate with up to 19 bachelor males in the absence of females . As many as five females may be found in a male 's territory . Territorial bulls drive out their sons when they start developing horns ( when they are about a year @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half old ) . These young males form groups of two to three individuals on the borders of territories , till they themselves mature in their fourth year . Large aggregations are observed during the dry season , when hundreds of bohor reedbuck assemble near a river . 
 Two prominent forms of display among these animals is whistling and bounding . Instead of scent @-@ marking its territory , the reedbuck will give a shrill whistle to make the boundaries of its territory be known . As it whistles , it expels air through its nose with such a force that the whole of its body vibrates . These whistles , usually one to three in number , are followed by a few stotting bounds . This behaviour is also used to raise alarm in herds . In this , the reedbuck raises its neck , exposing the white patch on its throat , but keeping the tail down , and leaps in a way similar to the impala 's jumps , landing on its forelegs . This is accompanied by the popping of the inguinal glands in the legs . Fights begin with both opponents holding their horns low , in a combat stance ; followed by the locking of horns and pushing one another . These fights can even lead to deaths . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 A herbivore , the bohor reedbuck prefers grasses and tender reed shoots with high protein and low fiber content . This reedbuck is dependent on water , though green pastures can fulfill its water requirement . A study of the bohor reedbuck 's diet in Rwenzori Mountains National Park ( Uganda ) revealed that , throughout the year , the most preferred species was Sporobolus <unk> . Other grasses the animals fed on included Hyparrhenia <unk> , Heteropogon contortus and Themeda triandra , all of which are species commonly found in heavily grazed grasslands . Bohor reedbuck preferred Cynodon dactylon and Cenchrus ciliaris in the wet season , and switched to Sporobolus pyramidalis and Panicum repens in the dry season . Though they rarely feed on dicots , these can include Capparis and Sida species . On regularly burnt pastures , the bohor reedbuck feeds on Imperata species , while in places close by water sources , it eats Leersia and newly sprouted <unk> species ( like topi and puku ) . 
 Primarily a nocturnal grazer , the bohor reedbuck may also feed at daytime . A study showed that feeding peaked at dawn and late afternoon . In the night , two feeding peaks were observed once again : at dusk and midnight . They traverse a long way from their daytime refuges while grazing . Seasonal differences in the amount of time spent while grazing in a particular area is possibly related to the availability and quality of grasses there . The bohor reedbuck often grazes in association with other grazers such as hartebeest , topi , puku and kob . In Kenyan farmlands , the reedbuck may feed on growing wheat and cereals . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Males become sexually mature at the age of three to four years , while females can conceive at just one year of age , reproducing every nine to fourteen months . Though there is no fixed breeding season , mating peaks in the rainy season . Fights for dominance take place in some particular " assembly fields " , where up to 40 males may assemble in an area of 1 hectare ( 2 @.@ 5 acres ; 0 @.@ 0039 sq mi ) . Some parts of these grounds are the main attractions - marked with dung and urine . The reason behind the attractiveness of these few spots for sexually active males is the oestrogen in the females ' urine . 
 Courtship begins with the dominant male approaching the female , who then assumes a low @-@ head posture and urinates . <unk> females run away on being pursued by a male . A male keen on sniffing the female 's vulva keeps flicking his tongue . As they continue their " mating march " , the male licks the female 's rump and persistently attempts mounting her . On mounting , the males tries to clasp her flanks tightly . If she stands firmly , it is a sign that she is ready to mate . Copulation is marked by a single ejaculation , after which both animals stand motionless or a while , and then resume grazing . 
 The gestation period is seven and a half months long , after which a single calf is born . The mothers keep their offspring concealed for as long as eight weeks . The mother keeps within a distance of 20 – 30 m ( 66 – 98 ft ) of its calf . Nursing , usually two to four minutes long , involves licking the whole body of the calf and suckling . The infant is suckled usually once in the day and one to two times at night . The female 's previous calf usually resists separation . At the age of two months , the calf begins grazing alongside its mother , and seeks protection from her if alarmed . Though after four months the calf is no more licked , it may still be groomed by its mother . The calves are weaned at eight to nine months of age . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The bohor reedbuck inhabits moist grasslands and swamplands as well as woodlands . It is found in two kinds of habitat in northern Cameroon : the seasonally flooded grasslands rich in grasses like Vetiveria <unk> and Echinochloa pyramidalis ( in the Sahelo @-@ Sudan region ) and <unk> woodlands ( in the <unk> @-@ Guinean region ) . Often found on grasslands susceptible to floods and droughts , the bohor reedbuck can adapt remarkably well to radical seasonal changes and calamities . It is not so widespread as the bushbuck due to its habitat requirements . In some margins of its range , the bohor reedbuck shares its habitat with the mountain reedbuck . The ranges of the bohor reedbuck and southern reedbuck extensively overlap in Tanzania . 
 Endemic to Africa , the bohor reedbuck is native to Benin , Burkina Faso , Burundi , Cameroon , Central African Republic , Chad , Democratic Republic of Congo , Ethiopia , Gambia , Ghana , Guinea , Guinea @-@ Bissau , Kenya , Mali , Mauritania , Niger , Nigeria , Rwanda , Senegal , Sudan , Tanzania and Togo . The animal is possibly extinct in Ivory Coast and Uganda . Formerly widespread in western , central and eastern Africa , its present range extends from Senegal in the west to Ethiopia in the east . Among the three reedbuck species , bohor reedbuck is the most widespread in Tanzania . Its status in Burundi , Eritrea , Ghana and Togo is uncertain , while it is rare in Niger and Nigeria . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 Reckless hunting and loss of habitat as a result of human settlement have led to significant decline in the numbers of the bohor reedbuck , although this antelope tends to survive longer in such over @-@ exploited areas as compared to its relatives . Natural calamities , like drought , are also major threats . While populations have declined in northern Cameroon due to degradation of floodplains through the construction of upstream dams , their habitat has been destroyed in Chad and Tanzania due to expansion of agriculture and settlement . Several deaths occur due to roadkill and drowning as well . During the dry season , bohor reedbuck are hunted with dogs and nets in Uganda . <unk> with the largest horns are prized by hunters . 
 The total populations of the bohor reedbuck are estimated to be above 100 @,@ 000 . Though the populations are decreasing , it is not sufficiently low to meet the Near Threatened criterion . Thus , the IUCN rates the bohor reedbuck as of Least Concern . Around three @-@ fourth of the populations survive in protected areas . Populations of the reedbuck are either declining or uncertain in <unk> du Baoulé National Park ( Mali ) ; Comoé National Park ( Ivory Coast ) ; Mole and <unk> National Parks ( Ghana ) . Numbers in the Akagera National Park , where its last @-@ known populations in Rwanda exist , have seen a steep fall . 
 Though populations have substantially decreased in western Africa , bohor reedbuck still exist in Niokolo @-@ Koba National Park ( Senegal ) ; <unk> River ( Guinea @-@ Bissau ) ; Kiang West National Park ( Gambia ) ; Arly @-@ Singou and Nazinga Game Ranch ( Burkina Faso ) . Larger numbers occur in eastern and central Africa , mostly in protected areas such as Bouba <unk> ( Cameroon ) ; Manovo @-@ Gounda St. Floris National Park ( Central African Republic ) ; Bale Mountains National Park ( Ethiopia ) ; Murchison Falls National Park and Pian <unk> Wildlife Reserve ( Uganda ) ; Maasai Mara ( Kenya ) ; Serengeti National Park , <unk> @-@ <unk> and Selous Game Reserve ( Tanzania ) . 
 = Abd al @-@ Rahman ibn Muhammad ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath = 
 ʿAbd al @-@ <unk> ibn Muḥammad ibn al @-@ Ashʿath ( Arabic : عبد الرحمن بن محمد بن <unk> ) , commonly known as Ibn al @-@ Ashʿath after his grandfather , was a distinguished Arab nobleman and general under the early Umayyad Caliphate , most notable for leading a failed rebellion against the Umayyad viceroy of the east , al @-@ Hajjaj ibn Yusuf , in 700 – 703 . 
 The scion of a distinguished family of the <unk> tribal nobility , he played a minor role in the Second Fitna ( 680 – 692 ) and then served as governor of Rayy . After the appointment of al @-@ Hajjaj as governor of Iraq and the eastern provinces of the Caliphate in 694 , relations between the haughty and overbearing al @-@ Hajjaj and the Iraqi nobility quickly became strained . Nevertheless , in 699 or 700 , al @-@ Hajjaj appointed Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath as commander of a huge Iraqi army , the so @-@ called " Peacock Army " , to subdue the troublesome principality of Zabulistan , whose ruler , the Zunbīl , vigorously resisted Arab expansion . During the campaign , al @-@ Hajjaj 's overbearing behaviour caused Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath and the army to rebel . After patching up an agreement with the Zunbīl , the army started on its march back to Iraq . On the way , a mutiny against al @-@ Hajjaj developed into a full @-@ fledged anti @-@ Umayyad rebellion . 
 Al @-@ Hajjaj initially retreated before the rebels ' superior numbers , but quickly defeated and drove them out of Basra . Nevertheless , the rebels seized Kufa , where supporters started flocking . The revolt gained widespread support among those who were discontented with the Umayyad regime , especially the religious scholars known as qurrāʾ ( " Quran readers " ) . Caliph Abd al @-@ Malik tried to negotiate terms , including the dismissal of al @-@ Hajjaj , but the hardliners among the rebel leadership pressured Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath into rejecting the Caliph 's terms . In the subsequent Battle of Dayr al @-@ <unk> , the rebel army was decisively defeated by al @-@ Hajjaj 's Syrian troops . Al @-@ Hajjaj pursued the survivors , who under Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath fled to the east . Most of the rebels were captured by the governor of Khurasan , while Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath himself fled to Zabulistan . His fate is unclear , as some accounts hold that , after long pressure from al @-@ Hajjaj to surrender him , the Zunbīl executed him , while most sources claim that he committed suicide to avoid being handed over to his enemies . 
 The suppression of Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath 's revolt signalled the end of the power of the tribal nobility of Iraq , which henceforth came under the direct control of the Umayyad regime 's staunchly loyal Syrian troops . Later revolts , under Yazid ibn al @-@ Muhallab and Zayd ibn Ali , also failed , and it was not until the success of the Abbasid Revolution that the Syrian dominance of Iraq was broken . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Origin and early career = = = 
 Abd al @-@ Rahman ibn Muhammad ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath was a descendant of a noble family from the Kinda tribe in the <unk> . His grandfather Ma <unk> , better known by his nickname " al @-@ Ash 'ath " ( " He with the dishevelled hair " ) , was an important chieftain who submitted to Muhammad , but rebelled during the Ridda wars . Defeated , he was pardoned and married Caliph Abu Bakr 's sister . He went on to participate in the crucial battles of the early Muslim conquests , Yarmouk and <unk> , as well as in the Battle of Siffin , where he was instrumental in forcing Ali to abandon his military advantage and submit to arbitration , and later led the <unk> quarter in Kufa , where he died in 661 . His father Muhammad was far less distinguished , serving an unsuccessful tenure as governor of Tabaristan , and becoming involved in the Second Fitna as a supporter of Ibn al @-@ Zubayr , being killed in 686 / 7 in the campaign that overthrew al @-@ Mukhtar . Like his father at Siffin , he is denigrated by pro @-@ Alid sources for his ambiguous role in the Battle of Karbala in 680 , being held responsible for the arrests of Muslim ibn Aqil and Hani ibn <unk> . Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath 's mother , Umm Amr , was the daughter of Sa 'id ibn Qays al @-@ Hamdani . He had four brothers , Ishaq , Qasim , <unk> , and Isma 'il , of whom the first three also fought in the campaigns in Tabaristan . 
 According to al @-@ Tabari , the young Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath accompanied his father and participated in his political activities : in 680 he revealed the hiding @-@ place of Muslim ibn Aqil to the authorities , and he fought in the campaign against al @-@ Mukhtar in which his father was killed , and reportedly executed ( or persuaded Mu 'sab ibn al @-@ Zubayr to execute ) al @-@ Mukhtar 's captured followers in revenge . Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath disappears from the record during the next few years , but after Mu 'sab ibn al @-@ Zubayr was defeated and killed by the Umayyad caliph Abd al @-@ Malik ibn Marwan in October 691 , he , like other followers of Mu 'sab , apparently went over to the Umayyads . In early 692 , Abd al @-@ Malik 's brother Bishr put him in command of over 5 @,@ 000 <unk> for a campaign against the Kharijites threatening al @-@ Ahwaz . The Kharijites retreated before the far larger caliphal army , led by Khalid ibn Abdallah ibn Khalid ibn <unk> , and Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath went on to take up the governorship of Rayy . 
 = = = Al @-@ Hajjaj 's appointment to Iraq = = = 
 In 694 , Abd al @-@ Malik appointed the trusted and capable al @-@ Hajjaj ibn Yusuf as the new governor of Iraq , a crucial post given the restiveness of the region towards Umayyad rule . In 697 , his remit was expanded to cover the entirety of the eastern Caliphate , including Khurasan and Sistan . 
 In 695 , al @-@ Hajjaj entrusted Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath with 6 @,@ 000 horsemen and the campaign against the Kharijite rebels under Shabib ibn Yazid ibn Nu 'aym al @-@ Shaybani . Although not large , this group benefited from Shabib 's tactical skill and inflicted a number of defeats on Umayyad forces . Advised by the general al @-@ <unk> Uthman ibn Sa 'id , Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath pursued the Kharijites but displayed great caution in order to avoid falling into a trap . As a result , the governor of al @-@ Mada 'in , Uthman ibn Qatan , wrote to al @-@ Hajjaj criticizing Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath 's leadership . Al @-@ Hajjaj responded by giving command to Uthman , but when the latter attacked Shabib , the Umayyad army suffered a heavy defeat , losing around 900 men and fleeing to Kufa ; Uthman himself was killed , while Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath , who lost his horse , managed to escape with the help of a friend and reached Kufa after an eventful journey . There he remained in hiding until al @-@ Hajjaj granted him pardon . 
 Despite his setback , relations between Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath and al @-@ Hajjaj were friendly initially , and al @-@ Hajjaj 's son married one of Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath 's sisters . Gradually , however , the two men became estranged . The sources attribute this to Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath 's overweening pride as one of the foremost of the ashrāf , the tribal nobility , and his aspirations to leadership : al @-@ Mas 'udi records that he adopted the title of <unk> al @-@ <unk> ( " Helper of the Faithful " ) , an implicit challenge to the Umayyads , who were implied to be false believers . In addition , he claimed to be the <unk> , a messianic figure in South Arab ( Yamani ) tribal tradition who was expected to raise them to domination . Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath 's pretensions irked al @-@ Hajjaj , whose hostile remarks — such as " Look how he walks ! How I should like to cut off his head ! " — were conveyed to Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath and served to deepen their hostility to outright mutual hatred . According to L. Veccia Vaglieri , however , these reports are more indicative of the Arabic sources ' tendency to " explain historical events by incidents relating to persons " , rather than the actual relationship between the two men , especially given the fact that Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath faithfully served al @-@ Hajjaj in a number of posts , culminating in his appointment to lead the " Peacock Army " . Nevertheless , it is clear that al @-@ Hajjaj quickly became unpopular among the Iraqis in general through a series of measures that , according to Hugh N. Kennedy , " [ seem ] almost to have goaded the Iraqis into rebellion " , such as the introduction of Syrian troops — the mainstay of the Umayyad dynasty — into Iraq , the use of Iraqi troops in the arduous and unrewarding campaigns against the Kharijites , and the reduction of the Iraqi troops ' pay to a level below that of the Syrian troops . 
 = = = Sistan campaign and rebellion = = = 
 In 698 / 9 , the Umayyad governor of Sistan , Ubayd Allah ibn Abi <unk> , suffered a severe defeat by the semi @-@ independent ruler of Zabulistan , known as the Zunbīl . The Zunbīl drew the Arabs deep into his country and cut them off , so that they managed to extricate themselves only with great difficulty and after suffering many losses , particularly among the Kufan contingent . In response , al @-@ Hajjaj sent an Iraqi army to the east against the Zunbīl . Whether due to the splendour of its equipment or as an allusion to the " proud and haughty manner of the Kufan soldiers and ashrāf who composed it " ( G. R. Hawting ) , this army became known in history as the " Peacock Army " . Two different generals were appointed by al @-@ Hajjaj in succession to command it , before he appointed Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath instead . In view of their bad relations , the sources report , the appointment came as a surprise to many ; an uncle of Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath even approached al @-@ Hajjaj and suggested that his nephew might revolt , but al @-@ Hajjaj did not rescind his appointment . Al @-@ Tabari suggests that al @-@ Hajjaj relied on the fear he inspired to keep Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath in check ; modern scholarship on the other hand holds that the portrayal of the great personal animosity between the two men is likely to be exaggerated . 
 It is unclear whether Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath himself had joined the army from the outset or whether , according to an alternative tradition , he had been sent to Kirman to punish a local leader who had refused to help the governors of Sistan and Sind . After taking up the leadership of the army , Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath led it to Sistan , where he united the local troops with the " Peacock Army " . He rejected a peace offer from the Zunbīl and — in marked contrast to his predecessor 's direct assault — began a systematic campaign to first secure the lowlands surrounding the mountainous heart of the Zunbīl 's kingdom : slowly and methodically , he captured the villages and fortresses one by one , installing garrisons in them and linking them with messengers . After accomplishing this task , he withdrew to Bust to spend the winter of 699 / 700 . Once al @-@ Hajjaj received Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath 's messages informing him of the break in operations , however , he replied in what L. Veccia Vaglieri described as " a series of arrogant and offensive messages ordering him to penetrate into the heart of Zabulistan and there to fight the enemy to the death " . Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath called an assembly of the army 's leadership , in which he informed them of al @-@ Hajjaj 's orders for an immediate advance and his decision to refuse to obey . He then went before the assembled troops and repeated al @-@ Hajjaj 's instructions , calling upon them to decide what should be done . The troops clearly resented " the prospect of a long and difficult campaign so far from Iraq " ( G. R. Hawting ) , denounced al @-@ Hajjaj , proclaiming him deposed , and swore allegiance to Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath instead . Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath 's brothers , however , as well as the governor of Khurasan , al @-@ Muhallab ibn Abi <unk> , refused to join the rebellion . Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath hastily concluded an agreement with the Zunbīl , whereby if he was victorious in the coming conflict with al @-@ Hajjaj , he would accord the Zunbīl generous treatment , while if he was defeated , the Zunbīl would provide refuge . With his rear secure , Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath left representatives at Bust and Zaranj , and his army set out on the return journey to Iraq , picking up more soldiers from Kufa and Basra , who were stationed as garrisons , along the way . By the time the army reached Fars , it had become clear that deposing al @-@ Hajjaj could not be done without deposing Caliph Abd al @-@ Malik as well , and the revolt evolved from a mutiny into a full @-@ blown anti @-@ Umayyad uprising , with the troops renewing their oath to Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath . 
 The reasons for the rebellion have been the source of much discussion and theories among modern scholars . Moving away from the personal relationship between al @-@ Hajjaj and Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath , Alfred von Kremer suggested that the rebellion was linked with the efforts of the non @-@ Arab converts to Islam ( the mawālī ) to secure equal rights with the Arab Muslims . Julius Wellhausen rejected this view as the main source of the revolt , seeing it instead as a reaction of the Iraqis in general and the ashrāf in particular against the Syrian regime of the Umayyads as represented by the overbearing ( and notably low @-@ born ) al @-@ Hajjaj . Other scholars have seen in it a manifestation of the tribal factionalism between the northern Arab and southern Arab ( " Yamani " ) tribal groups prevalent at the time . Thus a poem by a certain A <unk> Hamdan in celebration of the rebellion shows not only a religious but also a tribal motivation of the rebel troops : al @-@ Hajjaj is denounced as an apostate and a " friend of the devil " , while Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath is portrayed as the champion of the Yamani Qahtani and Hamdani tribes against the northern Arab Ma <unk> and <unk> . On the other hand , as G. R. Hawting points out , this is insufficient evidence to ascribe purely tribal motivations to the revolt : if Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath 's movement was indeed led largely by <unk> , this simply reflects the fact that they were the dominant element in Kufa , and while al @-@ Hajjaj himself was a northerner , his main commander was a southerner . Wellhausen 's analysis , however , rejected the evident religious dimension of the revolt , especially the participation of the fanatical zealots known as qurrāʾ ( " Quran readers " ) . While the " religious polemic used by both sides [ .. ] is stereotyped , unspecific and to be found in other contexts " ( C.G. Hawting ) , there do appear to have been specific religious grievances , notably the accusation that the Umayyads were neglecting the ritual prayer . It seems clear that the revolt began as a simple mutiny against an overbearing governor who made impossible demands of the troops , but , at least by the time the army reached Fars , a religious element emerged , represented by the qurrāʾ . Given the close " interaction of religion and politics in early Muslim society " , as G. R. Hawting points out , the religious element quickly became dominant , as seen by the difference between the oath of allegiance ( <unk> ) sworn at the beginning of the revolt and that exchanged between the army and Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath at <unk> in Fars . While in the first Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath declared as his intention to " depose al @-@ Hajjaj , the enemy of God " , in the latter , he exhorted his men to " [ defend ] the Book of God and the Sunna of His Prophet , to depose the <unk> of error , to fight against those who regard [ the blood of the Prophet ’ s kin ] as licit " . Although Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath remained as the head of the uprising , Veccia Vaglieri writes that after this point " one has the impression that [ ... ] the control of the revolt slipped from his hands " , or that , as Wellhausen comments , " he was urged on in spite of himself , and even if he would , could not have banished the spirits which he had called up . It was as if an avalanche came rushing down sweeping every thing before it " . 
 This interpretation is corroborated by the different rhetoric and actions of Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath and his followers , as reported in the sources : the former was ready and willing to compromise with the Umayyads , and continued to fight only because he had no alternative , while the great mass of his followers , motivated by discontent against the Umayyad regime couched in religious terms , were far more uncompromising and willing to carry on the struggle until death . Al @-@ Hajjaj himself seems to have been aware of the distinction : in suppressing the revolt , he pardoned the Quraysh , the Syrians , and many of the other Arab clans , but executed tens of thousands among the mawālī and the Zutt of the Mesopotamian Marshes , who had sided with the rebels . 
 = = = Fight for control of Iraq = = = 
 Informed of the revolt , al @-@ Hajjaj requested reinforcements from the Caliph , but was unable to stop the advance of the rebel army , which is reported to have numbered 33 @,@ 000 cavalry and 120 @,@ 000 infantry . On 24 or 25 January 701 , Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath overwhelmed al @-@ Hajjaj 's advance guard at <unk> . At the news of this defeat , al @-@ Hajjaj withdrew to Basra and then , as he could not possibly hold the city , left Basra as well for nearby al @-@ Zawiya . Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath entered Basra on 13 February 701 . Over the next month , a series of skirmishes were fought between the forces of Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath and al @-@ Hajjaj , in which the former generally held the upper hand . Finally , in early March , the two armies met for a pitched battle . Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath initially prevailed , but in the end al @-@ Hajjaj 's Syrians , under Sufyan ibn <unk> , carried off a victory . Many rebels fell , especially among the qurrāʾ , forcing Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath to withdraw to Kufa , taking with him the Kufan troops and the élite of the Basran cavalry . At Kufa , Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath found the citadel occupied by Matar ibn <unk> , an officer from al @-@ Mada 'in , and was forced to take it by assault . 
 His lieutenant at Basra , the Hashimi Abd al @-@ Rahman ibn Abbas , tried but was unable to hold the city , as the populace opened the gates in exchange for a pardon after a few days . Abd al @-@ Rahman too withdrew with as many Basrans as would follow him to Kufa , where Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath 's forces swelled further with the arrival of large numbers of anti @-@ Umayyad volunteers . After taking control of Basra — and executing some 11 @,@ 000 of its people , despite his pledge of pardon — al @-@ Hajjaj marched on Kufa in April 701 . His army was harassed by Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath 's cavalry , but reached the environs of the city and set up camp at Dayr Qurra , on the right bank of the Euphrates so as to secure his lines of communication with Syria . In response Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath left Kufa and with an army reportedly 200 @,@ 000 strong approached al @-@ Hajjaj 's army and set up camp at Dayr al @-@ <unk> . Both armies fortified their camps by digging trenches and , as before , engaged in skirmishes . Whatever the true numbers of Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath 's force , al @-@ Hajjaj was in a difficult position : his army was considerably outnumbered by the rebels , although reinforcements from Syria were constantly arriving , and his position was difficult to resupply with provisions . 
 In the meantime , Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath 's progress had sufficiently alarmed the Umayyad court that they sought a negotiated settlement , despite the contrary advice of al @-@ Hajjaj . Caliph Abd al @-@ Malik sent his brother Muhammad and son Abdallah as envoys , proposing the dismissal of al @-@ Hajjaj , the appointment of Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath as governor over one of the Iraqi towns , and a raise in the Iraqis ' pay so that they received the same amount as the Syrians . Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath was inclined to accept , but the more radical of his followers , especially the qurrāʾ , refused , believing that the offered terms revealed the government 's weakness , and pushed for outright victory . With the negotiations failing , the two armies continued to skirmish — the sources report that the skirmishing lasted for 100 days with 48 engagements . This lasted until September , when the two armies met in battle . Again Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath initially held the upper hand , but the Syrians prevailed in the end : shortly before the sun set , Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath 's men broke and scattered . Failing to rally his troops , Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath with a handful of followers fled to Kufa , where he took farewell of his family . As Hawting comments , the contrast " between the discipline and organisation of the Umayyads and their largely Syrian support and the lack of these qualities among their opponents in spite of , or perhaps rather because of , the more righteous and religious flavour of the opposition " is a recurring pattern in the civil wars of the period . 
 Victorious , al @-@ Hajjaj entered Kufa , where he tried and executed many rebels , but also pardoned those who submitted after admitting that through revolt they had become infidels . In the meantime , however , one of Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath 's supporters , Ubayd Allah ibn <unk> , had recaptured Basra , to where Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath now headed ; and another , Muhammad ibn Sa 'd ibn Abi Waqqas , had captured al @-@ Mada 'in . Al @-@ Hajjaj remained for a month in Kufa , before setting out to meet Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath . The two armies met at <unk> on the river <unk> . After two weeks of skirmishing , al @-@ Hajjaj delivered the final blow by launching a simultaneous attack on the rebel camp from two sides : while he with the main part of his army attacked from one side , a portion of his army , guided by a shepherd , crossed the marshes and launched itself on the camp from the rear . Caught by surprise , the rebel army was nearly annihilated , with many rebels drowning in the river in their attempt to flee . 
 = = = Flight east and death = = = 
 Following this renewed defeat , Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath fled east , towards Sistan , with a few survivors . Al @-@ Hajjaj sent troops under Umara ibn al @-@ Tamim al @-@ Lakhmi to intercept them . Umara caught up with them twice , at Sus and <unk> , but Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath and his men managed to fight through to Kirman and thence to Sistan . There he was refused entry into Zaranj by his own agent ( ʿāmil ) , and was then arrested by the ʿāmil of Bust . The Zunbīl however , true to his word , came to Bust and forced Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath 's release , taking him with him to Zabulistan and treating him with much honour . There , Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath assumed command of some 60 @,@ 000 supporters who had assembled there in the meantime . With their support , he seized Zaranj , where he punished the ʿāmil . Faced with the approach of the Umayyad troops under Umara ibn al @-@ Tamim , however , most of Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath 's followers urged him to go to Khurasan , where they would be hopefully able to recruit more followers , and sit out the Umayyad attacks until either al @-@ Hajjaj or Caliph Abd al @-@ Malik died and the political situation changed . Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath bowed to their pressure , but after a group of 2 @,@ 000 men defected , he returned to Zabulistan with those who would follow him there . Most of the rebels remained in Khurasan , choosing Abd al @-@ Rahman ibn Abbas as their leader . They were soon confronted and defeated by the local governor , Yazid ibn al @-@ Muhallab . Yazid released those who belonged to the Yamani tribes related to his own , and sent the rest to al @-@ Hajjaj , who executed most of them . In the meantime , Umara quickly effected the surrender of Sistan , by offering lenient terms to the garrisons if they surrendered without struggle . 
 Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath remained safe under the protection of the Zunbīl , but al @-@ Hajjaj , fearing that he might raise another revolt , sent letters to the Zunbīl , mixing threats and promises , to secure his surrender . Finally , in 704 the Zunbīl gave in , in exchange for lifting the annual tribute for 7 or 10 years . Accounts of Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath 's end differ : one version holds that he was executed by the Zunbīl himself , or that he died of illness , and that his head was cut off and sent to al @-@ Hajjaj . The more widespread account , however , holds that he was confined to a remote castle at <unk> in anticipation of his extradition to al @-@ Hajjaj , and chained to his warden , but that he threw himself from the top of the castle ( along with his warden ) to his death . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The failure of Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath 's revolt led to the tightening of Umayyad control over Iraq . Al @-@ Hajjaj founded a permanent garrison for the Syrian troops at Wasit , situated between Basra and Kufa , and the Iraqis , regardless of social status , were deprived of any real power in the governance of the region . This was coupled with a reform of the salary ( ʿaṭāʾ ) system by al @-@ Hajjaj : whereas hitherto the salary had been calculated based on the role of one 's ancestors in the early Muslim conquests , it now became limited to those actively participating in campaigns . As most of the army was now composed of Syrians , this measure gravely injured the interests of the Iraqis , who regarded this as another impious attack on hallowed institutions . In addition , extensive land reclamation and irrigation works were undertaken in lower Iraq ( the Sawad ) , but this was limited mostly to around Wasit , and the proceeds went to the Umayyads and their clients , not the Iraqi nobility . As a result , the political power of the once mighty Kufan élites was soon broken . 
 It was not until 720 that the Iraqis rebelled once again , under Yazid ibn al @-@ Muhallab , " the last of the old @-@ style Iraqi champions " ( Hugh Kennedy ) , and even then , support was ambivalent , and the revolt was defeated . Two of Ibn al @-@ Ash 'ath 's nephews , Muhammad ibn Ishaq and Uthman ibn Ishaq , supported the rebellion , but most remained quiescent and content with their role as local dignitaries . A few held posts in Kufa under the early Abbasids . Perhaps the most famous of the family 's later members is the philosopher al @-@ Kindi . Another uprising , that of Zayd ibn Ali , broke out in 740 , again promising to right injustices ( restoration of the ʿaṭāʾ , distribution of the revenue from the Sawad , an end to distant campaigns ) and to restore rule according to the Quran and the Sunna . Once more , however , the <unk> deserted it at the critical moment , and it was defeated by the Umayyads . Discontent with the Umayyad government continued to simmer , however , and during the Abbasid Revolution , Iraq rose up in support of the rebellion . Kufa overthrew Umayyad rule and welcomed the Abbasid army in October 749 , followed immediately by the proclamation of as @-@ Saffah as the first Abbasid caliph there . 
 = Nina Davuluri = 
 Nina Davuluri ( Telugu : <unk> <unk> ; born April 20 , 1989 ) , Miss America 2014 , is an American public speaker and advocate for civil rights and humanitarian causes . She is also the " first contestant of Indian descent to win the Miss America Competition " ( as well as the second Asian American ) . Shortly after becoming Miss America , however , Davuluri became the target of xenophobic and racist commentary in American social media . Her win also instigated dialogue in India and the Indian diaspora over the topic of <unk> . Davuluri drew upon these experiences to promote her platform " Celebrating Diversity Through Cultural Competency " during her year as Miss America . Since ending her reign as Miss America in September 2014 , Davuluri has continued to travel throughout the United States and India as a speaker and advocate for diversity , gender equality , and the promotion of STEM education . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Davuluri was born on April 20 , 1989 in Syracuse , New York , to Hindu Telugu parents from Vijayawada , Andhra Pradesh , India . Her mother , Sheela Davuluri , is an Information technology specialist , her father , Chaudhury Davuluri , is a gynecologist , and her older sister , Meena Davuluri has an M.D. and an <unk> .. When she was six weeks old , Davuluri was brought to live with her grandmother and aunt in Vijayawada . She stayed there until she was two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years old , when her parents brought her back to the United States , returning to India each summer in order to study Indian dance . She is also fluent in Telugu . 
 Davuluri moved to Oklahoma when she was four years old . She lived there until she was 10 , next moving to St. Joseph , Michigan . Years later , at a 2015 White House Initiative on Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders event , Davuluri noted that nine eleven marked a turning point in her life . She was in the seventh grade at the time , and recalls that in the conservative community in which they lived , her family went from being " the little indian family that lived on the block , that was the nice , kept to themselves type of family " to being " the terrorist family on the block . " She also stated that her house was vandalized and that her family began to receive hate mail . This period of her life would become the foundation for her future Miss American platform , " Celebrating Diversity Through Cultural Competency , " as its goal is to confront bullying by actively learning to talk about diversity in an open and respectful way . 
 As a child , Davuluri studied ballet , tap , and jazz dance , and was later in the St. Joseph High School marching band ( where she also played varsity tennis and was on the Science Olympiad team ) . She graduated from St. Joseph in 2007 , the same year that her parents moved to Fayetteville , New York . She chose to stay in Michigan , however , first beginning college at Michigan State University , and later transferring to the University of Michigan ( where she was a Sigma Kappa / Alpha Mu , was on the Dean 's List , and received Michigan Merit and National Honor Society Awards ) . She graduated in 2011 with a B.S. in Brain Behavior and Cognitive Science , next moving in with her family in New York where she took nine pre @-@ med courses at Le Moyne College . Halfway through her tenure as Miss America , however , she announced that she would not be applying to medical school . Instead , she plans to attend business school sometime in the future . 
 = = Miss Michigan 's Outstanding Teen and Miss New York = = 
 At the age of 16 , Davuluri became interested in beauty pageants after her sister Meena won the title of Miss St. Joseph . As she was too young to enter local pageants , Davuluri became involved with Miss America 's Teen division in Michigan , where she also learned that she could earn scholarship money for college . She won the Miss Southwest Michigan 's Outstanding Teen 2005 pageant , followed by the Miss Michigan 's Outstanding Teen 2006 pageant , and was first runner @-@ up at the 2007 Miss America 's Outstanding Teen pageant . After winning nearly $ 25 @,@ 000 in scholarship money , she stopped competing for a few years and focused instead on her undergraduate education . After graduating from the University of Michigan , Davuluri returned to competing in pageants in order to fund graduate school . In 2012 , as a New York resident , she won the title of Miss Greater Rochester , followed by second place in the Miss New York pageant . 
 Davuluri tried again the following year and won the title of Miss Syracuse . She was then was crowned Miss New York 2013 . Shortly after winning the Miss New York title , she held a party in her hotel room , where a fellow contestant in the neighboring room later claimed to have heard her refer to the previous Miss New York Mallory Hagan ( who later went on to become Miss America 2013 ) as " fat as [ bleep ] " during this party . Davuluri denied making these comments , later saying that " Mallory and I are good friends . " An official from the Miss America pageant also stated that the " situation was investigated fully back in July and there is no validity to the story whatsoever . Miss New York spoke to Mallory <unk> Hagan to let her know there was no validity and to apologize if she was offended in any way . " In addition , Davuluri has spoken publicly about losing 53 pounds ( 24 kg ) , her struggle with bulimia , and her belief that " you don 't need to be a certain size to be healthy " . 
 = = Miss America = = 
 Davuluri , the first Indian American to win the Miss America pageant ( and the second Miss New York in a row ) , held the title of Miss America 2014 from September 15 , 2013 to September 14 , 2014 . In doing so , she followed in the footsteps of a previous Miss Syracuse / Miss New York , Vanessa Williams , who ( as Miss America 1984 ) was the first African American winner of the pageant . She is also the second Asian American contestant to be crowned Miss America ( the first was Filipino American Angela Perez <unk> in 2001 ) . NPR 's Michael Martin commented on this aspect of her win by noting that “ there were five Asian @-@ Americans competing for the crown . That 's the highest number in pageant history . Three of you were in the top five . Two of you were the finalists , and this in a contest where initially the requirements were that contestants be of good health and of the white race . " 
 Drawing on her background in Kuchipudi and Bharatanatyam , Davuluri danced to the song " Dhoom Taana " from the film Om Shanti Om for her talent performance . Her routine , the first time Bollywood appeared on the Miss America stage , was developed in conjunction with Nakul Dev Mahajan as a fusion of Bollywood and Indian classical dance . After being crowned Miss America , she said that she was told that she would " never going to win with a Bollywood talent so just go back to singing if you are serious about [ winning ] . ” 
 During the final moments of the pageant , one of the hosts Lara Spencer , approached the only contestants left on the stage , Davuluri and Miss California Crystal Lee and asked them how they were " feeling . " Davuluri replied that both she and Lee were " so proud . We ’ re making history right here , standing here as Asian @-@ Americans . " She later described that part of the pageant as “ very surreal . ” 
 I really wanted to help effect a change in beauty standards .... Miss America 's branding is so associated with the girl next door , which has always meant blonde hair and blue eyes with only a few exceptions , but the girl next door must evolve as the country evolves . When I was younger I wanted to fit in , but I was aware growing up that I didn 't fit that mould , and I really wanted to help make a change that meant young girls wouldn 't feel like that . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Shortly after she was crowned Miss America 2014 , Davuluri became the target of xenophobic and racist commentary in American social media . The news media compared this response to the backlash against Vanessa Williams after she became Miss America 1984 . Congresswoman Grace Meng additionally linked Davuluri 's experience to the antisemitism that Jewish American Bess Myerson faced as Miss America 1945 . Many of the comments demanded to know why Davuluri was chosen over the soldier , Miss Kansas Theresa Vail , misidentified her as Muslim or Arab ( equating both terms to the word " terrorist ” ) , or associated her with groups such as Al @-@ Qaeda . They also noted the pageant date relative to the September 11 anniversary , and generally expressed anti @-@ Indian sentiments and anti @-@ Arab sentiments . Davuluri later said that she was prepared for the social @-@ media response because she faced a similar situation a few months earlier when she was crowned Miss New York . 
 Some responded to the backlash in a show of solidarity with Davuluri . Students at Duke University , and with Yale University 's Asian American Cultural Center and the South Asian Society , created videos and ran photo campaigns denouncing the social media attacks , while Miss Kansas Theresa Vail blogged and gave interviews to discredit the comments about both herself and Davuluri . Actor and civil @-@ rights activist George Takei ( the original Hikaru Sulu in Star Trek ) posted a comment on Facebook stating that while he normally doesn 't " care about Miss America … the uproar over an Indian @-@ American winning ( whom many decried for being ' Arab ' ) has me shaking my head . Please tell me I 'm not alone in wondering whether we 've learned anything at all . " University of Michigan student <unk> Khan also stated that she while doesn 't like beauty pageants , she hates " racism and bigotry even more [ ... ] Not only was [ Davuluri ] the first Indian Miss New York , but she is now also the first Indian Miss America . All cause for celebration . " Finally , Immediate Past President , Young Democrats of America , <unk> Omara , argued that " a sexist , racist , xenophobic attack against one prominent woman of color is an attack against us all , and it shouldn 't be tolerated just because we disdain that woman 's choices . As an African @-@ American woman with an ethnic name , I know the constant sting that comes from hearing how you are not American enough no matter how much you accomplish in the name of America . " 
 An editorial by the staff of The Hindu highlighted a different narrative in India and the Indian diaspora regarding her win and <unk> . The editorial suggested that rather than hold a pageant title in India , " the dark complexioned 24 @-@ year @-@ old [ Davuluri ] would not have stood a chance … had she been in India , far from entering a beauty contest , it is more likely that Ms Davuluri would have grown up hearing mostly disparaging remarks about the colour of her skin ; she would have been — going by the storyline of most “ fairness ” cream advertisements — a person with low self @-@ esteem and few friends . " Dean Asha <unk> ( Yale Law School ) echoed these sentiments when she stated that " Davuluri is following in the footsteps of other darker @-@ skinned Indian women who have been recognized in America for their talent and beauty , like The Office ’ s Mindy Kaling or ER 's <unk> Nagra — women who ’ d never get a second glance in India . " Similar remarks appeared in social media and in numerous editorials . Davuluri also discussed the subject with reporters in the American media , stating that she was interested in becoming involved in the " Dark is Beautiful " campaign . 
 = = = Platform = = = 
 During her year as Miss America , Davuluri promoted her platform " Celebrating Diversity Through Cultural Competency " and STEM ( science , technology , engineering and mathematics ) education to high @-@ school and college students . She elaborated on her platform in a Yale University talk as one using social media as a form of activism . Describing it as " Circles of Unity " , she encouraged students to view social media as a tool to spread cultural awareness and combat ignorance . 
 During Davuluri 's visit to Central York High School in Pennsylvania , 18 @-@ year @-@ old Patrick <unk> was suspended for inviting her to his 2014 prom during a question @-@ and @-@ answer session . Although she requested that the suspension be lifted in a Facebook post , school administrators said that they must maintain standards for student behavior . <unk> later stated that he regretted the joke as it overshadowed her platform . 
 Davuluri is a spokeswoman for PETA , extending her campaign celebrating diversity to the adoption of mixed @-@ breed dogs from animal shelters . She also met with President Barack Obama for the Children 's Miracle Network Hospital Champions at the White House . 
 = = Speaker and advocate = = 
 Since completing her year as Miss America in September 2014 , Davuluri has worked as a public speaker and advocate for diversity , gender equality , and the promotion of STEM education . In this capacity , she has spoken in both political and diplomatic venues . In September 2014 , she shared the stage with PBS ' NewsHour Weekend anchor Hari Sreenivasan as hosts for a Madison Square Garden talk by Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi . She also participated in the 2015 Global Entrepreneurship Summit Youth and Women Day in Nairobi in July 2015 . About a year later , Davuluri traveled to Mumbai , Hyderabad , and Vijayawada as part of an official March 2016 tour for the U.S. State Department to discuss women 's education . Part of this tour focused on events connected with International Women 's Day ( including a talk for the Asia Society ) . 
 Davuluri continues to speak on the subjects of diversity and STEM at college campuses . In an October 2014 East Carolina University talk , she discussed the harassment she faced during her childhood . " The following month , she spoke on women in STEM at Northeastern University . In March 2015 , she spoke at Harvard 's " Side by Side " gender @-@ equality campaign . Later in the same month , she discussed the subject of diversity at Princeton . 
 = = Other accolades = = 
 India Abroad Face of the Future Award 2014 : India Abroad , June 19 , 2015 , M69 @-@ M82 . 
 Elected trustee to the Miss America Foundation Board in February 2015 ( the first Miss America elected to the board ) . 
 In August 2014 fashion designer Tony Bowls announced that he designed a shoe , " The Nina , " in her honor . 
 = = = Miss America and Miss New York = = = 
 # <unk> : Duke Stands with Miss America - Duke University , September 18 , 2013 . 
 India 's Disturbing Obsession with Fair Skin - Time , September 19 , 2013 . 
 " After Defending Miss America From Racial Comments , George Takei Meets Nina Davuluri For First Time " - ABC News , September 17 , 2013 ( George Takei , Star Trek 's Sulu ) . 
 George Stephanopoulos . " Groundbreaking Miss America Winner Miss New York Takes Home Pageant Crown " - ABC News , September 16 , 2013 . 
 Lakshmi Gandhi . " Miss America ’ s Choreographer Nakul Dev Mahajan Tells Us How That ‘ Bollywood Fusion ’ Dance Came to Be " - The <unk> , September 20 , 2013 ( Talent performance to " Dhoom Taana , " from Om Shanti Om ) . 
 " America 2014 Nina Davuluri 's Crowning Moment . " Miss America Organization , September 15 , 2013 . 
 " Vote for Miss New York 2013 Nina Davuluri . " Miss America Organization , August 15 , 2013 . 
 = Ling Woo = 
 Ling Woo is a fictional character in the US comedy @-@ drama Ally McBeal , portrayed by Chinese @-@ American actress Lucy Liu . A Mandarin @-@ speaking Chinese @-@ American lawyer , Ling has been described as cold and ferocious and knowledgeable in an art of sexual pleasure unknown to the Western world . At the time , she was the most famous and only significant representative of Asian women on US television ( besides news anchors and reporters ) . Thus , the portrayal of Ling Woo attracted much scholarly attention in the US . 
 = = Background = = 
 Ally McBeal is an American television series created by David E. Kelley which ran on the Fox network from 1997 to 2002 . Set in the fictional Boston law firm of Cage , Fish and Associates , the series explores the relationships among various lawyers working at the firm , often as they relate to gender @-@ specific issues raised in court cases . Ling Woo was a character written by Kelley specifically for actress Lucy Liu after she failed to secure the role of Nelle Porter in the show . 
 Woo appeared for the first time in the second season as a client suing a Howard Stern @-@ like talk show host named Wick . She was suing because Wick 's programs contributed to sexual harassment in her workplace . Wick claimed Woo brought suit because she had a " slutty little Asian thing going " , and Woo said that she wanted to sleep with Wick because if she did , she would kill him . The character proved to be a hit , and Liu was signed on as a regular for the series . 
 Ling became a lawyer with the firm by pressuring Richard Fish , the firm 's senior partner , to hire her services as counsel . She remained a regular on the show until 2001 , when her role was reduced to four episodes in the upcoming season . Ling 's employment history changes that season when the Governor of Massachusetts offers Ling a job as judge after Ling complimented her twin babies . Woo is a graduate of Cornell Law School where she was editor of the Law Review . 
 Asian women are rarely given prominent roles on American television . In 1994 Margaret Cho had a brief prime @-@ time show called All American Girl , which was not popular with audiences and did not last a full season . When the show aired , there had not been another Asian @-@ American @-@ centered show or an Asian main character at the time the Ling character was created . Unlike the 1970s depictions of docile East Asian women on TV , Ling 's character was the opposite , but still a classic stereotype , that of the Dragon Lady . At the time , she was the only significant representative of Asian women on television in the United States ( besides news anchors and reporters ) , leaving no one else to counteract this prominent stereotype . She remains the most memorable Asian TV character of the 1990s . 
 = = Character = = 
 Ling Woo 's character has been described as the antithesis of Ally McBeal 's . For example , Woo is portrayed as evil , McBeal as good ; Woo growls , McBeal purrs . At the same time , Woo 's verbal assaults present a fantasy of authority that appeals to even McBeal . " She 's my hero " , says McBeal , " she 's vicious , I disagree with almost everything she says , she treats me like dirt , and somehow she 's my hero . " 
 The character 's main function was to inject into the show " sensuality , promise , terror , sublimity , idyllic pleasure , intense energy " - elements long associated with the Orient in Western culture , according to Orientalism author Edward Said . Ling brings to mind the geisha , the unreadable Oriental , and the dragon lady . Describing her as " fearsome , devouring , vicious , cool , " and with an " exotic sexuality " , Georgia State University professor Greg Smith sees Woo as a stereotype of Asian women , a " Dragon Lady " . 
 Her character was frequently used to examine matters related to gender definition and topics . Ling is the only major character in Ally McBeal who does not have a story for the origin of her particular neurosis . She is exempt from the psychoanalytic focus given to others in the series , which Smith attributes to her Asian " mysteriousness " . 
 = = = Cold and vicious = = = 
 Woo is cast as a villain , underscored by her frequent appearance to the theme music that accompanied the Wicked Witch of the West in the Wizard of Oz . Unlike a melodramatic villain such as J. R. Ewing , Ling was cast as a remarkably heartless character until well into the second season ( Season 3 of the show ) , when she begins to befriend other characters . 
 She harasses people with physical handicaps . When visiting a hospital , Ling accidentally collides with a man in a wheelchair , and shouts , " Watch where you are going ! It 's bad enough that you people get all the parking spots ! " To an individual with Tourette syndrome , she says , " I think <unk> is so cool . It would be great to be able to annoy people like that . You get to whoop and twitch . Any other good ones ? " A passing blind man accidentally taps her with his cane , and Ling cries , " OW ! They 're not weapons ! ... I so prefer the deaf to the blind . " Ling will even impersonate the blind to get her way . In one episode she puts on sunglasses , extends a telescoping white cane , and walks across a busy street , tires squealing as she hits a couple of cars with her cane . Ling is unapologetic for these affronts . When pointed out that " there are real blind people in the world " , Ling retorts , " It 's not like any of them saw me . " 
 Ling is concerned with petty annoyances that disrupt her pleasure or inconvenience her . When a colleague is stuck in an elevator with his feet dangling out of the doors , Ling asks , " Does this mean I 'm going to have to take the stairs ? " She is impatient in getting what she wants , for example snapping at a judge to " hurry up " as he read a verdict . She frequently announces that she is uninterested in proceedings that don 't affect her personally . As her co @-@ counsel questions a witness in court , Ling objects to the judge , " I 'm bored ! As an officer of the court , I have a duty to be open and forthright . I think the witness is tedious and I 'm concerned for the jury 's attention span . " 
 Smith sees Ling 's attacks as pointed and consciously vicious . She attacks because her words have consequences , clearing a path for her own selfish interests . Nelle Porter says , " I admire the way you don 't let yourself be pushed around . Too many people when they think they 've been wronged just walk away . " Jeff Yang , founding publisher of A Magazine , a New York @-@ based publication on Asian American culture , sees Ling as " a strong Asian woman who 's clearly potent , clearly has control . She 's not a victim , not somebody who lets anyone come even close to victimizing her . " 
 Even though she coldly <unk> virtually everyone around her , she is sometimes hurt and confused over being disliked . She admits , " It 's lonely on the bench . I thought I 'd like a place where people can 't get to you but once in a while ... " A colleague completes her thought : " you need to have somebody who can get to you . " 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 University of Wyoming Associate Professor Tracey Patton sees Woo as the embodiment of the Asian fantasy woman , the seductive temptress expert in eroticism who is knowledgeable in the art of sexual pleasure unknown to the Western world . In one episode , she agreed to have sex only after her partner signed a health waiver and confidentiality agreement to protect her sexual secrets . In another episode , Ling is hired by Richard Fish as an attorney in his firm , in exchange for sexual favors . Ling 's sexual foreplay with Richard Fish included sucking his fingers , dropping hot wax on him , and performing a " hair @-@ tickling massage " on his bare chest . " What she offered was not too far from an Oriental massage - hair splayed across his chest , his stricken face , the whole interracial thing " , said Yang . " It 's clearly something that plays off so many deep @-@ seated fantasies about Asian American women . " 
 Ling 's attitude to sex is cold and uninterested . While depicted as a sexual predator , she nonetheless " doesn 't like sex ; it 's messy " " and overrated " . She is able to keep her boyfriend interested without having to have intercourse with him because she does not like sweat . To Ling , according to Smith , sex is just another arena for her to exert control . To her , " Sex is a weapon " , and " a woman hasn 't got true control of a man until her hand is on the dumb stick " . She enjoys using the weapon , as she says " there 's nothing I enjoy more than seeing a happy couple and coming between them . " As with the " vicious " personality , most of this hyper @-@ sexuality is gone by Season 3 ( Woo 's second season on the show ) . 
 Darrell Hamamoto , Professor of Asian American Studies at the University of California , Davis , describes Ling is as " a neo @-@ Orientalist masturbatory fantasy figure concocted by a white man whose job it is to satisfy the blocked needs of other white men who seek temporary escape from their banal and deadening lives by indulging themselves in a bit of visual cunnilingus while relaxing on the sofa . " 
 Her liaisons are with white men , but not only men . In a dream sequence of Ally McBeal 's in which the two of them go on a date , they kiss on screen . The kiss was shot in profile , locked lips clearly visible , rather than using the normal angle for same @-@ sex kisses , in which the partner 's head blocks the view of the actual contact . The scene was considered so racy that the episode was banned from being shown in Singapore . The episode won its time slot among young adult viewers during its showing in the November 1999 sweeps , even beating Monday Night Football . Ling made the " damn hot kiss " even hotter because " she 's the exotic , erotic experimenter of the group " , according to Scott <unk> , media director at that time for the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation . 
 = = = Alien = = = 
 Patton sees Woo 's actions , attitudes , and portrayal of the evil manipulator make her into the alien of the law firm , and as such many of the lawyers in the firm did not want her hired . Campbell , a Euro @-@ American male at the firm stated , " With her as a lawyer , the whole thing ( the dynamic make @-@ up of the firm ) will change . " Not only is her non @-@ White presence questioned but her competency too . Even though she was the law review editor in law school , the presumption was she got the job mainly because Fish could not say no to Woo and her sexual promises . Woo is seen as an unwelcome addition to the law team despite her expertise and her success in law school . 
 Her character is the one most often portrayed on the show using animal effects . She frequently responds with a range of animal growls and snarls and breathes fire like a literal manifestation of dragon lady . Smith sees this as reinforcing the bestial undertone of the Asian stereotype , making her appear inhuman . Ling herself admits , " It must be hard being human . I wouldn 't know . I never tried it . " 
 In one episode , Woo literally turned into an alien , reminiscent of a scene from the movie Alien . Woo 's transformation into an alien was a reference on her not fitting in with the other lawyers as well as a reference on her citizenship . Patton points out that the assumption is often made that a second @-@ generation White immigrant is an American citizen , but that same assumption is not granted to non @-@ Whites - in this case , Woo . Woo is not constructed as American ( because an American is constructed as White ) , nor is she constructed as human . Woo , the only non @-@ Euro @-@ American member of the law firm , is constructed and seen as foreign or alien . 
 Ling is not above using her ethnicity as a means of gaining advantage . In one episode , as she delivers her closing arguments to a jury , she says " There 's a very old expression in China , " and then begins to speak in Chinese . In the subtitles we see her saying , " It really doesn 't matter what I say here , because none of you speak Chinese . But you can see from my sad face I 'm sympathetic . You hear from my tone it 's appropriate to feel sorry for me . As I drop to a faint whisper ( which she does ) , you 'll feel the sorrow yourself . I 'm going to finish now , pretend to cry " , which she does as she walks off . 
 = Cecil Brown ( Hawaii politician ) = 
 Cecil Brown ( October 9 , 1850 – March 6 , 1917 ) was a Hawaiian attorney , politician , businessman , and banker in the Kingdom , Republic , and Territory of Hawaii . 
 Brown served as a member of the Kingdom of Hawaii House of Representatives , Deputy Attorney General , and Attorney General . He served on the Advisory Council for the Provisional Government of Hawaii , the Council of State for the Republic of Hawaii , and in the Senate of both the Republic and Territory of Hawaii . Brown had diverse investments , was a director or officer of several sugar companies , and Vice @-@ President of the Hawaiian Bell and Mutual Telephone Company when service to the Hawaiian Islands was being developed . Brown was also the founding President of the first national bank chartered in Hawaii . 
 = = Background = = 
 Brown was born in Wailua , Hawaii to Thomas and Mary Ann ( Rhodes ) Brown who moved to the Hawaiian Islands from England in 1844 . He was the fifth of six siblings ( who survived infancy ) , two of whom were also involved in Hawaiian politics : Godfrey ( Minister of Foreign Affairs , then Minister of Finance for the Kingdom of Hawaii ) and Frank ( House of Representatives , Kingdom of Hawaii ) . Brown married Mary K. Miner Dickson ( widow of Menzies Dickson ) on August 11 , 1897 . They had no children together . She died on September 12 , 1907 . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Thomas and Mary Ann ( Rhodes ) Brown had four children ( Arthur , Godfrey , Alice , and Frank ) before leaving England for the warmer climate of the Hawaiian Islands in 1844 . Louis ( died in infancy ) , Cecil , and Malcolm were born in Hawaii . In 1853 the entire family left for Boston to put Arthur , Godfrey , and Frank in school . The remaining members of the Brown family returned to Hawaii at the very end of 1855 . 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Cecil was homeschooled by his parents and educated by his maternal aunt Sarah Rhodes Von Pfister . He attended the Cathedral Grammar School followed by the Punahou School . In December 1866 Brown left Honolulu for the United States , and enrolled in Columbia Law School ( Washington D.C. ) . He graduated with honors in June 1871 , and moved to New York City ( 1871 – 74 ) where he was employed by the law firm of Evarts , Southmayd , and Choate . In 1874 Brown moved to San Francisco before returning to Honolulu . 
 Shortly after his return to Hawaii , Brown was licensed to practice law before the Supreme Court of the Kingdom of Hawaii on January 28 , 1875 . He was appointed a notary public for Oahu on July 27 , 1875 by King Kalākaua . Starting a private practice , he was representing clients in circuit court by the end of 1875 , and in the Supreme Court of the Kingdom of Hawaii by 1876 . Despite his future political and business careers , Brown continued the private practice of law ( mainly probate ) for the duration of his life . On at least eight occasions between 1893 and 1901 , Brown sat on the bench of the Supreme Court of Hawaii as an Acting Justice . 
 = = Political career = = 
 Cecil Brown ’ s political career spanned nearly 40 years ( 1876 – 1913 ) . He was engaged in politics under four constitutions of the Kingdom of Hawaii prior to annexation by the United States : 1840 , 1852 , 1864 , and 1887 , and a constitution for the Republic of Hawaii ( of which Brown was one of the framers ) that was adopted on July 4 , 1894 . The last three constitutions ( 1864 , 1887 , and 1894 ) were each in effect at some point during Cecil Brown ’ s career in public service . 
 = = = Kingdom of Hawaii = = = 
 On September 5 , 1876 , Representative Samuel <unk> died in office . A special election to fill the remainder of his term was held September 18 , 1876 and Brown was elected . His bid for re @-@ election in February 1878 was close but unsuccessful . 
 In July 1878 Brown was appointed the clerk to the Attorney General and by November of the same year legal announcements published in the local newspapers referenced him as the Deputy Attorney General . He was listed in the Kingdom ’ s directory for 1880 as Deputy Attorney General , the first use of the title in an official directory . 
 Brown carried several government appointments . In addition to notary public , he was appointed in 1877 to a three @-@ person Board of <unk> of Lands , and in 1879 as an Agent to Take Acknowledgments to Instruments . He would later resign all three appointments in 1887 , to be in compliance with the 1887 Constitution of the Kingdom of Hawaii . 
 In February 1884 , Cecil Brown ( along with brothers Godfrey and Frank ) were elected to the Legislative Assembly ’ s House of Representatives . Cecil proposed , passed , and had signed into law the first bill of the legislative session , named the " Turkey Law " . Brown was re @-@ elected in 1886 , 1888 and appointed Chair of the Judiciary Committee , and 1890 . 
 While planning to run for a vacant seat in the House of Nobles , Brown was appointed Attorney General of the Kingdom of Hawaii in the newly formed cabinet of Queen Liliuokalani . The cabinet was disbanded on January 12 , 1893 and on January 17 a coup d 'état resulted in the overthrow of the Kingdom of Hawaii . 
 = = = Provisional Government of Hawaii = = = 
 The Provisional Government of Hawaii established an Advisory Council vested with legislative powers . Brown was appointed on January 25 , 1893 after declining an appointment as Attorney General , made on January 16 , the evening before the overthrow . On March 20 , 1893 he was appointed Commissioner of a three @-@ person committee tasked with the revision of the Hawaiian penal code , and was appointed chair of the Judiciary Committee . An act calling for a constitutional convention ( to which Brown was a delegate ) was passed on March 15 , 1894 and convened from May 30 to July 3 , 1894 . Brown was one of the signers of the 1894 constitution of the newly formed Republic of Hawaii . 
 = = = Republic of Hawaii = = = 
 Brown resigned from the Advisory Council on October 25 , 1894 to run for the Senate . He was elected in November 1894 and served continuously through 1904 . During his tenure in the Senate , Brown served on the Council of State from June 23 , 1895 through 1901 , and on the Senate Judiciary , Coinage , and Foreign Relations committees . In November 1904 , though nominated , Brown was not re @-@ elected . There was talk of Brown running again in the general elections of 1906 and 1908 , but in 1910 he was re @-@ elected . Cecil Brown effectively retired from the Senate in May 1914 . 
 = = Business career = = 
 = = = Boards of directors = = = 
 Cecil Brown sat on multiple association and business boards as trustee , director , or officer . Beginning in the early 1880s , Brown was a director of the Stock Breeders ’ Association , and Treasurer of the <unk> Park Association , and the Hawaiian Jockey Club . 
 Business interests included the Hawaiian Hardware Company ( Vice @-@ President ) , Honolulu Soap Works company , Ltd . ( President ) , the California Feed Company , Ltd . ( President ) , and the Hawaiian Fibre Company , Limited ( President ) . Sugar interests included the Kona Sugar Company , <unk> Sugar Plantation Co . , and Pacific Sugar Mill ( Vice @-@ president ) . 
 = = = Telephone service in Hawaii = = = 
 Hawaiian Bell Telephone Company ( HBT ) incorporated in 1879 , and began service on December 30 , 1880 . In August 1883 , Mutual Telephone Company was founded as a competitor and began operations in March 1885 . On August 2 , 1894 the two companies consolidated with Mutual Telephone in control . 
 Cecil and brother Godfrey were elected to the board of directors of HBT in early 1884 ( Godfrey as Vice @-@ President and Cecil as Auditor ) , and by the end of the year , Godfrey had become President . By January 1886 , Godfrey was both President and Treasurer , and Cecil Vice @-@ President , positions they would hold for the next several years . 
 In September 1892 , Cecil was also elected to the board of directors of rival company Mutual Telephone . When the two companies merged in 1894 , he was named Vice @-@ President of Mutual Telephone Company , and two years later Godfrey was elected Treasurer . Cecil remained Vice @-@ President for over a decade . 
 = = = The First National Bank of Hawaii = = = 
 Anticipating the annexation of Hawaii as a US territory ( July 1898 ) , and the expected adoption of the National Banking Act , by the beginning of 1898 several parties had already sent requests to Washington DC to reserve the title " The First National Bank of Hawaii " . Brown served as attorney to George Macfarlane during the organization and incorporation of the First American Bank of Hawaii during 1899 . The bank organizers anticipated that having a fully functioning bank in place when the National Banking Act was extended to include the Territory of Hawaii would allow them to then become The First National Bank of Hawaii . At the first stockholders meeting in September 1899 , Cecil Brown was elected President . 
 Congress eventually extended the National Banking Act to include the Territory of Hawaii ( April 30 , 1900 ) , and during a July 1900 stockholders meeting , it was agreed to convert the First American Bank into a national bank . The First National Bank of Hawaii at Honolulu opened for business on October 1 , 1900 . Brown remained President of the bank until 1915 , when he stepped down and became chairman of the board . 
 = = Declining health and death = = 
 In the summer of 1914 , while visiting San Francisco , Brown ’ s health began to deteriorate . After a two and a half month illness he was hospitalized when he suffered a " severe " stroke and was reported in " serious condition " . He arrived in Hawaii on November 4 , 1914 and suffered a second stroke on March 4 , 1915 , leaving his right side partially paralyzed . He was reported to be in " critical " condition . Although it was initially reported that Brown ’ s condition was slowly improving , by the end of 1916 his functioning had significantly deteriorated , and in late December 1916 the courts declared him to be " mentally non @-@ competent " , and appointed his nephew H.M. von Holt as his guardian . On March 6 , 1917 Cecil Brown died of apoplexy . The following day the Territorial Senate , House , and Hawaiian Bar Association issued resolutions expressing condolences and loss . 
 = = = Hawaiian Almanac and Annual = = = 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1875 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1875 . [ not listed ] . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1876 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1876 . J.H. Black , Printer , Pacific Commercial Advertising Printing House . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1877 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1877 . Thrum & Oat Publishers . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1878 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1878 . Thomas G. Thrum , Publisher . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1879 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1879 . Thomas G. Thrum , Publisher . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1880 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1880 . Thomas G. Thrum , Publisher . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1881 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1881 . Thomas G. Thrum , Publisher . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1882 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1882 . Thomas G. Thrum , Publisher . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1883 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1883 . Thomas G. Thrum , Publisher . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1884 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1884 . Thomas G. Thrum , Publisher . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1885 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1885 . Thomas G. Thrum , Publisher . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( <unk> ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1886 . Press Publishing Company Print . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( <unk> ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1887 . Press Publishing Company Print . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1887 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1888 . Press Publishing Company Print . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1888 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1889 . Press Publishing Company Print . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1889 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1890 . Press Publishing Company Print . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1890 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1891 . Press Publishing Company Print . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1891 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1892 . Press Publishing Company Print . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1892 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1893 . Press Publishing Company Print . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1893 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1894 . Press Publishing Company Print . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1894 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1895 . Press Publishing Company Print . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1896 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1896 . Press Publishing Company Print . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1897 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1897 . Press Publishing Company Print . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1898 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1898 . Press Publishing Company Print . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1900 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1900 . Hawaiian Gazette Co . , Print . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1901 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1901 . Thomas G. Thrum , Publisher . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( <unk> ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1902 . Thomas G. Thrum , Publisher . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( <unk> ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1903 . Thomas G. Thrum , Publisher . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( <unk> ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1904 . Thomas G. Thrum , Publisher . 
 Thrum , Thomas G. , ed . ( 1910 ) . Hawaiian Almanac and Annual for 1911 . Thomas G. Thrum , Publisher . 
 = Rescue of Bat 21 Bravo = 
 The rescue of Bat 21 Bravo , the call sign for <unk> " Gene " Hambleton , from behind North Vietnamese lines was the " largest , longest , and most complex search @-@ and @-@ rescue " operation during the Vietnam War . 
 On April 2 , 1972 , the Easter Offensive , the largest combined arms operation of the entire Vietnam War , was in its third day . An early morning flight of two United States Air Force EB @-@ 66 aircraft was led by Bat 20 , piloted by Lt. Col. Robert Singletary . Hambleton was a navigator aboard Bat 21 . The two aircraft were escorting a cell of three B @-@ 52s . Bat 21 was configured to gather signals intelligence , including identifying North Vietnamese anti @-@ aircraft radar installations to enable jamming . Bat 21 was destroyed by an SA @-@ 2 surface @-@ to @-@ air missile and Hambleton was the only survivor , parachuting behind the front lines into a battlefield filled with thousands of North Vietnamese Army soldiers . 
 Hambleton had Top Secret access to Strategic Air Command operations and was an expert in surface @-@ to @-@ air missile countermeasures . The North Vietnamese Army may have possessed information about his presence in Vietnam and his capture would have meant a huge intelligence bonanza for the Soviet Union . 
 Hambleton and 1st Lt. Mark Clark , who was shot down during rescue operations , were finally recovered from behind the front lines on two different nights in daring , covert , night @-@ time rescues carried out by U.S. Navy SEAL Thomas R. Norris and <unk> commando Nguyen Van Kiet . For their actions , Norris was awarded the Medal of Honor and Nguyen was recognized with the Navy Cross . Nguyen was the only South Vietnamese naval officer given that award during the war . 
 The Air Force did not put limits on what it took to rescue a downed airman . The direct and indirect cost of rescuing Hambleton was enormous and became a watershed event in Air Force search and rescue . To prevent friendly fire incidents , the Americans imposed a standard no @-@ fire zone within a 27 kilometres ( 17 mi ) radius of Hambleton and diverted aircraft to aid in his rescue . It is likely that South Vietnamese soldiers indirectly died as a result of their inability to obtain fire support . Five additional aircraft were shot down during rescue attempts , directly resulting in the deaths of 11 airmen , the capture of two others , and another airman trying to evade capture . 
 The added deaths , loss of aircraft , and length of the rescue operation led the USAF to change the way they planned and conducted search and rescue missions . As a result , they developed new techniques and equipment to improve their ability to rescue downed airmen . 
 = = Operational background = = 
 At the time of Bat 21 's mission , American combat forces had been vastly reduced in South Vietnam under President Richard Nixon 's Vietnamization policy . The North Vietnamese Army ( NVA ) launched the Nguyen Hue Offensive against the South Vietnamese Army and U.S. military on Friday , March 30 , 1972 . It was their largest attack of the war and was timed to take full advantage of the bad weather typical during monsoon season , offering low clouds and poor visibility . About 30 @,@ 000 heavily equipped NVA troops from the 304th and 308th Divisions and three separate infantry regiments of the B5 Front crossed the DMZ into I Corps zone across the five northernmost provinces of South Vietnam . 
 In the 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) area between the Cam Lo Bridge and Dong Ha Bridge , the NVA were supported by two tank regiments of 150 Soviet T @-@ 54 and PT @-@ 76 tanks , 75 tracked anti @-@ aircraft vehicles , an artillery regiment of 47 towed <unk> guns , and the largest concentration of anti @-@ aircraft weaponry of the entire war , including the advanced SA @-@ 2 surface @-@ to @-@ air missile . Their main line of advance was along the axis of the north @-@ south national highway QL @-@ 1 . 
 When General Creighton Abrams ' headquarters in Saigon learned of large NVA movement south of the DMZ , a number of B @-@ 52s had been sent on " Arc Light " missions without escort , but were experiencing significantly increased SAM activity . The 42nd Tactical Electronic Warfare Squadron ( 42 <unk> ) was tapped for assistance . The draw down of troops had left the unit shorthanded and Hambleton was the senior officer among a group of senior navigators . 
 Hambleton assigned himself as navigator on the older EB @-@ <unk> , which was configured to gather signals intelligence . The newer EB @-@ <unk> was tasked with jamming surface @-@ to @-@ air missile ( SAM ) radar guidance systems so their missiles could not accurately target the aircraft . The EB @-@ 66 's mission was to troll for missiles , let them lock on to their aircraft , and then execute a SAM break , a violent turn and dive designed to throw off the pursuing missile . The SA @-@ 2 was the size of a telephone pole and carried a proximity fused warhead that was lethal within about 150 feet ( 46 m ) , but their guidance systems failed at about 2 Gs , while the EB @-@ 66 could achieve 5 Gs in its avoidance maneuver . The crew had successfully pulled a SAM break more than 100 times . The presence of North Vietnamese surface @-@ to @-@ air missiles south of the DMZ had been tracked by Hambleton , but not everyone agreed they were present that far south . 
 = = Aircraft shot down = = 
 On Easter Sunday , April 2 , 1972 , two EB @-@ 66s ( call signs Bat 21 and Bat 22 ) were flying pathfinder escort for a cell of three B @-@ 52 , which were given assignments to bomb Mu Gia or the Ban Karai Pass , the two primary access routes to the Ho Chi Minh Trail through Laos . 
 Hambleton was aboard Bat 21 , EB @-@ <unk> serial number 54 @-@ <unk> , over Quảng Trị Province , Vietnam , just south of the Demilitarized Zone between North and South Vietnam . The airmen were surprised by the intensity of the anti @-@ aircraft fire and SAM activity . The NVA 365th Air Defense Division fired two volleys of SA @-@ 2 surface @-@ to @-@ air missile at the U.S. planes , but the EB @-@ 66s successfully thwarted the first volley . The NVA pointed their Fan Song radar at the B @-@ 52s , targeting them unsuccessfully with radar guided anti @-@ aircraft fire . When those missed , the NVA fired two more SAMs optically at Bat 21 , only turning on the guidance and radar system after the missiles were launched , which delayed the targeted aircraft 's ability to detect and avoid them . When the aircraft crew spotted the missiles , the pilot assumed they had as usual been fired from north of the DMZ . He began a SAM break to the south , away from the direction he assumed the missiles had been fired . One of the <unk> called " Negative ! Negative ! " , and the pilot flipped the plane over on its other wing . This time the pilot was unable to evade the missiles . The first missile exploded immediately beneath the aircraft striking it at 29 @,@ 000 feet ( 8 @,@ 800 m ) . 
 Hambleton , whose call sign was Bat 21 Bravo , was positioned immediately behind the pilot , who gave the signal for everyone to eject . Hambleton pulled the ejection seat handles and had a moment to make eye contact with the pilot as his seat rocketed out of the dying plane . A moment later , the aircraft was struck by a second SA @-@ 2 and exploded . The remainder of the aircraft 's six @-@ man crew — Maj. Wayne L. Bolte , pilot ; 1st Lt .. Robin F. Gatwood , co @-@ pilot ; and <unk> Lt. Col. Anthony R. <unk> , Lt. Col. Charles A. Levis , and Maj. Henry M. <unk> — were unable to eject and were listed as missing in action . Their remains were never found . 
 Hambleton was due for some R & R , and his wife Gwen was planning to meet him in Thailand the next week . She received airplane tickets for her trip on the same day that her husband was shot down . Instead of going to the airport , she collapsed after seeing an Air Force officer and a chaplain walk up her sidewalk . 
 = = = Surrounded by North Vietnamese = = = 
 Maj. Jimmy D. Kempton from the 390th Tactical Fighter Squadron was leading a flight of four F @-@ 4 Phantoms on a bombing mission when he got SAM warnings . He saw four SA @-@ 2 missiles emerge from the clouds about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) ahead of him and saw one strike Bat 21 . At a lower altitude , 1st Lt. Bill Jankowski and Capt. Lyle Wilson in an O @-@ 2 ( Bilk 34 ) forward air controller ( FAC ) aircraft saw Bat 21 explode . 
 Hambleton parachuted into the middle of more than 30 @,@ 000 troops pouring across the border into South Vietnam . When Hambleton 's URC @-@ 64 rescue radio <unk> , Jankowski responded , and was surprised to learn that Hambleton was above him descending in his parachute . Jankowski followed Hambleton down . Hambleton was concealed by a low fog bank as he landed in a dry rice paddy , unseen by the NVA troops . As Jankowski observed Hambleton land , his aircraft came under heavy antiaircraft fire . He was astonished at the huge number of NVA troops , equipment , and heavy weapons in the area . Hambleton found refuge in a group of bushes in the middle of the rice paddy . NVA troops were less than 100 metres ( 330 ft ) away . Jankowski fixed Hambleton 's location 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) north of the Cam Lo Bridge and just north of TL @-@ 88 , a major east @-@ west secondary road . 
 Kempton and Jankowski relayed Hambleton 's coordinates to King 22 , a HC @-@ 130 search and rescue ( SAR ) aircraft operating just south of Quảng Trị . Recovering Hambleton quickly was essential , as the odds of recovering downed airmen dropped below twenty percent if the aircrew member was on the ground after four hours . But their efforts would be severely hampered by the huge number of troops and large quantity of anti @-@ aircraft fire in the area , some of it supporting the NVA 's efforts to capture and protect the Cam Lo Bridge near Hambleton 's position . 
 At about the same time that Hambleton was shot down , Capt. John Ripley , adviser to the 3rd Vietnamese Marine Battalion , blew up the key Highway QL @-@ 1 bridge over the Cue Viet River , east of Hambleton 's position , at Dong Ha . The NVA re @-@ routed thousands of troops , dozens of tanks and other equipment west along TL @-@ 88 , immediately in front of Hambleton 's position , to the Cam Lo River bridge 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 mi ) to the west . 
 = = = Intelligence value = = = 
 Lt. Col. <unk> Hambleton had 29 years of military service . He had served in the Army Air Force as a radio operator during World War II , though not in combat . After World War II , he was recalled to active service by the USAF in the early 1950s . During the Korean War he flew 43 combat missions as a navigator in a B @-@ 29 bomber . He then worked during the 1960s on various USAF ballistic missile projects including the PGM @-@ 19 Jupiter , Titan I ICBM and Titan II ICBM . He had been the deputy chief of operations for the USAF Strategic Air Command 390th Strategic Missile Wing before the Vietnam War . 
 In April , 1972 he was reassigned from the SAC to TAC and to the 42nd Tactical Electronic Warfare Squadron ( 42 <unk> ) , 388th Tactical Fighter Wing , at Korat , Thailand . He was familiar with targeting both SAC missiles and SAC airplanes , was one of the most knowledgeable missile and electronic counter @-@ measures experts in Vietnam , and it is likely that his situation was quickly reported to U.S. intelligence services . Very few Americans remained on the ground in Vietnam , and the NVA made it a point to track particularly valuable personnel , even in Thailand . The North Vietnamese were probably supported by the Russians with decrypting American message traffic and they likely knew exactly who had parachuted into their midst . This ability was likely enabled by the then unknown American spy <unk> John Anthony Walker , who had given the Soviets a radio cipher card and other high @-@ value intelligence . Hambleton 's capture would be a terrific blow to American airpower around the world and a huge prize for the North Vietnamese and indirectly , the Soviets . Hambleton said after the war that he felt sure if he were captured that he would never have been taken to Hanoi . 
 = = Air rescue attempts = = 
 Hambleton had received water survival training at Turkey Run , Florida , and escape and evasion training and survival basics at the Pacific Air Command Jungle Survival School in the Philippines . 
 He had shrapnel wounds from his aircraft exploding , a ripped finger , and four compressed vertebra from the force of the ejection . Hidden in a clump of trees in his hole , surrounded by North Vietnamese less than 100 metres ( 330 ft ) away , Hambleton decided that with only nine months to go until his retirement , he was going to survive and return home . 
 1st Lt. Richard Abbot flying a FAC O @-@ 2 had been shot down offshore shortly before Hambleton , and when Abbot was picked up by the USS Hamner , two Air Force search and rescue Douglas A @-@ 1 Skyraiders ( Capt. Don Morse in Sandy 07 and his wingman in Sandy 08 ) from the 1st Special Operations Squadron remained in Hambleton 's vicinity . The Sandys immediately scrambled to cover Hambleton 's position . When Morse in Sandy 07 first got the call , he thought that , because the aircraft had gone down in South Vietnam , the SAR effort could be accomplished fairly quickly . When he got over <unk> 's position , he was shocked at the amount of ground fire he received . It was more intense than anything he had seen in the war . Some pilots reported that the intensity of the antiaircraft fire was equal to that around Hanoi . Although the U.S. and ARVN forces did not know it yet , the offensive was the largest combined arms attack conducted by the North Vietnamese during the war . 
 Hambleton coolly called in the coordinates of the North Vietnamese around him , watched the ordnance explode , and called in corrections to the FAC above , who relayed the information to the A @-@ 1s and the fast movers , F @-@ 4 Phantom fighter @-@ bombers . FAC pilots after the event were universally amazed at Hambleton 's ability to remain calm and call in accurate fire around his position . 
 Morse called for emergency support , which was picked up by a UH @-@ 1H slick ( Blueghost 39 ) near Hue , piloted by 1st Lt. Byron Kulland from F Troop , 8th Cavalry , 196th Brigade . Normally based at Marble Mountain Air Facility near Da Nang , Kulland was in the area showing a photographer the developing battle . He had on board with him Capt. Thomas White , the Troop operations officer . After depositing the photographer and White at Phu Bai airfield near Huế , White directed Kulland to proceed north and contact the FAC ( Jankowski ) for information on arrival . White also sent two Cobra gunships , Blueghost 28 and 24 , and then added Blueghost 30 , a second Huey . 
 Blueghost 39 proceeded across the Song Meiu Giang 50 feet ( 15 m ) above the ground towards Hambleton 's position with the well @-@ armed Blueghost 28 Cobra gunship following about 3 @,@ 000 feet ( 910 m ) behind and 300 feet ( 91 m ) above . Blueghost 24 waited at the south side of the Song Meiu Giang for Blueghost 30 to catch up . As soon as Blueghost 39 and 28 crossed the Song Meiu Giang , Kulland and Rosebeary 's aircraft were met by an immediate curtain of North Vietnamese fire from every direction , hurled against them with an intensity that defied belief . Rosebeary in his Cobra Blueghost 28 responded with rockets and 40mm fire but both helicopters were struck multiple times . 
 Kulland flying Blueghost 39 tried to turn back south but only managed to crash @-@ land his stricken aircraft , about 6 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 2 mi ) east of Hambleton and .9 miles ( 1 @.@ 4 km ) north of the river in an area full of NVA . When the helicopter smashed into the ground , the only mobile crew member was <unk> Jose Astorga , the door gunner , who had been wounded . He tried but was unable to extract other hurt crew members . Paschall was pinned in the wreckage . Frink , who was seriously wounded , urged Astorga to get out and away from the aircraft . A few moments later advancing North Vietnamese soldiers fired on the wreckage with automatic weapons and the aircraft 's fuel cell exploded with the remainder of the crew inside . Astorga was captured but pilots 1st Lt. Byron Kulland and WO John Frink along with <unk> Ronald Paschall were killed . 
 Rosebeary flying Cobra Blueghost 28 called a Mayday but was able to safely exit the area and landed his severely damaged helicopter . His aircraft was totaled . He and Gunner Warrant Officer Charles Gorski were picked up by a HH @-@ <unk> helicopter ( Jolly Green 67 ) , without incident . Rosebeary warned other aircraft against crossing the river . When Morse in Sandy 07 learned that the quick @-@ snatch had failed , he and his wingman Sandy 08 broke off engaging the North Vietnamese and returned to Da Nang . Both Sandys were found to be so damaged they would take several days to repair . At 9 : 00 p.m. , Nail 59 , piloted by Gary <unk> who was flying a new version of the OV @-@ 10A aircraft equipped with the Pave Nail LORAN radar , took over FAC duties . The SAR efforts were suspended for the night and the U.S. and ARVN forces remained unaware of the true strength of the NVA offensive . Advised by the FAC to remain in place , Hambleton moved to a safer spot in the jungle and dug a hole to hide in until morning . During the night , Nail 59 and King 27 , an HC @-@ 130 commanded by Maj. Dennis Constant , stayed . They suddenly found themselves painted by Fan Song radar and narrowly missed getting shot down as well . At 53 years old , Hambleton was not a prime candidate to survive the cold , wet weather conditions . 
 = = = No fire zone = = = 
 The Joint Search and Rescue Command ( JSARC ) was under the direction of the director of aerospace rescue , Col. Cecil Muirhead , who could restrict airspace activity for the use of search and rescue forces . He also commanded all the dedicated assets needed to assist with SAR . Muirhead ordered 24 @-@ hour forward air control ( FAC ) coverage around Hambleton 's position to watch over him and soften up the North Vietnamese positions around him . To protect the downed airmen and the search and rescue forces , Muirhead also ordered the 7th Air Force to establish a standard 27 kilometres ( 17 mi ) no @-@ fire zone around Hambleton . It prohibited friendly artillery , naval gunfire , or aircraft from engaging any target in the zone without JSARC approval . Three North Vietnamese divisions were attacking and the 3rd ARVN could not reply for several hours with artillery or request tactical air strikes in the area . 
 = = = More aircraft lost = = = 
 On April 3 , air search and rescue forces attempted a first light rescue which can successfully achieve surprise with minimal force . A search and rescue crew took off from the 37th <unk> based at Nakhon Phanom , Thailand . It consisted of two HH @-@ 53 rescue helicopters , Jolly Green 65 and 67 , and two A @-@ 1 Skyraiders , Sandy 07 and 08 . Sandy 05 and 06 joined them on the scene . The area was covered in a solid overcast , preventing visual control of air strikes by the on @-@ scene OV @-@ 10A FAC , Nail 25 . Capt. Rocky Smith and Capt. Rick Atchison coordinated the work of several F @-@ 4s who were directed to drop CBU @-@ 42 anti @-@ personnel cluster bombs around Hambleton to help protect his position . When Nail 25 ran low on fuel , it was replaced by an OV @-@ 10 ( Nail 38 ) from the 23rd TASS flown by Capt. William J. Henderson ( Nail 38 Alpha ) and 1st Lt. Mark Clark ( Nail 38 Bravo , and grandson of World War II General Mark Clark ) . 
 The NVA had a listening post in the area and overheard the American radio traffic . They were very familiar with American SAR tactics and on the second day they began to use the downed flyer as bait . They positioned a number of anti @-@ aircraft and surface @-@ to @-@ air missiles in the area near Hambleton . One pilot reported that " SAM calls were driving us into the small arms threat . Ground fire was accurate and well disciplined ... The NVA were very definitely monitoring and jamming our communications . " 
 Henderson obtained LORAN fixes on Hambleton 's position . Coast Guard Lt. Commander Jay Crowe , an exchange pilot on assignment to the 37th <unk> at Da Nang , was piloting Jolly Green 65 . The helicopter broke through the clouds and rapidly dropped into the area where Hambleton was hidden . The aircraft was immediately struck by a wall of North Vietnamese gunfire . Their rounds tore through the aircraft , destroying the instrument panel . Crowe struggled to get the aircraft out of the fire zone , and with his instruments shot up , he had to rely on external visual cues to fly the aircraft . He nursed the helicopter south and was able to get to the Phu Bai airfield . Jolly Green 66 flown by Lt. Colonel Bill Harris followed , only to break through the low ceiling to face ten North Vietnamese tanks and a withering onslaught of ground fire . He fought the controls to bring his rescue helicopter within 100 yards ( 91 m ) of Hambleton , his gunners firing the airship 's three GAU @-@ 2 / A 7 @.@ 62 mm ( .308 in ) six @-@ barreled miniguns , engaging the North Vietnamese on every side . A pilot flying support , looking for targets to engage , asked , " Where 's the enemy fire coming from ? " Harris replied , " From <unk> ! " Somehow Harris managed to get his badly damaged aircraft to gain altitude , then limp back to safety . 
 Forced to fly in and out of cloud cover at perilously low altitudes , FAC Nail 38 , piloted by Henderson was hit by North Vietnamese fire and shot down . Henderson landed on the north side of the Song Meiu Giang , about 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 600 ft ) from Hambleton . He hid in a bamboo patch until local villagers came looking for him and cut it down . He was taken north and became a POW . Clark parachuted to the ground safely on the south side of river and eluded capture . Later that same day , another UH @-@ 1H slick , unrelated to the rescue operation , was shot down in the same area carrying a crew of four . 
 After pinpointing Hambleton 's location , the Air Force bombarded the area around him for the next three days . On April 4 , a flight of ten Douglas A @-@ 1 Skyraiders , half the total available in all of South Vietnam , attempted to pave the way for a SAR team , and it was badly shot up . Eight of the ten aircraft were damaged , two severely . The damage significantly affected the availability of the <unk> dusk , Major Jimmy D. Kempton flying F @-@ 4D 66 @-@ <unk> with the 390th TFS ( Danang Gunfighters ) and a wingman entered from the coast under a descending 500 foot ceiling and dropped BLU 52 SAR ordnance on four sides of Hambleton 's location , the last of SAR ordnance on April 4 . ( Log book and citation of the Distinguished Flying Cross ) 
 On April 5 , bad weather prevented any SAR activity . 
 On April 6 at 3 : 15 p.m. , a third attempt was made to pick Hambleton and now Clark up . Four Douglas A @-@ 1 Skyraiders ( Sandys 01 , 02 , 05 , and 06 ) prepared the area around the survivors with extensive bombing and strafing . They were assisted by two <unk> helicopters ( Jolly Green 67 and Jolly Green 60 ) from the 37th Air Rescue Squadron . During the day American fighters flew 52 sorties and four B @-@ 52 bombers bombed the area around Cam Lo . 
 During April 6 , 80 SAMs were launched by the NVA in the area around Hambleton . It was estimated that Hambleton and Clark were in the midst of five or six NVA battalions . The NVA air defense seriously challenged American air superiority and blunted the success of close air support in the area . 
 Capt. Peter Chapman volunteered to pilot Jolly Green 67 , despite the fact that he was " short " , due to return home very soon . Capt. Boli in Sandy 01 decided they would pick up Bat 21 Bravo ( Hambleton ) first and Nail 38 Bravo ( Clark ) immediately after . At 5 : 10 p.m. , Sandy 03 joined the group with a full load of white phosphorus that could be used to lay down a smoke screen . Sandy 01 called in additional strikes on targets around Hambleton 's position and re @-@ checked the area . North Vietnamese response was limited . Aware that it could be a trap , he nonetheless gave the go @-@ ahead . As Jolly Green 67 crossed the Song Meiu Giang with Jolly Green 60 high and above guarding their approach , Jolly Green 67 began taking fire from all sides . As it approached Hambleton 's position , they called for him to pop his smoke and reveal his position . The aircraft was pummeled with automatic weapons and anti @-@ aircraft fire from all quarters . Hambleton hesitated , and the Jolly Green tried to pull away . Despite the best efforts of the remaining aircraft , Jolly Green 67 was critically damaged . 
 Jolly Green 67 flew east at first , further into territory held by the North Vietnamese , before it turned southeast for a few kilometers , when a fire broke out in the left engine . Pieces of the tail rotor struck the main rotor , and the aircraft rolled and crashed on its left side , burning ferociously . No rescue beepers were heard . The entire crew was listed as MIA and presumed killed : Capt. Peter Hayden Chapman II ( pilot ) , Capt. John Henry Call III ( co @-@ pilot ) , TSgt . William Roy Pearson , TSgt . Allen J. Avery ( para @-@ <unk> ) , TSgt . Roy D. Prater ( Crew Chief ) , and Sgt. James Harold Alley ( combat photographer ) . The fire consuming the helicopter was so hot it melted parts of the aircraft and continued to burn for three more days . 
 Hambleton 's and Clark 's spirits sank when they realized that six men died while attempting to rescue them . After a stern sermon from the new on scene commander Nail 32 Capt. John Van Etten , Hambleton decided , " Hell , I 'm going to get out of this , regardless . " He camouflaged his hole , hiding there for seven nights and six days . He left the hole twice to scavenge for food and was almost caught the second time when he was spotted by a boy and his dog . NVA soldiers searching for him passed within 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) of his hole twice . 
 The SAR task force mission leader , Capt. Fred Boli in Sandy 01 , called the rescue off for the time being because it was too dangerous . The remaining aircraft exited to the south across the Song Meiu Giang . The area was just too hot . Hambleton and Clark would have to spend another night behind the front lines . The North Vietnamese , alerted by the American 's intense efforts to find the navigator , increased their efforts to find Hambleton . 
 = = = NVA strength prevents air rescue = = = 
 All of the SAR teams were experienced in conducting rescues into what they described as " hot LZs " , but the airmen were shocked by the quantity and intensity of the ground and anti @-@ aircraft fire they had faced since the rescue attempt began . This included not only small arms fire and the previously used <unk> , 37mm and 57mm towed guns , but the 85mm and 100mm towed guns , along with the self @-@ propelled , radar @-@ guided 57mm AAA gun . Most surprising to the Americans were the large presence of SA @-@ 2 SAMs , and for the first time the use of the Soviet SA @-@ 7 Grail shoulder @-@ fired , heat @-@ seeking SAM . 
 Helicopter Squadron commander Lt. Col. Bill Harris was very upset . He concluded that the air rescue could not be attempted at that time due to the heavy concentration of North Vietnamese forces in the immediate area around Clark and Hambleton . He called Col. Muirhead and told him that they had to find another way . Hambleton was told to sit tight while they worked up an alternative plan . Hambleton had two survival radios , a first aid kit , two kinds of flares , a knife and a .38 caliber revolver , a compass and a map , an empty water bottle , and no food . On the morning of April 7 , 1st Lt. Bruce C. Walker accompanied by naval artillery spotter Marine Lt. Larry F. Potts were flying USAF <unk> ( Covey 282 ) from 20th Tactical Air Support Squadron . Potts was directing naval gunfire from the destroyer USS Buchanan ( DDG @-@ 14 ) against Soviet @-@ supplied North Vietnamese tanks to protect Hambleton . At 11 : 05 a.m. , an O @-@ 1 Bird Dog pilot observed a SAM launch and Covey 282 was shot down 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) west of Highway 1 and 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) north of Highway 9 . Radio contact was established with both Potts and Walker , and both reported that they were uninjured , but each man was too close to North Vietnamese forces to attempt a rescue . 
 Clark hid on the south side of the Song Meiu Giang , while Walker was about 6 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 7 mi ) north of Hambleton , who was on the north side of the river about 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) from the town of Cam Lo . Clark evaded capture for a number of days and was in contact with SAR personnel when he warned them away due to the proximity of NVA forces . In January 1992 , members of the Joint Task Force for Full Accounting examined war artifacts in the Hanoi military museum and found Bruce Walker 's ID card . The disposition and location of Potts , Walker 's backseat spotter , are unknown . It was Potts ' 25th birthday . Potts was wounded and captured alive , but later died in Quang Binh prison . 
 = = Ground rescue = = 
 After five days and multiple attempts to rescue Hambleton , five aircraft had been shot down and another 16 seriously damaged , 10 service members had been killed or were missing in action , two were POWs , and two were behind front lines also waiting to be rescued . On April 8 , Gen. Creighton Abrams was briefed on the high losses in the several failed attempts to rescue Hambleton and Clark . He ordered that no further air CSAR would be attempted , but that given Hambleton 's Top Secret clearance and knowledge of missiles and counter @-@ measure technology , that every effort should be made to bring him out . 
 USMC Col. Al Gray suggested a covert , land @-@ based rescue <unk> and Lt. Col. Andy Anderson , Commander of the Joint Personnel Recovery Center ( <unk> , <unk> @-@ 80 ) ordered a ground rescue . In Saigon , Navy SEAL Lt. Thomas R. Norris , one of just three SEAL officers and nine enlisted men remaining in Vietnam , had just completed an assignment in the Mekong Delta . He was waiting for orders when the call came in for a commando operation to get Hambleton out . Norris was immediately dispatched to lead an operation to rescue Hambleton . He recruited five Vietnamese Sea Commando frogmen from the Lien Doc <unk> <unk> ( <unk> ) , Naval Advisory Detachment ( NAD ) in Da Nang . 
 ARVN Brigadier General Vu Van Giai gave Anderson a Ranger platoon of about 20 men and three M @-@ 48 tanks that they used to set up a forward operating base along Highway QL @-@ 9 within observation range of the strategic Cam Lo Bridge . But Giai thought that the mission was insane and refused to take responsibility for the mission once they crossed the Song Meiu Giang . Anderson , who spoke Vietnamese , obtained additional intelligence from the headquarters of the 1st Armor Brigade near Dong Ha . 
 = = = Ad hoc code used = = = 
 The U.S. rescuers knew that the North Vietnamese were monitoring radio communications and understood English . Clark and Hambleton were several miles apart . A forward air controller told Clark , who was from Idaho , to " Get to the Snake , make like Esther Williams and float to Boston . " In other words , get to the river and swim east . 
 Hambleton had a much more difficult <unk> bypass North Vietnamese @-@ occupied villages and gun emplacements . His rescuers learned that he was one of the best golfers in the Air Force and that he retained a detailed memory of the golf courses he had played . Improvising a code using a series of specific golf @-@ course holes to guide him through the mine fields sown to protect him and to get him to the Song Meiu Giang , they radioed him , " You 're going to play 18 holes and you 're going to get in the Swanee and make like Esther Williams and Charlie the Tuna . The round starts on No. 1 at Tucson National . " 
 Hambleton initially replied , " What have you been smoking ? " But he broke the code . " It took me a half @-@ hour to figure out they were giving me distance and direction , " Hambleton explained . " No. 1 at Tucson National is 408 yards running southeast . They wanted me to move southeast 400 yards . The ' course ' would lead me to water . " 
 Using the golf @-@ course code , he was directed towards the Song Meiu Giang . To save time , Hambleton passed through the abandoned village that concealed the guns that shot down his would @-@ be rescuers . Although the village had been bombed , he was confronted by a North Vietnamese soldier . Hambleton killed him using a knife in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat . At one point , he was given directions to a " refreshment stand " where he would have to " tap his own keg " . Physically exhausted , hungry and dehydrated , Hambleton found a banana plantation where he could tap the tree for drinking water . He got lost briefly , and then fell off a cliff , breaking his arm . 
 The U.S. command in Saigon ordered special high @-@ altitude B @-@ 52 bombing raids on nearby targets to divert the Vietnamese from searching for the two men , who were several miles apart . 
 = = = Commandos cross lines = = = 
 Anderson now planned to rescue Hambleton and Clark . Norris and Anderson called in air strikes in an attempt to weaken the NVA 's resistance , but the NVA answered with mortar rounds and B @-@ 40 rockets that struck the team ’ s position . Lt. Col. Anderson , the senior American commander , and Lt. Tho Ngoc Vu , the senior Vietnamese commando , and all of the Vietnamese officers were hurt and had to be evacuated . One commando was killed . Norris was left with five Vietnamese commandos who spoke little English . 
 On April 9 , Hambleton 's eighth day of evading NVA forces all around him , FAC Harold Icke on Bilk 11 kept in constant contact with Hambleton . Icke directed Sandy 01 to drop a Madden survival pack containing food , water , ammunition and extra radios to Hambleton , but it fell 50 metres ( 160 ft ) away , slightly above him , and he was too weak to climb up to it . Icke and the pilots of two A @-@ 1 Skyraiders were shocked to see Hambleton come out his hiding place and stand in the open on a sandbar in the river , waving a white flag at them above . Icke knew Hambleton 's mental and physical health were precarious . Unknown to him , Hambleton was considerably weakened , having lost 40 pounds ( 18 kg ) in the 10 days since his jet had been shot down . 
 OV @-@ 10 pilot Clark ( Nail 38 Bravo ) was closest to the team ' s position and would be rescued first . Clark was relayed instructions to get in the water and float downstream where Norris and his team would intercept him . The rescuer 's initial plan was to swim upriver and meet Clark , but Norris tested the current and decided it was too strong . They would have to insert along the riverbank , a much more hazardous route . Anderson , Norris , and five Vietnamese commandos set up an overwatch position near the <unk> Giang River , which ran near the positions of both downed airmen . Anderson ordered Norris to take his team no more than 1 kilometre ( 0 @.@ 62 mi ) forward and wait for the survivors to come to them , but after departing , Norris ignored the order and turned off his radio . Traveling twice that distance upriver , he avoided frequent North Vietnamese patrols , truck , and columns of tanks . 
 Clark was seriously weakened by five days hiding from NVA forces with little to eat . Following the instructions of the FAC controller overhead , he floated down the cold river and at about 2 @-@ 3 : 00 a.m. , just as Norris was about to leave cover to pull Clark to shore , a six @-@ man NVA patrol walked between them . Norris refrained from opening fire , recognizing this would compromise the covert mission and that they were outgunned . When the patrol was gone , so was Clark . Norris radioed Clark and instructed him to get out of the river on the south bank . On his own initiative , Norris left his team and on his own searched the river for Clark for several hours before finally finding Clark hiding behind a sampan on the riverbank . Norris was able to re @-@ link up with the rest of his team and safely deliver Clark to Anderson at the forward operating base . Clark was transported to the last outpost on the Cua Viet River at Dong Ha by an ARVN M113 armored personnel carrier and then flown to Da Nang . 
 On April 11 , Hambleton ( Bat 21 Bravo ) was too weak to move any farther . Norris was well aware of the overwhelming North Vietnamese presence , but decided to proceed upriver again . He could only follow parts of Hambleton 's weak transmissions but knew he would have to go to him . North Vietnamese tanks were spotted at the Cam Lo bridge , and air strikes were carried out to destroy them before the team launched their second rescue mission . The NVA fixed the location of the outpost and poured mortar and artillery fire on the forward ARVN outpost , killing two of the five remaining ARVN Seals . The wounded were evacuated the next morning . 
 Norris was left with only three Vietnamese commandos who spoke little English . During their search for Hambleton on the night of April 12 , they headed upriver more than 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) , slipping forward into a massive NVA force . During the night , upon seeing the massive number of North Vietnamese forces , two of the commandos declined to press the mission further , saying they " refused to follow an American just to rescue an American " . Norris convinced them to stay by persuading them that the only way they would get back to safety was to stay with the team . They cautiously searched the river shore for two more hours without success and reluctantly returned to their forward operating base to rest and hope they would be more successful the next night . Icke fixed Hambleton 's position during the day so Norris could find him that night . 
 On the night of April 12 , Norris didn 't dare take the two ARVN soldiers who had faltered the night before . He was prepared to go alone when Petty Officer Third Class Nguyen Van Kiet volunteered to go with him . They worked their way slowly upriver until they came upon an abandoned , destroyed village . They found clothing and an abandoned sampan , which they used to disguise themselves as fishermen . They rowed quietly up river , but even in the pitch dark and dense fog they could see large numbers of North Vietnamese soldiers and tanks on the shoreline . Stopping to check his map at one point , Norris suddenly realized that two NVA soldiers were sitting about 10 metres ( 33 ft ) away . Fortunately , they were asleep . Traveling upriver in the <unk> , they broke out of the heavy fog and found themselves under the Cam Lo bridge . They had passed Hambleton ’ s position more than 30 minutes ago . Turning around , they worked their way south before putting ashore and began to search for Hambleton . They finally found him sitting in a clump of bushes , alive but partly delirious and extremely weakened , having eaten only four small ears of corn in 12 days and having lost 45 pounds ( 20 kg ) since his plane was shot down . He weighed only 128 pounds ( 58 kg ) . Sunrise was coming , and although Norris thought it best to wait until dark to return downriver , Hambleton needed to be evacuated immediately . Despite the risk , they hid Hambleton in the bottom of the sampan , covered him with bamboo , and started downriver . 
 = = = Daylight evacuation = = = 
 Their sampan was soon spotted by North Vietnamese troops , some of whom fired at them , but Norris and Nguyen could not afford to return fire . They paddled furiously , using the current and dense foliage along the far side of the river to their advantage , and trying to out @-@ distance the soldiers . However , when they rounded a bend in the river , the NVA fired on them with a heavy caliber machine gun . They pulled the sampan to the bank and turned it over to provide some cover . Icke in Bilk 11 overhead called in air support and five U.S. Navy A @-@ 4 Skyhawks led by Lt. Denny Sapp from the carrier Hancock killed a number of North Vietnamese troops and provided cover for his final escape . Two A @-@ 1 Skyraiders also assisted , dropping both explosives and <unk> smoke bombs , providing a smokescreen . Returning to the river , the three men were soon able to receive support from South Vietnamese forces . Landing on the river bank , they were met by some ARVN soldiers . Hambleton was unable to walk and they carried him back to their bunker . There , an M113 armored personnel carrier carried Hambleton , Norris and Nguyen back to Brigade Headquarters in Dong Ha . 
 News reporters were very aware of the intense rescue efforts to bring Hambleton home . When the rescue team and Hambleton arrived at Dong Ha , a reporter commented to Norris , “ It must have been tough out there . I bet you wouldn ’ t do that again . ” Norris replied , “ An American was down in enemy territory . Of course I ’ d do it again . " 
 From Dong Ha Hambleton was transported via US Army 571st <unk> helicopter , Lt. Ken Warner Aircraft Commander ( <unk> 502 ) to 95th Evacuation Hospital , Da Nang . He was shortly afterward evacuated to the hospital at Clark Air Force Base in the Philippines where he recuperated for a month . 
 Norris began to plan for the rescue of Walker , still more than a kilometer behind front lines . Walker managed to evade capture for almost 11 days when on the night of April 18 , without FAC coverage , he moved on his own accord and ran into a local villager who alerted the North Vietnamese . They began tracking him and the next morning the FAC saw NVA very near Walker 's position . Walker radioed the FAC that rescue should not be attempted because NVA forces were closing in and he was under fire . Bilk 36 , a OV @-@ 10A flown by FAC 1st Lt. Mickey Fain , reported that Walker was surrounded by more than 20 NVA soldiers and shortly afterward saw his body lying in the grass . Walker 's body was never recovered . 
 = = Rescue cost = = 
 There were no rules to apply to determine when a search and rescue was no longer cost effective . 
 = = = SAR priority = = = 
 The Air Force remained fully committed to finding and bringing back every downed air man , regardless of the cost . Air crew 's morale depended on it . Search and rescue was based on the premise that it was necessary " to secure the safety of pilots as valuable military assets and to enhance their effectiveness by boosting morale . " On June 2 , 1972 , General John Vogt , commander of the 7th Air Force , sent in a huge task force of 119 aircraft to rescue Capt. Roger Locher , a F @-@ 4 weapons officer who during Operation Linebacker had been shot down only 64 kilometres ( 40 mi ) from Hanoi . When he was picked up by a HH @-@ 53 from the 40th Aerospace Rescue and Recovery Squadron , he was within 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) of the heavily defended Yên Bái Air Base and had eluded capture while covering 19 kilometres ( 12 mi ) in North Vietnamese territory for 23 days . 
 I had to decide whether we should risk the loss of maybe a dozen airplanes and crews just to get one man out . Finally I said to myself , Goddamn it , the one thing that keeps our boys motivated is the certain belief that if they go down , we will do absolutely everything we can to get them out . If that is ever in doubt , morale would tumble . That was my major consideration . So I took it on myself . I didn 't ask anybody for permission . I just said , " Go do it ! " 
 There were also political overtones to Hambleton 's rescue . " U.S. personnel held as prisoners of war constituted a serious political liability to the U.S. government . " 
 As many as 90 sorties a day were called in to suppress North Vietnamese forces around Hambleton . In contrast , prior to the Easter Offensive , the number of daily sorties was about 10 , and during the action , peaked at about 300 . During the multi @-@ day effort to rescue the men , the Americans hit the North Vietnamese with over 800 air strikes in direct support of the rescue . Search and rescue took priority over almost all strike targets . 
 = = = No @-@ fire zone enforced = = = 
 To protect the downed airmen and the search and rescue forces , Col. Cecil Muirhead ordered the 7th Air Force to establish a standard 27 kilometres ( 17 mi ) no @-@ fire zone around Hambleton shortly after he went down . It remained in effect until 10 : 00 p.m. , and while in force it prohibited friendly artillery , naval gunfire , or aircraft from engaging any target within without JSARC approval . The no @-@ fire zone encompassed nearly the entire combat zone of the ARVN 3rd Division including the crucial Cam Lo Bridge . As a result , the South Vietnamese Army in the area was severely hampered in its efforts to stem the NVA offensive against Dong Ha and Quang Tri City . During this six @-@ hour period , thousands of NVA troops pushed into the region , designated Military Region 1 . 
 When it was seen that NVA forces were pouring through the gap unimpeded , the no @-@ fire zone was reduced at 10 : 00 p.m. that night , but not before the action generated considerable debate . One ranking adviser commented , " When viewed in relation to all the events of the day , a worse decision could not have been made . " The 3rd ARVN had lost most of its artillery in the first two days of the offensive , and in fact had surrendered two of their batteries intact to the NVA . Hambleton commented after the war , " If the taxpayers and my neighbors knew what it cost to pull me out of there , they 'd probably shoot me . " 
 Maj. David A. <unk> , a U.S. Air Force liaison with the 3rd Division , reported , " The operation cost the 3rd ARVN dearly . " He concluded that the restriction gave the North Vietnamese " an opportunity unprecedented in the annals of warfare to advance at will . " He stated , " It seems logical to assume that many South Vietnamese troops died because air and artillery support were not available . " He warned his superiors that the 3rd Division 's officers resented the fact that the 7th Air Force would put thousands of South Vietnamese soldiers ' lives at risk to rescue one of their own . 
 American response to the NVA operation virtually ground to a halt as air resources were diverted to support the recovery , and for a few days defense of the northern border area was second in priority to rescuing Hambleton . 
 = = = Casualties = = = 
