 Poetical tributes came to Bewick even during his lifetime . William Wordsworth began his anecdotal poem “ The Two Thieves ” , composed in 1798 , with the line “ O now that the genius of Bewick were mine ” , in which case he would give up writing , he declared . 
 In 1823 , Bewick 's friend the Reverend J. F. M. <unk> dedicated a sonnet to him with the lines 
 <unk> I name thee , Bewick , taught 
 By thy wood @-@ Art , that from rock , flood , and tree 
 Home to our hearths , all lively , light and free 
 In suited scene each living thing has brought 
 As life elastic , animate with thought . 
 Four years after his death , his sixteen @-@ year @-@ old admirer Charlotte Bronte wrote a poem of 20 quatrains titled “ Lines on the celebrated Bewick ” which describe the various scenes she comes across while leafing through the books illustrated by him . Later still , the poet Alfred Tennyson left his own tribute on the flyleaf of a copy of Bewick 's History of British Birds found in Lord Ravenscroft 's library : 
 A gate and field half ploughed , 
 A solitary cow , 
 A child with a broken slate , 
 And a <unk> in the bough . 
 But where , <unk> , is Bewick 
 To tell the meaning now ? 
 Each in their own way is making the same point , that Bewick 's work is more than mere illustration . Its liveliness and truth to experience appeals to the imagination of the reader and calls forth an individual response that goes beyond the text . 
 As noted at the end of the article on him in the Dictionary of National Biography , there is a rich collection of Bewick portraits , beginning with that of Newcastle painter George Gray ( 1758 @-@ 1819 ) , from about 1780 and long owned by Bewick 's family , that is now in the Laing Art Gallery . Several are by James Ramsay , including the one at the Literary and Philosophical Society of Newcastle upon Tyne , in which he sits holding spectacles , one in middle @-@ age , held by the Natural History Society of Northumbria , and one in old age in the National Portrait Gallery . Bewick also appears among the figures on the left in Ramsay 's " The Lost Child " ( 1823 ) , where he is standing next to Ramsay and his wife in the street leading up to St Nicholas ' Church . John Henry Frederick Bacon was to draw on this small figure to create his 1852 print of Bewick , in which he has been transferred from the urban to a rural setting , with the city and the Tyne in the background . 
 Other portraits include one by William Nicholson dating from 1814 in which Bewick sits with a pencil in his hand and a dog beside his chair ; the one at his birthplace ; and the full @-@ length seated portrait of 1827 by Thomas Sword Good ( see above ) . Another painting by Sword in the National Portrait Gallery is now no longer thought to be of Bewick . An unsigned painting supposedly of him in the Yale Center for British Art is equally dubious . 
 A marble portrait bust of Bewick was commissioned from Edward Hodges Baily in 1825 by the Literary and Philosophical Society , of which there are several copies beside the one still at the Society itself . According to Jenny Uglow , his recent biographer , when he came to sit for the sculptor , he “ stoutly refused to be portrayed in a toga . Instead he wore his ordinary coat and waistcoat with <unk> and ruffled shirt , and even asked for some of his smallpox scars to be shown . " Baily was so taken with him that he presented Bewick with a plaster model of the finished bust . A bronze copy now rests in a niche of the building that replaced his workshop in the churchyard of Saint Nicholas ( see above ) and still another is at the British Museum . There is also a full length statue of him at the top left of the former chemist 's shop designed by <unk> at 45 Northumberland Street in the city . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Bewick 's fame , already nationwide across Britain for his Birds , grew during the nineteenth century . In 1830 , William Yarrell named Bewick 's swan in his honour and Bewick 's son Robert engraved the bird for later editions of British Birds . Bewick 's wren also took his name . 
 The critic John Ruskin compared the subtlety of his drawing to that of Holbein , J. M. W. Turner , and Paolo Veronese writing that the way Bewick had engraved the feathers of his birds was " the most masterly thing ever done in woodcutting " . His fame faded as illustration became more widespread and more mechanical , but twentieth @-@ century artists such as Gwen <unk> ( née Darwin ) continued to admire his skill , and work by artists such as Paul Nash and Eric <unk> has been described as reminiscent of Bewick . 
 Hugh Dixon , reflecting on Bewick and the landscape of North @-@ East England , wrote that 
 Bewick 's illustrated books , admired since they first appeared , gave him some celebrity in his own lifetime . His Memoir , published a generation after his death , brought about a new interest and a widening respect which has continued to grow ever since . The attraction to his contemporaries of Bewick 's observations lay in their accuracy and amusement . Two centuries later these qualities are still recognised ; but so , too , is the wealth and rarity of the historical information they have to offer . 
 Thomas Bewick Primary School , in Newcastle upon Tyne , is named after him . Bewick 's works are held in collections including the Victoria and Albert Museum . Bewick is also memorialised elsewhere around Newcastle city , and Gateshead town , centres . These include streets named after him , blue ( and other ) plaques marking former homes and workshops . 
 = Swiss peasant war of 1653 = 
 The Swiss peasant war of 1653 was a popular revolt in the Old Swiss Confederacy at the time of the Ancien Régime . A devaluation of Bernese money caused a tax revolt that spread from the Entlebuch valley in the Canton of Lucerne to the Emmental valley in the Canton of Bern and then to the cantons of Solothurn and Basel and also to the Aargau . 
 The population of the countryside demanded fiscal relief from their ruling authorities , the city councils of these cantons ' capitals . When their demands were dismissed by the cities , the peasants organized themselves and threatened to blockade the cities . After initial compromises mediated by other cantons had failed , the peasants united under the treaty of Huttwil , forming the " League of Huttwil " . Their movement became more radical , going beyond the initially purely fiscal demands . The Huttwil League considered itself a political entity equal to and independent from the city authorities , and it assumed full military and political sovereignty in its territories . 
 The peasants laid siege on Bern and Lucerne , whereupon the cities negotiated a peace agreement with the peasant leader Niklaus Leuenberger , the so @-@ called peace on the Murifeld . The peasant armies retreated . The Tagsatzung , the federal council of the Old Swiss Confederacy , then sent an army from Zürich to definitely end the rebellion , and after the Battle of Wohlenschwil , the Huttwil League was forcibly annulled in the peace of Mellingen . The last resistance in the Entlebuch valley was broken by the end of June . After their victory , the city authorities took drastic punitive measures . The Huttwil League and the peace of the Murifeld were declared null and void by the city council of Bern . Many exponents of the insurrection were captured , tortured , and finally received heavy sentences . Niklaus Leuenberger was beheaded and quartered in Bern on September 6 , 1653 . 
 Although the military victory of the absolutist city authorities was complete , the war had also shown them that they depended very much on their rural subjects . Soon after the war , the ruling aristocrats instituted a series of reforms and even lowered some taxes , thus fulfilling some of the peasants ' original fiscal demands . In the long term , the peasant war of 1653 prevented Switzerland from an excessive implementation of absolutism as occurred in France during the reign of Louis XIV . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Old Swiss Confederacy in the 17th century was a federation of thirteen largely independent cantons . The federation comprised rural cantons as well as city states that had expanded their territories into the countryside by political and military means at the cost of the previously ruling liege lords . The cities just took over the preexisting administrative structures . In these city cantons , the city councils ruled the countryside ; they held the judicial rights and also appointed the district sheriffs ( <unk> ) . 
 Rural and urban cantons had the same standing in the federation . Each canton was sovereign within its territory , pursuing its own foreign policy and also minting its own money . The diet and central council of the federation , the Tagsatzung , held no real power and served more as an instrument of coordination . The reformation in the early 16th century had led to a confessional division amongst the cantons : the central Swiss cantons including Lucerne had remained Catholic , while Zürich , Bern , Basel , Schaffhausen , and also the city of St. Gallen had become Protestant . The Tagsatzung was often paralysed by disagreements between the equally strong factions of the Catholic and Protestant sides . 
 Territories that had been conquered since the early 15th century were governed as condominiums by the cantons . Reeves for these territories were assigned by the Tagsatzung for a period of two years ; the posts changed bi @-@ annually between the cantons . The Aargau had been annexed in 1415 . The western part belonged to Bern , while the eastern part comprised the two condominiums of the former County of Baden in the north and the Freie <unk> ( " Free Districts " ) in the south . The Free Districts had been forcibly <unk> after the Reformation in Switzerland , and the Catholic cantons , especially Lucerne , Zug , and Uri considered these districts part of their sphere of influence and the reeves typically came from these cantons . The Thurgau , which had been annexed in 1460 , was also a condominium of the Confederacy . 
 = = Causes of the conflict = = 
 At its root , the peasant war of 1653 was caused by the rapidly changing economic circumstances after the end of the Thirty Years ' War . The Swiss Confederacy had been spared from all belligerent action ; the Swiss peasants generally had profited from the wartime economy as they had been able to export their agrarian products at higher prices than before . After the Peace of Westphalia , the southern German economy recovered quickly , the Swiss exports dwindled , and the prices for agrarian products dropped . Many Swiss peasants , who had raised mortgages during the boom at wartime , suddenly faced financial problems . 
 At the same time the war had since the 1620s caused significant expenses for the cities , e.g. for building better defenses such as new bastions . A significant source of income for the cantons ran dry : their financial means exhausted by the war , France and Spain no longer paid the Pensions , the agreed sums in return for the cantons providing them with mercenary regiments . The city authorities tried to compensate for this and to cover their expenses on the one hand by increasing the taxes or inventing new ones and on the other hand by minting less valuable copper coins called Batzen that had the same face value as the previously minted silver money . The population began hoarding the silver coins , and the cheap copper money that remained in circulation continually lost in purchasing power . Zürich , Basel , and the central Swiss cantons therefore began already in 1623 to mint more valuable coins again . Bern and also Solothurn and Fribourg set a compulsory fixed exchange rate between copper and silver money instead , but this measure did not break the de facto devaluation . At the end of the war , the population thus faced both a postwar depression and a high inflation , combined with high taxes . This financial crisis led to a series of tax revolts in several cantons of the Confederacy , for instance 1629 – 36 in Lucerne , 1641 in Bern , or 1645 / 46 in Zürich . The uprising in 1653 continued this series , but would take the conflict to an unprecedented level . 
 Since the 15th century , the political power in the city cantons had become more and more concentrated in the hands of a few urban families , who increasingly saw their public offices as hereditary positions and who developed aristocratic and absolutist attitudes . Slowly , an urban oligarchy of magistrates had formed . This concentration of power in the city cantons in a small urban élite caused a veritable " participatory crisis " ( Suter ) . The rural population increasingly was subject to decrees issued without their consent that restricted their rights of old and also their social and cultural freedom . 
 = = Outbreak of the rebellion = = 
 At the beginning of December 1652 , Bern devalued its copper Batzen by 50 % to adjust its face value to its intrinsic value to combat the inflation . The authorities set a term of only three days to exchange the copper coins at the old rate against more stable gold or silver money . Not many people could thus take advantage of this exchange offer , and for most — and in particular the rural population — half their fortunes just vanished . The other cantons soon followed suit and similarly devalued the Bernese copper money . The situation was most dire in the Lucerne Entlebuch valley , where the Bernese Batzen were in widespread usage . The financial situation of many a peasant became unsustainable . Insider deals of the ruling magistrates of Lucerne furthered the unrest among the population . The peasants of the Entlebuch valley , led by Hans Emmenegger from <unk> and Christian Schybi from <unk> , sent a delegation to Lucerne to demand remedies , but the city council refused to even hear them . The enraged peasants organized a general assembly ( Landsgemeinde ) of the population of the valley at <unk> , in spite of such assemblies being illegal as the authorities ' laws of the time denied the freedom of assembly . The assembly , which took place after the mass on February 10 , 1653 , decided to suspend all tax payments until the authorities in Lucerne fulfilled their demands by reducing taxes and abolishing some of them altogether , such as the taxes on salt , cattle , and horse trades . 
 The authorities of Lucerne were not willing to grant the population 's demands , but neither did they manage to subdue this insurrection . The large majority of the rural districts of the canton of Lucerne sided with the peasants of the Entlebuch valley in an alliance concluded at <unk> on February 26 , 1653 . At the beginning of March , the people of the neighbouring Bernese Emmental valley joined their cause , addressing similar demands at the Bernese authorities . Both cantons called upon the other uninvolved members of the Old Swiss Confederacy to mediate in the conflict , but at the same time , the Tagsatzung , the diet of the cantons ' governments , also began to prepare for a military resolution . Troops from Schaffhausen and Basel were sent towards the Aargau , but this immediately solicited an armed resistance amongst the population such that the troops had to withdraw . 
 On March 18 , 1653 , the mediating Catholic central Swiss cantons proposed in Lucerne a resolution that fulfilled most of the peasants ' demands , especially the fiscal ones . In Bern , a similar compromise was proposed by a Protestant delegation from Zürich under the direction of the mayor of Zürich , Johann Heinrich <unk> , on April 4 , 1653 . The Bernese Emmental and most of the districts of the canton of Lucerne accepted these resolutions and their representatives swore new oaths of fealty . But the people in the Entlebuch valley did not accept the authorities ' terms , as these — besides offering some tax reliefs — criminalized the insurrection and called for the punishment of the leaders . At a meeting at <unk> on April 10 , 1653 , the delegates from the Entlebuch convinced their neighbours in the Emmental : the assembly decided not to honor the new oaths its representatives had sworn in Bern . 
 = = Formation of the Huttwil League = = 
 The negotiations between the city authorities and the peasants were not continued . While the authorities debated at the Tagsatzung how to deal with the insurrection , the peasants worked to gain support for their cause amongst the rural population of other regions and lobbied for a formal alliance . A peasant delegation sent to Zürich was turned back promptly : the city authorities , who had put down local <unk> in their territory already in 1645 and again in 1646 , had already recognized the danger of the agitation . On April 23 , 1653 , representatives of the people of the countryside of Lucerne , Bern , Basel , and Solothurn met at <unk> and concluded an alliance to help each other to achieve their goals . A week later , they met again at Huttwil , where they renewed that alliance and elected Niklaus Leuenberger from <unk> in the Emmental as their leader . 
 On May 14 , 1653 , the peasants met again at a Landsgemeinde at Huttwil and formalized their alliance as the " League of Huttwil " by signing a written contract in the style of the old <unk> of the Old Swiss Confederacy . The treaty clearly established the league as a separate political entity that considered itself equal to and independent from the cities . The tax revolt had become an independence movement , based ideologically on the traditional Swiss founding legends , especially on the legend of William Tell . Legally , the peasants justified their assemblies and their union by the rights of old and in particular the <unk> <unk> of 1481 , one of the important coalition treaties of the Old Swiss Confederacy . 
 The peasants by then had assumed full sovereignty over the territory they controlled . They refused to acknowledge the jurisdiction of the city authorities and also had the military control over the area . The Huttwil League openly declared its intention to expand until it encompassed the rural population in the whole Confederacy . The majority of the rural population supported the rebellion ; the dissenting minority was silenced by threats of violence and sometimes violence indeed . Communications between the cities were interrupted , official envoys were shaken down and ships on the rivers were captured . The peasants even sent a letter to the French ambassador at Solothurn assuring the French king Louis XIV of their good intentions . 
 The confessional conflicts that dominated the relations between the ruling city authorities were only secondary to the peasants of the Huttwil league . The peasant alliance bridged the confessional divide , uniting Catholic people from the Entlebuch and from Solothurn with Protestant peasants from the Emmental and from Basel . The treaty of Huttwil explicitly recognized this <unk> . The cities remained in all their manoeuvring and negotiations for military support within their respective confessional spheres : Catholic Lucerne had requested mediation and then military help from the Catholic central Swiss cantons , while Protestant Bern had turned to Protestant Zürich for help . The distrust between the authorities of the Catholic and Protestant cantons was so deep that none would allow troops of the other confession to operate on their territories . 
 = = Military confrontation = = 
 Both sides began to prepare openly for an armed conflict . The cities faced the problem that their armies were militias , recruited from the rural population of their subject territories , but that precisely this rural population had turned against them . Bern began raising troops in the Vaud and the Bernese <unk> , two regions unaffected by the uprising . The authorities of Bern and Lucerne were supported by the other cantons at the Tagsatzung . In a dispatch from Zürich , the uprising was termed for the first time a " revolution " . 
 On May 18 , 1653 , the peasants delivered ultimatums to Bern and Lucerne and raised 16 @,@ 000 troops . When the city of Bern replied with a protest note , the peasants marched to Bern under the leadership of Leuenberger , arriving on May 22 , 1653 . A second army led by Emmenegger laid siege to Lucerne . The city authorities were unprepared for an armed conflict and immediately engaged in negotiations . Within days , peace agreements were concluded . In the peace on the Murifeld ( <unk> , named after the field just outside Bern where the peasant army 's camp lay ) signed by Leuenberger and the mayor of Bern , Niklaus <unk> , the city council of Bern promised on May 28 , 1653 , to fulfill the peasants ' fiscal demands in return for the dissolution of the Huttwil League . In view of this development , the city of Lucerne and the besieging peasants agreed on a truce . Leuenberger 's army lifted the siege of Bern and retreated , but the people refused to follow their leaders and objected to dissolving the Huttwil League . 
 On May 30 , 1653 , following an earlier resolution of the Tagsatzung and earlier Bernese demands , Zürich assembled an army with recruits from its own territories , from the Thurgau , and from Schaffhausen under the command of Conrad Werdmüller with the task to break any armed resistance once and for all times . Some 8 @,@ 000 men with 800 horses and 18 cannons marched towards the Aargau . Already three days later , Werdmüller 's army controlled the important crossing of the river Reuss at Mellingen . In the hills around the nearby villages Wohlenschwil and <unk> a peasant army of some 24 @,@ 000 men assembled , led by Leuenberger and Schybi . A peasant delegation tried to negotiate with Werdmüller , showing him the peace treaty concluded on the Murifeld . Werdmüller , who had been until then unaware of this treaty that had been signed only days before , refused to acknowledge the validity of the contract and demanded the unconditional surrender of the peasants . Thus rebutted , the peasants attacked Werdmüller 's troops on June 3 , 1653 , but being poorly equipped and lacking any artillery , they were defeated decisively in the Battle of Wohlenschwil . The peasants were forced to agree to the peace of Mellingen , which annulled the Huttwil League . The peasant troops returned home and an amnesty was declared , except for the leaders of the movement . 
 Bernese troops under the command of Sigmund von Erlach then advanced from Bern to the Aargau to meet the forces of Zürich . Under this double pressure , the peasants ' resistance collapsed . Von Erlach 's troops numbered about 6 @,@ 000 men and 19 cannons . The operation was a veritable punitive expedition : the troops plundered the villages along their way and even razed the defenses of the small town of <unk> , which lost its town privileges and was declared a village again . On June 7 , 1653 , the Bernese army met with a troop of about 2 @,@ 000 men of Leuenberger 's army who were on their way back from Wohlenschwil . The peasants retreated to <unk> , where they were defeated by von Erlach 's troops ; the little town went up in flames in the course of the battle . Niklaus Leuenberger fled and went hiding , but he was betrayed by a neighbour and was apprehended by the Bernese district sheriff Samuel <unk> on June 9 , 1653 . 
 The Entlebuch valley , where the revolt had begun , resisted a little longer . Peasant troops under the command of Schybi tried in vain on June 5 , 1653 , to gain the bridge at <unk> , held by a joint army of the city of Lucerne and the central Swiss cantons commanded by Sebastian Peregrin <unk> of Uri . In the following weeks , <unk> 's troops slowly advanced through the valley , until they controlled it completely by June 20 , 1653 . Schybi was captured a few days later and incarcerated at Sursee . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The city authorities proceeded to punish severely the leaders of the Huttwil League . Bern did not accept the terms of the peace of <unk> with its amnesty , claiming the treaty was invalid on its territory , and cracked down hard on the rural population . The peasants were fined large sums and were made to cover the expenses for the military operations . The peace of the Murifeld was declared null and void by the Bernese city council , as was the Huttwil League . The rural population was disarmed . Many of the exponents of the movement were incarcerated , tortured , and finally sentenced to death or to hard labour on galleys , or exiled . Christian Schybi was executed at Sursee on July 9 , 1653 . Niklaus Leuenberger was beheaded and quartered at Bern on September 6 , 1653 ; his head was nailed at the gallows together with one of the four copies of the <unk> of the Huttwil League . Punishment was hardest in the canton of Bern , where 23 death sentences were handed down and numerous other prominent peasants were executed in courts @-@ martial by von Erlach 's army , compared to eight and seven death sentences in Lucerne and Basel , respectively . 
 Although the authorities had won a total military victory , they refrained from inflicting further draconian measures on the general population . The whole affair had clearly demonstrated that the cities depended on the support of their rural subjects . Putting down the insurrection had been achieved only with difficulties , and only with the help of troops from Zürich and Uri . Had the peasants succeeded to extend the Huttwil League to encompass the countryside of Zürich , the outcome of the conflict might have been different . The city authorities were well aware of their essentially lucky escape , and their actions in the following years reflect it . While they took steps to disempower the rural population politically , they also fulfilled many of the peasants original fiscal demands , alleviating the economic pressure on them . Tax reforms were passed , to the point that for instance in the canton of Lucerne the overall taxation of the population decreased in the second half of the 17th century . 
 Suter even concludes that the peasant war of 1653 thwarted a further advancement of absolutist trends in Switzerland and prevented a development like it occurred in France following the Fronde . The authorities of the Swiss cantons had to act much more carefully and were forced to respect their rural subjects . The Bernese for instance instructed their district sheriffs to employ a far less pompous and less authoritarian attitude to minimize the conflict potential . The city council even opened legal procedures against a few of its district sheriffs against whom there were many complaints from the rural population , accusing them of corruption , incompetence , and unjustified enrichment . The district sheriff of <unk> , the same Samuel <unk> who had captured Niklaus Leuenberger , was dismissed , tried , and exiled in early 1654 . Abraham <unk> , who had been ambassador of England in Bern from 1705 to 1713 , published in 1714 an extensive treatise entitled An account of Switzerland , in which he described the authorities ' rule as particularly mild , mentioning explicitly the low taxation in comparison to other European states and giving as the reason for the comparatively soft @-@ gloved government the fear of rebellions . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 In the decades following the peasant war the city authorities tried to suppress the memory of this nearly successful revolt . Resistance symbols like the flags or the weapons used by the peasants , in particular their typical clubs with nails on the hitting end ( called ( <unk> ) <unk> ) , were outlawed , confiscated , and destroyed . Documents such as the <unk> of Huttwil were stashed away in the vaults of the city archives . Any public remembrances or pilgrimages to the places where the leaders had been executed were forbidden and carried the death penalty , as did the singing of the peasants ' war songs . Bern was particularly active in trying to censor the memories of the event and also tried to suppress images of the peasant leaders . Historic texts written during the Ancien Régime of Switzerland generally follow the official diction and mention the peasant war , if they do so at all , only briefly and in negative terms . Works with differing viewpoints were often prohibited . The censorship was not entirely successful ; in private , the rural population kept the memories of 1653 alive , and various accounts of the events were printed in Germany . 
 In the 19th century , the official view was increasingly questioned . The aristocratic Ancien Régime had been weakened severely during the Napoleonic Wars , when the Confederacy had been a French satellite state . The episode of the Helvetic Republic , short @-@ lived as it had been , had instilled democratic ideals in the population . The <unk> of the Ancien Régime after the end of the Napoleonic era proved to be only temporary , until Switzerland became a federal state in 1848 when its first democratic constitution was passed . During the restoration , democratic publishers instrumented and interpreted the history of the peasant war as an allegory on the then current struggle for democracy , seeing the peasant war of 1653 as an early precursor of their own efforts to overcome the authoritarian regime . Well @-@ known examples are the illustrations by Martin <unk> from 1839 / 40 , who used scenes from the peasant war in such allegoric ways . 
 The official view remained ambivalent at best , though . A scene devoted to the peasant war of 1653 in a theatre production for the Swiss <unk> celebrations in 1891 , for instance , was cut on the demands of the organizers . The first statues to honor the peasants of 1653 and their leaders were erected in 1903 on the occasion of the 250th anniversary of the peasant war . A monument honoring Schybi and Emmenegger was unveiled at <unk> on July 26 , 1903 , at <unk> , a statue in honor of Leuenberger was erected the same year , and at <unk> an obelisk honoring the peasant victims of the war was inaugurated on September 25 , 1904 . More statues and plaques were installed in various other places at the tricentennial of the war in 1953 , for instance a relief showing Schybi in a chapel at Sursee , where the peasant leader had been incarcerated . 
 Ideological <unk> of the peasant war occurred even in the 20th century . Hans <unk> , a Swiss Marxist historian , interpreted the events of 1653 in the 1940s and 1950s as an early bourgeois revolution of a progressive bourgeoisie , fitting the Marxist concept of " class struggle " ; a view considered untenable by many later historians . 
 Modern historians generally agree that the peasant war was an important event in Swiss history , and also in comparison to other popular revolts in late medieval Europe . Such revolts were rather common at the time and often were motivated by excessive taxation . The peasant war of 1653 stands out as a <unk> end point in Switzerland for three reasons : 
 The revolt spread quickly to cover several cantons , whereas previous uprisings in the Confederacy had invariably been local affairs . 
 The peasants were well organized and for the only time mobilized veritable armies against their rulers , which hadn 't happened before . The peasant leaders had clearly learned from previous unsuccessful smaller revolts they had been involved in . 
 The peasants ' goals for the first time went beyond a pure restoration of rights of old and tax relief : the Huttwil League radically denied the authorities ' hitherto unquestioned entitlement to rule . 
 In 2003 , the city of Bern celebrated the 650th anniversary of its adherence to the Old Swiss Confederacy with many events , including a dedicated exposition at the Historical Museum that ran for several months and the publication of the history schoolbook Berns <unk> Zeit . The simultaneous 350 @-@ year anniversary of the peasant war was reflected in the city only in a few newspaper articles , but it was widely celebrated in the <unk> with speeches , colloquia , and an ambitious and very successful open @-@ air theatre production at <unk> in the Emmental . 
 = M2 light tank = 
 The Light Tank M2 was an American pre @-@ World War II light tank which saw limited use during World War II . The most common model , the M2A4 , was equipped with one 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) M5 gun , one .50 M2 Browning machine gun , and five .30 cal M1919 Browning machine guns . 
 It was originally developed from the prototype T2 tank built by Rock Island Arsenal , which had a Vickers @-@ type leaf spring suspension . The suspension was replaced by the superior vertical volute system in the T2E1 series of 1935 . This was put into production with minor modifications as the M2A1 in 1936 , with ten produced . The main pre @-@ war version was the M2A2 , with 239 produced , becoming the main tank in the US Army infantry units in the pre @-@ world @-@ war @-@ II period . The Spanish Civil War showed that tanks armed only with machine guns were ineffective . This led to the M2A4 with a 37 mm gun as the main armament . 375 were delivered , the last ten as late as April 1942 . 
 Its only combat use in American units was with the US Marine Corps 1st Tank Battalion during the Pacific War in 1942 . However , it is believed that M2A4s served in Burma and India with the British 7th Hussars and 2nd Royal Tank Regiment during their engagements with the Imperial Japanese Army 's 14th Tank Regiment . The M2A4 light tank led to the M3 Stuart light tank , the M2 Medium Tank and M4 Tractor artillery tower . The M3 Stuart saw widespread use throughout the war , the M2 Medium Tank , though another unsuccessful design , led to the M3 Lee and thence the M4 Sherman medium tanks . 
 = = Development history = = 
 US Army infantry tank design started with the Light Tank , T1 during the 1920s , which developed into a series of experimental designs which didn 't enter production . The T2 concept , starting five years later , incorporated several design lessons from the T1 , but used a new suspension system copied from the British Vickers 6 @-@ Ton tank . The first prototype was delivered in 1933 . 
 The Defense Act of 1920 had defined tanks to be used in support of the infantry . Through the 1920s a number of theorists outlined an independent role for the tank that required it to move at high speed into the rear areas , a modern version of the cavalry . The British referred to these designs as cruiser tanks , but similar high @-@ speed designs were developed under a variety of names . As the Defense Act limited tank development to the infantry , the United States Cavalry began tank development under the name " combat car " . In keeping with the high @-@ speed role , the new T5 Combat Car introduced the new vertical volute spring suspension ( <unk> ) system , which proved clearly superior to the Vickers leaf spring system . 
 This led to a second prototype of the T2 , the T2E1 in April 1934 , adopting <unk> from the T5 . The T2E1 was armed with one .30 cal ( 7 @.@ 62 mm ) and one .50 inch ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) Browning machine gun mounted in a fixed turret ; another .30 cal Browning was mounted on the hull front . The T2E1 was selected for production in 1935 as the M2 , which mounted only the M2 Browning in a small one @-@ man turret , and the .30 cal in the hull . 
 After only 10 units were delivered , the Infantry Branch decided to switch to a twin turret configuration in the <unk> , with a .30 @-@ caliber ( 7 @.@ 62 mm ) machine gun in a second turret . These early twin @-@ turret tanks were given the nickname " Mae West " by the troops , after the popular busty movie star . The twin @-@ turret layout was inefficient , but was a common feature of 1930s light tanks derived from the Vickers , such as the Soviet T @-@ 26 and Polish <unk> . Further refinements to the M2A2 produced the A3 model , which incorporated a modified suspension system that reduced the tank 's ground pressure . The weight increased to 10 tons . 
 Following the Spanish Civil War , most armies , including the U.S. Army , realized that they needed tanks armed with cannon and not merely with machine guns . The Cavalry had already opted for a single , larger turret on its nearly identical M1 Combat Car . In December 1938 , <unk> # <unk> directed that a single M2A3 be removed from the assembly line and modified with heavier armor and weapons , to meet the standards of the U.S. Infantry . This vehicle , after conversion , was re @-@ designated as the M2A4 . It was equipped with an M5 37 mm main gun , 1 inch ( 25 mm ) thick armor , and a seven @-@ cylinder gasoline engine . Other upgrades included improved suspension , improved transmission , and better engine cooling . Production of the M2A4 began in May 1940 at the American Car and Foundry Company , and continued through March 1941 ; an additional ten M2A4s were assembled in April 1942 , for a total production run of 375 M2A4 light tanks . The US Army sent out press photos still showing the M2A4 being assembled in July 1941 after the assembly line had been changed over to the M3 . 
 = = = Successor vehicles = = = 
 The M2 Light Tank led to the US M3 @-@ series and M5 @-@ series light tanks . The Ordnance Department viewed the M2A4 as a stopgap tank ; work to improve it further began in June 1940 . The first M3 Stuart tanks began to be produced in March 1941 ; the original riveted M3s closely resembled the M2A4 , and the two types occasionally served in the same units ; the easiest recognition feature is the aft ( rear ) idler wheel . On the M2A4 , the idler is raised ; on the M3 it trails on the ground , increasing the flotation of the heavier vehicle . The M3 retained the same Continental W @-@ 670 engine , but incorporated ½ -inch thicker ( 1 ½ inch total thickness ) armor ; weight increased to 14 tons . The tank initially kept the same 37 mm gun and the forward firing hull machine guns , but the turret incorporated improvements . Eventually over 4 @,@ 500 examples of all variants were produced . 
 = = Operational use = = 
 By December 1941 , the M2A1 , M2A2 and M2A3 were used for training only . The majority of M2A4s , which went to the US Army , were also used only for training between 1940 and 1942 . The U.S. Marine Corps ordered M3 Stuart tanks to outfit its armored units in 1940 , but as the new tank was not yet in production , it received 36 M2A4s , after which point production of the M3 had come on line . Many of these tanks were deployed during the Battle of Guadalcanal while assigned to A Company , 1st Tank Battalion , where they and M3 Stuarts were typically spread out among infantry units . Their use was generally limited to providing mobile fire support to the Marines , either in disabling Japanese bunkers or using canister shot against Japanese attacks . In defensive engagements , the M2A4s and Stuarts would deploy in pairs , so they could cover each other with machine gun fire against Japanese soldiers armed with satchel charges . 
 Ultimately , the Marine Corps determined that the 37 mm gun of the <unk> and M3s was not powerful enough to defeat Japanese bunkers , and so they would be replaced with tanks armed with 75 mm guns . Following the end of the Guadalcanal campaign , A Company returned to Australia , where the M2A4s were replaced with the new M4 Shermans in preparation for the Battle of Cape Gloucester in December 1943 . They remained in service in some areas of the Pacific Theater until 1943 . After they served in the Pacific , they were used for training . 
 Britain ordered 100 M2A4s in early 1941 . After 36 of them were delivered , the order was canceled in favor of an improved M3 Stuart . The fate of these vehicles is unclear . There is evidence that indicates those 36 M2A4s were shipped off from North Africa as part of the British Army 's 7th Hussars and 2nd Royal Tank Regiment , fighting in the India and Burma campaigns against the Japanese 14th Tank Regiment . However , according to historian Mike Green , the tanks were never issued to combat units . 
 = = Design = = 
 Besides the machine gun mounted <unk> to the main gun , there were three .30 cal. machine guns on the front hull of the M2 . One was mounted in a ball mount in front of the bow gunner . The other two were mounted in a fixed orientation in the upper hull near the sides of the tank . The machine guns were fired by the driver with the triggers on his steering levers . Troops could also mount another .30 cal machine gun on the top of the turret for anti @-@ aircraft defense . 
 The 37 mm M5 gun had a manually operated breechblock . The tank commander doubled as loader , like many other tanks of the time . There was no turret basket in the M2A4 light tank ; the commander stood on the right side , while the gunner stood on the left side . The commander turned the turret onto the general direction of target . The gunner would then bring the target into the M5 telescopic sight . The M20 combination mount had 20 ° of traverse ; this could either be by a handwheel driving the rack and pinion traverse gear mechanism or pressure on the gunners shoulder rest overcoming the friction in the mechanism . Depression and elevation of the gun was either through a geared mechanism or , with the gears disengaged , free through movement of the gunner 's shoulder rest . 
 = = Variants = = 
 M2A1 ( 1935 ) . 
 Initial production type with single fixed turret containing one .50 cal machine gun . 17 units were produced . 
 M2A2 ( 1935 ) . 
 Twin turrets with single .50 machine gun in each ; the turrets partly obstructed each other limiting fields of fire . Dubbed " Mae West " . 239 units produced from 1936 – 37 . 
 M2A3 ( 1938 ) . 
 Twin turrets with two machine guns , thicker armor , slightly lengthened hull , improved engine access , increased gear ratios , better engine cooling , improved suspension , and other minor detail changes . 72 units produced . 
 M2A4 ( 1939 ) . 
 Single turret with 37mm gun . <unk> armor . 375 units produced . Orders went to the American Car & Foundry in October 1939 upon request by the Ordnance Department . Used in the early Pacific campaigns and training . Only service was in Guadalcanal . Used for training after December 1941 . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 The M2A4 was 14 ft 6 in ( 4 @.@ 42 m ) long , 8 ft 1 in ( 2 @.@ 46 m ) wide , 8 ft 8 in ( 2 @.@ 64 m ) high , and weighed 11 @.@ 6 t ( 26 @,@ 000 lb ) . It had a vertical volute spring suspension and had a speed of 36 mph ( 58 km / h ) , and had a range of 200 mi ( 320 km ) . It had one M5 37 mm gun ( with 103 rounds ) , one .50 cal ( 12 @.@ 7 mm ) M2 Browning heavy machine guns ( with 1800 rounds ) and five .30 cal M1919 Browning machine guns ( with 8 @,@ 470 rounds ) with 6 to 25 mm of armor . It had an 250 hp ( 190 kW ) Continental W @-@ 670 9A seven @-@ cylinder radial engine . The vehicle was operated by a crew of four ( commander / loader , gunner , driver , and co @-@ driver ) . 
 = Central American squirrel monkey = 
 The Central American squirrel monkey ( Saimiri oerstedii ) is a squirrel monkey species from the Pacific coast of Costa Rica and Panama . It is restricted to the northwestern tip of Panama near the border with Costa Rica , and the central and southern Pacific coast of Costa Rica , primarily in Manuel Antonio and Corcovado National Parks . 
 It is a small monkey with an orange back and a distinctive white and black facial mask . It has an omnivorous diet , eating fruits , other plant materials , invertebrates and some small vertebrates . In turn , it has a number of predators , including raptors , cats and snakes . It lives in large groups that typically contain between 20 and 75 monkeys . It has one of the most egalitarian social structures of all monkeys . Females do not form dominance hierarchies , and males do so only at breeding season . Females become sexually mature at 2 ½ years , and males at 4 to 5 years . Sexually mature females leave the natal group , but males can remain with their natal group their entire life . The Central American squirrel monkey can live for more than 15 years . 
 The Central American squirrel monkey population declined precipitously after the 1970s . This decline is believed to be caused by deforestation , hunting , and capture to be kept as pets . Efforts are underway to preserve the species . Despite the threats to the population , in 2008 the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) upgraded its conservation status from " endangered " to " vulnerable " . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Central American squirrel monkey is a member of the family Cebidae , the family of New World monkeys containing squirrel monkeys , capuchin monkeys , tamarins and marmosets . Within the family Cebidae , it is a member of the subfamily <unk> , the subfamily containing squirrel monkeys . It is one of five recognized species of squirrel monkey , and the only species occurring outside South America . The Central American Squirrel Monkey is placed in genus Saimiri ( Voigt , 1831 ) along with all the other squirrel monkey species . Among the squirrel monkeys , the Central American squirrel monkey is most closely related to the common squirrel monkey ( Saimiri sciureus ) and the bare @-@ eared squirrel monkey ( Saimiri <unk> ) and these three species form the S. sciureus species group . The binomial name Saimiri oerstedii was given by Johannes Theodor Reinhardt in honor of his fellow Danish biologist Anders <unk> Ørsted . 
 There are two subspecies of the Central American squirrel monkey : 
 Black @-@ crowned Central American squirrel monkey , Saimiri oerstedii oerstedii 
 Grey @-@ crowned Central American squirrel monkey , Saimiri oerstedii citrinellus 
 S. o. oerstedii lives in the western Pacific portion of Panama and the Osa Peninsula area of Costa Rica ( including Corcovado National Park ) , while S. o. citrinellus lives in the Central Pacific portion of Costa Rica . The largest estimate ( most recently in 2003 ) is that the remaining wild population of S. o. citrinellus is only 1 @,@ 300 to 1 @,@ 800 individuals . 
 = = Physical description = = 
 The Central American squirrel monkey differs in coloration from South American squirrel monkeys . While South American squirrel monkeys tend to be primarily greenish in color , the Central American species has an orange back with olive shoulders , hips and tail and white undersides . The hands and feet are also orange . There is a black cap at the top of the head , and a black tip at the end of the tail . Males generally have lighter caps than females . The face is white with black rims around the eyes and black around the nose and mouth . 
 The two subspecies are similar in coloration , but differ in the shade of the cap . The northern subspecies , living in Central Pacific Costa Rica , has a lighter cap than the southern subspecies , which lives in Panama and in parts of Costa Rica near Panama . The southern subspecies also has more yellowish limbs and underparts . 
 Adults reach a length of between 266 and 291 millimetres ( 10 @.@ 5 and 11 @.@ 5 in ) , excluding tail , and a weight between 600 and 950 grams ( 21 and 34 oz ) . The tail is longer than the body , and between 362 and 389 mm ( 14 @.@ 3 and 15 @.@ 3 in ) in length . As with other squirrel monkeys , there is considerable sexual dimorphism . On average , males weigh 16 % more than females . Males have an average body weight of 829 g ( 29 @.@ 2 oz ) and females average 695 g ( 24 @.@ 5 oz ) . Squirrel monkeys have the largest brains of all primates relative to their body size ; the Central American squirrel monkey 's brain weighs about 25 @.@ 7 g ( 0 @.@ 91 oz ) , or about 4 % of its body weight . Unlike larger relatives , such as the capuchin , spider and howler monkeys , Central American squirrel monkeys do not have a fully prehensile tail , except as newborn infants , and the tail is primarily used to help with balance . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 = = = Social structure = = = 
 The Central American squirrel monkey is arboreal and diurnal , and most often moves through the trees on four legs ( quadrupedal locomotion ) . It lives in groups containing several adult males , adult females and juveniles . The group size tends to be smaller than that of South American squirrel monkeys , but is still larger than for many other New World monkey species . The group generally numbers between 20 and 75 monkeys , with a mean of 41 monkeys . Groups in excess of 100 sometimes occur , but these are believed to be temporary mergers of two groups . On average , groups contain about 60 % more females than males . 
 The squirrel monkey groups have a home range of between 35 and 63 hectares ( 86 to 156 acres ) . Group ranges can overlap , especially in large , protected areas such as Manuel Antonio National Park . Less overlap occurs in more fragmented areas . Groups can travel between 2 @,@ 500 and 4 @,@ 200 m ( 8 @,@ 200 and 13 @,@ 800 ft ) per day . Unlike some other monkey species , the group does not split into separate foraging groups during the day . Individual monkeys may separate for the main group to engage in different activities for periods of time , and thus the group may be dispersed over an area of up to three acres ( 1 @.@ 2 hectares ) at any given time . The group tends to sleep in the same trees every night for months at a time , unlike other squirrel monkeys . 
 There are no dominance hierarchies among the females , and the females do not form coalitions . Males in the group are generally related to each other and thus tend to form strong affiliations , and only form dominance hierarchies during the breeding season . This is especially the case among males of the same age . Neither males nor females are dominant over each other , an egalitarian social system that is unique to Central American squirrel monkeys . In South American species , either the females ( S. boliviensis ) or males ( S. sciureus ) are dominant over the other sex , and both sexes form stable dominance hierarchies . Groups of Central American squirrel monkeys generally do not compete or fight with each other . Male Costa Rican squirrel monkeys are known to have very close bonds with each other . 
 Although South American species of squirrel monkeys often travel with and feed together with capuchin monkeys , the Central American squirrel monkey only rarely associates with the white @-@ headed capuchin . This appears to be related to the fact that the food the Central American squirrel monkey eats is distributed in smaller , more dispersed patches than that of South American squirrel monkeys . As a result of the different food distribution , associating with capuchin monkeys would impose higher foraging costs for the Central American squirrel monkey than for their South American counterparts . In addition , while male white @-@ headed capuchins are alert to predators , they devote more attention to detecting rival males than to detecting predators , and relatively less time to detecting predators than their South American counterparts . Therefore , associating with capuchins would provide less predator detection benefits and impose higher foraging costs on the Central American squirrel monkey than on South American squirrel monkeys . 
 Certain bird species associate with the Central American squirrel monkey . The birds follow the monkeys in an attempt to prey on insects and small vertebrates that the monkeys flush out . At Corcovado National Park , bird species known to regularly follow squirrel monkeys include the double @-@ toothed kite , the grey @-@ headed tanager and the tawny @-@ winged <unk> , but other woodcreepers and such species as motmots and <unk> do so as well . This activity increases during the wet season , when arthropods are harder to find . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The Central American squirrel monkey is omnivorous . Its diet includes insects and insect larvae ( especially grasshoppers and caterpillars ) , spiders , fruit , leaves , bark , flowers and nectar . It also eats small vertebrates , including bats , birds , lizards and tree frogs . It finds its food foraging through the lower and middle levels of the forest , typically between fifteen and thirty feet high . Two @-@ thirds to three @-@ quarters of each day is spent foraging for food . It has difficulty finding its desired food late in the wet season , when fewer arthropods are available . 
 It has a unique method of capturing tent @-@ making bats . It looks for roosting bats by looking for their tents ( which are made of a folded leaf ) . When it finds a bat it climbs to a higher level and jumps onto the tent from above , attempting to dislodge the bat . If the fallen bat does not fly away in time , the monkey pounces on it on the ground and eats it . 
 The Central American squirrel monkey is an important seed disperser and a pollinator of certain flowers , including the passion flower . While it is not a significant agricultural pest , it does sometimes eat corn , coffee , bananas and mangos . Other fruits eaten include <unk> , legumes , figs , palms , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> <unk> and wild cashew fruits . 
 = = = Communication = = = 
 The Central American squirrel monkey is noisy . It makes many squeals , whistles and chirps . It also travels through the forest noisily , disturbing vegetation as it moves through . It has four main calls , which have been described as a " smooth chuck " , a " bent mask chuck " , a " peep " and a " twitter " . 
 = = = Predators = = = 
 Predators of the Central American squirrel monkey include birds of prey , cats and snakes . <unk> and venomous snakes both prey on squirrel monkeys . Raptors are particularly effective predators of Central American squirrel monkeys . The oldest males bear most of the responsibility for detecting predators . When a Central American squirrel monkey detects a raptor , it gives a high @-@ pitched alarm peep and dives for cover . All other squirrel monkeys that hear the alarm call also dive for cover . The monkeys are particularly cautious about raptors , and give alarms when they detect any raptor @-@ like object , including small airplanes and even falling branches and large leaves . 
 Predator detection by the males becomes particularly important during the period when the infants are born . Raptors spend significantly more time near the squirrel monkey troops during this period , and prey on a significant number of the newborn infants . Other animals that prey on Central American squirrel monkey infants include <unk> , <unk> , opossums , coatis , snakes , and even spider monkeys . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 The breeding season for the Central American squirrel monkey is in September . All females come into estrus at virtually the same time . A month or two before the breeding season begins , males become larger . This is not due to extra muscle , but to altered water balance within the male 's body . This is caused by conversion of the male hormone testosterone into estrogen ; thus the more testosterone a male produces , the more he grows in advance of the breeding season . Since males within a group have not been observed fighting over access to females during breeding season , nor attempting to force females to copulate with them , it is believed that female choice determines which males get to breed with females . Females tend to prefer the males that expand the most in advance of breeding season . This may be because the most enlarged males are generally the oldest and the most effective at detecting predators , or it may be a case of runaway intersexual selection . 
 Males sometimes leave their group for short periods of time during the breeding season in order to try to mate with females from neighboring groups . Females are receptive to males from other groups , although resident males attempt to repel the intruders . The gestation period is six months , and the infants are born within a single week during February and March . Typically , a single infant is born . 
 Only 50 % of infants survive more than six months , largely due to predation by birds . The infant remains dependent on its mother for about one year . Females give birth every 12 months , so the prior infant becomes independent at about the same time the new infant is born . Females become sexually mature at 2 ½ years old , while males become sexually mature at between 4 and 5 years old . The females leave their natal group upon reaching sexual maturity , while males usually remain with their group for their entire lives . This is different from South American squirrel monkey species , where either males disperse from their natal group or both sexes disperse . Males of the same age tend to associate with each other in age cohorts . Upon reaching sexual maturity , an age cohort may choose to leave the group and attempt to oust the males from another group in order to attain increased reproductive opportunities . 
 The lifespan of the Central American squirrel monkey in the wild is unknown , but captive specimens have been known to live more than 15 years . Other squirrel monkey species are known to be able to live more than 20 years . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The Central American squirrel monkey has a restricted distribution in Costa Rica and Panama . It lives only near the Pacific coast . Its range covers Central Pacific Costa Rica in the north through western Panama . It lives in two of Costa Rica 's national parks — Manuel Antonio National Park and Corcovado National Park — where it can be seen by visitors , but it is not as commonly seen in these parks as the white @-@ headed capuchin or the mantled howler monkeys . It lives in lowland forests and is restricted to secondary forests and primary forests which have been partially logged . It requires forests with abundant low and mid @-@ level vegetation and has difficulty surviving in tall , mature , undisturbed forests that lack such vegetation . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 It was once believed that the Central American squirrel monkey was just a population of a South American species of squirrel monkey brought to Central America by humans . Evidence for this theory included the very small range of the Central American squirrel monkey and the large gap from the range of any other squirrel monkey species . A study of nuclear and mitochondrial DNA demonstrated that the Central American squirrel monkey is indeed a separate species that apparently diverged from the South American species long ago – at least 260 @,@ 000 years ago and possibly more than 4 million years ago . 
 One popular theory is that squirrel monkeys did live in Colombia during the late Miocene or Pliocene and these squirrel monkeys migrated to Central America , becoming the ancestors of the current Central American species . According to this theory , the Guatemalan black howler migrated to Central America around the same time . Passage through the isthmus of Panama later closed due to rising oceans , and eventually opened up to another wave of migration about 2 million years ago . These later migrants , ancestors to modern populations of white @-@ headed capuchins , mantled howlers and Geoffroy 's spider monkeys , out @-@ competed the earlier migrants , leading to the small range of the Central American squirrel monkey and Guatemalan black howler . 
 The population density has been estimated at 36 monkeys per square kilometer ( 93 per square mile ) in Costa Rica and 130 monkeys per square kilometer ( 337 per square mile ) in Panama . It has been estimated that the population of the Central American squirrel monkey has been reduced from about 200 @,@ 000 in the 1970s to less than 5 @,@ 000 . This is believed to be largely due to deforestation , hunting , and capture for the pet trade . There are significant efforts within Costa Rica to try to preserve this monkey from extinction . A reforestation project within Panama tries to preserve the vanishing population of the <unk> Province . 
 As of 2008 , the Central American squirrel monkey is listed as " vulnerable " from a conservation standpoint by the IUCN . This is due to the fact that its range encompasses just 8 @,@ 000 square kilometers ( 3 @,@ 100 sq mi ) , its range is fragmented , and it suffers from ongoing habitat loss . This assessment is an improvement from the 2003 assessment , in which the Central American squirrel monkey was listed as " endangered " . 
 = California State Route 188 = 
 State Route 188 ( SR 188 ) is a two @-@ mile ( 3 km ) route that connects State Route 94 with the Mexico – United States border . Its southern terminus is at the border near Tecate , Baja California and its northern terminus is near Tecate , California with SR 94 . The route was assigned in the area in 1972 , and has remained intact since . 
 = = Route description = = 
 State Route 188 or Tecate Road begins at the U.S.-Mexico border in the community of Tecate , Baja California ; this border crossing handled roughly four percent of all traffic in between Baja California and California during 2008 . The route progresses northward , passing through a large commercial district in Tecate , California . The highway heads to an intersection with Thing Road , where it turns to the northeast and out of the commercial district . The route continues to the northeast , intersecting with Humphries Road , where the surroundings become highly undeveloped . SR 188 continues to an intersection with SR 94 a short distance out of Potrero , where the designation ends and right @-@ of @-@ way merges into SR 94 . 
 The entire route is in the National Highway System , a network of roadways important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . In 2013 , SR 188 had an annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) of 5 @,@ 600 at the northern terminus , and 5 @,@ 900 at the southern terminus , the latter of which was the highest AADT for the highway . 
 = = History = = 
 The original alignment of SR 188 , when routes where first assigned , was designated as Legislative Route 94 . In the 1964 state highway renumbering , SR 188 was officially defined as " the south end of Fallen Leaf Lake to Route 89 near Camp Richardson " ; this was later removed in 1965 . 
 A road from the town of Potrero to Tecate existed by 1917 . The Tecate border crossing originally opened in 1932 . In 1938 , the San Diego County board of supervisors proposed moving rerouting the road to be shorter and on more level ground , although there was opposition from local residents and businesses who favored the old road . However , the route of the road to Tecate has remained the same since then . 
 The current routing of SR 188 was assigned in 1972 . The route has remained virtually unchanged since . The Tecate border crossing expanded through the opening of the Tecate Commercial Vehicle Enforcement Facility , including truck scales ; this was completed in 2008 , with past expansions to the crossing having been completed in 2004 and 2005 . 
 = = Future = = 
 Improvements are being planned to connect the two ports of entry with a truck bypass to improve security ; these are scheduled for completion by 2015 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in San Diego County . 
 = Roy 's Wedding = 
 " Roy 's Wedding " is the second episode of the ninth season of the American comedy television series The Office and the show 's 178th episode overall . The episode originally aired on NBC on September 27 , 2012 . The episode guest stars David Denman as Roy Anderson , Michael Patrick McGill as his brother Kenny , Robert R. Shafer as Bob Vance , and Ameenah Kaplan as Val . 
 The series depicts the everyday lives of office employees in the Scranton , Pennsylvania branch of the fictional Dunder Mifflin Paper Company . In this episode , Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) and Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) are invited to the wedding of Roy Anderson ( Denman ) — Pam 's former fiancé . Roy 's wedding toast later leads to Pam and Jim searching their relationships for any secrets that the other might not know about . Jim , however , hides the fact that he has started a company with a college friend , and Pam grows more and more suspicious . Meanwhile , Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) reacts to Nellie Bertram 's ( Catherine Tate ) mandatory charity initiative by announcing he will donate to the Taliban . 
 " Roy 's Wedding " saw the return of Denman as Roy , who was a regular character in the show 's first three seasons . The episode received moderately positive reviews from critics . Many applauded the emotional drama in Pam and Jim 's storyline . However , many reviews gave the episode 's two subplots mixed reviews . " Roy 's Wedding " was viewed by an estimated 4 @.@ 13 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 1 rating / 6 percent share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49 . The episode ranked fourth in its timeslot and was also the highest @-@ rated NBC series of the night . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In the cold open Pam ( Jenna Fischer ) creates a chore wheel after the office janitor is on vacation , but after everyone else in the office notes that the wheel is no fun , Pam changes the wheel so that it barely relates to chores or work at all , which goes over well . 
 Pam and Jim Halpert ( John Krasinski ) are invited to Pam 's former fiancé Roy Anderson 's ( David Denman ) wedding , which takes place at 8 AM before work . They are both surprised by Roy 's beautiful home and the elegant wedding details , and Roy tells them he runs a very successful gravel company . During his wedding toast , Roy stuns his lovely bride by performing " She 's Got a Way " by Billy Joel on the piano , saying that he told her he was taking boxing lessons as a cover for learning some music for her instead . Pam and Jim , convinced they already know everything about one another but stunned by Roy 's transformation , try to find things about themselves the other does not know . This is exacerbated by Jim 's frequent calls about a new business he is starting with a friend , because Jim and Pam agreed that the venture was not right for them , but Jim then signed onto it without telling his wife he 'd done so . Pam tries unsuccessfully to bait Jim to find out what the secret is and becomes increasingly annoyed that her husband is lying to her . 
 Dwight Schrute ( Rainn Wilson ) reacts to Nellie Bertram 's ( Catherine Tate ) mandatory charity initiative by maintaining that he will donate the money he raises to the Global Relief Foundation , a front for the Taliban . Nellie then makes Dwight sign a contract in " a ridiculous font " to live by Taliban rules in the office . Subsequently , Nellie steals Dwight 's pen and challenges him to cut her hand off for doing so , hoping he will capitulate and pick a legitimate charity . Dwight spends an inordinate amount of time preparing to do so before the two end up watching 127 Hours together upon the advice of Darryl Philbin ( Craig Robinson ) . 
 Clark ( Clark Duke ) hits on Erin Hannon ( Ellie Kemper ) by dangling a fake newscaster job . After receiving some not @-@ so @-@ helpful advice from her coworkers ( especially Andy and Darryl , who is now assistant regional manager ) , Clark invites Erin to his apartment for the fake audition . However , Pete ( Jake Lacy ) , who has come to dislike Clark , invites himself and Andy along under the pretense of helping with the audition , ruining Clark 's seduction plan . Andy ends up throwing himself into the fake plan and more or less dismissing Erin , who in turns goes out for dinner with Pete and appears to be enjoying time spent with him . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Roy 's Wedding " was written by co @-@ executive producer Allison Silverman , marking her second writing credit after joining the series the previous season and writing the episode , " Pam 's Replacement " . The episode was directed by series cinematographer Matt Sohn , marking his sixth director 's credit for the series . This episode sees the return of David Denman as Roy Anderson . Roy was a regular character in the show 's first three seasons . Denman 's character was written out of the show near the end of the series ' third season , although he did have small cameos in the fifth season episode " Crime Aid " and in the seventh season episode " Threat Level Midnight " . On Twitter , Denman later called the episode " Roy 's best episode ! " The episode 's subplot was announced by showrunner Greg Daniels early on via a press release ; he noted that Dwight would be trying to spite Nellie by trying to donate to the Taliban . 
 The official website of The Office included several cut scenes from " Roy 's Wedding " within a week of the episode 's release . In the first 57 @-@ second clip , Darryl talks about his relationship with Roy , and Pam talks to Roy 's parents , who make subtle barbs about her lack of loyalty . In the second 84 @-@ second clip , Oscar notes that he is supporting a charity that supports the " homo @-@ hispanic community " , and Toby notes that he wants to support a charity that helps " inconspicuous creatures " like moths . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Andy chooses Darryl to be consigliere , a reference to the 1972 crime film The Godfather ; one brief scene in the episode in which Darryl accepts the position parallels the final scene of The Godfather . Darryl later notes that he likes The Godfather because he is a " cinephile " , but that he likes the 1983 film Scarface because he is black . Clark tries to start up a conversation with Erin about Newsweek . Later , while discussing news anchors , Meredith mentions how attractive she found Walter Cronkite . Dwight and Nellie watch 127 Hours , a 2010 biographical survival drama film starring James Franco as real @-@ life <unk> Aron Ralston , who became trapped by a boulder in an isolated slot canyon in Blue John Canyon , southeastern Utah , in April 2003 , and was eventually forced to amputate his own right arm in order to free himself . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Roy 's Wedding " originally aired on NBC on September 27 , 2012 . The episode was viewed by 4 @.@ 13 million viewers and received a 2 @.@ 1 / 6 percent share in the 18 – 49 demographic . This means that it was seen by 2 @.@ 1 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds , and 6 percent of all 18- to 49 @-@ year @-@ olds watching television at the time of the broadcast . The episode stayed consistent when compared to the season opener " New Guys " . The Office finished fourth in its time slot , being beaten by an episode of the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) series Grey 's Anatomy which received a 4 @.@ 4 / 12 percent rating ; an entry of the CBS drama Person of Interest , which received a 2 @.@ 9 / 8 percent rating ; and an installment Fox series Glee , which received a 2 @.@ 4 / 7 percent rating . " Roy 's Wedding " , however , finished ahead of repeats of the The CW show The Next . The Office was also the highest @-@ rated NBC television program of the night . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 " Roy 's Wedding " received moderately positive reviews from critics . Many applauded the emotional drama in Pam and Jim 's storyline . However , many reviews gave the episode 's two subplots mixed reviews . The A.V. Club reviewer Myles McNutt praised the Jim @-@ Pam storyline and Daniels for using the previous seasons of Jim and Pam 's " boring storylines " to create greater drama for this episode and for the season as a whole . He also complimented the change of dynamic the episode caused , saying that by " allowing Jim and Pam to serve as the point of dramatic interest , the rest of the characters are loosened up to simply riff off of one another , a dynamic that felt bogged down by Andy ’ s ascension to the leadership position last season " . He ultimately rated the episode a " B " . New York writer Michael Tedder praised the writers for going back to the show 's early style of ongoing plotlines and the suspense in the Jim @-@ Pam arc . Mark Trammell of TV Equals wrote that the episode " was not as good an episode as the premiere [ but ] the seeds were being sown for other payoffs down the line in the season . " Bonnie Stiernberg of Paste was not so positive , saying the whole episode and season storyline was " predictable " and a " wasted opportunity " , and that it ultimately didn 't live up to the producers ' promise to " shake things up in Scranton " . Stiernberg later rated the episode a 6 @.@ 8 out of 10 . 
 The episode 's subplots , however , received mixed reviews . McNutt wrote that , while Tate had given a " rather subtle and charming performance " , the Nellie @-@ Dwight subplot felt like " a leftover idea " from the previous season . Tedder , on the other hand , liked the Dwight @-@ Nellie subplot for its silliness , concluding that " ongoing plotlines are great , but it 's still the little things on this show " . Trammell felt that the joke involving font was " cute " , but he did not enjoy the rest , writing that " the resulting antics just weren ’ t that funny " . 
 McNutt was not pleased with the characterization of Andy in the episode , calling him " insufferable " and " plain unlikeable " . He also noted that Clark and Pete 's prominence in the subplot , while enjoyable , seemed " weird for one part of the show to be invested in exploring characters ’ lives when another part of the show is deploying newly introduced characters " . Tedder complimented the Erin @-@ Clark subplot , for examining and introducing Pete and Clark further , and called Clark the " New Ryan " . Mark Trammell enjoyed Duke 's acting , writing " few do nervous geek @-@ <unk> better than [ him ] these days . Well played , sir . " Stiernberg , on the other hand , considered the whole plot to be " too icky and unfunny " and that the aftermath of Pete and Erin 's dinner together was " predictable " . 
 = Julia Lennon = 
 Julia Lennon ( née Stanley ; 12 March 1914 – 15 July 1958 ) was the mother of English musician John Lennon , who was born during her marriage to Alfred Lennon . After complaints to Liverpool 's Social Services by her eldest sister , Mimi Smith ( née Stanley ) , she handed over the care of her son to her sister . She later had one daughter after an affair with a Welsh soldier , but the baby was given up for adoption after pressure from her family . She then had two daughters , Julia and Jackie , with John ' Bobby ' Dykins . She never divorced her husband , preferring to live as the common @-@ law wife of Dykins for the rest of her life . 
 She was known as being high @-@ spirited and impulsive , musical , and having a strong sense of humour . She taught her son how to play the banjo and ukulele . She kept in almost daily contact with Lennon , and when he was in his teens he often stayed overnight at her and Dykins ' house . On 15 July 1958 , she was struck down and killed by a car driven by an off @-@ duty policeman , close to her sister 's house at 251 Menlove Avenue . Lennon was traumatised by her death and wrote several songs about her , including " Julia " and " Mother " . Biographer Ian MacDonald wrote that she was , " to a great extent ... her son 's muse " . 
 = = Background = = 
 Julia Stanley , later known by the family as Judy , was born at 8 Head Street , Toxteth , South Liverpool in 1914 , and was the fourth of five sisters . Her mother , Annie Jane ( née Millward ) , gave birth to a boy and then a girl , both of whom died shortly after birth . She then had Mary , known as ' Mimi ' ( 1906 – 91 ) , Elizabeth ' Mater ' ( 1908 – 76 ) , Anne ' Nanny ' ( 1911 – 88 ) , Julia ' Judy ' ( 1914 – 58 ) , and Harriet ' Harrie ' ( 1916 – 72 ) . John Lennon would later comment that the ' Stanley girls ' were " five , fantastic , strong , beautiful , and intelligent women " . Their father , George Ernest Stanley , retired from the Merchant Navy and found a job with the Liverpool & Glasgow Salvage Association as an insurance investigator . He moved his family to the suburb of Woolton , where they lived in a small terraced house at 9 Newcastle Road near to Penny Lane . Her mother died in 1945 , and Julia had to take care of her father with help from her oldest sister . 
 = = Marriage to Alf Lennon = = 
 Alfred ' Freddie ' Lennon — always called ' Alf ' by his family — was always joking but never held a job for very long , preferring to visit Liverpool 's many vaudeville theatres and cinemas , where he knew the <unk> by name . At the Trocadero club , a converted cinema on Camden Road , Liverpool , he first saw an " auburn @-@ haired girl with a bright smile and high cheekbones " ; Julia Stanley . He saw her again in Sefton Park , where he had gone with a friend to meet girls . Lennon , who was dressed in a bowler hat and with a cigarette holder in hand , saw " this little waif " sitting on a wrought @-@ iron bench . Julia ( 14 years old ) said that his hat looked " silly " , to which the 15 @-@ year @-@ old Alf replied that she looked " lovely " , and sat down next to her . She asked him to take off his hat , so he promptly threw it straight into the Sefton Park lake . 
 Despite standing only five feet two inches ( 157 cm ) tall in heels , she often caught the gaze of men in the street , being attractive and full @-@ figured . She was always well @-@ dressed and even went to bed with make @-@ up on so as to " look beautiful when she woke up " . A nephew later said that she could " make a joke out of nothing " , and could have " walked out of a burning house with a smile and a joke " . She frequented Liverpool 's dance halls and clubs where she was often asked to dance in jitterbug competitions with dockers , soldiers , sailors , and waiters . It was remarked that she could be as humorous as any man and would sing the popular songs of the day at any time of day or night . Her voice sounded similar to Vera Lynn 's , whilst Lennon specialised in impersonating Louis Armstrong and Al Jolson . She played the ukulele , the piano accordion , and the banjo ( as did Lennon ) , although neither pursued music professionally . They spent their days together walking around Liverpool and talking of what they would do in the future : opening a shop , a pub , a cafe , or a club . 
 On 3 December 1938 , 11 years after they had first met , she married Alf Lennon after she had proposed to him . They were married in the Bolton Street Registry office , although none of her family were present as she had not informed them about the wedding . She wrote ' cinema usherette ' as her occupation on the marriage certificate , even though she had never been one . They spent their honeymoon eating at Reece 's restaurant in Clayton Square ( which is where their son would later celebrate after his marriage to Cynthia Powell ) , and then went to a cinema . She walked into 9 Newcastle Road waving the marriage licence and said to her family , " There ! — I 've married him . " It was an act of defiance against her father , who had threatened to disown her if she ever <unk> with a lover . On their wedding night , she stayed at her parents ' house , and Lennon went back to his boarding house . The next day , he went back to sea for three months , on a ship bound for the West Indies . 
 The Stanley family completely ignored her husband at first , believing him to be of " no use to anyone — certainly not our Julia " . Her father demanded that Lennon present something concrete to show that he could financially support his daughter , but Lennon signed on as a Merchant Navy steward on a ship bound for the Mediterranean . He returned after a few months at sea and moved into the Stanley home . He auditioned for local theatre managers as an entertainer but had no success . Julia found out that she was pregnant ( with John ) in January 1940 , but as the war had started her husband continued to serve as a merchant seaman during World War II , sending money home regularly . The payments stopped after Alf deserted in 1943 . 
 = = = John = = = 
 Julia gave birth to John Winston Lennon on 9 October 1940 , in the second @-@ floor ward of the Oxford Street Maternity Hospital in Liverpool , during World War II . Her eldest sister , Mimi , phoned the hospital and was told that she had given birth to a boy . Mimi would later claim that she went straight to the hospital during the middle of an air raid and was forced to hide in doorways to avoid the shrapnel from falling bombs , but in actuality , there had been no attack on Liverpool that night . Alf was not present at their son 's birth , as he was at sea . 
 The infant Lennon started at his first school in November 1945 — Mosspits , on Mosspits Lane , Wavertree — so she found a part @-@ time job at a café near the school . After numerous criticisms from the Stanley family about their ( still @-@ married ) daughter ' living in sin ' with John Dykins , and considerable pressure from Mimi — who twice contacted Liverpool 's Social Services to complain about the infant Lennon sleeping in the same bed as Julia and Dykins — she reluctantly handed the care of Lennon over to Mimi and her husband , George Smith . In July 1946 , Alf visited Mimi 's house , ' Mendips ' at 251 Menlove Avenue , and took Lennon to Blackpool for a long holiday , but he was secretly intending to emigrate to New Zealand with him . Julia and Dykins found out and followed them to Blackpool . Alf asked Julia to go with them both to New Zealand , but she refused . After a heated argument , Alf said their five @-@ year @-@ old child had to choose between his mother or him . He chose Alf ( twice ) so Julia walked away , but in the end her son ( crying ) followed her . Alf lost contact with the family until Beatlemania , when he and his son met again . 
 She took John back to her house and enrolled him in a local school , but after few weeks she handed him back to Mimi . Various reasons have been suggested for her decision , such as Dykins ' unwillingness to raise the young boy , Julia 's inability to cope with the responsibility , or a punishment forced on her by Mimi and her father for " living in sin " . Lennon blamed himself , saying later , " My mother ... couldn 't cope with me . " He then lived continuously at ' Mendips ' , in the smallest bedroom above the front door , with Mimi determined to give him a " proper upbringing " . Julia later bought Lennon his first guitar for £ 5 / 10- ( five pounds , ten shillings ) after Lennon had pestered her incessantly for weeks , but insisted it had to be delivered to her house , not her sister 's . As Lennon had difficulty learning chords , she taught him banjo and ukulele chords , which were simpler , and later taught Lennon how to play the piano accordion . Julia 's banjo was the first instrument that John learned to play ' sitting there with endless patience until I managed to work out all the chords . ' After Julia 's untimely death the instrument was never seen again and its whereabouts remains a mystery . 
 As Mimi refused to have a record player in her house , Lennon learned how to play his favourite songs by going to Julia 's house . She played Elvis records to Lennon and would dance around her kitchen with him . In 1957 , when The Quarrymen played at St. Barnabas Hall , Penny Lane , Julia turned up to watch . After each song she would clap and whistle louder than everyone else and was seen " swaying and dancing " throughout the whole concert . Lennon frequently visited her house during that period , detailing his anxieties and problems , where she gave him encouragement to continue with music over Mimi 's objection 
 = = = Victoria = = = 
 During 1942 – 1943 , Julia lived with her son at The Dairy Cottage ; 120a Allerton Road , Woolton . The cottage was owned by Mimi 's husband , and Mimi wanted Julia to live there because they would be closer to her house and also out of the Stanley house . As Alf was often away at sea , Julia started going out to dance halls . In 1942 , she met a Welsh soldier named ' Taffy ' Williams who was stationed in the barracks at Mossley Hill . Alf later blamed himself for this , as he had written letters telling her that because there was a war on , she should go out and enjoy herself . After an evening out , she would often give her young son a piece of chocolate or shortcrust pastry the next morning for breakfast . She became pregnant by Williams in late 1944 , though first claiming that she had been raped by an unknown soldier . Williams refused to live with Julia — who was still married to Alf — until she gave up John , which she refused to do . When Alf eventually came home in 1944 , he offered to look after his wife , their son , and the expected baby , but she rejected the idea . 
 Alf took John to his brother Sydney 's house , in the Liverpool suburb of <unk> , a few months before Julia came to term . Julia 's daughter , Victoria Elizabeth , born in the <unk> Nursing Home on 19 June 1945 , was subsequently given up for adoption to a Norwegian Salvation Army Captain and his wife ( Peder and Margaret Pedersen ) after intense pressure from the Stanley family . John Lennon was informed by his Aunt Harriet of her existence in 1964 . John was so overcome by emotion , wanting to find his sister that he placed an ad in the paper , and hired detectives to look for her . They searched Norway for Victoria , and came up empty handed , and John never found her . He died never knowing her . 
 = = = John ' Bobby ' Dykins = = = 
 Julia started seeing Dykins a year after Victoria 's birth ( although they had known each other before ) when she was working in the café near Lennon 's primary school ; Mosspits . Dykins was a good @-@ looking , well @-@ dressed man who worked at the Adelphi Hotel in Liverpool as a wine steward . She later moved into a small flat in Gateacre with Dykins . He enjoyed luxuries , and had access to rationed goods like alcohol , chocolate , silk stockings and cigarettes , which was what initially attracted her . The Stanley sisters called him " <unk> " , because of his pencil @-@ thin moustache , margarine @-@ coated hair , and pork @-@ pie hat , and the young Lennon called him " Twitchy " because of a physical tic / nervous cough . Julia 's family and friends remembered that he also had a fiery temperament , which could result in his being violent when drunk . Lennon remembered seeing his mother during a visit to Mimi 's , when her face was bleeding after being hit by Dykins . 
 Paul McCartney later stated that Julia living in sin with Dykins while she was still married was a point of social ostracization for Lennon , as it was often used as a " cheap shot " against him . Although Julia never divorced Alf , she was considered to be the common @-@ law wife of Dykins . She wanted Lennon to live with them both , but he was passed between the Stanley sisters and often ran away to Mimi 's , where she would open the door to find Lennon standing there , " his face covered in tears " . Julia was accused by the family of being frivolous and unreliable — she never enjoyed household chores — and was once seen sweeping the kitchen floor with a pair of knickers on her head . Her cooking methods were also haphazard , as she would mix things " like a mad scientist " , and even put tea " or anything else that came to hand " in a stew . A favourite joke would be to wear a pair of spectacles that had no glass in them , and then to scratch her eye through the empty frame . 
 Dykins later managed several bars in Liverpool , which allowed Julia to stay at home and look after their two daughters ( Julia and Jackie ) and Lennon , who often visited and stayed overnight , at 1 Blomfield Road , Liverpool . Lennon and McCartney would rehearse in the bathroom of the house where the acoustics " sounded like a recording studio " . Dykins used to give Lennon weekly pocket money ( one shilling ) for doing odd jobs , on top of the five shillings that Mimi gave him . In December 1965 , Dykins was killed in a car crash at the bottom of Penny Lane , but Lennon was not told about his death for months afterwards , as it was " not [ Stanley ] family business " . 
 = = = Julia and Jackie = = = 
 Julia had two daughters with Dykins : Julia Baird ( née Dykins - b . 5 March 1947 ) and Jacqueline ( Jackie ) Dykins ( b . 26 October 1949 ) . As Jackie was born prematurely , her mother visited the hospital every day to see her . When Lennon was 11 years old , he started to visit the Dykins ' house , and often stayed overnight . Baird would give up her bed to him , then share her sister 's bed . Baird remembered that after Lennon had visited them , her mother would often play a record called , My Son John , To Me You Are So Wonderful , " by some old crooner , and sit and listen to it " . [ Baird probably meant " My Son John " — sung by David Whitfield — which was released in 1956 ] . After Julia 's death , the two girls ( aged eleven and eight ) were sent to stay in Edinburgh at Aunt Mater 's and were only told two months later by Norman Birch ( Lennon 's uncle ) that their mother had died . The commercial success of the Beatles allowed Lennon to buy a 4 @-@ bedroomed house in Gateacre Park Drive , Liverpool , for Baird and Jackie to live in with Lennon 's Aunt Harriet and Birch . They had previously been made legal guardians of the two girls ; Dykins ' parentage had been disregarded as he had never legally married Julia . After Lennon 's death and Harriet died , Lennon 's wife , Yoko Ono , wanted to sell the house — as it was still in Lennon 's name — but she later gave it to the Salvation Army on 2 November 1993 , even though Lennon had once written a letter , stating : " I always thought of the house he 's in [ Birch ] as my contribution towards looking after Julia [ Baird ] and Jackie . I would prefer the girls to use it . " 
 Baird and Jackie later met their half @-@ sister , Victoria / Ingrid , when they were present at the ceremony to place a Blue Heritage plaque on Mimi 's house to commemorate the fact that Lennon had lived there . Stanley Parkes ( Lennon 's cousin ) was on the ladder fixing the plaque to the wall and said , " I think I can see Ingrid " [ walking towards the house ] . Baird and her sister were surprised , as it meant that Parkes had seen Ingrid before , even though Baird and Jackie never had . When all three finally met for the first time Baird was shocked that Ingrid did not look anything like the Stanley family , as she had " pale blue eyes and fair hair " . 
 = = Death = = 
 Julia visited Mimi 's house nearly every day , where they would chat over tea and cakes in the morning room or stand in the garden when it was warm . On the evening of 15 July 1958 , Nigel Walley went to visit Lennon and found Julia and Mimi talking by the front gate . Lennon was not there , as he was at the Blomfield Road house . Walley accompanied Julia to the bus stop further north along Menlove Avenue , with her telling jokes along the way . At about 9 : 30 , Walley left her to walk up Vale Road and she crossed Menlove Avenue to the central reservation between two traffic lanes , which was lined with hedges that covered disused tram tracks . Five seconds later , Walley heard " a loud thud " , and turned to see her body " flying through the air " — which landed about 100 feet ( 30 m ) from where she had been hit . He ran back to get Mimi and they waited for the ambulance , with Mimi crying hysterically . 
 Julia was struck and killed by a Standard Vanguard car , driven by an off @-@ duty constable , PC Eric Clague , who was a learner @-@ driver . Clague was acquitted of all charges and given a short suspension from duty . When Mimi heard the verdict she was so incensed that she shouted " Murderer ! " at Clague . Clague later left the police force and became a postman . 
 Lennon could not bring himself to look at his mother 's corpse when he was taken to the Sefton General Hospital , and was so distraught that he put his head on Mimi 's lap throughout the funeral service . Lennon refused to talk to Walley for months afterwards , and Walley felt that Lennon somehow held him responsible . Julia was buried in Allerton Cemetery , in Liverpool . Her gravesite was for some time unmarked , but it was later identified as " CE ( Church of England ) 38 @-@ 805 " . The graveyard 's location is approx . 1 @.@ 19 miles east of 1 Blomfield Road . Baird said that the Stanley family hoped to finally put a headstone on her mother 's grave , which she hoped " will be a private affair for the family and not for the public " . A headstone was subsequently placed on Julia 's grave ( replacing a wooden cross ) , with the words " Mummy , John , Victoria , Julia , Jackie " inscribed . 
 = = Effect on Lennon = = 
 Her death traumatised the teenage Lennon and , for the next two years , he drank heavily and frequently got into fights , consumed by a " blind rage " . It contributed to the emotional difficulties that haunted him for much of his life , but also served to draw him closer to McCartney , who had also lost his mother at an early age . Julia 's memory inspired songs such as the 1968 Beatles song " Julia " , with its dreamlike imagery of " hair of floating sky glimmering " , recalling Lennon 's boyhood memories of his mother . Lennon remarked that the song " was sort of a combination of Yoko [ Ono ] and my mother blended into one " . " Mother " and " My Mummy 's Dead " were both written under the influence of Arthur Janov 's " Primal Scream " therapy , and released on his solo album John Lennon / Plastic Ono Band in 1970 . Lennon 's first son , Julian , born in 1963 , was named after her . 
 = = Portrayals on film = = 
 She was portrayed by Christine Kavanagh in In His Life : The John Lennon Story ( 2000 ) , and by Anne @-@ Marie Duff in Nowhere Boy ( 2009 ) . 
 = Hurricane Sergio ( 2006 ) = 
 Hurricane Sergio was the third strongest Pacific hurricane in the month of November on record . The nineteenth named storm and eleventh hurricane of the 2006 Pacific hurricane season , Sergio developed from a tropical wave on November 13 about 460 miles ( 740 km ) south of Manzanillo , Mexico , and steadily intensified as it tracked southeastward . It reached peak winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) on November 15 , and subsequently began to weaken due to increased wind shear as it turned to the north . Sergio later turned to the west , remaining well off the coast of Mexico , and dissipated on November 20 about 320 miles ( 515 km ) west @-@ northwest of it originally formed . 
 Sergio produced light rainfall along the coast of Mexico , though its effects were minimal . The formation of Sergio marked the 2006 season as the busiest in 12 years and the first season in which more than one tropical storm formed in November . Sergio , in addition to being the strongest hurricane after November 1 , was also the longest @-@ lived Pacific tropical cyclone in November , lasting a total of seven days . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave crossed Central America and entered the eastern Pacific Ocean on November 7 . An area of convection along the wave tracked westward to the south of Central America and Mexico , and became more concentrated on November 12 while located about 400 miles ( 645 km ) south of Acapulco . Later that day , Dvorak classification began on the disturbance , and the convection continued to organize . Early on November 13 , the National Hurricane Center indicated the possibility of the system developing into a tropical depression . Thunderstorm activity briefly decreased , though late on November 13 the system acquired enough circulation and organized convection for it to be designated Tropical Depression Twenty @-@ One @-@ E while located about 460 miles ( 740 km ) south of Manzanillo , Mexico . Operationally , the depression was not upgraded until eleven hours later . 
 Initially , the tropical depression tracked to the northwest , and was forecast to peak as a 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) tropical storm while continuing on a northwest motion . Located within an area of weak wind shear , deep convection increased near the center , and banding features became more pronounced . <unk> flow aloft and a moist troposphere allowed the depression to intensity into Tropical Storm Sergio on November 14 . Shortly after becoming a tropical storm , Sergio turned to the southeast , believed to be due to the flow associated with a mid- to upper @-@ level trough to its northeast . It steadily intensified , and Sergio attained hurricane status on November 15 while located about 420 miles ( 675 km ) southwest of Acapulco . With a small , distinct eye located in the center of the deep convection , Sergio rapidly intensified to attain peak winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) about 6 hours after becoming a hurricane . 
 Upon reaching peak strength , forecasters at the National Hurricane Center predicted Hurricane Sergio to intensify further to reach winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) . Shortly after peaking , the hurricane turned to the north and gradually weakened as wind shear from an upper @-@ level trough to its northwest increased . By early on November 17 , the low @-@ cloud circulation became partially exposed on the west side of the deep convection , and it is estimated that Sergio weakened to a tropical storm later that day . A ridge to its north and northeast turned the storm to the northwest and later to the west as Sergio gradually weakened . Deep convection reformed near the center on November 18 , resulting in a slight increase in winds , though vertical shear quickly weakened it again . Later that day , the storm made its closest approach to land , about 225 miles ( 360 km ) southwest of Michoacán . Early on November 20 it degenerated into a tropical depression , and later that day Sergio dissipated about 360 miles ( 580 km ) southwest of Manzanillo , Mexico , or about 320 miles ( 515 km ) west @-@ northwest of where it originally formed . The remnants of Sergio continued westward for about a day before the minimal amount of convection diminished . 
 = = Impact and records = = 
 No tropical cyclone warnings or watches were issued in relation to Sergio . Several storm advisories indicated a slight threat to coastal regions of Mexico ; the National Hurricane Center assessed a 29 % probability of tropical storm @-@ force winds affecting Barra de Navidad in Jalisco . From November 16 and 17 , the outer rainbands of the hurricane dropped light precipitation along the Mexican coastline , peaking at 1 @.@ 97 inches ( 50 mm ) at Tierra Colorada in Guerrero . 
 Sergio contributed to November 2006 being the most active November since Pacific hurricane records began , based on using the accumulated cyclone energy index . This record later became tied with another season nine years later . After Rosa formed a few days before Sergio , November 2006 became the first since 1961 to have more than one storm in the month . The hurricane is currently the third strongest in the month , as well as the longest @-@ lasting . 
 = Roy of the Rovers = 
 Roy of the Rovers is a British comic strip about the life and times of a fictional footballer named Roy Race , who played for Melchester Rovers . The strip first appeared in the Tiger in 1954 , before giving its name to a weekly ( and later monthly ) comic magazine , published by IPC and Fleetway from 1976 until 1995 , in which it was the main feature . 
 The weekly strip ran until 1993 , following Roy 's playing career until its conclusion after he lost his left foot in a helicopter crash . When the monthly comic was launched later that year the focus switched to Roy 's son Rocky , who also played for Melchester . This publication was short @-@ lived , and folded after only 19 issues . The adventures of the Race family were subsequently featured in the monthly Match of the Day football magazine , in which father and son were reunited as manager and player respectively . These strips began in 1997 and continued until the magazine 's closure in May 2001 . 
 Football @-@ themed stories were a staple of British comics for boys from the 1950s onwards , and Roy of the Rovers was the most popular . To keep the strip exciting , Melchester was almost every year either competing for major honours or struggling against relegation to a lower division ; a normal , uneventful season of mid @-@ table mediocrity was unknown at Melchester Rovers . The strip followed the structure of the actual English football season , thus there were several months each year in summer when there was no league football . By far the most common summer storyline saw Melchester touring a fictional country in an exotic part of the world , often South America , where they would invariably be kidnapped and held to ransom . The average reader probably stayed with the comic regularly for only three or four years , therefore storylines were sometimes recycled ; during the first ten years of his playing career , Roy was kidnapped at least four times . Roy also made numerous appearances for England , depicted playing alongside actual players such as Malcolm Macdonald and Trevor Francis . 
 The stock media phrase " real ' Roy of the Rovers ' stuff " is often used by football writers , commentators and fans when describing displays of great skill , or surprising results that go against the odds , in reference to the dramatic storylines that were the strip 's trademark . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Roy of the Rovers first appeared on 11 September 1954 , as a weekly feature in the comic magazine Tiger , debuting on the front page of the first issue . After 22 years of continued popularity , the strip was judged successful enough to sustain its own weekly comic , the eponymous Roy of the Rovers , launched on 25 September 1976 . The comic ran for 851 issues , until 20 March 1993 , and included other football strips and features . At the peak of the comic 's success about 450 @,@ 000 copies were sold each week . There were also hardback annuals and holiday specials featuring a mix of reprinted and original content , and for a brief period , starting in 1986 , Roy of the Rovers was serialised in the now defunct Today newspaper . These were all @-@ new strips , focusing largely on the relationship between Roy and his wife Penny , rather than the action on the pitch . Between 1988 and 1993 , a Best of Roy of the Rovers monthly comic was published , reprinting older stories . 
 Following the closure of the weekly title in 1993 , the strip appeared in a relaunched monthly publication in September that year , with grittier storylines intended to attract teen and young adult fans who had read the weekly comic in their youth . Between January 1994 and January 1995 , the monthly strips were mirrored by a weekly edition in Shoot magazine , which had in the late 1980s published a parody called Ray of the Rangers . 
 The comic strip was resurrected in July 1997 , printed as short ( usually two @-@ page ) features in the BBC 's monthly Match of the Day magazine . These strips ran until the magazine 's demise in May 2001 . By then the strip 's wholesome tone , often espousing the virtues of fair play and strong moral character , was beginning to seem old @-@ fashioned . The editor of Roy of the Rovers comic , Barrie Tomlinson , has commented that " everyone seemed to be growing up a bit more quickly , and they wanted stories that were more realistic " . 
 There has been no new material since 2001 , but reprints of the strip have appeared online and in print . The Roy of the Rovers website has archived all of the Match of the Day years ' material , in addition to excerpts from other classic strips . In October 2007 , Setanta bought the original strips , which they featured on their web site . 
 The present rights holder , Egmont , published a 64 @-@ page " collectors edition " of the comic strip in April 2009 , gathering together a number of 1980 's era Roy of the Rovers stories in addition to other backup strips from the comic . Two Best of Roy of the Rovers books , featuring successive runs of strips from the 1980s and 1970s , were published in June 2008 and 2009 respectively . 
 = = Plot = = 
 For more information on the fictional career of the Race family , see Melchester Rovers 
 The story followed Roy Race , a striker for the fictional football team Melchester Rovers , based in a town of the same name in an unspecified part of England , where Roy lived with his family . In the first episode , a teenaged Roy and his best friend , Blackie Gray , signed for the Rovers after being spotted playing for a youth club team . Eight months later , Roy and Blackie made their first @-@ team debuts against <unk> Wanderers in a game that ended in a 3 – 3 draw , with Roy scoring twice . He soon became a star , leading the team to either the Football League title or a cup almost every season . In January 1975 he was made player @-@ manager , a position he retained for most of the next 20 years . Although the strip followed the Rovers through nearly 40 seasons , Roy did not age at the same rate and appeared to be at most in his late thirties by the time the weekly comic ended . This unrealistic longevity was never remarked upon by the weekly comic , although the monthly comic attempted to address the anomaly by explaining that more than one Roy Race had played for Melchester over the years . 
 Roy won a number of trophies during his career with Rovers , including nine league titles , eight FA Cups , three League Cups , three European Cups , one UEFA Cup , and four Cup Winners ' Cups , and he also made several appearances for England . He married club secretary Penny Laine at the end of the 1975 – 76 season , with whom he had three children : Roy Jr . ( later known as Rocky ) , Melinda , and Diana . Penny left Roy in the early 1980s , in a high @-@ profile storyline that was covered on national television news . The following year Roy was shot in his office by a mystery gunman , in an incident clearly mirroring the shooting of J. R. Ewing in the hit television series Dallas the previous year . Roy lay in a coma for several weeks . The culprit was eventually revealed to be Elton Blake , an actor who had been cast as Roy in a television series about the Rovers , but who blamed him for his dismissal . In early 1983 Roy swapped Melchester Rovers for ambitious London side Walford Rovers after a fallout with the Melchester directors , but his stint away was short @-@ lived and he was back at his spiritual home by the end of the year . In July 1986 eight members of the Rovers team were killed during a club tour of the fictional middle @-@ eastern country of Basran , when terrorists accidentally crashed a bomb @-@ laden car into the team bus . Roy escaped with a dislocated shoulder . Author Mick Collins has commented that " Even as youngsters , we knew that this certainly bordered on bad taste , and probably overstepped the mark . " 
 The final incident of Roy 's playing career came in the closing pages of the last weekly issue , in March 1993 , when he lost control of his helicopter and crashed into a field . Thus the weekly strip ended its 39 @-@ year unbroken run on a downbeat and unresolved cliffhanger , as Roy was taken into hospital while fans , the media and his family awaited news on his condition . The mystery of whether or not Roy had survived his crash was unresolved until the first issue of the new Roy of the Rovers Monthly in September 1993 , in which readers discovered that the accident had resulted in the amputation of his famous left foot , ending his playing career and resulting in his move to Italy as the manager of Serie A side AC Monza ( a fictional top @-@ level Italian club , rather than the real club of the same name ) . 
 Reconciling the continuity of the monthly strip with the stories that preceded and followed it presented difficulties , forcing the story 's writers to alter its history in a number of ways , a technique known as retroactive continuity . Significantly , the strip rewrote various parts of Melchester 's history , and shortened Roy Sr. ' s recorded playing career to a more realistic level . 
 By the time the strip ended in March 1995 Melchester were in dire straits , on the verge of bankruptcy , and their long @-@ term future far from certain . When the strip returned in Match of the Day magazine in May 1997 , much of the monthly comic 's new continuity was ignored , although the basic thread of the club having struggled against relegation and being severely in debt was continued . It was revealed in the first strip that in the intervening years , while Rovers had managed to survive the threat of bankruptcy , a bribery scandal had caused a mass exodus of players and eventual relegation to Division One . Rocky , meanwhile , was playing for fierce local rivals <unk> , after a bitter falling @-@ out with his father over a car accident in Italy in which his mother , Penny , had been killed . Roy , who had quit football as a result , was blamed by some ( including his son ) for the accident , even though he had no memory of it , and the precise circumstances surrounding the event were never resolved . 
 Roy was persuaded to rejoin Melchester as manager and part @-@ owner , backed by the unscrupulous Vinter brothers , and he arrived just in time to save the club from relegation . The following season , Roy and Rocky resolved their differences . Rocky rejoined Melchester , and the club was promoted back into the Premier League at the end of the year . When the magazine closed in 2001 , Rovers were attempting to achieve a league placing that would secure them UEFA Champions League football , giving them financial security . Although this storyline was never resolved , there was nevertheless a certain sense of closure as , shortly beforehand , Roy Sr. had wrested full control of the club from the <unk> , thus completing his 44 @-@ year progression from player to owner . 
 = = Recurring characteristics = = 
 Over the years , the strip became famous for its employment of certain types of storyline and stylistic storytelling devices . For example , despite the fast @-@ paced nature of a football match , exposition would be provided by members of the crowd apparently commenting to one another . Fans made lengthy comments in the short time it took the ball to travel through the air ; as the ball was struck towards the goal a member of the crowd might be seen saying " Racey 's had a shot ! " , followed by another responding " The ' keeper won 't make it ! " . Nonetheless , loyal readers would usually suspend disbelief , a characteristic later parodied by Viz magazine 's Billy the Fish , a fish with a human head who plays in goal for <unk> United . 
 In the interests of keeping the strip exciting , it seemed that no season for Melchester Rovers could ever consist of mid @-@ table obscurity . Almost every year , the club was either competing for the major honours at the top of the domestic and European game , or struggling against relegation to lower divisions . Often , such spells of good and bad fortune and form would directly succeed one another — a Rovers team that won the European Cup one year could find itself struggling to stay in Division One the next . 
 Storylines often centred on new signings who were unable to settle easily in the Melchester team , either because they refused to change their style of play and expected the Rovers to play around them , such as the <unk> tough defender Duncan McKay , or had personal characteristics that made it difficult for the other players to accept them , such as ex @-@ circus ball juggler Sammy Spangler . As the average reader probably stayed with the comic for only three or four years , many storylines were recycled . For instance , during the first ten years of his playing career Roy was kidnapped at least five times . 
 When playing foreign teams , particularly in the European club competitions , the opposition would often cynically employ overt gamesmanship or downright dirty tactics . Continental sides were considered to be " sneaky " : 
 If they went ahead , they didn 't try to extend their lead , like proper footballers , but defended , like blackguards and cowards . It was , Roy always believed , something of a character defect , probably caused by the pencil @-@ thin moustaches they wore , in order to distinguish themselves as foreign . 
 The strip followed the structure of the football season , thus there were several months each year when the Rovers were not playing football , but the strip needed to depict something more exciting than the players going on holiday and then reporting for pre @-@ season training . As a result , the players tended to spend their summers involved in activities such as competing in charity cricket tournaments , but by far the most common summer storyline saw the Rovers go on tour to a fictional country in an exotic part of the world , normally South America , where they would invariably be kidnapped and held to ransom . " Melchester played more pre @-@ season games at gunpoint deep in the jungle than they ever did in more mundane settings . " The summer would often also see Roy fending off lucrative offers to leave Melchester , as in 1978 , when the Sheik of Basran , an oil @-@ rich Middle @-@ Eastern state , offered him £ 1 million to coach the national team . 
 Especially during the 1980s , real @-@ life personalities often made appearances . Former Division One stars Bob Wilson and Emlyn Hughes were brought out of retirement to play for Melchester in 1985 , along with longtime fans of the strip Martin Kemp and Steve Norman , of the pop group Spandau Ballet . Geoff Boycott served for several years as Melchester 's chairman , and Sir Alf Ramsey had briefly taken over as manager of Melchester in 1982 , while Roy lay in his coma . Players such as Malcolm Macdonald and Trevor Francis would sometimes line up alongside Roy in England matches , despite the fact that the clubs they played for in real life were never featured in the strip . 
 The concept of TV pundits and <unk> making appearances was a later development . When Roy announced his resignation as Rovers manager in 1992 , he did so live on Sky Sports in front of shocked presenters Richard Keys and Andy Gray . 
 = = Creators = = 
 = = = Writers = = = 
 Roy was created by the author Frank S. Pepper , who had created the similar strip , Danny of the Dazzlers , but he only wrote four instalments of Roy of the Rovers , because of his commitments to another of his characters , Captain Condor . His role was taken by the strip 's first artist Joe Colquhoun , who used the pen @-@ name " Stewart Colwyn " . He was replaced after four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years by Derek <unk> , the editor of Tiger , who had commissioned the strip . In 1960 , in an attempt to whip up publicity , it was announced that the footballer Bobby Charlton had taken over as writer , although in reality it was still written by <unk> ( who claimed that he did consult with Charlton occasionally for story ideas ) . The longest @-@ serving writer of the strip was Tom Tully , who began in 1969 on an intermittent basis and then continuously from 1974 until the end of the weekly comic in 1993 . Ian Rimmer became the main writer for the strip during the Match of the Day years , until the magazine 's closure in May 2001 . 
 = = = Artists = = = 
 After Joe Colquhoun departed , he was succeeded first by Paul <unk> , then by Yvonne Hutton , who illustrated from 1967 to 1974 , before David <unk> took over in 1975 . Despite reportedly not being a football fan , he was responsible for one of the strip 's more definitive looks in its early ' 80s period . He was replaced in 1986 by former 2000 AD artist Mike White , who gave Roy a more muscular look and the strip a more modern feel . Barrie Mitchell took over in 1992 , with a style quite similar to White 's . A number of artists worked on the monthly comic , such as David Jukes , Sean <unk> and Garry Marshall , in contrast to the lengthy tenures of the weekly strip 's creative team . Tony Harding often illustrated Roy for the Roy of the Rovers annuals and also drew the Roy 's Action Replay strip that appeared in All Action Monthly in the late eighties ( Fleetway ) . Mitchell returned in 1997 as the sole artist of the Match of the Day strips for all four years . 
 Filmmakers Luke <unk> and Tom Atkinson , released a documentary called " Roy " in 2008 , featuring interviews with some of the key members of the Roy of the Rovers creative team . The film was shown at The End of the Pier International Film Festival in 2009 , where it won the prize for Best Documentary Short . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 The phrase " Roy of the Rovers " has become a trope familiar to generations of British football fans and sports commentators , used to describe a memorable sporting achievement such as winning against the odds , or an unexpected comeback . The Guardian newspaper of 10 April 1995 , for instance , described future England captain Alan Shearer as " the classic working class sporting hero ... everything legend demands an English centre @-@ forward should be ... As a striker he comes closer to fitting the Roy of the Rovers fantasy than anyone else lately admired by English crowds " . Shearer was at that time the leading goal @-@ scorer for " unfashionable " Blackburn Rovers F.C. , who were on the verge of winning the Premiership title . 
 Comparisons have been drawn between the fictional Roy Race and the captain of England 's 1966 World Cup winning team , Bobby Moore , whose playing career spanned a similar time @-@ scale to that of Roy 's . Moore 's death in 1993 , just days after the last edition of the Roy of the Rovers comic was published , produced a " literature of tribute " , framed around themes " remarkably similar to those at the center of the Roy Race fiction and ideology ... there was a clear sense of mourning for the loss of an age " . 
 Reading Roy of the Rovers and reflecting on the response to the death of sporting heroes such as Bobby Moore , demonstrates how children 's popular cultural experiences , and the recollections of them in later life , traverse the boundaries of , and fuse , the fictional and the real ... The world of representation in the comic strip is mobilized as an everyday trope , tapping into modes of thinking within the reality of football discourse ; and in turn , football discourse draws upon the narratives , conventions , and myths of football fictions . 
 = = Spin @-@ offs and merchandise = = 
 Roy of the Rovers Annuals were produced every year from 1958 until 1994 , and again in 2000 . A number of tie @-@ in books were also published , including a handful of paperback prose storybooks in 1977 and 1993 , and two football quiz books in 1978 and 1979 . Roy of the Rovers never made the leap from page to screen , although he did make an appearance on the BBC comedy sports quiz They Think It 's All Over in 1999 , in the form of a cardboard cut @-@ out . 
 A Roy of the Rovers computer game was released , on the Commodore 64 , Amstrad CPC and ZX Spectrum in 1988 . It was split into two parts : the first an adventure game , in which – taking the role of Roy Race – the player had to find and rescue the kidnapped Melchester team , before then playing the second part , which consisted of a charity match to raise funds for the club . The fewer players recovered before the match began , then the smaller the team who could take part . In the extreme , Roy would be the only player for Melchester . The game received mixed reactions ; the Spectrum version received 7 / 10 from Your Sinclair , but only 3 / 10 from Sinclair User . 
 A number of official Melchester Rovers <unk> teams were produced in the 1980s and 1990s . There was also an officially licensed board game in the 1980s , which saw players take on the role of Roy Race and manage the club . The Old Fashioned Football Shirt Company now makes officially licensed replica shirts . 
 In 1990 , " Roy Race " and footballer Gary Lineker released a single , " Europe United " , described in the comic as " a hot rocking heavy metal rap " , which failed to chart in the UK Top 40 . The confectionery company <unk> produced a pineapple @-@ flavoured " Roy of the Rovers " chew bar in the 1990s . 
 = = Collected editions = = 
 On 29 February 2008 it was announced that Titan Books had acquired worldwide book publishing rights to a range of Egmont 's comic strips , including Roy of the Rovers . The first of their compilations of Roy 's playing days , The Best of Roy of the Rovers : The 1980s was released in May 2008 and included the " Relegation " and " Who Shot Roy " story arcs . The Bumper Book of Roy of the Rovers was published in October 2008 , and reprinted strips , articles , short stories and features taken from Roy annuals dated from 1957 to 1971 . Two further titles were released in 2009 , The Best of the 1970s and The Second Bumper Book , and a third Best of , focusing on the World Cup , was released in 2010 . All five of the titles were edited and compiled by David Leach . 
 The trade paperbacks : 
 The Best of Roy of the Rovers : The 1980s ( 208 pages , June 2008 , ISBN 1 @-@ 84576 @-@ 948 @-@ 1 ) 
 The Best of Roy of the Rovers : The 1970s ( 208 pages , June 2009 , ISBN 1 @-@ 84856 @-@ 024 @-@ 9 ) 
 Roy of the Rovers : World Cup Special ( 208 pages , June 2010 , ISBN 1 @-@ 84856 @-@ 671 @-@ 9 ) 
 The hardcovers : 
 The Bumper Book of Roy of the Rovers ( 112 pages , October 2008 , ISBN 1 @-@ 84576 @-@ 958 @-@ 9 ) 
 The Second Bumper Book of Roy of the Rovers ( 112 pages , October 2009 , ISBN 1 @-@ 84856 @-@ 443 @-@ 0 ) 
 = The Bart Wants What It Wants = 
 " The Bart Wants What it Wants " is the eleventh episode of The Simpsons ' thirteenth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 17 , 2002 . In the episode , Bart befriends Rainier Wolfcastle 's daughter , Greta . While Greta falls in love with him , Bart only accompanies her because she owns a lot of entertaining things . 
 " The Bart Wants What it Wants " was written by John Frink and Don Payne while Michael Polcino served as director . Although the episode 's first draft was written by Frink and Payne , the idea for the episode was pitched by staff writer Matt Selman . Because the Simpsons visit Toronto in the episode , the Fox network wanted to promote it by having the city of Toronto declare February 17 " The Simpsons day " , and award the Simpsons family a key to the city . Because the city does not allow for @-@ profit companies to receive a key , the request was turned down . 
 " The Bart Wants What it Wants " also features guest stars Reese Witherspoon as Greta and Wolfgang Puck as himself . It also features references to Scrabble , Seinfeld and Whassup ? , an advertisement campaign for Budweiser beer . In its original broadcast , the episode was seen by approximately 6 @.@ 4 million viewers , finishing in 27th place in the ratings the week it aired . Following its broadcast , the episode received mixed reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At the beginning of the episode , the Simpsons are seen in their car being chased by Olympic administrators in a helicopter . It turns out that Homer has stolen the Olympic torch because the television broadcast of the Olympics preempts his favorite shows once again . When Marge finally gives the torch to the administrators , the sight of its flame causes them to crash ( The administrators survive the crash , but the Olympic flame is gone ) . On their way home , the family go to a private school @-@ held fair , where Bart meets Greta , Rainier Wolfcastle 's daughter . Greta develops a crush on the oblivious Bart , and the whole family begins enjoying the royal treatment her father , Rainier , provides them . However , Lisa discovers Bart not taking Greta seriously , after skipping her school dance to watch Principal Skinner bomb at an open mic comedy night . Upon Lisa 's advice , Bart breaks up with Greta , who does not take it well . 
 After losing her , Bart discovers that he actually wanted to be with Greta and goes to her house to ask her to come back to him . To his surprise , Greta has already started a new relationship with Milhouse . Greta goes to Canada with Milhouse during her father 's movie shooting , and Bart follows her to Toronto with his family . At the movie set , Bart confronts Milhouse and they get into a fight , crashing into sets and ruining props . They end up in front of Greta , demanding her to choose between them , and Greta turns both boys down due to loss of interest in the two . The episode ends with the boys reconciling and joining Canada 's basketball team . 
 = = Production = = 
 " The Bart Wants What It Wants " was directed by Michael Polcino and written by John Frink and Don Payne . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on February 17 , 2002 . Although the episode was written by Frink and Payne , the idea for the episode was conceived by staff writer Matt Selman , who pitched an episode in which Bart likes a girl because she has " awesome things " , while the girl likes him for his personality . Because the Simpsons visit Toronto in the episode , the Fox network decided to promote it as the episode 's main focus , even though Canada is not mentioned before the third act . To help promote the episode , Fox requested that the city of Toronto declare February 17 , 2002 , the day the episode first aired , to be " The Simpsons Day " and award the Simpson family a key to the city . However , the request was turned down because the city does not allow for @-@ profit companies to receive a key . According to executive producer and current showrunner Al Jean , Fox 's request " upset " Canada , and a " sternly worded " editorial in The Toronto Star criticized the network 's ways of promoting the episode . The newspaper also credited Canadian The Simpsons staff writers Joel H. Cohen and Tim Long for pitching the episode , but this was refuted in the episode 's DVD commentary . While " The Bart Wants What It Wants " features the Simpsons ' first travel to Canada , the family would return in two later episodes : season sixteen 's " Midnight Rx " , where Homer and Grampa visited Winnipeg so they could smuggle cheap medication ; and season 21 's " Boy Meets Curl " , where Marge and Homer travel to Vancouver , so they can participate in the 2010 Winter Olympics . 
 The beginning of the episode shows the Simpsons being chased by Olympic employees . The scene was included because the staff knew that the episode would air during the 2002 Winter Olympics . In order to avoid a lawsuit from the International Olympic Committee , the animators slightly altered the design of the Olympic rings , which can be seen on Olympic employees ' helicopters . At one point in the episode , the Simpsons visit the Springfield Preparatory School fair , where Lisa notices how much more developed the school is in comparison to Springfield Elementary School . Jealous , Springfield Elementary principal Skinner breaks in and steals some school equipment . Shocked , Lisa asks Skinner why he stole the equipment , to which he replies " welcome to Dick Cheney 's America " . Originally , he would say " welcome to George W. Bush 's America " , but because none of the series ' regular cast members could do an impression of him , and because the staff found it to be in bad taste , they decided to change it . When Lisa scolds Bart for being oblivious to Greta 's feelings , he replies " Hey , I didn 't lead her on . I always played it light and breezy . " The line was written by Frink and , according to Selman , it became very popular with the staff writers , having " stayed with [ them ] for years " . The song that plays while the Simpsons visit the <unk> in Toronto is " Take Off " by the fictional comedy duo Bob and Doug McKenzie , the chorus of which was sung by Geddy Lee , the lead vocalist and bassist of the Canadian rock band Rush . The episode features American actress Reese Witherspoon as Rainier Wolfcastle 's daughter , Greta . Jean stated that Witherspoon was " brilliant " , and noted that she was " very young @-@ looking " . The episode also features Austrian @-@ American celebrity chef Wolfgang Puck as himself . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When first meeting Greta , Milhouse greets her by saying Whassup ? . The scene is a reference to an advertisement campaign for the American Budweiser beer , in which several characters are seen calling each other and saying " Whassup ? " . 
 In Moe 's bar , Wolfcastle receives several questions from bar customers , prompting him to send in his " authorized look @-@ alike " to give answers . In the DVD commentary for the episode , Jean stated that the scene was written at a time when celebrity look @-@ alikes were making " excellent livings " . 
 At one point in the episode , Bart and Greta are seen playing Scrabble , a word game manufactured by Hasbro . The music cue that plays before and after Skinner 's comedy routine is based on the intro music from the American television sitcom Seinfeld . 
 = = Release = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " The Bart Wants What It Wants " received a 6 @.@ 1 rating , according to Nielsen Media Research , translating to approximately 6 @.@ 4 million viewers . The episode finished in 27th place in the ratings for the week of February 11 @-@ 17 , 2002 , making it the third most watched program on the network . Later that year , the episode was nominated for a Writers Guild of America Award in the Animation category , but it ultimately lost to the Futurama episode " <unk> " . On August 24 , 2010 , " The Bart Wants What It Wants " was released as part of The Simpsons : The Complete Thirteenth Season DVD and Blu @-@ ray set . Al Jean , Matt Selman , Tim Long , John Frink , Don Payne , Tom Gammill , Max Pross , Joel H. Cohen , Pamela Hayden , Michael Polcino , Steven Dean Moore and Bill Freiberger participated in the audio commentary of the episode . 
 Following its broadcast , " The Bart Wants What It Wants " received mixed reviews from critics . Giving the episode a positive review , Ben Rayner of the Toronto Star wrote , " Fortunately , the episode is on par with this season 's best , boasting a reasonably <unk> plotline and , where the main romantic storyline is concerned , a touch of the childlike sweetness Simpsons writers have brought to previous ' crush ' episodes . " Casey Broadwater of Blu @-@ ray.com gave a positive review as well , describing it as a " strong character @-@ centric episode . " Although he enjoyed most episodes of the thirteenth season , Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide wrote that " Half @-@ Decent Proposal " and " The Bart Wants What It Wants " " forces [ him ] to rethink that opinion . " He continued , " Like ' Proposal ' , ' Wants ' isn ’ t a bad program , but it feels stale and rehashed . " He particularly disliked a joke about poor mileage , which he stated was " identical " to a gag from an earlier episode . He concluded his review by writing that the episode is " mediocre [ ... ] at best . " 
 Nate Boss of Project @-@ Blu wrote that , while it featured Rainier Wolfcastle , which he considered to be " one of the funniest characters in Simpsons lore , " the episode " doesn 't tread ground that hasn 't been tread a few times before . " He continued , " Throw in Canada , and a few Mountie jokes , and bam , you have an episode . " 411Mania 's Ron Martin also found it to be unoriginal , describing the episode as a " yearly episode just with different tempters each time . " Hannah Sung , also of the Toronto Star , felt the episode was disappointing , writing that it " wasn 't entirely bad , but the payoff didn 't match the hype " . She said that the third act in the city of Toronto was a disappointment and " really just a sloppy amalgamation of every Canadian joke we 've ever been told by Americans that lose their punch after the millionth time . " 
 = Cryptograms ( album ) = 
 Cryptograms is the second album from Atlanta , Georgia @-@ based indie rock group Deerhunter , released through Kranky Records on January 29 , 2007 on CD and vinyl . Following the 2005 release of its first full @-@ length album Turn It Up Faggot , Deerhunter began recording material for its next record at Rare Book Room studio in New York . This initial recording session failed , due to the physical and mental state of lead singer Bradford Cox , as well as malfunctioning equipment in the studio . The band returned to Atlanta , only giving recording a second try after encouragement from members of the band Liars . The final version of Cryptograms was recorded in two separate day @-@ long sessions , months apart , resulting in two musically distinct parts — the first includes more ambient music while the second contains more pop music elements . Cox sang most of the record 's lyrics in a stream @-@ of @-@ consciousness manner ; they include themes of death , companionship , and Cox 's experiences with his genetic disorder Marfan syndrome . Cryptograms was generally well received by critics , and several publications placed the album on their lists of the top albums of 2007 . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Deerhunter first attempted to record their second album in 2005 with folk musician Samara <unk> at Rare Book Room studios in New York . This recording session failed , due in part to the physical and mental state of lead singer Bradford Cox , who had influenza and walking pneumonia at the time . The group was also working with malfunctioning equipment , including an out @-@ of @-@ tune piano and an uncalibrated tape recorder . Cox later described the results of these sessions as sounding like " if you listen to Loveless on mushrooms , and I mean that in not a complimentary way " . In an interview with Pitchfork Media , Cox said that the music was " on a scratched CD @-@ R under my bed " , which " nobody will ever hear " . These tracks were later made available , in mixtape form , on the Deerhunter blog . 
 Following the failed session Deerhunter returned to Atlanta . The group became acquainted with punk band Liars , who encouraged them to give recording a second try . For their second attempt , Deerhunter returned to the same rural Georgia studio in which they had recorded their debut album Turn It Up Faggot . This time successful , the album was recorded in two parts : the first half was recorded over one day @-@ long session , completely filling the reel of tape the band had brought with them . The last song of this recording session , " Red Ink " , ends with the tape spinning off the reel . The second half , recorded months later over a single day in November , begins with the song " Spring Hall Convert " . During this recording session Cox had the flu , and his congestion caused his voice on the album 's pop tracks to sound " really weird [ … ] I always thought I would go back and redo them , but we never did . " 
 Cryptograms was followed four months later by a four @-@ track extended play , Fluorescent Grey , which was recorded while Cryptograms was being mixed . Cox indicated that each new track was worthy of being a single ; one music critic characterized the EP as being less " dreamy " than Cryptograms . When Cryptograms was released on vinyl as a double album , the Fluorescent Grey tracks took up the fourth side . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Cryptograms is more " subdued and introverted " musically , according to Cox , than Deerhunter 's first release Turn It Up Faggot . Cox has shown disdain for that record in interviews , saying it " sounds like 2002 — angry , post @-@ hardcore dance punk . We were really young and angry . " In contrast , Deerhunter 's new album is " not the punk attitude " characteristic of Turn It Up Faggot . While Cox does not consider Cryptograms a " reaction " to its predecessor , he noted in an interview with Stylus Magazine that the group 's new record " developed out of different circumstances , altogether . " 
 Deerhunter 's two recording sessions produced two halves of the album with distinct musical styles . The first half of the album is more ambient in style and includes four ambient instrumental tracks . With the song " Providence " , the band aimed to create a feeling of solitude . The idea for the song came about when , while in Providence , Rhode Island during a 2005 tour , Cox had an argument with other members of the band . Having left his bandmates to cool off , Cox " walked around Providence at dusk " feeling " totally alone " , while admiring his " meditative " surroundings . In the instrumental track " Red Ink " , Cox and drummer Moses Archuleta worked to create an atmosphere in which the listener is dreaming he or she is dead and the experience of death feels like reality . 
 The second part of the album , which begins with " Spring Hall Convert " , contains more elements of psychedelic and pop music . In an interview with L.A. Record , Archuleta remarked that the band often received letters from fans who had listened to their music while stoned . He noted the negative connotations that come with being called a " psychedelic " band , and considered the group to be " pretty clean … [ and ] sober " in contrast , adding , " That ’ s funny that that ’ s people ’ s idea of what we ’ re into . " " Spring Hall Convert " originates from a demo Cox first recorded in October 1998 when he was sixteen . On the Deerhunter blog , Cox wrote of two girls he knew from his school as one day being " bathed in this golden spring light in the hallway " . He described himself feeling as close to them as if they were his sisters . The same day he recorded " Spring Hall Convert " on a karaoke machine ; Cox wanted the song to reflect the " acid trip " he experienced seeing his friends in this light . He calls the song 's drum track characteristic of his " <unk> " at the time , adding that " <unk> was [ also ] a factor . " The lyrics of the track reflect Cox 's experiences with his genetic disorder Marfan syndrome . As a teenager he underwent " extensive " surgeries for his chest , ribs , and back . The lyrics reflect the experience of someone moving in and out of consciousness during chemotherapy , while missing their friends and memories of a normal life . The original lyrics of the song written in 1998 were not changed when the track was re @-@ recorded for Cryptograms . 
 In " Octet " , Cox sings " I was the corpse that spiraled out into phantom hallways " . The imagery of this song was inspired by the cover art of the Grove paperback edition of the Dennis Cooper novel Closer . In the album ’ s closing track , " Heatherwood " , Cox tells of the house he was born in , where he believes he will return to die . " Strange Lights " is a song about " companionship , and facing uncertainty with someone " . The song was written by guitarist Lockett Pundt , and is based on a dream he had in which himself , Cox , and a third person " walked into the sun together , knowing it was going to kill us " , as described by Cox . The idea for the song " Lake Somerset " came from a trip Cox took to the zoo while hung over , during which he saw a turtle eating carrots . " It was cool and adorable … It had this cute neck and was very small . It chewed slowly . " When video producer James Sumner approached the band to make a music video for " Lake Somerset " , Cox told Sumner he " wanted a video of a turtle eating a piece of pizza . " Several days later , Sumner posted his video to YouTube ; it consists of a man in a turtle suit eating pizza for four straight minutes . Cox has said that the band 's greatest achievement with Cryptograms was " evoking a feeling of someone who 's woken up after being strung out one too many nights … It 's the feeling of being lovesick and very spaced @-@ out . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Cryptograms received positive reviews from music critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 77 , based on 17 reviews , indicating " Generally Favorable Reviews " . 
 Pitchfork Media awarded the album the publication 's " Best New Music " accolade , and later placed it fourteenth on a list of the fifty best albums of 2007 . Pitchfork staff writer Marc Hogan wrote that Cryptograms " is alternately murky ... ethereal , amorphous and incisive " , calling the second half of the album " vastly more accessible " than the first . Mike Diver of Drowned in Sound found the album 's two halves " absolutely coherent ; the sequencing allows the listener space to breathe at the most opportune moments , and its leaps from ambiance into adrenaline @-@ soaked enthusiasm ... are worthy of celebration . " Tiny Mix Tapes 's Paul Haney enjoyed the " psych @-@ crazed pop " found in the second half of Cryptograms , citing " Spring Hall Convert " , " Heatherwood " , and " Strange Lights " as exemplary tracks . Nick Sylvester of The Phoenix considered the first half of the album to be irregular in style and quality , but found that this gave the transition between its two halves " a black @-@ and @-@ white @-@ to @-@ Technicolor moment ( or TV to HDTV , if you prefer ) : " Spring Hall Convert " combines Deerhunter 's come @-@ up and come @-@ down into the most uplifting rock song I 've heard in a while , an explosion of gritty Velvet <unk> and swirling vocal harmonies . " 
 The first half of Cryptograms was called " the problem child " by Kevin Elliott of Stylus Magazine , characterizing this child as having been " medicated at a young age to subdue constant anxiety and the fear of death , overly mired in thoughts of regret and anguish , overwhelmed with ideas and insight . " Mike Schiller of PopMatters found that because the second half of Cryptograms " <unk> [ s ] on examples of Deerhunter 's songcraft , which is actually somewhat average " , the use of delay effects " mask [ s ] whatever deficiencies in musicianship Deerhunter might choose to hide " . He believes the potential seen in the first half of the album is lost in the second . Allmusic writer Marisa Brown felt the band 's ambient music is used to the extent that it becomes " commonplace , despite its avant @-@ garde leanings . " The writer found that when Deerhunter " aims for the provocative and the esoteric " , the band often " overreach [ es ] and end [ s ] up hitting something much more ordinary , predictably " experimental " … in a genre that 's supposed to be anything but . " Dom <unk> of Cokemachineglow stated that all of Cryptograms " sounds , as a whole , too coherently cold " , the tracks " Providence " and " Heatherwood " being exceptions . 
 The album placed high on lists of the best albums of 2007 of several publications , earning spots in the top twenty with Tiny Mix Tapes , The Phoenix , and Drowned in Sound . An article by Pitchfork Media gave musicians the opportunity to publicize their favorite records from 2007 . Cryptograms received praise from Ed Droste of Grizzly Bear , ranking the album as his third favorite of 2007 . Klaxons 's James Righton and Black Lips 's Cole Alexander placed the album on their own top tens as well . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Music written by Moses Archuleta , Bradford Cox , Josh <unk> , Colin Mee and Lockett Pundt , except where noted . Lyrics by Bradford Cox . 
 " Intro " – 2 : 50 
 " Cryptograms " – 4 : 17 
 " White Ink " – 4 : 59 
 " Lake Somerset " – 3 : 49 
 " Providence " – 4 : 08 
 " Octet " – 7 : 50 
 " Red Ink " – 3 : 40 
 " Spring Hall Convert " – 4 : 29 
 " Strange Lights " – 3 : 38 ( music by Lockett Pundt ) 
 " Hazel St. " – 3 : 48 
 " Tape Hiss Orchid " – 1 : 12 
 " Heatherwood " – 3 : 37 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Deerhunter 
 Moses Archuleta — synth / pads , drums , electronics , treatments 
 Bradford Cox — vocals , electronics , tapes , drum , acoustic slide guitar , bell set , accordion , electric guitar 
 Josh <unk> — tremolo bass , bass guitar , reverse guitar , vocals 
 Colin Mee — guitar , tapes , electric guitar 
 Lockett Pundt — synth bells , guitar , acoustic slide guitar , hammond organ , vocals 
 Production 
 Susan Archie — layout design 
 Chris Bishop — production , engineering 
 Jennifer Munson — mastering 
 L. Somerset — author 
 Nicolas <unk> — mixing 
 = Fred VanVleet = 
 Fred VanVleet ( born February 25 , 1994 ) is an American professional basketball player for the Toronto Raptors of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) . At Auburn High School in Rockford , Illinois , he was an All @-@ State player who was mostly recruited by mid @-@ major basketball programs . In college , he has contributed to a resurgence of Wichita State Shockers basketball that included a final four run in the 2013 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament by the 2012 – 13 Shocker team as a freshman and an undefeated regular season by the 2013 – 14 team as a sophomore . By his sophomore year , he was on midseason watchlists for most major awards . He was named as a 2014 NCAA Men 's Basketball All @-@ American by a variety of media outlets . As a junior for the 2014 – 15 Shockers , he was an All @-@ Missouri Valley Conference first team selection and received All @-@ American honorable mention recognition from the Associated Press . He is the Wichita State career assists leader . He was named Missouri Valley Conference Men 's Basketball Player of the Year as both a sophomore and a senior . 
 = = High school career = = 
 VanVleet played for Auburn High School in Rockford , Illinois , where he was an All @-@ State first team selection by the Chicago Sun @-@ Times ( Class 4A ) , Associated Press ( Class 4A ) , and Chicago Tribune as a senior in 2012 . In 2012 , VanVleet helped lead Auburn to a 22 @-@ game winning streak which resulted in the school 's first Illinois High School Association ( IHSA ) final four since 1975 . He led the Knights to a 3rd @-@ place finish in the IHSA state tournament . 
 Van Vleet remained loyal to his local Rockford Amateur Athletic Union ( AAU ) club team rather than accept offers to more high profile teams in Chicago . Van Vleet did not feel it would make a difference in his recruiting : " As long as you 're leading whoever you 're playing with , the coaches are going to see that . If they see you competing and winning with guys maybe I shouldn 't be winning with , that 's maybe even an advantage for me . " He received basketball scholarship offers from Colorado State , Northern Illinois , Southern Illinois , Drake , Detroit and Kent State . His stepfather felt that he was being overlooked by many Chicago metropolitan area schools because of his decision not to join a Chicago AAU team . He cut his list down to Kent State , Northern Illinois and Wichita State . When he accepted an offer to play for Wichita State , he became the only member of the national class of 2012 Rivals.com top 150 to attend a Missouri Valley Conference school . 
 = = College career = = 
 = = = Freshman year = = = 
 As a freshman , VanVleet contributed double digit scoring twice ( versus Gonzaga and Ohio State ) in the 2013 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament from off the bench as the 2012 – 13 Shockers team reached the final four . Against Gonzaga , his 13 points included basket with 1 : 28 remaining that helped the Shockers secure only the fifth sweet sixteen appearance by a number 9 seed since the tournament went to 64 teams in 1985 . His 12 points against Ohio State included a late basket that helped the Shockers become the fifth team with a seeding higher than eight to make it to the final four since 1979 when seeding began . 
 = = = Sophomore year = = = 
 He broke out as a sophomore , as expected . On January 8 , he posted 10 assists against Illinois State . On January 23 , 2014 , he was selected to the 23 @-@ man Oscar Robertson Award midseason watchlist by the United States Basketball Writers Association . On February 13 , he was named one of the 30 finalists for Naismith College Player of the Year . On February 17 , <unk> was selected as one of 23 finalists for the Bob Cousy Award . When the Rockford native returned to the Chicago metropolitan area on February 19 to lead Wichita State against Loyola , he went 6 @-@ for @-@ 6 from the field and 10 @-@ for @-@ 10 on his free throw attempts for a game @-@ high 22 points and added 8 rebounds and 6 assists to help Wichita State raise its record to 28 – 0 . On February 28 , he was named one of the 10 semi @-@ finalists for the Naismith Award . 
 VanVleet helped lead the 2013 – 14 team to the first 31 – 0 regular season in NCAA Division I men 's basketball history . As a result , he was named to the Missouri Valley Conference All @-@ Conference first team and selected as the Missouri Valley Conference Men 's Basketball Player of the Year . He was also selected to the 2014 Missouri Valley Conference Most @-@ Improved Team . Following the 2014 Missouri Valley Conference Men 's Basketball Tournament , VanVleet was a 2014 NCAA Men 's Basketball All @-@ American second team selection by Sports Illustrated and Bleacher Report , third @-@ team selection by the Sporting News and the NABC . He earned honorable mention recognition from the Associated Press . On March 11 VanVleet was named to the all @-@ District VI ( IA , MO , KS , OK , NE , ND , SD ) team by the United States Basketball Writers Association ( USBWA ) . VanVleet was listed on the National Association of Basketball Coaches Division I All ‐ District 16 first team on March 12 . VanVleet was named as one of six finalists for the Cousy Award ( along with Kyle Anderson , Aaron Craft , Tyler Ennis , Shabazz Napier and Marcus Paige ) . Following his sophomore season , he delivered the commencement address at his high school alma mater and became a highly demanded public speaker . 
 = = = Junior year = = = 
 VanVleet was Preseason All @-@ American first team selection by USA Today , Blue Ribbon College Basketball Yearbook , Bleacher Report , CBSSports.com , Sports Illustrated , and Associated Press . He was a second team selection by Athlon Sports , SB Nation , and <unk> In its preseason top 100 player ranking , VanVleet was listed at number 5 by ESPN . VanVleet was named to the 36 @-@ man Bob Cousy Award Preseason Watch List . He was also listed as a John R. Wooden Award Preseason Top 50 candidate and a Oscar Robertson Trophy Watch List selection . VanVleet was also included in the early December Naismith Award top 50 watch list . 
 On November 14 VanVleet tallied 7 steals in the opener against New Mexico State , which tied a school record . On December 3 , against # 25 Utah VanVleet , helped Wichita State recover from a 9 @-@ point deficit in the final 2 : 45 of regulation with 8 points ( including two three @-@ point shots in the final 1 : 15 ) and an assist on a three @-@ point shot , but with 7 seconds remaining in overtime and Wichita trailing by one , he missed the front end of a one and one . In his return visit to Chicago and the Gentile Center to play Loyola on January 11 , he again was perfect from the field with a 5 @-@ for @-@ 5 performance and added a career @-@ high tying 10 assists ( as well as 6 rebounds and 3 steals ) for his first career double @-@ double . VanVleet , however , snapped his perfect streak of 20 free throws made in his home state with a 3 @-@ for @-@ 4 performance . In the rematch against Loyola on January 28 , VanVleet posted a career @-@ high 27 points . On February 7 , VanVleet posted the first triple double for Wichita State Shockers men 's basketball in 43 years with a 10 @-@ point 10 @-@ rebound 11 @-@ assist 4 @-@ steal performance against Missouri State . On February 16 , VanVleet was Missouri Valley Conference Co @-@ Player of the Week ( with Seth Tuttle ) . On February 26 , VanVleet broke the all @-@ time Wichita State career assist record against Evansville with 431 assists , surpassing Warren Armstrong who had 429 and <unk> Murry who had 430 . VanVleet was one of 17 finalists for the Cousy Award . The Shockers defeated Northern Iowa on February 28 to win the Missouri Valley Conference regular season title . In the opening game of the 2015 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament for the Shockers , VanVleet matched a career high with 27 points against Indiana . He finished the tournament with 17 @-@ point and 25 @-@ point performances against # 2 @-@ seeded Kansas and # 3 @-@ seeded Notre Dame , respectively . 
 VanVleet was named an All @-@ MVC first team selection following the regular season . He was also recognized by the Associated Press as an honorable mention selection for its All @-@ America team . 
 = = = Senior year = = = 
 VanVleet was a selection to the 20 @-@ man Bob Cousy Award preseason watchlist , and the 30 @-@ man Lute Olson Award preseason watchlist . He was a second team selection to the Sporting News , Sports Illustrated and Athlon Sports preseason All @-@ American teams . He was a third team selection to the CBS Sports , USA Today and NBC Sports preseason All @-@ American teams . Lindy 's Sports did not name an All @-@ America team , but did rank all college basketball players by position and presented a top 25 list at each position . It included VanVleet as its second best point guard . In preseason top 100 player rankings Van Vleet was ranked 14 by ESPN and 17 by NBC Sports . He made the initial 50 @-@ man John R. Wooden Award watch list on November 17 . On December 2 , VanVleet earned recognition on the 50 @-@ man Naismith College Player of the Year watchlist and 33 @-@ man Robertson Trophy watchlists . 
 VanVleet , who was dealing with hamstring issues , rolled his right ankle and saw only 3 minutes of action in the season opener against the Charleston Southern Buccaneers on November 13 . Although he played in the next game against Tulsa , he aggravated his hamstring in the game and was expected to miss the next few games . Without a healthy VanVleet , <unk> State fell to two games below .500 for the first time since the 2008 – 09 Shockers team and endured their first three @-@ game losing streak since VanVleet was coming off the bench as a freshman for the 2012 – 13 Shockers as well as the worst start to a season ( 2 – 4 ) since the 2007 – 08 team . VanVleet returned to the lineup on December 5 against St. Louis to stop the losing streak . His 13 @.@ 5 points , 5 @.@ 0 assists and 4 @.@ 0 rebounds averages in wins on December 9 over UNLV and on December 12 win over # 25 Utah earned him Missouri Valley Player of the Week honors on December 14 . He again earned Player of the Week honors on January 11 when he led the Shockers to victories over conference co @-@ leading Evansville on January 6 and Southern Illinois on January 9 with 11 @.@ 0 points , 8 @.@ 5 rebounds , 7 @.@ 5 assists and 2 @.@ 5 steals averages . His 12 rebounds against Southern Illinois was a career high . VanVleet was named to the January 25 20 @-@ man Oscar Robertson Trophy midseason watch list . On January 31 , VanVleet made all 15 of his free throw attempts on his way to a career high 32 points against Evansville . The following day , he earned his third MVC Player of the Week honor . On February 3 in the 1500th victory in Wichita State Shockers men 's basketball history and in head coach Gregg Marshall 's school record @-@ setting 221st victory , VanVleet notched a double @-@ double with 12 points and a career high @-@ tying 11 assists against Southern Illinois . He was named to the 35 @-@ man midseason watchlist for the Naismith Trophy on February 11 . VanVleet was included in the Wooden Award Late season Top 20 Watch List on February 12 . In the 2016 NCAA Men 's Division I Basketball Tournament , VanVleet led the team to victories over Vanderbilt and Arizona . Against Vanderbilt in the First Four round , he and fellow senior Ron Baker led an 11 – 0 run to break a 30 – 30 tie on March 15 . The pair scored all 11 points in the run and tied with a game @-@ high 14 points . On March 17 , VanVleet and Baker led 11 @-@ seed Wichita State to a victory over 6 @-@ seed and AP Poll 17th @-@ ranked Arizona . VanVleet posted a game @-@ high 16 points , 5 steals and 4 rebounds . 
 Following the regular season , VanVleet was named to the Missouri Valley Conference all @-@ league first team ( for the third consecutive season ) and the MVC Larry Bird Trophy Player of the Year for the second time in three years . VanVleet was also an AP All @-@ America honorable mention . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 VanVleet was not selected in the 2016 NBA draft after declining two offers to agree to play in the NBA Development League at $ 20 @,@ 000 for two years by teams interested in drafting him in the second round . VanVleet signed to play in the 2016 NBA Summer League with the Toronto Raptors with the expectation that he will be in the Raptors ' training camp . His summer league contract had a guarantee of three game appearances . On July 18 , he signed a multi @-@ year deal with the Raptors . At the time of his signing , the Raptors had 14 players entering training camp on guaranteed contracts , including point guards Kyle Lowry , Cory Joseph , and Delon Wright . 
 = = National team career = = 
 VanVleet was among the 22 players selected to try out for the 12 @-@ man Team USA at the 2015 Pan American Games . He was among the 16 finalists for the team , but he did not make the final 12 @-@ man team . 
 = = Personal = = 
 VanVleet is the son of Fred Manning , who was shot dead in 1999 . Manning had played basketball at Guilford High School in Rockford . VanVleet 's mother is named Susan . VanVleet has a brother named Darnell . VanVleet 's stepfather is Joe Danforth . 
 He is a sociology major at Wichita State . 
 = Nature = 
 Nature , in the broadest sense , is the natural , physical , or material world or universe . " Nature " can refer to the phenomena of the physical world , and also to life in general . The study of nature is a large part of science . Although humans are part of nature , human activity is often understood as a separate category from other natural phenomena . 
 The word nature is derived from the Latin word natura , or " essential qualities , innate disposition " , and in ancient times , literally meant " birth " . Natura is a Latin translation of the Greek word <unk> ( <unk> ) , which originally related to the intrinsic characteristics that plants , animals , and other features of the world develop of their own accord . The concept of nature as a whole , the physical universe , is one of several expansions of the original notion ; it began with certain core applications of the word <unk> by pre @-@ Socratic philosophers , and has steadily gained currency ever since . This usage continued during the advent of modern scientific method in the last several centuries . 
 Within the various uses of the word today , " nature " often refers to geology and wildlife . Nature can refer to the general realm of living plants and animals , and in some cases to the processes associated with inanimate objects – the way that particular types of things exist and change of their own accord , such as the weather and geology of the Earth . It is often taken to mean the " natural environment " or wilderness – wild animals , rocks , forest , and in general those things that have not been substantially altered by human intervention , or which persist despite human intervention . For example , manufactured objects and human interaction generally are not considered part of nature , unless qualified as , for example , " human nature " or " the whole of nature " . This more traditional concept of natural things which can still be found today implies a distinction between the natural and the artificial , with the artificial being understood as that which has been brought into being by a human consciousness or a human mind . Depending on the particular context , the term " natural " might also be distinguished from the unnatural or the supernatural . 
 = = Earth = = 
 Earth is the only planet known to support life , and its natural features are the subject of many fields of scientific research . Within the solar system , it is third closest to the sun ; it is the largest terrestrial planet and the fifth largest overall . Its most prominent climatic features are its two large polar regions , two relatively narrow temperate zones , and a wide equatorial tropical to subtropical region . Precipitation varies widely with location , from several metres of water per year to less than a millimetre . 71 percent of the Earth 's surface is covered by salt @-@ water oceans . The remainder consists of continents and islands , with most of the inhabited land in the Northern Hemisphere . 
 Earth has evolved through geological and biological processes that have left traces of the original conditions . The outer surface is divided into several gradually migrating tectonic plates . The interior remains active , with a thick layer of plastic mantle and an iron @-@ filled core that generates a magnetic field . This iron core is composed of a solid inner phase , and a fluid outer phase . Convective motion in the core generates electric currents through dynamo action , and these , in turn , generate the geomagnetic field . 
 The atmospheric conditions have been significantly altered from the original conditions by the presence of life @-@ forms , which create an ecological balance that stabilizes the surface conditions . Despite the wide regional variations in climate by latitude and other geographic factors , the long @-@ term average global climate is quite stable during interglacial periods , and variations of a degree or two of average global temperature have historically had major effects on the ecological balance , and on the actual geography of the Earth . 
 = = = Geology = = = 
 Geology is the science and study of the solid and liquid matter that constitutes the Earth . The field of geology encompasses the study of the composition , structure , physical properties , dynamics , and history of Earth materials , and the processes by which they are formed , moved , and changed . The field is a major academic discipline , and is also important for mineral and hydrocarbon extraction , knowledge about and mitigation of natural hazards , some Geotechnical engineering fields , and understanding past climates and environments . 
 = = = = Geological evolution = = = = 
 The geology of an area evolves through time as rock units are deposited and inserted and <unk> processes change their shapes and locations . 
 Rock units are first emplaced either by deposition onto the surface or intrude into the overlying rock . Deposition can occur when sediments settle onto the surface of the Earth and later <unk> into sedimentary rock , or when as volcanic material such as volcanic ash or lava flows , blanket the surface . Igneous intrusions such as batholiths , <unk> , dikes , and sills , push upwards into the overlying rock , and crystallize as they intrude . 
 After the initial sequence of rocks has been deposited , the rock units can be deformed and / or metamorphosed . Deformation typically occurs as a result of horizontal shortening , horizontal extension , or side @-@ to @-@ side ( strike @-@ slip ) motion . These structural regimes broadly relate to convergent boundaries , divergent boundaries , and transform boundaries , respectively , between tectonic plates . 
 = = = Historical perspective = = = 
 Earth is estimated to have formed 4 @.@ 54 billion years ago from the solar nebula , along with the Sun and other planets . The moon formed roughly 20 million years later . Initially molten , the outer layer of the Earth cooled , resulting in the solid crust . <unk> and volcanic activity produced the primordial atmosphere . Condensing water vapor , most or all of which came from ice delivered by comets , produced the oceans and other water sources . The highly energetic chemistry is believed to have produced a self @-@ replicating molecule around 4 billion years ago . 
 Continents formed , then broke up and reformed as the surface of Earth reshaped over hundreds of millions of years , occasionally combining to make a supercontinent . Roughly 750 million years ago , the earliest known supercontinent Rodinia , began to break apart . The continents later recombined to form <unk> which broke apart about 540 million years ago , then finally Pangaea , which broke apart about 180 million years ago . 
 During the Neoproterozoic era covered much of the Earth in glaciers and ice sheets . This hypothesis has been termed the " Snowball Earth " , and it is of particular interest as it precedes the Cambrian explosion in which multicellular life forms began to proliferate about 530 – 540 million years ago . 
 Since the Cambrian explosion there have been five distinctly identifiable mass extinctions . The last mass extinction occurred some 66 million years ago , when a meteorite collision probably triggered the extinction of the non @-@ avian dinosaurs and other large reptiles , but spared small animals such as mammals . Over the past 66 million years , mammalian life diversified . 
 Several million years ago , a species of small African ape gained the ability to stand upright . The subsequent advent of human life , and the development of agriculture and further civilization allowed humans to affect the Earth more rapidly than any previous life form , affecting both the nature and quantity of other organisms as well as global climate . By comparison , the Great Oxygenation Event , produced by the proliferation of algae during the <unk> period , required about 300 million years to culminate . 
 The present era is classified as part of a mass extinction event , the Holocene extinction event , the fastest ever to have occurred . Some , such as E. O. Wilson of Harvard University , predict that human destruction of the biosphere could cause the extinction of one @-@ half of all species in the next 100 years . The extent of the current extinction event is still being researched , debated and calculated by biologists . 
 = = Atmosphere , climate , and weather = = 
 The Earth 's atmosphere is a key factor in sustaining the ecosystem . The thin layer of gases that envelops the Earth is held in place by gravity . Air is mostly nitrogen , oxygen , water vapor , with much smaller amounts of carbon dioxide , argon , etc . The atmospheric pressure declines steadily with altitude . The ozone layer plays an important role in depleting the amount of ultraviolet ( UV ) radiation that reaches the surface . As DNA is readily damaged by UV light , this serves to protect life at the surface . The atmosphere also retains heat during the night , thereby reducing the daily temperature extremes . 
 Terrestrial weather occurs almost exclusively in the lower part of the atmosphere , and serves as a convective system for redistributing heat . Ocean currents are another important factor in determining climate , particularly the major underwater thermohaline circulation which distributes heat energy from the equatorial oceans to the polar regions . These currents help to moderate the differences in temperature between winter and summer in the temperate zones . Also , without the redistributions of heat energy by the ocean currents and atmosphere , the tropics would be much hotter , and the polar regions much colder . 
 Weather can have both beneficial and harmful effects . Extremes in weather , such as tornadoes or hurricanes and cyclones , can expend large amounts of energy along their paths , and produce devastation . Surface vegetation has evolved a dependence on the seasonal variation of the weather , and sudden changes lasting only a few years can have a dramatic effect , both on the vegetation and on the animals which depend on its growth for their food . 
 Climate is a measure of the long @-@ term trends in the weather . Various factors are known to influence the climate , including ocean currents , surface albedo , greenhouse gases , variations in the solar luminosity , and changes to the Earth 's orbit . Based on historical records , the Earth is known to have undergone drastic climate changes in the past , including ice ages . 
 The climate of a region depends on a number of factors , especially latitude . A latitudinal band of the surface with similar climatic attributes forms a climate region . There are a number of such regions , ranging from the tropical climate at the equator to the polar climate in the northern and southern extremes . Weather is also influenced by the seasons , which result from the Earth 's axis being tilted relative to its orbital plane . Thus , at any given time during the summer or winter , one part of the Earth is more directly exposed to the rays of the sun . This exposure alternates as the Earth revolves in its orbit . At any given time , regardless of season , the northern and southern hemispheres experience opposite seasons . 
 Weather is a chaotic system that is readily modified by small changes to the environment , so accurate weather forecasting is limited to only a few days . Overall , two things are happening worldwide : ( 1 ) temperature is increasing on the average ; and ( 2 ) regional climates have been undergoing noticeable changes . 
 = = Water on Earth = = 
 Water is a chemical substance that is composed of hydrogen and oxygen and is vital for all known forms of life . In typical usage , water refers only to its liquid form or state , but the substance also has a solid state , ice , and a gaseous state , water vapor , or steam . Water covers 71 % of the Earth 's surface . On Earth , it is found mostly in oceans and other large water bodies , with 1 @.@ 6 % of water below ground in aquifers and 0 @.@ 001 % in the air as vapor , clouds , and precipitation . Oceans hold 97 % of surface water , glaciers , and polar ice caps 2 @.@ 4 % , and other land surface water such as rivers , lakes , and ponds 0 @.@ 6 % . Additionally , a minute amount of the Earth 's water is contained within biological bodies and manufactured products . 
 = = = Oceans = = = 
 An ocean is a major body of saline water , and a principal component of the hydrosphere . Approximately 71 % of the Earth 's surface ( an area of some 361 million square kilometers ) is covered by ocean , a continuous body of water that is customarily divided into several principal oceans and smaller seas . More than half of this area is over 3 @,@ 000 meters ( 9 @,@ 800 feet ) deep . Average oceanic salinity is around 35 parts per thousand ( ppt ) ( 3 @.@ 5 % ) , and nearly all seawater has a salinity in the range of 30 to 38 ppt . Though generally recognized as several ' separate ' oceans , these waters comprise one global , interconnected body of salt water often referred to as the World Ocean or global ocean . This concept of a global ocean as a continuous body of water with relatively free interchange among its parts is of fundamental importance to oceanography . 
 The major oceanic divisions are defined in part by the continents , various archipelagos , and other criteria : these divisions are ( in descending order of size ) the Pacific Ocean , the Atlantic Ocean , the Indian Ocean , the Southern Ocean , and the Arctic Ocean . Smaller regions of the oceans are called seas , <unk> , bays and other names . There are also salt lakes , which are smaller bodies of landlocked saltwater that are not interconnected with the World Ocean . Two notable examples of salt lakes are the Aral Sea and the Great Salt Lake . 
 = = = Lakes = = = 
 A lake ( from Latin <unk> ) is a terrain feature ( or physical feature ) , a body of liquid on the surface of a world that is localized to the bottom of basin ( another type of landform or terrain feature ; that is , it is not global ) and moves slowly if it moves at all . On Earth , a body of water is considered a lake when it is inland , not part of the ocean , is larger and deeper than a pond , and is fed by a river . The only world other than Earth known to harbor lakes is Titan , Saturn 's largest moon , which has lakes of ethane , most likely mixed with methane . It is not known if Titan 's lakes are fed by rivers , though Titan 's surface is carved by numerous river beds . Natural lakes on Earth are generally found in mountainous areas , rift zones , and areas with ongoing or recent glaciation . Other lakes are found in endorheic basins or along the courses of mature rivers . In some parts of the world , there are many lakes because of chaotic drainage patterns left over from the last Ice Age . All lakes are temporary over geologic time scales , as they will slowly fill in with sediments or spill out of the basin containing them . 
 = = = = Ponds = = = = 
 A pond is a body of standing water , either natural or man @-@ made , that is usually smaller than a lake . A wide variety of man @-@ made bodies of water are classified as ponds , including water gardens designed for aesthetic ornamentation , fish ponds designed for commercial fish breeding , and solar ponds designed to store thermal energy . Ponds and lakes are distinguished from streams via current speed . While currents in streams are easily observed , ponds and lakes possess thermally driven micro @-@ currents and moderate wind driven currents . These features distinguish a pond from many other aquatic terrain features , such as stream pools and tide pools . 
 = = = Rivers = = = 
 A river is a natural watercourse , usually freshwater , flowing toward an ocean , a lake , a sea or another river . In a few cases , a river simply flows into the ground or dries up completely before reaching another body of water . Small rivers may also be called by several other names , including stream , creek , brook , rivulet , and rill ; there is no general rule that defines what can be called a river . Many names for small rivers are specific to geographic location ; one example is Burn in Scotland and North @-@ east England . Sometimes a river is said to be larger than a creek , but this is not always the case , due to vagueness in the language . A river is part of the hydrological cycle . Water within a river is generally collected from precipitation through surface runoff , groundwater recharge , springs , and the release of stored water in natural ice and <unk> ( i.e. , from glaciers ) . 
 = = = Streams = = = 
 A stream is a flowing body of water with a current , confined within a bed and stream banks . In the United States , a stream is classified as a watercourse less than 60 feet ( 18 metres ) wide . Streams are important as conduits in the water cycle , instruments in groundwater recharge , and they serve as corridors for fish and wildlife migration . The biological habitat in the immediate vicinity of a stream is called a riparian zone . Given the status of the ongoing Holocene extinction , streams play an important corridor role in connecting fragmented habitats and thus in conserving biodiversity . The study of streams and waterways in general involves many branches of inter @-@ disciplinary natural science and engineering , including hydrology , fluvial geomorphology , aquatic ecology , fish biology , riparian ecology , and others . 
 = = Ecosystems = = 
 Ecosystems are composed of a variety of abiotic and biotic components that function in an interrelated way . The structure and composition is determined by various environmental factors that are interrelated . Variations of these factors will initiate dynamic modifications to the ecosystem . Some of the more important components are : soil , atmosphere , radiation from the sun , water , and living organisms . 
 Central to the ecosystem concept is the idea that living organisms interact with every other element in their local environment . Eugene Odum , a founder of ecology , stated : " Any unit that includes all of the organisms ( ie : the " community " ) in a given area interacting with the physical environment so that a flow of energy leads to clearly defined trophic structure , biotic diversity , and material cycles ( i.e. : exchange of materials between living and nonliving parts ) within the system is an ecosystem . " Within the ecosystem , species are connected and dependent upon one another in the food chain , and exchange energy and matter between themselves as well as with their environment . The human ecosystem concept is grounded in the deconstruction of the human / nature dichotomy and the premise that all species are ecologically integrated with each other , as well as with the abiotic constituents of their <unk> . 
 A smaller unit of size is called a <unk> . For example , a <unk> can be a stone and all the life under it . A <unk> might involve a whole ecoregion , with its drainage basin . 
 = = = Wilderness = = = 
 Wilderness is generally defined as areas that have not been significantly modified by human activity . Wilderness areas can be found in preserves , estates , farms , conservation preserves , ranches , national forests , national parks , and even in urban areas along rivers , <unk> , or otherwise undeveloped areas . Wilderness areas and protected parks are considered important for the survival of certain species , ecological studies , conservation , solitude , and recreation . Some nature writers believe wilderness areas are vital for the human spirit and creativity , and some Ecologists consider wilderness areas to be an integral part of the Earth 's self @-@ sustaining natural ecosystem ( the biosphere ) . They may also preserve historic genetic traits and that they provide habitat for wild flora and fauna that may be difficult to recreate in zoos , <unk> , or laboratories . 
 = = Life = = 
 Although there is no universal agreement on the definition of life , scientists generally accept that the biological manifestation of life is characterized by organization , metabolism , growth , adaptation , and response to stimuli and reproduction . Life may also be said to be simply the characteristic state of organisms . 
 Properties common to terrestrial organisms ( plants , animals , fungi , protists , archaea , and bacteria ) are that they are cellular , carbon @-@ and @-@ water @-@ based with complex organization , having a metabolism , a capacity to grow , respond to stimuli , and reproduce . An entity with these properties is generally considered life . However , not every definition of life considers all of these properties to be essential . Human @-@ made analogs of life may also be considered to be life . 
 The biosphere is the part of Earth 's outer shell – including land , surface rocks , water , air and the atmosphere – within which life occurs , and which biotic processes in turn alter or transform . From the broadest <unk> point of view , the biosphere is the global ecological system integrating all living beings and their relationships , including their interaction with the elements of the lithosphere ( rocks ) , hydrosphere ( water ) , and atmosphere ( air ) . The entire Earth contains over 75 billion tons ( 150 trillion pounds or about 6 @.@ 8 × 1013 kilograms ) of biomass ( life ) , which lives within various environments within the biosphere . 
 Over nine @-@ tenths of the total biomass on Earth is plant life , on which animal life depends very heavily for its existence . More than 2 million species of plant and animal life have been identified to date , and estimates of the actual number of existing species range from several million to well over 50 million . The number of individual species of life is constantly in some degree of flux , with new species appearing and others ceasing to exist on a continual basis . The total number of species is in rapid decline . 
 = = = Evolution = = = 
 The origin of life on Earth is not well understood , but it is known to have occurred at least 3 @.@ 5 billion years ago , during the <unk> or <unk> eons on a primordial Earth that had a substantially different environment than is found at present . These life forms possessed the basic traits of self @-@ replication and inheritable traits . Once life had appeared , the process of evolution by natural selection resulted in the development of ever @-@ more diverse life forms . 
 Species that were unable to adapt to the changing environment and competition from other life forms became extinct . However , the fossil record retains evidence of many of these older species . Current fossil and DNA evidence shows that all existing species can trace a continual ancestry back to the first primitive life forms . 
 The advent of photosynthesis in very basic forms of plant life worldwide allowed the sun 's energy to be harvested to create conditions allowing for more complex life . The resultant oxygen accumulated in the atmosphere and gave rise to the ozone layer . The incorporation of smaller cells within larger ones resulted in the development of yet more complex cells called eukaryotes . Cells within colonies became increasingly specialized , resulting in true multicellular organisms . With the ozone layer absorbing harmful ultraviolet radiation , life colonized the surface of Earth . 
 = = = Microbes = = = 
 The first form of life to develop on the Earth were microbes , and they remained the only form of life until about a billion years ago when multi @-@ cellular organisms began to appear . Microorganisms are single @-@ celled organisms that are generally microscopic , and smaller than the human eye can see . They include Bacteria , Fungi , Archaea , and <unk> . 
 These life forms are found in almost every location on the Earth where there is liquid water , including in the Earth 's interior . Their reproduction is both rapid and profuse . The combination of a high mutation rate and a horizontal gene transfer ability makes them highly adaptable , and able to survive in new environments , including outer space . They form an essential part of the planetary ecosystem . However , some microorganisms are pathogenic and can post health risk to other organisms . 
 = = = Plants and animals = = = 
 Originally Aristotle divided all living things between plants , which generally do not move fast enough for humans to notice , and animals . In Linnaeus ' system , these became the kingdoms <unk> ( later Plantae ) and Animalia . Since then , it has become clear that the Plantae as originally defined included several unrelated groups , and the fungi and several groups of algae were removed to new kingdoms . However , these are still often considered plants in many contexts . Bacterial life is sometimes included in flora , and some classifications use the term bacterial flora separately from plant flora . 
 Among the many ways of classifying plants are by regional floras , which , depending on the purpose of study , can also include fossil flora , remnants 
 of plant life from a previous era . People in many regions and countries take great pride in their individual arrays of characteristic flora , which can vary widely across the globe due to differences in climate and terrain . 
 Regional floras commonly are divided into categories such as native flora and agricultural and garden flora , the lastly mentioned of which are intentionally grown and cultivated . Some types of " native flora " actually have been introduced centuries ago by people migrating from one region or continent to another , and become an integral part of the native , or natural flora of the place to which they were introduced . This is an example of how human interaction with nature can blur the boundary of what is considered nature . 
 Another category of plant has historically been carved out for weeds . Though the term has fallen into disfavor among botanists as a formal way to categorize " useless " plants , the informal use of the word " weeds " to describe those plants that are deemed worthy of elimination is illustrative of the general tendency of people and societies to seek to alter or shape the course of nature . Similarly , animals are often categorized in ways such as domestic , farm animals , wild animals , pests , etc. according to their relationship to human life . 
 Animals as a category have several characteristics that generally set them apart from other living things . Animals are eukaryotic and usually multicellular ( although see Myxozoa ) , which separates them from bacteria , archaea , and most protists . They are heterotrophic , generally digesting food in an internal chamber , which separates them from plants and algae . They are also distinguished from plants , algae , and fungi by lacking cell walls . 
 With a few exceptions , most notably the sponges ( Phylum Porifera ) , animals have bodies differentiated into separate tissues . These include muscles , which are able to contract and control locomotion , and a nervous system , which sends and processes signals . There is also typically an internal digestive chamber . The eukaryotic cells possessed by all animals are surrounded by a characteristic extracellular matrix composed of collagen and elastic glycoproteins . This may be calcified to form structures like shells , bones , and spicules , a framework upon which cells can move about and be reorganized during development and maturation , and which supports the complex anatomy required for mobility . 
 = = Human interrelationship = = 
 Although humans comprise only a minuscule proportion of the total living biomass on Earth , the human effect on nature is disproportionately large . Because of the extent of human influence , the boundaries between what humans regard as nature and " made environments " is not clear cut except at the extremes . Even at the extremes , the amount of natural environment that is free of discernible human influence is diminishing at an increasingly rapid pace . 
 The development of technology by the human race has allowed the greater exploitation of natural resources and has helped to alleviate some of the risk from natural hazards . In spite of this progress , however , the fate of human civilization remains closely linked to changes in the environment . There exists a highly complex feedback loop between the use of advanced technology and changes to the environment that are only slowly becoming understood . Man @-@ made threats to the Earth 's natural environment include pollution , deforestation , and disasters such as oil spills . Humans have contributed to the extinction of many plants and animals . 
 Humans employ nature for both leisure and economic activities . The acquisition of natural resources for industrial use remains the primary component of the world 's economic system . Some activities , such as hunting and fishing , are used for both sustenance and leisure , often by different people . Agriculture was first adopted around the 9th millennium BCE . Ranging from food production to energy , nature influences economic wealth . 
 Although early humans gathered uncultivated plant materials for food and employed the medicinal properties of vegetation for healing , most modern human use of plants is through agriculture . The clearance of large tracts of land for crop growth has led to a significant reduction in the amount available of forestation and wetlands , resulting in the loss of habitat for many plant and animal species as well as increased erosion . 
 = = = Aesthetics and beauty = = = 
 Beauty in nature has historically been a prevalent theme in art and books , filling large sections of libraries and bookstores . That nature has been depicted and celebrated by so much art , photography , poetry , and other literature shows the strength with which many people associate nature and beauty . Reasons why this association exists , and what the association consists of , are studied by the branch of philosophy called aesthetics . Beyond certain basic characteristics that many philosophers agree about to explain what is seen as beautiful , the opinions are virtually endless . Nature and wildness have been important subjects in various eras of world history . An early tradition of landscape art began in China during the Tang Dynasty ( 618 – 907 ) . The tradition of representing nature as it is became one of the aims of Chinese painting and was a significant influence in Asian art . 
 Although natural wonders are celebrated in the Psalms and the Book of Job , wilderness portrayals in art became more prevalent in the 1800s , especially in the works of the Romantic movement . British artists John Constable and J. M. W. Turner turned their attention to capturing the beauty of the natural world in their paintings . Before that , paintings had been primarily of religious scenes or of human beings . William Wordsworth 's poetry described the wonder of the natural world , which had formerly been viewed as a threatening place . Increasingly the valuing of nature became an aspect of Western culture . This artistic movement also coincided with the Transcendentalist movement in the Western world . A common classical idea of beautiful art involves the word mimesis , the imitation of nature . Also in the realm of ideas about beauty in nature is that the perfect is implied through perfect mathematical forms and more generally by patterns in nature . As David Rothenburg writes , " The beautiful is the root of science and the goal of art , the highest possibility that humanity can ever hope to see " . 
 = = Matter and energy = = 
 Some fields of science see nature as matter in motion , obeying certain laws of nature which science seeks to understand . For this reason the most fundamental science is generally understood to be " physics " – the name for which is still recognizable as meaning that it is the study of nature . 
 Matter is commonly defined as the substance of which physical objects are composed . It constitutes the observable universe . The visible components of the universe are now believed to compose only 4 @.@ 9 percent of the total mass . The remainder is believed to consist of 26 @.@ 8 percent cold dark matter and 68 @.@ 3 percent dark energy . The exact arrangement of these components is still unknown and is under intensive investigation by physicists . 
 The behavior of matter and energy throughout the observable universe appears to follow well @-@ defined physical laws . These laws have been employed to produce cosmological models that successfully explain the structure and the evolution of the universe we can observe . The mathematical expressions of the laws of physics employ a set of twenty physical constants that appear to be static across the observable universe . The values of these constants have been carefully measured , but the reason for their specific values remains a mystery . 
 = = Beyond Earth = = 
 Outer space , also simply called space , refers to the relatively empty regions of the universe outside the atmospheres of celestial bodies . Outer space is used to distinguish it from airspace ( and terrestrial locations ) . There is no discrete boundary between the Earth 's atmosphere and space , as the atmosphere gradually attenuates with increasing altitude . Outer space within the Solar System is called interplanetary space , which passes over into interstellar space at what is known as the heliopause . 
 Outer space is sparsely filled with several dozen types of organic molecules discovered to date by microwave spectroscopy , blackbody radiation left over from the big bang and the origin of the universe , and cosmic rays , which include ionized atomic nuclei and various subatomic particles . There is also some gas , plasma and dust , and small meteors . Additionally , there are signs of human life in outer space today , such as material left over from previous manned and unmanned launches which are a potential hazard to spacecraft . Some of this debris re @-@ enters the atmosphere periodically . 
 Although the Earth is the only body within the solar system known to support life , evidence suggests that in the distant past the planet Mars possessed bodies of liquid water on the surface . For a brief period in Mars ' history , it may have also been capable of forming life . At present though , most of the water remaining on Mars is frozen . If life exists at all on Mars , it is most likely to be located underground where liquid water can still exist . 
 Conditions on the other terrestrial planets , Mercury and Venus , appear to be too harsh to support life as we know it . But it has been conjectured that Europa , the fourth @-@ largest moon of Jupiter , may possess a sub @-@ surface ocean of liquid water and could potentially host life . 
 Astronomers have started to discover extrasolar Earth analogs – planets that lie in the habitable zone of space surrounding a star , and therefore could possibly host life as we know it . 
 = First Persian invasion of Greece = 
 The first Persian invasion of Greece , during the Persian Wars , began in 492 BC , and ended with the decisive Athenian victory at the Battle of Marathon in 490 BC . The invasion , consisting of two distinct campaigns , was ordered by the Persian king Darius I primarily in order to punish the city @-@ states of Athens and Eretria . These cities had supported the cities of Ionia during their revolt against Persian rule , thus incurring the wrath of Darius . Darius also saw the opportunity to extend his empire into Europe , and to secure its western frontier . 
 The first campaign in 492 BC , led by Mardonius , re @-@ subjugated Thrace and forced Macedon to become a fully subordinate client kingdom part of Persia , after being a vassal to Persia as early as the late 6th century BC . However , further progress was prevented when Mardonius 's fleet was wrecked in a storm off the coast of Mount Athos . The following year , having demonstrated his intentions , Darius sent ambassadors to all parts of Greece , demanding their submission . He received it from almost all of them , except Athens and Sparta , both of whom executed the ambassadors . With Athens still defiant , and Sparta now effectively at war with him , Darius ordered a further military campaign for the following year . 
 The second Persian campaign , in 490 BC , was under the command of Datis and Artaphernes . The expedition headed first to the island Naxos , which it captured and burnt . It then island @-@ hopped between the rest of the Cycladic Islands , annexing each into the Persian empire . Reaching Greece , the expedition landed at Eretria , which it besieged , and after a brief time , captured . Eretria was razed and its citizens enslaved . Finally , the task force headed to Attica , landing at Marathon , en route for Athens . There , it was met by a smaller Athenian army , which nevertheless proceeded to win a remarkable victory at the Battle of Marathon . 
 This defeat prevented the successful conclusion of the campaign , and the task force returned to Asia . Nevertheless , the expedition had fulfilled most of its aims , punishing Naxos and Eretria , and bringing much of the Aegean under Persian rule , as well as the full inclusion of Macedon . The unfinished business from this campaign led Darius to prepare for a much larger invasion of Greece , to firmly subjugate it , and to punish Athens and Sparta . However , internal strife within the empire delayed this expedition , and Darius then died of old age . It was thus left to his son Xerxes I to lead the second Persian invasion of Greece , beginning in 480 BC . 
 = = Background = = 
 The first Persian invasion of Greece had its immediate roots in the Ionian Revolt , the earliest phase of the Greco @-@ Persian Wars . However , it was also the result of the longer @-@ term interaction between the Greeks and Persians . In 500 BC the Persian Empire was still relatively young and highly expansionist , but prone to revolts amongst its subject peoples . Moreover , the Persian king Darius was a usurper , and had spent considerable time extinguishing revolts against his rule . Even before the Ionian Revolt , Darius had begun to expand the Empire into Europe , subjugating Thrace , expanding past the Danube river , conquering Paeonia , and forcing Macedon to become a client kingdom to Persia ; though the latter retaining an amount of autonomy up to 492 BC . Attempts at further expansion into the politically fractious world of Ancient Greece may have been inevitable . However , the Ionian Revolt had directly threatened the integrity of the Persian empire , and the states of mainland Greece remained a potential menace to its future stability . Darius thus resolved to subjugate and pacify Greece and the Aegean , and to punish those involved in the Ionian Revolt . 
 The Ionian revolt had begun with an unsuccessful expedition against Naxos , a joint venture between the Persian satrap Artaphernes and the Miletus tyrant Aristagoras . In the aftermath , Artaphernes decided to remove Aristagoras from power , but before he could do so , Aristagoras abdicated , and declared Miletus a democracy . The other Ionian cities , ripe for rebellion , followed suit , ejecting their Persian @-@ appointed tyrants , and declaring themselves democracies . <unk> then appealed to the states of Mainland Greece for support , but only Athens and Eretria offered to send troops . 
 The involvement of Athens in the Ionian Revolt arose from a complex set of circumstances , beginning with the establishment of the Athenian Democracy in the late 6th century BC In 510 BC , with the aid of Cleomenes I , King of Sparta , the Athenian people had expelled Hippias , the tyrant ruler of Athens . With Hippias 's father Peisistratus , the family had ruled for 36 out of the previous 50 years and fully intended to continue Hippias 's rule . Hippias fled to Sardis to the court of the Persian satrap , Artaphernes and promised control of Athens to the Persians if they were to help restore him . In the meantime , Cleomenes helped install a pro @-@ Spartan tyranny under Isagoras in Athens , in opposition to Cleisthenes , the leader of the traditionally powerful Alcmaeonidae family , who considered themselves the natural heirs to the rule of Athens . In a daring response , Cleisthenes proposed to the Athenian people that he would establish a ' democracy ' in Athens , much to the horror of the rest of the aristocracy . Cleisthenes 's reasons for suggesting such a radical course of action , which would remove much of his own family 's power , are unclear ; perhaps he perceived that days of aristocratic rule were coming to an end anyway ; certainly he wished to prevent Athens becoming a puppet of Sparta by whatever means necessary . However , as a result of this proposal , Cleisthenes and his family were exiled from Athens , in addition to other dissenting elements , by Isagoras . Having been promised democracy however , the Athenian people seized the moment and revolted , expelling Cleomenes and Isagoras . Cleisthenes was thus restored to Athens ( 507 BC ) , and at breakneck speed began to establish democratic government . The establishment of democracy revolutionised Athens , which henceforth became one of the leading cities in Greece . The new @-@ found freedom and self @-@ governance of the Athenians meant that they were thereafter exceptionally hostile to the return of the tyranny of Hippias , or any form of outside subjugation ; by Sparta , Persia or anyone else . 
 Cleomenes , unsurprisingly , was not pleased with events , and marched on Athens with the Spartan army . Cleomenes 's attempts to restore Isagoras to Athens ended in a debacle , but fearing the worst , the Athenians had by this point already sent an embassy to Artaphernes in Sardis , to request aid from the Persian Empire . Artaphernes requested that the Athenians give him a ' earth and water ' , a traditional token of submission , which the Athenian ambassadors acquiesced to . However , they were severely censured for this when they returned to Athens . At some point later Cleomenes instigated a plot to restore Hippias to the rule of Athens . This failed and Hippias again fled to Sardis and tried to persuade the Persians to subjugate Athens . The Athenians dispatched ambassadors to Artaphernes to dissuade him from taking action , but Artaphernes merely instructed the Athenians to take Hippias back as tyrant . Needless to say , the Athenians balked at this , and resolved instead to be openly at war with Persia . Having thus become the enemy of Persia , Athens was already in a position to support the Ionian cities when they began their revolt . The fact that the Ionian democracies were inspired by the example of Athens no doubt further persuaded the Athenians to support the Ionian Revolt ; especially since the cities of Ionia were ( supposedly ) originally Athenian colonies . 
 The city of Eretria also sent assistance to the Ionians for reasons that are not completely clear . Possibly commercial reasons were a factor ; Eretria was a mercantile city , whose trade was threatened by Persian dominance of the Aegean . Herodotus suggests that the Eretrians supported the revolt in order to repay the support the Milesians had given Eretria in a past war against Chalcis . 
 The Athenians and Eretrians sent a task force of 25 triremes to Asia Minor . Whilst there , the Greek army surprised and outmaneuvered Artaphernes , marching to Sardis and there burning the lower city . However , this was as much as the Greeks achieved , and they were then pursued back to the coast by Persian horsemen , losing many men in the process . Despite the fact their actions were ultimately fruitless , the Eretrians and in particular the Athenians had earned Darius 's lasting enmity , and he vowed to punish both cities . The Persian naval victory at the Battle of Lade ( 494 BC ) all but ended the Ionian Revolt , and by 493 BC , the last hold @-@ outs were vanquished by the Persian fleet . The revolt was used as an opportunity by Darius to extend the empire 's border to the islands of the East Aegean and the Propontis , which had not been part of the Persian dominions before . The completion of the pacification of Ionia allowed the Persians to begin planning their next moves ; to extinguish the threat to the empire from Greece , and to punish Athens and Eretria . 
 = = 492 BC : Mardonius 's campaign = = 
 In the spring of 492 BC an expeditionary force , to be commanded by Darius 's son @-@ in @-@ law Mardonius was assembled , consisting of a fleet and a land army . Whilst the ultimate aim was to punish Athens and Eretria , the expedition also aimed to subdue as many of the Greek cities as possible . Departing from Cilicia , Mardonius sent the army to march to the Hellespont , whilst he travelled with the fleet . He sailed round the coast of Asia Minor to Ionia , where he spent a short time abolishing the tyrannies that ruled the cities of Ionia . Ironically , since the establishment of democracies had been a key factor in the Ionian Revolt , he replaced the tyrannies with democracies . 
 From thence the fleet continued on to the Hellespont , and when all was ready , shipped the land forces across to Europe . The army then marched through Thrace , re @-@ subjugating it , since these lands had already been added to the Persian empire in 512 BC , during Darius 's campaign against the Scythians . Upon reaching Macedon , the Persians forced Macedonia to become a fully subordinate part of the Persians ; they had been vassals of the Persians since the late 6th century BC , but retained their general autonomy . 
 Meanwhile , the fleet crossed to <unk> , resulting in the Thasians submitting to the Persians . The fleet then rounded the coastline as far as <unk> in Chalcidice , before attempting to round the headland of Mount Athos . However , they were caught in a violent storm , which drove them against the coastline of Athos , wrecking ( according to Herodotus ) 300 ships , with the loss of 20 @,@ 000 men . 
 Then , whilst the army was camped in Macedon , the <unk> , a local Thracian tribe , launched a night raid against the Persian camp , killing many of the Persians , and wounding Mardonius . Despite his injury , Mardonius made sure that the <unk> were defeated and subjugated , before leading his army back to the Hellespont ; the remnants of the navy also retreated to Asia . Although this campaign ended ingloriously , the land approaches to Greece had been secured , and the Greeks had no doubt been made aware of Darius 's intentions for them . 
 = = 491 BC : Diplomacy = = 
 Perhaps reasoning that the expedition of the previous year may have made his plans for Greece obvious , and weakened the resolve of the Greek cities , Darius turned to diplomacy in 491 BC . He sent ambassadors to all the Greek city states , asking for " earth and water " , a traditional token of submission . The vast majority of cities did as asked , fearing the wrath of Darius . In Athens , however , the ambassadors were put on trial and then executed ; in Sparta , they were simply thrown down a well . This firmly and finally drew the battle @-@ lines for the coming conflict ; Sparta and Athens , despite their recent enmity , would together fight the Persians . 
 However , Sparta was then thrown into disarray by internal machinations . The citizens of Aegina had submitted to the Persian ambassadors , and the Athenians , troubled by the possibility of Persia using Aegina as a naval base , asked Sparta to intervene . Cleomenes travelled to Aegina to confront the Aeginetans personally , but they appealed to Cleomenes 's fellow king Demaratus , who supported their stance . Cleomenes responded by having Demaratus declared illegitimate , with the help of the priests at Delphi ( whom he bribed ) ; Demaratus was replaced by his cousin Leotychides . Now faced with two Spartan kings , the Aeginetans capitulated , and handed over hostages to the Athenians as a guarantee of their good behaviour . However , in Sparta news emerged of the bribes Cleomenes had given at Delphi , and he was expelled from the city . He then sought to rally the northern Peloponnesus to his cause , at which the Spartans relented , and invited him back to the city . By 491 BC though , Cleomenes was widely considered insane and was sentenced to prison where he was found dead the following day . Cleomenes was succeeded by his half @-@ brother Leonidas I. 
 = = 490 BC : Datis and Artaphernes ' campaign = = 
 Taking advantage of the chaos in Sparta , which effectively left Athens isolated , Darius decided to launch an amphibious expedition to finally punish Athens and Eretria . An army was assembled in Susa , and marched into Cilicia , where a fleet had been gathered . Command of the expedition was given to Datis the Mede and Artaphernes , son of the satrap Artaphernes . 
 = = = Size of the Persian force = = = 
 According to Herodotus , the fleet sent by Darius consisted of 600 triremes . There is no indication in the historical sources of how many transport ships accompanied them , if any . Herodotus claimed that 3 @,@ 000 transport ships accompanied 1 @,@ 207 triremes during Xerxes 's invasion in 480 BC . Amongst modern historians , some have accepted this number of ships as reasonable ; it has been suggested either that the number 600 represents the combined number of triremes and transport ships , or that there were horse transports in addition to 600 triremes . 
 Herodotus does not estimate the size of the Persian army , only saying that they formed a " large infantry that was well packed " . Among other ancient sources , the poet Simonides , a near @-@ contemporary , says the campaign force numbered 200 @,@ 000 , while a later writer , the Roman Cornelius Nepos estimates 200 @,@ 000 infantry and 10 @,@ 000 cavalry . Plutarch and Pausanias both independently give 300 @,@ 000 , as does the Suda dictionary ; Plato and Lysias assert 500 @,@ 000 ; and Justin 600 @,@ 000 . 
 Modern historians generally dismiss these numbers as exaggerations . One approach to estimate the number of troops is to calculate the number of marines carried by 600 triremes . Herodotus tells us that each trireme in the second invasion of Greece carried 30 extra marines , in addition to a probable 14 standard marines . Thus , 600 triremes could easily have carried 18 @,@ 000 – 26 @,@ 000 infantry . Numbers proposed for the Persian infantry are in the range 18 @,@ 000 – 100 @,@ 000 . However , the consensus is around 25 @,@ 000 . 
 The Persian infantry used in the invasion was probably a heterogeneous group drawn from across the empire . However , according to Herodotus , there was at least a general conformity in the type of armour and style of fighting . The troops were , generally speaking , armed with a bow , ' short spear ' and sword , carried a wicker shield , and wore at most a leather jerkin . The one exception to this may have been the ethnic Persian troops , who may have worn a corslet of scaled armour . Some of contingents would have been armed somewhat differently ; for instance , the Saka were renowned axemen . The ' elite ' contingents of the Persian infantry seem to have been the ethnic Persians , Medians , Cissians and the Saka ; Herodotus specifically mentions the presence of Persians and Saka at Marathon . The style of fighting used by the Persians was probably to stand off from an enemy , using their bows ( or equivalent ) to wear down the enemy before closing in to deliver the coup de grace with spear and sword . 
 Estimates for the cavalry are usually in the 1 @,@ 000 – 3 @,@ 000 range . The Persian cavalry was usually provided by the ethnic Persians , <unk> , Medes , Cissians , and Saka ; most of these probably fought as lightly armed missile cavalry . The fleet must have had at least some proportion of transport ships , since the cavalry was carried by ship ; whilst Herodotus claims the cavalry was carried in the triremes , this is improbable . Lazenby estimates 30 – 40 transport ships would be required to carry 1 @,@ 000 cavalry . 
 = = = Lindos = = = 
 Once assembled , the Persian force sailed from Cilicia firstly to the island of Rhodes . A Lindian Temple Chronicle records that Datis besieged the city of Lindos , but was unsuccessful . 
 = = = Naxos = = = 
 The fleet then moved north along the Ionian coast towards Samos , before abruptly turning west into the Aegean Sea . The fleet sailed next to Naxos , in order to punish the Naxians for their resistance to the failed expedition that the Persians had mounted there a decade earlier . Many of the inhabitants fled to the mountains ; those that the Persians caught were enslaved . The Persians then burnt the city and temples of the Naxians . 
 = = = The Cyclades = = = 
 Moving on , the Persian fleet approached Delos , whereupon the <unk> also fled from their homes . Having demonstrated Persian power at Naxos , Datis now intended to show clemency to the other islands , if they submitted to him . He sent a herald to the <unk> , proclaiming : 
 " Holy men , why have you fled away , and so misjudged my intent ? It is my own desire , and the king 's command to me , to do no harm to the land where the two gods were born , neither to the land itself nor to its inhabitants . So return now to your homes and dwell on your island . " 
 Datis then burned 300 talents of frankincense on the altar of Apollo on Delos , to show his respect for one of the gods of the island . The fleet then proceeded to island @-@ hop across the rest of Aegean on its way to Eretria , taking hostages and troops from each island . 
 = = = Karystos = = = 
 The Persians finally arrived off the southern tip of Euboea , at Karystos . The citizens of Karystos refused to give hostages to the Persians , so they were besieged , and their land ravaged , until they submitted to the Persians . 
 = = = Siege of Eretria = = = 
 The task force then sailed around Euboea to the first major target , Eretria . According to Herodotus , the Eretrians were divided amongst themselves as to the best course of action ; whether to flee to the highlands , or undergo a siege , or to submit to the Persians . In the event , the majority decision was to remain in the city . The Eretrians made no attempt to stop the Persians landing , or advancing , and thus allowed themselves to be besieged . For six days the Persians attacked the walls , with losses on both sides ; however , on the seventh day two reputable Eretrians opened the gates and betrayed the city to the Persians . The city was razed , and temples and shrines were looted and burned . Furthermore , according to Darius 's commands , the Persians enslaved all the remaining townspeople . 
 = = = Battle of Marathon = = = 
 The Persian fleet next headed south down the coast of Attica , landing at the bay of Marathon , roughly 25 miles ( 40 km ) from Athens , on the advice of Hippias , son of the former tyrant of Athens , Peisistratus . The Athenians , joined by a small force from Plataea , marched to Marathon , and succeeded in blocking the two exits from the plain of Marathon . At the same time , Athens ' greatest runner , Pheidippides ( or Philippides ) was sent to Sparta to request that the Spartan army march to Athens ' aid . Pheidippides arrived during the festival of Carneia , a sacrosanct period of peace , and was informed that the Spartan army could not march to war until the full moon rose ; Athens could not expect reinforcement for at least ten days . They decided to hold out at Marathon for the time being , and they were reinforced by a contingent of hoplites from Plataea . 
 Stalemate ensued for five days , before the Athenians ( for reasons that are not completely clear ) decided to attack the Persians . Despite the numerical advantage of the Persians , the hoplites proved devastatingly effective , routing the Persians wings before turning in on the centre of the Persian line ; the remnants of the Persian army left the battle and fled to their ships . Herodotus records that 6 @,@ 400 Persian bodies were counted on the battlefield ; the Athenians lost just 192 men and the Plataeans 11 . 
 In the immediate aftermath of the battle , Herodotus says that the Persian fleet sailed around Cape Sunium to attack Athens directly , although some modern historians place this attempt just before the battle . Either way , the Athenians evidently realised that their city was still under threat , and marched as quickly as possible back to Athens . The Athenians arrived in time to prevent the Persians from securing a landing , and seeing that the opportunity was lost , the Persians turned about and returned to Asia . On the next day , the Spartan army arrived , having covered the 220 kilometers ( 140 mi ) in only three days . The Spartans toured the battlefield at Marathon , and agreed that the Athenians had won a great victory . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The defeat at Marathon ended for the time being the Persian invasion of Greece . However , Thrace and the Cycladic islands had been <unk> into the Persian empire , and Macedon reduced to a subordinate kingdom part of the empire ; since the late 6th century BC they had been vassals of the Persians , but remained having a broad scope of autonomy . Darius was still fully intent on conquering Greece , to secure the western part of his empire . Moreover , Athens remained unpunished for its role in the Ionian Revolt , and both Athens and Sparta were unpunished for their treatment of the Persian ambassadors . 
 Darius therefore began raising a huge new army with which he meant to completely subjugate Greece ; however , in 486 BC , his Egyptian subjects revolted , indefinitely postponing any Greek expedition . Darius then died whilst preparing to march on Egypt , and the throne of Persia passed to his son Xerxes I. Xerxes crushed the Egyptian revolt , and very quickly restarted the preparations for the invasion of Greece . This expedition was finally ready by 480 BC , and the second Persian invasion of Greece thereby began , under the command of Xerxes himself . 
 = = Significance = = 
 For the Persians , the two expeditions to Greece had been largely successful ; new territories had been added to their empire and Eretria had been punished . It was only a minor setback that the invasion had met defeat at Marathon ; that defeat barely dented the enormous resources of the Persian empire . Yet , for the Greeks , it was an enormously significant victory . It was the first time that Greeks had beaten the Persians , and showed them that the Persians were not invincible , and that resistance , rather than subjugation , was possible . 
 The victory at Marathon was a defining moment for the young Athenian democracy , showing what might be achieved through unity and self @-@ belief ; indeed , the battle effectively marks the start of a ' golden age ' for Athens . This was also applicable to Greece as a whole ; " their victory endowed the Greeks with a faith in their destiny that was to endure for three centuries , during which western culture was born " . John Stuart Mill 's famous opinion was that " the Battle of Marathon , even as an event in British history , is more important than the Battle of Hastings " . 
 Militarily , a major lesson for the Greeks was the potential of the hoplite phalanx . This style had developed during internecine warfare amongst the Greeks ; since each city @-@ state fought in the same way , the advantages and disadvantages of the hoplite phalanx had not been obvious . Marathon was the first time a phalanx faced more lightly armed troops , and revealed how devastating the hoplites could be in battle . The phalanx formation was still vulnerable to cavalry ( the cause of much caution by the Greek forces at the Battle of Plataea ) , but used in the right circumstances , it was now shown to be a potentially devastating weapon . The Persians seem to have more @-@ or @-@ less disregarded the military lessons of Marathon . The composition of infantry for the second invasion seems to have been the same as during the first , despite the availability of hoplites and other heavy infantry in Persian @-@ ruled lands . Having won battles against hoplites previously , the Persians may simply have regarded Marathon as an aberration . 
 = = = Ancient sources = = = 
 Herodotus , The Histories 
 Thucydides , History of The Peloponnesian Wars 
 Diodorus Siculus , Library 
 Lysias , Funeral Oration 
 Plato , Menexenus 
 Xenophon Anabasis 
 Cornelius Nepos Lives of the Eminent Commanders ( Miltiades ) 
 Plutarch Parallel Lives ( Aristides , Themistocles ) , On the Malice of Herodotus 
 Pausanias , Description of Greece 
 Marcus <unk> Justinus Epitome of the <unk> History of Pompeius <unk> 
 Photius , Bibliotheca or <unk> : Epitome of Persica by Ctesias 
 Suda lexicon 
 = = = Modern sources = = = 
 Green , Peter ( 1996 ) . The Greco @-@ Persian Wars . University of California Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 520 @-@ 20313 @-@ 5 . 
 Holland , Tom ( 2006 ) . Persian Fire : The First World Empire and the Battle for the West . Abacus . ISBN 0 @-@ 385 @-@ 51311 @-@ 9 . 
 Lazenby , JF . The Defence of Greece 490 – 479 BC . Aris & Phillips Ltd . , 1993 ( ISBN 0 @-@ 85668 @-@ 591 @-@ 7 ) 
 Lloyd , Alan . Marathon : The Crucial Battle That Created Western Democracy . Souvenir Press , 2004 . ( ISBN 0 @-@ 285 @-@ <unk> @-@ X ) 
 Davis , Paul . 100 Decisive Battles . Oxford University Press , 1999 . ISBN 1 @-@ 57607 @-@ 075 @-@ 1 
 Higbie , C. The Lindian Chronicle and the Greek Creation of their Past . Oxford University Press , 2003 . 
 Powell J. , Blakeley D.W. , Powell , T. Biographical Dictionary of Literary Influences : The Nineteenth Century , 1800 @-@ 1914 . Greenwood Publishing Group , 2001 . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 313 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 
 Fuller , <unk> A Military History of the Western World . Funk & Wagnalls , 1954 . 
 Fine , <unk> . The Ancient Greeks : A Critical History . Harvard University Press , 1983 ( ISBN 0 @-@ 674 @-@ 03314 @-@ 0 ) . 
 Fehling , D. Herodotus and His " Sources " : Citation , Invention , and Narrative Art . Translated by J.G. Howie . Leeds : Francis Cairns , 1989 . 
 Finley , Moses ( 1972 ) . " Introduction " . Thucydides – History of the Peloponnesian War ( translated by Rex Warner ) . Penguin . ISBN 0 @-@ 14 @-@ 044039 @-@ 9 . 
 Howe , Timothy ; <unk> , Jeanne ( 2008 ) . Macedonian Legacies : Studies in Ancient Macedonian History and Culture in Honor of Eugene N. <unk> . Regina Books . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 930 @-@ <unk> @-@ 4 . 
 Ιστορία του <unk> <unk> ( History of the Greek nation volume Β ) , Athens 1971 
 Kampouris , M. ( 2000 ) . Η Μάχη του <unk> , το <unk> της <unk> <unk> ( The battle of Marathon , the dawn of classical Greece ) . <unk> και <unk> ( War and History magazine ) , no . 26 , January 2000 , Communications Editions , Athens . 
 <unk> , Livio . " The Persian Wars " . Retrieved 2007 @-@ 10 @-@ 17 . 
 Roisman , Joseph ; Worthington , Ian ( 2011 ) . A Companion to Ancient Macedonia . John Wiley and Sons . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ 44 @-@ 435163 @-@ 7 . 
 = Fire Emblem : Radiant Dawn = 
 Fire Emblem : Radiant Dawn , known in Japan as Fire Emblem : Akatsuki no Megami , is a tactical role @-@ playing game developed by Intelligent Systems and published by Nintendo for the Wii home console . It is the tenth entry in the Fire Emblem series , and acts as a direct sequel to the 2005 GameCube title Fire Emblem : Path of Radiance . It released in 2007 in Japan and North America , and 2008 in Europe and Australia . 
 Radiant Dawn 's plot begins in war @-@ torn Daein with the main character Micaiah and her allies rebelling against the oppressive Begnion army . The story is divided into four parts , and changes perspective between different factions within the continent of Tellius . The gameplay is similar to Path of Radiance and previous Fire Emblem titles , with units moving across a grid @-@ based map in turn @-@ based battles , and characters unrelated to the core plot being subject to permanent death if defeated . 
 Radiant Dawn began development in 2005 for the Wii after the success of Path of Radiance . Continuing the trend of developing for home consoles after a period on portable devices , it was intended to release close to the Wii hardware 's release so as to boost sales for both game and hardware . Radiant Dawn has been positively received by critics , many of whom criticised only the game 's high difficulty . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Radiant Dawn retains the gameplay mechanics of Fire Emblem : Path of Radiance , with turn @-@ based battles taking place on a square @-@ based grid . Most of the Path of Radiance cast returns , including all of its playable characters ( except Largo ) , as well as figures new to Tellius . Data from a completed Path of Radiance save file can be transferred to Radiant Dawn via a Nintendo GameCube memory card , which can lead to characters obtaining statistical gains . Support conversations from Path of Radiance can also be accessed and viewed using this method . In Radiant Dawn , the " support " system has been altered so that a unit can support any other unit , although units can only have one support relationship each . A secondary support known as a " bond " is also available , which is active by default or obtained when two units have attained an " A " support level in Path of Radiance . 
 Radiant Dawn 's multifaceted plot and lack of a permanent main character leads to the player controlling different factions in the game . In the later stages of the game , the player 's units will battle against a previously playable set of enemy units ; despite the " permanent death " feature common to the Fire Emblem series , some partner units and previously playable enemy units defeated in battle will still be playable later in the game . Radiant Dawn introduced new features relating to unit development , such as double promotion for <unk> , which grants the unit a special skill dependent on the unit 's class . New features have also been added to the laguz units , including a maximum level increased to 40 , the ability to fight <unk> , and the presence of the wolf laguz . 
 There are also modifications to combat , including an elevation advantage which grants units at a greater altitude with more power and accuracy . Radiant Dawn introduces the highest level of weaponry , known as " SS " , which requires a unit to have used a particular weapon type many times . In previous Fire Emblem games , archers could not attack adjacent units , but the crossbow , as well as a few other bows , allows such units to attack both adjacent and distant units . Dark magic , omitted from Path of Radiance but present in earlier games , was reintroduced to form a second magical trinity ( akin to the rock @-@ paper @-@ scissors system ) alongside the one in Path of Radiance . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Radiant Dawn is divided into four parts , each of which begins with a prologue chapter that introduces the situation , followed by a series of chapters that is resolved with an " Endgame " chapter . Three years after the Mad King 's War , detailed in Path of Radiance , Daein , the war 's instigator and eventual loser , and the victorious nation Crimea are still in the process of rebuilding . Although Crimea is ruled by Queen Elincia , Daein lacks a proper successor and is instead ruled by the occupation forces of the Begnion Empire . The Daein people are oppressed by the corrupt senate and imperial soldiers . A group of Daein rebels named the Dawn Brigade , headed by Micaiah and <unk> , act as vigilantes to provide some measure of hope . After being driven from the capital , they locate and ally with the late King Ashnard 's orphan son Pelleas , his scheming and ruthless adviser Izuka , the heron prince <unk> who was long presumed dead , the wolf queen Nailah , and the former general of Daein known as the Black Knight . The group launches a guerrilla war against the occupation army , and word of their plight eventually reaches Empress Sanaki of Begnion . The senate disavows and scapegoats occupation leader <unk> , who is overthrown and killed by the liberation army . Unbeknownst to them all , Izuka tricks Pelleas into signing a contract known as a blood pact with the head of the Begnion senate , <unk> , which will kill increasingly large amounts of Daein citizens when triggered . 
 Word of Pelleas ' ascension reaches Crimea , and Queen Elincia 's recognition of Pelleas as Daein 's rightful ruler outrages the Crimean nobility . A Crimean noble named Ludveck takes advantage of the tension to organize a rebellion in order to claim Crimea for himself . Ludveck 's troops siege Elincia 's castle , but they are repelled and Ludveck is captured . He attempts to force Elincia to release him by holding her friend Lucia hostage , but she is rescued by Ike and the Greil Mercenaries . Before Ike leaves , Elincia reveals the Black Knight 's return . 
 When Ike returns to his headquarters , he is hired by the Laguz Alliance , consisting of the hawk nation of <unk> , the raven nation of <unk> , and the beast nation of Gallia . Their representative , Ranulf , explains that <unk> has revealed that the Begnion senate was responsible for assassinating the previous apostle of Begnion and framing the heron clans for it , resulting in their near annihilation . This has led to the Laguz Alliance declaring war on Begnion . The situation quickly escalates , threatening to become a world war that will awaken the god of chaos Yune who will supposedly destroy the world . Begnion coerces Daein into joining the war on their side with the blood pact and uses another blood pact to force <unk> to betray the Laguz Alliance . Nailah and Prince <unk> of the dragon nation of <unk> learn of Daein 's plight and also side with them . Meanwhile , Begnion begins raiding Crimean villages for supplies , drawing Crimea into the conflict on the Laguz Alliance 's side , and Empress Sanaki escapes the senate 's clutches and joins the Alliance along with the faction of Begnion soldiers loyal to her . A massive battle ensues , and the chaos begins to awaken Yune ; Micaiah is forced to prematurely awaken her with the galdr of release . Yune 's awakening also awakens the goddess of order Ashera . 
 As punishment for bringing the world into chaos , Ashera subsequently petrifies Tellius ; only the most powerful warriors and human @-@ laguz half @-@ breeds survive . She decides that humankind is unworthy of survival and must be eradicated , and recruits the Begnion senate to this end . Guided by Yune , who sides with humanity , Ike , Micaiah , and King <unk> of <unk> lead three groups in an assault on the Tower of Guidance where Ashera lies . They confront the senators and Izuka , who reveal that Pelleas was not Ashnard 's son , but an unwitting dupe used to place Daein further under Begnion 's thumb . Ike also learns that the Black Knight 's true identity is the Begnion general <unk> , and defeats him in a duel . At the entrance to Ashera 's chambers , the group encounters Sanaki 's trusted adviser <unk> , who reveals himself to be the ancient heron <unk> . <unk> admits that the massacre of the heron clans destroyed his faith in humanity , and that he has since engineered both the Mad King 's War and the Laguz @-@ Begnion conflict in order to destroy the world . After defeating him , Yune empowers Ike with godlike power , and he defeats Ashera and restores peace to Tellius . Hundreds of years later , Yune and Ashera combine to again become the goddess <unk> , creator of Tellius . 
 = = Development = = 
 By 2005 , when Radiant Dawn 's predecessor Path of Radiance was release , the Fire Emblem series had successfully established itself overseas first with the release of Fire Emblem for the Game Boy Advance and then Path of Radiance for the Gamecube . The developers at Intelligent Systems wanted to continue the story of Path of Radiance on home consoles , but they decided not to release on the Gamecube as it was becoming a redundant system . Instead , as they had see the Fire Emblem series ' ability to sell hardware , they chose to develop the next title for the then @-@ in @-@ development Wii . Development began in May 2005 , the same time the Wii was first announced under its codename " Revolution " . The reason development began so early was because they wanted to release Radiant Dawn as close as possible to the console 's release , so it would boost both hardware and software sales : this was the first time in the series ' history the developers had attempted anything like that . They also decided to make it a Wii exclusive rather than making versions for both Wii and Gamecube , as the new graphics meant the game could not run on Gamecube . The wish to keep the series on home consoles rather than developing for the new portable Nintendo DS after its absence from them between the releases of Path of Radiance and Fire Emblem : Thracia 776 . The Wii 's motion controls options were not implemented into the gameplay as it felt unnecessary to the design . Wi @-@ Fi compatibility had been considered , with features such as downloadable battle maps and units , although difficulties relating to balance and difficulty prevented the idea from developing . 
 As with the previous game , the CGI cutscenes were created by Digital Frontier . The staff numbers , including those working on the cutscenes , went from around one hundred for Path of Radiance to around 200 for Radiant Dawn : half the staff worked on the game itself , while the other half worked on the cutscenes . For the cutscenes , Digital Frontier were asked to show a more epic scope rather than just focusing on the characters , a trend from Path of Radiance the developers felt was wrong . All of the character movements in cutscenes were mapped using motion capture , with between 100 and 150 animations per character to implement . 
 The scenario was a continuation of the narrative of Path of Radiance , even though that game was not given an intentional cliffhanger ending . So the story would be comprehensible for people who had not played Path of Radiance , the story was split up into four segments divided between the game 's various factions . The team initially thought of a three @-@ part structure , then settled on the current format . Their aim from the beginning was to create a large @-@ scale , intricate world for players to enjoy . It was the first time the developers had incorporated such a structure into a Fire Emblem game . The dialogue for characters was made slightly rougher based on feedback from Path of Radiance , where character dialogue remained calm and cultured even in battle situations . The total number of characters increased by approximately 1 @.@ 5 times compared to Path of Radiance . So players could keep track of how characters interacted with each other , the team introduced a character relationship flow chart . The game 's Japanese subtitle made reference to both a key character and the way <unk> came to be . They also wanted to continue to portray the themes of conflict explored in Path of Radiance . The game 's thematic color , expressed in its artwork and presentation , was red , as opposed to the use of blue in Path of Radiance . Senri Kita , the character designer for Path of Radiance , returned in that capacity for Radiant Dawn . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Radiant Dawn hold a score of 78 / 100 on the review aggregator Metacritic , indicating generally favorable reviews . GameSpot 's Lark Anderson noted that , although players can save mid @-@ battle , the difficulty " will easily overwhelm even experienced tacticians . " Eurogamer 's Keza MacDonald appreciated the depth and refinement of the game , but proceeded to note a lack of accessibility due to greater complication and difficulty as Radiant Dawn progresses . Some reviewers were also critical of the developers ' choice not to use the Wii 's motion controls , although RPGamer 's Bryan <unk> commented that " the game thankfully delivers a traditional experience that isn 't changed just for the sake of changing it . " In general , critics praised the gameplay system recognized in previous Fire Emblem games , but noted that the game felt too similar to its GameCube predecessor , with <unk> 's Chandra Nair commenting that Radiant Dawn has " refused to move forward . " Hyper 's Yuri <unk> commends the game for its " deep strategy and for being hard " . However , he criticises it for being " unforgiving " , noting that it features " permanent death and is not really a Wii game " . 
 Reviewers praised refinements of gameplay aspects present in Path of Radiance , such as the weapon forging system , which <unk> thought was simpler to control in Radiant Dawn . Despite this , other changes , such as those to the support system , were not as welcome , with GameSpot commenting that support conversations " have been reduced to mere battlefield chatter . " 1UP 's Michael Donahoe praised the game 's length and range of characters , but stated that the laguz " still aren 't very useful . " Although Fire Emblem games have been praised for their plot and characterisation in the past , GameSpot described the story as " laughable " and the game 's villains as clichéd and " one @-@ dimensional . " Conversely , RPGamer lauded the alterations in perspective by use of different protagonists , which <unk> felt " makes the overall story feel so much broader and more expansive in scope . " 
 The game 's presentation received a mixed response , with IGN 's Mark Bozon lauding the use of FMV and accompanying voice acting , although he commented that these were too infrequent , and that voice acting should have been used for the entirety of the game . The game 's music received a positive response , with GameSpy crediting the work of series composer Yuka Tsujiyoko as " Remarkably good . " However , multiple reviewers noted that the game 's visuals were very similar to its predecessor 's , with GameSpot rating them as " little to no improvement graphically " from Path of Radiance . GameSpy noted that the game 's visuals " aren 't mindblowing , " but welcomed Radiant Dawn 's interface and camera , stating that " A strategy game should often focus on function before form , but Radiant Dawn nails both . " 
 = Escape from Tomorrow = 
 Escape from Tomorrow is a 2013 American black @-@ and @-@ white independent fantasy horror film , the debut of writer and director Randy Moore . It follows an unemployed father having increasingly bizarre experiences and disturbing visions on the last day of a family vacation at the Walt Disney World Resort . It premiered in January at the 2013 Sundance Film Festival and was later a personal selection of Roger Ebert , shown at his 15th annual film festival in Champaign , Illinois . The film was a 2012 official selection of the <unk> Film Festival , but at the time filmmakers were still working on some legal issues and asked that it not be screened . 
 It drew attention because Moore had shot most of it on location at both Walt Disney World and Disneyland without permission from The Walt Disney Company , owner and operator of both parks . Due to Disney 's reputation of being protective of its intellectual property , the cast and crew used guerrilla filmmaking techniques to avoid attracting attention , such as keeping their scripts on their iPhones and shooting on handheld video cameras similar to those used by park visitors . After principal photography was complete , Moore was so determined to keep the project a secret from Disney that he edited it in South Korea . Sundance similarly declined to discuss the film in detail before it was shown . It was called " the ultimate guerrilla film " . 
 It has been compared to the work of Roman Polanski and David Lynch . However , many who saw it expressed strong doubts that the film would be shown to a wider audience due to the legal issues involved and the negative depiction of the parks . At the time of its premiere , Disney said that it was " aware " of the film ; since then the online supplement to Disney A to Z : The Official Encyclopedia has included an entry for the film . Rather than suppressing the film , Disney chose to ignore it . 
 Escape from Tomorrow was released simultaneously to theaters and video on @-@ demand on October 11 , 2013 , through PDA , a <unk> Media company . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A montage shows visitors on the rides at Walt Disney World Resort and the many visuals and animatronics that accompany the rides . It ends with a man losing his head while riding Big Thunder Mountain Railroad . On the last day of a family vacation at Walt Disney World , Jim White ( Roy <unk> ) gets fired by his boss during a phone call on the balcony of the Contemporary Resort Hotel with his family . He keeps the news to himself to avoid spoiling their vacation . During the call , he finds a white van pulling up to the hotel . Behind him , his son Elliot ( Jack Dalton ) locks the balcony door and Jim calls his wife Emily ( Elena <unk> ) to let him back in . The family leaves their room and takes the monorail to the park , alongside two French teenagers , Isabelle ( Annet Mahendru ) and Sophie ( Danielle Safady ) . 
 As chance encounters with the girls increase interests and Jim begins to pursue them , he has disturbing visions during the rides , such as the evil faces of audio @-@ animatronic characters and his family talking badly . After fighting with Emily and springing from decision to take Elliot on Space Mountain ( which gives Elliot motion sickness ) to keep chasing after the French girls , Jim takes his daughter Sara ( Katelyn Rodriguez ) to the Magic Kingdom and keeps tracking the girls , while his wife and son return to the hotel . Later , the son of a wheelchair @-@ bound man , whom Jim spotted earlier , shoves Sara , who scrapes her knee . Jim takes her to the park nurse , who while treating his daughter , seems extremely unsettled by the " cat flu " apparently spreading among the parks ' patrons , noting " You could be a host and not even know it . " Jim and Sara meet a mysterious woman with a glimmering amulet necklace which hypnotizes Jim . He blacks out and regains consciousness mid @-@ coitus with the woman in her room . Afterwards , she claims that the parks ' wholesome , costumed princesses are actually part of a secret prostitution ring that services " rich Asian businessmen " . Increasingly unnerved , he makes an awkward exit with Sara and eventually joins his wife and son at the pool , where he sees the French girls . He swims closer to converse with them , but his wife sees and berates him . 
 His family returns to Epcot , where the tension between Jim and Emily comes to a head after a drunk Jim vomits while on the Gran Fiesta Tour . Spotting the French girls , Emily argues with Jim about his obvious interest in them and slaps Sara . Embarrassed , she returns to the hotel with Elliot , leaving Jim and Sara to ride on the Soarin ' attraction , where Jim imagines a beautiful topless woman ( Zan Naar ) superimposed over the ride 's video footage of landscapes , who promises they will be together soon . After the ride and spotting the French girls once again , Sophie approaches and invites Jim to come with them , but he refuses after having a brief vision of Spaceship Earth crumbling and exploding . After Sophie spits on Jim 's face and she walks off , Jim notices that Sara disappears and searches frantically for her , but the park guards knock him unconscious , electrocuting him in the testicles with a Taser . Jim awakes in a secret detention facility under Epcot 's Spaceship Earth , where the pictures of the woman he imagined on the Soarin ' ride and video screens display images of events that happened earlier . A scientist activates a Spaceship Earth resembling helmet which covers Jim 's head and scans him while images of what the scientist calls " the real Jim " appear on the screens , being himself dressed differently and apparently part of another family . The scientist discusses Jim 's flights of fantasy and imagination that he is part of the experiment by the Siemens Corporation , since he first went to the theme park as a child with his father , his boss is in on the conspiracy and his firing was all part of the plan , and the closure of the Buzz Lightyear ride just as he and Elliot approached the boarding area , much to his son 's distress . The scientists also tells Jim that he had turned in Elliot to them , like Jim 's father had done to him as a child . After damaging the instrument panel with a medical ointment and decapitating the scientist which turns out to be an android , Jim escapes from the laboratory through the sewer . While searching for Sara , Jim trips next to the wheelchair @-@ bound man , suspects and attacks him . After realizing that he caused a scene and doubts the man 's involvement , he returns to the room of the woman , where he discovers she has captured Sara , now wearing a Snow White costume . The woman rambles about her time as a character princess and tells him how bad things happen everywhere , including the decapitation at the park . She again hypnotizes Jim with the necklace , but Sara pulls it off and smashes it , freeing Jim from her spell . He returns to his hotel room and puts his family to bed . Jim suffers with digestive distress , vomits up a large amount of blood and hairballs , which he recognizes as symptoms of the cat flu . He begins to panic and bleed uncontrollably in the bathroom . Elliot enters and Jim begs him for help , but he closes the door on him . 
 The next morning , Emily finds Jim 's corpse , which now has cat eyes and a grinning face . Disney cleaning staff arrive to remove proof of death and fill Elliot 's head with false memories of riding the Buzz Lightyear attraction . They take Jim 's body to the unmarked white van from the opening . Meanwhile , the valet from the video screens greets the " real Jim " , accompanied by the fantasy woman and a young girl , before they check into the hotel as the valet watches the van drive away . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Roy <unk> as Jim White , a repressed middle @-@ aged father of two 
 Elena <unk> as Emily , Jim 's frustrated wife 
 <unk> Rodriguez as Sara , Jim and Emily 's daughter 
 Jack Dalton as Elliott , Jim and Emily 's son 
 Danielle Safady and Annet Mahendru as Sophie and Isabelle , the two French teen girls 
 Alison Lees @-@ Taylor as the Other Woman 
 Lee Armstrong as the Man on Scooter 
 Amy Lucas as the Nurse 
 Zan Naar as the Fantasy Woman / New Wife 
 <unk> Klassen as The Scientist 
 Trevor McCune as Valet 
 = = Background = = 
 Moore , a native of Lake Bluff , Illinois , frequently visited his father in Orlando following his parents ' divorce . The two often spent time together at Walt Disney World nearby . " It was a special , physical place , and it became an emotional space , " he told Filmmaker . " Obviously , I have a lot of father issues that I can 't separate from that place . " Later , their relationship deteriorated . 
 He decided to pursue a career in film . After attending two other film schools , he graduated from Full Sail University in another Central Florida town , Winter Park , as the class valedictorian . He moved to Southern California and began working as a story editor , primarily doing uncredited rewrites . 
 In Hollywood , he married and started a family . Much like his own father , he frequently took his own children to Disneyland . " It wasn 't until our first family trip together that this very visceral emotional landscape of my past , that I had by now nearly all but forgotten , hit me again like [ a ] bullet . " On the family 's first trip to Walt Disney World , the emotions grew stronger . " [ I ] t was like he was there as a ghost . We were going on the same rides I used to go on with him , but now we 're no longer talking anymore . " 
 His wife , a native of the former Soviet Union who had no memories or expectations like his , saw things with fresh eyes . " She 's a nurse and goes between floors at hospitals . At one point she turned to me at some princess fair or something and said , ' This is worse than working the psych [ ward ] at the hospital . ' " 
 He read Neal Gabler 's biography of Walt Disney and took the children to Disneyland more frequently . " I became obsessed with finding a connection , " he recalled later . He wrote the screenplay for Escape from Tomorrow in a month along with two others . An inheritance from his grandparents provided the bulk of the film 's budget , which he put at around $ 650 @,@ 000 , triple what he had originally planned . 
 = = Production = = 
 " There was nowhere else to do it , " Moore says of his decision to use Disney World as a setting and shoot at the parks . Disney , which has a reputation for aggressively protecting its intellectual property , has been tolerant of visitors uploading videos of their visits to YouTube and elsewhere since most of those user @-@ created videos project a positive image of the parks . But Moore did not expect to get permission from Disney to shoot there given his negative , surrealistic portrayal of the park . 
 Instead he used guerrilla filmmaking techniques , which sometimes call for using locations without getting permission . Escape from Tomorrow is not the first film made in whole , or part , this way at the Disney parks . In 2010 , the British street artist Banksy shot a scene for Exit Through the Gift Shop in one of the parks with his collaborator Mr. Brainwash . They managed to smuggle the footage out after being detained and questioned by park security . The following year , a viral found footage short , Missing in the Mansion , filmed in the Haunted Mansion , was distributed online without interference from Disney . 
 Extensive pre @-@ production was necessary . The unique nature of the film shoot dictated steps not normally taken in filmmaking , such as charting the position of the sun weeks in advance since they could not use lighting equipment . Scenes were rehearsed and blocked in hotel rooms , rather than the actual locations . " We must have walked through the entire movie at least eight or nine times during multiple scouting trips before we ever rolled camera , " Moore says . 
 Before principal photography , the cast and crew bought season passes to both the Disneyland and Walt Disney World resorts . They spent ten days in Florida , then returned to California for two weeks at Disneyland , making the parks depicted in the film a combination of both resorts . Actors and crew entered the parks in small groups to avoid attracting attention . " At one point , I even made the camera department shave off their facial hair and dress in tourist attire , which almost provoked a mutiny , " says Moore . Despite the actors wearing the same clothes for days on end , Moore told the Los Angeles Times , no one at the gates seemed to suspect anything , save for one day near the end of filming when Disneyland security thought they were paparazzi harassing a celebrity family . 
 The film was shot using the video mode of two Canon EOS 5D Mark II and one Canon EOS 1D Mark IV digital single @-@ lens reflex cameras , which helped the filmmakers look more like typical park visitors . To compensate for their inability to control the lighting , the film was shot in monochrome mode . " [ W ] e were shooting with really fast lenses wide open , so our depth of field was razor thin . Black and white helped us enormously with focus and composition , since we were doing almost everything in camera and didn 't use a focus puller , " Moore recalled . It was an irreversible choice . " [ B ] ecause the 5D doesn 't shoot RAW , we customized settings in its monochromatic mode and couldn 't go back to color , even if we had wanted to . " Moore was comfortable with the result because of the surrealistic , dreamlike quality it created , forcing viewers to see the familiar sights of the Disney parks in a new way . 
 Actors and crew used their iPhones to communicate and store information such as the script — that way , they looked like guests casually using their phones . The phones were also used to record sound , in addition to digital recorders taped to each actor 's body that were left running all day . For day scenes , Moore felt comfortable risking only three or four takes of each scene , but found he could do more at night . 
 Scenes involved riding on eight recognizable attractions in the parks . One required waiting in a long line for the Buzz Lightyear ride at Disneyland , and the actors rode It 's a Small World at least 12 times to get the scene right . " I was surprised the ride operators weren 't a little more savvy , " Moore told The New York Times . For a scene where two characters pass on the People Mover , Moore had the actors ride it for hours while he worked out the timing . 
 After the location filming , production went back to soundstages for interiors . Some scenes were shot against a green screen background for second unit footage of other locations to be substituted , allowing the use of crane shots . With the photography done , Moore took the film to South Korea to edit to prevent Disney from finding out ; he also refused to tell most of his close friends what he was doing . Visual effects were done by the same company there that had done them for the 2006 South Korean monster film , The Host . 
 The post @-@ production tasks were as challenging as the production itself . Sound editors had to listen to the entire uncut tracks from the recorders taped to the actors ' bodies in order to find the dialogue . Content proprietary to Disney , such as the lyrics to " It 's a Small World " and footage from Soarin ' , was removed from the film to avoid copyright infringement . Composer Abel Korzeniowski contributed a light , airy score similar to those used in Hollywood 's Golden Age . 
 = = Sundance = = 
 Moore submitted the completed film to the Sundance Film Festival , where many independent films seek distributors . He had little hope that it would be accepted due to the festival 's corporate sponsors . But Trevor Groth , the festival 's new director of programming , was " blown away " by Escape from Tomorrow , and accepted it for the festival 's non @-@ competitive " Next " category , for films that transcend the limitations of the low budgets common to most independent films . 
 When the 2013 festival began in Park City , Utah , the secrecy about the movie continued . The festival 's website only identified the setting as a theme park . Nan <unk> @-@ <unk> , critic for the Park Record , recalls that the festival and even the film 's publicist were unwilling to share further details about the film , but strongly urged critics to see it . In her review , she declined to identify the setting of the film by name , although she dropped broad hints , out of fear it would alert Disney 's lawyers . The premiere , on the festival 's first night , was not fully attended ; when word got out to the attendees , all the other shows were effectively sold out . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a rating of 56 % based on 78 reviews . The site 's critical consensus reads : " Conceptually audacious but only intermittently successful in execution , Escape From Tomorrow is nonetheless visually inventive and darkly surreal . " On Metacritic , the film has a score of 58 out of 100 , based on 27 critics , indicating " mixed or average reviews " . 
 Before the Martin Luther King Day weekend was over , Escape from Tomorrow was being widely discussed by festival attendees . The New York Times and the Los Angeles Times both ran articles about the film and Moore . Much of the attention focused on the audacity of the filmmaking . Movies.com reported that people were already calling it " the ultimate guerrilla film " . On the night of the premiere , Drew McWeeny wrote : 
 It is not possible that this film exists . It is not possible that they shot long scripted sequences on the actual rides . It is not possible that I just saw a film in which it is suggested and then shown that the various Disney princesses all work as high @-@ priced hookers who sell their wares to wealthy Asian businessmen . It simply cannot be true . 
 I grew up in Florida , and I have been going to Walt Disney World my entire life . I worked at that park . I 've been there as a child , as a teenager , as an employee , and as a parent . I 've done Disney sitting on my father 's shoulders , and I 've done the Disney parks with my kids sitting on my shoulders . It is a huge part of my DNA , and I can tell you that there is no way Randy Moore pulled off what I saw tonight . It is a film that should not exist by any rational definition . 
 And yet ... not only does it exist , but it 's fascinating . 
 He allowed that it was " undisciplined at times , rough around the edges in places , technically uneven , and there 's no sense of pacing to it at all . Even so , " he concluded , " there is a sort of naive charm that makes it impossible to look away . " 
 Other critics concurred that the film had artistic merit . " [ W ] <unk> Moore 's noir tale is like being super @-@ glued to your seat while getting poked in the eye , " <unk> @-@ <unk> wrote . " It 's both fascinating and repelling . " Stephen <unk> of the Los Angeles Times called it " one of the strangest and most provocative movies this reporter has seen in eight years attending the Sundance Film Festival " . At Indiewire , Eric Kohn wrote that " Moore portrays Disney World as the ultimate horror show – and gets the point across in nearly every scene " . While they conceded the film 's audacious production made it worth their time to watch , other critics found flaws . " It 's not a great film . The story has some good ideas , but the execution is uneven , " wrote Peter Sciretta at / Film , while still recommending it as " unlike anything you 've seen before [ or will ] see again " . Similarly , CraveOnline 's William Bibbiani " wouldn 't have missed it for the world " but qualified it by noting that the film often lacked " cohesion and clarity " . 
 Musician and comedian Tony Goldmark , on his Channel Awesome produced webseries " Some Jerk With A Camera " ( which also films on @-@ site at the Disney parks ) , criticized the film in a three part review , saying " Half of it bores me , half of it confuses me , and all of it pisses me off . It 's not even pretentious . You need ambition to be pretentious . This is just fucking inept . " Goldmark also stated in his review that he is " not the least bit surprised " that Disney didn 't push legal action against the film , claiming that " They would have Streisand <unk> themselves into a laughingstock . " Despite his dissenting opinion on the film , Goldmark also claimed that the film 's existence shows what anybody can do with modern technology , Saying : 
 Drew McWeeny couldn 't have been more wrong . This film wasn 't just possible , It was inevitable . No matter what some soulless YouTube bot on the wrong side of history may tell you , no one needs anyone 's permission to make stuff anymore . We never did really , we just thought we did because they had all the resources . But now , we all have HD cameras in our pockets and worldwide distribution at our fingertips . And the very existence of Escape From Tomorrow means more symbolically than its content ever could , but its content is borderline unwatchable . Like a less racist Birth Of A Nation . 
 Kyle Smith of the New York Post had the most negative assessment , calling it " more fun to discuss than to sit through " . While he found the guerilla filmmaking aspect of it " intriguing " , all it amounted to for him was " a couple of amusingly surreal moments " that could have taken place at any sufficiently large amusement park : " Even Disney @-@ hating hipsters are going to be disappointed ; the film is a pure festival play that is more or less unreleasable unless theater owners start selling weed along with popcorn . " 
 = = Legal issues = = 
 Every reviewer at Sundance who saw the film speculated that it was likely that Disney would take legal action to prevent the film from being shown outside the festival , or perhaps even during it . " Disney 's lawyers are probably climbing onto helicopters and planning a raid on Park City right now , " wrote McWeeny . Reviewers urged others present to see it before it was too late , and expressed regret that their readers elsewhere would likely be denied a chance to see the film for themselves . 
 However , it was unclear what the basis of such a legal claim on Disney 's part could be . Moore took care to avoid direct copyright infringement of songs or films played as part of attractions , and intellectual property law is less clear on the other aspects of the film . Science fiction writer Cory Doctorow , who distributed his first novel , Down and Out in the Magic Kingdom , set in a 22nd @-@ century Disney World , under a Creative Commons license , believes there 's at most " a possible trademark claim , and I suppose that Disney could <unk> [ y ] bring suit for violating the park 's terms of use , but these are much harder cases to make than copyright . " 
 Columbia Law School professor Tim Wu does not think Disney would have any defensible intellectual property claim . " Though the filmmakers may have committed trespass when they broke Disney World 's rules and if it violated the terms of entry on their tickets , the film itself is a different matter , " he wrote on The New Yorker 's blog . " As commentary on the social ideals of Disney World , it seems to clearly fall within a well @-@ recognized category of fair use , and therefore probably will not be stopped by a court using copyright or trademark laws . " 
 Despite the film 's repeated use of Disney 's characters and iconography , Wu explained , trademark law was not sufficient . " Disney does not have some kind of general intellectual @-@ property right in Disney World itself . " To make a trademark @-@ infringement case against Moore , he continued , Disney would have to convince a court that the use of its protected imagery in the movie could reasonably lead viewers to believe that it had a role in the film 's production , and he did not think that was a plausible argument . " The scene where a Disney Princess attempts to crush a child seems to eliminate that possibility . " 
 As for copyright , Wu sees Moore 's use of the Disney parks as transformative : 
 ... [ H ] is use of Disney World is not as simple window dressing ; he transforms it into something gruesome and disturbing — a place where , for example , guests are sometimes tasered and have their imaginations purged ... It might be a violation if Moore had made a film designed for viewers who wanted to see Disney World but were too lazy to go to Florida . Escape from Tomorrow , however , is clearly no substitute for buying a ticket . 
 As such , he sees the film as offering artistic commentary on the cultural impact of Disney , and thus clearly falling under fair use . Wu likens it to a 1990s case brought by Mattel against artist Thomas Forsythe , after he sold some of his photographs depicting another American icon , Barbie , being eaten by vintage appliances as a way of calling attention to the toy doll 's role in promoting the objectification of women in American culture . Not only did the court dismiss Mattel 's complaint , " [ t ] he judges were so annoyed by the lawsuits that they awarded attorney 's fees of nearly two million dollars to the artist ... A judge has to think of the First Amendment when asked to ban art work . " 
 In his / Film review , Sciretta raised another issue : 
 Intellectual property and copyrights aside , many people appear in this film who have never signed a release . Real families and children are seen in the background of almost every shot . None of them gave permission or knew they were being filmed for a feature film . 
 At Slate , Aisha Harris allowed that this was a possibility , especially if children were filmed without their parents ' consent , but noted " the law on that issue is not black and white either . " 
 = = = Response by Disney = = = 
 Disney did not return reporters ' calls or emails for comment , nor took any legal action during the festival , although it confirmed to CNN that it was " aware " of the movie . Despite critical apprehension that the film would never be shown outside the festival , some observers saw the situation as more complex . Were Disney to attempt to forcefully suppress the film , that effort could serve to draw even more attention to it , a phenomenon known as the Streisand effect . Even if Disney were to successfully prevent official distribution , the film could easily be pirated and distributed over the Internet . In his Post review , Smith suggested that Disney prevent this by taking the opposite course , simply ignoring Escape from Tomorrow and letting the attention dissipate by itself . 
 Michael Ryan , director of The <unk> Film Festival , noted that there was a precedent for the film in the Air Pirates lawsuit , in which Disney spent eight years in court with some underground cartoonists who had published an underground comix parody in which Mickey Mouse and the other Disney characters engaged in explicit sex and used illegal drugs , among other behavior they avoided in Disney 's own narratives . He suggested that Disney buy the rights and release the film itself , which it could easily do as its announced interest would guarantee it a monopsony on the film since no other distributor would want to match Disney 's deep pockets or its feared legal response . As a Disney release , Escape from Tomorrow would have a large potential audience of both Disney enthusiasts and antagonists , Disney would be making money from property it already owns instead of someone else and the company 's apparent willingness to go in the joke would take some of the satiric edge off . 
 Moore expressed hope that the film could be shown and released , even if it meant a legal battle . 
 It depends on how good a case lawyers can make for it . If they say I have a chance , I 'll definitely fight for it . I worked on it really hard for three years and it took a lot out of me . Just to let it disappear would be a waste of time . 
 Since the film 's release Disney has discreetly acknowledged it in another way . The online supplement to Disney A to Z : The Official Encyclopedia includes an entry for Escape from Tomorrow , describing it as " An independent surrealistic cult film surreptitiously filmed at Walt Disney World and Disneyland . " 
 According to The Hollywood Reporter , Disney chose to avoid responding to the film altogether , rather than seeking legal action , in an effort to prevent increased publicity . 
 = Battle of Elephant Point = 
 The Battle of Elephant Point was an airborne operation conducted by a composite Gurkha airborne battalion that took place on 1 May 1945 . In March 1945 , plans were made for an assault on Rangoon , the capital of Burma , as a stepping @-@ stone on the way to recapturing Malaya and Singapore . Initial plans for the assault on the city had called for a purely land @-@ based approach by British Fourteenth Army , but concerns about heavy Japanese resistance led to this being modified with the addition of a joint amphibious @-@ airborne assault . This assault , led by 26th Indian Division , would sail up the Rangoon River , but before it could do so , the river would have to be cleared of Japanese and British mines . In order to achieve this , coastal defences along the river would have to be neutralized , including a battery at Elephant Point . 
 This task was given to 44th Indian Airborne Division , but the division was in the middle of a reorganization , and as such a composite battalion was formed from two Gurkha parachute battalions . The battalion assembled and then trained throughout April , and then early in the morning of 1 May was dropped near Elephant Point . As it advanced towards the battery one of the battalion 's companies was attacked by American bombers , causing a number of casualties . Despite this , and torrential rain , the battalion successfully assaulted Elephant Point and neutralized the battery there after a fierce firefight . It remained around Elephant Point until 2 May , when 26th Indian Division conducted its amphibious assault and secured Rangoon . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 22 March , as the joint battles of Meiktila and Mandalay were drawing to a close , a conference was held at <unk> in Burma , attended by senior Allied military figures including Admiral Lord Mountbatten , the commander in chief of the Allied South East Asia Command , and General William Slim , commander of Fourteenth Army . The object of the conference was to discuss future Allied strategy in South East Asia in the aftermath of Meiktila and Mandalay , including the reconquest of Burma and the retaking of Malaya and then Singapore . In order to secure these objectives however , Rangoon , the capital of Burma , would have to be captured before the onset of the monsoon rains , which would impede any Allied advance over land ; the Allied Chiefs of Staff worked on the assumption that this would occur before June . After Rangoon had fallen , a force of between four and five divisions would be landed in Western Malaya in an operation code @-@ named Zipper , which would itself be followed by <unk> , the capture of Singapore . 
 To accommodate all of these goals , Mountbatten insisted that Rangoon be taken by May . Slim had initially planned to take the city in a pincer movement , with XXXIII Corps advancing towards the city down the east bank of the Irrawaddy river via <unk> , and IV Corps taking a shorter route along the <unk> River valley to the east . Slim believed that the Japanese had insufficient forces to block both thrusts , and one of the corps would therefore be able to capture Rangoon . However , Mountbatten was unsure that a purely overland advance would be successful , and that a joint airborne @-@ amphibious assault would therefore be the better option . Slim and others , such as Slim 's superior , General Oliver Leese ( commander of Allied Land Forces , South East Asia ) , initially opposed such an operation , fearing that it would divert vital resources from Fourteenth Army . By the time of the meeting at <unk> , however , Slim had come around to Mountbatten 's way of thinking , fearing that a purely overland advance would meet fierce Japanese resistance , as it had at Meiktila , and be delayed at the end of an overextended supply line . As such , a combined airborne and amphibious assault would be ideal as Fourteenth Army neared Rangoon , Slim arguing that it would be " a hammering at the back door while I burst in at the front . " On 2 April orders were issued for the operation to go ahead , with the proviso that Rangoon be in Allied hands by 5 May at the latest . 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 The joint operation was christened Dracula , and its schedule was decided by the Royal Navy , under the command of Admiral Arthur Power , who was responsible for the amphibious portion of the assault on Rangoon . Several problems had to be overcome during the planning for the operation . The first , and the least likely , was that the amphibious assault would be intercepted by elements of the Imperial Japanese Navy as it neared Rangoon . To ensure that the amphibious elements would remain unmolested , 21 Carrier Squadron , commanded by Commodore G.N. Oliver was attached to provide fight cover for the landings ; the squadron consisted of four escort carriers , two cruisers and four destroyers . Operating further out would be 3rd Battle Squadron , commanded by Vice Admiral Walker , which was formed of two battleships , HMS Queen Elizabeth and the Free French battleship Richelieu , as well another two escort carriers , four cruisers and six destroyers . Two days prior to Dracula taking place , this " massive naval screen " bombed several ports and airfields , and also engaged a Japanese troop convoy transporting more than one thousand Japanese troops to nearby Moulmein , sinking all the vessels . The Royal Air Force would provide support in the form of two RAF long @-@ range fighter Wings , and the United States Army Air Forces with eight B @-@ 24 Liberator and four B @-@ 25 Mitchell bomber squadrons . 
 More of a concern to Dracula 's planners , however , were the land @-@ based threats to the landing craft carrying the assault troops of 26th Indian Division . Air support was deemed to be vital to the operation 's success , and a number of Japanese airfields around <unk> were captured in the days leading up to Dracula . There was also the problem of the defences in and around the River Rangoon , up which the landing craft were to sail . The river itself was heavily mined , a result of Japanese defensive measures as well as RAF offensive operations earlier in the conflict , and it would have to be swept and cleared of mines before any amphibious assault could take place . Before this could occur , however , the coastal defences along the banks of the river would have to be neutralized ; a particular worry was the presence of an artillery battery at Elephant Point on the west bank of the river . The geography of the area ensured that the battery could not be destroyed through artillery bombardment or airstrikes , and weather conditions precluded an early amphibious assault . As such , it was decided that a day before Dracula began on 2 May , a parachute battalion would be dropped near Elephant Point with the task of assaulting and destroying the battery . 
 The task was given to 44th Indian Airborne Division , but this presented several problems . The division was in the middle of a reorganization , and many of its officers were on leave , as were two Gurkha airborne battalions ; another , the 3rd Gurkha Parachute Battalion , was about to transfer to 77th Indian Parachute Brigade . With no one unit available , a composite force was put together for the operation . The Headquarters Company was formed of men from 2nd and 3rd Gurkha Parachute Battalions , and each battalion provided a further two companies – A and B from 2nd Gurkha Parachute Battalion and C and D from 3rd Gurkha Parachute Battalion . A mortar platoon and machine gun platoon augmented the ad hoc formation . The battalion was formed in early April , and came under the command of Major Jack Newland . After its initial formation it transferred to <unk> , where its strength was augmented by Field Ambulance and Indian Engineers sections and it undertook training for the operation . When was this was completed it was transported to Midnapore , where for ten days it assembled its equipment and conducted a rehearsal exercise . Finally , on 29 April it was flown to Akyab on the Burmese coast , approximately 200 miles north of Rangoon , and was soon joined by a 200 @-@ strong reserve force formed of men from both Gurkha battalions and the 152nd Indian Parachute Battalion . The battalion would be transported in 40 C @-@ 47 Skytrain transport aircraft belonging to 1st and 2nd United States Air Commando Group . 
 = = Battle = = 
 At 02 : 30 on 1 May , a C @-@ 47 of 317 Tactical Control Squadron USAAF departed for Rangoon carrying a twenty @-@ man pathfinder team , followed by a CCG plane carrying a pair of VCP , to mark and defend the landing zone at <unk> . The rest of the composite battalion boarded thirty @-@ eight Dakotas and took off thirty minutes later , and at 05 : 45 jumped over the drop zone ; there were only a few casualties , one being a medical officer attached to the battalion . It encountered no Japanese opposition , and after it had rallied , advanced towards Elephant Point and the artillery battery . It halted 3 @,@ 000 yards in front of the battery to allow B @-@ 24 Liberators from the USAAF to carry out a preliminary bombing attack on the battery . Unfortunately , despite officers and other ranks wearing yellow recognition panels and carrying orange umbrellas to identify themselves , C Company was bombed and strafed by the bombers , causing a number of casualties . As a result , a Forward Air Controller attached to the battalion ordered a halt to all further bombing runs on the battery . 
 After moving through torrential rain , the battalion reached Elephant Point at 16 : 00 , and close @-@ quarters fighting then took place , with flame @-@ throwers being used against several Japanese bunkers guarding the battery . About forty Japanese soldiers and gunners were killed during the assault , and the battalion also sustained several casualties . After the battery had been secured the battalion dug in around Elephant Point and awaited the arrival of the relief force , which landed at <unk> at 15 : 30 , with a supply drop following it several minutes later . As it neared the position of the battalion , the surgical team accompanying the relief force was accidentally fired upon by the Gurkhas , causing four members of the team to be wounded . The battalion remained where it was through the night , although high tides submerged a number of trenches and forced the battalion to higher ground . By the dawn of 2 May , after it had cleared a number of nearby bunkers , the battalion was able to watch as minesweepers cleared the Rangoon river for the columns of landing craft following behind them . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Operation Dracula was a complete success , as Japanese forces had actually vacated Rangoon several days prior to the amphibious landing ; 36th Indian Infantry Brigade was able to occupy the city without encountering any Japanese opposition . Shortly after Rangoon 's occupation Japanese forces called for a cease @-@ fire , and plans for the amphibious landing in Western Malaya and an advance into Singapore were cancelled . Instead , British and Commonwealth forces landed unopposed and liberated those areas , and also temporarily occupied Thailand . On 3 May the composite battalion moved to <unk> , and two days later , leaving one company behind , it was transferred to Rangoon where it conducted anti @-@ looting operations and also searched for Japanese stragglers remaining in the city . It left the city on 16 May and travelled to India by ship , where it rejoined 44th Indian Airborne Division . It had been the division 's first major airborne operation . The 2nd Air Commando Group 's C @-@ 47s , which had transported the parachute battalion , returned to <unk> and then moved to Comilla . The 317th Tactical Control Squadron spent the next two weeks supplying XV Corps who were engaged with Japanese forces northeast of Rangoon and returned to <unk> on 19 May . The group 's fighter squadrons provided air cover for Rangoon until 9 May when they too returned to home station . 
 = Tooms = 
 " Tooms " is the twenty @-@ first episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on April 22 , 1994 . " Tooms " was written by Glen Morgan and James Wong , and directed by David Nutter . The episode featured Mitch Pileggi 's first appearance as Assistant Director Walter Skinner , and saw Doug Hutchison and William B. Davis reprise their roles as Eugene Victor Tooms and The Smoking Man , respectively . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Tooms " earned a Nielsen household rating of 8 @.@ 6 , being watched by 8 @.@ 1 million households in its initial broadcast ; and received positive reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . When mutant serial killer Eugene Tooms , last seen in " Squeeze " , is released from prison , Mulder and Scully try to stop him from resuming his killing spree . Tooms , however , sets out to frame Mulder for assault before the agent can apprehend him . 
 After seeing men working on an open escalator in a mall around Christmas time , Glen Morgan decided to revisit the character of Eugene Victor Tooms , from the first episode he and co @-@ writer James Wong wrote for the series , " Squeeze " . " Tooms " introduced the character of Walter Skinner , although this would be his only appearance in the first season . The character had been conceived as playing against the stereotypical bureaucratic " paper @-@ pusher " , being instead someone more " quietly dynamic " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After the events of " Squeeze " , Eugene Victor Tooms has been placed in a sanatorium in Baltimore . He attempts to escape by squeezing his arm through the food slot of his cell door , but is forced to abort when he is visited by his psychologist , Dr. Aaron Monte . 
 Dana Scully is called before FBI assistant director Walter Skinner , who is accompanied by the Smoking Man . Despite the success of the X @-@ Files investigations , Skinner criticizes their <unk> and wants both Scully and Fox Mulder to do by @-@ the @-@ book work . The agents attend a release hearing for Tooms , where Monte claims that Tooms ' attack on Scully was due to being falsely accused of murder . Mulder tries to point out the physical evidence of Tooms ' physiology and crimes , but is ignored by the hearing 's panel . Tooms is released into the care of an elderly couple , and is ordered to continue his treatment with Dr. Monte . 
 Scully meets with Frank Briggs , the detective who investigated Tooms ' 1933 murders . Briggs claims that the body of one of the victims from that spree was never discovered . Scully and Briggs visit a chemical plant where a piece of the victim 's liver was found , ultimately discovering a skeleton encased in concrete . Meanwhile , Mulder harasses Tooms at work as he stalks a would @-@ be victim . Later that night , Mulder follows him when he tries to break into a man 's house . Tooms flees without attacking anyone . 
 A researcher examining the skeleton identifies it as the missing victim from 1933 . However , there seems to be no substantial evidence proving that Tooms was the murderer . Scully relieves Mulder , who is watching Tooms ' new residence ; they are unaware that Tooms is hiding in the trunk of Mulder 's car . He manages to break into Mulder 's apartment , where he injures himself and imprints Mulder 's shoe print on his face . Tooms ' <unk> leads to Mulder being questioned by the police . Skinner forbids Mulder from contacting Tooms . 
 Further research on the skeleton reveals bite marks matching Tooms ' teeth . When the old couple watching Tooms depart and Tooms is visited by Monte , he kills him and consumes the final liver he needs before his thirty @-@ year hibernation . After discovering Monte 's body , Mulder and Scully head to Tooms ' former residence at 66 Exeter Street , which has been demolished and replaced with a shopping mall . Inside , Mulder crawls below an escalator and finds Tooms ' nest . Tooms bursts out , covered in bile , and pursues Mulder , who makes it to the surface and activates the escalator , trapping and killing Tooms . 
 Skinner reads Scully 's final report on the Tooms case and asks the Smoking Man if he believes it , to which he replies , " Of course I do . " Outside , Scully finds Mulder , who is observing a caterpillar 's cocoon . Mulder predicts that change is coming to the X @-@ Files . 
 = = Production = = 
 <unk> a sequel to " Squeeze " posed a challenge for writers Glen Morgan and James Wong , who had never written a follow @-@ up to any of their work previously . Morgan felt that the primary difficulty was in moving the story forward while still leaving room to recap what had happened previously for the benefit of viewers who had not seen the first episode ; this led to the use of the courtroom scene as a means to repeat any necessary information . Morgan also felt that Harry Longstreet , the initial director for " Squeeze " , had been " a problem " , and a second episode allowed for the use of scenes which Longstreet had failed to film for the earlier episode . To this end , the episode was helmed by David Nutter , who series creator Chris Carter considered the " best " director working on the series . 
 Morgan was inspired to write this episode after seeing men working on an open escalator in a mall around Christmas time . He thought of the scare factor from a creature living underneath the escalator , and felt Tooms would be the perfect choice for the creature . Tooms was the first villain in the show 's history to make an appearance in a second episode . It was actor Doug Hutchison 's idea to play Tooms nude during the escalator sequence , a decision which Carter felt " caused a little discomfort " , but that " actually added to the scene " . The bile @-@ like substance coating Tooms and his nest was actually a yellow piping gel , which the cast found would stick to their skin and pull out hair upon removal . Tooms framing Mulder for assault seems to have been inspired by a similar plot point in the film Dirty Harry . 
 " Tooms " introduced the character of Walter Skinner , although this would be his only appearance in the first season . The character had been conceived as playing against the stereotypical bureaucratic " paper @-@ pusher " , being instead someone more " quietly dynamic " . Actor Mitch Pileggi had auditioned unsuccessfully for several other parts on the series before being cast as Skinner . At first , the fact that he was asked back to audition for the role had puzzled him , until he discovered the reason he had not cast for the previous parts — Chris Carter had been unable to imagine Pileggi as any of those characters , due to the fact that the actor had been shaving his head . When Pileggi attended the audition for Skinner , he had been in a grumpy mood and had allowed his small amount of hair to grow back . Pileggi 's attitude fit well with the character of Skinner , causing Carter to assume that the actor was only pretending to be grumpy . After successfully auditioning for the role , Pileggi thought he had been lucky that he had not been cast in one of the earlier roles , as he believed he would have appeared in only a single episode and would have missed the opportunity to play the recurring role of Skinner . 
 The episode 's climactic scene in the shopping mall where Tooms had made his nest was filmed in City Square Mall , Vancouver . Shooting at the location required the permission of every store owner on the premises , and care was taken to ensure that the stage blood used for the escalator scene did not seep into the escalator 's motor to avoid possible damage . " Tooms " includes The Smoking Man 's first line of dialogue in the series , and his only lines of the first season . Carter was initially unsure that the character would ever receive any dialogue , feeling that he would seem " more forbidding " if he remained silent . However , he described actor William B. Davis as " an extremely competent actor " , noting the character 's increasing popularity . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Tooms " premiered on the Fox network on April 22 , 1994 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on February 16 , 1995 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 6 , with a 15 share , meaning that roughly 8 @.@ 6 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 15 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 8 @.@ 1 million households . 
 In a retrospective of the first season in Entertainment Weekly , " Tooms " was rated an A , with the Hutchison 's appearance being noted as " another sublimely slimy performance " , whilst Pileggi 's performance was said to have an " engagingly steely presence " . Zack Handlen , writing for The A.V. Club , called the episode " a richly rewarding one " , finding the interaction between the characters of Mulder and Scully to have been a highlight of the episode . However , Handlen felt that some of the episode 's plot development was ultimately needless , and found the motives of several characters to have been unexplained and baffling . Matt Haigh , writing for Den of Geek , felt that the plot thread of Tooms framing Mulder for assault " never really amounts to much " , though he felt that the episode showed Tooms to be a creepier villain than his previous appearance in " Squeeze " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of five , finding it to be a better instalment than " Squeeze " . Shearman felt that the episode featured very little plotting , consisting simply of " a series of set pieces " , but considered its wit and character development to adequately compensate for this . 
 The character of Eugene Tooms has also attracted positive criticism . Author Neil Gaiman listed the character of Eugene Tooms as one of his favourite monsters in a guest column for Entertainment Weekly 's 1000th issue ; whilst UGO Networks listed the character as one of their " Best TV Serial Killers " , describing Hutchison 's acting as " uber @-@ creepy " . Writing for Den of Geek , John Moore listed Eugene Tooms as his " Top 10 X @-@ Files Baddies " , noting that the popularity of both " Squeeze " and " Tooms " proved to be " largely responsible for shifting the emphasis of the show " away from dwelling solely on alien conspiracy @-@ based mythology episodes . 
 = SMS König Wilhelm = 
 SMS König Wilhelm ( King William ) was an armored frigate of the Prussian and later the German Imperial Navy . The ship was laid down in 1865 at the Thames Ironworks shipyard in London , originally under the name Fatih for the Ottoman Empire . She was purchased by Prussia in February 1867 , launched in April 1868 , and commissioned into the Prussian Navy in February 1869 . The ship was the fifth ironclad ordered by the Prussian Navy , after Arminius , Prinz Adalbert , Friedrich Carl , and Kronprinz . She was built as an armored frigate , armed with a main battery of sixteen 24 cm ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) and five 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) guns ; several smaller guns and torpedo tubes were added later in her career . 
 The ship was for a time the largest and most powerful warship in the German navy ; she served as its flagship during the Franco @-@ Prussian War in 1870 – 1871 , though engine troubles prevented the ship from seeing action . In 1878 , the ship accidentally rammed and sank the ironclad Grosser Kurfürst , with great loss of life . König Wilhelm was converted into an armored cruiser in 1895 – 1896 ; by early 1904 , however , she had been superseded by newer vessels . In May of that year , she was placed out of active service and used as a floating barracks and training ship , a role she held through World War I. In 1921 , the ship was ultimately broken up for scrap , after a career spanning 52 years and three German states . 
 = = Design = = 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 König Wilhelm was 108 @.@ 60 meters ( 356 @.@ 3 ft ) long at the waterline and 112 @.@ 20 m ( 368 @.@ 1 ft ) long overall . She had a beam of 18 @.@ 30 m ( 60 @.@ 0 ft ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 56 m ( 28 @.@ 1 ft ) forward and 8 @.@ 12 m ( 26 @.@ 6 ft ) aft . The ship was designed to displace 9 @,@ 757 metric tons ( 9 @,@ 603 long tons ; 10 @,@ 755 short tons ) at a normal loading , and up to 10 @,@ 761 t ( 10 @,@ 591 long tons ; 11 @,@ 862 short tons ) with a combat load . The ship 's hull was constructed with transverse and longitudinal iron frames . It contained eleven watertight compartments and a double bottom that ran for 70 percent of the length of the vessel . 
 König Wilhelm was noted by the German navy as having had " satisfactory sea @-@ keeping qualities " ; the ship was responsive to commands from the helm and had a moderate turning radius . She suffered from severe roll but little pitch . The ship 's crew numbered 36 officers and 694 enlisted men , and while serving as a flagship , the crew was augmented with a command staff composed of 9 officers and 47 enlisted men . König Wilhelm carried a number of smaller boats , including two picket boats , two launches , a pinnace , two cutters , two yawls , and one dinghy . 
 A horizontal two @-@ cylinder single expansion steam engine , built by Maudslay , Son & Field of London , powered the ship . It drove a four @-@ bladed screw 7 m ( 23 ft ) in diameter . J Penn & Sons of Greenwich built eight trunk boilers for the ship . These were divided into two boiler rooms with twenty fireboxes in each , supplied steam to the engine at 2 standard atmospheres ( 200 kPa ) . The propulsion system was rated at 8 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 6 @,@ 000 kW ) and a top speed of 14 knots ( 26 km / h ; 16 mph ) , though on trials König Wilhelm managed to make 8 @,@ 440 ihp ( 6 @,@ 290 kW ) and 14 @.@ 7 knots ( 27 @.@ 2 km / h ; 16 @.@ 9 mph ) . The ship carried 750 t ( 740 long tons ; 830 short tons ) of coal , which enabled a maximum range of 1 @,@ 300 nautical miles ( 2 @,@ 400 km ; 1 @,@ 500 mi ) at a cruising speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . A ship rig with a surface area of 2 @,@ 600 square meters ( 28 @,@ 000 sq ft ) supplemented the steam engine , though in service they added little to the ship 's performance . Steering was controlled with a single rudder . 
 = = = Armament and armor = = = 
 As built , König Wilhelm was equipped with thirty @-@ three rifled 72 @-@ pounder cannon . After her delivery to Germany , these guns were replaced with eighteen 24 @-@ centimeter ( 9 @.@ 4 in ) L / 20 guns , supplied with a total of 1 @,@ 440 rounds of ammunition . These guns were mounted in a central battery , with nine on either broadside . The guns could depress to − 4 ° and elevate to 7 @.@ 5 ° ; at maximum elevation , the guns could reach targets out to 4 @,@ 500 m ( 14 @,@ 800 ft ) . The ship 's armament was rounded out by five 21 cm ( 8 @.@ 3 in ) guns , which could depress to − 5 ° and elevate to 13 ° . Their maximum range was 5 @,@ 900 m ( 19 @,@ 400 ft ) . 
 König Wilhelm was reconstructed into an armored cruiser in 1895 – 1896 and rearmed with twenty @-@ two 24 cm L / 20 guns , a single 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) L / 30 gun with 109 rounds mounted in the stern , and eighteen 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) quick @-@ firing guns on the upper deck , nine on each broadside . The 15 cm gun had a range of 8 @,@ 900 m ( 29 @,@ 200 ft ) . Five 35 cm ( 14 in ) torpedo tubes were also installed ; two were placed in the bow , one on both broadsides , and one in the stern , all above water . The torpedo tubes were supplied with a total of 13 rounds . Following her conversion into a training ship , most of her armament was removed . The ship only carried sixteen 8 @.@ 8 cm L / 30 guns , and in 1915 , twelve of these were removed . 
 As built , the ship was protected by wrought iron plating mounted over teak backing . Protection at the waterline was thickest amidships , with an outer layer of iron armor 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) thick , an inner layer of 178 mm ( 7 @.@ 0 in ) thick iron , and 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) of teak behind the iron . The outer layer was reduced to 152 mm ( 6 @.@ 0 in ) in the stern but did not extend to the bow . The inner layer was 127 mm ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) thick in both the bow and stern , and the teak backing was 90 mm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) for both ends of the ship . The main battery was protected with 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) thick plating and capped on either end with 150 mm thick transverse bulkheads . During her reconstruction into an armored cruiser , the iron armor was cut away and replaced with stronger steel armor . The conning tower received armor protection during the refit as well . The sides were 50 to 100 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 to 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sloped plates , with a 30 mm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) thick roof . 
 = = Service history = = 
 Laid down at the Thames Ironworks shipyard in London , England in 1865 , the ship was originally ordered by the Ottoman Empire as the <unk> . The ship was built to a design created by the British naval architect Edward Reed . Before her launch , the Prussian Navy purchased the ship on 6 February 1867 and initially renamed it Wilhelm I. On 14 December 1867 , the ship was renamed again , as König Wilhelm . She was launched on 25 April 1868 and commissioned less than a year later , on 20 February 1869 . The ship 's first commander was Kapitän zur See Ludwig von Henk . The ship was the largest and most powerful vessel in the Prussian fleet , and served as its flagship . Indeed , König Wilhelm remained the largest German vessel until 1891 . This was in part due to the fact that Germany laid down only one small ironclad between 1876 and 1888 ; the four Brandenburg @-@ class battleships , launched in 1891 and 1892 , were the first ships to surpass König Wilhelm in size . 
 = = = Franco @-@ Prussian War = = = 
 At the outbreak of the Franco @-@ Prussian War in 1870 , the greatly numerically inferior Prussian Navy assumed a defensive posture against a naval blockade imposed by the French Navy . König Wilhelm and the broadside ironclads Friedrich Carl and Kronprinz , along with the small ironclad ram Prinz Adalbert , had been steaming in the English Channel before the French declared war ; they had left Plymouth on 10 July with the intention of steaming to Fayal in the Azores . On the 13th , however , they put into port and learned of the rising tension between France and Prussia . The ships therefore returned to Wilhelmshaven immediately , arriving on 16 July . France declared war on Prussia three days later on 19 July . König Wilhelm , Friedrich Carl , and Kronprinz were concentrated in the North Sea at the port of <unk> were subsequently joined there by the turret ship Arminius , which had been stationed in Kiel . 
 Despite the great French naval superiority , the French had conducted insufficient pre @-@ war planning for an assault on the Prussian naval installations , and concluded that it would only be possible with Danish assistance , which was not forthcoming . The four ships , under the command of Vice Admiral Jachmann , made an offensive sortie in early August 1870 out to the Dogger Bank , though they encountered no French warships . König Wilhelm and the other two broadside ironclads thereafter suffered from chronic engine trouble , which left Arminius alone to conduct operations . König Wilhelm , Friedrich Carl , and Kronprinz stood off the island of Wangerooge for the majority of the conflict , while Arminius was stationed in the mouth of the Elbe river . On 11 September , the three broadside ironclads were again ready for action ; they joined Arminius for another major operation into the North Sea . It too did not encounter French opposition , as the French Navy had by this time returned to France . After the war , the Prussian Navy became the Imperial Navy , and resumed its peacetime training routines . General Albrecht von Stosch became the chief of the Imperial Navy , and organized the fleet for coastal defense . 
 = = = Collision with Grosser Kurfürst = = = 
 While steaming in the Straits of Dover on 31 May 1878 , König Wilhelm accidentally collided with the newly commissioned turret ironclad Grosser Kurfürst . The two ships , along with Preussen , had left Wilhelmshaven on the 29th . König Wilhelm and Preussen steamed in a line , with Grosser Kurfürst off to starboard . On the morning of the 31st , the three ships encountered a pair of sailing vessels off Folkestone . Grosser Kurfürst turned to port to avoid the boats while König Wilhelm sought to pass the two boats , but there was not enough distance between her and Grosser Kurfürst . She therefore turned hard to port to avoid Grosser Kurfürst , but the action was not taken quickly enough , and König Wilhelm found herself pointed directly at Grosser Kurfürst . König Wilhelm 's ram bow tore a hole in Grosser Kurfürst . 
 A failure to adequately seal the watertight bulkheads aboard Grosser Kurfürst caused the ship to sink rapidly , in the span of about eight minutes . Out of a crew of 500 men , 269 died in the accident . König Wilhelm was also badly damaged in the collision , with severe flooding forward . König Wilhelm 's captain initially planned on beaching the ship to prevent it from sinking , but determined that the ship 's pumps could hold the flooding to an acceptable level . The ship made for Portsmouth , where temporary repairs could be effected to allow the ship to return to Germany . In the aftermath of the collision , the German navy held a court martial for Rear Admiral Batsch , the squadron commander , and Captains Monts and Kuehne , the commanders of the two ships , along with Lieutenant <unk> , the first officer aboard Grosser Kurfürst , to investigate the sinking . The damage to König Wilhelm necessitated a lengthy period of repairs from 1878 to 1882 . The work was carried out at the Imperial Dockyard in Wilhelmshaven , and also included <unk> and replacement of the ship 's ram . Torpedo nets were fitted to the ship from 1885 to 1897 . 
 = = = Later service = = = 
 By 1893 , König Wilhelm had been assigned as the flagship for the II Division of the German fleet ; the four Sachsen @-@ class armored corvettes composed the I Squadron . The ship flew the flag of Admiral Otto von Diederichs , and was based in Wilhelmshaven . On 20 February 1894 , a special ceremony was held on board the ship to commemorate the 25th anniversary of her commissioning . Kaiser Wilhelm II attended the ceremony , as did Ludwig von Henk , who had by that time retired as a Vizeadmiral . In April 1894 , the II Division conducted a training cruise to prepare for the annual summer maneuvers . During the cruise , König Wilhelm ran aground on a mud bank off the Frisian coast . Deutschland and Friedrich der Grosse quickly pulled the ship free with minimal damage . The ships then proceeded to Scotland via Oslo and Bergen . The division returned to Kiel at the end of May to replenish its stocks of coal and provisions for the summer exercises . During the 1894 maneuvers , von Diederich 's II Division acted as the opposing force in the Baltic , simulating a Russian fleet attacking Germany 's Baltic coast . Following the conclusion of maneuvers in September , Admiral Diederichs left the squadron and was replaced by Admiral Karl <unk> . 
 In 1895 , König Wilhelm went into drydock at the Blohm and Voss shipyard in Hamburg for an extensive reconstruction into an armored cruiser . The vessel 's armament was increased , the ship rig was removed , and new fighting masts were installed in place of the old masts . The ship 's crew was dramatically increased , to 38 officers and 1 @,@ 120 enlisted men . Work lasted through 1896 , and the ship was returned to the fleet in her new guise on 25 January 1897 . On 26 June , she represented Germany at the Fleet Review for Queen Victoria 's Diamond Jubilee . She served with the fleet until 1904 , when she was removed from active duty . Starting on 3 May 1904 , she became a harbor ship . She was then used barracks ship and training vessel for naval cadets , based in Kiel , starting on 1 October 1907 . Two years later , König Wilhelm was moved to the Naval Academy at Mürwik , where she continued in these duties . Starting in 1910 , the old corvette Charlotte served as a support vessel for the ship . The light cruiser Medusa replaced Charlotte as König Wilhelm 's auxiliary vessel in 1917 . König Wilhelm served through World War I , until 1921 , after Germany 's defeat . On 4 January 1921 , the ship was stricken from the naval register and broken up for scrap in Rönnebeck . 
 = William Murray , 1st Earl of Mansfield = 
 William Murray , 1st Earl of Mansfield , SL , PC ( 2 March 1705 – 20 March 1793 ) was a British barrister , politician and judge noted for his reform of English law . Born to Scottish nobility , he was educated in Perth , Scotland , before moving to London at the age of 13 to take up a place at Westminster School . He was accepted into Christ Church , Oxford , in May 1723 , and graduated four years later . Returning to London from Oxford , he was called to the Bar by Lincoln 's Inn on 23 November 1730 , and quickly gained a reputation as an excellent barrister . 
 He became involved in politics in 1742 , beginning with his election as a Member of Parliament for Boroughbridge , and appointment as Solicitor General . In the absence of a strong Attorney General , he became the main spokesman for the government in the House of Commons , and was noted for his " great powers of eloquence " and described as " beyond comparison the best speaker " in the House of Commons . With the promotion of Sir Dudley Ryder to Lord Chief Justice in 1754 , he became Attorney General , and when Ryder unexpectedly died several months later , he took his place as Chief Justice . 
 The most powerful British jurist of the century , his decisions reflected the Age of Enlightenment and moved England on the path to abolishing slavery and the slave trade . He advanced commercial law in ways that helped establish the nation as the world leader in industry , finance and trade . He modernised both English law and the English courts system ; he sped up the system for submitting motions and reformed the way judgments were given to reduce time and expense for the parties . For his work in Carter v Boehm and Pillans v Van Mierop , he has been called the founder of English commercial law . He is perhaps best known for his judgment in Somersett 's Case ( 1772 ) , where he held that slavery had no basis in common law and had never been established by positive law ( legislation ) in England , and therefore was not binding law ( although this did not end slave trafficking altogether ) . 
