 = = Early life and education = = 
 Murray was born on 2 March 1705 , at Scone Palace in Perthshire , Scotland , the fourth son of the 5th Viscount of Stormont and his wife , Margaret , née Scott , and one of eleven children . Both his parents were strong supporters of the Jacobite cause , and his older brother James followed " The Old Pretender " into exile . The Jacobite sympathies of Murray 's family were glossed over by contemporaries , who claimed that he had been educated at Lichfield Grammar School with many other members of the English judiciary . This was incorrect , as Murray was educated at Perth Grammar School , where he was taught Latin , English grammar , and essay writing skills . He later said that this gave him a great advantage at university , as those students educated in England had been taught Greek and Latin , but not how to write properly in English . While at Perth Grammar School , it became apparent that Murray was particularly intelligent , and in 1718 , his father and older brother James decided to send him to Westminster School , as James knew the Dean , Francis Atterbury . The distance from Perth to London was around 400 miles ( 640 km ) , and the journey took Murray 54 days . Murray flourished at Westminster and was made a King 's Scholar on 21 May 1719 . 
 After an examination in May 1723 , Murray was accepted into Christ Church , Oxford , having scored higher in the examination than any other King 's Scholar that year . He was admitted as a commoner on 15 June 1723 , and matriculated on 18 June ; the records say that he came from Bath rather than Perth , because the person recording the names of the new students was unable to understand his Scottish accent . His older brother James was a barrister in Scotland , and his family decided that a career as a barrister was best for Murray . The Scottish Bar at the time was overcrowded , which made it difficult for a young barrister to build a reputation , yet qualifying for the English Bar was extremely expensive . Thanks to the patronage of Thomas Foley , 1st Baron Foley , who gave Murray £ 200 a year to live on , Murray could afford to study at the bar , and became a member of Lincoln 's Inn on 23 April 1724 . 
 After George I died on 11 June 1727 , Murray entered and won a competition to write a Latin poem titled " The Death of the King " . His actions were seen as a show of support for the House of Hanover and the political status quo , something odd considering the strong Jacobite sympathies of his family . He probably did this because , having no private income , he wished to secure patronage to help him advance politically . Another entrant was William Pitt , who was a constant rival to Murray until Pitt 's death in 1778 . There is very little information about Murray 's time at Oxford ; it is known that he studied ancient and modern history , became fluent in French and gained a good understanding of Roman Law . He also became fluent in Latin , translating Cicero 's works into English and then back into Latin . He gained his Bachelor of Arts degree in 1727 , and travelled to London to train as a barrister . 
 = = Family life = = 
 Murray married Elizabeth Finch . They did not have children and took on care of their niece , Lady Elizabeth Murray ( b . 1760 ) , after her mother died . When Mansfield 's nephew Captain Sir John Lindsay returned to Britain in 1765 following the Seven Years ' War and his assignment in the West Indies , he brought his natural daughter Elizabeth . Of half African descent , she was born into slavery in 1761 , the daughter of Maria Bell , an enslaved woman . Lindsay asked Murray to take on her care and education , and she was baptized Dido Elizabeth Belle in 1766 in London . 
 = = At the English bar = = 
 Murray 's first contact when he moved to London was William Hamilton , a Scottish @-@ born barrister who was said to be the first Scot to practise at the English Bar , and one of the few people who was qualified to act as a barrister in both England and Scotland . Hamilton had been one of Murray 's sponsors when he joined Lincoln 's Inn in 1724 , and when Murray came to London , Hamilton helped find him a set of chambers at No. 1 Old Square . At this time , there was no formal legal education , and the only requirement for a person to be called to the Bar was for him to have eaten five dinners a term at Lincoln 's Inn , and to have read the first sentence of a paper prepared for him by the steward . Thus , most of Murray 's practical training came from reading the papers in Hamilton 's chambers and listening to Lord Raymond speak in court , along with tutoring by Thomas Denison on how to write special pleadings . Murray also studied various texts , including the French Ordinance de la Marine ( a predecessor to the Napoleonic Commercial Code ) , the works of Bracton and Littleton and " crabbed and uncouth compositions " on municipal law . 
 Murray was called to the Bar on 23 November 1730 , taking a set of chambers at 5 King 's Bench Walk . He was introduced to Alexander Pope around this time , and through his friendship met members of the aristocracy , some of whom later became his clients , including Sarah Churchill , Duchess of Marlborough . Pope also taught him oratory , which helped him enormously in court . His first two cases were in the English Court of Sessions in 1733 , where he was led by Charles Talbot and opposed by Philip Yorke . The support of Talbot and Yorke allowed him to gain a respectable practice in the Court of Chancery . 
 The 1707 Acts of Union had merged the Kingdom of England and Kingdom of Scotland into one national entity , but they retained separate legal systems . However , the House of Lords became the highest court of appeal in both English and Scottish law , and as a result , from 1707 Scottish cases on appeal from the Court of Session were sent there . To deal with these cases , a barrister had to be familiar with both Scottish and English law , and Murray found his niche , acting in Scottish cases in the House of Lords as early as 1733 . His work in Moncrieff v Moncrieff in 1734 established Murray as a brilliant young barrister praised for his performance by Lords Cowper and Parker . After Moncrieff , Murray was involved in almost every case in the House of Lords , whether it had been appealed from a Scottish court or not . 
 In 1737 , Murray acted as Counsel for the City of Edinburgh in the aftermath of the death of Captain John Porteous . In Edinburgh , it was traditional for criminals sentenced to death to be allowed to visit a church near the city jail the Sunday before the execution . Two criminals named Wilson and Robertson took this as an opportunity to escape , and although Wilson did not make it out of the church , Robertson escaped completely . Wilson had been a smuggler who supplied his fellow citizens with goods , and because of this and the unpopularity of the city guard , public opinion was firmly on his side . Porteous was the captain of the Edinburgh city guard , and angry with Wilson 's attempt to escape and aware of the possibility of an attempt to free him . Porteous ordered a guard of 80 men to be placed around the gallows for Wilson 's execution . When a man attempted to cut Wilson 's body down after the execution , Porteous ordered his troops to fire on the crowd , and seven people were killed . Porteous was initially sentenced to death for murder , and when the execution was delayed , a mob of citizens rushed the city jail and lynched him . 
 As a result , a bill was proposed in the House of Commons that sought to punish the City of Edinburgh for the behaviour of its citizens by disenfranchising the city . Murray represented the City in both the House of Commons and the House of Lords , and eventually whittled down the bill so much that by the time it was voted on , it simply proposed to fine the city and disqualify the Provost . In exchange for his work , the citizens of Edinburgh gave him the Freedom of the City and a diamond , which is still in the possession of his family . Murray 's reputation continued to grow ; in 1738 , he was involved in 11 of the 16 cases heard in the House of Lords , and in 1739 and 1740 he acted as legal counsel in 30 cases there . 
 On 20 September 1738 , he married Lady Elizabeth Finch , the daughter of Daniel Finch , 2nd Earl of Nottingham , at Raby Castle in Durham . Her sister Mary was married to Thomas Watson @-@ Wentworth , 1st Marquess of Rockingham . Murray 's connection with the Marquess had a positive , significant influence on his future career . After a short holiday , Murray returned to his work as a barrister . 
 = = Member of Parliament = = 
 Murray had repeatedly refused to become a Member of Parliament , saying he had no interest in politics . In 1742 , however , the government of Sir Robert Walpole fell , and Murray 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , the Earl of Nottingham , became First Lord of the Admiralty in the new Cabinet . With this added political influence , Murray hoped to be appointed to a government office , and when Sir John Strange resigned as Solicitor General , Murray was made a Member of Parliament for Boroughbridge on 15 December 1742 and immediately succeeded Strange as Solicitor General . 
 Although the Solicitor General was the lowest legal appointment , a successful one could be appointed Attorney General , and by custom , the Attorney General was allowed to become Lord Chief Justice of the King 's Bench if a vacancy arose . Although many barristers were not good politicians , Murray became a successful Member of Parliament , and one noted for his oratorical skills and logical arguments . 
 In 1745 , Murray defended the actions of the government in hiring 16 @,@ 000 Hanoverian troops to help fight in the War of the Austrian Succession . His argument ( that it was the prerogative of the King to decide how a war should be fought , and he should not be second @-@ guessed by politicians with no experience of warfare ) defeated the motion to cease employing the Hanoverian troops by 231 votes to 181 . Murray became popular with both the government and George II as a result , and in the absence of a strong Attorney General , Murray spoke for the government in most matters . In 1747 , he helped Lord Hardwicke write and pass an act to abolish the old hereditary positions in Scotland . In 1751 he drafted the government response to an attempt by the King of Prussia to frustrate neutral shipping , which Lord Stowell called " the foundation of the modern law of neutrality " , and Montesquieu described it as a " <unk> sans <unk> " ( response without a reply ) . 
 The death of Frederick , the heir to the British throne on 20 March 1751 , caused constitutional chaos ; George II wished to appoint his favourite son Prince William , Duke of Cumberland , as Regent ( since the heir apparent , George III , was only a child ) , while the public favoured the child 's mother Princess Augusta . In an attempt to reach a compromise the government introduced a bill to Parliament declaring that Augusta was to be a regent along with a council of others , and that George would become the heir when he reached maturity . Murray made a speech supporting the government 's proposal , but despite this , Parliament was not convinced that a council was necessary . 
 On 6 March 1754 , the Prime Minister Henry Pelham died , and this necessitated a Cabinet reshuffle . The Attorney General , Sir Dudley Ryder , became Lord Chief Justice of the King 's Bench , and Murray became Attorney General in his place . A few months later the Master of the Rolls died , and Murray was asked to replace him ; he declined , however , as he " did not want to leave His Majesty 's service " . After Ryder died unexpectedly on 25 May 1756 , however , Murray could not turn down the opportunity , and immediately applied to replace him as Lord Chief Justice . 
 He was accepted , and although his appointment delighted Murray , the government was very concerned at the loss of a good Attorney General . In an attempt to persuade him to stay , the new Prime Minister , the Duke of Newcastle offered him the Duchy of Lancaster , in addition to the position of Attorney General , an extra £ 6 @,@ 000 a year , and a pension , and finally attempted to blackmail him by saying that if he accepted the office of Lord Chief Justice , the government would refuse to grant him a peerage . It was customary for all Lord Chief Justices to be given a peerage , and Murray responded by saying that in that situation he would refuse to become either Lord Chief Justice or Attorney General . Newcastle gave in , and promised to allow him to become Lord Chief Justice and to recommend him for a peerage . 
 This was seen as an excellent result by Murray , who had no interest in politics except as a stepping stone to become a member of the judiciary . Murray was not suited to politics , as he was far too calculating and independent of thought to accept any one party 's doctrine . His Scottish and Jacobite roots also allowed for endless insinuation and controversy — in 1753 he was accused by the Bishop of Gloucester of " having drunk the health of the Old Pretender on his knees " . Although the story was proven to be false , it embarrassed Murray , and was used to taunt him as late as 1770 . His rivalry with William Pitt highlighted his unsuitability for politics - unlike other politicians such as Philip Yorke and Edward Thurlow , he did not have the temperament to resist " the vehemence of Pitt 's invective " . It was widely felt that he could have become Prime Minister after the death of Henry Pelham , but it would have " set [ his genius ] in a false environment " , and he declined all opportunities to return to politics except as Lord Chief Justice . 
 = = Lord Chief Justice = = 
 Anyone wishing to become a judge was required to be a Serjeant @-@ at @-@ law , which Murray was not ; as such , he left Lincoln 's Inn to join Serjeant 's Inn . He qualified as a Serjeant @-@ at @-@ law on 8 November 1756 , and was sworn in as Lord Chief Justice at the house of the Lord Chancellor that evening . Immediately afterwards he was created Baron Mansfield . 
 On 19 November , he was sworn in as a Privy Counsellor . He suspended his duties temporarily on 5 April 1757 , when appointed Chancellor of the Exchequer , due to an old custom that the Lord Chief Justice took the position when it was empty . He only served until 8 April , and there is no evidence of his performing anything more than the standard day @-@ to @-@ day duties . He became a cabinet minister in 1757 , still serving as Lord Chief Justice , and stayed until 1765 . 
 = = = Reform = = = 
 Mansfield first sat in court on 11 November 1756 , and at the time had " a very low estimate of the Common Law of England which he was to administer " . The legal system had been put together in the period immediately after the Norman conquest of England , and was completely unsuited to the 18th century , when Britain was " the greatest manufacturing and commercial country in the world " . Mansfield immediately began to reform the way the law and courts worked . One of his first acts as Lord Chief Justice was to change the system for submitting motions . Every day the court was in session , all barristers were invited to submit motions , in order of their seniority as barristers . Because they were allowed to submit as many motions as they wanted , by the time junior barristers were allowed to submit their motions , it was normally the end of the day . This meant that almost all the work went to the senior barristers , who were so overworked that they often did not have time to prepare properly before going to court . In addition it meant that work for junior barristers was scarce , hindering their careers . Mansfield changed the system so that barristers were allowed to submit only one motion a day , and if not all barristers had been heard by the end of the day , they could continue where they left off the next morning . 
 At the time it was also traditional for all judgments to be reserved . Although in a small number of cases this was useful , in the majority of cases it simply made coming to court more expensive and wasted time . As soon as Mansfield became Lord Chief Justice , he changed the rules so that , unless the court had doubts over the evidence presented to them , a judgment was to be made immediately . This had a far @-@ reaching effect on the English courts . Judges from the Court of Appeal and High Court of Justice now give reserved judgments in only a minority of cases . His reforms led to the Court of King 's Bench becoming one of the most active courts , at the expense of the Court of Common Pleas , which was described as the " sleepy hollow " . 
 = = = Mercantile law changes = = = 
 In the eighteenth century , English merchant law was still based on the Lex <unk> , a medieval series of customs and principles used to regulate trading . Other countries in Europe had reformed and modernised their law , resulting in English merchant law being about a century behind mercantile law of other European countries . A merchant was , by his very nature , international , and the inconsistencies between English law and the law of other nations made business difficult . 
 Mansfield made a great effort to bring English merchant law up to the same standards as that of other European nations , defining his position by saying that " the daily negotiations and property of merchants ought not to depend on subtleties and niceties , but upon rules easily learned and easily retained because they are dictates of common sense drawn from the truth of the case " . In most European countries , the principle was that a merchant was bound by his promises , not just his signed legal documents , while English lawyers maintained that a merchant could only be legally bound by documents that he signed . The European principle was based on the assumption of good faith on the part of the merchants , or uberrima fides , something completely lacking in English law . In Carter v Boehm [ 1766 ] 3 Burr 1905 Mansfield got a chance to reform the law relating to the assumption of good faith . Carter was the Governor of Fort Marlborough ( now Bengkulu ) , which was built by the British East India Company in Sumatra , Indonesia . He took out an insurance policy with Boehm against the fort 's being taken by a foreign enemy . A witness called Captain Tryon testified that Carter knew the fort was built to resist attacks from natives but not European enemies , and the French were likely to attack . The French did attack , and Boehm refused to fulfil the insurance claim . 
 Mansfield decided in favour of Boehm , saying that Carter had failed his duty of uberrima fides . In his judgment Mansfield said that : 
 Insurance is a contract based upon speculation . The special facts , upon which the contingent chance is to be computed , lie most commonly in the knowledge of the insured only ; the underwriter trusts to his representation and proceeds upon the confidence that he does not keep back any circumstance in his knowledge , to mislead the underwriter into a belief that the circumstance does not exist , and to induce him to estimate the risque as if it did not exist . Good faith forbids either party by concealing what he privately knows , to draw the other into a bargain from his ignorance of that fact , and his believing the contrary . 
 This was an attempt by Mansfield to introduce the assumption of good faith into English law , and although it failed for the most part ( as most areas of English commercial law no longer use uberrima fides ) , it is still used in insurance contracts . In insurance agreements , the <unk> inevitably knows more about the risk involved than the insurer ; without the requirement for pre @-@ contractual " good faith , " the <unk> would have no reason to tell the truth , and insurance companies would be loath to make contracts . 
 In the earlier case of Pillans & Rose v Van Mierop & Hopkins [ 1765 ] 3 Burr 1663 , Mansfield had tried to challenge the doctrine of Consideration . In English law , " Consideration " is a vital part of the contract ; without valid consideration , almost any contract is void . But , Mansfield argued in his judgment that it should only be treated as evidence of a contract , not as a vital element . Mansfield failed to make clear that he was referring only to consideration in commercial contracts , not general contracts , and as a result his judgment read that consideration was not required for any contract . His judgment has been much criticised by legal academics , and was effectively overruled by the House of Lords in Rann v Hughes [ 1778 ] 7 T. R. 350 . 
 Mansfield also enforced a previous judgement of the Court of King 's Bench made in 1645 , in which they allowed a special jury of merchants to sit in cases involving commercial law . He built up a special corps of these jurymen , some of whom , such as Edward Vaux , became noted experts on commercial law . " Lord Mansfield 's jurymen " acted as an effective liaison between the merchants and the courts . Mansfield was personally a supporter of free trade who was heavily influenced by Roman law and ancient Roman and Greek writers such as Cicero and Xenophon . 
 In 1783 , Mansfield heard the case of Gregson v. Gilbert , regarding the payment of an insurance claim for slaves killed when thrown overboard by the captain of a slave @-@ ship — an event now known as the Zong massacre . Mansfield , in summing up the jury 's verdict , said " The Case of Slaves was the same as if Horses had been thrown over board " , and endeavoured to uphold the notion that slaves were property which could be destroyed in situations of " absolute necessity " . But , new information was introduced in the case , and he ruled against the owners of the ship . In doing this , he achieved his aim of preventing maritime insurance law from becoming more complicated . 
 = = = Copyright law = = = 
 Mansfield made another notable judgment in Millar v Taylor [ 1769 ] KB , in relation to copyright law . Andrew Millar was a bookseller who in 1729 had purchased the publishing rights to James Thomson 's poem " The Seasons " . After the term of the exclusive rights granted under the Statute of Anne expired , Robert Taylor began publishing his own competing publication , which contained Thomson 's poem . Mansfield , sitting with three other judges , concluded that despite the Statute of Anne there was a perpetual common law copyright , and therefore that no works can ever be considered public domain . This was a massive victory for booksellers and publishers , as it meant that they could effectively make it impossible for new companies to compete , as in the absence of new texts , there was nothing they could print . Mansfield 's judgment was finally overruled by the House of Lords in Donaldson v Beckett in 1774 . 
 Mansfield 's judgment has been criticised as being unusually short @-@ sighted because he failed to see that while his decision was correct for that particular case , the precedent it would set would create an unfair monopoly for the booksellers and publishers . This was one of only a small number of cases in which Mansfield was overruled ; in his entire career only six of his judgments were overturned by a higher court . Mansfield 's judgement here has been seen as part of a wider agenda ; along with other legal figures such as Sir William Blackstone , he was personally in favour of a perpetual copyright . 
 = = = Junius = = = 
 In 1695 Parliament failed to renew the Licensing Acts , and as a result , the press were free to print material attacking the government . Although there were eight attempts to force a new Licensing Act through Parliament between 1697 and 1713 , none of them succeeded . Despite the freedom of the press from censorship by the government , the judiciary held a different view ; it regularly tried people for seditious libel if they printed material attacking the government . From 21 November 1768 , letters written by a man under the pseudonym of Junius were published in the Public Advertiser , a London newspaper run by Henry Sampson Woodfall . In them , Junius attacked many political leaders , including Lord Granby and Mansfield . As his letters were wildly popular , the circulation of the Public Advertiser doubled in just five months . 
 On 19 December 1769 , Junius wrote a letter attacking the King , and incensed at this , the government ordered several people to be arrested and tried for seditious libel , including Woodfall for publishing the letters , John Almon for selling them , and John Miller for republishing them . Almon 's case was heard at Westminster Hall by Mansfield and a jury on 2 June 1770 . He was found guilty , although it is unclear in what fashion he was punished , if at all . Woodfall was tried on 13 June 1770 , by Mansfield and a jury . While Mansfield believed that the language used was libellous , the jury disagreed , and held that he was " guilty of printing and publishing only " , and innocent of seditious libel . Miller was tried on 13 July 1770 , and after six hours of discussion , the jury found him innocent . As a result of these two trials , it became clear that no jury would convict a printer for printing these letters , leaving Junius free to continue publishing them . 
 On 14 November 1770 , a letter by Junius directed at Mansfield was published by the Public Advertiser and the London Evening Post , a newspaper run by John Miller . In it , Junius attacked Mansfield , first for being Scottish , then for being a lapsed Jacobite , and finally for attempting to suppress the freedom of the press . In a response to Junius ' letter dated 16 November 1770 , Mansfield made the following threat : 
 " Sir , if in future you indulge the ill @-@ founded asperity of your Pen , [ you ] may be called to answer for your Conduct , in a way that may cause you to regret that ever you was born , or , at least , that Nature has given you Abilities , which , if guided by Discretion , would have made you as much a Blessing , as you are now a Curse to Mankind . " 
 Although the Attorney General , William de Grey , advised that the publishers should again be prosecuted , Mansfield disagreed , saying that if they failed to respond to Junius , he would become bored and stop writing . Mansfield was evidently correct , because other than a letter printed on 5 October 1771 , Junius ceased to write at the beginning of 1772 . 
 = = = Somersett 's Case = = = 
 Mansfield is best known for his judgment in Somersett 's Case on the legality of keeping slaves in England . The English had been involved in the slave trade since 1553 , and by 1768 , ships registered in Liverpool , Bristol and London carried more than half the slaves shipped in the world . James Somersett was a slave owned by Charles Stewart , an American customs officer who sailed to Britain for business , landing on 10 November 1769 . A few days later Somersett attempted to escape . He was recaptured in November and imprisoned on the ship Ann and Mary , owned by Captain John Knowles and bound for the British colony of Jamaica . Stewart intended to sell him there . However , three people claiming to be Somersett 's godparents , John Marlow , Thomas Walkin and Elizabeth Cade , made an application before the Court of King 's Bench for a writ of habeas corpus , and Captain Knowles was ordered to produce Somersett before the Court of King 's Bench , which would determine whether his imprisonment was legal . 
 Mansfield ordered a hearing for 22 January 1772 . Following an adjournment , the case was not heard until 7 February 1772 . In the meantime , the case had attracted a great deal of attention in the press , and members of the public were forthcoming with donations to fund lawyers for both sides of the argument . An activist layman , Granville Sharp , who continually sought test cases against the legal justifications for slavery , was Somersett 's real backer . When the case was heard , no fewer than five advocates appeared for the slave , speaking at three separate hearings between February and May . These lawyers included William Davy SL , John Glynn SL , James Mansfield and Francis Hargrave , who was later to become a noted barrister based on his work in this case . Charles Stewart was represented by John Dunning and James Wallace . 
 On behalf of Somersett , it was argued that while colonial laws might permit slavery , neither the common law of England , nor any law made by Parliament recognised the existence of slavery , and slavery was therefore illegal . Moreover , English contract law did not allow for any person to enslave himself , nor could any contract be binding without the person 's consent . The arguments thus focused on legal details rather than humanitarian principles . A law passed in 1765 said that all lands , forts and slaves owned by the Africa Company were a property of the Crown , which could be interpreted to mean that the Crown accepted slavery . When the two lawyers for Charles Stewart put their case , they argued that a contract for the sale of a slave was recognised in England , and therefore the existence of slaves must be legally valid . 
 After the attorneys for both sides had given their arguments , Mansfield called a recess , saying that " [ the case ] required ... [ a ] consultation ... among the twelve Judges " . Finally , on 22 June 1772 Mansfield gave his judgment , which ruled that a master could not carry his slave out of England by force , and concluded : 
 The state of slavery is of such a nature , that it is incapable of being introduced on any reasons , moral or political ; but only positive law , which preserves its force long after the reasons , occasion , and time itself from whence it was created , is erased from memory : it 's so odious , that nothing can be suffered to support it , but positive law . Whatever inconveniences , therefore , may follow from a decision , I cannot say this case is allowed or approved by the law of England ; and therefore the black must be discharged . 
 This was not an end to slavery , as this only confirmed it was illegal in England and Wales , not in the rest of the British Empire . As a result of Mansfield 's decision , between 14 @,@ 000 and 15 @,@ 000 slaves were immediately freed in England , some of whom remained with their masters as paid employees . The decision was apparently not immediately followed ; Africans were still hunted and kidnapped in London , Liverpool and Bristol to be sold elsewhere . ( Such an incident was recounted by Olaudah Equiano in 1774 in his autobiography , An Interesting Narrative ( 1789 ) . ) 
 Mansfield was so uncertain about how it would be applied that he specified in his 1793 will that his " mulatto " great @-@ niece Dido Elizabeth Belle was to be considered a free woman . ( She had been born into slavery as the illegitimate daughter of his nephew in the West Indies but lived with him and his wife for 30 years . ) In addition , advertisements from the 1770s show that slaves continued to be bought and sold in England . Mansfield referred to slaves in his judgment in a later case . Although slavery was not completely abolished in the British Empire until 1834 , Mansfield 's decision is considered to have been a significant step in recognising the illegality of slavery . 
 = = Lord Mansfield 's Rule = = 
 Lord Mansfield 's name is frequently mentioned in modern legal settings as the originator of " Lord Mansfield 's Rule " , in his own words : " ... the law of England is clear , that the declarations of a father or mother , cannot be admitted to <unk> the issue born after marriage . " This quote comes from Mansfield 's appellate decision in <unk> v. Moss . The primary legal question in the case was not this preexisting principle , which applies only to children " born after marriage " , but rather whether the child had been born before the marriage . The question was whether statements the child 's parents allegedly made before their deaths could be introduced as evidence that the child had been born before their marriage and was thus illegitimate . Mansfield ruled to admit the testimony against the child 's legitimacy and grant a new trial . The term " Lord Mansfield 's Rule " is often used in a slightly different sense to denote the principle still applied in several jurisdictions that marriage creates a conclusive presumption of a husband 's paternity of his wife 's child . 
 = = House of Lords = = 
 After the formation of the Fox @-@ North Coalition , Mansfield agreed to act as Speaker of the House of Lords , taking up his post in February 1783 . The main item of debate during the Coalition Ministry was the East India Bill , which provoked bitter arguments in both the House of Lords and House of Commons . In an attempt to speed up the process of passing the bill , Mansfield left his position as Speaker to debate directly on 15 December ; when this failed to help he returned to the Woolsack the next day . The failure of the bill caused the government to be immediately dismissed , and Mansfield left his position on 23 December 1783 . 
 Mansfield had been made Earl of Mansfield , in the County of Nottingham , on 31 October 1776 . He attended the Lords as Lord Speaker , and the last record of him attending ( other than his presence at the state opening of Parliament on 23 March 1784 ) was in December 1783 . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Despite failing health , Mansfield refused to officially leave his post as Lord Chief Justice because George III was opposed to the appointment of Mansfield 's protégé Francis Buller to the position after Mansfield resigned . The government of the time instead suggested Lloyd Kenyon as a possible successor . Mansfield clung to office until 1788 , ( despite not sitting in court for two years ) in the hope that the government would fall before he was forced to retire . This was not to be , and on 3 June , he wrote a letter of resignation effective the next day . 
 Mansfield spent the remainder of his life at Kenwood House . Most of his time was spent maintaining the grounds . In the summer , he was visited by groups of barristers who informed him of the goings @-@ on at court . On 1 August 1792 he was made Earl of Mansfield , in the County of Middlesex . On 10 March 1793 , he complained of feeling sleepy , and although he recovered the next day , by 12 March , he was again complaining of a need for sleep . He went to bed early and remained asleep until 18 March , when he finally died . His body was buried in the North Transept of Westminster Abbey . Mansfield left a large amount of money after his death , including land worth £ 26 @,@ 000 . He gave £ 2 @,@ 000 to Francis Buller . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 English law saw significant changes during Mansfield 's career . As Lord Chief Justice , Mansfield had done much to reform the way the courts worked , making it easier for people to gain access to legal aid , and also making the process much less expensive . He was also noted for his insistence that equity should be applied by all courts , not just the Court of Chancery , a view that provoked much disagreement during his lifetime , but was eventually confirmed by Parliament in the Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873 , which allowed all courts to take cases of equity . He also established the principle that rather than blindly following precedent , judges should seek to find loopholes in rules that were no longer applicable , something that later received the support of Oliver Wendell Holmes , Jr . , who said , " It is revolting to have no better reason for a rule of law than that so it was laid down in the time of Henry IV . It is more revolting still if the grounds upon which it was laid down have vanished long since , and the rule simply persists from blind imitation of the past . " He made his judgements on the principle that " as the usages of society alter , the law must adapt itself to the various situations of mankind " , leading John Baker to describe him as " one of the boldest of judicial spirits " . 
 His most important contributions were to commercial , merchant and common law . Mansfield spent much time bringing the law of England on par with that of other countries , particularly in cases such as Pillans & Rose v Van Mierop & Hopkins [ 1765 ] 3 Burr 1663 , and Carter v Boehm [ 1766 ] 3 Burr 1905 . As a result of his work , he was described by a later judge as " the founder of the commercial law of this country " . 
 He was , however , criticised for his resistance to the freedom of the press and his refusal to go against the King , as well as for blatant nepotism — highlighted by his attempts to have Francis Buller made Lord Chief Justice after his retirement . He was also criticised as a politician for his support of a government antagonistic to the colonies ; in 1829 John Quincy Adams described him as " more responsible for the Revolution than any other man " . Scholars such as John Chipman Gray have questioned his reputation as a universally successful judge , saying that " the reputation of Lord Mansfield as a commercial lawyer should not blind us to the fact that he was not equally great in the law of real property " . 
 Opinion over Mansfield 's intention in his ruling in Somerset 's Case is mixed , with the current prevailing view being that he did not intend to free the slaves . The judgment was particularly narrow , as it ruled only that a master could not carry his slave out of England by force , not that slaves who came to England were emancipated . This is seen as particularly telling because this was the primary argument of Davy and Hargrave . If Murray had wanted to emancipate the slaves completely , there were various bits of judicial precedent he could have based his decision on , such as Smith v Gould or Shanley v Harvey , but he did not . Various comments he made before and during the case also suggest that complete emancipation was not his intent ; in a preliminary judgment he said that " the setting 14 @,@ 000 or 15 @,@ 000 men at once free loose by a solemn opinion , is much disagreeable in the effect it threatens ” , which one modern legal scholar interprets as indicative of his reluctance to make a decision for fear of economic consequences . Various comments he made to Thomas Hutchinson in private letters , along with his comments about the Somersett decision in R. v Inhabitants of Thames Ditton , also suggest that emancipation was not his goal . 
 Mansfield 's marriage to Lady Finch was barren . His title , which succeeds to this day , passed to his nephew , David Murray , 2nd Earl of Mansfield . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Mansfield is immortalised in St Stephen 's Hall , where he and other notable Parliamentarians look on at visitors to Parliament . 
 In 1801 a marble monument to him by John Flaxman was installed in Westminster Abbey ; it shows Murray flanked by the personifications of Wisdom and Justice , with an inscription that reads : 
 " ' Here Murray long enough his country ’ s pride is now no more than Tully or than Hyde ' . Foretold by Ar . Pope and fulfilled in the year 1793 when William Earl of Mansfield died full of years and of honours : of honours he declined many : those which he accepted were the following : he was appointed Solicitor General 1742 , Attorney General 1754 , Lord Chief Justice and Baron Mansfield 1756 , Earl of Mansfield 1776 . From the love which he bore to the place of his early education , he desired to be buried in this cathedral ( privately ) and would have forbidden that instance of human vanity , the erecting a monument to his memory , but a sum which with the interest has amounted to two thousand five hundred pounds was left for that purpose by A. Bailey <unk> of Lyon ’ s Inn , which at least well meant mark of esteem he had no previous knowledge or suspicion of and had no power to prevent being executed . He was the fourth son of David , fifth Viscount Stormont , and married the Lady Elizabeth Finch , daughter to Daniel , Earl of Nottingham by whom he had no issue . Born at Scone 2nd March 1704 . Died at Kenwood 20th March 1793 . " 
 The town of Mansfield , Massachusetts is apparently named for him . 
 Due to his reputation as a barrister , Lincoln 's Inn offer a series of scholarship for the Bar Vocational Course named the Lord Mansfield Scholarship . 
 Mansfield has been portrayed as a character several times in television and film - in The Fight Against Slavery ( 1975 ) by John Richmond , The British ( 2012 ) by Timothy West , Belle ( 2013 ) by Tom Wilkinson and The Scandalous Lady W ( 2015 ) by David Calder . 
 = = Character = = 
 Mansfield was noted at the Bar , in Parliament , and while sitting as a judge , for his eloquence and skill as a speaker ; in particular Lord Chesterfield described him as " beyond comparison the best speaker " in the House of Commons . He was also a hard worker ; he would sometimes do court paperwork himself , as well as do his judicial duties , in an attempt to speed up the legal process . 
 He was summarised by Gareth Jones as " Conservative , urbane , silver @-@ tongued , energetic , cultivated and well read ; a highly imaginative lawyer who looked to reason and was not overawed by the legacy of the past " . Edmund Burke , a contemporary , said that " he had some superiors in force , some equals in persuasion ; but in insinuation he was without a rival . He excelled in the statement of a case . This , of itself , was worth the argument of any other man " . The comment by Samuel Johnson that " Much may be made of a [ Scotsman ] , if he be caught young " was directed at Mansfield , and Johnson also described him as " more than a mere lawyer " , while Edward Coke , who is considered one of the most important lawyers in the history of English law , was " only a lawyer " . 
 Unlike other barristers , Mansfield was noted for always keeping a cool head and being " prudent to the point of timidity " . He was criticised for being " moderate and dispassionate " , unlike more aggressive barristers such as Edward Coke ; when asked about this he replied that " I would not have made Sir Edward Coke 's speech to gain all Sir Edward Coke 's estates and all his reputation " . There are conflicting reports about his temperament and attitude as a judge ; William Pitt described him as " a very bad judge , proud , haughty to the Bar and hasty in his determinations " , and Charles Yorke said he was " offensive and unpopular " . Both opinions are suspect , however ; Pitt 's because he was a constant rival to Mansfield and Yorke 's because he was attempting to beat Mansfield to the position of Lord Chancellor at the time . Edward Foss said that " there has never been a judge more venerated by his contemporaries , nor whose memory is regarded with greater respect and affection " , and described him as " the great oracle of law " . 
 Mansfield has been called " the legal genius of his generation " , and compared favourably with Joseph Story , a judge of the Supreme Court of the United States noted for his brilliance . Other Americans such as Julian S. Waterman , the founder of the University of Arkansas School of Law , described him as " not only the greatest common law judge but the greatest judge in Anglo @-@ American legal history " , while Joseph Story himself said that Mansfield " broke down the narrow barrier of the common law , redeemed it from feudal selfishness and barbarity " and that " he was one of those great men raised up by Providence , at a fortunate moment , to effect a salutary revolution in the world " . 
 = Paul Reinhart = 
 Paul Gerard Reinhart ( born January 6 , 1960 ) is a Canadian former professional ice hockey defenceman who played for the Atlanta Flames , Calgary Flames and Vancouver Canucks in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . He was a first round selection by the Flames , 12th overall , at the 1979 NHL Entry Draft with whom he immediately broke into the NHL . He relocated with the franchise to Calgary in 1980 , playing a total of nine seasons with the Flames franchise until he was traded to Vancouver in 1988 . He was a two @-@ time all @-@ star and played with Team Canada on three occasions , winning bronze medals at the World Championships in 1982 and 1983 . Chronic back problems plagued him throughout his career and forced his retirement in 1990 . Settling in Vancouver following his playing career , Reinhart became a stock market financier and investor . He was briefly involved with the Vancouver Ravens of the National Lacrosse League in the early 2000s . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Reinhart began his junior career with his hometown Kitchener Rangers of the Ontario Major Junior Hockey League ( OMJHL ) in 1975 – 76 , scoring 39 points in 53 games . He had been a protected player of the Rangers — signed directly by the team without his having to go through the league 's draft — but when the OMJHL eliminated the rules allowing teams to protect midget @-@ aged players following the season , he was made eligible for the 1976 draft . The Peterborough Petes claimed him with the third overall selection in the June 1976 draft , despite the fact that Reinhart and his family made it known he would refuse to play for any team other than Kitchener . His agent , Alan Eagleson , threatened to take the team and league to court in a bid to force them to respect Reinhart 's wishes . The dispute was not settled until November when the Petes traded Reinhart to Kitchener as part of a three @-@ team trade that involved the Oshawa Generals . The league had to rescind a rule prohibiting teams from trading first round draft picks to allow the deal to pass and to avoid the threat of litigation by Eagleson . 
 On the ice , Reinhart scored a total of 104 points as a defenceman with the Rangers between 1975 and 1978 before breaking out offensively in the 1978 – 79 season after moving centre for the majority of the campaign . He scored 51 goals and 78 assists for 129 points in 66 games to finish fifth overall in OMJHL scoring . The team 's captain in his final year , Reinhart won numerous team honours during his four years in Kitchener including three awards for having the " best defensive ability " on the team . 
 = = = Professional = = = 
 The Atlanta Flames selected Reinhart with their first round selection , 12th overall , at the 1979 NHL Entry Draft . Though he had been set to join Team Canada for the 1980 Winter Olympics , the Flames convinced Reinhart to sign with the team and begin his professional career instead . Joining the Flames for the 1979 – 80 NHL season , the 19 @-@ year @-@ old Reinhart became the youngest player to appear for the team at that point in franchise history . He appeared in 79 games for Atlanta , finishing as the team 's highest scoring defenceman . His total of 47 points was second to Ray Bourque for the overall lead amongst rookie defencemen . 
 Transferring to Calgary along with the franchise in 1980 – 81 , Reinhart improved to 67 points during the regular season and tied for the league lead in playoff assists with 14 . He was named to the Canadian entry for the 1981 Canada Cup tournament , but suffered an ankle injury and appeared in only two games . He remained an offensive catalyst for the team , scoring 61 points in 1981 – 82 and set a franchise record for points by a defenceman with 75 in 1982 – 83 . His career total of 250 points also set a Flames franchise record for a defenceman . He returned to Team Canada following both seasons to play in the World Championships . He won bronze medals with the team in both 1982 and 1983 , and was named Team Canada 's top defenceman in 1983 . 
 Reinhart suffered a serious injury midway through the 1983 – 84 season . Skating behind his net during a game against the Winnipeg Jets , his skate caught a rut and he twisted his back as he fell . He had to be carried off the ice on a stretcher , and was initially diagnosed with back spasms . He was later diagnosed as having suffered a herniated disc . He missed 51 games as a result of the injury , but scored a goal and an assist on his return , a 4 – 1 victory over the Hartford Whalers . Despite missing the majority of the season , Reinhart was the Flames ' offensive leader in the 1984 playoffs , leading the team and finishing first amongst all players who did not reach the finals with 17 points . 
 Though he turned down an offer to play with Team Canada at the 1984 Canada Cup due to his back , Reinhart remained healthy for the 1984 – 85 season , scoring a career high 23 goals to go with 67 points in 75 games . He also appeared in his first NHL All @-@ Star Game , playing in front of his home fans at the 1985 game in Calgary . Recurring back spasms again forced him to miss much of the 1985 – 86 season ; he was limited to 32 games . Reinhart remained healthy in 1986 – 87 , finishing fourth in the league amongst defencemen with 69 points . He scored his 100th career goal , playing at centre , while recording a hat trick in a 6 – 5 win over the Edmonton Oilers on November 24 , 1986 . His chronic back issues worsened in 1987 – 88 , as he played only 14 games for the Flames , scoring four points . 
 Between his back issues and the team 's desire to promote some of its younger defencemen to more prominent roles within the team , the Flames chose to trade Reinhart on September 6 , 1988 , along with Steve Bozek , to the Vancouver Canucks in exchange for a third round selection at the 1989 NHL Entry Draft . Reinhart played the majority of two seasons in Vancouver , though he missed 29 games between 1988 and 1990 . He was named an All @-@ Star for the second time in his career in 1989 , and was an offensive leader for the Canucks . He scored 57 points in both 1988 – 89 and 1989 – 90 , and was named the recipient of the Babe Pratt Trophy as the Canucks ' top defenceman in both seasons . However , chronic back pain forced him out of the game following that season . Reinhart announced his retirement at the age of 29 . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Though his position for the majority of his career was in defence , his offensive ability and speed meant that his teams occasionally played him at forward . At times , the Flames had him playing 30 minutes per game as he was often used at centre while also taking regular shifts at defence . He claimed in 1982 to prefer playing forward , but realized that the organization needed him on defence to act as a quarterback for the team 's offence . Bob Johnson , his coach for the majority of his time in Calgary , said that Reinhart was the type of player that could be a " cornerstone " for a franchise . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Reinhart and his wife Theresa have three children , all of whom play hockey . Their eldest son , Maxwell , made his NHL debut with the Flames in 2013 . His middle son , Griffin Reinhart was drafted 4th overall in the 2012 NHL Entry Draft by the New York Islanders , and currently plays for the Edmonton Oilers . His youngest son , Sam , was selected 2nd overall in the 2014 NHL Entry Draft by the Buffalo Sabres , where he currently plays . Paul and his wife spent their summers in Calgary during his playing days , where he often played with the team 's summer charity softball team , but settled in West Vancouver following the end of his NHL career . 
 Flames ' co @-@ owner Doc Seaman introduced Reinhart to investing and finance while he was playing with the team . He also owned a restaurant in Calgary . He now makes his living investing in start @-@ up companies . Reinhart 's investments have focused on resource exploration and medical companies and in 2011 joined the management of Vancouver @-@ based Bearing Resources Ltd . He was involved with the Vancouver Ravens franchise in the National Lacrosse League for a time , but walked away from the franchise in 2003 after claiming losses in excess of $ 1 million . In 2014 , Reinhart partnered with another former Vancouver Canuck , Bret Hedican , investing over $ 1 million in a sports team management start @-@ up , <unk> , based in Vancouver . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = Gebhard Truchsess von Waldburg = 
 Gebhard Truchsess von Waldburg ( 10 November 1547 – 21 May 1601 ) was Archbishop @-@ Elector of Cologne . After pursuing an ecclesiastical career , he won a close election in the Cathedral chapter of Cologne over Ernst of Bavaria . After his election , he fell in love with and later married Agnes von Mansfeld @-@ Eisleben , a Protestant <unk> at the Abbey of Gerresheim . His conversion to Calvinism and announcement of religious parity in the Electorate triggered the Cologne War . 
 On 19 December 1582 , a proclamation in his name established parity for Catholics and Calvinists in the Electorate of Cologne , causing a scandal in the Catholic Church and the Holy Roman Empire , and after his marriage in February 1583 , he sought to convert the Electorate into a dynastic dignity . For the next six years , his supporters fought those of the Catholic cathedral chapter for the right to hold the <unk> and the archdiocese in the so @-@ called Cologne War or Seneschal War . After brutal fighting , plundering of villages , cities , and abbeys throughout the Electorate , Gebhard surrendered his claim on the electorate and retired to Strasbourg . He died there in 1601 and was buried in the Cathedral . 
 Gebhard 's conversion and marriage was the first major test of the principle of ecclesiastical reservation established in the Peace of Augsburg , 1555 . His loss of the Electorate strengthened the Catholic counter reformation in the northern German states , gave the Jesuits a stronghold in Cologne , and expanded the Wittelsbach family influence in imperial politics . 
 = = Family and early career = = 
 Gebhard was born in the <unk> fortress of Heiligenberg , the second son of William , known as the younger , ( 6 March 1518 – 17 January 1566 ) , Freiherr and Seneschal of Waldburg and an Imperial Councilor , and his wife , Johanna v. Fürstenberg ( 1529 – 1589 ) . His family was an old Swabian house and he was descended from the Jacobin line of the House : Jakob I Truchseß von Waldburg , also known as the Golden Knight ( for his blond hair ) . The family owned extensive properties that bordered on the Abbey of Kempten and various Habsburg territories in present @-@ day southwestern Bavaria ; In 1429 and 1463 , the three surviving sons of Johann II , Jakob , Everhard , and George , and their surviving sister Ursula , concluded a covenant of inheritance to protect the family property . In the future , they would occupy and own the property as one ; the inheritance of the daughters could not exceed 4000 gulden . They guaranteed each other the right of first refusal on potential property sales . 
 Gebhard 's grandfather had been a commander for the Swabian League army in 1531 ; a cousin of his grandfather , Jörg Truchsess von Waldburg , also known as <unk> , had been a commander of the imperial army in the Peasant Wars ( 1525 ) . His uncle , Otto ( 1514 – 73 ) , was the bishop of Augsburg , later a Cardinal , and founded University of Dillingen in Augsburg . His younger brother , Karl ( 1548 – 1593 ) , trained for a military career ; a second younger brother , Ferdinand , died at the siege at ' s @-@ Hertogenbosch in 1585 . 
 As a younger son , Gebhard was prepared early for an ecclesiastical career . He received a broad , Humanist education , learned several languages , including Latin , Italian , French , and German , and studied history and theology . After studying at the universities of Dillingen , Ingolstadt , Perugia , Louvain and elsewhere , he began his ecclesiastical career in 1560 at Augsburg , serving as prebendary in the Cathedral church . His life at Augsburg caused some scandal ; Uncle Otto , the archbishop , petitioned the Duke of Bavaria to remonstrate with Gebhard about his conduct , which apparently led to some improvement in his behavior . In 1561 , he became a deacon at the cathedral in Cologne ( 1561 – 77 ) , a canon of St. Gereon in Köln ( 1562 – 67 ) , a canon in Strassburg ( 1567 ) , in <unk> ( 1567 – 83 ) , and in Würzburg ( 1569 – 70 ) . In 1571 , he became deacon of the Strassburg Cathedral , a position he held until his death in 1601 . In 1576 , by papal nomination , he became provost of the Cathedral in Augsburg . He would have drawn a stipend from all these positions . 
 In December 1577 , he was chosen elector of Cologne after a contest with Ernst of Bavaria , the youngest brother of the ruling Duke . He won the election by two votes . Although it was not required of him , Gebhard agreed to be ordained a priest , which his predecessor had not done . 
 The initial years of his office were relatively uneventful . Gebhard continued some of the work of his predecessor , Salentin , chiefly in the reconstruction of the <unk> castle in Westphalia . 
 = = Archbishop goes to war = = 
 Gebhard is chiefly noted for his conversion to the reformed doctrines , and for his marriage with the reportedly beautiful Agnes von Mansfeld @-@ Eisleben , a canoness of Gerresheim . After living in concubinage with Agnes for two years , he decided , perhaps by the persuasion of her brothers , to marry her , doubtless intending at the same time to resign his see . Other counsels , however , prevailed . 
 Encouraged by Protestant supporters , including several in the Cathedral chapter , he declared he would retain the electorate , and in December 1582 , he formally announced his conversion to the reformed faith and the parity of Calvinism with Catholicism in the Electorate and archdiocese of Cologne . The marriage with Agnes was celebrated on 4 February 1583 , and afterward Gebhard remained in possession of the see . This affair created a stir in the Holy Roman Empire . 
 The clause concerning ecclesiastical reservation in the religious Peace of Augsburg was interpreted in one way by his friends , and in another way by his foes ; the former held that he could retain his office , the latter insisted that he resign . The conversion of the ecclesiastic see to one ruled by a Calvinist prince challenged the principle of ecclesiastical reservation . Hermann von Wied , a previous prince @-@ elector and archbishop had also converted to Protestantism , but had resigned from his office ; Gebhard 's predecessor , Salentin von Isenburg @-@ Grenzau , had resigned from the office upon his marriage , necessary to perpetuate his house . Unlike his predecessors , Gebhard proclaimed the Reformation , in the style of Calvinism , from the cathedral , angering Cologne 's Catholic leadership and alienating the Cathedral chapter . He placed the evangelical confession on parity with the Catholic one ; furthermore , Gebhard adhered not to the teachings of Martin Luther , but to those of John Calvin , a form of religious observation not approved of in the Augsburg conventions of 1555 . 
 Anticipating events , Gebhard had collected some troops and had taken measures to convert his subjects to Protestantism . In April 1583 , he was excommunicated by Pope Gregory XIII ; the unsuccessful candidate of 1577 , Ernest , who was also bishop of Liège , Freising and Hildesheim , was chosen as the new elector . Initially , Gebhard was supported by Adolf von <unk> and his own brother , Karl , who commanded most of his troops . Although he sought assistance from several of the Lutheran princes of Germany , especially Augustus I , elector of Saxony , these princes were not enthusiastic to support Gebhard 's cause ; his association with the Calvinists was not to their liking . Henry of Navarre , later Henry IV of France , tried to form a coalition to aid Gebhard , but the only assistance which he obtained came from John Casimir , who took command of Gebhard 's troops in the spring of 1583 . Later that summer , after fruitlessly marching the troops up and down the Rhine , a process of intimidation , he disbanded his army to administer the Palatinate of the Rhine for his ten @-@ year @-@ old nephew , the new Elector Palatine , Frederick IV . 
 Ernest had the support of the previous Elector , now Salentin IX of Isenburg @-@ Grenzau , Frederick , Duke of Saxe @-@ Lauenburg , and , probably most important , several thousand Spanish troops hired by the pope . While representatives from the Cathedral chapter , the seven imperial electors , the emperor , and the pope tried to resolve differences around the negotiating table , first in Frankfurt am Main , and then in Muhlhausen in Westphalia , the armies of both sides rampaged throughout the southern portion of the Electorate , called the Oberstift , plundering abbeys and convents , burning villages and small cities , and destroying crops , bridges , and roads . None of the combatants were prepared to commit their troops in a fixed battle ; it was far more lucrative , and safer as well , to use them in a show of force , intimidating the peasantry , besieging walled towns and small cities , and limiting trade and the sale of food @-@ stuffs in the marketplaces . 
 By the end of March , Salentin , Frederick , and the few thousand Spanish troops drove Gebhard from Bonn , then from Bad Godesberg ; he and his wife took refuge into Vest Recklinghausen , a fiefdom of the electorate . There , he and Agnes encouraged a spurt of iconoclasm by their troops , alienating many heretofore supporters , including Hermann von Hatzfeld , seneschal of <unk> . Ferdinand , the brother of the rival archbishop , drove Gebhard and Agnes into the Netherlands ; they escaped with approximately 1000 cavalry and some infantry . Initially , they sought refuge in Delft , with William I of Orange . Living in the Netherlands , they became acquainted with Elizabeth 's envoy , Robert Dudley , 1st Earl of Leicester , and entered into lengthy negotiations with Elizabeth 's Court to obtain support for his cause ; these efforts failed to garner assistance for renewing the war either from the English queen or in any other quarter . 
 By 1588 , Gebhard 's joint pain ( <unk> ) prevented him from riding a horse ; the climate of Cologne , damp and cold , made his condition worse , so he relinquished his claim on the Electorate to the protection of Adolf von Neuenahr and Martin Schenck , which they pursued until their deaths later that year . In the summer 1588 , Gebhard established his residence at Strassburg , where he had held the office of dean of the cathedral since 1574 and had maintained it concurrently with his position in Cologne . 
 = = = Consequences of Gebhard 's conversion and marriage = = = 
 Gebhard 's conversion and marriage were exceptionally costly , in terms of lives and property , and historians have made no actual estimate of its actual cost , although 19th century historians tend to criticize him for acting rashly . Perhaps its greater cost , however , lay in the impact his actions had on Protestantism and Catholicism in the northern territories of the German states . Although fighting continued until 1589 , by early 1588 , Ernst controlled most of the Electorate . Gebhard 's defeat was a serious blow to Protestantism in northern Germany , and marks a critical stage in the history of the Reformation . Bavarian Jesuits went to the Electoral territories to bring the population back to Catholicism , a process rife with violence and coercion . Gebhard also opened the doors for Spanish incursions into the Rhineland ; blocked from water access to the rebellious Dutch , Spanish military commanders sought a land route to the Dutch Provinces and by providing troop support for Ernst , they established valuable bridgeheads in the Rhine valley . Finally , the Cologne War marks the beginning of the " internationalization " of the German religious question , which was not resolved until 1650 , after the disasters of the Thirty Years Wars . 
 = = Later years = = 
 In 1589 , Gebhard and his wife moved to Strasbourg , where he had held a prebendary position in the Cathedral chapter since 1574 , and had maintained concurrently with his position in Cologne . Before his arrival some trouble had arisen in the chapter when three excommunicated canons , refugees from the Cologne strife , persisted in retaining their offices after they had accepted the reformed doctrines . He joined this party , which was strongly supported in the city , and took part in a double election to the bishopric in 1592 . Despite some opposition , he retained his office until his death in 1601 . 
 Shortly after his marriage in 1583 , Gebhard had written his Testament in which he left his estate to his brother , Karl , and a life @-@ time annuity to Agnes , and charging Karl with her safety and protection . Karl died on 18 June 1593 , and was buried in the Strasbourg cathedral ; Gebhard wrote a codicil leaving Agnes to the care and protection of the Duke of Württemberg . He spent his last years diseased and crippled , and he died on 21 May 1601 . With great pomp and ceremony was buried in a grave with Karl on 8 June 1601 . 
 = = Historical assessments = = 
 Historians have not been kind to Gebhard . E.A. <unk> , in the Cambridge Modern History , was perhaps the most generous : " Few men personally insignificant have made more stir in the world . " Walter Goetz described him in less complimentary terms : he " was impelled by no great idea , nor could he claim through virile activity the title to any high striving ambition " and was " wanting in both depth and tenacity " . Goetz was not particularly kind to Ernst either : Ernst was not Gebhard 's superior ; the victory that placed him in the Electorate belonged to his brothers ' influence and to that of the Curia ( papacy ) , not to his own striving ambition ; Ernst was , fundamentally , riding on the Counter Reformation tide that lifted all boats . Philip Motley described Gebhard thus : despite his swearing an oath to renounce his See if he should marry , " the love of Truchsess for Agnes Mansfeld had created disaster , not only for himself but for all of Germany . " Like Goetz , he describes both Gebhard and Ernst as cut from the same cloth : " two pauper Archbishops without men or means of their own were pushed back and forth , like puppets , by the highwaymen " on either side , while murder and robbery , in the name of Catholicism and Protestantism , were the " for a time the only motive or result of the contest . " 
 = = Family = = 
 Genealogy 
 Sibling connections 
 Friedrich ( 4 August 1546 – 22 December 1570 ) , Imperial Legal Chambers President . Married in 1568 to Johanna , Countess of Helfenstein @-@ Gundelfingen ( 1540 – 1572 ) , daughter of George II , Count of Helfenstein von and zu Gundelfingen , and Marie de <unk> de <unk> . 
 Karl ( 7 August 1548 – † 18 June 1593 ) , Freiherr and Truchseß von Waldburg in <unk> ( 1580 ) , Imperial Legal Chambers President , buried in Strassburg , Münster ; married in Sigmaringen on 6 May 1572 to Countess Eleonore von Hohenzollern ( 15 February 1551 – after 1605 ) , daughter of Charles I , Count of Hohenzollern , and Anna Mark @-@ countess of Baden @-@ Durlach . 
 Christoph ( 24 August 1551 – 28 February 1612 ) , Freiherr and Truchseß von Waldburg in Friedberg und Scheer ( 1580 ) . Married in 1577 to Countess Anna Maria von Fürstenberg @-@ Heiligenberg ( 3 February 1562 – December 1611 ) . 
 Anna , died 5 October 1607 ; 1m : 1565 Heinrich IV Count of <unk> , Landgrave of <unk> ( 6 October 1543 – 26 December 1582 ) , no issue , and upon his death his line became extinct ; 2m : 10 February 1592 to Peter Freiherr von <unk> ( before 1555 – 1594 ) . 
 Sibylle , born before 1548 – died 5 August 1585 . 
 Margarete , died 30 May 1612 ; m . 1570 Georg Leo Freiherr <unk> ( died 23 April 1602 ) . 
 Ferdinand , Deacon in Cologne ( 1575 – 83 ) , in <unk> ( 1578 – 85 ) , canon of St. Gereon in Cologne ( 1578 – 82 ) , Deacon in Würzburg ( 1582 – 85 ) , born 1554 , † Siege of ' s @-@ Hertogenbosch , 19 – 20 January 1585 
 Eleonore , died 29 August 1609 ; married in 1573 Melchior Hannibal Freiherr von <unk> 1537 – 1596 . 
 = <unk> guitarfish = 
 The thornback guitarfish ( Platyrhinoidis <unk> ) is a species of ray in the family <unk> , and the only member of its genus . Despite its name and appearance , it is more closely related to stingrays than to true guitarfishes of the family Rhinobatidae . This species ranges from Tomales Bay to the Gulf of California , generally in inshore waters no deeper than 6 m ( 20 ft ) . It can be found on or buried in sand or mud , or in and near kelp beds . Reaching 91 cm ( 36 in ) in length , the thornback guitarfish has a heart @-@ shaped pectoral fin disc and a long , robust tail bearing two posteriorly positioned dorsal fins and a well @-@ developed caudal fin . The most distinctive traits of this plain @-@ colored ray are the three parallel rows of large , hooked thorns that start from the middle of the back and run onto the tail . 
 Encountered singly or in groups , the thornback guitarfish feeds on small , benthic invertebrates and bony fishes . It is aplacental viviparous , with the developing young drawing sustenance from a yolk sac . Females give birth to 1 – 15 pups annually in late summer , following a roughly year @-@ long gestation period . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed the thornback guitarfish under Least Concern because the majority of its range lies within United States waters , where it is common since it has no commercial value and is not heavily fished commercially or recreationally . The status of this species in Mexican waters is inadequately known but may be more precarious . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The thornback guitarfish was scientifically described by American ichthyologists David Starr Jordan and Charles Henry Gilbert in an 1880 issue of the scientific journal Proceedings of the United States National Museum . They assigned it to the genus <unk> , and named it <unk> from the Latin tres ( " three " ) and series ( " row " ) , in reference to the three rows of thorns on its back . One year later in the same journal , Samuel Garman placed this species in a newly created genus , Platyrhinoidis . The type specimen is an adult male caught off Santa Barbara on February 8 , 1880 . Other common names for this species include banjo shark ( not to be confused with the Australian banjo sharks , <unk> ) , California thornback , guitarfish , round skate , shovelnose , thornback , and thornback ray . 
 Based on morphology , John McEachran and Neil <unk> determined in a 2004 phylogenetic study that Platyrhinoidis and <unk> together form the most basal clade of the order <unk> , and are thus the sister group to all other members of the order ( encompassing stingrays and their relatives ) . This finding affirmed that the thornback guitarfish is not closely related to the true guitarfishes of the family Rhinobatidae , a possibility that had long been considered by taxonomists . 
 = = Description = = 
 The pectoral fin disc of the thornback guitarfish is heart @-@ shaped , slightly longer than it is wide , and thick towards the front . The snout is short and broad , with a blunt tip protruding slightly from the disc . The eyes are small and widely spaced ; the spiracles are larger than the eyes and lie closely behind . The wide nostrils are preceded by moderately large , broad flaps of skin . The mouth is wide and gently arched ; there are a pair of creases running from the mouth corners to the nostrils , enclosing a roughly trapezoidal area . The lower lip is inscribed by a deep furrow that wraps around the mouth corners . The small teeth have low crowns that may be sharp to blunt , and are arranged in 68 – 82 rows in the upper jaw and 64 – 78 rows in the lower jaw . The five pairs of gill slits are small and located beneath the disc . 
 The pelvic fins have curved outer margins and angular rear tips ; males have long claspers . The tail is robust and much longer than the disc , with lateral skin folds running along either side . The two dorsal fins are similar in size and shape , being longer than tall with rounded posterior margins . The first dorsal fin lies closer to the caudal fin than the pelvic fins . The caudal fin is well @-@ developed and almost elliptical , without a distinct lower lobe . The skin is entirely covered by tiny dermal denticles ; additionally there are large recurved thorns in two or three rows along the leading margin of the disc , in small groups on the snout tip , around the eyes , and on the " shoulders " , and most distinctively in three rows running from the middle of the back to the second dorsal fin . This species is plain olive to grayish brown above and off @-@ white below . The snout and disc margins are barely translucent . It grows up to 91 cm ( 36 in ) long . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Endemic to the northeastern Pacific Ocean , the thornback guitarfish is found from Tomales Bay to Magdalena Bay , with additional isolated populations in the Gulf of California . It is reportedly very abundant in some coastal waters off California and Baja California , such as in Elkhorn Slough , and uncommon north of Monterey and in the Gulf of California . Bottom @-@ dwelling in nature , this species is typically found close to shore in less than 6 m ( 20 ft ) of water , though it has been recorded from as deep as 137 m ( 449 ft ) . It inhabits coastal habitats with muddy or sandy bottoms , including bays , sloughs , beaches , and lagoons , and can also be found in kelp beds and adjacent areas . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 During the day , the thornback guitarfish spends much time partially buried in sediment . It may be encountered singly , in small groups , or in large aggregations that form seasonally in particular bays and sloughs . The diet of this ray consists of polychaete worms , crustaceans ( including crabs , shrimps , and isopods ) , squids , and small bony fishes ( including anchovies , sardines , gobies , sculpins , and <unk> ) . It can detect prey with its electroreceptive ampullae of Lorenzini , which are most sensitive to electric fields with a frequency of 5 – 15 Hz . In turn , the thornback guitarfish is preyed upon by sharks and the northern elephant seal ( Mirounga angustirostris ) . Known parasites of this species include the tapeworm <unk> <unk> and the nematode Proleptus acutus . <unk> guitarfish mate in late summer , and females give birth the following year at around the same time , peaking in August . It is aplacental viviparous , with developing embryos sustained until birth by yolk . Females bear litters of 1 – 15 pups every year ; the newborn rays measure about 11 cm ( 4 @.@ 3 in ) long . Males and females reach sexual maturity at 37 and 48 cm ( 15 and 19 in ) long respectively . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Harmless and docile , the thornback guitarfish can be readily approached underwater , and fares well in public aquariums . Off the United States , this ray is common and faces no substantial threats : it is only occasionally caught incidentally by commercial and recreational fishers , and has no economic value . As most of its range lies within US waters , the species has been assessed as Least Concern overall by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) . However , in Mexican waters the thornback guitarfish population is small and fragmented , and the degree to which it is affected by fishing is uncertain . There , the IUCN has listed it locally under Data Deficient while noting its susceptibility to inshore lagoon fisheries and shrimp trawlers , and the urgent need for additional information to ensure its long @-@ term regional survival . 
 = Ypsilanti Heritage Festival = 
 The Ypsilanti Heritage Festival is a festival in Ypsilanti , Michigan . Held each year on a late @-@ August weekend , the festival sprawls across Frog Island Park , Riverside Park , Depot Town , and downtown Ypsilanti . The festival includes events such as a parade , vintage base ball , a bed race , a hot dog eating contest , a rubber duck race , and a spoof of the Woodward Dream Cruise called the " Nightmare Cruise " . 
 = = History = = 
 The festival was first held on Saturday , July 15 , 1978 , " from noon ' til nightfall " . The sidewalks and streets in Depot Town had just been re @-@ paved , and the Depot Town Association held a " Sidewalk Celebration " . The poster advertised a noon sidewalk promenade led by the Honorable George Goodman " <unk> " the mayor of Ypsilanti and exciting ribbon cutting ceremonies , dedications and plain or fancy walkin ' . The Sidewalk Celebration was such a success that a decision was made to repeat the event , to be known as the " Ypsilanti Yesteryear Heritage Festival " . 
 According to other reports , a motivating factor was the desire to establish a historic district in Ypsilanti , to prevent the city from replacing historic buildings on North Huron Street and in Depot Town with new construction . A group of <unk> applied to the state for funding to publish a guidebook to the city 's historic homes , and were told that no money was available for that purpose , but that there was funding available to stage a festival . A $ 15 @,@ 000 grant from the state helped to fund the 1979 Ypsilanti Yesteryear Heritage Festival . 
 In 1979 , the festival drew 50 @,@ 000 attendees , continued to grow quickly in subsequent years , and the name was soon shortened to the present name . By the mid @-@ 1980s the festival was attracting attention from non @-@ local newspapers — a June 1985 edition of the Toledo Blade referred to it as an " Old time circus , arts and crafts , and historic home tour " — and later that decade the festival was drawing more than 250 @,@ 000 attendees a year , though attendance subsequently declined , and in recent years the festival has drawn about 100 @,@ 000 attendees . 
 = = Activities = = 
 The Ypsilanti Heritage Festival includes and has included a wide variety of activities and events . 
 The Ypsilanti Historic Home Tour , held annually during the Ypsilanti Heritage Festival , began , like the festival proper , in 1979 . A beer garden and gambling tent anchored the center of the festival from 1979 through 2010 . In 2011 the gambling was eliminated for financial reasons , while the beer garden continued with an expanded food and drink selection ; however , in January , 2012 , new festival director Andrew Clock announced that " the casino will be back , set up right next to the beer tent , where it belongs . " A bed race through downtown Ypsilanti was added as an annual event beginning in 2009 . 
 The Ypsilanti Heritage Festival Parade began in 1979 , and has been held every year . In 2007 , the parade attracted wider attention when parade organizers approved the inclusion of a group protesting a proposed city income tax and subsequently revoked the permission . Festival coordinators explained that their rule was to exclude groups marching to represent controversial or political issues , and that the initial approval was an error . 
 Because the Ypsilanti Heritage Festival has often been the same weekend as the Woodward Dream Cruise , festival coordinators " decided it would be a blast to have something that was the direct opposite of the Dream Cruise " , and the Nightmare Cruise , a spoof of the Woodward Dream Cruise , was born in 2005 . The only rules are that " [ t ] he car has to be legally <unk> , and fluid leaks should be at a minimum . " 
 Other events have included a pole vault competition sanctioned by USA Track & Field , live theater , antique cars and fire engines , vintage base ball sponsored by Greenfield Village , " Precious Pets " and " Beautiful Babies " contests , a rubber duck race , a living history encampment , a high wire performance by one of The Flying <unk> , and a circus . 
 = = = " The Game That Never Was " = = = 
 In 1973 , Carolyn King , with support from the Ypsilanti City Council , became one of the first girls in the country to play Little League Baseball . When they found out that she was playing , Little League International officials pulled the Ypsilanti American Little League 's charter , and the 1973 All @-@ Star game between the rival Ypsilanti American and National Little Leagues was never played . Thirty @-@ seven years later , with most of the participants aged 48 to 50 , the game , billed as " The Game That Never Was " , was held in Frog Island Park as part of the 2010 festival . The American League All @-@ Stars won . 
 = Chelsea ( song ) = 
 " Chelsea " is the debut song recorded by American pop rock band Stefy . It was released as the lead single from their debut album , The Orange Album ( 2006 ) . It was sent to mainstream radio in June 2006 and was made available as a CD single and digital download by Wind @-@ up Records on July 18 . The song features a melody that is similar to The Eurythmics ' " Sweet Dreams ( Are Made of This ) " . 
 " Chelsea " was written by Jimmy Harry , Greg Kurstin and Stefy Rae , while production was handled by Harry . The song received mixed reviews from music critics , who favorably compared it to the works of Gwen Stefani and Blondie , but found it to be a " weak " debut single . The song was moderately successful after its release , peaking at number 15 on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Play , and playing a prominent role in the video game 2006 FIFA World Cup ( 2006 ) . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Chelsea " was written and produced during recording sessions in Los Angeles , California at 320 Studios and <unk> Studios . Sessions for Stefy 's debut album , The Orange Album , began when lead singer Stefy Rae was " look [ ing ] for [ a ] sense of uniqueness " in the music industry . Rae stated that she was inspired to write " Chelsea " after another woman stole her boyfriend . 
 The single was written by Stefy lead singer Stefy Rae , Greg Kurstin , and Jimmy Harry , while production was handled solely by Harry . The track was released in 2006 as a CD single and digital download by Wind @-@ up Records . The CD single version of " Chelsea " came with B @-@ side track " Cover Up " . The single was later issued to mainstream radio in June 2006 , where it received modest success and significant airplay , charting on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Play for nine consecutive weeks . 
 = = Composition and reception = = 
 Musically , " Chelsea " is a bubblegum pop and new wave track , referencing the music of the 1980s and 1990s . Chris Carle , writing for IGN , described the single as an " ode to jealousy " that started " with [ a ] <unk> @-@ style synth before launching into a snarling , almost @-@ tough chorus . " Marcus Duke for the Daily Express also noted the " sly sampling " of <unk> , and stated " Stefy Rae has definitely been influenced by Gwen Stefani . " Francis <unk> of Domain Cleveland Entertainment wrote an album review of The Orange Album and stated " ' Chelsea ' kicks off [ the ] album with the pixie @-@ like vocals of Stefy Rae singing about a boyfriend leaving her for another woman . " 
 " Chelsea " received generally mixed reviews from music critics . Chris Carle of IGN praised the song for being a " standout track " and a " great blend of playful and painful " . Similarly , Marcus Dunk of the Daily Express wrote that " Chelsea " was a highlight for Stefy . Francis <unk> , writing for Domain Cleveland Entertainment , enjoyed the " danceable " qualities of the song . A reviewer of Billboard enjoyed the single , comparing it to Gwen Stefani and Blondie 's work , but considered it " hardly a proper intro " on The Orange Album , however , the reviewer praised it for being a " delectably bubble gum " song . A critic from CMJ New Music Monthly was displeased with " Chelsea " , stating that it 's a " pale imitation of [ a ] classic decade @-@ of @-@ decadence act " , referencing the song 's sampling of " Sweet Dreams ( Are Made of This ) " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Chelsea " was moderately successful . Due to strong airplay on mainstream radio , the single managed to peak at number fifteen on the Billboard Hot Dance Club Play ; it remained on the charts for nine weeks before departing the chart on October 7 , 2006 . It also peaked at number eighteen on the Billboard Dance / Mix Show Airplay chart , where it lasted for four weeks . In Europe , the single also fared moderately well . In the United Kingdom , the track debuted and peaked at number eighty @-@ two on the Official Charts Company . In Ireland , " Chelsea " debuted and peaked at number ninety @-@ six . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The official music video for " Chelsea " was first released on September 1 , 2006 via YouTube , before being made available for purchase on September 13 . The video was directed by Nigel Dick and features a guest appearance by Adam West as the judge of a court case . The video begins with Rae arriving at the scene of the case , surrounded by West and a group of female jurors who clap along to the song 's melody . Presumably , Rae is trying to convict her ex @-@ boyfriend of cheating on her . Various scenes include Rae performing at a school 's gymnasium and picking a fight with a female antagonist named Chelsea . The video concludes with Rae winning the court case and walking away from the scene . 
 = = Track listings and formats = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits and personnel adapted from The Orange Album liner notes 
 Recording 
 Recorded at 3 : 20 Studios and <unk> Studios , Los Angeles 
 Personnel 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Seychelles women 's national football team = 
 The Seychelles women 's national football team is the national team of the Seychelles . It does not officially exist and has not played in a FIFA recognised match . The national team has played in two eighty @-@ minute long games in 2005 in a tournament hosted by Mauritius , with the Seychelles losing both matches . An official under @-@ 17 national team exists and had regular training sessions in 2006 . The sport faces several development problems inside the country including a lack of popularity for the sport , and few female players and teams . Women have gained football leadership positions in the country with one coaching a men 's team and another umpiring international matches . There are other development issues for the sport that are ones facing the whole of Africa . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 The Seychelles Football Federation was founded in 1979 , and became a FIFA affiliate in 1986 . Women 's football is represented in the federation by specific mandate and currently they employee one full @-@ time employee to look after the women 's game . 
 Football is the third most popular women 's sport in the country . In 2006 there were overall 185 registered female players ( 100 adult players and 85 youth players ) . There are also a few women 's club , eight senior women 's club as of 2009 and a national competition takes place yearly . Girl 's football was not played in school based competitions in 2006 , but started in 2009 . The first woman 's football tournament occurred in the late 1990s , with the first tournaments being seven @-@ a @-@ side football before an eleven @-@ a @-@ side tournament started . The Patron 's Cup , the major women 's competition in the country that is the final for the national league , was won by Olympia Coast in 2001 , 2002 , 2003 and 2005 . The cup was won by Dolphins in 2004 . The competition and some of the teams underwent a name change with United Sisters becoming the Lioness and the Patron 's Cup becoming the Federation Cup . In 2007 , 2009 and 2011 , the Lioness won the Federation Cup . In 2002 , Cynthia Sanders became the first woman from the country to attain an assistant referee international license . Rights to broadcast the 2011 Women 's World Cup in the country were bought by the African Union of Broadcasting and Supersport International . In 2011 , Sanders became the first woman from the country to referee an international match when she officiated a match between Malawi and Zimbabwe in Harare , Zimbabwe . In 2012 , the country had their first woman sign a contract for and coach a men 's team . 
 Early development of the women 's game at the time colonial powers brought football to the African continent was limited , as colonial powers in the region tended to make concepts of patriarchy and women 's participation in sports was limited as a result . The lack of later development of the national teams on a wider international level is symptomatic of most of African teams and a result of several factors , including limited access to education , poverty amongst women in the wider society , and fundamental inequality present in the society that occasionally allows for female specific human rights abuses . When quality female football players are developed , they tend to leave for greater opportunities abroad . Continent wide , funding is also an issue , with most development money coming from FIFA , not the national football association . Future success for women 's football in Africa is dependent on improved facilities and access by women to these facilities . Attempting to commercialise the game and make it commercially viable is not the solution , as demonstrated by the current existence of many youth and women 's football camps held throughout the continent . 
 = = The team = = 
 In 1985 , almost no country in the world had a women 's national football team including the Seychelles who did play in a single FIFA sanctioned match between 1950 and June 2012 . In 2006 , the country did not have an official FIFA recognised senior a team , a situation unchanged by 2009 . In 2005 , they competed in a three nation tournament hosted by Mauritius , where all games were 80 minutes in length . They lost to Mauritius 1 – 4 . They lost to Réunion 0 – 9 . Overall , they finished last , scoring only one goal in the competition . In 2005 , Zambia was supposed to host a regional COSAFA women 's football tournament , with ten teams agreeing to send teams including South Africa , Zimbabwe , Mozambique , Malawi , Seychelles , Mauritius , Madagascar , Zambia , Botswana , Namibia , Lesotho and Swaziland . Seychelles did not record a match in the event . The country did not have a team competing in the 2010 African Women 's <unk> or at the 2011 All Africa Games . In March 2012 , the team was not ranked in the world by FIFA . 
 The country has an official under @-@ 17 team , the Seychelle women 's national under @-@ 17 football team . In 2006 , they had two training sessions a week but had yet to record an official FIFA recognised match . 
 = 1933 Trinidad hurricane = 
 The 1933 Trinidad hurricane was one of three North Atlantic tropical cyclones on record to produce hurricane @-@ force winds in Venezuela . The second tropical storm and first hurricane of the 1933 Atlantic hurricane season , the system formed on June 24 to the east of the Lesser Antilles . It moved westward and attained hurricane status before striking Trinidad on June 27 . The storm caused heavy damage on the island , estimated at around $ 3 million . The strong winds downed trees and destroyed hundreds of houses , leaving about 1 @,@ 000 people homeless . Later , the hurricane crossed the northeastern portion of Venezuela , where power outages and damaged houses were reported . 
 After entering the Caribbean Sea , the hurricane maintained a northwest trajectory . It passed south of Jamaica on July 1 , where heavy rainfall flooded roads and railways . The hurricane crossed western Cuba on July 3 . High winds on the island destroyed hundreds of houses , and the storm 's rainfall damaged the tobacco crop . Upon entering the Gulf of Mexico , the hurricane turned to the west and attained peak winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) on July 5 . It struck northeastern Mexico on July 8 and quickly dissipated . Upon its final landfall , the storm caused heavy damage in Mexico , and in southern Texas the storm ended a prolonged drought . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave was first observed near 40 ° W on June 23 . The next day , a ship in the region observed a closed circulation , suggesting that the tropical wave spawned a tropical depression about 1300 mi ( 2090 km ) east of Trinidad . The storm moved westward and gradually intensified . By June 27 , it attained hurricane status about 175 mi ( 280 km ) east of Trinidad , based on a ship report of a barometric pressure of 991 mbar ( 29 @.@ 27 inHg ) ; it was the first of 11 hurricanes during the season . At around 2100 UTC on June 27 , the hurricane made landfall on extreme southern Trinidad with winds of about 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) . After crossing the island , the hurricane struck the Paria Peninsula of northern Venezuela at the same intensity at 0200 UTC on June 28 . The 1933 Monthly Weather Review summary of the season noted that the hurricane was the " earliest known in [ the ] general area also the only one in a record of nearly 50 years to pass south of the Island of Trinidad and over the northeast corner of Venezuela . " 
 About two hours after striking Venezuela , the hurricane entered the southeastern Caribbean Sea . For the next few days it maintained its intensity while tracking to the northwest . A ship on June 30 reported a pressure of 982 mb ( 29 @.@ 0 inHg ) , suggesting winds of about 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . The next day , the hurricane passed south of Jamaica and turned more to the west before resuming a northwest motion . At around 0600 UTC on July 3 , the hurricane made landfall on western Cuba with winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . It weakened while crossing the island , although it maintained hurricane status upon entering the Gulf of Mexico . On July 4 , a strong high pressure area over the eastern United States turned the hurricane to the west . After restrengthening , the storm attained peak winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) on July 5 , based on a ship report of a pressure of 965 mbar ( 28 @.@ 5 inHg ) . It maintained that intensity for about 18 hours , and during that time the hurricane turned to the southwest . At 0100 UTC on July 8 , the hurricane made its final landfall near La Pesca , about halfway between Tampico , Tamaulipas and Brownsville , Texas . The intensity at landfall was estimated at around 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) . After moving ashore , the hurricane rapidly weakened over the high terrain of northeastern Mexico , and the storm dissipated at around 1200 UTC on July 8 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Throughout its path , the hurricane killed at least 35 people collectively in Trinidad , Venezuela , Jamaica , and Cuba . The hurricane first affected Trinidad , causing about $ 3 million in damage in the southern portion of the island . The storm destroyed 300 houses in one village , and thousands were left homeless . Trees across the island fell down and blocked many roads , including one that struck a car and seriously injured one man . Heavy damage was also reported to the cocoa industry . High winds destroyed about 60 oil derricks , and an 11 mi ( 18 km ) oil supply line was disrupted due to fallen trees . This represented a significant loss to the island 's oil industry , one of two such events in the 1930s . High winds downed power lines across the island , which were repaired by three days after the storm struck . The storm also dropped heavy rainfall and destroyed the roofs of many houses . Little damage occurred in the capital city of Port of Spain . There were 13 deaths in Trinidad , some of whom drowned after their boats sank . After the storm , medical assistance and relief supplies were sent via boat to Cedros , which was one of the most significantly affected areas . 
 After affecting Trinidad , the hurricane struck northeastern Venezuela , where damage was heaviest in Carúpano , Río Caribe , and Isla Margarita . High winds cut telephone and telegraph lines for several days . The storm destroyed several houses and fishing boats , resulting in several million bolívares in damage . Officials reported that there were " a number of lives lost " due to the hurricane . Striking with winds of 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) , the storm was one of only three Atlantic tropical cyclones on record at the time to affect the country with hurricane @-@ force winds as of 2015 , after hurricanes in 1877 and 1892 . 
 After moving across the Caribbean , the hurricane affected Jamaica . High winds downed about 200 @,@ 000 banana trees , while flooding in the western portion of the island affected roads and railways . Later , the hurricane crossed western Cuba , killing 22 people and causing $ 4 million in damage . The hurricane destroyed about 100 houses in Pinar del Río Province from the combination of strong winds and flooding from heavy rainfall . One person died after her house collapsed in the province . The rainfall caused four rivers to exceed their banks , and the storm @-@ related flooding left serious damage to the tobacco industry . The storm also damaged crops in the region . High winds downed telephone and telegraph lines in western Cuba . Little damage was reported in the capital city of Havana , despite the report of a peak wind gust of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . After the storm , Cuban President Gerardo Machado utilized the military to assist in relief operations and prevent looting . 
 The threat of the storm prompted the United States Weather Bureau to issue southeast storm warnings for Key West , Florida . Light rainfall from the storm was reported in Miami . Before the storm made its final landfall , the Weather Bureau issued northeast storm warnings from Brownsville to Port O 'Connor , Texas on July 5 . That same day , a hurricane warning was also issued for Brownsville . The hurricane ultimately struck a sparsely @-@ populated area of northeastern Mexico , causing several deaths and heavy damage in the country . High winds downed trees and power lines , and damaged the roofs of several houses . Along the beach near Tampico , high tides damaged coastal structures and flooded some cars . The effects extended into Texas , and Brazos Island , Port Isabel , and Port Aransas were flooded due to the storm surge . High tides damaged ten piers in Port Isabel , and there was damage to buildings along the coast . The storm damaged the cotton and fruit crops in south Texas from high winds and rainfall . Rains from the storm ended an extended drought in the Brownsville area . 
 = Zaion : I Wish You Were Here = 
 Zaion : I Wish You Were Here ( Japanese : <unk> , Hepburn : Anata ga koko ni <unk> ) is a four @-@ episode Japanese science fiction original video animation ( OVA ) released by Gonzo in 2001 . The story is set in the near future , when a <unk> virus threatens Earth by turning humans into violent creatures . Enhanced soldiers fight a losing war against these creatures to ensure the survival of the human race . The series was directed by Seiji Mizushima and written by Natsuko Takahashi . Music for the series was composed by Kenji Kawai . Zaion has been licensed for English @-@ language release in North America , the United Kingdom , and Australia . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The story of Zaion is set in 2004 , four years after the American CDC discovers a meteorite @-@ introduced virus that irreversibly alters the molecular structure of the human body and turns its victims into violent creatures . In an effort to eradicate the infestation that has claimed 3 percent of the human population , the World Health Organization of the United Nations establish a secret internal organization , the Committee of the Universal Resolution of <unk> ( CURE ) in 2002 with several international branches , and creates a unit of soldiers whose bodies have been introduced with nanomachines . These soldiers , wearing Nano <unk> Armor ( NOA ) , engage the victims in direct combat . They also establish units of unmanned , remote mech units known as Multi @-@ purpose Operative Beings ( MOB ) to assist the NOA . As the missions begin to take a toll on the NOA 's ranks , NOA soldier Yuuji Tamiya ( <unk> <unk> , Tamiya Yūji ) ( voiced by Joe Odagiri in Japanese and Joey Hood in English ) becomes angry at learning that CURE has been working on a secret weapon project , known as UNIT , and not employing it . The Japanese Branch 's weapon , UNIT @-@ i , is a girl named Ai ( <unk> ) ( voiced by Yukari Tamura in Japanese and Christa <unk> Jones in English ) who is able to create a projected being that can destroy the creatures . During the next outbreak , victims of the virus fuse together into a larger creature and overwhelm the soldiers . CURE decides to put Ai 's ability to the test , and the projected being destroys the creature . 
 Yuuji is quarantined after coming in contact with one of the creatures but is released when he recovers from his injuries . However , his blood tests later indicate that the virus has evolved and is attacking the nanomachines in his body . CURE orders for Yuuji 's arrest , but he escapes and takes Ai hostage . When his condition worsens during the journey , Ai heals him with her powers . The other NOA soldiers catch up to the two and help them escape , but they are soon found by CURE units . Unwilling to see Yuuji and the others hurt , Ai decides to leave with the CURE soldiers . At the NOA facility , the infected soldiers become victims of the virus as the nanomachines are destroyed . Yuuji is forced to fight them and the CURE units sent to kill them at the same time . Ai finds out that Yuuji is in danger and asks that she be taken to the facility . She realizes her feelings for Yuuji and projects them with her powers to eliminate the virus . A larger outbreak occurs elsewhere in the city , and the virus further evolves to mimic the nanomachines ' abilities . Yuuji delays the creatures ' advance as Ai creates the projected being once again . She uses all her power to purge the infected area of the virus , but this causes her to collapse in exhaustion . Yuuji runs to her , fearing that she is dead , but she is still alive . Unfortunately , the seemingly defeated virus resists , and Yuuji desperately rushes towards the creatures to fight them . In the end it is revealed that Ai had lost her ability and she and Yuuji had left the organization . In the epilogue it shows Ai and Yuuji spending time together , happy to be free from their duties at last . 
 = = Media = = 
 The first episode of Zaion was published on the Internet on October 4 , 2001 . It was one of the few instances of a new series being introduced on the Internet before it was broadcast on television . The first two episodes aired later that day on the Kids Station television network . The network also aired the final episodes of the series on November 3 , 2001 . The ending theme song for the series is " Lunatic Trance : Shizuka naru <unk> " ( Lunatic Trance ～ <unk> ～ ) , which was released as a maxi single on November 21 , 2001 . The song was later included in Gonzo 's compilation release of music from its anime works in 2006 . The series did not have an opening theme . 
 Each episode of Zaion was released monthly on DVD by Japanese distributor Media Factory . The first episode was released on February 22 , 2002 , and the final episode was released on May 31 , 2002 . ADV Films licensed the series for the English language and released the episodes in pairs in 2003 . It then repackaged the series into one set , released on February 3 , 2009 . Madman Entertainment licensed Zaion for distribution in Australia and New Zealand and released its boxed set on July 26 , 2006 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception of Zaion : I Wish You Were Here was mixed . " On the surface , it may appear to be merely another sci @-@ fi mecha action show " , Patrick King of Anime Fringe wrote . However , Zaion introduced apocalyptic themes similar those found in Michael Crichton 's novel Andromeda Strain and the film 28 Days Later . According to King , the real story of Zaion occurs when Yuuji and Ai develop their relationship , and " we begin to think less of the nanomachine technology and viral invasion of the planet and focus more upon the potential love between these two lonely people , trapped in a labyrinth devoid of an exit " . The series was produced with high audio and visual qualities and was designed with " plausible technical details " . King also praised the fitting soundtrack , which was composed by Kenji Kawai and incorporated the sounds of progressive rock . On the contrary , Jason Bustard of THEM Anime rated the series one out of five stars and accused Gonzo of attempting to " rip off Power Rangers as a last resort " . He also pointed out the seemingly oblivious general population of the world in Zaion that are not at all concerned about the invasion . " If they were trying for some sort of grand social statement here , they succeeded instead in making the vast majority of Japan simply look stupid " , Bustard charged . 
 Zac Bertschy of Anime News Network also rated Zaion below average . Although he criticized the series as a " woefully undercooked and dull bit of science fiction claptrap " , he also admitted that it " wouldn 't be quite so miserable if the design wasn 't as poorly handled as it is " . Gonzo , which was known for incorporating experimental animation into its productions , mismanaged the show 's 3D computer animation and produced a result that " could have been rendered many years ago in some ancient MS @-@ DOS modeling program " . Despite his criticisms , Bertschy called the soundtrack " a truck stop of pleasure on the highway of pain " and praised the professional English @-@ language dub released by ADV Films . Mania.com 's Chris Beveridge noted that character development between Yuuji and Ai was not consistent . " Yuuji comes across as little more than a blank sheet for the most part with just the scribble of ' angst ' on him " , Beveridge observed . Overall , Gonzo 's experimentation with computer animation " look highly fake and out of place " . 
 = Vincent Clarkson = 
 Vincent Clarkson , also known by the alter ego Valerie Davis , is a fictional character on the American soap opera Passions , which aired on NBC from 1999 to 2007 and on DirecTV in 2007 – 08 . Passions followed the romantic and supernatural adventures in the fictional New England coastal town of Harmony . 
 Created by the soap 's founder and head writer James E. Reilly , the role was portrayed by Phillip Jeanmarie from 2006 – 2008 . Valerie Davis was played by Daphnée Duplaix from 2004 – 2008 , and temporarily by Siena Goines in 2007 . Jeanmarie originally auditioned for the role of a peeping tom before the role was expanded as the show progressed . Jeanmarie and Duplaix were both unaware that Vincent and Valerie were the same character until receiving the script . Goines was temporarily cast as Valerie during Duplaix 's maternity leave . At the end of the show , several props and costumes related to Vincent were sold at an auction , along with other items from the show . 
 Vincent is a member of the Russell family and the Crane family . The long @-@ lost son of Julian Crane and Eve Russell , he was portrayed as mentally unstable and violent . He appeared initially under the alias Valerie Davis , but his later persona as the " Blackmailer " , and his criminal actions , would dominate the show in its later years . He received further prominence for his incestuous affair with Chad Harris @-@ Crane , sexual identity as intersex , and pregnancy with his father 's child . 
 The character made daytime television history for having the first instance in a soap opera of two men simulating sex ; he is also notable for being an intersex character . Vincent has received mixed feedback from critics , with some praising Jeanmarie 's acting while others criticized and parodied the character 's relationship with Chad . Jeanmarie cited the role as inspiration for future soap operas to address LGBT issues . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Casting and creation = = = 
 Phillip Jeanmarie originally auditioned for the part of a peeping tom unaware that the role would be expanded into the character of Vincent Clarkson . Jeanmarie praised James E. Reilly for taking a risk by creating an intersex villain while also staying true to his " tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek approach to his storytelling " . Jeanmarie stated that he enjoyed playing " the bad guy " and felt that Vincent was " surprising and challenging " to portray given the twists in his narrative . Reilly , and the show 's writers , did not inform Jeanmarie of their plans for Vincent 's storylines until the read @-@ through and the shooting of the scenes . Jeanmarie said this decision prevented him from overthinking the character and allowed him to act on his instinct . He equated his time on the soap opera to acting school . Daphnée Duplaix stated she was unaware that Valerie was Vincent 's split personality ; she said the cast did not know their future storylines : " until [ they ] ha [ d ] the script in [ their ] hand [ s ] " . From January 20 , 2007 to March 29 , 2007 , Siena Goines temporarily played the part during Duplaix 's maternity leave . 
 = = = Characterization and cast response = = = 
 Jeanmarie stated that he portrayed Vincent as a character in constant pursuit of love . He called his character " horribly scarred " from the abuse by his grandfather Alistair Crane and opined that his criminal and immoral behavior was meant to cover up his desire for acceptance . Jeanmarie viewed Vincent as a part of the larger history of the representation of LGBT persons on daytime television . He cited the role as inspiration for future soap operas to address LGBT issues . 
 Other Passions cast members had a more negative perception of the character . Tracey Ross , who played Russell family matriarch Eve Russell , reacted negatively to Vincent 's involvement in Eve 's storylines . She said that Vincent giving birth to his father 's child made her " physically nauseous " and she could only complete the birth scenes after the show 's acting coach , Maria O 'Brien , convinced her of " [ their ] comedic possibilities " . Vincent 's manipulation of Eve to incorrectly reattach Julian 's penis was criticized by co @-@ star McKenzie Westmore ( " This has got to be the worst storyline ever done , what are they doing ? " ) , who cited it as a reason for the show 's cancellation . Kim Johnston Ulrich , who played Ivy Winthrop , said she was confused by Vincent and never fully understood his storyline . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = 2001 : Hidden Passions : Secrets from the Diaries of Tabitha Lenox = = = 
 The 2001 novel Hidden Passions : Secrets from the Diaries of Tabitha Lenox was published by <unk> as a tie @-@ <unk> to expand the backstories of prominent characters from the show , such as revealing more information regarding Eve Russell 's child with Julian Crane . It was promoted as being written by the character Tabitha Lenox ( it was in reality composed by writers Alice Alfonsi and James E. Reilly ) and was heavily featured on the show . The novel reveals that Vincent was born on Christmas day . It states that Alistair Crane arranged for Vincent 's death , but instead the hitman , Jack , placed the baby with social services without his knowledge . The series changed Alistair 's involvement in Vincent 's life ; Alistair abuses and manipulates Vincent as a tool for his plans to maintain power over Harmony . Despite the book 's billing as canonical when it was published , the show contradicts much of its information with the most prominent aspect being the alterations to Eve 's family . 
 = = = 2004 – 08 : Passions = = = 
 Vincent first appears in the December 16 , 2004 episode as his alter @-@ ego Valerie Davis . While working as an executive assistant to Crane Industries ' vice president Theresa Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald , Valerie is characterized by her connection with the Crane family and past sexual encounter with Chad Harris @-@ Crane . Vincent fabricates a backstory for Valerie ; she joined Crane Industries to change its lack of minority employees . Valerie is initially a minor character , appearing to help Ivy Winthrop in her attempts to break up Fox Crane and Kay Bennett and support Chad during work . But she gains more prominence when Eve catches her having sex with Crane Industries ' CEO Julian Crane . Valerie engages in a catfight with Eve after she is accused of using sex to climb the corporate ladder . During this time , Whitney Russell suspects that Valerie is having an affair with Chad . Vincent is first seen outside of his split @-@ personality when he introduces himself as a tabloid reporter at Chad and Whitney 's wedding on December 26 , 2006 . Whitney sets up Vincent and Valerie as a couple without knowing they are in fact the same person . 
 From 2006 to 2007 , Vincent adopts the disguise of the " Blackmailer " to rape , murder , and blackmail several of the show 's characters . Alistair ( who was presumed dead at the time ) , manipulated Vincent into performing these criminal actions . Daytime Confidential 's Jamey Giddens described the storyline as a " reign of terror [ that ] dominated the last few years of the series " and called Vincent a : " seemingly omnipotent , omnipresent force " . Vincent 's first act as the " Blackmailer " is to repeatedly rape his paternal half @-@ sister Fancy Crane ; he frames Fancy 's boyfriend Luis Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald for the rapes by planting his semen inside her . After his maternal half @-@ sister Simone Russell 's girlfriend Rae Thomas learns the truth behind Fancy 's rapes , he murders her and frames Luis for the crime . As the storyline progresses , Vincent begins to harbor an obsession with Theresa 's love interest Ethan Winthrop and blackmails Judge JE Reilly into sentencing Luis to death by lethal injection . Vincent 's aunt Sheridan Crane was the only person to identify him as the " Blackmailer " ; she keeps his secret on the condition that he bring her niece Pretty Crane back to Harmony to destroy Fancy 's relationship with Luis . Vincent convinces Sheridan to kill Theresa with an electric chair , but she is interrupted by Theresa 's rival Gwen Hotchkiss . 
 In February 2007 , Vincent is revealed to have been engaging in an incestuous and adulterous affair with Chad ( who was simultaneously Vincent 's half @-@ uncle , adoptive half @-@ cousin , and half @-@ brother @-@ in @-@ law ) ; the affair was cited as starting prior to the show 's storyline in Rome in the summer of 2006 . Vincent blackmails Chad with secret videos of their sexual encounters . Furious with Chad for continuing to sleep with Whitney , Vincent engineers a scenario in which Whitney sees Vincent and Chad having sex in the back of a gay bar ; Whitney immediately leaves Chad and Chad distances himself from Vincent . Chad informs Valerie of Vincent 's infidelity after overhearing the two fight ; Chad , as well as the viewer , is unaware that Vincent and Valerie are the same person . As the incest storyline progresses , Vincent reveals to Julian and Eve his secret identities as the " Blackmailer " and their son . For most of the series , Eve and Julian 's child is believed to be Chad , who is later shown to be Eve 's adoptive sister Liz 's child from her rape by Alistair . Despite Julian 's insistence that they protect their son and the Crane name , Eve tells the police that Vincent is the " Blackmailer " and Luis is set free moments before his execution . Vincent is arrested and placed in psychiatric care . Alistair helps Vincent to escape , but hires assassin Spike Lester to murder him . Vincent is rescued by Sheridan and they escape Harmony by car while being pursued by Spike . Vincent and Spike fall over the side of a cliff . Sheridan can save only one of the two men and chooses to save Spike after he reveals her son Marty is still alive . Vincent plummets to his ( apparent ) death on August 30 , 2007 . A few episodes later , Vincent emerges from the ocean and goes to Valerie 's house to attack her off @-@ screen for exposing his secrets . In the show 's final episode on NBC on September 7 , 2007 , Valerie removes her mask to reveal she is in fact Vincent ; it is strongly implied that Vincent has dissociative identity disorder . 
 In November 2007 , Vincent runs a blood test on himself after experiencing what appears to be symptoms of morning sickness and discovers he is pregnant . Eve inspects Vincent ( who is dressed as Valerie ) on November 22 , 2007 and discovers his pregnancy and his true gender identity as intersex . Vincent torments Eve out of revenge for her failure to prevent his abduction when he was born and to prevent her from telling anyone that he was still alive and pregnant with Julian 's child . After his psychopathic accomplice Viki Chatsworth severs Julian 's penis , Vincent plies Eve with drugs and alcohol so she botches her attempt to surgically reattach Julian 's penis ; she reattaches it upside @-@ down , and an erection might kill him . In May 2008 , Eve and Julian assist Vincent with the birth of his son on the Russells ' kitchen table after Eve explains everything about Vincent and Valerie to Julian . Eve plans to form a relationship again with Vincent ( believing that motherhood has mellowed him ) , and convinces Julian not to turn him in to the police . During the rehearsal dinner for the joint weddings of Luis Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald and Fancy Crane , Noah Bennett and Paloma Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald , Miguel Lopez @-@ Fitzgerald and Kay Bennett , and Edna Wallace and Norma Bates , Vincent and Viki kill all the guests with a poison mushroom sauce . Witch Tabitha Lenox gives up her powers and becomes a born again Christian in order to resurrect everyone . Vincent is last seen being arrested by Chief of Police Sam Bennett . Since T. C. Russell , Whitney , and Simone moved to New Orleans in 2007 , Vincent and Eve are the only two Russells in the final episode . 
 = = Impact and reception = = 
 Throughout his run on Passions , he received mixed feedback from critics . Jamey Giddens of Daytime Confidential praised Jeanmarie 's performance for making all of Vincent 's storylines believable , writing : " If anyone on that show could have won an Emmy it was him " . Giddens felt the fact that Vincent and Chad was the first instance in a soap opera of two men simulating sex should have received more media attention compared to that given Luke Snyder and Noah Mayer from the CBS soap opera As the World Turns and Oliver Fish and Kyle Lewis from the ABC soap opera One Life to Live . Soap opera journalist Roger Newcomb of the website We Love Soaps included Vincent in his review of gay , lesbian , and bisexual characters in the history of daytime television . Josh Robertson of Complex called Duplaix one of the most successful soap actresses , who had been a Playboy Playmate , for her performances as Valerie in thirty @-@ four episodes of Passions , along with her portrayal of Rachel Gannon in ninety @-@ five episodes of One Life to Live . 
 After the show 's cancellation , the character was frequently referenced as a prime example of its outrageous storylines . BuzzFeed 's community member <unk> included Valerie and Vincent on the list - Crazy Ladies of Daytime Soaps . Following James E. Reilly 's death on October 12 , 2008 , Gawker 's Kyle Buchanan listed the " insanely convoluted incest storylines " involving Vincent as one of : " the most insane things that have ever happened on television " . An article in Soap Opera Digest included the revelations that Vincent was the blackmailer , Eve and Julian 's son , and Valerie on the list of Passions ' most shocking secrets . 
 Herndon L. Davis of Windy City Times was critical of the character 's development , saying the soap opera " recklessly wrote a down @-@ low storyline which involved an African @-@ American man but eventually turned it into an outrageous intersex serial killer storyline " . Mike Perigard of the Boston Herald criticized the storylines involving the rapist as " just vile " . Joel McHale from E ! ' s weekly television series The Soup turned a scene in which Chad insisted he was " not gay " , despite his affair with Vincent , into a running gag by referring to the character as " Not Gay Chad " . During the show 's season five premiere , Charles Divins ( who was the principal actor to play Chad during the storylines focusing on the character 's sexuality ) made a cameo to explain to McHale that he was not his character and was neither dead nor gay . After Divins leaves the shot , McHale asks : " so your character sleeps with transsexuals ? " in reference to the reveal that Vincent was intersex . 
 Following DirecTV 's decision to not renew the show , Passions partnered with Premiere Props to hold a public two @-@ day estate sale of props and costumes from the show . Stacey Ward , a director of NBCUniversal , pitched the auction as : " an opportunity to own a piece of their favorite show " . Several Vincent @-@ related items were offered for sale , including his disguise as the " Blackmailer " ( without the mask ) and several of Valerie 's outfits . 
 = Ear = 
 The ear is the organ of hearing and , in mammals , balance . In mammals , the ear is usually described as having three parts — the outer ear , middle ear and the inner ear . The outer ear consists of the pinna and the ear canal . Since the outer ear is the only visible portion of the ear in most animals , the word " ear " often refers to the external part alone . The middle ear includes the tympanic cavity and the three ossicles . The inner ear sits in the bony labyrinth , and contains structures which are key to several senses : the semicircular canals , which enable balance and eye tracking when moving ; the utricle and saccule , which enable balance when stationary ; and the cochlea , which enables hearing . The ears of vertebrates are placed somewhat symmetrically on either side of the head , an arrangement that aids sound localisation . 
 The ear develops from the first pharyngeal pouch and six small swellings that develop in the early embryo called otic <unk> , which are derived from ectoderm . 
 The ear may be affected by disease , including infection and traumatic damage . Diseases of the ear may lead to hearing loss , tinnitus and balance disorders such as vertigo , although many of these conditions may also be affected by damage to the brain or neural pathways leading from the ear . 
 The ear has been adorned by earrings and other jewellery in numerous cultures for thousands of years , and has been subjected to surgical and cosmetic alterations . 
 = = Structure = = 
 The human ear consists of three parts — the outer ear , middle ear and inner ear . The ear canal of the outer ear is separated from the air @-@ filled tympanic cavity of the middle ear by the eardrum . The middle ear contains the three small bones — the ossicles — involved in the transmission of sound , and is connected to the throat at the nasopharynx , via the pharyngeal opening of the Eustachian tube . The inner ear contains the otolith organs — the utricle and saccule — and the semicircular canals belonging to the vestibular system , as well as the cochlea of the auditory system . 
 = = = Outer ear = = = 
 The outer ear is the external portion of the ear and includes the fleshy visible pinna ( also called the auricle ) , the ear canal , and the outer layer of the eardrum ( also called the tympanic membrane ) . 
 The pinna consists of the curving outer rim called the helix , the inner curved rim called the <unk> , and opens into the ear canal . The tragus protrudes and partially obscures the ear canal , as does the facing <unk> . The hollow region in front of the ear canal is called the <unk> . The ear canal stretches for about 1 inch ( 2 @.@ 5 cm ) . The first part of the canal is surrounded by cartilage , while the second part near the eardrum is surrounded by bone . This bony part is known as the auditory bulla and is formed by the tympanic part of the temporal bone . The skin surrounding the ear canal contains <unk> and sebaceous glands that produce protective ear wax . The ear canal ends at the external surface of the eardrum . 
 Two sets of muscles are associated with the outer ear : the intrinsic and extrinsic muscles . In some mammals , these muscles can adjust the direction of the pinna . In humans , these muscles have little or no effect . The ear muscles are supplied by the facial nerve , which also supplies sensation to the skin of the ear itself , as well as to the external ear cavity . The great auricular nerve , auricular nerve , <unk> nerve , and lesser and greater occipital nerves of the cervical plexus all supply sensation to parts of the outer ear and the surrounding skin . 
 The pinna consists of a single piece of elastic cartilage with a complicated relief on its inner surface and a fairly smooth configuration on its posterior surface . A tubercle , known as Darwin 's tubercle , is sometimes present , lying in the descending part of the helix and corresponding to the ear @-@ tip of mammals . The earlobe consists of areola and adipose tissue . The symmetrical arrangement of the two ears allows for the localisation of sound . The brain accomplishes this by comparing arrival @-@ times and intensities from each ear , in circuits located in the superior olivary complex and the trapezoid bodies which are connected via pathways to both ears . 
 = = = Middle ear = = = 
 The middle ear lies between the outer ear and the inner ear . It consists of an air @-@ filled cavity called the tympanic cavity and includes the three ossicles and their attaching ligaments ; the auditory tube ; and the round and oval windows . The ossicles are three small bones that function together to receive , amplify , and transmit the sound from the eardrum to the inner ear . The ossicles are the malleus ( hammer ) , incus ( anvil ) , and the stapes ( stirrup ) . The stapes is the smallest named bone in the body . The middle ear also connects to the upper throat at the nasopharynx via the pharyngeal opening of the Eustachian tube . 
 The three ossicles transmit sound from the outer ear to the inner ear . The malleus receives vibrations from sound pressure on the eardrum , where it is connected at its longest part ( the <unk> or handle ) by a ligament . It transmits vibrations to the incus , which in turn transmits the vibrations to the small stapes bone . The wide base of the stapes rests on the oval window . As the stapes vibrates , vibrations are transmitted through the oval window , causing movement of fluid within the cochlea . 
 The round window allows for the fluid within the inner ear to move . As the stapes pushes the secondary tympanic membrane , fluid in the inner ear moves and pushes the membrane of the round window out by a corresponding amount into the middle ear . The ossicles help amplify sound waves by nearly 15 – 20 times . 
 = = = Inner ear = = = 
 The inner ear sits within the temporal bone in a complex cavity called the bony labyrinth . A central area known as the vestibule contains two small fluid @-@ filled recesses , the utricle and saccule . These connect to the semicircular canals and the cochlea . There are three semicircular canals angled at right angles to each other which are responsible for dynamic balance . The cochlea is a spiral shell @-@ shaped organ responsible for the sense of hearing . These structures together create the membranous labyrinth . 
 The bony labyrinth refers to the bony compartment which contains the membranous labyrinth , contained within the temporal bone . The inner ear structurally begins at the oval window , which receives vibrations from the incus of the middle ear . Vibrations are transmitted into the inner ear into a fluid called endolymph , which fills the membranous labyrinth . The endolymph is situated in two vestibules , the utricle and saccule , and eventually transmits to the cochlea , a spiral @-@ shaped structure . The cochlea consists of three fluid @-@ filled spaces : the vestibular duct , the cochlear duct , and the tympanic duct . Hair cells responsible for transduction — changing mechanical changes into electrical stimuli are present in the organ of Corti in the cochlea . 
 = = = Blood supply = = = 
 The blood supply of the ear differs according to each part of the ear . 
 The outer ear is supplied by a number of arteries . The posterior auricular artery provides the majority of the blood supply . The anterior auricular arteries provide some supply to the outer rim of the ear and scalp behind it . The posterior auricular artery is a direct branch of the external carotid artery , and the anterior auricular arteries are branches from the superficial temporal artery . The occipital artery also plays a role . 
 The middle ear is supplied by the mastoid branch of either the occipital or posterior auricular arteries and the deep auricular artery , a branch of the maxillary artery . Other arteries which are present but play a smaller role include branches of the middle meningeal artery , ascending pharyngeal artery , internal carotid artery , and the artery of the pterygoid canal . 
 The inner ear is supplied by the anterior tympanic branch of the maxillary artery ; the stylomastoid branch of the posterior auricular artery ; the petrosal branch of middle meningeal artery ; and the labyrinthine artery , arising from either the anterior inferior cerebellar artery or the basilar artery . 
 = = Function = = 
 = = = Hearing = = = 
 Sound waves travel through the outer ear , are modulated by the middle ear , and are transmitted to the vestibulocochlear nerve in the inner ear . This nerve transmits information to the temporal lobe of the brain , where it is registered as sound . 
 Sound that travels through the outer ear impacts on the eardrum , and causes it to vibrate . The three ossicles bones transmit this sound to a second window ( the oval window ) which protects the fluid @-@ filled inner ear . In detail , the pinna of the outer ear helps to focus a sound , which impacts on the eardrum . The malleus rests on the membrane , and receives the vibration . This vibration is transmitted along the incus and stapes to the oval window . Two small muscles , the tensor tympani and stapedius , also help modulate noise . The two muscles reflexively contract to dampen excessive vibrations . Vibration of the oval window causes vibration of the endolymph within the vestibule and the cochlea . 
 The inner ear houses the apparatus necessary to change the vibrations transmitted from the outside world via the middle ear into signals passed along the vestibulocochlear nerve to the brain . The hollow channels of the inner ear are filled with liquid , and contain a sensory epithelium that is studded with hair cells . The microscopic " hairs " of these cells are structural protein filaments that project out into the fluid . The hair cells are mechanoreceptors that release a chemical neurotransmitter when stimulated . Sound waves moving through fluid flows against the receptor cells of the organ of Corti . The fluid pushes the filaments of individual cells ; movement of the filaments causes receptor cells to become open to receive the potassium @-@ rich endolymph . This causes the cell to <unk> , and creates an action potential that is transmitted along the spiral ganglion , which sends information through the auditory portion of the vestibulocochlear nerve to the temporal lobe of the brain . 
 The human ear can generally hear sounds with frequencies between 20 Hz and 20 kHz ( the audio range ) . Sounds outside this range are considered infrasound ( below 20 Hz ) or ultrasound ( above 20 kHz ) Although hearing requires an intact and functioning auditory portion of the central nervous system as well as a working ear , human deafness ( extreme insensitivity to sound ) most commonly occurs because of abnormalities of the inner ear , rather than in the nerves or tracts of the central auditory system . 
 = = = Balance = = = 
 Providing balance , when moving or stationary , is also a central function of the ear . The ear facilitates two types of balance : static balance , which allows a person to feel the effects of gravity , and dynamic balance , which allows a person to sense acceleration . 
 Static balance is provided by two ventricles , the utricle and the saccule . Cells lining the walls of these ventricles contain fine filaments , and the cells are covered with a fine gelatinous layer . Each cell has 50 – 70 small filaments , and one large filament , the <unk> . Within the gelatinous layer lie otoliths , tiny formations of calcium carbonate . When a person moves , these otoliths shift position . This shift alters the positions of the filaments , which opens ion channels within the cell membranes , creating <unk> and an action potential that is transmitted to the brain along the vestibulocochlear nerve . 
 Dynamic balance is provided through the three semicircular canals . These three canals are orthogonal ( at right angles ) to each other . At the end of each canal is a slight enlargement , known as the ampulla , which contains numerous cells with filaments in a central area called the <unk> . The fluid in these canals rotates according to the momentum of the head . When a person changes acceleration , the inertia of the fluid changes . This affects the pressure on the <unk> , and results in the opening of ion channels . This causes <unk> , which is passed as a signal to the brain along the vestibulocochlear nerve . Dynamic balance also helps maintain eye tracking when moving , via the <unk> – ocular reflex . 
 = = Development = = 
 During embryogenesis the ear develops as three distinct structures : the inner ear , the middle ear and the outer ear . Each structure originates from a different germ layer : the ectoderm , endoderm and mesenchyme . 
 = = = Inner ear = = = 
 After implantation , around the second to third week the developing embryo consists of three layers : endoderm , mesoderm and ectoderm . The first part of the ear to develop is the inner ear , which begins to form from the ectoderm around the 22nd day of the embryo ’ s development . Specifically , the inner ear derives from two thickenings called otic <unk> on either side of the head . Each otic <unk> recedes below the ectoderm , forms an otic pit and then an otic vesicle . This entire mass will eventually become surrounded by mesenchyme to form the bony labyrinth . 
 Around the 33rd day of development , the vesicles begin to differentiate . Closer to the back of the embryo , they form what will become the utricle and semicircular canals . Closer to the front of the embryo , the vesicles differentiate into a rudimentary saccule , which will eventually become the saccule and cochlea . Part of the saccule will eventually give rise and connect to the cochlear duct . This duct appears approximately during the sixth week and connects to the saccule through the ductus reuniens . 
 As the cochlear duct ’ s mesenchyme begins to differentiate , three cavities are formed : the scala <unk> , the scala tympani and the scala media . Both the scala <unk> and the scala tympani contain an extracellular fluid called <unk> . The scala media contains endolymph . A set of membranes called the vestibular membrane and the basilar membrane develop to separate the cochlear duct from the vestibular duct and the tympanic duct , respectively . 
 Parts of the otic vesicle in turn form the vestibulocochlear nerve . These form bipolar neurons which supply sensation to parts of the inner ear ( namely the sensory parts of the semicircular canals , macular of the utricle and saccule , and organ of Corti ) . The nerve begins to form around the 28th day . 
 Molecular regulation 
 Most of the genes responsible for the regulation of inner ear formation and its morphogenesis are members of the homeobox gene family such as Pax , <unk> and <unk> homeobox genes . The development of inner ear structures such as the cochlea is regulated by <unk> / <unk> , <unk> / <unk> and <unk> , which in turn are controlled by the master gene Shh . Shh is secreted by the notochord . 
 = = = Middle ear = = = 
 The middle ear and its components develop from the first and second pharyngeal arches . The tympanic cavity and auditory tube develop from the first part of the pharyngeal pouch between the first two arches in an area which will also go on to develop the pharynx . This develops as a structure called the <unk> recess . The ossicles ( malleus , incus and stapes ) normally appear during the first half of fetal development . The first two ( malleus and incus ) derive from the first pharyngeal arch and the stapes derives from the second . All three ossicles develop from the neural crest . Eventually cells from the tissue surrounding the ossicles will experience apoptosis and a new layer of endodermal epithelial will constitute the formation of the tympanic cavity wall . 
 = = = Outer ear = = = 
 Unlike structures of the inner and middle ear , which develop from pharyngeal pouches , the ear canal originates from the dorsal portion of the first pharyngeal cleft . It is fully expanded by the end of the 18th week of development . The eardrum is made up of three layers ( ectoderm , endoderm and connective tissue ) . The pinna originates as a fusion of six hillocks . The first three hillocks are derived from the lower part of the first pharyngeal arch and form the tragus , crus of the helix , and helix , respectively . The final three hillocks are derived from the upper part of the second pharyngeal arch and form the <unk> , <unk> , and earlobe . The outer ears develop in the lower neck . As the mandible forms they move towards their final position level with the eyes . 
 = = Clinical significance = = 
 = = = Hearing loss = = = 
 Hearing loss may be either partial or total . This may be a result of injury or damage , congenital disease , or physiological causes . When hearing loss is a result of injury or damage to the outer ear or middle ear , it is known as conductive hearing loss . When deafness is a result of injury or damage to the inner ear , <unk> nerve , or brain , it is known as sensorineural hearing loss . 
 Causes of conductive hearing loss include an ear canal blocked by ear wax , ossicles that are fixed together or absent , or holes in the eardrum . Conductive hearing loss may also result from middle ear inflammation causing fluid build @-@ up in the normally air @-@ filled space , such as by otitis media . <unk> is the general name of the operation to repair the middle ear 's eardrum and ossicles . <unk> from muscle fascia are ordinarily used to rebuild an intact eardrum . Sometimes artificial ear bones are placed to substitute for damaged ones , or a disrupted <unk> chain is rebuilt in order to conduct sound effectively . 
 Hearing aids or cochlear implants may be used if the hearing loss is severe or prolonged . Hearing aids work by amplifying the sound of the local environment and are best suited to conductive hearing loss . <unk> implants transmit the sound that is heard as if it were a nervous signal , bypassing the cochlea . 
 = = = Congenital abnormalities = = = 
 Anomalies and malformations of the pinna are common . These anomalies include chromosome syndromes such as ring 18 . Children may also present cases of abnormal ear canals and low ear implantation . In rare cases no pinna is formed ( atresia ) , or is extremely small ( <unk> ) . Small pinnae can develop when the auricular hillocks do not develop properly . The ear canal can fail to develop if it does not <unk> properly or if there is an obstruction . <unk> surgery to treat hearing loss is considered as an option for children older than five , with a cosmetic surgical procedure to reduce the size or change the shape of the ear is called an <unk> . The initial medical intervention is aimed at assessing the baby 's hearing and the condition of the ear canal , as well as the middle and inner ear . Depending on the results of tests , reconstruction of the outer ear is done in stages , with planning for any possible repairs of the rest of the ear . 
 Approximately one out of one thousand children suffer some type of congenital deafness related to the development of the inner ear . Inner ear congenital anomalies are related to sensorineural hearing loss and are generally diagnosed with a computed tomography ( CT ) scan or a magnetic resonance imaging ( MRI ) scan . Hearing loss problems also derive from inner ear anomalies because its development is separate from that of the middle and external ear . Middle ear anomalies can occur because of errors during head and neck development . The first pharyngeal pouch syndrome associates middle ear anomalies to the malleus and incus structures as well as to the non @-@ differentiation of the annular stapedial ligament . Temporal bone and ear canal anomalies are also related to this structure of the ear and are known to be associated with sensorineural hearing loss and conductive hearing loss . 
 = = = Vertigo = = = 
 Vertigo refers to the inappropriate perception of motion . This is due to dysfunction of the vestibular system . One common type of vertigo is benign paroxysmal positional vertigo , when an otolith is displaced from the ventricles to the semicircular canal . The displaced otolith rests on the cupola , causing a sensation of movement when there is none . Ménière 's disease , <unk> , strokes , and other infective and congenital diseases may also result in the perception of vertigo . 
 = = = Injury = = = 
 Outer ear 
 Injuries to the external ear occur fairly frequently , and can leave minor to major deformity . Injuries include : laceration , avulsion injuries , burn and repeated twisting or pulling of an ear , for discipline or torture . Chronic damage to the ears can cause cauliflower ear , a common condition in boxers and wrestlers in which the cartilage around the ears becomes lumpy and distorted owing to persistence of a haematoma around the <unk> , which can impair blood supply and healing . Owing to its exposed position , the external ear is susceptible to frostbite as well as skin cancers , including squamous @-@ cell carcinoma and basal @-@ cell carcinomas . 
 Middle ear 
 The ear drum may become perforated in the event of a large sound or explosion , when diving or flying ( called barotrauma ) , or by objects inserted into the ear . Another common cause of injury is due to an infection such as otitis media . These may cause a discharge from the ear called <unk> , and are often investigated by <unk> and <unk> . Treatment may include watchful waiting , antibiotics and possibly surgery , if the injury is prolonged or the position of the ossicles is affected . Skull fractures that go through the part of the skull containing the ear structures ( the temporal bone ) can also cause damage to the middle ear . A <unk> is a cyst of squamous skin cells that may develop from birth or secondary to other causes such as chronic ear infections . It may impair hearing or cause dizziness or vertigo , and is usually investigated by <unk> and may require a CT scan . The treatment for <unk> is surgery . 
 Inner ear 
 There are two principal damage mechanisms to the inner ear in industrialised society , and both injure hair cells . The first is exposure to elevated sound levels ( noise trauma ) , and the second is exposure to drugs and other substances ( <unk> ) . A large number of people are exposed to sound levels on a daily basis that are likely to lead to significant hearing loss . The National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health has recently published research on the estimated numbers of persons with hearing difficulty ( 11 % ) and the percentage of those that can be attributed to occupational noise exposure ( 24 % ) . Furthermore , according to the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey ( <unk> ) , approximately twenty @-@ two million ( 17 % ) US workers reported exposure to hazardous workplace noise . Workers exposed to hazardous noise further exacerbate the potential for developing noise @-@ induced hearing loss when they do not wear hearing protection . 
 = = = Tinnitus = = = 
 Tinnitus is the hearing of sound when no external sound is present . While often described as a ringing , it may also sound like a clicking , hiss or roaring . Rarely , unclear voices or music are heard . The sound may be soft or loud , low pitched or high pitched and appear to be coming from one ear or both . Most of the time , it comes on gradually . In some people , the sound causes depression , anxiety , or concentration difficulties . 
 Tinnitus is not a disease but a symptom that can result from a number of underlying causes . One of the most common causes is noise @-@ induced hearing loss . Other causes include : ear infections , disease of the heart or blood vessels , Ménière 's disease , brain tumors , emotional stress , exposure to certain medications , a previous head injury , and earwax . It is more common in those with depression . 
 = = Society and culture = = 
 The ears have been ornamented with jewelry for thousands of years , traditionally by piercing of the earlobe . In ancient and modern cultures , ornaments have been placed to stretch and enlarge the earlobes , allowing for larger plugs to be slid into a large fleshy gap in the lobe . Tearing of the earlobe from the weight of heavy earrings , or from traumatic pull of an earring ( for example , by snagging on a sweater ) , is fairly common . 
 Injury to the ears has been present since Roman times as a method of reprimand or punishment - " In Roman times , when a dispute arose that could not be settled amicably , the injured party cited the name of the person thought to be responsible before the Praetor ; if the offender did not appear within the specified time limit , the complainant summoned witnesses to make statements . If they refused , as often happened , the injured party was allowed to drag them by the ear and to pinch them hard if they resisted . Hence the French expression " se faire <unk> l ’ <unk> " , of which the literal meaning is " to have one 's ear pulled " and the figurative meaning " to take a lot of persuading " . We use the expression " to tweak ( or pull ) someone 's ears " to mean " inflict a punishment " . " 
 The pinnae have an effect on facial appearance . In Western societies , protruding ears ( present in about 5 % of ethnic Europeans ) have been considered unattractive , particularly if asymmetric . The first surgery to reduce the projection of prominent ears was published in the medical literature by Ernst <unk> in 1845 , and the first case report in 1881 . 
 Pointy ears are a characteristic of some creatures in folklore such as the French <unk> , Brazilian <unk> or Japanese earth spider . It has been a feature of characters on art as old as that of Ancient Greece and medieval Europe . Pointy ears are a common characteristic of many creatures in the fantasy genre , including elves , faeries , pixies , hobbits , or orcs . They are a characteristic of creatures in the horror genre , such as vampires . Pointy ears are also found in the science fiction genre ; for example among the Vulcan and Romulan races of the Star Trek universe and the Nightcrawler character from the X @-@ Men universe . 
 Georg von <unk> was a Hungarian biophysicist born in Budapest , Hungary . In 1961 , he was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine for his research on the function of the cochlea in the mammalian hearing organ . 
 The Vacanti mouse was a laboratory mouse that had what looked like a human ear grown on its back . The " ear " was actually an ear @-@ shaped cartilage structure grown by seeding cow cartilage cells into a biodegradable ear @-@ shaped mold and then implanted under the skin of the mouse ; then the cartilage naturally grew by itself . It was developed as an alternative to ear repair or grafting procedures and the results met with much publicity and controversy in 1997 . 
 = = Other animals = = 
 The pinna helps direct sound through the ear canal to the eardrum . The complex geometry of ridges on the inner surface of some mammalian ears helps to sharply focus sounds produced by prey , using echolocation signals . These ridges can be regarded as the acoustic equivalent of a fresnel lens , and may be seen in a wide range of animals , including the bat , aye @-@ aye , lesser galago , bat @-@ eared fox , mouse lemur and others . 
 Some large primates such as gorillas and orang @-@ <unk> ( and also humans ) have undeveloped ear muscles that are non @-@ functional vestigial structures , yet are still large enough to be easily identified . An ear muscle that cannot move the ear , for whatever reason , has lost that biological function . This serves as evidence of homology between related species . In humans , there is variability in these muscles , such that some people are able to move their ears in various directions , and it has been said that it may be possible for others to gain such movement by repeated trials . In such primates , the inability to move the ear is compensated for mainly by the ability to easily turn the head on a horizontal plane , an ability which is not common to most monkeys — a function once provided by one structure is now replaced by another . 
 In some animals with mobile pinnae ( like the horse ) , each pinna can be aimed independently to better receive the sound . For these animals , the pinnae help localise the direction of the sound source . 
 = = = Invertebrates = = = 
 Only vertebrate animals have ears , though many invertebrates detect sound using other kinds of sense organs . In insects , tympanal organs are used to hear distant sounds . They are located either on the head or elsewhere , depending on the insect family . The tympanal organs of some insects are extremely sensitive , offering acute hearing beyond that of most other animals . The female cricket fly Ormia ochracea has tympanal organs on each side of her abdomen . They are connected by a thin bridge of exoskeleton and they function like a tiny pair of eardrums , but , because they are linked , they provide acute directional information . The fly uses her " ears " to detect the call of her host , a male cricket . Depending on where the song of the cricket is coming from , the fly 's hearing organs will reverberate at slightly different frequencies . This difference may be as little as 50 billionths of a second , but it is enough to allow the fly to home in directly on a singing male cricket and parasitise it . 
 Simpler structures allow other arthropods to detect near @-@ field sounds . Spiders and cockroaches , for example , have hairs on their legs which are used for detecting sound . Caterpillars may also have hairs on their body that perceive vibrations and allow them to respond to sound . 
 = Battle of Constantinople ( 922 ) = 
 The Battle of Constantinople was fought in June 922 at the outskirts of the capital of the Byzantine Empire , Constantinople , between the forces of the First Bulgarian Empire and the Byzantines during the Byzantine – Bulgarian war of 913 – 927 . In the summer the Byzantine Emperor Romanos I Lekapenos sent troops under the commander Saktikios to repel another Bulgarian raid at the outskirts of the Byzantine capital . The Byzantines stormed the Bulgarian camp but were defeated when they confronted the main Bulgarian forces . During his flight from the battlefield Saktikios was mortally wounded and died the following night . 
 The Bulgarians , who by 922 were in control of most of the Balkans , continued to ravage the Byzantine countryside virtually unopposed . However , they lacked the maritime power to conduct a successful siege of Constantinople . The subsequent attempts to negotiate a Bulgarian – Arab alliance for a joint assault of Constantinople were discovered by the Byzantines and successfully countered . The strategic situation in the Balkans remained unchanged until both sides signed a peace treaty in 927 , which recognized the imperial title of the Bulgarian monarchs and the complete independence of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church as an autocephalous Patriarchate . 
 The primary sources for the battle are the continuation of George Hamartolos ' Chronicle and John Skylitzes ' Synopsis of Histories . 
 = = Background = = 
 During his short reign the Byzantine emperor Alexander ( r . 912 – 913 ) provoked a conflict with the Bulgarian monarch Simeon I ( r . 893 – 927 ) . Simeon I , who had long harboured ambitions to claim an imperial title for himself , took the opportunity to wage war . With the Byzantine Empire in disarray following Alexander 's death in June 913 , the Bulgarians reached Constantinople unopposed and forced the regency of the infant Constantine VII ( r . 913 – 959 ) to recognize Simeon I as emperor ( in Bulgarian , Tsar ) . Following a palace coup in 914 , the new Byzantine regency revoked the concessions to the Bulgarians and summoned the whole army , including the troops in Asia Minor , to deal with the Bulgarian threat once and all . In the decisive battle of Achelous in 917 the Byzantine forces were completely annihilated , leaving the Bulgarians in charge of the Balkans . Their annual campaigns reached the walls of Constantinople and the Isthmus of Corinth . All subsequent attempts to confront the Bulgarian army at Katasyrtai , Aquae Calidae and Pegae ended in defeat . 
 Despite his military supremacy over land , Simeon I was aware that he needed naval assistance in order to seize Constantinople . In 922 he clandestinely sent envoys to the Fatimid caliph Ubayd Allah al @-@ Mahdi Billah in Mahdia to negotiate the assistance of the powerful Arab navy . Simeon I proposed to divide equally all spoils ; the Bulgarians were to keep Constantinople and the Fatimids would gain the Byzantine territories in Sicily and South Italy . 
 = = The battle = = 
 To distract the Byzantine attention from the secret negotiations with the Arabs , in the summer of 922 the Bulgarians launched a campaign in Eastern Thrace . They captured and garrisoned a number of fortified towns in the region , including Bizye . In June they reached the outskirts of Constantinople and burned the Palace of Theodora , situated on the shores of the Golden Horn . 
 In response , emperor Romanos I Lekapenos ( r . 920 – 944 ) summoned the commanders of the tagmata on a feast and urged them to confront the Bulgarians . The following day one of them , Saktikios , led the assault against the Bulgarians . While most of the Bulgarian soldiers were dispersed to loot the countryside , the Byzantines attacked the Bulgarian camp and slaughtered the few defenders left there . When the main Bulgarian forces were informed about the attack , they headed back to the camp to engage the opponents . In the ensuing heavy struggle the Bulgarians prevailed and forced the Byzantines to flee despite the personal courage of Saktikios , who the Byzantine chroniclers claim to have " killed many " . During the flight , the horse of Saktikios got stuck in the mud of a river and the Byzantine commander was wounded in the seat and the thigh . His soldiers managed to free the horse from the mud and to bring him to the Blachernae alive . Saktikios was laid in the Church of St. Mary of Blachernae , where he died the following night . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the victory Simeon I sent letters to the Ecumenical Patriarch Nicholas Mystikos and Romanos ' co @-@ emperor Constantine VII to propose peace negotiations . However , his intention was to prolong the negotiations until the return of his envoys to the Fatimids . While Simeon I and Nicholas Mystikos exchanged letters the military actions continued . In a few weeks the Bulgarian army captured Adrianople , the most important city in Byzantine Thrace . The fall of Adrianople raised fears in Constantinople that a Bulgarian assault of the city was imminent . The Byzantines tried to intimidate Simeon I by threatening to incite the Magyars , the Pechenegs and Kievan Rus ' to attack Bulgaria from the north @-@ east , as they had done in the war of 894 – 896 . Simeon I knew that these were empty words because the Byzantine Empire was in no position to carry out these threats . 
 In the meantime , the Bulgarian envoys received a warm welcome by al @-@ Mahdi . The Fatimid caliph accepted the Bulgarian terms and sent his own emissaries to Simeon I. However , on the way back their ship was captured by the Byzantines , who managed to outbid the Bulgarians and distract a Fatimid attack . The Bulgarians remained in control of most of the Balkans , annexing Byzantium 's ally Serbia in 924 , but without naval support were unable to launch a decisive attack on Constantinople . The war continued until the death of Simeon I in 927 , when his son Peter I ( r . 927 – 969 ) concluded a peace treaty with the Byzantines , who recognized the imperial title of the Bulgarian monarchs and the complete independence of the Bulgarian Orthodox Church as an autocephalous Patriarchate in return for most of Simeon I 's conquests in Thrace after 917 . 
 = Big Butte Creek = 
 Big Butte Creek is a 12 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 19 km ) tributary of the Rogue River in the U.S. state of Oregon . It drains approximately 245 square miles ( 635 km2 ) of Jackson County . Its two forks , the North Fork and the South Fork , both begin high in the Cascade Range near Mount McLoughlin . Flowing predominantly west , they meet near the city of Butte Falls . The main stem flows generally northwest until it empties into the Rogue Falls was incorporated in 1911 , and remains the only incorporated town within the watershed 's boundaries . 
 Big Butte Springs , located in the watershed , provides clean drinking water to more than 115 @,@ 000 residents of the Rogue Valley . It emits over 26 million US gallons ( 98 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 L ) of water per day . Water from Big Butte Creek is also diverted for irrigation at several other locations . 
 The water quality of the Big Butte Creek watershed is generally high , and it supports several species of trout and salmon . The watershed is also home to more than 152 species of birds , 63 species of mammals , 19 species of reptiles , and numerous plants . The Poverty Flats region was designated an Area of Critical Environmental Concern by the Bureau of Land Management in 1995 to protect several rare species of plants . 
 = = Course = = 
 Big Butte Creek begins in the Cascade Range near Butte Falls . It flows generally northwest over approximately 12 miles ( 19 km ) to its confluence with the Rogue River . The two main forks of Big Butte Creek , the North Fork and the South Fork , merge at 2 @,@ 244 feet ( 684 m ) above sea level , while the creek 's mouth is located at an elevation of 1 @,@ 562 feet ( 476 @.@ 1 m ) . 
 The North Fork 's headwaters are located on the slopes of the 6 @,@ 207 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 1 @,@ 892 m ) Rustler Peak . It flows southwest , receiving many small tributaries such as Jackass , Eighty Acre , and Friese creeks . Turning west , it flows just north of Butte Falls before merging with the South Fork . 
 The South Fork begins at the confluence of two of its tributaries , <unk> and Rancheria creeks . It flows southwest , receiving Fourbit Creek on the left . Fourbit Creek begins near Mount McLoughlin , where massive faults may allow water to seep into it from nearby Fourmile Lake in the Klamath River watershed . The South Fork turns west and receives Willow Creek on the left . Big Butte Springs are located on Willow Creek , and the Medford Aqueduct , which carries drinking water to cities in the Rogue Valley , parallels the South Fork from there all the way to Butte Falls . The South Fork flows over the 15 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 4 @.@ 6 m ) Butte Falls — the nearby city 's namesake — and merges with the North Fork about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) downstream . 
 Big Butte Creek travels northwest , gathering McNeil Creek on the left and Clark Creek on the right , along with many other minor tributaries . This region contains many Class II and III rapids , as rated on the International Scale of River Difficulty . The stream is crossed by Cobleigh Road at river mile ( RM ) 9 @.@ 5 or river kilometer ( RK ) 15 , and Netherlands Road at RM 3 ( RK 4 @.@ 8 ) . About 0 @.@ 6 miles ( 1 km ) before its mouth , Big Butte Creek cascades over Crowfoot Falls and is crossed by Crowfoot Road . It then flows into the Rogue River 155 miles ( 249 km ) from its mouth at the Pacific Ocean . Big Butte Creek 's mouth is about one mile southwest of William L. Jess Dam , and Oregon Route 62 passes just north of it . 
 = = = Discharge = = = 
 The United States Geological Survey monitors the flow of Big Butte Creek at three different stream gauges : two on the South Fork , and one on the main stem . Both South Fork gauges were shut down in 1991 , but the gauge located near the mouth of Big Butte Creek continues to operate . The main stem often discharges less water than the South Fork alone in the summer months because of numerous diversions . 
 = = Watershed = = 
 Big Butte Creek drains approximately 245 square miles ( 635 km2 ) of southern Oregon . Elevations range from 1 @,@ 562 feet ( 476 @.@ 1 m ) at the creek 's mouth to 9 @,@ 495 feet ( 2 @,@ 894 m ) at the summit of Mount McLoughlin , with an average of 3 @,@ 528 feet ( 1 @,@ 075 m ) . About 56 percent is federally owned by the Bureau of Land Management and the United States Forest Service , 44 percent is privately owned , and a small fraction belongs to the City of Medford . 
 The Big Butte Creek watershed experiences a Mediterranean climate . Temperatures range from 10 ° F ( − 12 ° C ) in the winter to 100 ° F ( 38 ° C ) in the summer . Precipitation averages between 35 and 80 inches ( 890 and 2 @,@ 000 mm ) annually . Most precipitation occurs between November and March . Nine percent of the watershed 's surface runoff is collected from rain , 35 percent from rain on snow , and 56 percent from snow . The watershed contains the largest groundwater source in the entire Rogue River basin ; one major outlet is at Big Butte Springs . 
 The watershed is split into two geographic regions : the High Cascades and the Western Cascades , both volcanic in origin . The Western Cascades compose the western two thirds of the watershed . This region is highly eroded , being between 17 and 38 million years old . Its unstable slopes are primarily made of pyroclastic rock . Due to the rock 's high ability to absorb moisture , earthflows are common . The High Cascades are much younger , around three to seven million years old . Mount McLoughlin is the most prominent High Cascade volcano in the watershed , last erupting between 20 @,@ 000 and 15 @,@ 000 years ago . Basalt and andesite are the most common rock types in this region . 
 Nearby watersheds include Little Butte Creek to the south , small Klamath River tributaries such as Fourmile Creek to the east , the South Fork Rogue River to the east and north , and minor tributaries of the Rogue River including Reese and Indian creeks to the west . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 Some of the most common trees that grow in the Big Butte Creek watershed include four species of fir , two species of pine , incense cedar , and western hemlock . The understory contains plants such as Pacific yew , Pacific madrone , chinquapin , and vine maple . Several invasive species have been reported in the Big Butte Creek watershed , such as Kentucky bluegrass , common bent , drooping brome , and <unk> . The spread of these species is most likely due to overgrazing . Sensitive species that grow in the watershed include Howell 's <unk> , Egg Lake monkeyflower , clustered lady 's slipper , green @-@ flowered ginger , Mount Mazama <unk> , and Detling 's <unk> . Mallow and popcorn flower have also been discovered in riparian zones . The Poverty Flats Area of Critical Environmental Concern ( ACEC ) is home to several rare species of plants , including Bellinger 's meadowfoam , Howell 's <unk> , and Rocky Mountain <unk> . 
 Over 152 species of birds are known or suspected to live in the Big Butte Creek watershed , including the northern goshawk and the northern spotted owl , a vulnerable species . Bald eagles nest around Willow Lake . Amphibians such as the vulnerable Oregon spotted frog and the near threatened Cascades frog inhabit some regions of the watershed . Black @-@ tailed deer , Roosevelt elk , cougars , and black bears are the most common of the 63 species of mammals found in the watershed . Fishers and American martens have also been spotted . The gray wolf and the vulnerable grizzly bear once lived in the watershed , but are now considered extirpated . Nineteen species of reptiles live in the area . Other sensitive species include the wolverine , the western pond turtle , the sandhill crane , and Townsend 's big @-@ eared bat . 
 Rainbow trout , chinook and coho salmon , and Pacific <unk> are the most common anadromous fish that inhabit Big Butte Creek . They travel as far as Butte Falls , sometimes passing over it during high flows . Because of the cold , sterile conditions of the water and the difficulty of jumping over the waterfall , streams above Butte Falls have very low populations of anadromous fish . Native , resident fish in this area include coastal cutthroat and rainbow trout . Willow Lake contains largemouth bass and rainbow , cutthroat , and brook trout . Overall , the number of fish in the Big Butte Creek watershed has declined in recent years , possibly due to the clearing of riparian zones and rising water temperatures . 
 = = History = = 
 Humans have lived in the Big Butte Creek area for at least 8 @,@ 000 years . The Klamath , Upper Umpqua , Takelma , and Latgawa tribes of Native Americans inhabited the watershed until they were driven out in the Rogue River Wars of the 1850s . On Christmas Eve , December 24 , 1855 , Captain E. A. Rice along with 34 other men attacked a Native American encampment near the creek 's mouth . Eighteen Native American men were killed , all the women and children were captured , and the camp was burned to the ground . Most were relocated to Indian reservations . Non @-@ indigenous settlers first arrived in the early 1860s , and agriculture , ranching , and logging industries quickly developed . Big Butte Creek was named by early settlers for its close proximity to Mount McLoughlin ( also known as Snowy Butte ) , as was nearby Little Butte Creek . 
 In 1904 , a water @-@ powered sawmill was constructed at Butte Falls . The town of Butte Falls was established in 1906 , and incorporated in 1911 . The Pacific and Eastern Railway was constructed to Butte Falls in 1910 . Butte Falls also received water rights to Ginger Springs , providing high quality drinking water for the town . 
 The Cat Hill Burn destroyed 30 @,@ 000 acres ( 120 km2 ) of forest on Rustler Peak in 1910 . In 1915 , the Eagle Point Irrigation Canal was constructed , diverting approximately 100 cubic feet per second ( 2 @.@ 83 m3 / s ) of water for irrigation in the Little Butte Creek watershed . The canal begins just below Butte Falls . The Butte Falls Fish Hatchery was also constructed in 1915 . Originally , the hatchery impounded water from Ginger Creek , however in 1923 a canal was built transferring 15 @.@ 5 cubic feet per second ( 0 @.@ 439 m3 / s ) of water from the South Fork of Big Butte Creek . The Medford Aqueduct , a 31 @-@ inch @-@ wide ( 79 cm ) pipeline , was constructed in 1927 . It delivers about 40 cubic feet per second ( 1 @.@ 1 m3 / s ) of drinking water from Big Butte Springs south to the Bear Creek watershed . In 1951 , a second pipeline was added , and Willow Dam was constructed , creating Willow Lake . The springs serve over 115 @,@ 000 customers throughout the Rogue Valley . 
 Loggers felled massive amounts of forest in the 1920s and 1930s . <unk> efforts began in the 1940s because natural regeneration could not keep pace with the rate of logging . In 1962 , the Columbus Day Storm knocked many more large trees to the ground . Today , old @-@ growth forest covers only about five percent of the watershed . 
 In 1995 , the Poverty Flats region was designated an Area of Critical Environmental Concern ( ACEC ) by the Bureau of Land Management . Located about 3 @.@ 5 miles ( 5 @.@ 6 km ) west of Butte Falls , the ACEC is home to several rare species of plants . It was fenced off in 1996 to protect the area from roaming cattle . 
 The Butte Falls Fish Hatchery was scheduled to be closed by the Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife in July 2009 as part of a statewide effort to decrease the department 's budget , but on July 3 it was announced that the hatchery would continue to operate with only one employee . However , the hatchery was closed permanently in October 2010 . 
 A 160 @-@ foot ( 49 m ) portion of the Eagle Point Irrigation Canal failed on October 2 , 2011 , sending 86 cubic feet per second ( 2 @.@ 4 m3 / s ) of muddy water down a hillside , across a road , and into lower Big Butte Creek , a vital salmon spawning area . A stream gauge on the Rogue River about 15 miles ( 24 km ) downstream reported turbidity levels twenty times higher than before the breach . The canal was repaired by October 28 . 
 = = Pollution = = 
 The Oregon Department of Environmental Quality ( DEQ ) has monitored Big Butte Creek for eight different parameters that affect water quality : temperature , oxygen saturation , pH , nutrients , bacteria , chemical contaminants such as pesticides and metals , turbidity , and alkalinity . Streams that exceed the standard level are placed on the DEQ 303d list in accordance with the Clean Water Act . About 54 @.@ 2 miles ( 87 @.@ 2 km ) of the streams in the Big Butte Creek watershed were listed on the 2004 / 2006 DEQ 303d list . The entire main stem exceeded the standard level for temperature , oxygen saturation , and E. coli , a type of bacteria . The lower 13 @.@ 9 miles ( 22 @.@ 4 km ) of the North Fork were listed for high temperature , along with many other minor tributaries . The South Fork was not listed , although some of its tributaries were . 
 Overall , water quality in the Big Butte Creek watershed is generally high , however road construction and logging can cause severe erosion , leading to high levels of sedimentation and turbidity . The Willow Creek region often experiences high turbidity , but Willow Lake traps the sediment before it can travel downstream . Big Butte Springs provides clean water that requires minimal treatment to meet water quality standards . Water from the springs has very little chemical pollution , low turbidity , and temperatures averaging between 44 and 46 ° F ( 6 @.@ 7 and 7 @.@ 8 ° C ) . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Popular recreational activities in the Big Butte Creek watershed include hunting , camping , hiking , and horseback riding . Many tourists also come to sight @-@ see . The most heavily used trail in the area is the Blue Canyon Trail , leading to the Sky Lakes Wilderness , and ultimately the larger Pacific Crest Trail . The city of Butte Falls has organized the Butte Falls Discovery Loop Tour , a half @-@ day @-@ long drive through the Rogue River – Siskiyou National Forest . The loop starts in Butte Falls , and has several stops for hiking and viewing the landscape , including Mount McLoughlin . 
 Water recreation on Willow Lake includes boating , swimming , fishing , and waterskiing . Fishing is also popular in other streams , especially Fourbit Creek . Cross @-@ country skiing and snowmobiling are popular in the winter . 
 = U.S. Route 206 = 
 U.S. Route 206 ( US 206 ) is a 130 @.@ 23 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 209 @.@ 58 km ) north – south United States highway in New Jersey and Pennsylvania , United States . Only about a half a mile ( 800 m ) of its length is in Pennsylvania ; the Milford @-@ Montague Toll Bridge carries it over the Delaware River into New Jersey , where it is the remainder of the route . The highway 's northern terminus is near Milford , Pennsylvania at an intersection with US 209 ; some sources and signs show an overlap with US 209 to end at its parent route US 6 . Its southern terminus is in Hammonton , New Jersey at an intersection with Route 54 and US 30 . For much of its length , US 206 is a rural two @-@ lane undivided road that passes through the Pine Barrens , agricultural areas , and the Appalachian Mountains of northwestern New Jersey , with some urban and suburban areas . The route connects several cities and towns , including Bordentown , Trenton , Princeton , Somerville , Netcong , and Newton . The road is known as the Disabled American Veterans Highway for much of its length . 
 What is now US 206 in New Jersey was designated as part of several state routes prior to 1927 , including Pre @-@ 1927 Route 2 between Bordentown and Trenton in 1916 , pre @-@ 1927 Route 13 between Trenton and Princeton in 1917 , and pre @-@ 1927 Route 16 between Princeton and Bedminster Township in 1921 . The current routing along pre @-@ 1927 Route 2 became a part of US 130 in 1926 . In 1927 , current US 206 became Route 39 between Hammonton and White Horse , Route 37 between White Horse and Trenton , Route 27 between Trenton and Princeton , Route 31 between Princeton and Newton , and Route S31 between Newton and the Delaware River . In the later 1930s , US 206 was designated to connect US 30 in Hammonton north to US 6 and US 209 in Milford ; the northern terminus was moved to its current location in the 1940s . The state highways running concurrent with US 206 in New Jersey were removed in 1953 . In the 1960s , two separate freeways were proposed for US 206 but never built . The first freeway was to connect Hammonton south along the Route 54 corridor toward Route 55 and the planned Route 60 in Vineland and Millville . The other US 206 freeway was planned in northwestern New Jersey , connecting I @-@ 80 in Netcong north to Montague Township . Construction has begun for a bypass of US 206 around Hillsborough in 2010 after being planned since 1974 . The NJDOT is currently widening the route in Byram Township to alleviate congestion , with completion in 2013 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = New Jersey = = = 
 = = = = Atlantic County = = = = 
 US 206 begins at US 30 in the town of Hammonton in Atlantic County , New Jersey , heading north @-@ northeast on the two @-@ lane , undivided Disabled American Veterans Highway . South of this intersection , the road continues as Route 54 . From its southern terminus , US 206 runs through farmland , which eventually gives way to the heavily forested Pine Barrens . Within this area , the route continues through the Wharton State Forest . Here , the road comes to the eastern terminus of CR 536 . 
 = = = = Burlington County = = = = 
 US 206 continues into <unk> Township , Burlington County , passing through more of the Pine Barrens . In <unk> Township , the road makes a turn to the north and passes by <unk> Lake . After running northwest , CR 541 splits to the left . After this intersection , US 206 heads north out of the Wharton State Forest and into more agricultural areas . At the intersection with CR 648 , the route briefly widens into a four @-@ lane undivided road before narrowing back to two lanes . Upon intersecting CR 622 , US 206 enters Tabernacle Township . Here , CR 532 crosses the route at a signalized intersection . Following CR 532 , residential development increases along the route as it continues into Southampton Township . US 206 becomes a three @-@ lane road with one northbound lane and two southbound lanes as it comes to the Red Lion Circle with Route 70 . Past the Red Lion Circle , the route becomes two lanes again and passes more rural surroundings with some development . US 206 comes to a junction with the eastern terminus of Route 38 and the western terminus of CR 530 . 
 A short distance after the Route 38 / CR 530 intersection , the route becomes the border between <unk> Township to the west and Southampton Township to the east before running between <unk> Township and Pemberton Township . Along this portion , it passes through <unk> . Continuing entirely into Springfield Township , the route crosses CR 537 . Past this intersection , US 206 widens into a four @-@ lane undivided road . The route briefly gains a wide painted median before crossing the Assicunk Creek into Mansfield Township In Mansfield Township , US 206 becomes a divided highway as it bypasses the community of Columbus to the west , with CR 690 continuing through Columbus . On the bypass of Columbus , the route has an interchange with CR 543 . 
 Past Columbus , US 206 becomes undivided again , with residential development increasing . It becomes a divided highway again and merges with Route 68 , the main access road to the Fort Dix entity of Joint Base McGuire @-@ Dix @-@ Lakehurst , at a directional intersection . After this intersection , US 206 enters Bordentown Township and reaches an interchange with the New Jersey Turnpike ( I @-@ 95 ) in a commercial area . Following this interchange , the route crosses over CR 545 . A short distance later , US 206 merges into US 130 at a directional interchange to form a concurrency . The two roads continue north on a six @-@ lane divided highway , briefly entering the eastern edge of Bordentown at the intersection with CR 528 . Back in Bordentown Township , US 130 and US 206 split at another directional interchange . Past US 130 , US 206 crosses under a Conrail Shared Assets Operations railroad line and heads through development as a four @-@ lane divided highway , making a slight northwest bend before resuming north . 
 = = = = Mercer County = = = = 
 US 206 crosses the Crosswicks Creek and enters Hamilton Township , Mercer County . Immediately after the Crosswicks Creek , there is an interchange with I @-@ 195 . Past I @-@ 195 , the route reaches the White Horse Circle , where it intersects CR 524 and CR 533 . At this point , US 206 turns west @-@ northwest to run along four @-@ lane divided locally maintained Broad Street . Passing through White Horse , the road briefly becomes five lanes with a center left @-@ turn lane before becoming a four @-@ lane divided highway again as it crosses over I @-@ 295 without an interchange . Running into more urban areas of development , the route enters Trenton at the crossing of CR 650 After entering Trenton , US 206 narrows into a two @-@ lane undivided street . As the road heads toward downtown Trenton , it crosses New Jersey Transit ’ s River Line immediately before interchanging with Route 129 . From here , the road turns more to the northwest with four lanes and passes by the Sun National Bank Center before crossing over Amtrak ’ s Northeast Corridor and the US 1 freeway simultaneously . US 206 enters the commercial downtown area , narrowing back to two lanes before reaching Warren Street , where US 206 splits into a one @-@ way pair following Broad Street northbound and Warren Street southbound . 
 This one – way pairing , which carries two lanes in each direction , curves north and continues through downtown Trenton . At the Trenton Battle Monument , the road reaches an intersection with the southern terminus of Route 31 and US 206 turns northeast onto another one @-@ way pairing that follows Brunswick Avenue northbound and Martin Luther King Jr . Boulevard southbound , with each road being two @-@ way but only carrying one direction of US 206 . The road continues through neighborhoods , with southbound US 206 forming the border between Ewing Township to the northwest and Trenton to the southeast as a county @-@ maintained road at the Calhoun Street intersection . At this point , southbound US 206 becomes concurrent with CR 583 . At the junction with Spruce Street , northbound US 206 becomes the border between Lawrence Township and Trenton , becoming state @-@ maintained , while southbound US 206 / CR 583 fully crosses into Lawrence Township . Northbound US 206 widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway as it comes to the Brunswick Circle with US 1 Business . At this point , US 1 Business continues northeast on Brunswick Pike while northbound US 206 heads north as a two @-@ lane undivided road called Lawrence Road . CR 645 links the Brunswick Circle to southbound US 206 / CR 583 . 
 At this point , both directions of US 206 are in Lawrence Township and rejoin , with US 206 continuing north as a two @-@ lane undivided road and CR 583 heading to the northeast . US 206 continues through suburban residential areas within Lawrence Township . The route makes a turn to the northeast before heading north again and passing to the east of Rider University . A short distance later , the road has a cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 95 prior to an intersection with CR 546 . In this area , US 206 is briefly a two @-@ lane divided highway . Past CR 546 , the route becomes two @-@ lane undivided Main Street and heads north @-@ northeast through Lawrenceville , passing development . Upon leaving Lawrenceville , US 206 turns more to the east though rural surroundings , forming a short concurrency with CR 569 . From this point , the route continues northeast and enters Princeton . 4 
 In Princeton , CR 533 intersects US 206 , and the two routes form a concurrency . The road becomes Stockton Street , passing by the Drumthwacket Governor 's mansion . US 206 turns north onto Bayard Lane , with Route 27 continuing northeast into downtown Princeton on Nassau Street , which provides access to Princeton University . The stretch from Lawrenceville until the intersection with Nassau Street in Princeton is part of the King 's Highway Historic District . Bayard Lane carries the route past more wooded developed areas , eventually curving northeast through a park . Here , US 206 becomes State Road and turns north again . Continuing to the north , the amount of development adjacent to the road decreases . 
 = = = = Somerset County = = = = 
 US 206 enters Montgomery Township in Somerset County , where the name of the road becomes Van Horne Memorial Highway . In Montgomery Township , the route runs to the east of Princeton Airport and crosses CR 518 . Following this intersection , CR 533 splits from US 206 by heading northeast , and US 206 continues north @-@ northwest through a mix of suburban and rural areas . The road passes through the community of Harlingen before widening to four lanes and reaching Belle Mead . In this area , US 206 passes over CSX ’ s Trenton Subdivision before making a turn to the northeast and then to the north , narrowing back to two lanes . The road enters Hillsborough Township , where the Van Horne Memorial Highway designation ends . It crosses an abandoned railroad line leading to the Belle Mead General Depot before continuing into residential and commercial areas of Hillsborough . The road comes to a junction with CR 514 in this area . 
 Past the CR 514 intersection , US 206 makes a curve northeast before heading north again . Leaving the center of Hillsborough , the road runs northeast past more wooded areas as it crosses under Norfolk Southern 's Lehigh Line . The route passes more development as it widens into a four lane divided highway with jughandles , turning to the north and passing Duke Gardens . US 206 briefly becomes six lanes wide at the CR 608 intersection before narrowing back to four lanes as it crosses the Raritan River into Somerville . In Somerville , the road runs northwest parallel to the Raritan River prior to turning north into commercial areas and entering Raritan . US 206 runs under New Jersey Transit ’ s Raritan Valley Line before making a turn to the north @-@ northwest . 
 US 206 comes to the modified Somerville Circle , where it meets US 202 and Route 28 . At this modified traffic circle , US 206 and Route 28 run through it while US 202 passes over it with ramp access . US 206 forms a concurrency with US 202 at this point and the two routes continue north into Bridgewater Township , briefly entering Somerville . The road features an interchange with US 22 and heads north with the Bridgewater Commons shopping mall on the east side of the road and the Somerset Corporate Center on the west side of the road . An interchange with Commons Way provides access to both these places . Past Commons Way , the road passes under <unk> Road and comes to an interchange with I @-@ 287 that also provides access to I @-@ 78 . Past the I @-@ 287 interchange , US 202 / 206 continue north as a two @-@ lane undivided road past suburban areas . The road crosses Chambers Brook into Bedminster Township , where it soon passes under I @-@ 78 . Shortly after I @-@ 78 , it widens into a four @-@ lane divided highway with a Jersey barrier . US 202 / 206 come to another interchange with I @-@ 287 , pass over the North Branch Raritan River , and come to an intersection where the two routes split . 
 After the US 202 split , US 206 continues north as a four @-@ lane divided highway through commercial areas , with the grass median becoming replaced by a painted median as it comes to a junction with CR 523 in downtown Bedminster . Following this intersection , the route narrows into a two @-@ lane undivided road that runs through less development . US 206 enters Peapack @-@ Gladstone , where it runs a short distance to the west of New Jersey Transit ’ s Gladstone Branch . In Peapack @-@ Gladstone , the road briefly becomes a four @-@ lane divided highway as it has an interchange with Pfizer Way , a road that provides access to a Pfizer facility . Past this point , US 206 becomes a two @-@ lane undivided road that runs northwest through rural areas , with CR 512 crossing the road . Just after this intersection , the route enters Bedminster Township again , turning to the north . 
 = = = = Morris County = = = = 
 The route continues north into Chester Township , Morris County . In Chester Township , US 206 passes through forested areas , with the northbound direction briefly gaining a second lane . As the road comes into Chester Borough , it widens to four lanes and passes shopping areas including the Streets of Chester . In the center of Chester , the route crosses CR 513 . Past this intersection , US 206 continues into woodland development , with the northbound direction narrowing back into one lane as the route heads back into Chester Township . The road narrows back to two total lanes as it enters more rural surroundings , coming into Mount Olive Township . Further north , residential development near the road starts to increase . As US 206 reaches an intersection with CR 613 , the surroundings becomes commercial before the route passes under Morristown & Erie Railway 's High Bridge Branch . After this area , the road turns north @-@ northeast and runs through forested areas as a three lane road with two northbound lanes and one southbound lane , eventually entering Roxbury Township . 
 Business in the area of the road increase before US 206 widens to four total lanes and comes to a modified cloverleaf interchange with I @-@ 80 and the southern terminus of Route 183 . At this point , the road continues north into Netcong as Route 183 while US 206 heads west along I @-@ 80 , a six @-@ lane freeway that continues into Mount Olive Township . The freeway continues northwest , running through a small corner of Netcong before coming back into Mount Olive Township and interchanging with US 46 . Immediately after US 46 , the highway passes over New Jersey Transit ’ s Morristown Line / Montclair @-@ Boonton Line before turning north and reaching a trumpet interchange where US 206 splits from I @-@ 80 . Following this split , US 206 is a four @-@ lane freeway that heads northeast , crossing under Waterloo Valley Road and an abandoned railroad line before coming to an interchange with International Drive . 
 = = = = Sussex County = = = = 
 After the International Drive interchange , US 206 crosses the Musconetcong River and enters Stanhope , Sussex County . Immediately following the river crossing , the freeway merges with the northern terminus of Route 183 at an interchange on the border between Byram Township to the west and Stanhope to the east . Past Route 183 , US 206 continues north as a four @-@ lane divided surface road past development , fully entering Stanhope again before crossing into Byram Township . Upon entering Byram Township , the route becomes a two @-@ lane undivided road . Upon turning northwest , the surroundings become more forested as US 206 crosses a mountain , with the northbound direction gaining a second lane for a distance . There are a few businesses along the road as it runs north past wooded areas near Cranberry Lake and Panther Lake . The route continues into Andover , where it becomes Main Street and passes under the abandoned Lackawanna Cut @-@ Off . US 206 forms a brief concurrency with CR 517 in the commercial downtown area . Past CR 517 , US 206 bends northwest and enters Andover Township . Here , the road runs back into forested areas , passing by Whites Pond and running near Kittatinny Valley State Park . After a curve to the north , the route enters a mix of development and rural areas , passing to the west of Newton Airport prior to entering Newton . 
 In Newton , the road is known as Main Street and is lined by homes as it turns north . Upon reaching the downtown area , US 206 meets Route 94 and CR 519 at the Park Place square . At this point , US 206 forms a concurrency with Route 94 / CR 519 , and all three routes run concurrent north on four @-@ lane undivided Water Street for a short distance . CR 519 splits from the road by turning north on Mill Street while US 206 and Route 94 continue north as a three @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane , crossing Paulins Kill before coming to a shopping district as the road leaves Newton for Hampton Township . The road narrows back to two lanes and heads into areas of farmland , becoming Hampton House Road . Route 94 splits from US 206 by making a right turn to continue east . After this intersection , US 206 turns northeast and enters Frankford Township . After crossing the Paulins Kill , Route 15 and CR 565 end at a traffic light with US 206 , with the route making a turn to the northwest on an unnamed road . 
 After this intersection , the route passes near <unk> Stadium before passing more farmland and reaching the community of Augusta . After Augusta , US 206 turns north @-@ northwest through more rural areas before entering <unk> . Here , the route bypasses the center of town to the south as a four @-@ lane divided highway before crossing CR 519 . Past CR 519 , the median ends and US 206 continues to the west @-@ northwest . After crossing back into Frankford Township , the route continues through forested areas . Turning more to the north , US 206 runs a short distance to the west of Culver 's Lake prior to intersecting CR 521 and forming a concurrency with that route . The concurrent US 206 and CR 521 heads into <unk> Township , where it crosses the Appalachian Trail at <unk> Gap in Kittatinny Mountain and passes through the mountainous Stokes State Forest . 
 After heading north with a three @-@ lane stretch that has two southbound lanes and one northbound lane , the two @-@ lane road reaches a junction with CR 560 . After this intersection , the road leaves the state forest and continues through wooded areas with some commercial establishments . US 206 / CR 521 reaches the community of Hainesville , where it passes through more agricultural surroundings with some development . Leaving Hainesville , the road continues into Montague Township . Near the community of Montague , CR 521 splits from US 206 by heading to the northeast . Meanwhile , US 206 turns to the northwest to run through wooded areas of the Delaware Water Gap National Recreation Area , where it comes to the Milford @-@ Montague Toll Bridge over the Delaware River that is maintained by the Delaware River Joint Toll Bridge Commission . 
 = = = Pennsylvania = = = 
 After crossing the river on the Milford @-@ Montague Toll Bridge , US 206 continues north into Dingman Township in Pike County , Pennsylvania . A short distance after the bridge , the route comes to a northbound toll plaza , where it becomes a two @-@ lane divided highway . US 206 officially ends at an intersection with US 209 not far after the toll plaza for the bridge . Even though this intersection marks the end of US 206 , a few signs show the route heading concurrent with US 209 to continue north to US 6 in Milford . 
 = = History = = 
 Prior to 1927 , what is now US 206 in New Jersey was legislated as part of several routes . Between Bordentown and Trenton , the current alignment was designated as a part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 2 in 1916 . Between Trenton and Princeton , present @-@ day US 206 became the southernmost part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 13 in 1917 . In 1921 , the current route from Princeton north to Bedminster Township was legislated as part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 16 . 
 After the U.S. Highway System was created in 1926 , the route between Bordentown and Trenton became the northernmost part of US 130 while it became a part of US 1 between Trenton and Princeton . In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , several state highways were legislated along present @-@ day US 206 . Route 39 followed the route from Hammonton to White Horse , while Route 37 was designated along it between White Horse and Trenton . From Trenton north to Princeton , pre @-@ 1927 Route 13 was replaced by Route 27 . Present @-@ day US 206 between Princeton and Newton became part of Route 31 , a route that was to go past Newton to the New York border near Unionville , while the portion north of Newton to the Delaware River in Montague became Route S31 , a spur of Route 31 . Another spur of Route 31 , Route 31A , was legislated in 1941 to run from Route 31 in Princeton to Route 33 in Hightstown ; only a small portion of this was built over the Northeast Corridor railroad line and is now Route 64 . 
 US 206 was designated in the later 1930s , running from US 30 in Hammonton , New Jersey north to US 6 and US 209 in Milford , Pennsylvania . By this time , the US 1 and US 130 designations were removed from the route onto new alignments . In 1938 , US 206 / Route 31 was designated to bypass Somerville , the former alignment was known as Route 177 from the 1960s until 1974 . In the 1940s , US 206 / Route 39 was realigned to the south of White Horse ; the former alignment was known as Route 160 between the 1960s and the 1980s . Also in the 1940s , the northern terminus of US 206 was moved to its current location at US 209 in Dingman Township , Pennsylvania . 
 In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , the state highways running concurrent with US 206 were removed . When US 206 's current alignment bypassing Columbus was built by the 1960s , the designation of Route 170 was given to the old alignment through Columbus ; this road was turned over to Burlington County in the 1980s and is now CR 690 . In the late 1960s , a freeway was proposed for the US 206 / Route 54 corridor , running from US 30 in Hammonton south to Route 55 and the proposed Route 60 near Vineland and Millville . Originally , a parkway had been planned in 1932 to serve the US 206 corridor between Hammonton and Trenton , but never materialized . The freeway between Vineland / Millville and Hammonton was to cost $ 47 million and was intended to provide a better route between the two areas than the existing two @-@ lane roads . However , it was never built due to environmental and financial issues . 
 A freeway was also proposed for US 206 in northwestern New Jersey during the 1960s . In 1964 , a Route 94 freeway was planned to follow US 206 between Netcong and Newton on its way to the proposed Route 23 freeway in Hamburg . The Tri @-@ State Transportation Commission proposed a longer US 206 freeway that was to connect I @-@ 78 and I @-@ 287 in Bedminster Township north to Newton , incorporating the southern portion of the Route 94 proposal . This freeway was intended to relieve traffic on existing roads and provide access to recreation areas . By the late 1960s , the US 206 freeway would be planned by the NJDOT to connect I @-@ 80 in Netcong north to Montague . This freeway was proposed to provide access to proposed national recreation area along the Delaware River that would have been built in conjunction with the controversial Tocks Island Dam project as well as alleviating traffic on the existing road . However , like the US 206 freeway proposal in southern New Jersey , it was not built . 
 Since 1974 , a bypass has been planned for the congested part of US 206 through Hillsborough . In 2002 , the NJDOT modified plans for the bypass . The bypass is to be mostly four lanes wide and run to the east of Hillsborough , with the southernmost portion only being two lanes ; one interchange was planned with CR 514 . The road is to meet a Smart Growth goal by preserving land and eliminating two planned interchanges that would have increased congestion . In July 2009 , it was announced that construction of the US 206 Hillsborough bypass , which is projected to cost $ 148 million , would start in 2010 . On June 24 , 2010 , a contract was given to <unk> Constructors Corporation to build the first phase between CR 514 and Hillsborough Road . Construction on this portion , planned to cost $ 43 million , began on August 18 , 2010 and opened on October 28 , 2013 . This section is currently designated US 206 Bypass . In spring 2015 , work on grading and utility relocation for the ends of the bypass was slated to be completed . Work on constructing the northern and southern ends of the US 206 bypass of Hillsborough is planned to begin in spring 2017 , but may be delayed as the state 's Transportation Trust Fund is anticipated to run out of money in 2016 . The Hillsborough Bypass is named for Peter J. Biondi , a former Assemblyman and Hillsborough mayor who died in 2011 . 
 US 206 was widened in Byram Township to six lanes . This construction follows a decade of controversy , including concerns that the widening would violate the Highlands Water Protection and Planning Act passed in 2004 ; an exemption to this act allowed the construction to proceed . The widening is being done in order to eliminate backups on the current two @-@ lane stretch during rush hours . The project was slated to be finished in November 2013 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = = Bannered routes = = 
 U.S. Route 206 Bypass ( US 206 Byp . ) is the designation for the incomplete Peter J. Biondi Bypass , a bypass of the section of US 206 through Hillsborough Township in Somerset County . The road currently begins at an at @-@ grade intersection with Hillsborough Road and heads north as a two @-@ lane divided road . The bypass passes through farmland and woodland with some nearby development , coming to bridges over Homestead Road and CSX 's Trenton Subdivision . The current northern terminus of US 206 <unk> is at an interchange with CR 514 . A stub of the roadway continues north of the interchange . The first section of US 206 Byp . , running from Hillsborough Road to CR 514 , opened on October 28 , 2013 . The route is currently 1 @.@ 66 mi ( 2 @.@ 67 km ) in length . 
 Major intersections 
 The entire route is in Hillsborough Township , Somerset County . 
 = = = Related routes = = = 
 U.S. Route 6 
 U.S. Route 106 
 = Mitchell Red Cloud , Jr . = 
 Mitchell Red Cloud , Jr . ( 2 July 1925 – 5 November 1950 ) was a Marine in the United States Marine Corps during World War II , and later a soldier in the United States Army during the Korean War . Corporal Red Cloud posthumously received the Medal of Honor for his actions near <unk> , North Pyongan Province , North Korea on 5 November 1950 . 
 Born in Hatfield , Wisconsin , Red Cloud , a Ho @-@ Chunk Native American , dropped out of high school to enlist in the US Marines during World War II . He served first with Carlson 's Raiders during the Battle of Guadalcanal before health problems forced him stateside to recover . Red Cloud avoided discharge , and served with the 6th Marine Division during the Battle of Okinawa . 
 Red Cloud enlisted in the US Army shortly before the beginning of the Korean War . Serving with the 24th Infantry Division , he was among the troops who fought the first battles of the war , being pushed back with the 19th Infantry Regiment during the Battle of Taejon and the Battle of Pusan Perimeter . He was then a part of the Eighth United States Army advance into North Korea . On the night of 5 November 1950 , Red Cloud was manning a forward observation post when he spotted an imminent surprise attack by Chinese forces . Red Cloud singlehandedly held off the Chinese forces despite being shot eight times , at one point ordering his men to tie him to a tree because he was too weak to stand by himself . His company found him the next morning , surrounded by dead Chinese troops . He was credited with alerting his company to the ambush and saving them from being overrun . For these actions , he was posthumously awarded the Medal of Honor . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Mitchell Red Cloud , Jr. was born on 2 July 1925 in Hatfield , Wisconsin . He was the eldest son of Mitchell Red Cloud and Lillian Red Cloud . The family were ethnic members of the Ho @-@ Chunk Native American tribe . Red Cloud attended <unk> High School in Black River Falls , Wisconsin . The school taught primarily Native American students , a large portion of whom joined the military after finishing school . At age 16 , Red Cloud dropped out of high school and , with his father 's approval , decided to enlist in the United States Marine Corps . He entered service on 11 August 1941 , the earliest date on which he was legally allowed to enlist . The family may have relocated to <unk> , Wisconsin , which was where Red Cloud enlisted . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 With World War II looming , Red Cloud joined " Carlson 's Raiders , " the 2nd Marine Raider Battalion under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Evans Carlson . As a light infantry special forces unit , the raiders held high standards of physical and mental fitness , and was known to perform very well with this unit . His only major deployment with the raiders was the Battle of Guadalcanal . Red Cloud landed on Guadalcanal on 6 November 1942 . The 2nd Raider Battalion conducted a number of mopping up operations to assist in the clearance of the island and to cut off troops from the Empire of Japan who had been attempting to escape . However , his time on Guadalcanal was plagued by several bouts of tropical disease , and he left the island a month later , on 4 December 1942 . 
 Red Cloud contracted diseases frequently during his time overseas , and he was returned to the United States to recuperate . The US Marine Corps offered him a medical discharge , but Red Cloud refused . Instead , he recovered from illness and requested reassignment to a combat unit . This request was granted , with Red Cloud subsequently assigned to the 29th Marine Regiment , 6th Marine Division . In this unit , he participated in the invasion of Okinawa on 1 April 1945 . In the ensuing Battle of Okinawa , his unit saw intense fighting in the campaign to secure the island . After several months of fighting , the unit was withdrawn to Guam to prepare for Operation Coronet , the second phase of the anticipated invasion of mainland Japan . However , these plans were scrapped following the surrender of Japan . Red Cloud left the Marine Corps in 1946 during the demobilization that followed the war . He left the military as a Sergeant . 
 = = = Inter @-@ war years = = = 
 In December 1945 , Red Cloud published an article in the Wisconsin Archaeologist , an account from his tribe 's traditional stories about the 1832 surrender of Sauk leader Black Hawk to US authorities after the short Black Hawk War . In the article , he expressed support for historical theories that Black Hawk had voluntarily surrendered . He also assisted anthropologist Nancy Lurie , informing her studies of how childcare customs among Native Americans were changing over time . 
 Red Cloud decided to return to the military two years after he left , in 1948 . He enlisted in the United States Army and was assigned to E Company , 2nd Battalion , 19th Infantry Regiment , 24th Infantry Division . The regiment was part of the Occupation of Japan , and Red Cloud was assigned to Kyushu . During this time , training opportunities were limited , many of the troops were inexperienced and their equipment was of low quality due to budget cuts . On joining the army , Red Cloud was not permitted to retain his sergeant rank from the Marine Corps . 
 In the inter @-@ war years , Red Cloud married and had a daughter , <unk> . 
 = = = Korean War = = = 
 With the outbreak of the Korean War in June 1950 , the 24th Infantry Division was the closest unit to the Korean Peninsula , and so Red Cloud 's company was among the first units into the country . The division was heavily engaged throughout July 1950 by North Korean troops as it attempted to stem their invasion of South Korea , and the 19th Infantry saw action in the Battle of Taejon , fighting at the Kum River before being forced out of Taejon . 
 The unit subsequently moved back to the Naktong River , and was involved in the subsequent Pusan Perimeter campaign during August and September 1950 . During the First Battle of Naktong Bulge , the 19th Infantry was moved up from reserve positions in to combat the NK 4th Division , which was attempting to break through their lines . Having been badly mauled in these fights , the division was moved into reserve along the Pusan Perimeter on 23 September . It was replaced by units of the US 2nd Infantry Division . In the subsequent Great Naktong Offensive , the 19th Infantry served as a reserve force to help units under attack in the Second Battle of Naktong Bulge . It would later participate in the Battle of Kyongju , assisting troops of the Republic of Korea Army to help push back North Korean troops from the Kyongju area . During these battles , Red Cloud 's experience as a combat veteran made him a valued member of his unit for leading the less experienced troops . 
 Following the Battle of Inchon and subsequent Second Battle of Seoul , the North Korean Army was largely defeated , and the 19th Infantry was one of the units of the Eighth United States Army which pursued the fleeing North Koreans north of the 38th Parallel with the intention of reuniting the country . However , beginning in October 1950 , the People 's Republic of China conducted the First Phase Offensive , a surprise attack against the advancing United Nations forces , which were unprepared to counter the offensive . By early November , Red Cloud and his unit had advanced to the Ch 'ongch 'on River . 
 = = = Medal of Honor action = = = 
 On the night of 5 November , 2nd Battalion was holding positions on Hill 123 , near <unk> , just north of the river . Red Cloud , then a Corporal , was manning a forward listening post in front of E Company 's position . 
 In the middle of the night , he began hearing suspicious noises , before spotting a number of Chinese troops intent on surprising the Americans . Red Cloud raised an alarm and began firing on the advancing Chinese troops with an M1918 Browning Automatic Rifle . The Chinese returned fire , wounding him . In spite of these wounds , he refused to withdraw from his post , continuing to attack the Chinese troops with accurate fire which caused significant casualties among their advancing force . Crucially , his actions alerted the American troops to the impending attack , preventing an ambush . Red Cloud propped himself against a tree to continue firing , exposing himself to intense Chinese fire . He was shot at least eight times in this battle . Suffering from severe injuries , he ordered his troops to tie him upright to the tree , as he was too weak to support himself , before he ordered them to withdraw to the main positions . Eventually , the Chinese overran his position . 
 Red Cloud 's actions gave E Company time and warning to blunt the Chinese offensive , eventually repelling the attack . His actions are also credited with allowing the company to evacuate several others wounded in the attack . When the troops of E Company returned to his position the next morning , his body was reportedly surrounded by a large number of dead Chinese troops . 
 = = Burial and honors = = 
 In April 1951 , Red Cloud 's mother received the Medal of Honor from General of the Army Omar Bradley in a ceremony at The Pentagon in Washington , D.C .. Red Cloud was initially buried at a UN cemetery in Korea . However , in 1955 , his body was exhumed and moved to Wisconsin where he was buried in accordance with Ho @-@ Chunk tribal customs . He was interred at the Decorah Cemetery at Winnebago Mission , Wisconsin , and in 1967 a monument was erected for him in the cemetery . Another plaque honoring Red Cloud was subsequently erected in Black River Falls . In La Crosse , Wisconsin , a park was dedicated in Red Cloud 's honor in 1957 . A memorial park was also dedicated in his memory that year , the Red Cloud Highway Memorial Park adjacent to the Black Hawk Powwow Grounds in <unk> , Wisconsin . A portion of Wisconsin Highway 54 was also renamed Red Cloud Highway . The American Legion post in Adams , Wisconsin was renamed for him . The Ho @-@ Chunk Nation observes Corporal Mitchell Red Cloud Jr . Day on July 4 . 
 On Armed Forces Day , 18 May 1957 , the United States Army named Camp Red Cloud after him , in recognition of his actions . Additionally , in 1999 the United States Navy named the newly commissioned USNS Red Cloud ( T @-@ AKR @-@ 313 ) , a Watson @-@ class vehicle cargo ship and Large , Medium @-@ Speed Roll @-@ on / Roll @-@ off ship , in his honor . The ship was christened by his daughter <unk> , who was dressed in traditional regalia . It was attended by several men who served alongside her father as well as several flag officers . 
 = = Finnigan 's War = = 
 Mitchell Red Cloud Jr. is one of the featured Korean War heroes honored in the 2013 documentary " Finnigan 's War " directed by Conor Timmis . Actor Mark Hamill narrates Red Cloud 's Medal of Honor citation in the film . 
 = = Awards and decorations = = 
 Red Cloud 's awards and decorations include : 
 = = = Medal of Honor citation = = = 
 Red Cloud was the third of four Native Americans to be awarded the Medal of Honor in Korea . Charles George of the Cherokee and Raymond Harvey of the Chickasaw were also awarded medals . Woodrow W. Keeble of the Sisseton Wahpeton <unk> was also honored with the Medal of Honor in 2007 , after a long campaign by members of his family . 
 Cpl. Red Cloud , Company E , distinguished himself by conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity above and beyond the call of duty in action against the enemy . From his position on the point of a ridge immediately in front of the company command post he was the first to detect the approach of the Chinese Communist forces and give the alarm as the enemy charged from a brush @-@ covered area less than 100 feet from him . Springing up , he delivered devastating pointblank automatic rifle fire into the advancing enemy . His accurate and intense fire checked this assault and gained time for the company to consolidate its defense . With utter fearlessness he maintained his firing position until severely wounded by enemy fire . Refusing assistance he pulled himself to his feet and , wrapping his arm around a tree , continued his deadly fire again , until he was fatally wounded . This heroic act stopped the enemy from overrunning his company 's position and gained time for reorganization and evacuation of the wounded . Cpl. Red Cloud 's dauntless courage and gallant self @-@ sacrifice reflects the highest credit upon himself and upholds the esteemed traditions of the U.S. Army . 
 = Great hammerhead = 
 The great hammerhead ( Sphyrna mokarran ) is the largest species of hammerhead shark , belonging to the family Sphyrnidae , attaining a maximum length of 6 @.@ 1 m ( 20 ft ) . It is found in tropical and warm temperate waters worldwide , inhabiting coastal areas and the continental shelf . The great hammerhead can be distinguished from other hammerheads by the shape of its " hammer " ( called the " cephalofoil " ) , which is wide with an almost straight front margin , and by its tall , sickle @-@ shaped first dorsal fin . A solitary , strong @-@ swimming apex predator , the great hammerhead feeds on a wide variety of prey ranging from crustaceans and cephalopods , to bony fishes , to smaller sharks . Observations of this species in the wild suggest that the cephalofoil functions to immobilize stingrays , a favored prey . This species has a viviparous mode of reproduction , bearing litters of up to 55 pups every two years . 
 Although potentially dangerous , the great hammerhead rarely attacks humans . It sometimes behaves inquisitively toward divers and should be treated with respect . This shark is heavily fished for its large fins , which are extremely valuable on the Asian market as the main ingredient of shark fin soup . As a result , great hammerhead populations are declining substantially worldwide , and it has been assessed as Endangered by the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) . 
 = = Taxonomy and phylogeny = = 
 The great hammerhead was first described as Zygaena mokarran in 1837 by the German naturalist Eduard Rüppell . The name was later changed to the current Sphyrna mokarran . However , for many years the valid scientific name for the great hammerhead was thought to be Sphyrna tudes , which was coined in 1822 by Achille Valenciennes . In 1950 , Enrico Tortonese determined that the specimens illustrated by Valenciennes were in fact smalleye hammerheads , to which the name S. tudes then applied . As the next most senior synonym , Sphyrna mokarran became the great hammerhead 's valid name . The lectotype for this species is a 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) long male from the Red Sea . 
 Older studies based on morphology have generally placed the great hammerhead as one of the more derived members of its family , reflecting the traditional view that cephalofoil size gradually increased over the course of hammerhead shark evolution . However , this view has been refuted by phylogenetic analyses using nuclear and mitochondrial DNA , which found that the great hammerhead and the smooth hammerhead ( S. zygaena ) form a clade that is basal to all other Sphyrna species . These results also show that the first hammerheads to evolve had large rather than small cephalofoils . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The great hammerhead inhabits tropical waters around the world , between the latitudes of 40 ° N and 37 ° S. In the Atlantic Ocean , it is found from North Carolina to Uruguay , including the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea , and from Morocco to Senegal , and the Mediterranean Sea . It is found all along the rim of the Indian Ocean , and in the Pacific Ocean from the Ryukyu Islands to Australia , New Caledonia , and French Polynesia , and from southern Baja California to Peru . It may occur off Gambia , Guinea , Mauritania , Sierra Leone , and Western Sahara , but this has not been confirmed . Great hammerheads may be found from inshore waters of less than 1 m ( 3 @.@ 3 ft ) deep , to a depth of 80 m ( 260 ft ) offshore . They favor coral reefs , but also inhabit continental shelves , island terraces , lagoons , and deep water near land . They are migratory ; populations off Florida and in the South China Sea have been documented moving closer to the poles in the summer . 
 = = Description = = 
 The streamlined body of the great hammerhead with the expanded cephalofoil is typical of the hammerhead sharks . Adult great hammerheads can be distinguished from the scalloped hammerhead and the smooth hammerhead by the shape of the cephalofoil , which has a nearly straight front margin ( as opposed to arched ) , with prominent medial and lateral indentations . The width of the cephalofoil is 23 – 27 % of the body length . The teeth are triangular and strongly serrated , becoming more oblique towards the corners of the mouth . There are 17 tooth rows on either side of the upper jaw with 2 – 3 teeth at the symphysis ( the midline of the jaw ) , and 16 – 17 teeth on either side of the lower jaw and 1 – 3 at the symphysis . 
 The first dorsal fin is distinctive , being very tall and strongly falcate ( sickle @-@ shaped ) , and originates over the insertions of the pectoral fins . The second dorsal fin and anal fin are both relatively large , with deep notches in the rear margins . The pelvic fins are falcate with concave rear margins , in contrast to the straight @-@ margined pelvic fins of the scalloped hammerhead . The skin is covered with closely placed dermal denticles . Each denticle is diamond @-@ shaped , with 3 – 5 horizontal ridges leading to marginal teeth in smaller individuals , and 5 – 6 in larger ones . The great hammerhead is dark brown to light gray to olive above , fading to white on the underside . The fins are unmarked in adults , while the tip of the second dorsal fin may be dark in juveniles . 
 The average great hammerhead measures up to 3 @.@ 5 m ( 11 ft ) long and weighs over 230 kg ( 510 lb ) . A small percentage of the population , mostly or all females , are much larger . The longest great hammerhead on record was 6 @.@ 1 m ( 20 ft ) . The heaviest known great hammerhead is a 4 @.@ 4 m ( 14 ft ) long , 580 kg ( 1 @,@ 280 lb ) female caught off Boca Grande , Florida in 2006 . The weight of the female was due to her being pregnant with 55 near @-@ natal pups . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 The great hammerhead is a solitary , nomadic predator that tends to be given a wide berth by other reef sharks . If confronted , they may respond with an agonistic display : dropping their pectoral fins and swimming in a stiff or jerky fashion . Juveniles are preyed upon by larger sharks such as bull sharks ( Carcharhinus leucas ) , while adults have no major predators . Yellow jacks ( <unk> <unk> ) have been seen rubbing themselves against the hammerhead 's flanks , possibly to rid themselves of parasites . Schools of pilot fish ( Naucrates ductor ) sometimes accompany the great hammerhead . The great hammerhead is parasitized by several species of copepods , including Alebion <unk> , A. elegans , Nesippus orientalis , N. <unk> , Eudactylina pollex , Kroyeria <unk> , and Nemesis atlantica . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 An active predator with a varied diet , known prey of the great hammerhead include invertebrates such as crabs , lobsters , squid , and octopus , bony fishes such as tarpon , sardines , sea catfishes , toadfish , porgies , grunts , jacks , croakers , groupers , flatfishes , <unk> , and porcupine fishes , and smaller sharks such as smoothhounds . At Rangiroa Atoll , great hammerheads prey opportunistically on grey reef sharks ( Carcharhinus amblyrhynchos ) that have exhausted themselves pursuing mates . The species is known to be cannibalistic . 
 The favorite prey of the great hammerhead are rays and skates , especially stingrays . The venomous spines of stingrays are frequently found lodged inside its mouth and do not seem to bother the shark as one specimen caught off Florida had 96 spines in and around its mouth . Great hammerheads primarily hunt at dawn or dusk , swinging their heads in broad angles over the sea floor so as to pick up the electrical signatures of stingrays buried in the sand , via numerous ampullae of Lorenzini located on the underside of the cephalofoil . The cephalofoil also serves as a hydrofoil that allows the shark to quickly turn around and strike at a ray once detected . Off Florida , large hammerheads are often the first to reach newly baited <unk> , suggesting a particularly keen sense of smell . 
 Another function of the cephalofoil is suggested by an observation of a great hammerhead attacking a southern stingray ( Dasyatis americana ) in the Bahamas : the shark first knocked the ray to the sea bottom with a powerful blow from above , and then pinned it with its head while pivoting to take a large bite from each side of the ray 's pectoral fin disc . This effectively crippled the stingray , which was then picked up in the jaws and sawed apart with rapid shakes of the head . A great hammerhead has also been seen attacking a spotted eagle ray ( Aetobatus narinari ) in open water by taking a massive bite out of one of its pectoral fins . The ray thus incapacitated , the shark once again used its head to pin it to the bottom and pivoted to take the ray in its jaws head @-@ first . These observations suggest that the great hammerhead seeks to disable rays with the first bite , a strategy similar to that of the great white shark ( Carcharodon carcharias ) , and that its cephalofoil is an adaptation for prey handling . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 As with other hammerhead sharks , great hammerheads are viviparous : once the developing young use up their supply of yolk , the yolk sac is transformed into a structure analogous to a mammalian placenta . Unlike most other sharks , which mate on or near the sea bottom , great hammerheads have been observed mating near the surface . In one account from the Bahamas , a mating pair ascended while swimming around each other , mating when they reached the surface . Females breed once every two years , giving birth from late spring to summer in the Northern Hemisphere and from December to January in Australian waters . The gestation period is 11 months . The litter size ranges from 6 – 55 pups , with 20 – 40 being typical . The young measure 50 – 70 cm ( 19 @.@ 5 – 27 @.@ 5 in ) at birth ; males reach maturity at 2 @.@ 3 – 2 @.@ 8 m ( 7 @.@ 5 – 9 @.@ 2 ft ) long and 51 kg ( 112 lb ) and the females at 2 @.@ 5 – 3 @.@ 0 m ( 8 @.@ 2 – 9 @.@ 8 ft ) and 41 kg ( 90 lb ) . The young differ from the adults in having a rounded frontal margin on the head . The typical lifespan of this species is 20 – 30 years ; the record Boca Grande female was estimated to be 40 – 50 years old . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 With its large size and cutting teeth , the great hammerhead could seriously injure a human and caution should be exercised around them . This species has a ( possibly undeserved ) reputation for aggression and being the most dangerous of the hammerhead sharks . Divers underwater have reported that great hammerheads tend to be shy or nonreactive toward humans . However , there have been reports of great hammerheads approaching divers closely and even charging them when they first enter the water . As of 2011 , the International Shark Attack File lists 34 bites , 17 of them unprovoked and none fatal , attributable to hammerhead sharks of the genus Sphyrna . Due to the difficulty in identifying the species involved , it is uncertain how many were caused by great hammerheads . This shark has been confirmed to be responsible for only one ( provoked ) bite . 
 The great hammerhead is regularly caught both commercially and recreationally in the tropics , using longlines , fixed bottom nets , hook @-@ and @-@ line , and trawls . Though the meat is rarely consumed , their fins are becoming increasing valuable due to the Asian demand for shark fin soup . In addition , their skin used for leather , their liver oil for vitamins , and their carcasses for fishmeal . The great hammerhead is also taken unintentionally as bycatch and suffers very high mortality , over 90 % for fisheries in the northwest Atlantic and the Gulf of Mexico . Entanglement in shark nets around Australian and South African beaches is another source of mortality . 
 = = = Conservation status = = = 
 The great hammerhead is extremely vulnerable to overfishing due to its low overall abundance and long generation time . Assessment of its conservation status is difficult as few fisheries separate the great hammerhead from other hammerheads in their reported catches . This species is listed as globally Endangered on the IUCN Red List . It is Endangered in the northwestern Atlantic and the Gulf of Mexico , where though it is a non @-@ targeted species , populations have dropped 50 % since the 1990s due to bycatch . It is also Endangered in the southwestern Indian Ocean , where large numbers of longline vessels operate illegally along the coasts for hammerheads and the giant guitarfish ( Rhynchobatus <unk> ) . The great hammerhead catch rate in Indian Ocean has declined 73 % from 1978 to 2003 , though it is yet undetermined whether these represent localized or widespread depletion . The great hammerhead is Critically Endangered along the western coast of Africa , where stocks have collapsed with an estimated 80 % decline in the past 25 years . The West African Sub @-@ Regional Fishing Commission ( SRFC ) has recognized the great hammerhead as one of the four most threatened species in the region , though fishing continues unmonitored and unregulated . Off northern Australia , this species was assessed as Data Deficient but at " high risk " . Concern has arisen there over a substantial increase in illegal , unreported , and unregulated ( IUU ) fishing , reflecting the raising value of this shark 's fins . 
 No conservation measures specifically protecting the great hammerhead have been enacted . It is listed on Annex I , Highly Migratory Species , of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea , though no management schemes have yet been implemented under this agreement . The banning of shark finning by countries and supranational entities such as United States , Australia , and the European Union , and international regulatory bodies such as the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas ( <unk> ) , should reduce fishing pressure on the great hammerhead . 
 = New York State Route 120 = 
 New York State Route 120 ( NY 120 ) is a state highway in southern Westchester County , New York , in the United States . It begins in the city of Rye at an intersection with U.S. Route 1 ( US 1 ) and runs for about 18 miles ( 29 km ) north to the hamlet of Millwood , where it ends at a junction with NY 100 . The route intersects with several limited @-@ access highways , including Interstate 684 ( I @-@ 684 ) and the Saw Mill River Parkway , and serves the Westchester County Airport in North Castle . Portions of the route have been signed ceremonially in remembrance of American serviceman killed in the 2000s and 2010s during the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan . 
 NY 120 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York , but only to the portion of its routing north of Westchester Avenue . It was extended south to Rye c . 1938 , then rerouted to follow Westchester Avenue east to Port Chester by the following year . Most of NY 120 's former routing to Rye became part of New York State Route 119A at that time . NY 120 was rerouted to serve Rye again c . 1961 , replacing NY 119A . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Rye to Harrison = = = 
 NY 120 begins at an intersection with US 1 ( Boston Post Road ) in the city of Rye . The route proceeds northward along Purchase Street as a two @-@ lane street through the Locust Avenue Business District , intersecting a handful of local streets and serving Rye 's station on the Metro @-@ North Railroad 's New Haven Line . Past the station , the highway passes under the New Haven Line , Amtrak 's Northeast Corridor line , and I @-@ 95 in quick succession ahead of the Purchase Street Business District . The commercial surroundings give way to residential neighborhoods after three blocks as NY 120 winds northward through the northern part of Rye to the adjacent village of Harrison . 
 In Harrison , NY 120 passes several mansions on both sides of the highway as it gradually turns northwestward and approaches I @-@ 287 ( the Cross Westchester Expressway ) . The route parallels the western edge of the freeway for several blocks to Westchester Avenue , where NY 120 meets the southern end of NY 120A , an alternate route through the easternmost part of Westchester County . While NY 120A heads east toward Port Chester , NY 120 takes on the Westchester Avenue name as the two directions of the route split to follow collector / distributor roads running northwestward along both sides of I @-@ 287 . The route remains on the frontage roads for about a half @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 8 km ) to another section of Purchase Street , where NY 120 turns to follow a slightly more northward track through another residential section of Harrison . 
 Less than 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) from I @-@ 287 , NY 120 connects to the Hutchinson River Parkway by way of exit 27 , a diamond interchange just northeast of the parkway 's interchanges with I @-@ 287 and a reference route spur leading to I @-@ 684 . Continuing northward from the parkway , the highway enters the hamlet of Purchase , where NY 120 runs along the eastern edge of Manhattanville College 's campus and passes a short distance west of the State University of New York at Purchase . Part of Purchase Street near the entrance to SUNY Purchase at Anderson Hill Road is named the Specialist Anthony N. <unk> Memorial Highway in memory of United States Army Specialist Anthony <unk> , a SUNY Purchase student who was killed in Iraq in 2004 . A dormitory at the school is also named for him . 
 Another stretch of homes north of Purchase leads to Westchester County Airport , situated between NY 120 and the New York – Connecticut state line about 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the east . Here , I @-@ 684 begins to run alongside NY 120 as both roads pass by Rye Lake , an offshoot of the Kensico Reservoir . NY 120 widens to four lanes ahead of the airport 's main entrance in the town of North Castle , where the road connects to I @-@ 684 via Airport Road ( unsigned County Route 135 or CR 135 ) . 
 = = = North Castle to Millwood = = = 
 Continuing northward , I @-@ 684 and NY 120 head due north toward the state line , where NY 120A rejoins its parent route at a junction with King Street just north of the airport . From here , I @-@ 684 continues north into Connecticut while NY 120 takes on the King Street name and turns northwest to straddle the state line for roughly 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) as a two @-@ lane road . The route passes over I @-@ 684 and the northern tip of Rye Lake and serves an industrial complex in the Connecticut town of Greenwich before the state line turns 90 degrees to the northeast . NY 120 remains on a northwesterly alignment , however , and it crosses the Delaware Aqueduct prior to meeting NY 22 ( Mount Kisco Road ) on the edge of another Kensico Reservoir inlet . The two routes briefly overlap to cross the inlet on a causeway before splitting on the water body 's north shore . From here , NY 120 heads through substantially less developed , mostly wooded areas as it traverses the northeastern edge of the reservoir . 
 North of the reservoir , NY 120 crosses the northernmost part of the Bronx River and traverses the northeastern corner of the town of Mount Pleasant , where the woods give way to a handful of residential neighborhoods . The transition in surroundings continues into the adjacent town of New Castle , home to housing tracts that become less isolated as the road veers westward toward the hamlet of Chappaqua . NY 120 proceeds west through residential and commercial areas to Chappaqua 's central business district , where it meets the community 's main north – south route , NY 117 ( Bedford Road ) . NY 120 heads north through the center of Chappaqua , overlapping with NY 117 to reach another section of King Street one block to the north . Past NY 117 , NY 120 continues generally westward through Chappaqua , changing names to Quaker Road a short distance east of Chappaqua 's station on the Metro @-@ North Railroad 's Harlem Line . 
 After crossing the Harlem Line , the route dips under the Saw Mill River Parkway and intersects two parallel local streets leading to the parkway 's exit 32 . NY 120 turns northward here , crossing over the Saw Mill River and leaving Chappaqua for less densely populated areas of the town of New Castle . At 0 @.@ 6 miles ( 0 @.@ 97 km ) north of Chappaqua early 19th @-@ century farmhouses that clustered around the Quaker meeting house that was then the center of Chappaqua , line the road . Today these are listed on the National Register of Historic Places as the Old Chappaqua Historic District . 
 Roughly 1 @.@ 5 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) past the historic district , NY 120 makes a gradual turn to the west to reach a junction with NY 133 ( Millwood Road ) . NY 120 turns onto NY 133 , following Millwood Road westward into the hamlet of Millwood and its commercial center . Here , the two routes cross the right @-@ of @-@ way of the former Putnam Division of the New York Central Railroad and pass by the site of Millwood 's station , which was demolished in May 2012 after years of neglect . Just after the railroad right @-@ of @-@ way , NY 133 turns southwestward onto Station Place while NY 120 proceeds northwest as Millwood Road for one more sparsely developed block before terminating at a junction with NY 100 ( Saw Mill River Road ) at the northern edge of the hamlet . 
 = = History = = 
 The segment of modern NY 120 between Westchester Avenue and the north end of the overlap with NY 22 was originally designated as part of Route 1 , an unsigned legislative route , by the New York State Legislature in 1908 . Route 1 approached Purchase Street from the west on Westchester Avenue and continued north from Armonk on what is now NY 22 . NY 120 , meanwhile , was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York to the portion of its modern alignment north of the junction of Purchase Street and Westchester Avenue ( then NY 119 ) in Harrison . It was extended south to US 1 in Rye c . 1938 by way of Purchase Street and Highland Road . 
 NY 120 was altered again by the following year to follow NY 119 east along Westchester Avenue to US 1 in Port Chester . Most of NY 120 's former routing south of Westchester Avenue became part of NY 119A , a new route assigned to all of Purchase Street between NY 119 and NY 120 in Harrison and US 1 in Rye . NY 120 was realigned once more c . 1961 to follow Purchase Street south to Rye , supplanting NY 119A . At the same time , NY 119 was truncated on its east end to Purchase Street while the portion of Westchester Avenue that had carried NY 119 and NY 120 between Purchase Street and Port Chester became an extension of NY 120A . 
 The two @-@ lane bridge carrying NY 120 over the Metro @-@ North Railroad in Chappaqua was rebuilt as a four @-@ lane bridge in 2012 for $ 19 million . Once completed , the bridge was named the SSG Kyu Hyuk Chay Memorial Bridge in memory of Army Staff Sergeant Kyu Chay , whose family owns a dry cleaning business adjacent to the bridge . A plaque was also erected in his honor at the war memorial by the Chappaqua train station . Chay , a Special Forces linguist and Korean immigrant , was three credits shy of his law degree at Brooklyn Law School when he was killed in Afghanistan . 
 = = Suffixed routes = = 
 NY 120 once had two suffixed routes ; only one still exists . 
 NY 120A ( 8 @.@ 55 miles or 13 @.@ 76 kilometres ) is an alternate route of NY 120 between Harrison and North Castle . The northern half of the route straddles the New York – Connecticut state line , and two portions of the route are physically located in Connecticut . It was assigned c . 1931 . 
 NY 120B was an alternate route of NY 120 between Rye and North Castle . It was assigned by 1932 and partially replaced by NY 120A c . 1939 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Westchester County . 
 = Marry Me a Little , Marry Me a Little More = 
 " Marry Me a Little , Marry Me a Little More " is a double @-@ length episode of the American television series Will & Grace 's fifth season . It was written by Jeff Greenstein and Bill Wrubel and directed by series producer James Burrows . The episode originally aired on the National Broadcasting Company ( NBC ) in the United States on November 21 , 2002 . Guest stars in " Marry Me a Little , Marry Me a Little More " include Harry Connick , Jr . , Katie Couric , Judith Ivey , and Debbie Reynolds . 
 The episode focuses on Grace ( played by Debra Messing ) impulsively accepting a marriage proposal from her boyfriend Leo ( Harry Connick , Jr . ) despite that the two have only known each other for a short time . They get married and tell their friends about the news , despite Grace 's best friend Will 's ( Eric McCormack ) unease about the whole idea . Grace and Leo decide to host a wedding reception for themselves , but at the festivity , Grace learns unsettling details about Leo , which gives her reason to wonder if she has made a mistake . 
 Before the episode aired , some critics worried that bringing Leo into the storyline would disrupt the friendship between Will and Grace . Co @-@ creator David Kohan , however , believed the two characters had to " move on forward in their lives in some way " , and sought to assure the worrying critics that a third individual added to the mix would be unlikely to replace Will as the best friend of Grace . NBC was also in full support of creating a triangle between the three characters , stating that it was a way for the producers to find a new " spark " for the series . 
 Once the episode aired , it received generally mixed reviews from television critics . Despite this , " Marry Me a Little , Marry Me a Little More " was watched by 24 @.@ 3 million households in its original airing , according to Nielsen ratings . The episode also garnered Will & Grace 's second @-@ largest audience ever among adults aged 18 to 49 . The Nation magazine commented that this was the first time that a prime @-@ time sitcom showed a Jewish protagonist ( Grace ) marrying inside the faith . 
 = = Plot = = 
 When Grace ( Debra Messing ) and her boyfriend Leo ( Harry Connick , Jr . ) take a walk around Central Park , they notice a tent and a van parked nearby , after a bride and groom ran past them . Eager to know what is happening , Grace stops by the van , sees Katie Couric , and asks her what is going on . Katie tells Grace that The Today Show is having massive televised weddings in the park for ratings sweeps week . When Katie asks Grace and Leo if they would like to get married , Leo says yes , but Grace believes he is being sarcastic , only later realizing that he is serious . Leo explains to Grace that because they originally met in a park , they should also get married in a park . Leo proposes and Grace accepts , despite that the two have only known each other for two months . 
 Upon arriving at Will 's ( Eric McCormack ) apartment , Grace and Leo reveal to their friends , Will , Jack ( Sean Hayes ) , and Karen ( Megan Mullally ) , that they have gotten married . The friends ' reactions to the news are not positive ; in particular , Grace 's gay best friend Will is uneasy about the whole idea . Leo and Grace , however , assure Will that they will have a wedding reception in honor of him , which improves Will 's relationship with both Grace and Leo . 
 During the reception , Grace learns many things she did not know about Leo , including that his first name is Marvin ( revealed by his mother , Eleanor ( Judith Ivey ) ) . So many unsettling details about Leo come to light that Grace becomes uneasy and leaves the reception ; Leo follows her . The two run into Katie in the lobby who tells them that The Today Show has scrapped the wedding segment because the judge who performed the ceremony was not licensed in New York so their marriage is not valid . Upon learning this , Grace tells Leo that she needs time to think about their relationship . Leo returns to the reception and announces to everyone that his marriage to Grace is not legitimate . Grace returns to the reception later , and reveals that she does want to marry Leo . 
 At a Jewish synagogue , where Grace and Leo 's wedding is to take place , Grace learns from her mother , Bobbi ( Debbie Reynolds ) , that her father will not be able to walk her down the aisle . Grace panics , but Karen suggests that Will should walk with her instead . She agrees and calls upon him . Although Will at first declines to give her away because of the prior argument , they make up and he finally escorts her down the aisle . After the wedding reception , Will , Grace , Leo , Jack , and Karen walk through Central Park enjoying Grace and Leo 's marriage . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Marry Me a Little , Marry Me a Little More " was written by Jeff Greenstein and Bill Wrubel and was directed by series producer James Burrows . It was the one @-@ hundredth episode of Will & Grace , and the producers celebrated the milestone by planning an hour @-@ long episode followed by a clip show featuring highlights and outtakes from past seasons . In an interview with The Jewish Journal in 2001 , David Kohan , the co @-@ creator of Will & Grace , in discussing the lead characters , stated that a marriage could be a problem for the dynamic between the two characters : " I 'd love for [ Grace ] to find a Jewish love interest , but that relationship might actually work , and then there 'd be no more ' Will & Grace ' . " Kohan , however , changed his mind by the time of a follow @-@ up interview in 2002 : he noted that the characters had to " move on forward in their lives in some way " and it would be unlikely that Grace 's possible husband would displace her gay best friend , Will . In July 2002 , reports surfaced that a possible wedding involving Grace would happen , but the staff were not allowed to reveal anything . 
 Musician Harry Connick , Jr . , was cast in the role of Leo . He received a call from co @-@ creators Kohan and Max Mutchnick asking him to appear on Will & Grace , and agreed to do it after learning that it was his wife 's favorite show . According to Debra Messing , who plays Grace , Kohan and Mutchnick had a specific vision of Grace 's husband from the start . They thought it was important that Grace meet a " <unk> , nice Jewish man who happens to be a hottie , and that 's what we got with Harry Connick Jr , " she said . According to The Nation magazine , this was the first time that a prime @-@ time sitcom showed a Jewish protagonist ( Grace ) marrying inside the faith . Connick , who is part @-@ Jewish , said he enjoyed the fact that he was not asked to sing on the show , because " it throws you out of character a little bit when that stuff happens . It 's been great just doing the acting thing . " Messing , in discussing Grace and Leo 's relationship , commented that it is " unlike anything that Grace has ever been a part of before and just the little that we 've done so far , it feels wonderful to be playing with Harry . " In another interview , also discussing the characters ' relationship , she explained , " ... bringing Leo into it and making it a viable and potent relationship for Grace , that 's never happened before . I think she 's a little less frenetic and neurotic , and I think that really being in love markedly changes Grace . That sexual energy in a great way has shaken things up , because it is the greatest threat to the friendship of Will and Grace to date . " 
 Before the Grace and Leo storyline was written , NBC worried that the show 's characters never seemed to move forward or mature . They wanted the show to be more like Friends , which received higher ratings because of its romantic storyline cliffhangers . Greenstein commented that " there was an interchangeability among the episodes from season to season . We wanted to create more continuing story arcs ; we wanted to deepen the predicaments the characters are in , get the audience kind of rooting for something from week to week . " In November 2002 , negotiations were made for Connick to play a series regular on Will & Grace ; he originally signed on for only 13 episodes . Jeff Zucker , who at the time served as President of NBC Entertainment , commented that creating a triangle between Will , Grace , and Leo was a " brilliant " way to give the series a new spark . He was confident that it would be well received by the audience and the fans . 
 The episode was filmed over three days at the end of October and beginning of November 2002 . It was supposed to take only two days , but the filming of the wedding scenes was postponed after Messing got sick on the first day . On November 3 , 2002 , the rooftop terrace scene was filmed at the New York Palace Hotel . In November 2002 , the scene in Central Park was shot in New York . The wedding ceremony was filmed , in part , at Temple Israel of Hollywood . As the actors performed their lines in front of a studio audience , the writing staff stood behind the cameras taking notes in the script and watching the audience 's reaction to jokes . The writers often stopped the cameras and added new inflections to the dialog . According to the Knoxville News Sentinel 's Terry Morrow , the cast handled the changes quickly , and scenes were routinely redone up to three times even if the actors executed their lines properly . 
 Debbie Reynolds and Judith Ivey guest @-@ starred in the episode as the mothers of Grace and Leo , respectively . Reynolds had played Grace 's mother in the episode " The <unk> Mommy Adler " in season one , while Ivey played Connick 's mother in the previous episode , " The Needle and the Omelet 's Done " . Katie Couric portrayed herself in the episode . Vera Wang designed Grace 's wedding dress , which cost approximately $ 20 @,@ 000 . The show 's costume designer , Lori <unk> @-@ Carter , provided Sergio Rossi boots worth $ 1 @,@ 750 for the episode , while Grace 's jewelry was supplied by Martin Katz . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Marry Me a Little , Marry Me a Little More " brought in an average of 24 @.@ 3 million viewers during its original airing on November 21 , 2002 , the second @-@ largest audience ever for a Will & Grace episode ; as a result , CSI : Crime Scene Investigation received its smallest audience that season . The episode received an 11 @.@ 8 rating / 27 % share among viewers in the 18 @-@ 49 demographic , making it Will & Grace 's second @-@ largest audience ever in that demographic . Editor Peter Chakos was nominated for an Emmy Award in the category of " Outstanding Multi @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Series " at the 55th Primetime Emmy Awards . 
 The episode received a mixed reception from television critics . Alan Pergament of The Buffalo News commented that " like all hourlong episodes of comedies , this one becomes a little bloated in the middle . But it holds up for the most part and has some very funny and poignant moments , including an emotional rooftop scene between Will and Grace that defines their friendship . " Whitney Matheson of USA Today said she " was bored to tears " by the episode , while Jeffrey Robinson of DVD Talk thought it was a " fun episode " . Seth Davis of Sports Illustrated was not complimentary towards Connick , " Whoever came up with the idea to cast Connick on Will & Grace should be fired . " A writer from Entertainment Weekly , however , commented that Leo " fits right in to the antic Will & Grace world of Will , Grace , Jack , and Karen . " Matt Roush of TV Guide was not thrilled of the idea of Grace getting married , writing : " Well , is the show called Will & Grace & Leo ? I don 't think so . " The Star @-@ Ledger 's Alan Sepinwall commented that Will & Grace " has already been infected with a sense of <unk> and despair , as the writers try to top each other 's nasty one @-@ liners . A happy , healthy relationship could be just the cure for what 's ailing the one @-@ time Emmy winner . " 
 Bill Carroll , Vice President and Director for the Katz Television Group , a consulting firm , wondered where the show would head after Grace got married : " The real question now is , where is the critical development of that show going to be ? Now that they 've married her off , where is the show 's focus ? " The Hartford Courant 's Roger Catlin did not think Grace 's and Leo 's marriage would last long . " Are we to believe Will & Grace will now be about a married woman , her husband and her gay roommate ? That they 'll all still live together ? That Connick will no longer have merely special @-@ guest status ? The inevitable breakup and annulment to come are as obvious as the sweeps @-@ timing of the ceremony . " 
 = Framingham Railroad Station = 
 Framingham Railroad Station is a historic Boston and Albany Railroad station located in downtown Framingham , Massachusetts . Designed by noted American architect H. H. Richardson , it was one of the last of the railroad stations he designed in the northeastern United States to be built . The station , built in 1884 – 85 , served as a major stop on the B & A Main Line as well as a hub for branch lines to Milford , Mansfield , Fitchburg , and Lowell . After years of deterioration , the station was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1975 , and restored a decade later . 
 In 2001 , MBTA Framingham / Worcester Line and Amtrak operations were shifted to a new set of platforms nearby , which have high @-@ level sections for handicapped @-@ accessible boarding and a footbridge for crossing the tracks . This new Framingham station is among the busiest on the MBTA system , with 41 daily MBTA and 2 Amtrak trains on weekdays . The H. H. Richardson @-@ designed station building remains largely intact and is currently used as a restaurant . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Boston and Worcester Railroad = = = 
 The Boston and Worcester Railroad , which had opened from Boston to Newton in April 1834 , opened to South Framingham in August 1834 . The village 's first major station , a 2 @-@ story wooden Dutch Colonial structure , was constructed in 1848 . After being replaced , it was moved slightly west and converted to a freight house – a function it served until it was demolished in the 1960s . 
 Over the next several decades , South Framingham became an important regional rail hub . The Boston and Worcester built its 12 @-@ mile Milford Branch from South Framingham to Milford via <unk> in 1848 . The next year , the B & W built a short branch to Framingham Center , which the B & W mainline had bypassed . This line , later called the Agricultural Branch Railroad , was realigned near Framingham Center and extended to <unk> Junction in Sterling in 1855 . Franklin Street was built on the former branch right of way . The Agricultural Branch and the Framingham & Lowell ( which branched off it at Framingham Center ) were the northernmost section of the Old Colony Railroad , which took over the lines in 1879 . 
 The Old Colony 's access to South Framingham was the Mansfield & Framingham , which opened in 1870 and was also acquired in 1879 . By the time of the Old Colony takeover , South Framingham featured the 1848 @-@ built station , a freight house , a car house , and three separate engine houses serving the various branch lines . Through service on the mainline operated as far as Albany ; the B & W had joined with the Western Railroad in 1867 to become the Boston and Albany Railroad . Framingham began to be used occasionally as a short turn terminus for Boston @-@ bound commuter trains in the early 1860s and continuously as such after 1864 . As of August 2015 , a small number of Framingham / Worcester Line trains are short @-@ turned at Framingham . 
 = = = H. H. Richardson depot = = = 
 Beginning in 1881 , the Boston & Albany began a massive improvement program that included the building of over 30 new stations along its main line as well as the Highland Branch , which it bought in 1883 . Famed architect H. H. Richardson was hired to design nine of these stations , including South Framingham which was commissioned in October 1883 . The $ 62 @,@ 718 station , built in 1884 – 85 by the Norcross Brothers company , was the largest and costliest of the nine . The station is a prime example of the Richardsonian Romanesque style , built of rough @-@ hewn granite with contrasting details . The dominant roofline , dormers , arched bow window , and wooden interior are typical of the style . Like many of Richardson 's designs , the station was well @-@ praised ; Henry @-@ Russell Hitchcock called it a " better and somewhat more personal work " in The Architecture of H. H. Richardson and His Time . A small square baggage room was built in the same style just east of the station , near the Concord Street ( Route 126 ) grade crossing . 
 The station 's importance remained through the first half of the 20th century . After the Boston & Albany was acquired by the New York Central Railroad in 1900 , third and fourth tracks were extended in 1907 to South Framingham from Lake Crossing station in Wellesley . In 1911 , the NYC considered laying third rail on the main line as far as South Framingham , as well as on the Highland Branch , to allow more frequent electric service on the lines . This would have been the only electrified commuter service directly into Boston , as neither the later @-@ electrified Boston , Revere Beach and Lynn Railroad nor experimental electric service on the South Shore Railroad went directly to downtown . However , the plan was abandoned because the infrastructure cost would have exceeded the annual savings on fuel . ( In 1959 , the Highland Branch received catenary wire and was turned into the Green Line " D " Branch ) . 
 Due in no small part to the presence of the station , South Framingham eclipsed Framingham Center in size ; by the 1940s , the village and the station were simply known as Framingham . Traffic on the B & A and its various branch lines , though , had been decreasing since World War I. In 1919 , Agricultural Branch trains were cut to Framingham requiring a transfer to continue Boston or Mansfield . The line was cut back to Marlborough in 1931 , and passenger service ended in 1937 . Passenger service on the Mansfield & Framingham ended in 1933 . The Milford Branch lasted the longest of the Boston & Albany branch lines ; it was cut to one daily trip in 1953 and terminated in April 1959 . 
 = = = MBTA era = = = 
 In January 1960 , the New York Central planned to end all service on the line , due to the opening of the Green Line " D " Branch to Riverside in July 1959 . However , that April , following public outcry over the planned discontinuation of service , the railroad was ordered to continue limited service , leaving Framingham with 8 daily round trips . When the extension of the Massachusetts Turnpike to downtown Boston began in 1961 , the third and fourth tracks were removed . The NYC merged into Penn Central in 1968 ; by 1969 , Framingham saw just 4 daily round trips . 
 The MBTA began subsidizing service as far as Framingham in January 1973 ; the last Worcester round trip ended on October 27 , 1975 , leaving Framingham as the terminus of the line . The modern Amtrak Lake Shore Limited was established 4 days later , and has provided intercity service via Framingham ever since . From 1996 to until their 2004 discontinuation , Amtrak Inland Route trains also stopped at Framingham . 
 By the 1970s , the station had fallen into disrepair ; part of the roof collapsed in 1978 . On January 17 , 1975 , the building was added to the National Register of Historic Places as Framingham Railroad Station . The building was restored in 1985 , and has been occupied by various restaurants since . The original interior is no longer extant , but the exterior is mostly complete . The small baggage office east of the station building has been converted into a bank ATM . 
 When the Needham Line was closed in October 1979 for Southwest Corridor construction , service on the Framingham line was increased considerably as partial compensation . By April 1984 , the MBTA operated 12 @.@ 5 daily round trips from Framingham . Service was restored to Worcester on September 26 , 1994 as mitigation for delays in reopening the Old Colony Lines ( the first two of which finally opened in September 1997 ) – the first time in 19 years that commuter rail service extended beyond Framingham . 
 = = = New station = = = 
 The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 mandated that all new construction on transit stations including making the stations handicapped accessible . Because the 1885 depot is very close to the tracks , such upgrades at the old station location would have been difficult . New platforms , with mini @-@ high platforms on their west ends for level boarding , were built just west of the former station . A footbridge with two elevators was built to allow passengers to reach the outbound platform without crossing the tracks , which carry slow @-@ moving CSX freight service as well as MBTA and Amtrak trains . The new station was built in 2000 and opened in early 2001 . 
 Framingham currently sees 24 weekday MBTA round trips to Boston , with 8 to 9 round trips on weekends . On weekdays , Framingham is the only station west of Yawkey at which all trains stop . Most trains run to / from Worcester , but some terminate at Framingham instead . Average weekday inbound ridership is 1 @,@ 299 passengers , making Framingham the second @-@ busiest station on the line ( after Worcester ) . Framingham also has Amtrak intercity service via the daily Lake Shore Limited , which runs to Chicago 's Union Station via Albany – Rensselaer . 
 = = = Grade crossings = = = 
 The crossings at Beaver Street and Concord Street ( Route 126 ) near the station are the first grade crossings on the line heading westbound ; there are only three others on the largely grade @-@ separated line east of Worcester . The Concord Street crossing was one of the last in the state with a crossing guard ; he was replaced by an automated system in 1986 . The crossing is problematic because passing freight trains often result in delays both on Route 126 , as well as Route 135 which crosses it just south of the tracks . The frequent blockage of the crossing by passing trains reduces capacity in the intersection by 21 % during the morning rush and 16 % in the afternoon , resulting in delays and traffic jams in the downtown area . Increased service levels planned by the MBTA would result in morning capacity reduction of 34 % and afternoon reduction of 28 % . 
 The first discussion of improving the intersection and grade crossing was a study in 1898 , since which there have been about three dozen more . The most recent , a 2009 study of the downtown area , examined the possibility of depressing Route 126 under the grade crossing and intersection as well as several other alternatives including bypasses . The Route 126 depression was deemed to create barriers to <unk> downtown , and the recommended alternative was to depress Route 135 under the intersection to prevent it from being affected by trains passing through the grade crossing . 
 Funds have not yet become available for final design and construction . 
 = = = Other Framingham stations = = = 
 Besides the main depot at the South Framingham junction , Framingham has been served by a number of stations inside or just outside its borders . The Agricultural Branch included three of these stations . One , variously known as Montwait , Mt . Wayte , and Lakeview , was located just north of Mt . Wayte Avenue at the north end of Farm Pond . The station served the Montwait neighborhood as well as the Montwait Camp Ground , a worship camp used by Methodist , <unk> , and later Pentecostal groups from the 1870s to the 1910s . The Framingham Centre station – at times known simply as Framingham – located at Maynard Street adjacent to Route 9 . It was opened in 1849 when the branch to Framingham Center was completed . A new station was built in 1855 when the branch was realigned and extended . It also served the Framingham & Lowell after that line opened in 1871 . A freight house and coal shed were located nearby to the north . <unk> station was located just over the Southborough border in the <unk> village and also served the western reaches of Framingham . The station was placed at Central Street between Route 9 and Route 30 at or after the 1855 opening of the line . The three stations closed with the end of passenger service on the branch in 1937 ; none of the buildings remain . 
 The Framingham & Lowell shared the South Framingham and Framingham Centre stations after its 1871 opening . An additional station , variously known as North Framingham and Nobscot , was located between Water Street and Edgell road , near the modern Nobscot Shopping Center . The station closed with the end of passenger service in the 1930s and was later destroyed . The former Nobscot post office and library building , which also served as a railroad ticket sales office , has been restored near its original site . 
 The Saxonville Branch – the only line in Framingham not connected to South Framingham – opened from Natick to Saxonville in July 1846 . Two stations on the branch line were in Framingham . <unk> station was at Commonwealth Road ( Route 30 ) on Framingham 's eastern border with Natick . The terminus station at Saxonville was a " typical B & A granite station " located off Concord Street north of School Street ( Route 126 ) . The lightly @-@ used line never saw more than three daily round trips ; in 1936 , passenger service was discontinued . A " bus " – in reality , a car driven by the Saxonville station agent – ran to Natick station until 1943 . Neither station is extant , but the Saxonville roof may have been reused on a nearby carriage house which still stands . 
 No stations other than the South Framingham hub were located on the Boston & Albany mainline within Framingham . The stations in Ashland ( still @-@ extant downtown station closed in 1960 ; nearby park @-@ and @-@ ride station opened in 2002 ) and West Natick ( opened 1982 ) serve some peripheral sections of Framingham . 
 = = Bus connections = = 
 Eight of the 17 bus routes operated by the MetroWest Regional Transit Authority ( MWRTA ) serve Framingham station . Five routes stop at the " banana lot " , a curved parking lot on the north side of the tracks : 
 Route 2 
 Route 3 
 Route 4 
 Route 7 
 Framingham Commuter Shuttle 
 One route stops on Concord Street at Howard Street : 
 <unk> Commuter Shuttle 
 Two routes stop on Waverly Street on the south side of the tracks : 
 Route 5 
 Route 6 
 The central hub for the MWRTA is the Blandin Hub in Framingham , a 3 @,@ 000 foot ( 910 m ) walk from Framingham station . Six of the MWRTA 's numbered routes plus the Boston Hospital Shuttle serve Blandin Hub . Three numbered routes , all five commuter shuttles , and the Boston Hospital Shuttle serve Waverly Hub , 1 mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) to the east of the station . 
 = = = Modern station = = = 
 Amtrak – Stations – Framingham , MA 
 MBTA – Framingham 
 Great American Stations – Framingham , MA ( FRA ) 
 Framingham Amtrak @-@ MBTA Station ( USA <unk> – <unk> ) 
 Modern station on Google Maps Street View 
 = = = 1885 station = = = 
 Historic American Buildings Survey entry with pictures and data pages 
 Framingham Railroad Station at Northeast Architecture 
 1885 station on Google Maps Street View 
 = Siege of Tyana = 
 A Siege of Tyana was carried out by the Umayyad Caliphate in 707 – 708 / 708 – 709 in retaliation for a heavy defeat of an Umayyad army under Maimun the Mardaite by the Byzantine Empire in c . 706 . The Arab army invaded Byzantine territory and laid siege to the city in summer 707 or 708 . In fact virtually each of the extant Greek , Arabic and Syriac parallel sources has in this respect a different date . Tyana initially withstood the siege with success , and the Arab army faced great hardship during the ensuing winter . Emperor Justinian II sent a relief army in the next spring , but the Umayyads defeated them , whereupon the inhabitants of the city were forced to surrender . Despite the agreement of terms , the city was plundered and largely destroyed , and according to Byzantine sources its people were made captive and deported , leaving the city deserted . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 692 / 693 , the Byzantine emperor Justinian II ( reigned 685 – 695 and 705 – 711 ) and the Umayyad Caliph Abd al @-@ Malik ( r . 685 – 705 ) broke the truce that had existed between Byzantium and the Umayyad Caliphate since 679 , following the failed Muslim attack on the Byzantine capital , Constantinople . The Byzantines secured great financial and territorial advantages from the truce , which they extended further by exploiting the Umayyad government 's involvement in the Second Muslim Civil War ( 680 – 692 ) . However , by 692 the Umayyads were clearly emerging as the victors in the conflict , and Abd al @-@ Malik consciously began a series of provocations to bring about a resumption of warfare . Justinian , confident in his own strength based on his previous successes , responded in kind . Finally , the Umayyads claimed that the Byzantines had broken the treaty and invaded Byzantine territory , defeating the imperial army at the Battle of <unk> in 693 . In its aftermath , the Arabs quickly regained control over Armenia and resumed their attacks into the border zone of eastern Asia Minor , that would culminate in the second attempt to conquer Constantinople in 716 – 718 . Furthermore , Justinian was deposed in 695 , beginning a twenty @-@ year period of internal instability that almost brought the Byzantine state to its knees . 
 = = Arab campaign against Tyana = = 
 As part of these Arab raids , an invasion under a certain Maimun al @-@ <unk> ( " Maimun the Mardaite " ) took place , which raided Cilicia and was defeated by a Byzantine army under a general named Marianus near Tyana . The dating of this expedition is unclear ; although the primary account , by al @-@ Baladhuri , places it under Abd al @-@ Malik ( who died in 705 ) , it is commonly dated to 706 by modern scholars . According to Baladhuri , this Maimun had been a slave of Caliph Muawiyah 's sister , who had fled to the Mardaites , a group of Christian rebels in northern Syria . After the Mardaites had been subdued , the general Maslama ibn Abd al @-@ Malik , who had heard of his valour , liberated him and entrusted him with a military command , and later swore to avenge his death . 
 As a result , Maslama launched another attack aimed at Tyana , with his nephew al @-@ Abbas ibn al @-@ Walid as co @-@ commander . The chronology of the expedition is again unclear : the Byzantine chronicler Theophanes the Confessor puts it in A.M. <unk> ( 708 / 709 AD , and possibly even 709 / 710 ) , but Arab sources date it to A.H. 88 and 89 ( 706 / 707 AD and 707 / 708 AD respectively ) . As a result , the siege has been variously dated to 707 – 708 AD and 708 – 709 AD . 
 The Arabs laid siege to the city , employing siege engines to bombard its fortifications . They managed to destroy part of the wall , but were unable to enter the city . Despite launching several assaults , the defenders successfully drove them back . The siege continued into winter , and the Arabs began to suffer greatly from shortage of food , so that they began contemplating abandoning the siege altogether . In the spring , however , Justinian II , who had been restored to the Byzantine throne in 705 , assembled a relief army under the generals Theodore <unk> and Theophylact <unk> and sent it towards Tyana . The Byzantine chroniclers record that the regular troops were complemented by armed peasants , numerous but lacking in any military experience . This may point to the dire straits the regular Byzantine army was in , partly as a result of Justinian 's purge of the officer corps after his restoration and partly due to the losses suffered in the war with the Bulgars . 
 As the relief army approached Tyana , it was confronted by the Arabs , and in the ensuing battle , the Byzantines were routed . According to Theophanes , the two Byzantine generals quarrelled among themselves , and their attack was disorderly . The Byzantines lost many thousand dead , and the captives also numbered in the thousands . The Arabs captured the Byzantine camp and took all the provisions they had brought along for the beleaguered city , allowing them to continue the siege . The inhabitants of Tyana now despaired of any succour , and as their own supplies dwindled they began negotiations for a surrender . The Arabs promised to allow them to depart unharmed , and the city capitulated after a siege of nine months ( in March according to Michael the Syrian , in May – June according to al @-@ Tabari ) . Theophanes reports that the Arabs broke their promise and enslaved the entire population , which was deported to the Caliphate , but no other source confirms this . After looting the town , the Arabs razed it to the ground . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The chroniclers report that after sacking Tyana , Abbas and Maslama divided their forces and campaigned in Byzantine territory . Again the chronology , as well as the identity of the targets , is uncertain . The primary sources give 709 or 710 as the dates , which could mean that these raids happened in the immediate aftermath of Tyana or in the year after . Abbas raided Cilicia and from there turned west as far as Dorylaion , while Maslama seized the fortresses of <unk> and Heraclea <unk> near Tyana , or , according to another interpretation of the Arabic sources , marched also west and took Heraclea Pontica and Nicomedia , while some of his troops raided Chrysopolis across from Constantinople itself . Arab raids continued for the next years , and were carried out even while a huge army under Maslama was besieging Constantinople in 717 – 718 . After the failure of this undertaking , Arab attacks continued , but they were now concerned with plunder and prestige , rather than outright conquest . Although the Umayyad attacks of the early 8th century were successful in gaining control of the border districts of Cilicia and the region around Melitene , and despite their destruction of Byzantine strongholds like Tyana in the following decades , the Arabs were never able to permanently establish a presence west of the Taurus Mountains , which thus came to delineate the Arab @-@ Byzantine frontier for the next two centuries . 
 = James T. Aubrey = 
 James Thomas Aubrey , Jr . ( December 14 , 1918 – September 3 , 1994 ) was a leading American television and film executive . President of the CBS television network from 1959 to 1965 , he put some of television 's most enduring series on the air , including Gilligan 's Island and The Beverly Hillbillies . Under Aubrey , CBS dominated American television the way General Motors and General Electric dominated their industries . The New York Times Magazine in 1964 called Aubrey " a master of programming whose divinations led to successes that are breathtaking " . 
 Aubrey replaced CBS Television president Louis Cowan , who was slowly dismissed after the quiz show scandals . Despite his successes in television , Aubrey 's abrasive personality and oversized ego – " Picture Machiavelli and Karl Rove at a University of Colorado football recruiting party " wrote Variety in 2004 – led to his firing from CBS amid charges of improprieties . " The circumstances rivaled the best of CBS adventure or mystery shows , " declared The New York Times in its front @-@ page story on his firing , which came on " the sunniest Sunday in February " 1965 . He earned the nickname " Smiling Cobra " for his brutal decision @-@ making ways . Aubrey governed CBS with a firm grip , and it did not go unnoticed . He was suddenly dismissed in February 1965 . Aubrey offered no explanation following his dismissal , nor did CBS President Frank Stanton or Board Chairman William Paley . After four years as an independent producer , Aubrey was hired by financier Kirk Kerkorian in 1969 to preside over Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer 's near @-@ total shutdown , during which he slashed the budget and alienated producers and directors but brought profits to a company that had suffered huge losses . In 1973 , Aubrey resigned from MGM , declaring his job was done , and then vanished into almost total obscurity for the last two decades of his life . 
 Hollywood executive Sherry Lansing , a close friend of Aubrey 's for two decades , told the Los Angeles Times in 1986 : 
 Jim is different . He does his own dirty work . Jim is one of those people who are willing to say , " I didn 't like your movie . " <unk> is disarming to people who are used to sugar @-@ coating . It 's tough for people who need approval to see somebody who doesn 't . Myths and legends begin to surround that kind of person . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Born in LaSalle , Illinois , James Thomas Steven Aubrey was the eldest of four sons of James Thomas Aubrey , Sr. , an advertising executive with the Chicago firm of Aubrey , Moore , and Wallace ; and his wife , the former Mildred Stever . He grew up in the affluent Chicago suburb of Lake Forest and attended Lake Forest Academy , Phillips Exeter Academy in Exeter , New Hampshire , and Princeton University . All four boys , James , Stever , David , and George , went to Lake Forest Academy , Exeter and Princeton ; his brother Stever became a successful advertising man at J. Walter Thompson before heading the F. William Free agency . While at Princeton all four brothers were members of the Tiger Inn eating club . " My father insisted on accomplishment , " Aubrey recalled in 1986 . In college , Aubrey was a star on the football team , playing left end . He graduated in 1941 with honors in English and entered the United States Army Air Forces . During his service in World War II , Aubrey rose to the rank of major and taught military flying to actor James Stewart , who was a licensed civilian pilot . 
 While stationed in southern California , he met Phyllis Thaxter ( born November 20 , 1921 ) , an actress signed to MGM , whom he married in November 1944 . Thaxter 's first role was as Ted Lawson 's wife in Thirty Seconds Over Tokyo ( 1944 ) , and her final film was as Martha , in the 1978 Superman . They had two children , Susan Schuyler " Skye " Aubrey ( born c . 1946 ) and James Watson Aubrey ( born c . 1953 ) . The marriage ended in divorce in 1962 . 
 Aubrey was " 6 @-@ foot 2 @-@ inch with an incandescent smile " with " unrevealing polar blue eyes , " said The New York Times Magazine in 1964 . The next year Life Magazine described him as " youthful , handsome , brainy , with an incandescent smile , a quiet , somewhat salty wit and , when he cared to turn it on , considerable charm . He was always fastidiously turned out , from his Jerry the Barber haircut to his CBS @-@ eye cuff links . " One producer said , " Aubrey is one of the most <unk> curious guys I know . " 
 = = = Enters broadcasting in radio = = = 
 After Aubrey was discharged from the Air Force , he stayed in southern California ; before his marriage , he intended to return to Chicago . In Los Angeles , he sold advertising for the Street & Smith and Condé Nast magazine companies . His first broadcasting job was as a salesman at the CBS radio station in Los Angeles , KNX , and soon went to the network 's new television station , <unk> . Within two years Aubrey had risen to be the network 's West Coast television programming chief . There he met Hunt Stromberg Jr . , and they developed the popular western Have Gun , Will Travel . They sent their idea to the network 's chief of programming , Hubbell Robinson , and as Oulahan and Lambert put it , " the rest is TV history . " Aubrey was promoted to manager of all television network programs , based in California , until he went to ABC in 1956 . 
 = = = Goes to ABC = = = 
 On December 16 , 1956 , American Broadcasting Company president Oliver E. Treyz announced Aubrey would immediately become the network 's head of programming and talent . ABC , the weakest of the three networks , was a perennial also @-@ ran with a weak roster of affiliates and programs , something comparable to the early days of the Fox Network . Aubrey later said " at that time , there was no ABC . The headquarters was an old riding stable . But I went because [ ABC chairman ] Leonard Goldenson in effect said , ' Look , I don 't know that much about TV , I 'm a lawyer . ' And he let me have autonomy . " 
 As vice president in charge of programs ( a title he gained before March 1957 ) , he brought to the air what he recalled as " wild , sexy , lively stuff , things that had never been done before , " shows such as Maverick , a western with James Garner , and 77 Sunset Strip , a detective show with Efrem Zimbalist Jr . ( However , by the time Strip went on the air in October 1958 , Aubrey had already left the network . ) Oulahan and Lambert said Aubrey scheduled " one lucrative show after another ... and for the first time the third network became a serious challenge to NBC and CBS . " Among the successes he scheduled were The Donna Reed Show , a domestic comedy ; The Rifleman , a western with Chuck Connors ; and The Real McCoys , a rural comedy with Walter Brennan and Richard Crenna . 
 = = CBS = = 
 Despite his success at ABC , Aubrey saw a limited future at the network and asked to return to CBS , doing so on April 28 , 1958 , initially as assistant to Frank Stanton , president of CBS , Inc . , the holding company which owned the network . ( Thomas W. Moore would take his ABC job . ) Aubrey was made vice president for creative services in April 1959 , replacing Louis G. Cowan , whom CBS promoted to network president . 
 Aubrey was named executive vice president on June 1 , 1959 , a newly created post that was the number @-@ two official at the network . His responsibilities encompassed general supervision of all departments of the CBS Television Network . On December 8 , 1959 , Cowan resigned , having been damaged from his connection to the quiz show scandals . ( He created the show The $ 64 @,@ 000 Question and owned the company which produced it for the network , though Cowan denied he knew anything about the rigging of the program . ) Cowan 's letter of resignation to Stanton declared , " you have made it impossible for me to continue . " Aubrey was named president the same day and elected to the board of directors on December 9 , 1959 . 
 = = = Named president = = = 
 Aubrey was president of the CBS Network for the next five years , and made it tremendously successful , substantially increasing ratings and doubling the company 's profits . In the 1963 – 64 season , all twelve of the top daytime programs and fourteen of the top fifteen prime @-@ time shows were on CBS – the lone evening exception was NBC 's Bonanza , ranked number two . After he was fired , journalists Richard Oulahan and William Lambert wrote in a Life Magazine profile : 
 In the long history of human communications , from tom @-@ tom to Telstar , no one man ever had a lock on such enormous audiences as James Thomas Aubrey , Jr. during his five @-@ year tenure as head of the Columbia Broadcasting System 's television network ... He was the world 's No. 1 purveyor of entertainment . 
 = = = Aubrey 's formula = = = 
 His formula was characterized by a CBS executive as " broads , bosoms , and fun , " resulting in such shows as The Beverly Hillbillies and Gilligan 's Island , despised by the critics – and CBS chairman William S. Paley – but extremely popular with viewers . While Aubrey had a great feel for what would be successful with viewers , he had nothing but contempt for them . " The American public is something I fly over , " he said . His former boss at ABC , Oliver E. Treyz , said at programming " Jim Aubrey was one of the most effective ever , from the standpoint of delivering what the public wanted and making money . He was the best program judge in the business . " 
 Aubrey said in 1986 of Paley and his programming choices : 
 I 'd gone to CBS , and I 'd become convinced Beverly Hillbillies was going to work . Bill Paley wasn 't convinced . Bill has this great sense of propriety . Putting aside the <unk> and all the other great names of broadcasting , Paley stood – stands – head and shoulders above everyone else . He had this blasting genius of instinctively looking at a show and knowing if it should be on the air . He could also be ruthless and distant ... But Bill was intuitive about both the business and creative sides of TV . And he genuinely disliked Beverly Hillbillies . I put it on the schedule anyway . 
 " The hucksters ' huckster , " David Halberstam labeled him , " whose greatest legacy to television was a program called The Beverly Hillbillies , a series so demented and tasteless that it boggles the mind " Columnist Murray Kempton described The Beverly Hillbillies as , " a confrontation of the characters of John Steinbeck with the environment of Spyros Skouras , " the extravagant chairman of Twentieth Century Fox . But regardless of what anyone said about Hillbillies , the public loved it . The Nielsen ratings showed 57 million were watching the show – one in three Americans . 
 When Skouras was forced out of Fox by the company 's board of directors in July 1962 , Aubrey was widely mentioned to be his successor , but he openly denied he had any intention of leaving CBS . 
 Another part of Aubrey 's formula was making sure that the commercial interests of CBS 's sponsors were kept foremost in their minds . In 1960 he elaborated on this idea more when he told The Office of Network Study : 
 " There is relatively little that is incompatible between our objectives and the objectives of the advertisers .... Before sponsorship of a program series commences there is often a meeting between production personnel and representatives of the advertiser at which time the general areas of the advertiser 's interest and general attitudes are discussed . A breakfast food advertiser may , for example , wish to make sure the programs do not contain elements that make breakfast distasteful . A cigarette manufacturer would not wish to have cigarette smoking depicted in an unattractive manner . Normally , as long as these considerations do not limit creativity , they will be adhered to . " 
 = = = Influence on the competition = = = 
 CBS 's dominance was so great that when the fall schedules were announced , ABC and NBC would wait until CBS announced its plans before making their own announcements , effectively making Aubrey programmer for all three networks . CBS had great success with rural @-@ themed programs such as the Hillbillies , The Andy Griffith Show , Mister Ed , Green Acres , and Petticoat Junction . Yet another CBS hit Paley hated was The Munsters , part of a trend of fantasy shows at the time that included CBS 's My Favorite Martian and Gilligan 's Island . Aubrey 's " unwritten code " for programs was described in Life : 
 Feed the public little more than rural comedies , fast @-@ moving detective dramas and , later , sexy dolls . No old people ; the emphasis was on youth . No domestic servants , the mass audience wouldn 't identify with maids . No serious problems to cope with . Every script had to be full of action . No physical infirmities . 
 Life acknowledged there were exceptions , such as The Defenders with E.G. Marshall and Robert Reed as socially conscious attorneys , and quoted Aubrey 's defense to charges of pandering to the public . " I felt that we had an obligation to reach the vast majority of most of the people , " he said . " We made an effort to continue purposeful drama on TV , but we found out that people just don 't want an anthology . They would rather tune in on Lucy . " 
 In 1962 , a United States Senate committee investigating juvenile delinquency held hearings on sex on television and called executives from the three networks . The chairman , Senator Thomas J. Dodd ( D @-@ Connecticut ) , blasted " an unmistakable pattern " and informed the executives " you all seem to use the same terminology – to think alike – and to jam this stuff down the people 's throat . " Dodd accused Aubrey of putting " prurient sex " in the CBS program Route 66 to boost ratings , and confronted him with the " bosoms , broads , and fun " quotation from a memorandum by CBS executive Howard G. Barnes following a meeting with the program 's producers . Aubrey denied saying the phrase . He said that people in the business often shorthanded " wholesome , pretty girls " as " broads " , and " attractive " as " bosoms " . Another memo summarizing the same meeting , written by Screen Gems executive William Dozier , read as follows : " There is not enough sex in the programs . Neither lead has gotten involved even for a single episode with the normal wants of a young man , namely to get involved with a girl or even to kiss her . " 
 = = = " The Smiling Cobra " = = = 
 Aubrey was a controlling man and a workaholic , putting in twelve @-@ hour days six days a week . He endlessly read scripts , screened episodes , and ordered reshoots or changes made in the furniture and dressing of a set . Murray Kempton wrote that he would see six movies every weekend and read three books on transcontinental flights . Kempton quoted a CBS executive saying : 
 He read everything . Like he saw every movie . But he had the smallest world there could be . He 'd watch a movie and , while everyone else was involved in the story , he 'd say out loud " that kid could be the lead in a television program . " He read everything sure . All the new fiction . What he didn 't like was Bellow , Updike , Cheever , Salinger , Capote , and Mailer . He didn 't know how to use them . 
 Kempton claimed Aubrey : 
 [ He ] was the fourth president of CBS @-@ TV as Caligula was the fourth of the twelve Caesars . Each carried the logic of his imperial authority as far as it could go . Each was deposed and disappeared suddenly leaving bad press behind him . 
 Oulahan and Lambert claimed " Aubrey exercised his tremendous power with the canny skill and the ruthlessness of a Tatar khan . " Aubrey 's treachery led the producer John Houseman in 1959 to dub him " The Smiling Cobra . " Houseman in public was less direct . In December 1962 , CBS announced it was spending $ 250 @,@ 000 an episode on Houseman 's hour @-@ long drama on American history for the next season , The Great Adventure , but on July 25 , 1963 , CBS announced Houseman had resigned . The producer told The New York Times " The kind of show they want is not what I wanted to produce " but attributed his departure to a simple difference of opinion , the Times reporter stating Houseman " expressed no criticism of CBS . " ( The show ran for one season , 1963 – 64 . ) 
 In Only You , Dick Daring ! , his humorous yet damning account of the five and a half months he spent trying to make a show with CBS for the 1963 – 64 season based on an idea of Aubrey 's about a county agent , writer Merle Miller described how Aubrey would simply walk out of meetings without offering any substantive comments on Miller 's program and the nineteen rewrites he did of the pilot episode . Miller was assured by other CBS executives that Aubrey 's silence meant things were fine – Kempton quoted a CBS producer telling Miller " this has nothing to do with a good script or a bad script . It has to do with pleasing one man , Jim Aubrey . Don 't ever forget it " – and Miller later learned of efforts by Aubrey to force him out . ( A pilot for the show , known as Calhoun and County Agent , to star Jackie Cooper and Barbara Stanwyck , was shot and put on the fall schedule , but the series was canceled before it ever aired . ) Miller quoted an independent producer : " Aubrey 's the most important man in television , in the history of television , maybe in the history of entertainment . He out @-@ Mayers Louis B. Mayer ten times over . " 
 = = = Abrasive toward many = = = 
 Aubrey 's success seemed to have gone to his head and he became even more arrogant . He was abusive to the network 's affiliates , advertisers , producers , and talent . Friends of Aubrey 's such as producers Dick <unk> of United Artists , Martin Ransohoff of Filmways , and David Susskind , who had each sold several series to CBS , suddenly found themselves shut out . " He 's a friend of mine , but he cut me stone cold last year , " Susskind said . " I was hanging there with my pants down , wondering what I 'd tell the stockholders . " Gossip columnist Liz Smith , who worked as CBS during Aubrey 's time there , called him a " a mean , hateful , truly scary , bad , outré guy . " 
 Garry Moore , a popular personality in the 1950s , wanted to make a comeback on CBS , but Aubrey casually dismissed him : " Not a chance . " ( Moore finally got his chance , long after Aubrey left the network , in the fall of 1966 , with a short @-@ lived revival of his weekly variety series ) . John Frankenheimer , critically acclaimed as the number one director of live TV dramas during the 1950s , was shown the exit door by Aubrey in 1960 . Frankenheimer was forced to find a new career as a movie director ( for which he is now arguably best known ) , although he had wanted to continue in television . In 1996 , during a personal appearance at the Museum of Television & Radio , Frankenheimer described Aubrey as " a barbarian . " 
 The star of CBS 's The Lucy Show had problems with Aubrey . " Lucille Ball couldn 't say his name without calling him an S.O.B. , " Stanton said – though Kempton quoted her after Aubrey 's firing as saying " he was the smartest one up there . " Aubrey fought with Red Skelton , Danny Thomas , Judy Garland and Arthur Godfrey as well . The treatment of Jack Benny was typical . 
 Aubrey first rescheduled Benny 's long @-@ running series without consulting the star . Benny , a good friend of Paley 's since he lured the comedian to CBS in 1948 , objected to his new lead @-@ in on Tuesdays for the 1963 – 64 season , Petticoat Junction , instead of the previous season 's The Red Skelton Hour . Then in the summer of 1963 , Aubrey told Benny his show would not be renewed at the end of the forthcoming season , Aubrey having decided that Benny was out of step with current tastes and no longer relevant . " You 're through , old man . " Aubrey told the star . Benny took his show to NBC , his home before 1948 , where it was cancelled after only one season , proving Aubrey 's point if not his tactics . 
 = = = <unk> alleged = = = 
 There were charges of favoritism in purchasing programs . Aubrey 's friend Keefe Brasselle , who had bit parts in several movies in the 1940s and 1950s and met Aubrey when they both worked at <unk> , had no experience as a producer . " A 1965 edition of George Raft , " said David Susskind , particularly apt as there were also rumors Brasselle had ties to the Mafia . Nevertheless , Aubrey scheduled three shows from Brasselle 's Richelieu Productions for the 1964 – 65 season , all without pilots , still an almost unheard @-@ of practice . ( The shows were The Baileys of Balboa , a sitcom with Paul Ford ; the newspaper drama The Reporter ; and The Cara Williams Show , a sitcom starring red @-@ head Williams , billed as the next Lucille Ball . ) Brasselle would personally supervise The Reporter , shot in New York City . Costs skyrocketed on Brasselle 's shows – after nine episodes , The Reporter was $ 450 @,@ 000 over budget – and all three bombed – The Reporter running only three months , Baileys until April 1965 ; and Cara Williams finishing the season . Aubrey was later asked why he aired three untested programs . " Arrogance , I guess " he responded . In his book The Other Glass <unk> , media critic Harlan Ellison alleges that a Mafia don had put out a contract on Aubrey for beating his daughter during consensual sex at a Las Vegas , Nevada hotel , and that Brasselle demanded the shows in exchange for his using his own Mafia connections to smooth things over . 
 But , as his critics acknowledged , Aubrey could be charming and go to great lengths to please talent . To keep Jackie Gleason happy when he moved his show from New York City to Miami Beach in 1963 , Aubrey had CBS buy Gleason 's futuristic home in Peekskill , New York – The New York Times called it " a flying @-@ saucer like cabana " – for $ 350 @,@ 000 . The network was still trying to sell it years later . 
 = = = News and sports = = = 
 Aubrey , who on May 9 , 1963 , warned the network 's affiliates the high cost of rights for professional sports could price them off television , nevertheless in January 1964 agreed to pay $ 28 @.@ 2 million to air the games of the National Football League for two years , seventeen games each season . " We know how much these games mean to the viewing audience , our affiliated stations , and the nation 's advertisers , " Aubrey told The New York Times . In April , he agreed to extend the deal for another year for a total of $ 31 @.@ 8 million . 
 In the spring of 1964 , The New York Times Magazine declared CBS " for the 10th year in a row ... was the undisputed champion of the television networks . " The Times quoted an analyst who said CBS was " almost comparable to what General Motors did in autos or what General Electric [ did ] in electrical equipment . " 
 Aubrey fought constantly with officials of CBS News , especially its chief , Fred W. Friendly , who was just as demanding and controlling as Aubrey . Friendly felt Aubrey was insufficiently concerned with public affairs and in his memoir , Due to Circumstances Beyond Our Control , recounts one budget meeting at CBS when Aubrey talked at length of how much money the news was costing the company , a sea of red ink that could be stopped by replacing news with more entertainment programs . However , Paley supported the news and protected Friendly 's division from Aubrey 's proposed budget cuts . Aubrey in 1962 ordered that there would be fewer specials , both entertainment and news , because he felt interruptions to the schedule alienated viewers by disrupting their routine viewing , sending them to the competition . Friendly resented this move . 
