 <unk> , Tchaikovsky sometimes experimented with unusual meters . More often , he used a firm , regular meter , a practice that served him well in dance music . At times , his rhythms became pronounced enough to become the main expressive agent of the music . They also became a means , found typically in Russian folk music , of simulating movement or progression in large @-@ scale symphonic movements — a " synthetic propulsion , " as Brown phrases it , which substituted for the momentum that would be created in strict sonata form by the interaction of melodic or motivic elements . This interaction generally does not take place in Russian music . ( For more on this , please see Repetition below . ) 
 = = = = Structure = = = = 
 Tchaikovsky struggled with sonata form . Its principle of organic growth through the interplay of musical themes was alien to Russian practice . According to Brown and musicologists Hans Keller and Daniel Zhitomirsky , Tchaikovsky found his solution to large @-@ scale structure while composing the Fourth Symphony . He essentially sidestepped thematic interaction and kept sonata form only as an " outline , " as Zhitomirsky phrases it . Within this outline , the focus centered on periodic alternation and juxtaposition . Tchaikovsky placed blocks of dissimilar tonal and thematic material alongside one another , with what Keller calls " new and violent contrasts " between musical themes , keys and harmonies . This process , according to Brown and Keller , builds momentum and adds intense drama . While the result , Warrack charges , is still " an ingenious episodic treatment of two tunes rather than a symphonic development of them " in the Germanic sense , Brown counters that it took the listener of the period " through a succession of often highly charged sections which added up to a radically new kind of symphonic experience " ( italics Brown ) , one that functioned not on the basis of summation , as Austro @-@ German symphonies did , but on one of accumulation . 
 Partly due to the melodic and structural intricacies involved in this accumulation and partly due to the composer 's nature , Tchaikovsky 's music became intensely expressive . This intensity was entirely new to Russian music and prompted some Russians to place Tchaikovsky 's name alongside that of Dostoyevsky . German musicologist Hermann <unk> credits Tchaikovsky in his later symphonies with offering " full images of life , developed freely , sometimes even dramatically , around psychological contrasts ... This music has the mark of the truly lived and felt experience . " Botstein , in elaborating on this comment , suggests that listening to Tchaikovsky 's music " became a psychological mirror connected to everyday experience , one that reflected on the dynamic nature of the listener ’ s own emotional self . " This active engagement with the music " opened for the listener a vista of emotional and psychological tension and an extremity of feeling that possessed relevance because it seemed reminiscent of one ’ s own ' truly lived and felt experience ' or one ’ s search for intensity in a deeply personal sense . " 
 = = = = Repetition = = = = 
 As mentioned above , repetition was a natural part of Tchaikovsky 's music , just as it is an integral part of Russian music . His use of sequences within melodies ( repeating a tune at a higher or lower pitch in the same voice ) could go on for extreme length . The problem with repetition is that , over a period of time , the melody being repeated remains static , even when there is a surface level of rhythmic activity added to it . Tchaikovsky kept the musical conversation flowing by treating melody , tonality , rhythm and sound color as one integrated unit , rather than as separate elements . By making subtle but noticeable changes in the rhythm or phrasing of a tune , modulating to another key , changing the melody itself or varying the instruments playing it , Tchaikovsky could keep a listener 's interest from flagging . By extending the number of repetitions , he could increase the musical and dramatic tension of a passage , building " into an emotional experience of almost unbearable intensity , " as Brown phrases it , controlling when the peak and release of that tension would take place . Musicologist Martin Cooper calls this practice a subtle form of unifying a piece of music and adds that Tchaikovsky brought it to a high point of refinement . ( For more on this practice , see the next section . ) 
 = = = = Orchestration = = = = 
 Like other late Romantic composers , Tchaikovsky relied heavily on orchestration for musical effects . Tchaikovsky , however , became noted for the " sensual opulence " and " voluptuous <unk> virtuosity " of his scoring . Like Glinka , Tchaikovsky tended toward bright primary colors and sharply delineated contrasts of texture . However , beginning with the Third Symphony , Tchaikovsky experimented with an increased range of timbres Tchaikovsky 's scoring was noted and admired by some of his peers . Rimsky @-@ Korsakov regularly referred his students at the Saint Petersburg Conservatory to it and called it " devoid of all striving after effect , [ to ] give a healthy , beautiful sonority . " This sonority , musicologist Richard Taruskin points out , is essentially Germanic in effect . Tchaikovsky 's expert use of having two or more instruments play a melody simultaneously ( a practice called doubling ) and his ear for uncanny combinations of instruments resulted in " a generalized orchestral sonority in which the individual timbres of the instruments , being thoroughly mixed , would vanish . " 
 = = = = <unk> ( <unk> @-@ ism ) = = = = 
 In works like the Serenade for Strings and the Variations on a Rococo Theme , Tchaikovsky showed he was highly gifted at writing in a style of 18th century European pastiche . In the ballet The Sleeping Beauty and the opera The Queen of Spades , Tchaikovsky graduated from imitation to full @-@ scale evocation . This practice , which Alexandre Benois calls " passé @-@ ism , " lends an air of timelessness and immediacy , making the past seem as though it were the present . On a practical level , Tchaikovsky was drawn to past styles because he felt he might find the solution to certain structural problems within them . His Rococo pastiches also may have offered escape into a musical world purer than his own , into which he felt himself irresistibly drawn . ( In this sense , Tchaikovsky operated in the opposite manner to Igor Stravinsky , who turned to Neoclassicism partly as a form of compositional self @-@ discovery . ) Tchaikovsky 's attraction to ballet might have allowed a similar refuge into a fairy @-@ tale world , where he could freely write dance music within a tradition of French elegance . 
 = = = Antecedents and influences = = = 
 Of Tchaikovsky 's Western contemporaries , Robert Schumann stands out as an influence in formal structure , harmonic practices and piano writing , according to Brown and musicologist Roland John Wiley . As mentioned earlier , <unk> comments that Schumann left his mark on Tchaikovsky not just as a formal influence but also as an example of musical dramaturgy and self @-@ expression . Leon Botstein claims the music of Franz Liszt and Richard Wagner also left their imprints on Tchaikovsky 's orchestral style . The late @-@ Romantic trend for writing orchestral suites , begun by Franz <unk> , Jules Massenet and Joachim Raff after the rediscovery of Bach 's works in that genre , may have influenced Tchaikovsky to try his own hand at them . His teacher Anton Rubinstein 's opera The Demon became a model for the final tableau of Eugene Onegin . So did Léo Delibes ' ballets Coppélia and Sylvia for The Sleeping Beauty and Georges Bizet 's opera Carmen ( a work Tchaikovsky admired tremendously ) for The Queen of Spades . Otherwise , it was to composers of the past that Tchaikovsky turned — Beethoven , whose music he respected ; Mozart , whose music he loved ; Glinka , whose opera A Life for the Tsar made an indelible impression on him as a child and whose scoring he studied assiduously ; and Adolphe Adam , whose ballet Giselle was a favorite of his from his student days and whose score he consulted while working on The Sleeping Beauty . Beethoven 's string quartets may have influenced Tchaikovsky 's attempts in that medium . Other composers whose work interested Tchaikovsky included Hector Berlioz , Felix Mendelssohn , Giacomo Meyerbeer and Henry <unk> . 
 = = = Aesthetic impact = = = 
 Maes maintains that , regardless of what he was writing , Tchaikovsky 's main concern was how his music impacted his listeners on an aesthetic level , at specific moments in the piece and on a cumulative level once the music had finished . What his listeners experienced on an emotional or visceral level became an end in itself . Tchaikovsky 's focus on pleasing his audience might be considered closer to that of Mendelssohn or Mozart . Considering that he lived and worked in what was probably the last 19th century feudal nation , the statement is not actually that surprising . And yet , even when writing so @-@ called ' programme music , for example his Romeo and Juliet fantasy overture , he cast it in sonata form . His use of stylized 18th @-@ century melodies and patriotic themes was geared toward the values of Russian aristocracy . He was aided in this by Ivan <unk> , who commissioned The Sleeping Beauty from Tchaikovsky and the libretto for The Queen of Spades from Modest with their use of 18th century settings stipulated firmly . Tchaikovsky also used the polonaise frequently , the dance being a musical code for the Romanov dynasty and a symbol of Russian patriotism . Using it in the finale of a work could assure its success with Russian listeners . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 = = = = <unk> and collaborators = = = = 
 Tchaikovsky 's relationship with collaborators was mixed . Like Nikolai Rubinstein with the First Piano Concerto , virtuoso and pedagogue Leopold Auer rejected the Violin Concerto initially but changed his mind ; he played it to great public success and taught it to his students , who included Jascha Heifetz and Nathan Milstein . Wilhelm <unk> " intervened considerably in shaping what he considered ' his ' piece , " the Variations on a Rococo Theme , according to music critic Michael Steinberg . Tchaikovsky was angered by <unk> 's license but did nothing ; the Rococo Variations were published with the cellist 's amendments . His collaboration on the three ballets went better and in Marius Petipa , who worked with him on the last two , he might have found an advocate . When The Sleeping Beauty was seen by its dancers as needlessly complicated , Petipa convinced them to put in the extra effort . Tchaikovsky compromised to make his music as practical as possible for the dancers and was accorded more creative freedom than ballet composers were usually accorded at the time . He responded with scores that minimized the rhythmic subtleties normally present in his work but were inventive and rich in melody , with more refined and imaginative orchestration than in the average ballet score . 
 = = = = Critics = = = = 
 Critical reception to Tchaikovsky 's music has also varied but also improved over time . Even after 1880 , some inside Russia held it suspect for not being nationalistic enough and thought Western European critics lauded it for exactly that reason . There might have been a grain of truth in the latter , according to musicologist and conductor Leon Botstein , as German critics especially wrote of the " indeterminacy of [ Tchaikovsky 's ] artistic character ... being truly at home in the non @-@ Russian . " Of the foreign critics who did not care for his music , Eduard Hanslick lambasted the Violin Concerto as a musical composition " whose stink one can hear " and William Forster <unk> wrote of the Fifth Symphony , " The furious peroration sounds like nothing so much as a hoard of demons struggling in a torrent of brandy , the music growing drunker and drunker . Pandemonium , <unk> tremens , raving , and above all , noise worse confounded ! 
 The division between Russian and Western critics remained through much of the 20th century but for a different reason . According to Brown and Wiley , the prevailing view of Western critics was that the same qualities in Tchaikovsky 's music that appealed to audiences — its strong emotions , directness and eloquence and colorful orchestration — added up to compositional shallowness . The music 's use in popular and film music , Brown says , lowered its esteem in their eyes still further . There was also the fact , pointed out earlier , that Tchaikovsky 's music demanded active engagement from the listener and , as Botstein phrases it , " spoke to the listener ’ s imaginative interior life , regardless of nationality . " Conservative critics , he adds , may have felt threatened by the " violence and ' hysteria ' " they detected and felt such emotive displays " attacked the boundaries of conventional aesthetic appreciation — the cultured reception of art as an act of formalist discernment — and the polite engagement of art as an act of amusement . " 
 There has also been the fact that the composer did not follow sonata form strictly , relying instead on juxtaposing blocks of tonalities and thematic groups . Maes states this point has been seen at times as a weakness rather than a sign of originality . Even with what Schonberg termed " a professional <unk> " of Tchaikovsky 's work , the practice of faulting Tchaikovsky for not following in the steps of the Viennese masters has not gone away entirely , while his intent of writing music that would please his audiences is also sometimes taken to task . In a 1992 article , New York Times critic Allan Kozinn writes , " It is Tchaikovsky 's flexibility , after all , that has given us a sense of his variability .... Tchaikovsky was capable of turning out music — entertaining and widely beloved though it is — that seems superficial , manipulative and trivial when regarded in the context of the whole literature . The First Piano Concerto is a case in point . It makes a joyful noise , it swims in pretty tunes and its dramatic rhetoric allows ( or even requires ) a soloist to make a grand , swashbuckling impression . But it is entirely hollow . " 
 In the 21st century , however , critics are reacting more positively to Tchaikovsky 's tunefulness , originality , and craftsmanship . " Tchaikovsky is being viewed again as a composer of the first rank , writing music of depth , innovation and influence , " according to cultural historian and author Joseph Horowitz . Important in this reevaluation is a shift in attitude away from the disdain for overt emotionalism that marked half of the 20th century . " We have acquired a different view of Romantic ' excess , ' " Horowitz says . " Tchaikovsky is today more admired than deplored for his emotional frankness ; if his music seems harried and insecure , so are we all . " 
 = = = = Public = = = = 
 Horowitz maintains that , while the standing of Tchaikovsky 's music has fluctuated among critics , for the public , " it never went out of style , and his most popular works have yielded iconic sound @-@ bytes [ sic ] , such as the love theme from Romeo and Juliet . " Along with those tunes , Botstein adds , " Tchaikovsky appealed to audiences outside of Russia with an immediacy and directness that were startling even for music , an art form often associated with emotion . " Tchaikovsky 's melodies , stated with eloquence and matched by his inventive use of harmony and orchestration , have always ensured audience appeal . His popularity is considered secure , with his following in many countries , including Great Britain and the United States , second only to that of Beethoven . His music has also been used frequently in the realms of popular music and film . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 According to Wiley , Tchaikovsky was a pioneer in several ways . " Thanks in large part to Nadezhda von Meck " , Wiley writes , " he became the first full @-@ time professional Russian composer . " This , Wiley adds , allowed him the time and freedom to consolidate the Western compositional practices he had learned at the Saint Petersburg Conservatory with Russian folk song and other native musical elements to fulfill his own expressive goals and forge an original , deeply personal style . He made an impact not only in absolute works such as the symphony but also in program music and , as Wiley phrases it , " transformed Liszt 's and Berlioz 's achievements ... into matters of Shakespearean elevation and psychological import . " Wiley and Holden both note that Tchaikovsky did all this without a native school of composition upon which to fall back . They point out that only Glinka had preceded him in combining Russian and Western practices and his teachers in Saint Petersburg had been thoroughly Germanic in their musical outlook . He was , they write , for all intents and purposes alone in his artistic quest . 
 Maes and Taruskin write that Tchaikovsky believed that his professionalism in combining skill and high standards in his musical works separated him from his contemporaries in The Five . Maes adds that , like them , he wanted to produce music that reflected Russian national character but which did so to the highest European standards of quality . Tchaikovsky , according to Maes , came along at a time when the nation itself was deeply divided as to what that character truly was . Like his country , Maes writes , it took him time to discover how to express his Russianness in a way that was true to himself and what he had learned . Because of his professionalism , Maes says , he worked hard at this goal and succeeded . The composer 's friend , music critic Hermann Laroche , wrote of The Sleeping Beauty that the score contained " an element deeper and more general than color , in the internal structure of the music , above all in the foundation of the element of melody . This basic element is undoubtedly Russian . " 
 Tchaikovsky was inspired to reach beyond Russia with his music , according to Maes and Taruskin . His exposure to Western music , they write , encouraged him to think it belonged not just to Russia but to the world at large . Volkov adds that this mindset made him think seriously about Russia 's place in European musical culture — the first Russian composer to do so . It steeled him to become the first Russian composer to personally acquaint foreign audiences with his own works , Warrack writes , as well as those of other Russian composers . In his biography of Tchaikovsky , Anthony Holden recalls the dearth of Russian classical music before Tchaikovsky 's birth , then places the composer 's achievements into historical perspective : " Twenty years after Tchaikovsky 's death , in 1913 , Igor Stravinsky 's The Rite of Spring erupted onto the musical scene , signalling Russia 's arrival into 20th @-@ century music . Between these two very different worlds Tchaikovsky 's music became the sole bridge . " 
 = = Tchaikovsky 's voice = = 
 The following recording was made in Moscow in January 1890 , by Julius Block on behalf of Thomas Edison . 
 Problems listening to the files ? See media help . 
 According to musicologist Leonid <unk> , Tchaikovsky was not comfortable with being recorded for posterity and tried to shy away from it . On an apparently separate visit from the one related above , Block asked the composer to play something on a piano or at least say something . Tchaikovsky refused . He told Block , " I am a bad pianist and my voice is raspy . Why should one <unk> it ? " 
 = = = Public domain sheet music = = = 
 Mutopia Project Tchaikovsky Sheet Music at Mutopia 
 Free scores by Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky at the International Music Score Library Project 
 [ 2 ] Tchaikovsky Arias and Piano works performed live in Brussels 
 = Hibiki 's Magic = 
 Hibiki 's Magic ( <unk> , Hibiki no Mahō ) , subtitled a continental chronicle in the original version , is a Japanese manga series written by Jun Maeda and illustrated by Rei Izumi . The story centers on a young girl named Hibiki who is the apprentice to a very skilled wizard named Shirotsuki . Hibiki does not have much skill with magic , and the only thing she is really good at is making tea . After an accident where her teacher nearly dies , Hibiki comes to stay at a famous magic academy and works as a teacher herself . 
 Hibiki 's Magic started serialization in the August 2004 issue of Kadokawa Shoten 's Shōnen Ace , but later transferred to Kadokawa 's Comp Ace in November 2005 , and concluded in the May 2016 issue . Tokyopop licensed the series in North America , and released the first two volumes in 2007 . The manga is described by Anime News Network as having an " inspirational tone " with a very cute style of storytelling . IGN Comics describes the manga as a " solid story that breaks out of that cuteness mold . " 
 = = Plot = = 
 Hibiki 's Magic revolves around the title character Hibiki , a lonely young girl under the wing of a skilled wizard named Shirotsuki . At the story 's onset , Hibiki is living with Shirotsuki and is in training as an assistant to learn the art of magic . Shirotsuki , whom Hibiki refers to as " Master " , is searching for the key to immortality . He is a renowned expert at the craft known as Magic Circles , which draws its power from the art of elaborate circles that enact various enchantments . Even though Shirotsuki invites Hibiki to learn what he knows , she is unskilled in magic and rarely succeeds in anything she does . In spite of repeatedly failing , she keeps trying with her teacher 's encouragement . 
 Shirotsuki 's research is interrupted when a group of men break into his house during an experiment . Shirotsuki 's soul becomes trapped inside a squirrel @-@ like creature called a <unk> , and his real body is lost in a fire that results from his magical protection wards ; Hibiki and the <unk> barely escape alive . With nowhere else to go , Hibiki takes up residence in the nearby capital city <unk> . Hibiki is surprised that Shirotsuki 's reputation precedes him , and she is taken to the local Kamisaid Magic Academy where she is given the position of professor . Hibiki 's attempts to convince the administration of her shortcomings meet with failure . Hibiki is forced to learn to cope with being a professor in the most famous magic school in the country and meets many new people that help her along the way . 
 Hibiki meets a hard @-@ to @-@ handle student named Ahito who hates magic , and while he and Hibiki are eventually able to become friends , Ahito continues to hate magic . With the help of her master , Hibiki creates a homunculus in the form of a young girl which names herself Shiraasan . While she is hard to keep in line , Hibiki and Shiraasan share a close relationship . Hibiki meets a cursed girl named Nazuna <unk> , and Hibiki tries to help alleviate her curse , and in doing so becomes her friend . Nazuna turns out to be the granddaughter of the king of the land where Hibiki 's Magic takes place . 
 In the world of Hibiki 's Magic , in order to gain magic one must make a sacrifice . It can be a physical sacrifice , such as Ahito experiencing pain , or a mental sacrifice , such as Shirotsuki losing his memories . Hibiki tries to help by making the sacrifices a little more bearable . 
 = = Characters = = 
 Hibiki ( <unk> ) 
 Hibiki is a young girl with little confidence in her abilities , except in tea making . When she met Shirotsuki , Hibiki was a shy girl who would hide in the corner of a room in his house <unk> . Eventually , Hibiki warmed up to Shirotsuki 's affectionate personality and came to consider him a very important person . Hibiki can be very lighthearted , and always helps people who need it . She has no talent for magic , and relies on her master to help her in this regard . She is a crybaby and somewhat clumsy , but does her best and wins people over with her abundant kindness and warm heart . 
 Shirotsuki ( <unk> ) 
 Shirotsuki is a very skilled wizard who took Hibiki into his home in order to train her as an assistant to his craft . Despite Hibiki 's constant failures , Shirotsuki never gets angry with her and lets her take her time to get it right . He had been in love with a young woman his age named Yui , but had sacrificed his memories of her and his loved ones for his magic . 
 Ahito ( <unk> ) 
 Ahito is a young man enrolled as a student at Kamisaid Magic Academy . In spite of this , he does not believe that magic is useful to mankind He had been forced to go to the academy by his grandmother . His parents had died in a war while conducting horrible experiments and he remarks that " they deserved it " . This attitude stems from a series of painful magical experiments he was involved in as a child so he could save a girl his age named Mizuki , but she died prematurely . Ahito becomes friends with Hibiki , and starts to act a little more nicely to her . Ahito sacrificed going though pain for his magic ; he is physically injured after gazing upon someone with his healing eyes . 
 Shiraasan ( <unk> , <unk> ) 
 Shiraasan , also known as Shi @-@ chan , is a female homunculus , or artificial human , created by a joint effort of Hibiki and Shirotsuki . Despite looking like a very young girl , Shiraasan has the maturity of an adult who finds nothing wrong with reading newspapers or smoking cigarettes . Since homunculi were originally created as weapons in Hibiki 's Magic , Shiraasan can procure guns and other weapons to use as she pleases , such as taking care of stray flies . Shiraasan has a very independent personality and does not like to be told what she can and cannot do . After it is confirmed that she is a stable lifeform , Shiraasan warms up to Hibiki and loves her very much . 
 Asuma ( <unk> ) 
 Asuma is a male wizard with a frivolous personality and is the director of Kamisaid Magic Academy . He likes using magic to surprise others , such as making flowers and small birds appear out of nowhere . His sacrifice for magic is that he ages quickly . For example , when Misaki was saved by him , she was surprised he had aged a few years in one day . 
 Misaki ( <unk> ) 
 Misaki is Asuma 's assistant and is the first person that Hibiki meets from Kamisaid Magic Academy . When Hibiki makes a mistake , Misaki lectures her and informs her how a member of the faculty should act , even when it may not entirely be her fault . Due to Hibiki 's low magical experience , Misaki worries about Hibiki succeeding as a member of the staff . Like Hibiki , Misaki cannot perform magic , though she still has a vast knowledge of magic at her disposal . She had been adopted by a man that constantly abused her and the only thing that could cheer her up was a book from a magic user . She had been saved by Asuma and hopes to be of use to him . 
 Ikko ( <unk> ) 
 Ikko is a female teacher at Kamisaid Magic Academy whose specialty is curses . While normally a sweet , young woman , her personality becomes sinister when she is performing her curses . She shows a skill in sewing when she is asked by Hibiki to make new clothes for Shiraasan . 
 Yukko ( <unk> ) 
 Yukko is a woman around the same age as Ikko , her older sister . Yukko lost her young daughter Nanako in the last war , and since then has spent all her time researching how to make a homunculus in human form , though has never been able to produce one that looks human . After the incident with Shiraasan , Yukko is finally able to accept her daughter 's death and ceases to make more homunculi . Yukko sacrificed her slumber for her magic . 
 Nazuna <unk> ( <unk> = <unk> ) 
 Nazuna is a young girl whose grandfather is the king of the land of Kamisaid . She is a skilled sword @-@ fighter , but is followed by the dead spirits of baby chicks , who believe her to be their mother , and rest on her , thus interfering in her sword @-@ training . Hibiki is able to help her initially by making some of them disappear , though the chicks come back . 
 = = Production and release = = 
 The manga series Hibiki 's Magic is written by Jun Maeda and illustrated by Rei Izumi . As stated at the back of the first volume , Maeda first conceived Hibiki 's Magic as a short story he wrote as a student , and the story contains an unspecified theme that he has carried through a lot of stories since . In 2003 , he wanted to collaborate with Izumi , one of his favorite artists , and remembered his earlier concept that would become Hibiki 's Magic . After Izumi drew some early character designs for Hibiki , Maeda wanted to continue the story and start a manga with Izumi as the artist . 
 The manga premiered in the August 2004 issue of Kadokawa Shoten 's Shōnen Ace . It was later transferred to Kadokawa Shoten 's Comp Ace magazine on November 26 , 2005 . Hibiki 's Magic went on hiatus after the release of Comp Ace volume 15 on May 26 , 2007 , during which only three chapters were released : the first in Comp Ace 's August 2008 issue , next as a bonus chapter in the September 2008 issue of Comp Ace , and finally in a special edition of the magazine 's July 2011 issue titled Key Station . The manga resumed regular publication with the April 2013 issue of Comp Ace , and concluded with the May 2016 issue . The first tankōbon volume was released on August 10 , 2005 ; four volumes have been released as of February 26 , 2015 . 
 At Comic @-@ Con International 2006 , Tokyopop announced that it had acquired Hibiki 's Magic for distribution in English in North America . Tokyopop released the first volume on January 9 , 2007 , followed by the second volume on September 11 , 2007 . Kadokawa Media licensed the series in Chinese . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Anime News Network 's ( ANN ) review of the first volume states that " Hibiki 's Magic ... focus [ es ] on the ways that magic effects the everyday lives of its users . The personal focus is welcome , but the book is a little too compressed and rushed to evoke exactly the emotional response that it desires . " While at the same time describing the first volume as having an " inspirational tone " , the review ends by saying , " Don 't come to Hibiki 's Magic expecting a life @-@ changing re @-@ examination of magic . It 's a heavy dose of pure cuteness for those who like their sweet @-@ and @-@ sour drama with lots of cheese . " The first volume of Hibiki 's Magic was featured in ANN 's Right Turn Only column in January 2007 , where Carlo Santos compares the series to " Someday 's Dreamers with more guts and heart , " which portrays magicians as similar to normal people with " weaknesses and all " as opposed to " other tales of magic [ which ] focus on how cool and different magicians are [ compared to normal people ] . " Visually , the series is described as being too similar to " every other fantasy series " and even cites similarities with " Hogwarts ' magic robes and school logo . " IGN Comics ' review said , " This book ought to be fairly popular for its intended age group .... Make no mistake , this book is cute in every sense of the word ... but at the same time it 's a solid story that breaks out of that cuteness mold . " 
 In a review at Comic Book Bin , the reviewer Leroy Douresseaux praised Jun Maeda for crafting a " gentle , yet highly engaging story about deep friendship and strong love and devotion . " Douresseaux also cited Rei Izumi 's art as " cute " and how her " visuals are also emotionally potent . " In a review at Mania , Michelle <unk> follows with other reviewers , citing the series as " deceptively cute " , but also describing it as " often funny , but mostly <unk> a real tear @-@ jerker . " The manga 's theme is thought to be related to " finding hope in times of pain and grief . " In the online appendix to Manga : The Complete Guide , Jason Thompson cites Hibiki 's Magic as " a cross between Someday 's Dreamers and Atelier Marie and Elie , " though describes it as being " less optimistic than Someday 's Dreamers . " Thompson goes on to pan the manga as a " dull moe title " with " crude , generic art . " 
 = Music for a Time of War = 
 Music for a Time of War is a 2011 concert program and subsequent album by the Oregon Symphony under the artistic direction of Carlos Kalmar . The program consists of four compositions inspired by war : Charles Ives ' The Unanswered Question ( 1906 ) , John Adams ' The Wound @-@ Dresser ( 1989 ) , Benjamin Britten 's Sinfonia da Requiem ( 1940 ) and Ralph Vaughan Williams ' Symphony No. 4 ( 1935 ) . The program was performed on May 7 , 2011 , at the Arlene Schnitzer Concert Hall in Portland , Oregon , and again the following day . Both concerts were recorded for album release . On May 12 , the Oregon Symphony repeated the program at the inaugural Spring for Music Festival , at Carnegie Hall . The performance was broadcast live by KQAC and WQXR @-@ FM , the classical radio stations serving Portland and the New York City metropolitan area , respectively . The concerts marked the Oregon Symphony 's first performances of The Wound @-@ Dresser as well as guest baritone Sanford Sylvan 's debut with the company . 
 In October 2011 the recording of the Portland performances was released on CD by Dutch record label PentaTone Classics . The album marked the orchestra 's first release in eight years and Kalmar 's first with the Oregon Symphony . The live performances and album received favorable reviews ; the recording debuted at number 31 on Billboard 's Classical Albums chart , and made several lists of the best classical recordings of 2011 . The album earned three recognitions from the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences for the 2013 Grammy Awards . Kalmar and the Oregon Symphony were nominated in the categories Best Orchestral Performance and Best Engineered Album , Classical ( along with engineers Jesse Lewis and John Newton , and mastering engineer Jesse Brayman ) . Producer Blanton Alspaugh received the award for Producer of the Year , Classical for his contributions to Music for a Time of War and other recordings . 
 = = Program = = 
 Music for a Time of War contains four 20th @-@ century classical compositions based on the theme of war . Kalmar stated that the program was not inspired by current events and that not every composition was written specifically because of war . He also warned that audiences should not attend the performances anticipating an optimistic conclusion : 
 There is redemption in our concert , but not at the end . I think that is an important point . I don 't think that anybody who goes to this concert will come out and think everything is alright . I think the pacing is good because nothing is alright . If we humans have to live with war , that is pretty much what the message should be . 
 The program began with Charles Ives ' The Unanswered Question , originally the first of Two <unk> , composed in 1906 ( along with its counterpart Central Park in the Dark ) . Theodore Bloomfield , who served as music director of the Oregon Symphony from 1955 to 1959 , conducted its world premiere at the Juilliard School in New York in 1946 . The Oregon Symphony had first performed the work in January 1974 , under Lawrence Leighton Smith , and had played it under Kalmar in January 2007 . The Unanswered Question , which is approximately six minutes in length , contains parts for two flutes , oboe , clarinet , trumpet and strings . The composition starts softly and builds with a repeated " ambiguous " question delivered by an offstage trumpet solo , answered by other instruments . 
 The second composition was The Wound @-@ Dresser , American minimalist composer John Adams ' portrayal of Walt Whitman 's experience as a medic during the American Civil War . The work refers to Whitman 's 1865 eponymous poem , part of a greater collection of poems related to the conflict . Adams wrote the composition following his father 's death from Alzheimer 's disease under his mother 's care . According to the program notes , Adams was influenced by friends who died of HIV / AIDS during the 1980s and how their struggles impacted loved ones . In his own notes , Adams wrote : " I was plunged into an awareness not only of dying but also of the person who cares for the dying ... The bonding that takes place between the two is one of the most extraordinary human events that can happen – something deeply personal of which most of us are completely unaware . " The work , which is approximately 20 minutes in length , employs solo baritone , piccolo , flute , two oboes , two clarinets ( one doubling bass clarinet ) , two bassoons , two horns , piccolo trumpet , timpani , synthesizer and strings . In Kalmar 's program the guest baritone soloist is Sanford Sylvan , for whom the piece was written in 1989 . Adams premiered the piece with the Saint Paul Chamber Orchestra and Sylvan in February 1989 ; Sylvan 's performance subsequently earned him a Grammy Award nomination . The live recording sessions marked the first performances of The Wound @-@ Dresser by the Oregon Symphony as well as Sylvan 's debut with the orchestra . 
 The program continued with Benjamin Britten 's Sinfonia da Requiem ( 1940 ) , commissioned by the Japanese government to commemorate the <unk> anniversary of the Japanese Empire . Britten , a pacifist , took the opportunity to compose a work that expressed his anti @-@ war sentiments as well as his grief over his parents ' deaths . The Japanese were displeased by the work 's Christian connotations and melancholic tone , deeming it unsuitable for the national ceremony . Britten was unapologetic about his composition . Sinfonia da Requiem contains three movements — " Lacrymosa " ( " Weeping " ) , " Dies Irae " ( " Day of Wrath " ) and " Requiem Aeternam " ( " Eternal Rest " ) — and alludes to the Catholic Church 's Requiem . The work premiered in March 1941 at Carnegie Hall , performed by the New York Philharmonic , John Barbirolli conducting . The Oregon Symphony premiered the composition on February 26 , 2005 , under Kalmar 's baton ; these performances marked the orchestra 's last before Music for a Time of War . Approximately 18 minutes in length , the symphony includes three flutes ( one doubling alto flute and one doubling piccolo ) , two oboes , English horn , three clarinets ( one doubling bass clarinet ) , alto saxophone , two bassoons , contrabassoon , four horns , three trumpets , three trombones , tuba , timpani , bass drum , cymbals , snare drum , tambourine , whip , xylophone , piano , harp and strings . Its end completed the program 's first half . Kalmar requested that the audience hold their applause from the start of the program until the end of Britten 's symphony . 
 The performance ended with Ralph Vaughan Williams ' Symphony No. 4 , composed during 1931 – 1934 . Williams did not write the symphony on a specific subject ; once he quipped that the work was " about F minor " and his wife insisted he had " [ experimented ] with purely musical ideas " . Critics perceived the piece as a reflection of the political situation in Europe . The BBC Symphony Orchestra , conducted by Adrian Boult , premiered the work at Queen 's Hall in London in April 1935 . Boult considered this " dissonant " work , inspired by Beethoven , to be a " ' magnificent gesture of disgust ' against war and fascism " . The Oregon Symphony first performed the work in February 1959 with Bloomfield conducting ; prior to 2011 , the ensemble had not performed the symphony since October 2001 , with James Judd conducting . Approximately 34 minutes in length , it employs three flutes ( one doubling piccolo ) , three oboes ( one doubling English horn ) , two clarinets , bass clarinet , tenor saxophone , two bassoons , contrabassoon , four horns , two trumpets , three trombones , tuba , timpani , bass drum , cymbals , snare drum , triangle and strings . 
 = = Performances and broadcasts = = 
 The Oregon Symphony presented the program at the Arlene Schnitzer Concert Hall in Portland the evening of May 7 and the afternoon of May 8 , 2011 . Both performances were recorded for album release by the Boston @-@ based company Soundmirror . The Portland and subsequent New York performances were dedicated to Harold Schnitzer , the businessman and philanthropist who died in April 2011 . 
 On May 12 , the Oregon Symphony repeated the program at the inaugural Spring for Music Festival , marking the orchestra 's Carnegie Hall debut . The festival invites orchestras " dedicated to distinctive and adventurous programming " to perform " unusual repertoire " . The Symphony raised $ 300 @,@ 000 to fund travel and hotel expenses for the concert series . In addition to the Oregon Symphony , the inaugural festival presented seven ensembles within nine days , including the Albany Symphony Orchestra , Dallas Symphony Orchestra , Montreal Symphony Orchestra , Orpheus Chamber Orchestra , Saint Paul Chamber Orchestra and Toledo Symphony Orchestra . Orchestras were invited based on their submitted program proposals . No other ensemble presented a program themed by a single topic . In February 2011 , three months before the Carnegie Hall performance , The Oregonian reported that nearly half of the 1 @,@ 000 tickets reserved for distribution by the Oregon Symphony had been sold . Kalmar later confirmed that 450 Oregonians traveled to New York City to witness the performance . 
 The Carnegie Hall performance was broadcast live across the United States . Portland 's classical radio station , KQAC , broadcast the concert live throughout the Pacific Northwest as part of an ongoing partnership with the Symphony . WQXR @-@ FM , the classical radio station licensed to Newark , New Jersey and serving the New York City metropolitan area , broadcast the performance live in 3D sound in collaboration with the design and engineering consulting company Arup . WQXR also hosted a live chat on their website . Prior to the live broadcast , WQXR 's Q2 Music provided their own take on the Oregon Symphony 's war @-@ themed concert by airing a program with works by Lowell Liebermann , <unk> Pohjola , Steve Reich , Frederic <unk> , Dmitri Shostakovich and John Adams . KQAC rebroadcast the program in November . In April 2012 , the station broadcast the album recording and has since aired individual works . 
 = = = Reception ( concert ) = = = 
 The concert program received a positive reception . The Oregonian 's David Stabler wrote that during the May 7 performance the orchestra displayed peak condition and " played with a precision and intensity that would have been unattainable a decade ago " . He complimented Sylvan 's diction and " emotional engagement " , but noted that some words were difficult to make out . Stabler called the timpanist 's performance during Britten 's symphony " fierce " and the orchestra 's playing " clear and intentional " . In his review of the Carnegie Hall performance , Stabler opined that the Oregon Symphony 's program ( which he described as one of " rage , brutality and fleeting beauty that required the utmost precision and ferocity from the musicians " ) focused more on playing , while the programs by other orchestras drew attention to the music . Stabler wrote : " Everyone knows orchestras are fighting to survive , but on this night , the Oregon Symphony breathed long and deep of triumph . " In a separate article summarizing reviews by New York critics , Stabler called the Symphony a " virtuosos band " that " now plays with more acute rhythmic precision , more clarity , more informed style ... and more extreme dynamics and tempos " . James Bash of Oregon Music News wrote a positive review of the New York performance , describing it as more enhanced , dramatic and intense than the Portland concerts , partly because of the venue 's superior acoustics . Bash described the orchestra 's performance of The Unanswered Question as " compelling and auspicious " and wrote that Sylvan 's vocals during The Wound @-@ Dresser " conveyed the sensitive text superbly " . In addition to complimenting the Symphony overall , Bash singled out solo performers by name . After noting the audience 's enthusiastic response to the performance , including multiple bravos and particular recognition for Kalmar , Bash quipped " the Oregon Symphony may be regional in terms of size and budget , but they are world @-@ class when they play " . 
 Following the New York concert , music critic Alex Ross tweeted : " Triumphant Carnegie debut for the Oregon Symphony -- best of Spring for Music so far . Eloquent Sylvan , explosive Vaughan Williams . " On his blog , " The Rest Is Noise " , Ross called the Symphony 's performance " extraordinary " , one of the " most gripping events of the current season " . In his two @-@ page review of Spring for Music for The New Yorker , Ross devoted more coverage to the Oregon Symphony than the other featured ensembles and considered Music for a Time of War the festival 's highpoint . He complimented the orchestra for playing with " controlled intensity " and said of Symphony No. 4 : " The Oregonians ' furious rendition of that symphony would have been impressive in any context , but as the capstone to a brilliantly worked @-@ out program it had shattering force . " The review contained an illustration of Kalmar , " hair flying and all " . Sedgwick Clark of Musical America called the orchestra 's performance of the Williams ' piece " positively searing ... with fearless edge @-@ of @-@ seat tempos ... breathtakingly negotiated by all . " After Clark 's review was published , Ross posted on his blog that he and Clark concurred : the Symphony 's performance was the most " remarkable " of the season . Ross included the Symphony 's concert on his list of the most memorable classical performances of 2011 . Allan Kozinn , music critic for The New York Times , considered the program " pained " and " thought @-@ provoking " , and wrote that Sylvan performed with his " characteristic acuity " . He called the woodwind and brass playing in Sinfonia da Requiem " superb " , specifically highlighting the " pointed " percussion in " Dies Irae " and the " haunting " string tone in " Requiem Aeternam " . Like Ross , Kozinn thought Symphony No. 4 was performed " with a furious , incendiary energy " that made an ideal ending to the program . 
 Elaine Calder , then president of the Oregon Symphony , called the Carnegie Hall performance a " game changer " . She also confirmed that the Toledo Symphony Orchestra expressed interest in performing the Music for a Time of War program in the future . In September 2011 , the Symphony confirmed that Kalmar 's contract , previously set to expire in 2013 , had been extended until 2015 . According to the organization , his contract was renewed " in recognition of his significant accomplishments " , specifically acknowledging the Carnegie Hall performance . The orchestra was invited to perform again at the 2013 Spring for Music Festival as one of two returning ensembles . Kalmar said of the return invitation , " To be invited once is a thrill . To be invited twice is clear proof that we are in the artistic big leagues . " However , in October 2012 the Symphony announced it would not accept the invitation for financial reasons . 
 = = Album = = 
 Music for a Time of War was released on CD by the Dutch record label PentaTone Classics on October 25 , 2011 . It was recorded in hybrid multichannel ( surround sound ) Super Audio CD format . Blanton Alspaugh served as producer . John Newton and Jesse Lewis were the recording engineers ; mastering and authoring was conducted by Jesse Brayman . In addition to recording the performances , Soundmirror edited , mixed and mastered the audio . 
 The album contains nine tracks ( Sinfonia da Requiem and Symphony No. 4 are divided into separate tracks for each movement ) and totals just over 78 minutes in length . Program notes for the recording were written by Steven Kruger . The album 's cover art photo is credited to orchestra member Martha Warrington . 
 Music for a Time of War marked the orchestra 's first recording in eight years as well as Kalmar 's first with the Oregon Symphony . The recording is the first of four albums to be produced by the Symphony and PentaTone through the end of the 2014 – 2015 season , all under Kalmar 's artistic leadership . 
 = = = Reception ( album ) = = = 
 The album performed well commercially and received favorable reviews . Music for a Time of War debuted and peaked at number 31 on Billboard 's Classical Albums chart the week of November 19 , 2011 . On November 19 , BBC Radio 3 reviewed the album on its program " CD Review " , which discusses and recommends new classical music recordings . AllMusic 's Mike Brownell awarded the album 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and wrote that the Symphony " prove [ d ] they can easily stand alongside the world 's great orchestras " . Audiophile Audition 's John <unk> thought the program was " well @-@ chosen to offer great variety in sound and compositional techniques " . Michael Miller of The Berkshire Review appreciated the " precision and sensitivity " of the playing and <unk> 's " lucid , straightforward , and ... virile " approach to the program . Miller also complimented Sylvan 's performance and called the recording " memorable " and " thrilling " , recommending it for any classical music library . Brian Horay , a classical music critic for The Huffington Post , questioned Kalmar 's claim that his selections should not be interpreted as political , writing that listeners " [ encounter ] a more difficult and nuanced 20th @-@ century musical landscape of existential questions , gruesome descriptions , defiant submissions and cold dissonance . " Horay continued , " Music for a Time of War serves as a powerful acoustic journey of peaceful resistance and questioning of power " . Barry <unk> of the Islington Gazette thought the war theme was " tendentious " but called the collection " enterprising " . James Bash of Oregon Music News called the album a " brilliant stunner " , mirroring his positive review of the Carnegie Hall performance . 
 Soundmirror also received compliments . Andrew Quint of The Absolute Sound described the sound as " vivid , highly detailed , and dynamic " as well as avoiding " digital steeliness " . Quint called the front @-@ to @-@ back layering outstanding . John <unk> said the recording 's " rich surround sonics " bring together excellent performances and " first @-@ rate fidelity " . He also noted the lack of audience interference , suggesting either good behavior by attendees or subtle work by audio engineers . Michael Miller complimented the quality of the recording for having " no problems of intonation or ensemble " and said the album " belongs in the reference collection of any audiophile , whether they are inclined to multichannel playback or not " . Miller specifically appreciated Alspaugh and the engineers for capturing the loudness and subtleties of Sinfonia da Requiem . International Record Review 's Nigel Simeone recommended the recording , calling it " impressive " and writing that the live sound is " exceptionally vibrant " . Kalman <unk> of Stereophile commended the ensemble , PentaTone and Soundmirror for providing " spacious , transparent , powerful sound " . <unk> , who designated the recording as the year 's best concept album , praised the program for being " thought @-@ provoking and restorative " and appreciated the range of emotions it summoned . 
 Several publications included Music for a Time of War on their lists of the best classical recordings of 2011 . Eugene Weekly recommended the album as a " stocking <unk> " on their list of the best Oregon classical music recordings of the year . Contributor Brett Campbell called the recording one of the year 's " most compelling " , with " blistering , committed , sharply etched performances " that illustrate the orchestra 's quality under Kalmar 's leadership . Similarly , Portland Monthly included Music for a Time of War on its list of fifteen " <unk> " Portland albums . Alex Ross of The New Yorker included the album on his list of the ten most " exceptional " classical music recordings of the year . New York City 's Time Out included the album as number seven on their list of the ten " Best Classical Albums of 2011 " . The publication 's Steve Smith called the collection " greater than the sum of its parts " . James <unk> of the Winnipeg Free Press included Music for a Time of War as number three on his list of the ten best classical recordings of the year , calling the performances " superbly prepared " . The album received its second pressing in February 2012 . 
 Music for a Time of War earned three recognitions from the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences for the 2013 Grammy Awards . Kalmar and the Oregon Symphony were nominated in the categories Best Orchestral Performance and Best Engineered Album , Classical ( along with engineers Jesse Lewis and John Newton and mastering engineer Jesse Brayman ) . Producer Alspaugh received the award for Producer of the Year , Classical for his contributions to the album and other recordings . The nominations marked the orchestra 's first from the Grammy Awards since 2004 . 
 = = = Track listing = = = 
 The Unanswered Question ( Charles Ives ) – 5 : 44 
 The Wound @-@ Dresser ( John Adams ) – 20 : 18 
 Sinfonia da Requiem , Op. 20 ( Benjamin Britten ) 
 " Lacrymosa ( Andante ben <unk> ) " – 8 : 34 
 " Dies Irae ( Allegro con fuoco ) " – 4 : 53 
 " Requiem Aeternam ( Andante molto tranquillo ) " – 5 : 36 
 Symphony No. 4 in F minor ( Ralph Vaughan Williams ) 
 " Allegro " – 8 : 57 
 " Andante moderato " – 10 : 01 
 " Scherzo : Allegro molto " – 5 : 22 
 " Finale con <unk> fugato : Allegro molto – con anima " – 8 : 33 
 Track listing adapted from AllMusic and the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from AllMusic . 
 = = = Orchestra roster = = = 
 Orchestra roster adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 " * " designates acting orchestra members ; " * * " designates musicians on a leave of absence ; " * * * " designates guest musicians . 
 = Maurice Fernandes = 
 <unk> Pacheco " Maurice " Fernandes , ( 12 August 1897 – 8 May 1981 ) was a West Indian Test cricketer who played first @-@ class cricket for British Guiana between 1922 and 1932 . He made two Test appearances for the West Indies , in 1928 and 1930 . Fernandes played as a right @-@ handed top @-@ order batsman and occasional wicket @-@ keeper . He scored 2 @,@ 087 first @-@ class runs in 46 appearances at an average of 28 @.@ 20 . 
 Graduating from playing at the Demerara Cricket Club as a teenager , to play for British Guiana in 1922 , Fernandes took part in tours of England in 1923 and 1928 . He made his debut Test appearance during the 1928 tour , playing in the first of the three Tests . His next , and final Test match came during the English tour of the West Indies in 1930 . At the time , the West Indies had a practice of picking their captain from the colony that the match was being played in , and Fernandes was granted the honour for the match in British Guiana . The West Indies won the match , their maiden victory in Test cricket . After the match , Fernandes only played one further first @-@ class match , and retired from first @-@ class cricket in 1932 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 <unk> Pacheco Fernandes was born in Georgetown , Demerara , British Guiana on 12 August 1897 . He played for the Demerara Cricket Club as a teenager , gaining a reputation as a good cricketer , and made his debut for British Guiana during the 1922 Inter @-@ Colonial Tournament , facing Trinidad . Playing as an opening batsman , Fernandes scored a duck in his first innings , but made 25 runs in the second . 
 He was part of the West Indian team that toured England in 1923 , playing twenty first @-@ class matches against county and representative opposition . Fernandes played in over half of the matches , and passed fifty on three occasions against first @-@ class opposition . He had reached 83 not out when his side declared against Northamptonshire , and reached 73 runs in the second innings against Lancashire in the next match , having narrowly missed out in the first innings , when he scored 49 . His highest score of the tour , and his maiden first @-@ class century came against Leicestershire , when he hit 110 runs . In A History of Cricket , H. S. Altham and E. W. Swanton describe the touring side as one which " proved themselves equal to the best . " The team relied heavily on the batting of George Challenor , who struck six centuries , and it was only Challenor that Fernandes trailed in the batting averages on the tour : he scored 523 runs at an average of 34 @.@ 86 , and was one of only two players other than Challenor to score a century for the West Indies . 
 During the Inter @-@ Colonial Tournament in October 1925 , Fernandes made significant scores in each of British Guiana 's matches : he scored 89 runs in the first innings of their match against Barbados , helping his side to open up a 144 @-@ run first innings lead , which they converted into an eight wicket victory . In the subsequent match against Trinidad , he reached 124 , but lacked support from his teammates , three of whom fell just short of half @-@ centuries . British Guiana eventually lost the match by two wickets . In the following February , the Marylebone Cricket Club ( MCC ) toured the West Indies , playing matches in Barbados , Trinidad , British Guiana and Jamaica . Three of the matches , one in each location excluding Jamaica , was against representative West Indies sides : Fernandes played in the match held in British Guiana , but not in either of the others , and also played in both matches between British Guiana and the touring MCC . In the last of these matches , he was selected as captain of the British Guiana side , and marked the occasion by scoring 120 in his team 's only innings of a drawn match . He remained as captain for the colony 's 1927 match against Barbados , in which their opponents scored 715 / 9 declared : the second highest innings score made against the team . 
 = = Test cricket = = 
 Fernandes was part of the West Indian side which toured England in 1928 . After the success of their 1923 tour , three of the matches were granted Test status . The team played 30 first @-@ class matches , but in contrast to their previous tour , they won just five of them . Altham and Swanton describe the side as being " substantially less formidable combination than the West Indies of ' 23 . " The touring side lacked a regular wicket @-@ keeper , and as a result Fernandes and the West Indian captain Karl Nunes shared the duties , though Nunes kept in all three Tests . Both were expensive on occasion : against Ireland , Fernandes allowed 25 byes in one innings , and Nunes the same number against Nottinghamshire . Fernandes ' batting was significantly less effective than it had been five years before ; he passed fifty on only three occasions , making 73 against both Ireland , and Cambridge University , and 54 against Middlesex . He played in the first Test match , the West Indies ' first appearance in Test cricket , facing England at Lord 's . Batting at number three in each innings , he scored a duck in the first , and eight runs in the second after the West Indies had been forced to follow @-@ on . England won the match by an innings and 58 runs . Fernandes played 20 of the first @-@ class matches in the tour , and scored 581 runs at an average of 18 @.@ 15 . 
 During the 1929 Inter @-@ Colonial Tournament , Fernandes made the highest score of his first @-@ class career during a seven @-@ day match against Barbados . After the early dismissal of captain Maurice Green , Fernandes joined Jeremy McKenzie at the crease . The pair added 177 runs for the second wicket before McKenzie was run out for 74 . Fernandes then shared another century partnership with Frank de Caires , before being dismissed for 141 . British Guiana won the match by 391 runs to progress to the final , in which they faced Trinidad . Fernandes scored half @-@ centuries in both innings of the final , scoring 88 runs in the first and 54 runs in the second to help his side to a four wicket victory . 
 Early the following year , a weakened English cricket team toured the West Indies , playing four Tests and eight other first @-@ class matches . Fernandes captained British Guiana in both of their matches against the MCC , each of which was lost by an innings . Generally , the West Indies named a different captain for each of their home matches , commonly selecting a player from the host colony for the honour due to financial constraints . Fernandes was chosen as captain for the Test played at Bourda , Georgetown , British Guiana . The first two Tests had resulted in a draw and an English victory . Fernandes won the toss and elected to bat first . Clifford Roach and Errol Hunte opened the batting for the West Indies and scored 144 runs together for the opening partnership before Hunte was out for 53 . George Headley then joined Roach at the crease , and the pair took the score onto 336 before Roach was dismissed after reaching his double century . Fernandes and Headley took the score up to 400 , of which Fernandes added 22 . The remaining batsmen were dismissed for a combined 71 ; Headley scored a century and the West Indies were all out for 471 . The England team was then bowled out for 145 , a first innings deficit of 326 . Despite the healthy lead , Fernandes chose not to enforce the follow @-@ on , and the West Indies batted again to score 290 , leaving England requiring 617 runs in the fourth innings to achieve victory . Patsy Hendren scored a century for the visitors , but no other batsman reached 50 runs , and with just four minutes of the match remaining , the West Indies secured their maiden Test win by 289 runs . 
 = = Later career and life = = 
 After his single match as West Indies Test captain , Fernandes did not appear for the West Indies again , and only made one further appearance for British Guiana , scoring 78 and 7 against Trinidad in the 1932 Inter @-@ Colonial Tournament final . Fernandes is described in his Wisden Cricketers ' Almanack obituary as being " an obdurate batsman " , and was praised for his cutting and driving during the 1923 tour of England . He remained a private individual throughout his cricketing career , a characteristic which became stronger after his retirement from cricket . He had one son , Leslie , who played one first @-@ class match for Guyana in the 1960 – 61 season , and died in a car accident in 1978 aged 39 . After this , Fernandes ' health , already poor , deteriorated rapidly , and he died on 8 May 1981 , aged 83 . 
 = Jevons paradox = 
 In economics , the Jevons paradox ( / <unk> / ; sometimes Jevons effect ) occurs when technological progress increases the efficiency with which a resource is used ( reducing the amount necessary for any one use ) , but the rate of consumption of that resource rises because of increasing demand . The Jevons paradox is perhaps the most widely known paradox in environmental economics . However , governments and environmentalists generally assume that efficiency gains will lower resource consumption , ignoring the possibility of the paradox arising . 
 In 1865 , the English economist William Stanley Jevons observed that technological improvements that increased the efficiency of coal @-@ use led to the increased consumption of coal in a wide range of industries . He argued that , contrary to common intuition , technological progress could not be relied upon to reduce fuel consumption . 
 The issue has been re @-@ examined by modern economists studying consumption rebound effects from improved energy efficiency . In addition to reducing the amount needed for a given use , improved efficiency also lowers the relative cost of using a resource , which increases the quantity demanded . This counteracts ( to some extent ) the reduction in use from improved efficiency . Additionally , improved efficiency accelerates economic growth , further increasing the demand for resources . The Jevons paradox occurs when the effect from increased demand predominates , and better efficiency leads to more resources being used . 
 Considerable debate exists about the size of the rebound in energy efficiency and the relevance of Jevons paradox to energy conservation . Some dismiss the paradox , while others worry that it may be self @-@ defeating to pursue sustainability by increasing energy efficiency . Environmental economists have proposed that efficiency gains be coupled with conservation policies that keep the cost of use the same ( or higher ) to avoid the Jevons paradox . Conservation policies ( such as cap and trade ) do not display the paradox , and can be used to control the rebound effect . 
 = = History = = 
 The Jevons paradox was first described by the English economist William Stanley Jevons in his 1865 book The Coal Question . Jevons observed that England 's consumption of coal soared after James Watt introduced the Watt steam engine , which greatly improved the efficiency of the coal @-@ fired steam engine from Thomas Newcomen 's earlier design . Watt 's innovations made coal a more cost @-@ effective power source , leading to the increased use of the steam engine in a wide range of industries . This in turn increased total coal consumption , even as the amount of coal required for any particular application fell . Jevons argued that improvements in fuel efficiency tend to increase ( rather than decrease ) fuel use , writing : " It is a confusion of ideas to suppose that the economical use of fuel is equivalent to diminished consumption . The very contrary is the truth . " 
 At that time , many in Britain worried that coal reserves were rapidly dwindling , but some experts opined that improving technology would reduce coal consumption . Jevons argued that this view was incorrect , as further increases in efficiency would tend to increase the use of coal . Hence , improving technology would tend to increase the rate at which England 's coal deposits were being depleted , and could not be relied upon to solve the problem . 
 Although Jevons originally focused on the issue of coal , the concept has since been extended to the use of any resource , including , for example , water usage . It is perhaps the most widely known paradox in environmental economics . 
 = = Cause = = 
 Economists have observed that consumers tend to travel more when their cars are more fuel efficient , causing a ' rebound ' in the demand for fuel . An increase in the efficiency with which a resource ( e.g. fuel ) is used , causes a decrease in the cost of using that resource when measured in terms of what it can achieve ( e.g. travel ) . Generally speaking , a decrease in the cost ( or price ) of a good or service will increase the quantity demanded ( the law of demand ) . With a lower cost for travel , consumers will travel more , increasing the demand for fuel . This increase in demand is known as the rebound effect , and it may or may not be large enough to offset the original drop in demand from the increased efficiency . The Jevons paradox occurs when the rebound effect is greater than 100 % , exceeding the original efficiency gains . 
 The size of the rebound effect is determined by the price elasticity of demand for the good . In a perfectly competitive market where fuel is the sole input used , if the price of fuel remains constant but efficiency is doubled , the effective price of travel would be halved ( twice as much travel can be purchased ) . If in response , the amount of travel purchased more than doubles ( i.e. demand is price elastic ) , then fuel consumption would increase , and the Jevons paradox would occur . If demand is price inelastic , the amount of travel purchased would less than double , and fuel consumption would decrease . However , goods and services generally use more than one type of input ( e.g. fuel , labour , machinery ) , and other factors besides input cost may also affect price . These factors tend to reduce the rebound effect , making the Jevons paradox less likely to occur . 
 = = Khazzoom – Brookes postulate = = 
 In the 1980s , economists Daniel Khazzoom and Leonard Brookes revisited the Jevons paradox for the case of society 's energy use . Brookes , then chief economist at the UK Atomic Energy Authority , argued that attempts to reduce energy consumption by increasing energy efficiency would simply raise demand for energy in the economy as a whole . Khazzoom focused on the narrower point that the potential for rebound was ignored in mandatory performance standards for domestic appliances being set by the California Energy Commission . 
 In 1992 , the economist Harry Saunders dubbed the hypothesis that improvements in energy efficiency work to increase ( rather than decrease ) energy consumption the Khazzoom – Brookes postulate , and argued that the hypothesis is broadly supported by neoclassical growth theory ( the mainstream economic theory of capital accumulation , technological progress and long @-@ run economic growth ) . Saunders showed that the Khazzoom – Brookes postulate occurs in the neoclassical growth model under a wide range of assumptions . 
 According to Saunders , increased energy efficiency tends to increase energy consumption by two means . First , increased energy efficiency makes the use of energy relatively cheaper , thus encouraging increased use ( the direct rebound effect ) . Second , increased energy efficiency leads to increased economic growth , which pulls up energy use for the whole economy . At the microeconomic level ( looking at an individual market ) , even with the rebound effect , improvements in energy efficiency usually result in reduced energy consumption . That is , the rebound effect is usually less than 100 % . However , at the macroeconomic level , more efficient ( and hence comparatively cheaper ) energy leads to faster economic growth , which increases energy use throughout the economy . Saunders argued that , taking into account both microeconomic and macroeconomic effects , technological progress that improves energy efficiency will tend to increase overall energy use . 
 = = Energy conservation policy = = 
 Jevons warned that fuel efficiency gains can lead to an increase in the use of fuel , which cancels out any efficiency gains . But this does not imply that improved fuel efficiency is worthless ; higher fuel efficiency enables greater production and a higher material quality of life . For example , a more efficient steam engine allowed the cheaper transportation of both goods and people who contributed to the Industrial Revolution . However , if the Khazzoom – Brookes postulate is correct , increased fuel efficiency , by itself , will not reduce the rate of depletion of fossil fuels . 
 There is considerable debate about whether the Khazzoom @-@ Brookes Postulate is correct , and of the relevance of Jevons paradox to energy conservation policy . Most governments , environmentalists and NGOs pursue policies that improve efficiency , holding that it will lower resource consumption and reduce environmental problems . Others , including many environmental economists , doubt this ' efficiency strategy ' towards sustainability , and worry that efficiency gains may in fact lead to higher production and consumption . They hold that for resource use to fall , efficiency gains should be coupled with other policies that limit resource use . 
 The Jevons paradox is sometimes used to argue that energy conservation efforts are futile , for example , that more efficient use of oil will lead to increased demand , and will not slow the arrival or the effects of peak oil . This argument is usually presented as a reason not to enact environmental policies or pursue fuel efficiency ( e.g. if cars are more efficient , it will simply lead to more driving ) . Several points have been raised against this argument . First , in the context of a mature market such as for oil in developed countries , the direct rebound effect is usually small , and so increased fuel efficiency usually reduces resource use , other conditions remaining constant . Second , even if increased efficiency does not reduce the total amount of fuel used , there remain other benefits associated with improved efficiency . For example , increased fuel efficiency may mitigate the price increases , shortages and disruptions in the global economy associated with peak oil . Third , environmental economists have pointed out that fuel use will unambiguously decrease if increased efficiency is coupled with an intervention ( e.g. a fuel tax ) that keeps the cost of fuel use the same or higher . 
 The Jevons paradox indicates that increased efficiency by itself may not reduce fuel use , and that sustainable energy policy must rely on other types of government interventions . As the Jevons paradox applies only to technological improvements that increase fuel efficiency , the imposition of conservation standards or other government interventions that increase costs do not display the paradox and can be used to control the rebound effect . To ensure that efficiency @-@ enhancing technological improvements reduce fuel use , efficiency gains can be paired with government intervention that reduces demand ( e.g. green taxes , cap and trade , or higher emissions standards ) . The ecological economists Mathis <unk> and William Rees have suggested that any cost savings from efficiency gains be " taxed away or otherwise removed from further economic circulation . Preferably they should be captured for reinvestment in natural capital rehabilitation . " By mitigating the economic effects of government interventions designed to promote ecologically sustainable activities , efficiency @-@ improving technological progress may make the imposition of these interventions more palatable , and more likely to be implemented . 
 = Mick Aston = 
 Michael Antony " Mick " Aston , FSA ( 1 July 1946 – 24 June 2013 ) was an English archaeologist who specialised in Early Medieval landscape archaeology . Over the course of his career , he lectured at both the University of Bristol and University of Oxford and published fifteen books on archaeological subjects . A keen populariser of the discipline , Aston was widely known for appearing as the resident academic on the Channel 4 television series Time Team from 1994 to 2011 . 
 Born in Oldbury , Worcestershire to a working @-@ class family , Aston developed an early interest in archaeology , studying it as a subsidiary to geography at the University of Birmingham . In 1970 , he began his career working for Oxford City and County Museum and there began his work in public outreach by running extramural classes in archaeology and presenting a series on the subject for Radio Oxford . In 1974 , he was appointed as the first County Archaeologist for Somerset , there developing an interest in aerial archaeology and establishing a reputation as a pioneer in landscape archaeology – a term that he co @-@ invented with Trevor Rowley – by authoring some of the earliest books on the subject . In 1978 he began lecturing at the University of Oxford and in 1979 became a tutor at the University of Bristol , supplementing these activities by working as an archaeological tour guide in Greece . 
 In 1988 , Aston teamed up with television producer Tim Taylor and together they created two shows which focused on bringing archaeology into British popular consciousness . The first was the short @-@ lived Time Signs ( 1991 ) , although this was followed by the more successful Time Team , which was produced for Channel 4 from 1994 to 2013 . Aston was responsible for identifying sites for excavation and for selecting specialists to appear on the show , and through the programme became well known to the viewing public for his trademark colourful jumpers and flowing , untidy hairstyle . In 1996 he was appointed to the specially @-@ created post of Professor of Landscape Archaeology at Bristol University , and undertook a ten @-@ year project investigating the manor at Shapwick , Somerset . He retired from his university posts in 2004 , but continued working on Time Team until 2011 and in 2006 commenced writing regular articles for British Archaeology magazine until his death . Although Aston did not believe that he would leave a significant legacy behind him , after his death various archaeologists claimed that he had a major impact in helping to popularise the discipline among the British public . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and education : 1946 – 69 = = = 
 Aston was born on 1 July 1946 into a working @-@ class family in Oldbury , West Midlands , to cabinet @-@ maker Harold Aston and his wife Gladys . He developed an early interest in archaeology , although teachers at Oldbury Grammar School attempted to dissuade him from pursuing it . His father gave him two books on archaeology as a Christmas present , and he subsequently spent much time visiting archaeological sites , sometimes playing truant to do so . The first of his family to attend university , Aston studied geography at the University of Birmingham , albeit with a subsidiary in archaeology , graduating in 1967 . He taught himself more about archaeology by enrolling in various excavations , and was influenced by such figures as his thesis supervisor Harry Thorpe , as well as the geographer Trevor Rowley and archaeologists Philip Rahtz and Philip Barker . His dissertation was on the development of settlement in the West Penwith peninsula . 
 = = = Early career : 1970 – 87 = = = 
 Aston first gained full @-@ time employment in 1970 , working as a field officer at the Oxford City and County Museum in Oxfordshire . For a time living in a tent , he worked on the sites and monuments record and taught several extramural classes while based at the museum . This extramural teaching fitted closely with Aston 's staunch belief that archaeology should be open to all who were interested in it . As part of this devotion to public outreach , he presented a radio series on archaeology that was broadcast on Radio Oxford . In 1974 he moved to Taunton to become the first County Archaeologist for Somerset , where he set up a new site record and oversaw the excavation of sites revealed by the construction of the M5 motorway . Again he also taught extramural adult education classes , this time for the University of Bristol . It was here that he developed a passion for aerial archaeology , and would often charter private planes in order to undertake aerial photography . Becoming a pioneer of landscape archaeology , along with Trevor Rowley he was responsible for coining the term in their 1974 book , Landscape Archaeology . With archaeologist James Bond he authored The Landscape of Towns ( 1976 ) , in which he extended his use of landscape archaeology to urban areas . Recognising his contribution to the discipline , in 1976 , he was elected a Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of London . 
 Tiring of his position as county archaeologist , finding it " too safe , pensionable and <unk> " , in 1978 he returned to Oxfordshire to take up a temporary position as a tutor in archaeology and local studies at Oxford University 's External Studies Department . That year he co @-@ ran his first study tour to Greece with Peter Hardy ; he would continue to run these annually for a number of years , most often visiting Santorini . In 1979 he returned to the West Country as tutor in archaeology at the University of Bristol 's Extra @-@ Mural Department , through which he organised weekend and evening courses throughout the region , introducing thousands of interested people to archaeology . During this period he also authored Interpreting the Landscape ( 1985 ) . 
 = = = Founding Time Team : 1988 – 95 = = = 
 In June 1988 the producer Tim Taylor invited Aston to work on a new four @-@ episode television series for Channel 4 called Time Signs , broadcast in June and July 1991 . The series focused on the historical development of the area about to be flooded by the <unk> Reservoir in Devon , making heavy use of archaeological data . Aston brought archaeologist Phil Harding into the project in order to explain techniques of experimental archaeology to the audience . Meanwhile , in August 1989 , Aston was promoted to the position of Reader in Landscape Archaeology at Bristol University . He also continued to write on the subject , authoring the book Monasteries ( 1993 ) ; he had initially planned to title the volume Monasteries in the Landscape but his publisher , Batsford , had insisted on the shorter title . 
 Aston and Taylor subsequently decided to work together on a new archaeological television series , devising the format for Time Team . Whilst Taylor organised the film production side of the project with Channel 4 , Aston located suitable sites to excavate , and gathered together a team of specialists to appear on the show , among them field archaeologists Harding and Carenza Lewis , artist Victor Ambrus , and historian Robin Bush . He knew the actor and television presenter Tony Robinson after they had met on an archaeological course in Greece , and successfully requested that he present the show . From an early stage , they had agreed that every episode would feature a practical process or a re @-@ enactment alongside the field archaeology . 
 Time Team was first broadcast in 1994 , and would attract around four million viewers per episode , with Aston becoming " an icon to the viewing public . " Writing in The Guardian , Christopher Dyer noted that Aston 's " unkempt hair and beard , multicoloured sweaters and Black Country accent made him instantly recognisable " to the British public , describing him as " a popular success " who had attracted " a large public following " . Aston acted as chief archaeological adviser to the programme until the end of series nineteen , starring in almost every episode , although he would later comment that when it first started he had no idea it would continue for so long . Aston enjoyed working with the Time Team crew , commenting that they were " a great gang ... There are some real party people . " 
 Aston saw Time Team as an extension of his work as an extramural tutor , telling a 2013 interviewer that it was " a way of reaching 3 million people rather than 30 people in the village hall . " Commenting on the popularity of Time Team , and its role in exposing the British public to archaeology , in a 2010 interview Aston remarked that " My motive was to get as many people as possible interested in archaeology , because we [ in the profession ] all enjoy it and think it interesting . That was my personal aim ... and on that basis I think it is a success . " Time Team encouraged wider public interest in archaeology and led to increasing numbers of students applying to study archaeological courses at British universities , while subscriptions to Current Archaeology magazine quadrupled to 18 @,@ 000 in the show 's first five years . In autumn 1998 , Channel 4 started a Time Team fan club , which had 16 @,@ 000 members within a few months , while Aston became a supporter of the Council for British Archaeology 's Young Archaeologists ' Club ( YAC ) , and with Harding gave regular talks to YAC branches . Aston found himself giving up to 20 public lectures a year on the subject of Time Team , describing the public feedback as " <unk> encouraging " . 
 = = = Professorship : 1996 – 2011 = = = 
 In 1996 , Aston was appointed to the position of Professor of Landscape Archaeology at Bristol University 's Department of Continuing Education , a post designed explicitly for him . In 1998 the post was moved to the Centre for the Historic Environment within the Department of Archaeology . He would subsequently be instrumental in setting up the master 's degree in archaeology and screen media at the department . By 1996 , Aston was feeling " a bit frustrated " with Time Team , primarily because he was always " number two " to Robinson . He proceeded to present his own six @-@ episode series , Time Traveller , in which he explored various archaeological sites in the counties around Bristol . It was broadcast on HTV over July and August 1997 , and gained the largest local audiences for its time slot . 
 The archaeology students of King Alfred 's College , Winchester also participated in a 10 @-@ year project led by Aston to investigate the manor of Shapwick in Somerset . It became the " type site for the study of the development of medieval villages " . Aston published the results of the project in The Shapwick Project , Somerset : A Rural Landscape <unk> ( 2007 ) , co @-@ written with Christopher Gerrard , and this was followed by a more popular account of the project , Interpreting the English Village , in 2013 . 
 Alongside his academic publications , Aston wrote two books on archaeology for a more general audience , both of which were published by Channel 4 Books as a spin @-@ off from the Time Team television series . The first of these was Time Team 's <unk> : A Companion to Archaeology , co @-@ written with Carenza Lewis and Phil Harding and first published in 2000 . Based around the fictional British town of <unk> , the book looks at how the settlement would have progressed from the Palaeolithic through to the modern day , and examines the remains that each period would have left behind in the archaeological record . This was followed in 2002 by Archaeology is Rubbish : A Beginner 's Guide , which Aston co @-@ wrote with Tony Robinson and dedicated to Harding . Archaeology is Rubbish describes a fictional excavation site in an ordinary suburban back garden , and discusses the evidence from different archaeological periods , the field methods and techniques used by the excavators , and the legal proceedings and problems that archaeologists in Britain face . 
 Aston retired from Bristol University in 2004 , subsequently becoming Professor Emeritus . He was also appointed an Honorary Visiting Professor at the University of Exeter , University of Durham , and the University of Worcester . That year , the University of Winchester awarded him an honorary Doctor of Letters . In 2006 Aston began writing a regular column , " Mick 's Travels " , for the bimonthly journal British Archaeology , the publication of the Council for British Archaeology . In 2007 , Worcester University awarded Aston an honorary doctorate ; that same year a number of his colleagues released a festschrift in his honour entitled People and Places : Essays in Honour of Michael Aston . 
 = = = Final years : 2012 – 13 = = = 
 In February 2012 it was reported that Aston had left Time Team . He explained his position to the Western Daily Press , stating that the show 's producers had made a number of changes to the series without consulting him , and that in the process Time Team had been " dumbed down " , something he considered bad for archaeology . He was annoyed that a number of archaeologists — including surveyor Stewart Ainsworth , small finds specialist Helen <unk> and illustrator Victor Ambrus — had seen their roles diminished while a new co @-@ presenter , Mary @-@ Ann <unk> ( a former model with a bachelor 's degree in archaeology and anthropology ) , had been introduced , and that as a result the episodes now contained " a lot of <unk> about . " In an interview with the magazine British Archaeology Aston said : " The time had come to leave . I never made any money out of it , but a lot of my soul went into it . I feel really , really angry about it . " 
 In July Aston received a lifetime achievement award at the British Archaeological Awards , with Bristol University 's Professor Mark Horton praising him for making " the past accessible to all " . In October , Channel 4 announced that the twentieth series of Time Team would be its last as the show was being axed . In December Aston signed a petition advocating his support for the revamp of the Somerset Rural Life Museum in Glastonbury , which was then seeking financial backers . 
 On 24 June 2013 it was announced that Aston had died unexpectedly at his home in Somerset . 
 Ralph Lee , head of Channel 4 's factual programming , announced that they had been " terribly saddened " by the news , and that they were planning a " tribute night " to Aston consisting of Time Team episodes to be screened on More4 on 13 July . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Aston was known for his " unfailing commitment and integrity " , with his life being dominated by " old @-@ fashioned idealism and loyalty " . He was a vegetarian and a naturist , as well as an anarchist and an atheist . Describing himself as " a keen European " , a friend of his noted that he " railed against right wing politics , reserving special venom for Margaret Thatcher , and fought against all manner of authority , including university paperwork , and most especially if it came in a uniform . " 
 His hobbies included gardening , pottery , astronomy , listening to classical music and cooking . He supported a number of charities and other causes , including Greenpeace , the Woodland Trust , Oxfam and <unk> International . He liked to live a private , hermit @-@ like life , and once commented that " For some of the time I feel I could be a monk " but that he " couldn 't cope with the celibacy . " A self @-@ described " solitary person " , he found it somewhat annoying being a television celebrity and being recognised by members of the public . 
 Aston had a son , James , and a stepdaughter , Kathryn , both children of his former partner <unk> Allinson , with whom he broke up in 1998 . He later entered into a relationship with landscape historian Teresa Hall , who survived him on his death . He lived in what he called " a rather grotty ' 60s bungalow " in Somerset . The reporter Steve <unk> visited Aston 's home in 2008 , where he noted that it was filled with " a labyrinth of books and maps , seemingly with different projects at different stages in each room . " 
 Aston commented that throughout his life he suffered from poor health ; he was afflicted with aspergillosis from the early 1980s , and was also asthmatic . He suffered a brain haemorrhage in March 2003 , and was hospitalised for two weeks . The experience sent him into depression for eighteen months , during which time he read the autobiography of actress Jane <unk> , who had gone through the same experience , something which he believed aided his recovery more than anything else . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Aston did not believe that he would leave a significant legacy behind him . He commented that this was the case because Britain 's archaeological community had failed to develop the work that he had done with Time Team and with extramural teaching , and that all the public outreach he had accomplished would die with him . He felt that there was no " celebrity archaeologist " to replace him , and ultimately felt that the situation in British archaeology made him " angry and sad . " 
 In British Archaeology magazine , Aston was described as " the Mortimer Wheeler of our times " because , despite strong differences between their personalities , both had done much to bring archaeology to the British public . It went on to note that Aston reminded archaeologists that " their job is to do archaeology , and if that was an archaeology that meant nothing to ordinary people , there was no point in it – and government would be among the first to notice . " Two of Aston 's colleagues from Bristol University , Stuart Prior and Mark Horton , commented that " Mick brought archaeology into the living rooms of half the nation , and left a legacy that will shape the discipline for decades to come . " Writing for the website of Antiquity , Christopher Gerrard described him as " perhaps the best known face in British archaeology " , adding that " in so many different areas of medieval archaeology his legacy will live on " . Emma <unk> described Aston as " Somerset 's premier archaeologist " in her obituary on the This is Somerset website . 
 Following Aston 's death , former colleague Francis Pryor noted that Aston was a " remarkable archaeologist who could really dig " , being a " warm , loving , nice man . " Another colleague , Phil Harding , commented on Aston 's " incredible knowledge " and " effortless way of making archaeology accessible to people . " Tony Robinson wrote of him : " Mick was a real child of the ' 60s and a bit of a rebel , but he was also a series of contradictions . He was one of the best academic archaeologists in the country , yet his real love was teaching ordinary people . He was the <unk> old Black Country curmudgeon you could imagine , but he had a heart of absolute gold . " He also noted that " archaeology is now a subject that tens of thousands of people enjoy and value , and this is almost solely down to him . " Ralph Lee , head of Channel 4 's factual programming , described Aston as a " brilliant communicator " who helped make archaeology " so popular " in the UK . 
 = The Vinyl Conflict = 
 The Vinyl Conflict is a box set by the thrash metal band Slayer , released October 12 , 2010 . It includes all ten of Slayer 's studio albums since 1986 and their 1991 live album Decade of Aggression . The idea of releasing a second box set was made public in August 2010 . It was first released with a price of $ 199 @.@ 99 . The albums are all in vinyl and are remastered . It received generally positive reception from critics . 
 = = Conception = = 
 In August 2010 , it was announced that band would be releasing a second box set after Soundtrack to the Apocalypse ( 2003 ) , and would include every one of Slayer 's studio albums from 1986 's Reign In Blood to 2009 's World Painted Blood . It originally had a price tag of $ 199 @.@ 99 , but is now sold at retail price of $ 149 @.@ 98 . It was released through American Recordings and Sony . Blabbermouth.net noted that they are " treating the albums the way they would treat a great jazz , classical , Bob Dylan or Miles Davis record , something that isn 't normally done for metal records . " To increase quality , <unk> were cut several times , and the original albums were remastered . It was released as a high @-@ quality 180 gram audiophile vinyl , pressed at RTI , an American pressing plant . The vinyl discs are packaged in a standard , clear inner sleeve to preserve the vinyl , and are also in high @-@ quality litho @-@ wrapped jackets , and boxed in a slipcase . Reproductions of the original albums inner sleeve artwork were converted to 12 inch square inserts to fit the standard vinyl disc covers . 
 Adam Farber of Sony Music Entertainment explained : " The vinyl box is a real treat for fans , especially with today 's renewed and increased interest in vinyl . " It is the first time that ten of Slayer 's studio albums have been mass @-@ produced on vinyl . Dino Paredes of American Records relates : " It 's been years and years since the Slayer vinyl has been in print — only the two most recent albums are currently available on vinyl , the rest have been out of print for years and very hard to find . These albums sound spectacular — they sound like you 've never heard them before . Everything about ' The Vinyl Conflict ' — the look of it , the feel of it — is very strong , very powerful , very Slayer , from the music to the dripping , bloody pentagram on the front of the box . It 's perfect . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 John <unk> of the Associated Press criticized its price , stating : " For $ 200 , casual fans may want to steer clear . " <unk> also said that what it " offers the hard @-@ core listener goes beyond the distinct romance of vinyl 's warm , earthy sound . " Bob Gendron of <unk> wrote that the box set was a " godsend " and also said that they were " amazingly produced LPs that bring to life several of the greatest metal records ever made … " Guitar World praised the box set for its mastering , saying the benefits of the treatment " are immediately clear when you drop the needle onto one of these babies . Basically all the songs Slayer fans lose their mind over are here , sounding heavier , livelier and more brutal than ever . " He also said that the remastering made a listener want to thoroughly listen to the music . 
 = = Album listing = = 
 = AMX @-@ 30E = 
 The AMX @-@ 30E ( E stands for España , Spanish for Spain ) is a Spanish main battle tank based on France 's AMX @-@ 30 . Although originally the Spanish government sought to procure the German Leopard 1 , the AMX @-@ 30 was ultimately awarded the contract due to its lower price and the ability to manufacture it in Spain . 280 units were manufactured by Santa Bárbara Sistemas for the Spanish Army , between 1974 and 1983 . 
 First acquired in 1970 , the tank was to supplement Spain 's fleet of M47 and M48 Patton United States tanks and to reduce Spain 's reliance on American equipment in its army . The first 19 AMX @-@ 30 tanks were acquired from France in 1970 , while another 280 were assembled in Spain . It was Spain 's first mass @-@ produced tank and developed the country 's industry to the point where the government felt it could produce a tank on its own , leading to the development of the Lince tank project in 1985 . It also offered Santa Bárbara Sistemas the experience which led to the production of the Leopard 2E in late 2003 . Although final assembly was carried out by Santa Bárbara Sistemas , the production of the AMX @-@ 30E also included other companies in the country . Total production within Spain amounted to as much as 65 % of the tank . 
 Spain 's AMX @-@ 30E fleet went through two separate modifications in the late 1980s , a modernization program and a reconstruction program . The former , named the AMX @-@ 30EM2 ( 150 tanks ) , sought to modernize and improve the vehicle 's automotive characteristics , while the latter , or the AMX @-@ 30EM1 ( 149 tanks ) , resulted in a more austere improvement of the tank 's power plant by maintaining the existing engine and replacing the transmission . Both programs extended the vehicle 's lifetime . Spain 's fleet of AMX @-@ 30EM1s was replaced in the late 1990s by the German Leopard 2A4 , and the AMX @-@ 30EM2s were replaced by Centauro wheeled anti @-@ tank vehicles in the early 21st century . 
 Although 19 AMX @-@ 30Es were deployed to the Spanish Sahara in 1970 , the tank never saw combat . In 1985 Indonesia expressed interest in the AMX @-@ 30E , while in 2004 the Spanish and Colombian governments discussed the possible sale of around 40 AMX @-@ 30EM2s . Both trade deals fell through . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1960 , Spain 's tank fleet was composed mainly of American M47 Patton tanks , with some newer M48 Patton tanks . The M47s had been acquired by the Spanish army in the mid @-@ 1950s , replacing the previous fleet of 1930s @-@ vintage Panzer I , T @-@ 26 and Panzer IV tank designs . During the 1957 @-@ 58 <unk> War , the United States ' ban on the usage of American ordnance supplied earlier as military aid to Spain pushed Spain to look for alternative equipment which could be freely employed in the Spanish Sahara . 
 In the early 1960s , Spain looked towards its European neighbors for a new tank . The Spanish government first approached Krauss @-@ Maffei , the German manufacturer of the Leopard 1 , and the company applied for an export license from the German Economics Ministry . Spain 's status as a non @-@ NATO country meant that the decision to grant the export license had to be reviewed by the <unk> ( Federal Security Council ) , or the <unk> , which was responsible for the coordination of the national defense policy . Ultimately , the council ruled that Krauss @-@ Maffei could sign an export contract with Spain . The deal was , however , stalled by pressure from the United Kingdom 's Labour Party on the basis that the Leopard 's 105 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 13 in ) L7 tank gun was British technology . Meanwhile , Spain tested the French AMX @-@ 30 between 2 and 10 June 1964 . 
 The Leopard 1 and the AMX @-@ 30 originated from a joint tank development program known as the <unk> . For a tank , the AMX @-@ 30 had a low silhouette ; the height of the tank was 2 @.@ 28 meters ( 7 @.@ 48 ft ) , compared to the Leopard 's 2 @.@ 6 meters ( 8 @.@ 53 ft ) . In terms of lethality , the AMX @-@ 30 's Obus G high @-@ explosive anti @-@ tank ( HEAT ) round was one of the most advanced projectiles at the time . Because HEAT warheads become less efficient during spin stabilization induced by the rifling of a tank @-@ gun barrel , the Obus G was designed so that the shaped charge warhead was mounted on ball bearings within an outer casing , allowing the round to be spin stabilized through the rifling of the gun without affecting the warhead inside . The Obus G was designed to penetrate up to 400 millimeters ( 15 @.@ 75 in ) of steel armor . On the other hand , the Leopard was armed with the <unk> tank gun , capable of penetrating the frontal armor of most contemporary tanks . Although the Leopard boasted greater armor than the AMX @-@ 30 — partially accounting for the weight difference between the two tanks — the latter was sold at a cheaper price . 
 In May 1970 , the Spanish government decided to sign a contract with the French company GIAT to begin production of the AMX @-@ 30 . However , it was not the advantages of the French vehicle itself that influenced the decision . Rather , it was the UK 's unwillingness to sell their L7 tank @-@ gun , the low cost of the AMX @-@ 30 , and the French offer to allow Spain to manufacture the tank , that led the Spanish Army to favor the French armored vehicle . 
 = = Production = = 
 On 22 June 1970 , the Spanish Ministry of Defense signed an agreement of military cooperation with France , which outlined plans for the future acquisition of around 200 tanks for the Spanish Army . Of these , 180 were to be manufactured under license in Spain and 20 were to be manufactured by France . Ultimately , GIAT was contracted to manufacture 19 tanks . These were delivered to the Spanish Legion 's <unk> company , deployed in the Spanish Sahara . The first six AMX @-@ 30s were delivered by rail to the Spanish border city of Irún , in the Basque Country , and then transferred to Bilbao . Finally , they were shipped by the Spanish Navy , on the transport Almirante Lobo , to El <unk> in the Spanish Sahara . This unit existed until 1975 , when it was disbanded and its tanks transferred to the Uad @-@ Ras Mechanized Infantry Regiment . 
 This agreement laid the foundations for the upcoming tank plant at the industrial polygon of Las <unk> , near the town of Alcalá de <unk> . Several parts of the tank were subcontracted to other Spanish companies , including <unk> <unk> ( turret ) , Boetticher , Duro <unk> and E. N. Bazán . The grade of local production varied per batch . The first 20 tanks were to have 18 % of each vehicle manufactured in Spain ; the next 40 would have 40 % of the vehicle manufactured in Spain . The other 120 had 65 % of the tank manufactured in the country . Production began in 1974 , at a rate of five tanks per month , and ended on 25 June 1979 . The first five tanks were delivered to the Uad Ras Mechanized Infantry Regiment on 30 October 1974 . This batch also replaced the M41 Walker Bulldog light tanks and M48 Patton tanks in the Armored Cavalry Regiment Villaviciosa and the Armored Infantry Regiment Alcázar de Toledo , receiving 23 and 44 tanks , respectively . 
 On 27 March 1979 , prior to the end of production of the first batch , the Spanish Army and Santa Bárbara Sistemas signed a contract for the production and delivery of a second batch of 100 AMX @-@ 30Es . In 1980 , after the 200th AMX @-@ 30E was delivered to the Spanish Army , the tank 's patent was awarded to Spain . This allowed minor modifications to be done to the vehicle without having to consult GIAT . It also meant that the degree of local construction of each vehicle augmented considerably . Production of the second batch lasted between 1979 and 1983 . By the time production ended , the Spanish Army fielded 299 AMX @-@ 30Es ( 280 produced between 1974 and 1983 , and 19 delivered from France in 1970 ) and 4 training vehicles delivered in 1975 . Santa Bárbara Sistemas also manufactured 18 Roland España ( denominated AMX @-@ <unk> ) anti @-@ air vehicles and 10 AMX @-@ 30D armored recovery vehicles . The average cost per tank , in the first batch , was 45 million pesetas ( US $ 642 @,@ 800 ) . Cost per tank increased during the second batch to 62 million pesetas ( 885 @,@ 700 dollars ) . 
 Although brand new , the AMX @-@ 30E entered service with automotive issues , including problems with the antiquated <unk> @-@ 200D transmission . Consequently , as the first production batch began to end , the Spanish Army and Santa Bárbara Sistemas began to study possible upgrades . The main objectives were to increase the power and the reliability of the power pack , an improvement to the tank 's firepower and accuracy , as well as to increase the vehicle 's ballistic protection and overall survivability . A number of modernization packages were proposed , including a suggestion to mount the AMX @-@ 30E 's turret on a Leopard 1 's chassis . Other options included swapping the existing power pack for a new American diesel engine and transmission or exchanging the power pack for a new German diesel engine and transmission . More austere versions of these same options were offered , pairing the existing HS @-@ 110 engine with the already mentioned transmissions . Another prototype was produced using the Leopard 's more modern tracks , and another similar prototype mounted a new 12 @.@ 7 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) machine gun for the loader 's position . France 's GIAT also offered to modernize Spain 's AMX @-@ 30Es to AMX @-@ 30B2 standards , a modernization being applied to French AMX @-@ 30s . 
 = = = Modernization = = = 
 Ultimately , a mixed solution named Tecnología Santa Bárbara @-@ Bazán ( Santa Bárbara @-@ Bazán Technology ) ( or TSB ) was chosen . The improvement of the tank 's mobility entailed replacing the HS @-@ 110 diesel engine with an MTU 833 Ka @-@ 501 diesel engine , producing 850 metric horsepower ( 625 kW ) , and the transmission with a German ZF LSG @-@ 3000 , compatible with engines of up to 1 @,@ 500 metric horsepower ( 1103 kW ) . The first 30 engines were to have 50 % of the engine manufactured in Spain ; the rest , 73 % were to be produced indigenously . This new engine gave the modernized tank a power ratio of 23 metric horsepower per tonne ( 21 @.@ 13 hp / S / T ) . The new engine was coupled with the AMX @-@ 30B2 's improved torsion @-@ bar suspension , which used larger diameter torsion @-@ bars and new shocks . 
 To improve the tank 's firepower , the gun mount around the loader 's turret hatch was modified to allow the installation of a 12 @.@ 7 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 5 in ) machine gun , while the main gun 's firepower was augmented through the introduction of the new <unk> armor @-@ piercing , fin @-@ stabilized discarding sabot ( APFSDS ) . The gun 's accuracy was improved through the installation of the new Mark 9 modification A / D fire control system , designed by Hughes Aircraft Company . The new system allowed firing during the day and during night operations , and increased the likelihood of a first round impact . The fire control system was also modernized through the exchange of the old <unk> gunner 's periscope with a new periscope and a new Nd : YAG laser rangefinder . A new ballistics computer , the NSC @-@ 800 , was issued , as well as a new digital panel for the gunner , designed and manufactured by the Spanish company <unk> . The tank commander also received a control unit that allowed the choice of ammunition for the gun and provided information on the ballistics of the round and the target to be engaged . As a result , the loader received a presentation unit to display information on which round to load into the gun 's breech and to communicate ballistic data received , including angular velocity , wind velocity , gun elevation and vehicle inclination . The fire control system also allowed for the future upgrade to a more sophisticated stabilization system for the tank 's main gun . Survivability improvements included the addition of new steel side @-@ skirts , a new smoke generating system linked to the engine and a new fire suppression system . 
 One hundred fifty AMX @-@ 30Es received this modernization package and were designated AMX @-@ 30EM2s . The program began in 1989 and ended in 1993 . Ultimately , Spain 's AMX @-@ 30EM2s were replaced by brand @-@ new Centauro anti @-@ tank vehicles , which were partially manufactured in Spain , in the early 21st century . 
 = = = Reconstruction = = = 
 The other 149 AMX @-@ 30Es were reconstructed to improve their mobility . The reconstruction consisted of the replacement of the original French transmission with the American Allison CD @-@ 850 @-@ 6A . Furthermore , several parts of the tank , such as the brakes , were renovated in order to bring them up to their original standards . The CD @-@ 850 @-@ 6A was an automatic transmission , with a triple differential providing two forward velocities and one reverse velocity . However , the new transmission resulted in a new problem . The excessive heat produced by the transmission reduced the vehicle 's range . The reconstruction of the 149 AMX @-@ 30Es began in 1988 , and these were designated AMX @-@ 30EM1s . In the early 1990s Spain received a large number of M60 Patton tanks , replacing its fleet of M47s and M48s , as well as its AMX @-@ 30EM1s . 
 = = Export = = 
 In the mid @-@ 1980s Indonesia approached Spain in an attempt to procure armaments for the modernization of its armed forces . Of the possible armaments for sale , Indonesia expressed interest in the procurement of the AMX @-@ 30 . Although this deal fell through , in 2004 the Spanish and Colombian governments agreed on the sale of between 33 and 46 second @-@ hand AMX @-@ 30EM2s , which had recently been replaced in the Spanish Army . However , the deal was canceled after José María Aznar was replaced by José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero as prime minister of Spain — the new Spanish government declared that Spain didn 't even have enough AMX @-@ 30EM2s in working condition to sell to Colombia . 
 = Selena ( album ) = 
 Selena is the self @-@ titled debut studio album by American Tejano singer Selena , released on October 17 , 1989 by EMI Latin . Its music incorporates a range of contemporary genres with a mix of cumbia and regional styles of Mexican music . The album was released after EMI Latin president Jose Behar 's request for a crossover album was denied by the heads of EMI Records ' pop division . The majority of the recordings were composed by A.B. Quintanilla — Selena 's brother and principal record producer and songwriter . Aside from A.B. , Selena worked with two Mexican songwriters , Alejandro Montealegre and Reinaldo Ornelas . Selena peaked at number seven on the U.S. Billboard Regional Mexican Albums chart . 
 The recording lead Selena to win Female Vocalist of the Year and Female Entertainer of the Year at the 1990 Tejano Music Awards . The album was more successful than her local independent label albums . It outsold other female Tejano singers albums at the time of its release , and as a result increased the singer 's popularity . Selena became a sex icon after the album 's release . Selena had a mixture of music genres , which became her trademark . The lead single " Contigo Quiero Estar " peaked at number eight on the U.S. Billboard Hot Latin Tracks . Two other singles released from the album — " Mentiras " and " Sukiyaki " — were commercially less successful . 
 = = Production = = 
 José Behar , president of EMI Latin , attended the 1989 Tejano Music Awards , and was scouring the area for new acts . After Selena performed , Behar called his boss and told him about her . Behar thought he found the next " Gloria Estefan " , to which his manager thought he was illogical . Selena later signed with EMI Latin later that year and became the first artist to sign with them . Recording began immediately after she signed with them in 1989 . Initially , EMI Latin did not want Selena 's brother A.B. Quintanilla III to write and produce any of her songs ; they felt that they were " gambling " when they opened a Latin division of EMI Records . The company allowed A.B. to write and produce Selena after the family argued that the recording label should give him a chance . A.B. said in 2002 that Selena displayed a mix of music genres that became a standard practice when he began producing Selena 's career . Their father and manager Abraham Quintanilla , Jr. gave the job to <unk> , after he successfully produced several recordings in Selena 's musical career prior to their arrival at EMI Latin . Selena recorded most of the songs in San Antonio , Texas at <unk> Studios , while " Sukiyaki " and " My Love " were recorded in Houston , Texas at Sunrise Studios . The former was written by Selena , who wanted the song to be on the album . A.B. believed " My Love " echoed works by Exposé and Sweet Sensation that had a " club feel " . 
 The only tracks A.B. did not composed were " Sukiyaki " , " Contigo Quiero Estar " , and " No Te Vayas " . The latter was an original 1960s Japanese recording by Kyu Sakamoto . The lyrics Selena used were a Spanish version of an English version of the song by Janice Marie Johnson . Keyboardist of Los Dinos , Ricky Vela and backup dancer Pete Astudillo helped with the translation of " Sukiyaki " ; Vela confessed in 2002 that his Spanish wasn 't perfect and cited Astudillo as having done the majority of the songwriter for the track . Vela also said that he used a music sequencer and began " elaborating " Selena 's music with the start of " Sukiyaki " . Selena 's sister and drummer of the band , Suzette Quintanilla , said in 2002 that " Sukiyaki " was her favorite track off Selena . Texas Monthly called " Sukiyaki " a " sentimental " song . " Contigo Quiero Estar " was written by Mexican songwriter Alejandro Montealegre while " No Te Vayas " was written by Reinaldo Ornelas . Abraham called the recording a " Tejano ranchera " tune . The song was produced with a <unk> synthesizer , handled by Joe Ojeda who joined the band a few days prior to the recording session of " Contigo Quiero Estar " . A.B. wanted " No Te Vayas " on the album because of its reggae feel , he thought it would make the album " exotic " from other Spanish @-@ language albums that were released at that time . " Tengo Ganas de Llorar " was the last song recorded and included on Selena . 
 = = Release = = 
 Selena was released on October 17 , 1989 through EMI Latin . In its first week on the U.S. Billboard Regional Mexican Albums chart ( December 2 , 1989 ) , it was positioned at number 17 . It peaked at number seven on March 24 , 1990 . It was on the chart for another three weeks . On May 5 , 1990 , it reentered the chart at number 14 , after the release of Ven Conmigo ( 1990 ) . However , it slipped off the charts once again . It reentered the chart again two times in August 1990 . " Contigo Quiero Estar " , " Mentiras " , and " Sukiyaki " were released as singles . The lead single , " Contigo Quiero Estar " peaked at number eight on the U.S. Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart . The album was a moderate success for Selena . 
 At the 1990 Tejano Music Awards , Selena won Female Vocalist of the Year and Female Entertainer of the Year . " Amame , <unk> " , a duet with Astudillo , was nominated for " Vocal Duo of the Year " at the 1990 Tejano Music Awards . On August 27 , 2002 , Selena was re @-@ released as part of the 20 Years of Music series . It had one bonus track ( " La Bamba " ) and spoken liner notes by the singer 's family , friends , and former band . 
 = = Legacy and reception = = 
 Her album Selena performed better than albums from other female Tejano singers . Lee Stacy wrote in her book Mexico and the United States ( 2002 ) , that Selena " achieved reasonable success " . According to Billboard magazine , Selena 's recordings were not successful until she signed with EMI Latin in 1989 and released her debut album with them . Manuel Pena wrote in his book Música <unk> : The Cultural Economy of Artistic Transformation , that after 1989 , Selena 's popularity increased and she became a sex icon following her album 's release . According to Latin Style magazine , the tracks " Sukiyaki " , " Contigo Quiero Estar " , and " <unk> " , were " pivotal " recordings that showcased Selena 's " mixed rhythm and sound " which the magazine attributed it as being her " trademark " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits = = 
 Credits are taken from the album 's liner notes . 
 Selena — vocals 
 Pete Astudillo — backing vocals 
 Ricky Vela — keyboardist , synthesizer 
 Jose " Pepe " Ojeda — keyboardist 
 Suzette Quintanilla — drums 
 Roger Garcia — guitarist 
 A.B. Quintanilla III — bass guitar , backing vocalist , music producer , songwriter , music arranger 
 Manny Rodriguez Guerra — recording engineer 
 Brian " Red " Moore — co @-@ producer 
 Lisette Lorenzo — cover designer ( 2002 re @-@ issue ) 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = Books = = 
 Peña , Manuel ( 2002 ) . Música <unk> : the cultural economy of artistic transformation . Texas A & M Univ . Pr . ISBN 9 @-@ <unk> @-@ <unk> @-@ 888 
 Stacy , Lee ( 2002 ) . Mexico and the United States . Marshall Cavendish . ISBN <unk> . 
 = Brian Wilson ( baseball ) = 
 Brian Patrick Wilson ( born March 16 , 1982 ) is a former American professional baseball relief pitcher . He has pitched in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) for the San Francisco Giants and Los Angeles Dodgers . He stands 6 feet 2 inches ( 1 @.@ 88 m ) tall and weighs 205 pounds ( 93 kg ) . He throws and bats right @-@ handed . He throws a four @-@ seam fastball , a cutter , a slider , and a two @-@ seam fastball . 
 Wilson pitched collegiately at Louisiana State University . His college career ended during his junior season , when he injured his elbow and underwent Tommy John surgery . The San Francisco Giants selected him in the 2003 draft . He reached the major leagues in 2006 and had become the Giants ' regular closer by the end of 2007 . In 2010 , he led the National League ( NL ) with 48 saves and posted a 1 @.@ 81 ERA , and he saved clinching games at every level of the playoffs , including the World Series . 
 In the first week of the 2012 season , Wilson injured his elbow and subsequently underwent his second Tommy John surgery . He completed his recovery midway through the 2013 season and signed with the Los Angeles Dodgers , pitching effectively with them as a late @-@ inning reliever through the playoffs . However , he was not able to continue his success in 2014 , and the Dodgers released him after that season . 
 Wilson is known for his large black beard , which he began growing during the 2010 pennant race . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Wilson was born in Winchester , Massachusetts on March 16 , 1982 . While he was in second grade , he moved to Londonderry , New Hampshire . Today , he talks little of his childhood except to discuss his father , Mike Wilson , who was an Air Force veteran and a demanding perfectionist . During fall , he would have Brian bag leaves and bury them in the woods ; and in winter , he would have Brian spend seven hours shoveling snow on weekends . Brian said in a 2011 interview , " I think that 's how you need to be raised . It 's not your friend , it 's your dad . And he 's going to be strict . And one day you 're going to understand why . And sometimes , it 's a little too late . They might pass away , and you might not get that chance to say thanks or understand why you did those things . But when you become a man , you understand why . " 
 When Wilson was 12 years old , his father was diagnosed with cancer . His father fought the disease for five years before dying while Wilson was attending Londonderry High School ; Wilson today says he had to become a man when his father was diagnosed . In a 2011 story , ESPN.com writer Elizabeth Merrill said about Wilson 's high school years , " He was an honor roll student at Londonderry , but clashed with various authority figures who didn 't appreciate his occasional lack of a filter . " In the same story , a number of Londonderry faculty speculated that some teachers didn 't understand Wilson 's life situation at the time . Art <unk> , an assistant principal at the school , added , " It happened at probably the worst time anybody could lose your dad . Watching his dad deteriorate over the years was probably the singular thing that formed his personality . " 
 = = High school career = = 
 Bob Napolitano , Wilson 's coach at Londonderry High School , noticed Wilson 's ability to concentrate on baseball . Napolitano specifically remembered the first home game of Wilson 's senior year , which happened shortly after his father 's death . No fewer than 29 professional scouts , all with radar guns , showed up to see him pitch . According to Napolitano , Wilson was completely oblivious to their appearance ; he ate and drank in the dugout , warmed up , and pitched a two @-@ hitter while apparently not noticing that scouts were there . The Cleveland Indians offered him a contract straight out of high school , but he did not sign , opting to attend college instead . 
 = = College career = = 
 After a coach saw Wilson pitch well at a tournament in California , he was offered a scholarship to Louisiana State University ( LSU ) , where he played for the LSU Tigers baseball team , eventually becoming their No. 2 starter . In his time at LSU , Wilson pitched in 51 games ( 22 starts ) and accumulated 18 wins , 10 losses , and five saves . He was in the middle of his third season on March 28 , 2003 , when he injured his elbow and underwent Tommy John surgery . He also played for the Keene Swamp Bats of the New England Collegiate Baseball League , a summer league for collegiate prospects . Despite facing extensive rehabilitation , Wilson chose to enter the 2003 Major League Baseball draft . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues = = = 
 Coming off his surgery , Wilson was drafted by the San Francisco Giants in the 24th round in 2003 . He began his career with the Hagerstown Suns of the Class @-@ A South Atlantic League in 2004 . In 23 games , he had a 2 – 5 record , a 5 @.@ 34 earned run average ( ERA ) , 41 strikeouts , and 22 walks in 57 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . He made three starts that year , the only time he ever started games professionally . The Giants switched single @-@ A affiliates the next year and Wilson began pitching for the Augusta GreenJackets . In 26 games , he had a 5 – 1 record , a 0 @.@ 82 ERA , 30 strikeouts , and seven walks in 33 innings pitched while notching 13 saves , good for second in the league behind Brett Campbell 's 19 . His performance with Augusta caused Mark Camps of the San Francisco Chronicle to mention him in his " Minor Report " on May 15 . He also pitched for the Norwich Navigators of the double @-@ A Eastern League ( posting no record , eight saves , a 0 @.@ 57 ERA , 22 strikeouts , five walks , and 15 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 15 games ) and the Fresno Grizzlies of the Triple @-@ A Pacific Coast League ( posting a 1 – 1 record , no saves , a 3 @.@ 97 ERA , 13 strikeouts , eight walks , and 11 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in nine games ) . 
 = = = San Francisco Giants = = = 
 = = = = 2006 season = = = = 
 Wilson began 2006 with the Grizzlies before getting called up to the majors on April 23 to replace Tyler Walker , who was designated for assignment after struggling to begin the season . He made his major league debut that day in relief , pitching two innings , surrendering two hits and no runs while striking out three . He later revealed that he hurt himself during his first inning but continued pitching through the second without informing anyone of his injury . Afterward he was placed on the disabled list for a month . On May 23 , he returned from the DL . He was optioned to Fresno on June 7 when Tim Worrell was activated from the DL ; Giants ' manager Felipe Alou said Wilson was not getting enough playing time . Wilson would go on to have three more stints with the Giants in 2006 . On July 2 , he got his first career save , stranding three inherited runners in the eighth inning and throwing 1 2 ⁄ 3 scoreless innings in a 6 – 2 victory over the San Diego Padres . In 31 games , he had a 2 – 3 record , a 5 @.@ 40 ERA , 23 strikeouts , and 21 walks in 30 innings pitched . In 24 games with Fresno , he had a 1 – 3 record , a 2 @.@ 89 ERA , 30 strikeouts , and 14 walks in 28 innings pitched . 
 = = = = 2007 season = = = = 
 Wilson competed for the closer role with Armando Benítez in 2007 spring training . After he struggled and posted a 7 @.@ 71 ERA , the Giants optioned him to the minors to start the season . After building a 1 – 2 record , 2 @.@ 10 ERA , 37 strikeouts , 24 walks , 11 saves , and 34 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched in 31 games with Fresno , Wilson was called up on August 11 when Jonathan Sánchez was demoted . He was initially used as the setup man for closer Brad Hennessey , but he took over as closer on September 11 when Hennessey lost the role due to ineffectiveness . He went on to pitch in 24 games , recording a 1 – 2 record , a 2 @.@ 28 ERA , 18 strikeouts , six walks , 23 2 ⁄ 3 innings pitched , and six saves . 
 = = = = 2008 season = = = = 
 Wilson remained the Giants ' closer in 2008 and kept the role all season . He recorded 24 consecutive saves from May 3 through August 17 , the longest streak by a Giant since Robb Nen had 28 straight in 2000 . Wilson was named to the All @-@ Star Game after leading the NL in saves with 25 in the first half of the season . He gave up no hits and struck out one in 2 / 3 innings in a 4 – 3 loss to the American League . He continued to lead the league in saves until José Valverde passed him at the end of August . Despite posting a 4 @.@ 04 ERA through September 6 , Wilson converted 37 of 40 save opportunities . In his final seven games of the year , however , he posted a 9 @.@ 56 ERA while converting just four out of seven opportunities . In 63 games , he had a 3 – 2 record , a 4 @.@ 62 ERA , 67 strikeouts , and 28 walks in 62 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . He converted 41 saves in 47 attempts ; his 41 saves were tied with Brad Lidge 's total for second in the league behind Valverde 's 44 . 
 = = = = 2009 season = = = = 
 On June 5 , 2009 , Wilson saved Randy Johnson 's 300th win . Johnson , searching for his 300th win , gave up one unearned run in six innings in Game 1 of a doubleheader against the Washington Nationals ; the Giants had a 2 – 1 lead in the eighth inning . With runners on first and second for the Nationals and two outs , Wilson was called on to get the save . He walked Ryan Zimmerman to load the bases and bring up Adam Dunn . He then loaded the count against Dunn before throwing a called strike three to end the inning . Wilson then pitched a scoreless ninth , preserving the victory for Johnson . On September 24 , with two outs and two strikes in the ninth inning and the Giants leading the Chicago Cubs by a 2 – 1 score , Wilson gave up a two @-@ run home run to Jeff Baker . The loss hurt the Giants ' chances of reaching the playoffs . In 68 games , Wilson had a 5 – 6 record , a 2 @.@ 74 ERA , 83 strikeouts , and 27 walks in 72 1 ⁄ 3 innings pitched . He blew seven saves , but his 38 saves tied for third in the NL with Ryan Franklin 's total behind Heath Bell 's 42 and Francisco Cordero 's 39 . He led the league in saves requiring four outs or more , with eight . 
 = = = = 2010 season = = = = 
 In 2010 spring training , Wilson was asked whether or not he thought himself one of baseball 's elite closers . In what would turn out to be a very prophetic quote , he replied : 
 An elite closer is a closer who 's part of a World Series win . If you get that final out in the final win of the season , then you can consider yourself elite . 
 On March 25 , Wilson agreed to a contract extension with the Giants . He struck out five batters in 1 2 ⁄ 3 innings on May 9 while recording a save in a 6 – 5 victory over the New York Mets . On May 15 , against the Houston Astros with the bases loaded , two outs , and the Giants leading 2 – 1 in the ninth inning , Wilson struck out Kazuo Matsui in a 15 @-@ pitch at bat to end the game . The next day , against Houston with runners on first and second , two outs , and the Giants leading 4 – 3 in the ninth , Wilson retired Matsui to end the game . On June 12 , Wilson entered in the eighth inning with one out , the bases loaded , and the Giants leading the Oakland Athletics 5 – 4 . Wilson struck out Adam Rosales and retired Rajai Davis to end the inning ; he then pitched a scoreless ninth to earn the save . He recorded 22 saves in his first 24 chances and was named to the All @-@ Star Game in which he threw a scoreless eighth inning in the contest , a 3 – 1 victory over the AL . On October 3 ( the final day of the regular season ) , the Giants faced the Padres , whom they led by one game in the NL West . Wilson threw a scoreless inning to earn the save and clinch the division for the Giants . Wilson converted his 48th save that day , tying the Giants ' single season save record of 48 held by Rod Beck . He finished the season with a 3 – 3 record , a 1 @.@ 81 ERA , 93 strikeouts , 26 walks , and 74 2 ⁄ 3 inning pitched in 70 games . He converted 48 of 53 save opportunities and led the majors in saves as well as leading the major leagues in saves of four outs or more ( 10 ) . He was named the This Year in Baseball Closer of the Year after the season . He finished 13th in NL Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) voting . 
 = = = = 2010 postseason = = = = 
 Wilson made his playoff debut in Game 2 of the NL Division Series against the Atlanta Braves ; he blew a save , but that was partly because of an error by Pablo Sandoval . He earned saves in Games 3 and 4 as the Giants defeated the Braves in four games . In the NL Championship Series , the Giants faced the Philadelphia Phillies . In Game 4 , Wilson threw a scoreless inning and earned the win in the 6 – 5 victory . In Game 6 , Wilson entered with one out in the eighth inning , runners on first and second , and the Giants leading 3 – 2 . He got Carlos Ruiz to line into a double play . He then pitched the ninth inning , striking out Ryan Howard with two runners on base , clinching the series for the Giants . He joined Dennis Eckersley , Mitch Williams , and John Wetteland as the only pitchers since 1969 to win or save four games in a postseason series . ( In 2014 Greg Holland of Kansas City matched this feat . ) 
 The Giants faced the Texas Rangers in the World Series . Wilson appeared in three games , allowing no runs . He recorded the save in the series @-@ clinching Game 5 as the Giants won their first World Series since 1954 . 
 = = = = 2011 season = = = = 
 Wilson strained an oblique muscle in 2011 spring training and opened the season on the DL . He was activated from the DL on April 6 . After posting a 3 @.@ 75 ERA in his first two games , Wilson posted a 1 @.@ 26 ERA in his next 35 outings . During a game against the Detroit Tigers on July 1 , Wilson blew a save for a second straight game and was taken out of the game by Bruce Bochy . Upon entering the dugout , Wilson took out his frustrations by throwing a Gatorade cooler and smashing it with a bat . The Giants still won the game 4 – 3 as Jeremy Affeldt got the save . Wilson was elected to his third All @-@ Star Game ; he earned the save in a 5 – 1 victory over the AL . 
 Wilson was placed on the DL on August 21 due to inflammation in his right elbow . At the time of his injury , he was third in the NL in saves , behind Craig <unk> and John Axford . On September 18 , the Giants reactivated him from the DL . After two games back , Bochy decided to shut down Wilson for the final two games of the season . In 57 games , he had a 6 – 4 record , a 3 @.@ 11 ERA , 54 strikeouts , and 31 walks in 55 innings pitched . He converted 36 of his 41 save opportunities which tied Juan Carlos Oviedo for eighth in the NL . 
 = = = = 2012 season = = = = 
 Wilson 's 2012 season would be short @-@ lived . With the Giants leading the Colorado Rockies 4 – 1 entering the bottom of the ninth inning on April 12 , he made his second appearance of the season to get the save for the Giants . He walked in a run to make it 4 – 2 , but retired Marco <unk> with the bases loaded to earn the save . He injured his elbow during the game and underwent Tommy John surgery for the second time in his career on April 19 , causing him to miss the remainder of the season . During his injury @-@ shorted season , Wilson made only 2 appearances with an ERA of 9 @.@ 00 and 1 save . The Giants went on to win their second World Series in three years . Wilson expressed confidence in an interview on April 15 that he would return to the Giants in 2013 . However , because he was coming off an injury and would be owed at least $ 6 @.@ 8 million for 2013 , he was non @-@ tendered after the season , which made him a free agent for the first time in his career . As of the end of the 2012 season , he ranked third all @-@ time in saves as a Giant with 171 , behind only Robb Nen ( 206 ) and Rod Beck ( 199 ) . 
 = = = 2012 – 2013 free agency = = = 
 Wilson chose not to sign with any team before the 2013 season because he wanted to be 100 % recovered from surgery when he attempted his comeback . On July 25 , he threw a bullpen session in front of various teams ' scouts with the hope to sign with a contender . 
 = = = Los Angeles Dodgers = = = 
 On July 30 , 2013 , Wilson agreed to a contract with the Los Angeles Dodgers for the remainder of the 2013 season . After a few weeks at the Dodgers training facility in Arizona , he began a minor league rehab assignment . 
 He joined the Dodgers active roster on August 19 and made his debut with the team on August 22 against the Miami Marlins at Marlins Park . He appeared in 18 games for the Dodgers with a 2 @-@ 1 record and a 0 @.@ 66 ERA . Regardless of signing for the team late in the season , Wilson made 3 relief appearances in the postseason without giving up an earned run until the Dodgers lost in the 2013 NLCS to the St. Louis Cardinals . 
 On December 5 , 2013 , Wilson agreed to a one @-@ year , $ 10 million contract to return to the Dodgers . The deal also contained a player option for the 2015 season . His numbers were not as good in 2014 , as he had a 4 @.@ 66 ERA in 61 appearances . On October 8 , 2014 , he announced that he would be exercising his player option for 2015 . However , the Dodgers designated him for assignment on December 16 , 2014 . He was released by the Dodgers on December 19 and became a free agent . 
 = = Scouting report = = 
 Wilson was a power pitcher . He has a repertoire of four pitches . He throws a straight four @-@ seam fastball around 92 @-@ 95 mph ; this is one of his main pitches . He also has a slider , a cut fastball , and a two @-@ seam fastball . His slider traveled around 89 mph . His cut fastball has allowed him to use fewer four @-@ seam fastballs . In 2011 , he started throwing the two @-@ seam fastball as well . The two @-@ seamer starts away on a right @-@ handed hitter ( or in to a left @-@ handed hitter ) and has dramatic inward ( or outward ) movement over the plate . He has also experimented with curveballs , <unk> , and knuckleballs . 
 Wilson has said that when pitching , players cannot be worried about the potential outcome . 
 This is a man 's sport . You can 't go in there with doubts . You can 't accept failure , and you certainly can 't go into a situation thinking , ' Oh , gosh , what 's going to happen ? ' You make what 's going to happen . ... This game isn 't for negative emotions , or being scared . 
 = = Personality = = 
 Wilson is noted for his flamboyant personality . 
 In the 2010 MLB All @-@ Star Game , Wilson debuted a pair of bright orange cleats and continued to wear them throughout the season . On July 27 , Marlins ' manager Edwin Rodríguez complained that the shoes were too bright . Wilson received a $ 1 @,@ 000 fine from MLB the next day , and he responded by coloring half of the shoes black with a marker . He said afterwards , " The fact that he ( Rodríguez ) thinks these shoes throw 97 – 100 with cut might be a little far @-@ fetched . I guess we should probably have these checked for performance @-@ enhancing cleats . " He also stated that he was punished " for having too much awesome on my feet . " 
 In addition to his mohawk hairstyle , Wilson has a large black beard which he began growing and presumably dyeing during the Giants ' playoff run in 2010 . He never admitted to dyeing it , saying in 2010 , " It 's dark because we play a lot of day games . It 's tanned . It 's focused . " He decided he would not shave until the Giants ' season was over , and only if they failed to win the World Series . During the Giants ' playoff run in 2010 , Giants ' fans began growing their own beards or wearing fake beards . Many fans chanted " Fear the Beard " , and held up signs bearing the same motto . Teammate Sergio Romo also began growing a beard in 2010 ; he has had it intermittently ever since . 
 Wilson has a number of tattoos . On his left shoulder , he has a dragon to honor his father which represents the " protection from fear " that Wilson 's dad gave him . Across his chest , he has the words " In nomine patris " ( " In the name of the father " ) , and on his right wrist he has a Celtic cross with lettering that says " All Honor To Him " in Gaelic ; both of these tattoos symbolize his Christian faith . Finally , he has Japanese Kanji characters on his arm which symbolize his faith ; they say , " Father . Son . Eternal Strength . " 
 Wilson has enjoyed a great deal of media attention during his career . He once had a locally produced , self @-@ filmed reality show called Life of Brian . He has often been on The Cheap Seats . Following the World Series in 2010 , a photo of Wilson celebrating with teammate Buster Posey appeared on the cover of Sports Illustrated . Wilson also appeared on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno and Lopez Tonight . He has frequently starred in commercials . 
 Wilson became a Christian at the age of 23 . He has adopted a gesture of crossing his arms , with his left hand in his glove and his right hand underneath pointing with the index finger while looking at the sky , which both honors The Holy Trinity as well as his late father who died of cancer when Wilson was 17 . He performs it when he records a save or closes out a game . 
 On May 30 , 2011 ( Memorial Day ) , Wilson announced that in memory of his father , an Air Force veteran , he would endow two scholarships for LSU Air Force ROTC cadets . The scholarship will be a need based scholarship available to any college junior or senior . Later that year , on July 7 , Wilson gave away 1 @,@ 000 baseball gloves to members of the Giants Community Fund 's Junior Giants baseball program . 
 Frequently , Wilson has made references to " The Machine " , a character from the movie 8mm . In an episode of The Cheap Seats , he had someone dressed as " The Machine " walk past in the background in full BDSM leather fetish apparel , supposedly unknown to him . Another time , in an interview with Rome , Wilson appeared to receive a call from " The Machine " and pulled a leather mask ( allegedly " The Machine 's " ) out of his pocket to show to Rome . 
 = Croatian Natural History Museum = 
 The Croatian Natural History Museum ( Croatian : Hrvatski <unk> muzej ) is the oldest and biggest natural history museum and the main body for natural history research , preservation and collection in Croatia . Located on Dimitrije Demeter Street in Gornji Grad , one of the oldest neighbourhoods of the Croatian capital Zagreb , it owns one of the biggest museum collections in Croatia , with over 2 million artefacts , including over 1 @.@ 1 million animal specimens . It was founded in 1846 as the " National Museum " . The National Museum was later split up into five museums , three of which were in 1986 merged as departments of the newly named Croatian Natural History Museum . The museum contains a large scientific library open to the public , and publishes the first Croatian natural history scientific journal , Natura <unk> . 
 The permanent display of the Croatian Natural History Museum consists of mineralogical , petrographical and zoological collections , as well as two permanent exhibits in the atrium : the Rock Map of Croatia and the Geological Pole . It is home to the remains of the Neanderthal from Krapina . 
 = = History = = 
 The history of the Croatian Natural History Museum begins with the founding of the so @-@ called " National Museum " ( Narodni muzej ) on 10 September 1846 , the first museum for historic and pre @-@ historic objects related to Croatia . In 1867 , it was moved to its current address . The National Museum grew and was split into five new museums by the end of the 19th century . Three of them covered natural history : the Croatian National Zoological Museum ( Hrvatski <unk> <unk> muzej ) , the Geological – Palaeontological Museum ( <unk> @-@ <unk> muzej ) and the Mineralogical – <unk> Museum ( <unk> @-@ <unk> muzej ) . All three were housed in the same building on Demeter Street 1 , and , in 1986 , united into the Croatian Natural History Museum . 
 The museum 's current building was earlier home to Amadeo 's theatre , the first theatre in Zagreb . Formed in 1797 by Antal <unk> de <unk> , the prefect of Zagreb County , it operated until 1834 . In 2000 , Amadeo 's theatre was revived as a yearly summer series of theatrical plays entitled <unk> Amadeo ( " Amadeo Scene " ) held in the museum atrium . 
 = = Library = = 
 The museum is home to a large scientific library open to the public . Its oldest books were printed in 17th @-@ century Italy , and includes works by Ulisse Aldrovandi , Niccolò Gualtieri and Carl Linné . The library was founded in 1868 by a newly appointed museum director , Spiridon Brusina . Starting from a meager corpus acquired from the National Library , including only three books on zoology , Brusina traveled throughout then @-@ Austria @-@ Hungary in order to acquire books . In 1875 , the museum acquired the large library and natural history collection of Francesco Lanza , a physician and archaeologist from Split , Croatia . Brusina retired in 1901 , reporting a collection 1 @,@ 800 works in 3 @,@ 948 volumes three years earlier . In 1928 , it was recorded that the library held 5 @,@ 838 books in 9 @,@ 901 volumes . As the library was not professionally maintained during the Croatian War of Independence or inventoried since , it is not known how many titles it holds . A 1999 estimate is 30 @,@ 000 volumes and 13 @,@ 100 monographs . 
 = = Journals = = 
 In 1885 , Brusina led a successful initiative to publish The Journal of the Croatian Natural History Society ( Glasnik <unk> <unk> <unk> ) . The journal is published since 1972 under the title <unk> <unk> , and focuses on biology and biomedicine , forestry and biotechnology . In 1992 , the museum began publishing Natura <unk> , a peer @-@ reviewed biological and geological academic journal . The natural history journal was the first of its kind in Croatia , despite the existence of seven natural history museums . The journal is published quarterly in English , and reviewed by both Croatian and foreign scholars . 
 = = Holdings = = 
 The museum is divided into Mineralogical – <unk> , Geological – Palaeontological , Zoological and Botanical Departments . The first three are successors to the National Museum 's 19th @-@ century offspring museums , while the Botanical Department was established in 1990 . 
 The museum 's holdings number over 2 million rocks , minerals , fossils , and other artefacts collected all over the country . The zoological collection consists of 1 @,@ 135 @,@ 000 animal specimens , including a tissue bank for DNA analysis . It also holds the remains of the Neanderthal man found near Krapina by Dragutin <unk> @-@ <unk> , a former director of the National Museum . The original remains are held in the museum 's vault , while a replica is being exhibited in the Krapina museum . 
 The museum 's permanent display encompasses mineralogical and petrographical collections , as well as a collection of animals , the bulk of which dates back to the 19th century . The zoological collection is on the second floor of the museum . It includes the skeleton of a Mediterranean monk seal , a basking shark native to the Adriatic Sea and an Atlantic puffin , a bird today native to the Arctic area , which is believed to have nested in the Adriatic in the 19th century . 
 The mineralogical and petrographical collections are divided into three exhibitions . " From a Collection to a Museum " ( Od <unk> do <unk> ) showcases the work of Croatian mineralogists and <unk> <unk> history , including a geological map of Moslavačka gora in central Croatia by Ljudevit <unk> , as well as the work of Đuro Pilar , one of the first Croatian academic geologists . " The Empire of Minerals " ( <unk> <unk> ) displays a collection of minerals assembled by location of discovery , including collections of agate from Lepoglava and opal , gemstones rare in Croatia . " Rocky Planet Earth " ( <unk> planet <unk> ) is organized by rock types , and also contains meteorites , lava from Vesuvius and speleothems . In 2014 , the exhibitions were made accessible to blind people . 
 The atrium of the museum contains two exhibits : the Rock Map of Croatia ( <unk> <unk> Hrvatske ) and the Geological Pole ( <unk> <unk> ) . The Rock Map of Croatia is a mosaic map assembled from various pieces of rock found in Croatia into the country 's shape . 
 = = Exhibitions = = 
 Exhibitions at the Croatian Natural History Museum have included " <unk> : in Biology and the Kitchen " and " Lion 's Pit " , exhibiting the remains of a cave lion ( Panthera leo spelaea ) , found deep in <unk> Male , a pit cave near <unk> , Croatia . With a body length of 3 @.@ 6 metres ( 12 ft ) , the lion was at the time of discovery claimed to be one of the biggest found in the world thus far . Another notable exhibition displayed the reconstruction of a Megalodon , an extinct giant shark found in the plains of northern Croatia , where the Paratethys ocean once stood . The museum held the first moss animal exhibition in the world in 2006 , entitled " Neptune 's Lace " . In 2009 , visitors had the opportunity to view crocodile fossils from the island Pag , while eighty live snakes owned by the Slovenian breeder Aleš <unk> were exhibited in 2013 . 
 The museum takes part in the Croatian Museum Night ( <unk> <unk> ) , an annual event whereby the public is allowed free entrance to many museums in Croatia during one night in the year . In the 2014 event , the museum was visited by more than 11 @,@ 000 people . 
 = Tropical Storm Arlene ( 1959 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Arlene was a short lived , pre @-@ season tropical storm which made landfall on the central Louisiana coastline on May 30 , 1959 , causing minor damages and one fatality . Arlene developed out of a tropical wave which was first noted near the Dominican Republic on May 23 . Development of the system was slow before it gained enough convection to be declared Tropical Storm Arlene on May 28 . The storm slowly intensified and reached its peak intensity of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) on May 30 . Rapid weakening took place as the storm neared land and Arlene made landfall with winds of 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) later that night . Arlene weakened to what is now classified as a Tropical Depression early the next morning . The system degenerated into a remnant low on the afternoon of May 31 and fully dissipated late on June 2 while located over South Carolina . 
 Arlene dropped heavy rains totaling over 1 ft ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) in localized areas as it moved into the Southeast United States . The maximum rainfall amount was 13 @.@ 55 in ( 344 mm ) , recorded in Merrill , Mississippi , over a three @-@ day period . The heavy rains caused minor flooding in Louisiana and property damage from the storm amounted to $ 500 @,@ 000 ( $ 3 @.@ 7 million 2008 USD ) . One death was indirectly attributed to the storm when a man drowned in rough surf off the Texas coast . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Tropical Storm Arlene developed out of a tropical wave which was first noted near the Dominican Republic on May 23 . The wave slowly developed as it moved westward through the Caribbean Sea and developed into an area of low pressure on May 25 . By May 27 , the low entered the Gulf of Mexico and a ship report the next day showed that the low had developed a closed low @-@ level circulation . Early the next morning , the low was determined to have intensified into Tropical Storm Arlene , the first storm of the season , while located 300 mi ( 480 km ) south @-@ southeast of New Orleans , Louisiana with winds estimated at 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . Arlene was moving towards the northwest at 10 to 15 mph ( 16 to 24 km / h ) . Arlene slowly intensified throughout the day as it continued towards the northwest at 12 to 15 mph ( 19 to 24 km / h ) . On May 29 , Arlene turned towards the west and its foreword motion slowed before becoming nearly stationary that night . 
 The storm was located 150 mi ( 240 km ) south of Lafayette , Louisiana as it drifted northward and winds were estimated to have peaked at 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . However , in the post @-@ season , it was determined that Arlene peaked near landfall with winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . As Arlene neared the coast , the storm began to weaken due to the interaction with land . Arlene made landfall about 40 mi ( 65 km ) southeast of Lafayette , Louisiana at 2100 UTC ( 4 p.m. CST ) . The operational landfall intensity was 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) but it was lowered to 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) in the post season . Upon making landfall , Arlene became the earliest landfalling tropical cyclone in Louisiana history . Arlene weakened quickly to a tropical depression shortly after landfall . The storm further degenerated to a remnant area of low @-@ pressure on the afternoon of May 31 . The remnant of the storm lingered in the Southern United States until June 2 , when it dissipated over South Carolina . Although the original low pressure system dissipated , a new , non tropical center formed further north over Virginia . This new low quickly tracked northeast , brushing the southern coast of New England before moving over Nova Scotia and losing its identity on June 3 . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 The low that eventually became Arlene prompted wind warnings and small craft advisories for both coasts in southern Florida on May 27 . The small craft advisory was significantly expanded the next day when the low was upgraded to Tropical Storm Arlene . The new warnings stretched from Sabine Pass , Texas to Saint Marks , Florida . Gale warnings were also issued upon the upgrade from Morgan City , Louisiana to Pascagoula , Mississippi . Rough seas and tides of two to four feet ( 0 @.@ 6 to 1 @.@ 2 metres ) — also known as storm surge — were expected in the areas under the gale warning . By May 29 , all craft were advised not to leave port in Louisiana . Memories of Hurricane Audrey led to numerous residents evacuating coastal areas upon hearing about Arlene . In Pierre , 50 families evacuated to higher grounds . Officials reported that 25 families were also evacuated from low @-@ lying areas in Vermilion Parish . As Arlene neared landfall , the small craft advisory was canceled from Pensacola , Florida southward . The new warnings extended from Pensacola to Galveston , Texas . The gale warnings shifted more towards the west , now extending from Galveston , Texas to Grand Isle , Louisiana . 
 Arlene produced winds up to 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) with gusts up to 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) upon landfall . The lowest pressure recorded on land was 999 @.@ 7 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 52 inHg ) , which was rounded up to 1000 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 53 inHg ) for the minimum pressure of the storm . Minor storm surge up to three feet was recorded at Weeks Island and Point Au Fer , Louisiana . Heavy rains fell across much of the southeastern Louisiana coastline . During a 24 ‑ hour span , 10 @.@ 92 in ( 277 mm ) of rain fell in <unk> International Airport . Roughly 2 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 m ) of water flooded the control tower at the airport , forcing traffic control workers to relocate to the new tower which was under @-@ construction . A state maximum rainfall of 13 @.@ 13 in ( 334 mm ) fell in Houma . Along the coast , a few towns reported downed trees and electrical lines from high winds , resulting in scattered power outages . 
 At the height of the storm , several of the main roads in New Orleans were shut down due to flooding . At least 100 homes were flooded by the storm . In Baton Rouge , dozens of people were evacuated from a flooded home via ambulance and wagon to safer areas . In nearby Mississippi , rainfall from the storm was mainly confined to the southeastern counties ; however , significant accumulations , peaking at 13 @.@ 55 in ( 344 mm ) , were recorded . Rain from the remnant low spread into Georgia . Some stream flooding and crop damage were reported but overall , the damage was minor . In all , Arlene caused $ 500 @,@ 000 ( $ 3 @.@ 7 million 2010 USD ) in damage . One death was related to Arlene ; a man drowned in rough surf off the Galveston coast . After the initial low dissipated over the southeastern United States , the extratropical remnants of Arlene brought moderate rainfall to parts of the Mid @-@ Atlantic States and New England . 
 = The Cool Kids = 
 The Cool Kids is an American alternative hip hop duo composed of rappers Antoine " Sir Michael Rocks " Reed ( originally from Matteson , Illinois ) and Evan " Chuck Inglish " Ingersoll ( originally from Mount Clemens , Michigan ) . The Cool Kids ' music had been released primarily to the independent Chocolate Industries via their own label <unk> Recordings , but as of 2010 are no longer with Chocolate Industries .. Reed and Ingersoll have made appearances in numerous forms of media , as well as in collaborations with other artists such as Chip tha Ripper , Asher Roth , Yelawolf , Kenna , Ivan Ives , The Bloody <unk> , Drake , Travis Barker , Lil Wayne , Pac Div , Ludacris , Mac Miller , Maroon 5 , Curren $ y , and The O <unk> 's . Cool Kids are also members of the hip @-@ hop collective All City Chess Club founded in 2010 . 
 = = History = = 
 Reed attended Walter Payton College Prep in Chicago , IL while Ingersoll had attended Notre Dame High School in Harper Woods , MI where he played football and basketball . Reed and Ingersoll first exchanged conversations in 2005 when Reed found a beat on MySpace that Ingersoll had produced . The two met to discuss terms of the beat 's sale , and eventually ended up recording for two hours . They were inspired by golden age hip hop and artists like LL Cool J and Eric B. & Rakim . Ingersoll began promoting the new duo 's material , and it was eventually booked by Josh Young of <unk> for a DJ performance . At this performance ( in a venue called Town Hall Pub ) , the duo met the DJ Diplo who offered to release a mixtape of their unreleased tracks titled Totally <unk> Out on his label Mad Decent , though it was eventually released on <unk> Recordings . They also received an offer from the DJ A @-@ Trak to sign to his Fool 's Gold Records label , which they did , but only for one single . Of their time with Fool 's Gold Records , the Cool Kids felt they weren ’ t getting enough attention : “ When your boss is on tour with Kanye West , it ’ s easy to have timelines missed , ” said Chuck in an interview . 
 All of their material had been released solely on the band 's MySpace page — their recording contract came after performances at the CMJ Music Festival and Pitchfork Media Music Festival , on July 15 , 2007 . Eventually , The Cool Kids signed to Chocolate Industries , another independent label . The group has revealed on its MySpace page that The Cool Kids ' debut album , When Fish Ride Bicycles , will be released in 2008 , though it did not come out until 2011 . Ingersoll has been the producer for tracks released thus far , but both work in rapping and production . The duo uses music software program Reason from <unk> Software to produce their music . 
 They have been on tour , opening for M.I.A. and they also joined the bill of the 2008 Rock the Bells hip hop festival on select dates . The group toured across Australia in February 2008 and also appeared at the Laneway Festival . The group also appeared at SUNY Purchase 's Culture Shock event in April 2009 . One of the duo 's singles , " Black Mags " , was featured in a late 2007 Rhapsody TV commercial , along with Sara Bareilles . In the same year , the group collaborated with Lil Wayne and DJ Benzi through the Internet on a track entitled " Gettin ' It " , which will reportedly appear on the DJ 's future album Get Right . 
 The Cool Kids have been featured in the video games NBA Live 08 and MLB <unk> with the song " 88 " , in Need for Speed Nitro , with The Bloody <unk> in the song Awesome , and in the episode " The First Cut Is the <unk> " from HBO 's TV series Entourage with the song " Mikey Rocks " . They were listed in Rolling Stone 's Ten Artists to Watch in 2008 . According to Rolling Stone , " since " Black Mags " debuted , the Cool Kids have gone from an underground sensation in their native Chicago to the hottest ticket at New York 's CMJ festival . " 
 The duo has been endorsed by Mountain Dew for their single , " Delivery Man " , to which commercials and the music video have aired on MTV2 . The group 's song " Bassment Party " was featured in the September 21 , 2008 episode of the HBO hit comedy Entourage . They also recorded an original track , " 2K Pennies , " for the soundtrack of NBA <unk> . The Cool Kids have said in an interview that their success has been gradual . They will also be headlining the " NBA 2K Bounce Tour " along with Q @-@ Tip . The Cool Kids also performed at the 2009 Voodoo Experience in New Orleans , Louisiana . Producer Don Cannon said in an interview with XXL , that he will be working with The Cool Kids for their new album . The group 's second official mixtape , Gone Fishing was released on May 5 , 2009 . Their debut album , When Fish Ride Bicycles , was released July 12 , 2011 . 
 Their song " A Little Bit Cooler " was used in a " Most Valuable Puppets " commercial from Nike with LeBron James and Kobe Bryant entitled " Mrs. Lewis " . A new mixtape called <unk> came out on May 31 , 2010 . Chuck Inglish worked with Chip tha Ripper and produced his debut album Gift Raps in its entirety . The group claims they haven 't put out an album because of having issues with their former label Chocolate Industries for the past three years , but according to the group these issues are now settled and they are working on putting out When Fish Ride Bicycles . In 2010 , Chuck Inglish and Mikey Rocks teamed up with Gary , Indiana 's Freddie Gibbs and Cleveland 's Chip tha Ripper to form the " super group " <unk> ( Pulled Over by the Cops ) . Sir Michael Rocks has released a solo project titled The Rocks Report . When Fish Ride Bicycles was released on July 12 , 2011 . Featuring production by The Neptunes and also featuring Bun B , Chip Tha Ripper , Ghostface Killah , among other artists . The group plans a follow up album titled " Shark Week " . 
 On October 23 , 2011 Mikey Rocks signed with Jet Life Recordings , a Warner Bros. imprint owned by fellow rap artist Curren $ y . Chuck Inglish produced the EP " Candy Jams " for <unk> in February 2012 and is also set to work on a mixtape with Curren $ y . 
 On April 25 , 2015 , member Mikey Rocks took to Twitter to address the consistent questions about a possible reunion , saying they were " never coming back . " However , fellow member Chuck Inglish announced the duo were getting back together on July 13 , 2016 
 = = Discography = = 
 = Dogmeat = 
 Dogmeat is a recurring dog non @-@ player character ( NPC ) in the Fallout series of post @-@ apocalyptic themed role @-@ playing video games . Dogmeat was introduced as an optional companion to the player character in the original Fallout ( 1997 ) , and has made cameo appearances in the sequel Fallout 2 ( 1998 ) and in some other video games . Another , different Dogmeat is featured in the same role in Fallout 3 ( 2008 ) and Fallout 4 ( 2015 ) . In both incarnations of the character , Dogmeat was well received , becoming widely regarded as one of the best remembered features in the series , as well as one of the most popular sidekick type characters in video gaming overall . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 In the original Fallout by Black Isle Studios and Interplay Entertainment , the protagonist player character , the Vault Dweller , first encounters the feral Dogmeat in Junktown . Dogmeat 's former owner ( an unnamed man closely resembling Max Rockatansky ) died at the hands of thugs hired by a local gangster named Gizmo . If the player character feeds Dogmeat or is wearing a leather jacket , Dogmeat will follow them and fight in their defense . According to the series ' canon , Dogmeat was adopted by the Vault Dweller on 30 December 2161 , and killed by a force field barrier during the Vault Dweller 's assault on the Master 's Military Base on 20 April <unk> . Dogmeat was supposed to appear in the canceled film adaptation of the game as well . 
 In Fallout 2 , Dogmeat makes a non @-@ canonical appearance in an Easter egg type special encounter " Café of Broken Dreams " . During the encounter , Dogmeat can be picked up by the player character , the Chosen One , if the player approaches him wearing Vault 13 jumpsuit ( or the <unk> 's robes , due to a bug in the game ) . If the player chooses to kill Dogmeat , a man named Mel ( in a reference to Mel Gibson , the actor who played Mad Max in the film ) will appear and try to avenge him . Dogmeat has made uncredited cameo appearances outside of the Fallout universe in Troika Games ' 2001 Arcanum : Of Steamworks and Magick Obscura ( created by Fallout designer Tim Cain ) and in 2004 The Bard 's Tale by inXile Entertainment ( headed by Fallout producer Brian Fargo ) . However , there were no plans to bring back Dogmeat for the original third Fallout game project by Black Isle Studios , the canceled Van Buren . 
 An entirely different dog named Dogmeat appears in Fallout 3 by Bethesda Softworks , which begins in the year 2277 . His master , a scavenger , was killed by a band of raiders in the scrapyard where the dog is to be found . Dogmeat can be recruited by Fallout 3 's player character , the Lone Wanderer . The dog can find objects of value across the landscape and bring them to the player . Fallout 3 expansion set Broken Steel optionally ( enabled by choosing the ' perk ' bonus " Puppies ! " after reaching 22nd experience level ) allows a killed Dogmeat to be replaced by a new one ( with twice as many hit points , that is a starting value of 1 @,@ 000 instead of 500 ) whenever he dies during the game . A <unk> mod which provides an armor for Dogmeat was compared by Destructoid to the infamous horse armor paid DLC from Bethesda 's The Elder Scrolls IV : Oblivion , " except free and functional " . Another mod adds Dogmeat to Fallout : New Vegas . 
 A new version of Dogmeat appears in Fallout 4 . Fallout 4 ′ s Dogmeat is a German Shepherd , and cannot die . 
 = = Character design = = 
 Dogmeat was inspired by the unnamed dog of Max Rockatansky ( Mad Max ) from the 1981 post @-@ apocalyptic film Mad Max 2 . His initial name had been " <unk> " and his ultimate name was derived from the opening scene of the 1975 post @-@ apocalyptic film A Boy and His Dog , in which the main character Vic calls his dog Blood " dog meat " . According to Fallout producer , lead programmer and designer Tim Cain , " Leonard Boyarsky , the [ game 's ] art director ... had that movie running continuously in his office , and I think he remarked on several occasions that having a dog in the game would be really cool . [ It 's ] why we wanted a dog in the first place . " Fallout programmer and designer Jesse Heinig was credited by Cain as probably " one person to thank for Dogmeat . " Heinig himself said : " My understanding is that [ Fallout designer ] Scott Bennie settled on the name ' Dogmeat ' for the character , and it 's likely that he did pick that from the story in question . " 
 In 2009 , Fallout designer Chris Taylor said they " never expected that Dogmeat would become such a popular character . " Taylor said : " I always intended that the various NPCs that joined up with the player would come to a violent end . I was shocked when I heard of all the work people went through to keep Dogmeat alive to the end – especially the hell that they went through with the force fields in the Military Base . " According to Fallout 2 and Fallout : New Vegas designer Chris Avellone , Dogmeat is " arguably the most successful NPC companion ever " for several reasons : " One , he doesn 't talk , so the players can project a personality on to him . Two , he 's effective in combat ... and three , he 's a dog that stays with you through thick @-@ and @-@ thin . I don 't think there 's a deeper ' <unk> ' sentiment than people have in their hearts for their pets . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Kotaku 's Owen Good called Dogmeat " one of the franchise 's most iconic characters " as well as its " one of the most [ e ] <unk> fulfilling features . " The book Level Up ! : The Guide to Great Video Game Design by Scott Rogers used him as an example while discussing how the " party members don 't need to be human " . In 2008 , UGO Team stated this " undisputed champion of Fallout characters " is not " only our favorite Fallout character , he 's also one of gaming 's greatest dogs . " That same year , Joe Martin of Bit @-@ tech ranked Dogmeat as the sixth top PC game NPC of all time , commenting : " There are a lot of computer game characters we like and a few we ’ d even go so far as to say we love . Dogmeat though , despite being a definite tabula rasa , sits in a different category altogether and is the only computer game character that we ’ d reload and repeat significant portions of a game for , just so he could stand a better chance of survival . " In 2009 , Michael <unk> of The Escapist called Dogmeat possibly the most beloved character of the Fallout universe , writing that " in an uncaring wasteland ... Dogmeat is a moral compass : Though your needle might swing towards good or evil , his center always holds strong provided you protect him . " Steve and Larson of ScrewAttack ranked Dogmeat as the tenth best gaming pet in 2011 . Dogmeat was included in numerous lists of best video game dogs , including by Lisa Foiles of The Escapist in 2010 , Michael Perry of PlayStation Official Magazine in 2012 , Gergo Vas of Kotaku in 2013 , and Benjamin Abbott of Metro , Brian Taylor of Paste , and the staff of Bild in 2014 . Ryan McCaffrey of IGN chose Dogmeat as the top feature he wished to return in Fallout 4 . 
 Dogmeat was also acclaimed by numerous publications as one of the best sidekick type characters in video games . He was included on GameSpot 's list of the top ten video game sidekicks in 2000 , chosen for his loyalty to his master in spite of his " propensity to get himself into trouble , his inability to perform any tricks , and his refusal to listen to directions " in the original game . This " loyal companion " was also chosen by GameSpot to be one of the 64 characters to compete in the 2008 poll for the title of " All @-@ Time Greatest Game Sidekick " . In 2004 , Dogmeat placed as second on GameSpy 's Dave <unk> 's list of the best video game sidekicks , also because of his extreme faithfulness to the player 's character . In 2008 , The Telegraph featured him as one of top ten greatest sidekicks in gaming history . In 2011 , Maximum PC included Dogmeat among the 25 of gaming 's greatest sidekicks , commenting that " though his look , his breed , and his stats have varied [ through the series ] , Dogmeat has the loyalty and heart of a champion . " 
 = Material properties of diamond = 
 Diamond is the allotrope of carbon in which the carbon atoms are arranged in the specific type of cubic lattice called diamond cubic . Diamond is an optically isotropic crystal that is transparent to opaque . Owing to its strong covalent bonding , diamond is the hardest naturally occurring material known . Yet , due to important structural weaknesses , diamond 's toughness is only fair to good . The precise tensile strength of diamond is unknown , however strength up to 60 GPa has been observed , and it could be as high as 90 – 225 GPa depending on the crystal orientation . The anisotropy of diamond hardness is carefully considered during diamond cutting . Diamond has a high refractive index ( 2 @.@ 417 ) and moderate dispersion ( 0 @.@ 044 ) properties which give cut diamonds their brilliance . Scientists classify diamonds into four main types according to the nature of crystallographic defects present . Trace impurities <unk> replacing carbon atoms in a diamond 's crystal lattice , and in some cases structural defects , are responsible for the wide range of colors seen in diamond . Most diamonds are electrical insulators but extremely efficient thermal conductors . Unlike many other minerals , the specific gravity of diamond crystals ( 3 @.@ 52 ) has rather small variation from diamond to diamond . 
 = = Hardness and crystal structure = = 
 Known to the ancient Greeks as <unk> – adámas ( " proper " , " unalterable " , " unbreakable " ) and sometimes called adamant , diamond is the hardest known naturally occurring material , scoring 10 on the Mohs scale of mineral hardness . Diamond is extremely strong owing to the structure of its carbon atoms , where each carbon atom has four neighbors joined to it with covalent bonds . The material boron nitride , when in a form structurally identical to diamond ( zincblende structure ) , is nearly as hard as diamond ; a currently hypothetical material , beta carbon nitride , may also be as hard or harder in one form . It has been shown that some diamond aggregates having nanometer grain size are harder and tougher than conventional large diamond crystals , thus they perform better as abrasive material . Owing to the use of those new ultra @-@ hard materials for diamond testing , more accurate values are now known for diamond hardness . A surface perpendicular to the [ 111 ] crystallographic direction ( that is the longest diagonal of a cube ) of a pure ( i.e. , type IIa ) diamond has a hardness value of 167 GPa when scratched with an nanodiamond tip , while the nanodiamond sample itself has a value of 310 GPa when tested with another nanodiamond tip . Because the test only works properly with a tip made of harder material than the sample being tested , the true value for nanodiamond is likely somewhat lower than 310 GPa . 
 The precise tensile strength of diamond is unknown , however strength up to 60 GPa has been observed , and it could be as high as 90 – 225 GPa depending on the perfection of diamond lattice and on its orientation : <unk> strength is the highest for the [ 100 ] crystal direction ( normal to the cubic face ) , smaller for the [ 110 ] and the smallest for the [ 111 ] axis ( along the longest cube diagonal ) . Diamond also has one of the smallest <unk> of any material . 
 Cubic diamonds have a perfect and easy octahedral cleavage , which means that they only have four planes — weak directions following the faces of the octahedron where there are fewer bonds — along which diamond can easily split upon blunt impact to leave a smooth surface . Similarly , diamond 's hardness is markedly directional : the hardest direction is the diagonal on the cube face , 100 times harder than the softest direction , which is the dodecahedral plane . The octahedral plane is intermediate between the two extremes . The diamond cutting process relies heavily on this directional hardness , as without it a diamond would be nearly impossible to fashion . Cleavage also plays a helpful role , especially in large stones where the cutter wishes to remove flawed material or to produce more than one stone from the same piece of rough ( e.g. Cullinan Diamond ) . 
 Diamonds crystallize in the diamond cubic crystal system ( space group <unk> ) and consist of tetrahedrally , covalently bonded carbon atoms . A second form called lonsdaleite , with hexagonal symmetry , has also been found , but it is extremely rare and forms only in meteorites or in laboratory synthesis . The local environment of each atom is identical in the two structures . From theoretical considerations , lonsdaleite is expected to be harder than diamond , but the size and quality of the available stones are insufficient to test this hypothesis . In terms of crystal habit , diamonds occur most often as euhedral ( well @-@ formed ) or rounded octahedra and twinned , flattened octahedra with a triangular outline . Other forms include dodecahedra and ( rarely ) cubes . There is evidence that nitrogen impurities play an important role in the formation of well @-@ shaped euhedral crystals . The largest diamonds found , such as the Cullinan Diamond , were shapeless . These diamonds are pure ( i.e. type II ) and therefore contain little if any nitrogen . 
 The faces of diamond octahedrons are highly lustrous owing to their hardness ; triangular shaped growth defects ( <unk> ) or etch pits are often present on the faces . A diamond 's fracture may be step @-@ like , conchoidal ( shell @-@ like , similar to glass ) or irregular . Diamonds which are nearly round , due to the formation of multiple steps on octahedral faces , are commonly coated in a gum @-@ like skin ( nyf ) . The combination of stepped faces , growth defects , and nyf produces a " scaly " or corrugated appearance . Many diamonds are so distorted that few crystal faces are discernible . Some diamonds found in Brazil and the Democratic Republic of the Congo are polycrystalline and occur as opaque , darkly colored , spherical , radial masses of tiny crystals ; these are known as <unk> and are important to industry as they lack the cleavage planes of single @-@ crystal diamond . <unk> is a similar opaque microcrystalline form which occurs in shapeless masses . Like <unk> diamond , carbonado lacks cleavage planes and its specific gravity varies widely from 2 @.@ 9 to 3 @.@ 5 . <unk> diamonds , found in Brazil , Venezuela , and Guyana , are the most common type of industrial @-@ grade diamond . They are also polycrystalline and often poorly crystallized ; they are translucent and cleave easily . 
 Because of its great hardness and strong molecular bonding , a cut diamond 's facets and facet edges appear the flattest and sharpest . A curious side effect of diamond 's surface perfection is hydrophobia combined with <unk> . The former property means a drop of water placed on a diamond will form a coherent droplet , whereas in most other minerals the water would spread out to cover the surface . Similarly , diamond is unusually lipophilic , meaning grease and oil readily collect on a diamond 's surface . Whereas on other minerals oil would form coherent drops , on a diamond the oil would spread . This property is exploited in the use of so @-@ called " grease pens , " which apply a line of grease to the surface of a suspect diamond simulant . Diamond surfaces are hydrophobic when the surface carbon atoms terminate with a hydrogen atom and hydrophilic when the surface atoms terminate with an oxygen atom or hydroxyl radical . Treatment with gases or plasmas containing the appropriate gas , at temperatures of 450 ° C or higher , can change the surface property completely . Naturally occurring diamonds have a surface with less than a half monolayer coverage of oxygen , the balance being hydrogen and the behavior is moderately hydrophobic . This allows for separation from other minerals at the mine using the so @-@ called " grease @-@ belt " . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 Unlike hardness , which denotes only resistance to scratching , diamond 's toughness or tenacity is only fair to good . <unk> relates to the ability to resist breakage from falls or impacts . Because of diamond 's perfect and easy cleavage , it is vulnerable to breakage . A diamond will shatter if hit with an ordinary hammer . The toughness of natural diamond has been measured as 2 @.@ 0 MPa m1 / 2 , which is good compared to other gemstones , but poor compared to most engineering materials . As with any material , the macroscopic geometry of a diamond contributes to its resistance to breakage . Diamond has a cleavage plane and is therefore more fragile in some orientations than others . Diamond cutters use this attribute to cleave some stones , prior to faceting . 
 Ballas and carbonado diamond are exceptional , as they are polycrystalline and therefore much tougher than single @-@ crystal diamond ; they are used for deep @-@ drilling bits and other demanding industrial applications . Particular faceting shapes of diamonds are more prone to breakage and thus may be <unk> by reputable insurance companies . The brilliant cut of gemstones is designed specifically to reduce the likelihood of breakage or splintering . 
 Solid foreign crystals are commonly present in diamond . They are mostly minerals , such as olivine , garnets , ruby , and many others . These and other inclusions , such as internal fractures or " feathers " , can compromise the structural integrity of a diamond . Cut diamonds that have been enhanced to improve their clarity via glass infilling of fractures or cavities are especially fragile , as the glass will not stand up to ultrasonic cleaning or the rigors of the jeweler 's torch . Fracture @-@ filled diamonds may shatter if treated improperly . 
 = = = Pressure resistance = = = 
 Used in so @-@ called diamond anvil experiments to create high @-@ pressure environments , diamonds are able to withstand crushing pressures in excess of 600 gigapascals ( 6 million atmospheres ) . 
 = = Optical properties = = 
 = = = Color and its causes = = = 
 Diamonds occur in various colors : black , brown , yellow , gray , white , blue , orange , purple to pink and red . Colored diamonds contain crystallographic defects , including substitutional impurities and structural defects , that cause the coloration . Theoretically , pure diamonds would be transparent and colorless . Diamonds are scientifically classed into two main types and several subtypes , according to the nature of defects present and how they affect light absorption : 
 Type I diamond has nitrogen ( N ) atoms as the main impurity , at a concentration of up to 1 % . If the N atoms are in pairs or larger aggregates , they do not affect the diamond 's color ; these are Type Ia . About 98 % of gem diamonds are type Ia : these diamonds belong to the Cape series , named after the diamond @-@ rich region formerly known as Cape Province in South Africa , whose deposits are largely Type Ia . If the nitrogen atoms are dispersed throughout the crystal in isolated sites ( not paired or grouped ) , they give the stone an intense yellow or occasionally brown tint ( type Ib ) ; the rare canary diamonds belong to this type , which represents only ~ 0 @.@ 1 % of known natural diamonds . Synthetic diamond containing nitrogen is usually of type Ib . Type Ia and Ib diamonds absorb in both the infrared and ultraviolet region of the electromagnetic spectrum , from 320 nm . They also have a characteristic fluorescence and visible absorption spectrum ( see Optical properties ) . 
 Type II diamonds have very few if any nitrogen impurities . Pure ( type IIa ) diamond can be colored pink , red , or brown owing to structural anomalies arising through plastic deformation during crystal growth ; these diamonds are rare ( 1 @.@ 8 % of gem diamonds ) , but constitute a large percentage of Australian diamonds . Type IIb diamonds , which account for ~ 0 @.@ 1 % of gem diamonds , are usually a steely blue or gray due to boron atoms scattered within the crystal matrix . These diamonds are also semiconductors , unlike other diamond types ( see Electrical properties ) . Most blue @-@ gray diamonds coming from the Argyle mine of Australia are not of type IIb , but of Ia type . Those diamonds contain large concentrations of defects and impurities ( especially hydrogen and nitrogen ) and the origin of their color is yet uncertain . Type II diamonds weakly absorb in a different region of the infrared ( the absorption is due to the diamond lattice rather than impurities ) , and transmit in the ultraviolet below 225 nm , unlike type I diamonds . They also have differing fluorescence characteristics , but no discernible visible absorption spectrum . 
 Certain diamond enhancement techniques are commonly used to artificially produce an array of colors , including blue , green , yellow , red , and black . Color enhancement techniques usually involve irradiation , including proton bombardment via cyclotrons ; neutron bombardment in the piles of nuclear reactors ; and electron bombardment by Van de Graaff generators . These high @-@ energy particles physically alter the diamond 's crystal lattice , knocking carbon atoms out of place and producing color centers . The depth of color penetration depends on the technique and its duration , and in some cases the diamond may be left radioactive to some degree . 
 Some irradiated diamonds are completely natural ; one famous example is the Dresden Green Diamond . In these natural stones the color is imparted by " radiation burns " ( natural irradiation by alpha particles originating from uranium ore ) in the form of small patches , usually only micrometers deep . Additionally , Type IIa diamonds can have their structural deformations " repaired " via a high @-@ pressure high @-@ temperature ( HPHT ) process , removing much or all of the diamond 's color . 
 = = = Luster = = = 
 The luster of a diamond is described as ' adamantine ' , which simply means diamond @-@ like . Reflections on a properly cut diamond 's facets are undistorted , due to their flatness . The refractive index of diamond ( as measured via sodium light , 589 @.@ 3 nm ) is 2 @.@ 417 . Because it is cubic in structure , diamond is also isotropic . Its high dispersion of 0 @.@ 044 ( variation of refractive index across the visible spectrum ) manifests in the perceptible fire of cut diamonds . This fire — flashes of prismatic colors seen in transparent stones — is perhaps diamond 's most important optical property from a jewelry perspective . The prominence or amount of fire seen in a stone is heavily influenced by the choice of diamond cut and its associated proportions ( particularly crown height ) , although the body color of fancy ( i.e. , unusual ) diamonds may hide their fire to some degree . 
 More than 20 other minerals have higher dispersion ( that is difference in refractive index for blue and red light ) than diamond , such as titanite 0 @.@ 051 , <unk> 0 @.@ 057 , cassiterite 0 @.@ 071 , strontium titanate 0 @.@ 109 , sphalerite 0 @.@ 156 , synthetic rutile 0 @.@ 330 , cinnabar 0 @.@ 4 , etc . ( see dispersion ) . However , the combination of dispersion with extreme hardness , wear and chemical resistivity , as well as clever marketing , determines the exceptional value of diamond as a gemstone . 
 = = = Fluorescence = = = 
 Diamonds exhibit fluorescence , that is , they emit light of various colors and intensities under long @-@ wave ultraviolet light ( 365 nm ) : Cape series stones ( type Ia ) usually fluoresce blue , and these stones may also phosphoresce yellow , a unique property among gemstones . Other possible long @-@ wave fluorescence colors are green ( usually in brown stones ) , yellow , mauve , or red ( in type IIb diamonds ) . In natural diamonds , there is typically little if any response to short @-@ wave ultraviolet , but the reverse is true of synthetic diamonds . Some natural type IIb diamonds phosphoresce blue after exposure to short @-@ wave ultraviolet . In natural diamonds , fluorescence under X @-@ rays is generally bluish @-@ white , yellowish or greenish . Some diamonds , particularly Canadian diamonds , show no fluorescence . 
 The origin of the luminescence colors is often unclear and not unique . Blue emission from type IIa and IIb diamonds is reliably identified with dislocations by directly correlating the emission with dislocations in an electron microscope . However , blue emission in type Ia diamond could be either due to dislocations or the N3 defects ( three nitrogen atoms bordering a vacancy ) . Green emission in natural diamond is usually due to the H3 center ( two substitutional nitrogen atoms separated by a vacancy ) , whereas in synthetic diamond it usually originates from nickel used as a catalyst ( see figure ) . Orange or red emission could be due to various reasons , one being the nitrogen @-@ vacancy center which is present in sufficient quantities in all types of diamond , even type IIb . 
 = = = Optical absorption = = = 
 Cape series ( Ia ) diamonds have a visible absorption spectrum ( as seen through a direct @-@ vision spectroscope ) consisting of a fine line in the violet at 415 @.@ 5 nm ; however , this line is often invisible until the diamond has been cooled to very low temperatures . Associated with this are weaker lines at 478 nm , 465 nm , 452 nm , 435 nm , and 423 nm . All those lines are labeled as N3 and N2 optical centers and associated with a defect consisting of three nitrogen atoms bordering a vacancy . Other stones show additional bands : brown , green , or yellow diamonds show a band in the green at 504 nm ( H3 center , see above ) , sometimes accompanied by two additional weak bands at 537 nm and 495 nm ( H4 center , a large complex presumably involving 4 substitutional nitrogen atoms and 2 lattice vacancies ) . Type IIb diamonds may absorb in the far red due to the substitutional boron , but otherwise show no observable visible absorption spectrum . 
 Gemological laboratories make use of spectrophotometer machines that can distinguish natural , artificial , and color @-@ enhanced diamonds . The spectrophotometers analyze the infrared , visible , and ultraviolet absorption and luminescence spectra of diamonds cooled with liquid nitrogen to detect tell @-@ tale absorption lines that are not normally discernible . 
 = = Electrical properties = = 
 Except for most natural blue diamonds , which are semiconductors due to substitutional boron impurities replacing carbon atoms , diamond is a good electrical insulator , having a resistivity of 100 <unk> · m to 1 <unk> · m ( 1011 to 1018 Ω · m ) . Natural blue or blue @-@ gray diamonds , common for the Argyle diamond mine in Australia , are rich in hydrogen ; these diamonds are not semiconductors and it is unclear whether hydrogen is actually responsible for their blue @-@ gray color . Natural blue diamonds containing boron and synthetic diamonds doped with boron are p @-@ type semiconductors . N @-@ type diamond films are <unk> synthesized by phosphorus doping during chemical vapor deposition . <unk> p @-@ n junctions and UV light emitting diodes ( LEDs , at 235 nm ) have been produced by sequential deposition of p @-@ type ( boron @-@ doped ) and n @-@ type ( phosphorus @-@ doped ) layers . 
 Diamond transistors have been produced ( for research purposes ) . FETs with SiN dielectric layers , and SC @-@ FETs have been made . 
 In April 2004 , the journal Nature reported that below the superconducting transition temperature 4 K , boron @-@ doped diamond synthesized at high temperature and high pressure is a bulk superconductor . Superconductivity was later observed in heavily boron @-@ doped films grown by various chemical vapor deposition techniques , and the highest reported transition temperature ( by 2009 ) is 11 @.@ 4 K. ( See also Covalent superconductor # Diamond ) 
 Uncommon magnetic properties ( spin glass state ) were observed in diamond nanocrystals intercalated with potassium . Unlike paramagnetic host material , magnetic susceptibility measurements of intercalated nanodiamond revealed distinct ferromagnetic behavior at 5 K. This is essentially different from results of potassium intercalation in graphite or C60 fullerene , and shows that sp3 bonding promotes magnetic ordering in carbon . The measurements presented first experimental evidence of intercalation @-@ induced spin @-@ glass state in a nanocrystalline diamond system . 
 = = Thermal conductivity = = 
 Unlike most electrical insulators , diamond is a good conductor of heat because of the strong covalent bonding and low phonon scattering . Thermal conductivity of natural diamond was measured to be about 22 W / ( cm · K ) , which is five times more than copper . <unk> synthetic diamond enriched in the isotope 12C ( 99 @.@ 9 % ) has the highest thermal conductivity of any known solid at room temperature : 33 @.@ 2 W / ( cm · K ) . Because diamond has such high thermal conductance it is already used in semiconductor manufacture to prevent silicon and other semiconducting materials from overheating . At lower temperatures conductivity becomes even better , and reaches 410 W / ( cm · K ) at 104 K ( 12C @-@ enriched diamond ) . 
 Diamond 's high thermal conductivity is used by jewelers and gemologists who may employ an electronic thermal probe to distinguish diamonds from their imitations . These probes consist of a pair of battery @-@ powered thermistors mounted in a fine copper tip . One thermistor functions as a heating device while the other measures the temperature of the copper tip : if the stone being tested is a diamond , it will conduct the tip 's thermal energy rapidly enough to produce a measurable temperature drop . This test takes about 2 – 3 seconds . However , older probes will be fooled by moissanite , a crystalline mineral form of silicon carbide introduced in 1998 as an alternative to diamonds , which has a similar thermal conductivity . 
 = = Thermal stability = = 
 Being a form of carbon , diamond oxidizes in air if heated over 700 ° C. In absence of oxygen , e.g. in a flow of high @-@ purity argon gas , diamond can be heated up to about 1700 ° C. Its surface blackens , but can be recovered by re @-@ polishing . At high pressure ( ~ 20 GPa ) diamond can be heated up to 2500 ° C , and a report published in 2009 suggests that diamond can withstand temperatures of 3000 ° C and above . 
 Diamonds are carbon crystals that form deep within the Earth under high temperatures and extreme pressures . At surface air pressure ( one atmosphere ) , diamonds are not as stable as graphite , and so the decay of diamond is thermodynamically favorable ( <unk> = − 2 kJ / mol ) . So , contrary to De Beers ' ad campaign extending from 1948 to at least 2013 under the slogan " A diamond is forever " , diamonds are definitely not forever . However , owing to a very large kinetic energy barrier , diamonds are metastable ; they will not decay into graphite under normal conditions . 
 = The Brute Man = 
 The Brute Man is a 1946 American horror thriller film starring Rondo Hatton as the Creeper , a murderer seeking revenge against the people he holds responsible for the disfigurement of his face . Directed by Jean Yarbrough , the film features Tom Neal and Jan Wiley as a married pair of friends the Creeper blames for his deformities . Jane Adams also starred as a blind pianist for whom the Creeper tries to raise money for an operation to restore her vision . 
 The film was produced by Universal Pictures near the end of their horror film period . According to legend , as the result of its pending merger with International Pictures , Universal Pictures adopted a policy against releasing any more B movies , so sold The Brute Man for $ 125 @,@ 000 to poverty row 's Producers Releasing Corporation , which distributed the film without any mention of Universal 's involvement in publicity or credits . In fact , Universal released at least one B @-@ western following the merger , and still had numerous other titles in active circulation from the preceding few years , up to the month before the merger . Most experts tend to believe that Universal simply found the exploitation of the deceased Hatton and his deformity for the third time , in his last film ( in which evidence of his impending demise may be foreshadowed in his acting ) , and of a poorly @-@ developed story , to be detrimental to its corporate image but did not want to take a financial loss by simply shelving the film permanently . 
 Considered a lost film after its initial release , because it was neither reissued theatrically by Madison Pictures , inheritor of the PRC library of films , nor sent to television by Universal , it was eventually relocated for television by TNT and subsequently released to home video in 1982 . The Brute Man received generally negative reviews , drawing particular criticism for Hatton 's poor performance . The film was featured in a 1996 episode of the movie @-@ mocking comedy television series Mystery Science Theater 3000 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The police investigate a string of murders committed by the Creeper ( Rondo Hatton ) , a mysterious killer with a hideously disfigured face . The Creeper attacks and murders Professor Cushman ( John Hamilton ) , a professor from the nearby Hampton University . Later that night , the killer approaches a woman named Joan Bemis ( Janelle Johnson ) in front of her home and identifies himself as Hal Moffet . Joan screams hysterically at the sight of him until he is driven to kill her . When police cars approach , the Creeper climbs the fire escape of a city tenement building to escape and enters the apartment of Helen Paige ( Jane Adams ) , a blind pianist . Unable to see the Creeper 's deformed face , Helen is not afraid of the intruder , even when he admits to fleeing . When police officers knock on her door , failing to identify themselves , Helen encourages him to hide in her bedroom , where he escapes through the window . 
 The next day , a general store delivery boy named Jimmy ( Jack Parker ) listens to a radio report about the Creeper 's murders . The cantankerous store owner Mr. Haskins ( Oscar O 'Shea ) arrives with a handwritten letter slipped under the door , requesting groceries be delivered to a nearby dock . Jimmy brings the groceries to the dock and leaves them at a door , where the Creeper takes them into his hideout . But , when Jimmy tries to spy on him through a window , the Creeper sneaks up on Jimmy and kills him . Meanwhile , at the police station , Captain M.J. Donelly ( Donald MacBride ) and Lieutenant Gates ( Peter Whitney ) receive complaints from the mayor 's office about their failure to arrest the Creeper , but they deflect the blame . The two officers then get a call about the missing delivery boy and head to the dock to investigate . 
 The Creeper sneaks out and escapes while Donelly and Gates infiltrate his hideout and discover Jimmy 's corpse . Donnelly also finds a newspaper clipping with a man named Hal Moffet and two of his friends , Clifford Scott ( Tom Neal ) and Virginia Rogers ( Jan Wiley ) , during their college days . The police visit Clifford and Virginia , who are now married and wealthy . Clifford tells the officers during college , Hal was a handsome college football star who competed with Clifford for Virginia 's affections . One day , while helping Hal prepare for a chemistry exam , a jealous Clifford deliberately gave him the wrong answers , resulting in Hal being asked by Professor Cushman to remain after class for extra work . While working on a chemistry experiment , Clifford walks by the window with Virginia to boast . Furious , Hal hurls a beaker to the ground , accidentally causing an explosion that disfigures his face . Donnelly speculates that Hal is the Creeper , and that he killed Professor Cushman and Joan because he holds them partially responsible for his accident . 
 Meanwhile , the Creeper goes to a pawn store to buy a brooch for Helen , and kills the pawnbroker ( Charles Wagenheim ) following a fight . He later brings the brooch to Helen , who he realizes for the first time is blind . Hal learns she needs $ 3 @,@ 000 for surgery that would restore her eyesight . When Helen tries to touch his face , Hal angrily storms out . He then goes to the Scott residence and demands money from Clifford and Virginia , whom he blames for his disfigurement . Clifford draws a gun and shoots Hal twice in the stomach , but the weakened Hal manages to strangle Clifford to death before escaping with Virginia 's jewels . He brings them to Helen , who is concerned about Hal 's injuries , but he flees before she can learn he is shot . 
 Helen brings the jewels to an appraiser , who recognizes them as having recently been reported stolen . Donelly and Gates bring Helen into the station , where they inform her Hal is the Creeper and accuse her of harboring a murderer . Reluctantly , she agrees to help them capture him . The next day , the newspapers run stories about Helen cooperating with police , which infuriates Hal . Feeling betrayed , he sneaks back into her apartment and finds her playing the piano . Sneaking up from behind , Hal is about to strangle her when the police seize and arrest him . The film ends with Donelly and Gates assuring Helen she will get the operation she needs . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The screenplay for The Brute Man was written by George Bricker and M. Coates Webster based on a story by Dwight V. Babcock . An author of pulp fiction stories and novels , <unk> started writing for Universal Pictures in 1943 , where he worked primarily on horror films . The Brute Man marked the last of nine films Babcock wrote for Universal before he left for a job at Columbia Pictures . Bricker wrote several screenplays in a variety of genres , from horror films and mysteries to comedies , and worked primarily as a freelancer jumping from studio to studio . Babcock and Brister previously worked together on several low @-@ budget horror films , including The Devil Bat ( 1940 ) , House of Dracula ( 1945 ) , Pillow of Death ( 1945 ) , She @-@ Wolf of London ( 1946 ) and House of Horrors ( 1946 ) . Bricker and Webster both previously wrote the screenplays for Universal Pictures films featuring The Brute Man star Rondo Hatton : Bricker penned House of Horrors , and Webster wrote The Jungle Captive ( 1947 ) , the third in a series of films about an ape that transforms into a beautiful woman . 
 The Brute Man is a quasi @-@ prequel to House of Horrors , in which Hatton played a deformed madman named " The Creeper " who kills people by breaking their backs . In The Brute Man Hatton also plays " The Creeper " , while the story explains how he became deformed and why he has a murderous personality . Hatton also played a disfigured killer called the Creeper in The Pearl of Death , a 1944 Sherlock Holmes film , but neither House of Horrors nor The Brute Man have any connection to that film . In establishing a backstory explaining the Creeper 's motives , The Brute Man 's script seeks to humanize the character and elicit more sympathy for him than the Creeper 's other films , in which he is generally portrayed as a two @-@ dimensional murderer . The origin of the Creeper is based partially on autobiographical details from Hatton 's real life . Before becoming disfigured by an accident , the Creeper was a handsome young college football hero . Hatton himself was also a football player at the University of Florida before suffering from the effects of acromegaly , a syndrome that causes abnormal bone growth due to excess growth hormone from the pituitary gland . In the film , the character is disfigured by chemicals during a laboratory accident in school . While Hatton 's real @-@ life abnormalities stemmed from acromegaly , it was often incorrectly stated by Universal Pictures publicity materials that they were the result of exposure to mustard gas attacks during Hatton 's service in World War I. 
 The film 's setting , which appears to be a major city , is never identified in The Brute Man , but it has been suggested that it is Manhattan , since that is where House of Horrors took place . Commentators have noted similarities between The Brute Man and other films , including the Charlie Chaplin silent comedy City Lights ( 1931 ) , and the Universal Pictures horror film Bride of Frankenstein ( 1935 ) . City Lights , like The Brute Man , included a protagonist ( Chaplin 's Tramp character ) who falls in love with a blind girl and seeks money for an operation to restore her eyesight . Likewise , the scenes between the Creeper and Helen Paige share a similar premise and dialogue as the scenes between the Frankenstein 's monster and the blind hermit in Bride of Frankenstein . In both films , the protagonist is shunned by society based on their physical appearance , but find companionship in a blind loner who knows nothing about their deformities . In both instances , the protagonist is first drawn to their blind companions by music . The Creeper heard Helen playing the piano , while the Frankenstein 's monster heard the hermit playing the violin . Commentators have noted other similarities between the two films . For example , the Creeper smashes a mirror after looking at his misshapen face , much like the Monster lashes out at his reflection in a waterfall pool . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The Brute Man marked one of several films in which Universal Pictures cast Hatton as a murderer , taking advantage of his natural deformities for shock value . As a result of his acromegaly , Hatton had abnormally enlarged and shaped bones on his head and hands , and the Universal Pictures publicity department often promoted the fact that Hatton did not need make @-@ up for his roles . Tom Neal , who had recently appeared in the cult classic noir film Detour ( 1945 ) , was cast as Clifford Scott . Having appeared in dozens of low @-@ budget films throughout the early @-@ 1940s , Neal began to become known as the " King of the B Pictures " . In The Brute Man , Neal portrayed Scott both in his older years and in the flashback scenes , where the character appears as a college student . To differentiate between the two , Neal was fitted with make @-@ up and costumes to make him better resemble a middle @-@ aged man during his non @-@ flashback scenes . Jane Adams was cast as the blind pianist Helen Paige . Adams had appeared in several Universal Pictures films before , including the Lon Chaney , Jr. film House of Dracula ( 1945 ) . 
 Jan Wiley was cast as Scott 's wife , Virginia . Although Wiley had appeared in several movies throughout the 1930s and 1940s , The Brute Man marked one of her final film performances . It was also recalled as one of her most memorable film appearances along with another Universal Pictures B horror film , She @-@ Wolf of London . However , her performance in The Brute Man proved to be a less than memorable one for her , so much so that in an interview shortly before Wiley 's death in 1993 , she could barely remember even having appeared in the film . Donald MacBride and Peter Whitney portray the police officers Captain M.J. Donelly and Lieutenant Gates , respectively . Their roles serve as comic relief for the film . Their characters portray the incompetence of the police force in their inability to find and arrest the Creeper and their focus on passing blame for their failures rather than diverting resources toward his arrest . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The Brute Man was developed by Universal Pictures Company , Inc. in the later years of their successful production of horror films , including Dracula ( 1931 ) , Frankenstein ( 1931 ) and The Mummy ( 1932 ) . While those films were great critical and financial successes , The Brute Man was filmed during what was widely considered the low point of the studio 's horror film period . It was produced by Ben <unk> and directed by Jean Yarbrough , both of whom had worked on House of Horrors and many other horror films for Universal over the years . The Brute Man was filmed in 13 days , during November 1945 . The flashback scenes — which depict how Hal Moffet became disfigured and ultimately became the Creeper — were all shot on the final day of filming . Jane Adams said Hatton 's acromegaly was becoming progressively worse by the time The Brute Man was filmed , and it made acting difficult for him . Hatton had trouble remembering his lines , focusing on his performance , and responding to the other actors . Hatton occasionally appears confused even on screen , like during one scene where he says " yes " while shaking his head " no . " Adams called him a friendly and thoughtful man , but called him " so pathetic to work with [ and ] almost autistic " . 
 Maury Gertsman , who handled the cinematography for nearly all Universal Pictures films from the mid @-@ 1940s to mid @-@ 1950s , worked as director of photographer on The Brute Man . Since the film focused on a disfigured serial killer , Gertsman sought to give the movie a dark , diseased look appropriate for the film 's subject matter and urban setting . Although primarily a horror thriller film , Gertsman uses several film noir elements in his photography , including shadowed lighting , unbalanced compositions , and chiaroscuro contrasts between light and dark . As a result , The Brute Man features a bleak , at times dismal visual atmosphere . Hans J. Salter , who composed the scores for many of the Universal Pictures films of the 1940s and 1950s , worked as composer for The Brute Man as well . Salter 's score for the film strongly resembled the music he composed for the Universal horror films Black Friday ( 1940 ) and The Invisible Man 's Revenge ( 1944 ) . Philip Cahn edited The Brute Man . Raymond Kessler and Ralph <unk> worked a dialogue director and assistant director , respectively , while John B. Goodman and Abraham Grossman worked as art directors . Other crew included Russell A. <unk> and Edward G. Robinson as set decorators , Joe Lapis as sound technician , Jack Pierce as make @-@ up director , Carmen <unk> as hair stylist , and Vera West as gowns supervisor . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 Although produced by Universal Pictures , The Brute Man was distributed by Producers Releasing Corporation , one of the smaller film studios from Hollywood 's Poverty Row . In 1945 , Universal merged with the company International Pictures , and the new organization adopted a policy against developing any more B movies , including Westerns , horror films , serials and movies running 70 minutes or less . This resulted in the firing of numerous production personnel members and the sale of several already @-@ developed films , including The Brute Man . The sale was also perpetuated in part by the death of star Rondo Hatton . He died as a result of his acromegaly on February 2 , 1946 , about eight months before The Brute Man was first screened , making it his final film . Universal feared releasing the film so soon after his death would lead to accusations that the studio was exploiting the illness that ultimately killed Hatton . Now embarrassed by the film , the studio was anxious to sell it . 
 Universal sold the film to PRC for $ 125 @,@ 000 , which represented the negative cost plus interest . The transaction occurred around August 1946 , but was not made public until it was screened for the trade press on October 1 , marking its official release date . The sale occurred so quickly and hastily on the copyright files stores at the Library of Congress , the name Universal Pictures was crossed out and <unk> Industries , PRC 's corporate body , was written in its place in pencil . Some pressbook advertisements circulated for the film still included the Universal Pictures logo . PRC had previously produced a horror film about <unk> called The Monster Maker ( 1944 ) , in which a mad scientist injects human subjects with the disease as part of his experiments . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 The Brute Man received generally negative critical reviews following its release on October 1 , 1946 . A 1946 review in the Harrison 's Reports trade journal , found that the film had some suspenseful moments and could be enjoyed by fans of the genre , but that the overall effect was " artificial and stagy " . The review stated most audiences " will find it tiresome in plot and in treatment [ ... ] in fact , some of the action and dialogue may provoke laughs , instead of serious response . " New York Post critic Arthur Winsten criticized the story and the acting of Rondo Hatton , commenting that his facial disfigurements alone did not make up for his poor acting skills : " Just as clothes don 't make a gentleman , so a face doesn 't make both a villain and continuous thrills . All this picture has is a face , handicapped by encircling improbabilities . " In a review published in 1947 , Wanda Hale of the New York Daily News called it " a crude production [ ... ] compiled of bits from various B thrillers " . In contrast , Mandel <unk> of The Motion Picture Herald , said although the film used standard thriller film devices , The Brute Man " stands favorably " in its genre and director Jean Yarbrough kept the film moving at a brisk pace . 
 Decades after the film 's release , contemporary reviews of The Brute Man were similarly negative , with many commentators criticizing the exploitation of Hatton 's real @-@ life acromegaly . Film reviewer Leonard Maltin gave the film one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of four stars . John Stanley , host of the <unk> television show Creature Features , described it as a dull and " shoddy thriller " , criticizing both the performances and the mood from the direction and photography . The authors of Universal Horrors : The Studio 's Classic Films , 1931 @-@ 1946 were highly critical of the film 's dialogue , and claimed much of the script seemed to be " time @-@ killing stuff " to pad the film 's already @-@ short running time . They wrote that Hatton 's acting was so bad , it " wouldn 't be acceptable even at a pre @-@ production cast get @-@ together and table reading , much less in the movie itself " . 
 Donald C. Willis , a writer who wrote about horror and science fiction films , described the horror scenes as completely lacking suspense , and said the film was " so flimsy that its three co @-@ plots seem to be operating independently of one another " . Keith Brown of the University of Edinburgh , in his paper " Notes on the Terror Film " , argued that The Brute Man is an example of what he calls the " terror film " , a genre distinguishable from the horror film due to its emphasis on naturally occurring sources of fear , rather than fantastical or otherworldly horror elements . Brown wrote that the Creeper character " blurs the boundary between human and animal on account of his grotesque , deformed features , but is natural and thus a figure of terror " . 
 = = = Home video = = = 
 For decades after the film 's theatrical release , copies of The Brute Man were unavailable , and it became regarded as a lost film . However , the film was eventually discovered and mass @-@ produced by Admit One , a home video distribution company that focused specifically on lesser @-@ known B films . The Brute Man was first released on Betamax and VHS in 1982 by Admit One . It has been reissued on VHS several times since then , and was released on laserdisc format in 1990 . The Brute Man was most recently released on VHS by Image Entertainment in 1999 , a year which also marked the first DVD release of the film , also by Image Entertainment . In his 2004 DVD guide book , Douglas Pratt complimented both the picture and sound transfers of the 1999 DVD release : " The picture looks great . There are a couple shots where a few speckles pop up , but much of the time the image is clean , with deep blacks and sharp , finely graded contrasts . " An inexpensive DVD version was also released in 2006 by <unk> Flicks Entertainment , Inc . , which primarily markets B films . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Rondo Hatton 's likeness from The Brute Man inspired the appearance of one of the villain characters in Dave Stevens ' Rocketeer comic book as well as the 1991 film adaptation , The Rocketeer . In the film , the seven @-@ foot @-@ tall Tiny Ron Taylor portrays Lothar , an ugly and murderous henchman for the story 's antagonist . Rick Baker , the special make @-@ up effects artist that worked on the film , designed the character 's facial make @-@ up to resemble Hatton 's Creeper character , and Lothar dresses in a dark coat and hat similar to his clothing from The Brute Man . 
 In 2002 , the founders of the website The Classic Horror Film Board created the Rondo Hatton Classic Horror Awards to honor horror works in film , television and publishing . The awards were named after the actor , and award recipients received statuettes with miniature busts of Hatton as he appeared portraying the Creeper in House of Horrors and The Brute Man . The statuettes were sculpted by illustrator Kerry Gammill and cast by modeler Tim M. Lindsey . 
 The Brute Man was featured in a seventh season episode of Mystery Science Theater 3000 , a comedy television series . In the show , the human character Mike Nelson and his two robots friends , Crow T. Robot and Tom Servo , are trapped in a satellite and forced by the mad scientist Dr. Forrester to watch bad films as part of an ongoing scientific experiment . In order to get through the experiment , Mike and the robots make jokes mocking the film as they watch . During the episode , their silhouetted images are superimposed over the film to give the impression that they are sitting in a movie theater as they make their jokes . The Brute Man was the second episode of the seventh season , which was broadcast on Comedy Central on February 10 , 1996 . The description for The Brute Man in The Mystery Science Theater 3000 Amazing Colossal Episode Guide , a book by the cast and writers of the series , reads : " A dark film about dark things . Rondo Hatton 's swan song ; he died just weeks after the film was completed . So murky and dark , it makes M look like Mrs. Doubtfire . " 
 Michael J. Nelson , the show 's head writer who also plays the character of the same name , said the staff initially felt strange making jokes at the expense of Rondo Hatton and his real @-@ life illness ; however , Nelson said , " Then you realize it 's the whole point of the movie : he 's a guy with a big ugly face ... And he is a terribly bad actor . " Paul Chaplin , another writer with the series , said of the actor 's acromegaly : " That fact opens up a large , irresolvable issue concerning the movie industry 's use of this poor afflicted fellow ; he was paid , after all , and movie work is nice work . Yet it can seem exploitative of misfortune . " 
 = Apeomyoides = 
 Apeomyoides savagei is a fossil rodent from the Miocene of the United States , the only species in the genus Apeomyoides . It is known from fragmentary jaws and isolated teeth from a site in the early Barstovian , around 15 – 16 million years ago , of Nevada . Together with other species from scattered localities in the United States , Japan , and Europe , Apeomyoides is classified in the subfamily Apeomyinae of the extinct rodent family <unk> . <unk> are a rare but widespread group that may have been adapted to a relatively dry habitat . 
 As is characteristic of apeomyines , Apeomyoides was a large eomyid with high @-@ crowned cheekteeth and a large gap between the incisors and cheekteeth . Furthermore , the cheekteeth — premolars and molars — approach a <unk> pattern , with two distinct lobes . Other features distinguish Apeomyoides from other apeomyines , including the rectangular shape of the cheekteeth . The fourth lower premolar ( p4 ) is larger than the molars behind it and has two roots , while the lower molars have three . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Apeomyoides is a member of the <unk> , a diverse rodent family that is now extinct . <unk> first appeared in the Middle Eocene ( ~ 47 million years ago , mya ) in North America , where they existed until the end of the Miocene ( ~ 5 mya ) . In Europe , they survived a little longer , until the end of the Pliocene ( ~ 2 – 3 mya ) . Apeomyoides is further part of a distinctive subgroup of eomyids known as the Apeomyinae . The first apeomyine to be discovered was Apeomys <unk> , named in 1968 based on fossils from the Early Miocene of Germany , and later discoveries have expanded the range of Apeomys and similar taxa . In 1998 , Oldřich <unk> and colleagues reviewed Apeomys and identified a second , related genus Megapeomys , from the Early Miocene of Germany , the Czech Republic , and Japan . These scientists also named a new eomyid subfamily , Apeomyinae , to house Apeomys and Megapeomys . The Japanese Megapeomys was named as a separate species , Megapeomys <unk> , in 2011 . Further apeomyines have been identified in North America : Megapeomys bobwilsoni from the <unk> of Nevada , Apeomyoides savagei from the Barstovian of Nevada , Zophoapeomys indicum from the Late Oligocene of South Dakota , and a possible second species of Zophoapeomys from the Late Oligocene of Nebraska . Another North American eomyid , Arikareeomys <unk> , from the <unk> of Nebraska , has also been <unk> as an apeomyine . 
 In general , apeomyines are a widespread but generally rare group of <unk> distinctive eomyids with a tendency towards large size . <unk> and colleagues suggested that apeomyines were ecologically distinct from other eomyids and probably preferred a drier habitat . Although other scientists recognized Apeomyinae as a subfamily , in a 2008 summary of North American eomyids , Lawrence Flynn placed the group as a tribe , <unk> , within the subfamily <unk> . Flynn described Apeomyoides as the most derived apeomyine . 
 Apeomyoides savagei was described as a new genus and species by Kent Smith , Richard <unk> , and Nicholas <unk> in 2006 . The generic name , Apeomyoides , adds the Greek suffix <unk> , indicating similarity , to the name of the related genus Apeomys , while the specific name , savagei , honors Donald E. Savage for his work on fossil mammals and for assistance to Smith . In the same paper , these scientists argued in favor of apeomyine affinities for Arikareeomys . 
 = = Description = = 
 Apeomyoides savagei is a large eomyid , though not as large as Megapeomys <unk> and M. bobwilsoni . Megapeomys <unk> from Japan is similar in size , but its cheekteeth are not as high @-@ crowned . A. savagei shows a series of traits that are characteristic for the apeomyines : high @-@ crowned cheekteeth with thick enamel that are <unk> ( divided into two lobes ) in form and a very long diastema ( gap ) between the lower incisor and cheekteeth . However , the cheekteeth are higher @-@ crowned than those of other apeomyines , including Apeomys , Megapeomys , and Arikareeomys , and they are rectangular in shape , while other apeomyines have barrel @-@ shaped teeth . Similarly , the oldest apeomyine , Zophoapeomys , is smaller and has lower @-@ crowned cheekteeth . The known material of Apeomyoides consists of a number of fragmentary mandibles ( lower jaws ) and isolated cheekteeth . The length of the first and second lower molars ( m1 and m2 ) ranges from 1 @.@ 74 to 2 @.@ 58 mm , the width from 2 @.@ 08 to 2 @.@ 33 mm . 
 The fourth upper premolar ( P4 ) has not been recorded , but there is a specimen of its deciduous precursor ( <unk> ) . This tooth is characterized by four major cusps ( protocone , paracone , hypocone , and metacone ) and lophs or crests ( protoloph , mesoloph , metaloph , and posteroloph ) , separated by synclines or valleys . The first and second upper molar ( M1 and M2 ) are almost square and similar in size and structure to the <unk> . An additional <unk> on M1 and M2 , the <unk> , is incomplete in Apeomyoides , but more prominent in both Megapeomys bobwilsoni and Arikareeomys . 
 The four lower cheekteeth — the fourth lower premolar ( p4 ) and first through third lower molars ( m1 – m3 ) — are high @-@ crowned teeth . Like the upper teeth , they bear four cusps ( metaconid , protoconid , entoconid , and hypoconid ) , four lophs ( metalophid , mesolophid , <unk> , and posterolophid ) and three valleys . Each of the lower cheekteeth lacks an additional <unk> , the ectolophid , which is present in Arikareeomys . The p4 is larger than any of the molars and longer than it is wide . Among the molars , m1 and m2 do not differ appreciably from each other and are a little wider than they are long , while m3 is a little smaller and its back side is more rounded and narrower . Syncline IV , which is located at the back of the tooth , between the <unk> and posterolophid , is closed at the margins ; this valley is open in Megapeomys bobwilsoni . Syncline IV also opens into the centrally located syncline III ; this opening is absent in Arikareeomys . There are two roots under p4 and three under each of the molars , fewer than in Megapeomys bobwilsoni , which shows three under p4 and four under the molars . 
 On the mandible , the diastema is very large and the incisor is procumbent ( projecting forward ) , which distinguishes Apeomyoides from most eomyids apart from Megapeomys . There is a masseteric scar ( associated with the jaw muscles ) from below the m1 forward to a point in front of p4 , below the mental foramen , an opening in the jawbone . In Apeomys and Megapeomys this scar only reaches to the level of the front root of p4 . The mental foramen is very small and opens in the diastema , near the ventral shelf of the scar ; in Apeomys and Megapeomys it is located near the dorsal shelf . Further foramina are present on the lingual ( inner ) surface of the bone , below the cheekteeth . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 Apeomyoides savagei is from the Eastgate local fauna in the Monarch Mill Formation of Churchill County , Nevada . This fauna dates to the early Barstovian land mammal age , around 15 – 16 mya . This makes Apeomyoides the youngest known apeomyine , and its occurrence helps close a gap in the known geographic range of North American apeomyines between Megapeomys bobwilsoni elsewhere in Nevada and Arikareeomys in Nebraska . Other eomyids found at Eastgate include species of <unk> and <unk> . 
 = Itchen Navigation = 
 The Itchen Navigation is a 10 @.@ 4 @-@ mile ( 16 @.@ 7 km ) disused canal system in Hampshire , England , that provided an important trading route from Winchester to the sea at Southampton for about 150 years . Improvements to the River Itchen were authorised by Act of Parliament in 1665 , but progress was slow , and the navigation was not declared complete until 1710 . It was known as a navigation because it was essentially an improved river , with the main river channel being used for some sections , and cuts with locks used to bypass the difficult sections . Its waters are fed from the River Itchen . It provided an important method of moving goods , particularly agricultural produce and coal , between the two cities and the intervening villages . 
 On its completion it was capable of taking shallow barges of around 13 feet ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) in width and 70 feet ( 21 m ) in length , but traffic was fairly modest . 18 @,@ 310 tons of freight were carried in 1802 , one of the better years , and there were never more than six boats in use on the waterway . Following the opening of the London and Southampton Railway in 1840 , traffic declined sharply , and the navigation ceased to operate in 1869 . There were various attempts to revitalise it , but none were successful . There had also been several proposals to link it to the Basingstoke Canal to form an inland route from London to Southampton during its life , which likewise did not come to fruition . 
 The revival of interest in inland waterways following the end of the Second World War has resulted in the tow path alongside the canal becoming part of the Itchen Way long @-@ distance footpath , and is a popular route for walkers . The Itchen Navigation Preservation Society was formed in the 1970s , but progress was slow . A joint venture between the Environment Agency and the Hampshire and Isle of Wight Wildlife Trust in 2005 led to the formation of the Itchen Navigation Trust , and two years later , they obtained a grant from the Heritage Lottery Fund , funding the creation of the Itchen Navigation Heritage Trail Project , which has sought to conserve and interpret the remains . The route provides habitat for a diverse flora and fauna , which has resulted in it being designated as a European Special Area of Conservation and a Site of Special Scientific Interest . 
 = = History = = 
 The River Itchen had been commercially important since before Norman times , with a <unk> for unloading boats recorded at Bishopstoke in 960 , and stone for Winchester Cathedral , built when Winchester was the capital city of England , was probably transported by water from the quarries of Caen in France . The first recorded improvements to the river were made by Godfrey de Lucy , who was Bishop of Winchester between 1189 and 1204 . He funded the works himself , and as a consequence , was granted the right to levy tolls on goods transported on the river by King John . There was considerable trade in wool and leather , but the centres for this moved to Calais and Melcombe Regis in 1353 , and as the trade declined , so did the navigable parts of the river . It was noted to be in poor condition in 1452 , and a report for the Commissioners of Sewers in 1617 suggested that much of it was obstructed by mills which had been built on the banks . 
 Construction of the canal was authorised by an Act of Parliament passed in 1665 . The Act allowed a number of rivers to be made navigable , and in each case , undertakers were appointed , to carry out the work , as were commissioners , chosen from the local justices , who were responsible for confirming the tolls . The undertakers made very slow progress , and it was not until 1710 that the work was completed . They had built locks and some artificial cuts to bypass difficult sections of the river , and created a towing path for horses . The route was 10 @.@ 4 miles ( 16 @.@ 7 km ) long , of which 2 @.@ 75 miles ( 4 @.@ 43 km ) were new cuts , and although some of the rest used the course of the river , much of it followed secondary streams . New undertakers were not appointed as old ones died , and by 1767 , the navigation was effectively owned by one man , a Mr Edward Pyott . Local people felt that he was exceeding his powers , and they obtained a second Act of Parliament in 1767 , which noted that Pyott had created a trading and carrying monopoly , as he would refuse to carry coal and other goods which interfered with his own activities . The preamble to the Act claimed that this was harming the poor and the inhabitants of Winchester . 
 The Act was unusual , as it was obtained without Pyott 's consent , and created a new group of commissioners from local justices and dignitaries . They were empowered to set the rates for tolls , and the owner was obliged to transport all goods at the established rates . If there were not sufficient boats and the owner did not provide more , they could license others to provide carriage services . They could also order that locks , wharves and warehouses should be erected . The size of boats was specified , and were to be capable of carrying between 20 and 30 tons of cargo . The tolls set were quite moderate , and a group of merchants appear to have leased the river from Pyott for a period after 1767 , but he eventually took control again . 
 Some additional locks were added , and by 1795 , there were fifteen , three made of masonry blocks , and twelve with turf sides . There were also two single gates or half locks . The lowest lock was at Woodmill , where the navigation joined the estuary of the River Itchen , on its way to Southampton Water . The main wharves at the Southampton end were at Northam , about 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) below the lock , and barges worked down to them on the tide or were punted if the tide was rising . As the river was tidal below Woodmill Lock , the structure was rebuilt in 1829 with a third set of gates facing downstream , to prevent high tides flooding the navigation . 
 The route map shows the navigation in deep blue , ( or green for the drained section ) , to distinguish it from the river , shown in light blue . Deep blue is normally used to represent navigable waterways , but is used here for clarity . 
 = = = Operation = = = 
 Following the death of Pyott , ownership of the navigation was bought by James D 'Arcy , by then married to the widow of one of Pyott 's sons . There were still mortgages of £ 4 @,@ 666 outstanding , all of them owned by members of Pyott 's family , on which interest had to be paid . He appears to have leased the tolls to the proprietors , according to a local newspaper report of the time , and then to Edward Knapp , before taking over again in 1794 . Around 1802 , the navigation was carrying 18 @,@ 310 long tons ( 18 @,@ 600 t ) of freight , of which 10 @,@ 300 long tons ( 10 @,@ 500 t ) were coal and culm , 350 long tons ( 360 t ) were salt , 1 @,@ 710 long tons ( 1 @,@ 740 t ) tons were chalk , and the remaining 5 @,@ 950 long tons ( 6 @,@ 050 t ) tons were made up of other goods . The average annual income was quoted as £ 3 @,@ 735 , but this probably included freight charges as well as tolls , since D 'Arcy managed both . He operated four barges . 
 With the prospects of a link between the navigation and the Basingstoke Canal being constructed , the undertaking was valued at £ 24 @,@ 000 , and D 'Arcy sold a half share in it to his agent , George Hollis . He then sold the other half to him , and moved to Ireland . Hollis became the sole proprietor from 1804 , having bought out his sleeping partner . Throughout its life , the navigation had almost been a monopoly , but Hollis planned to end this , and obtained an Act of Parliament in 1802 , to make it an open navigation , where anyone could use it on payment of the appropriate tolls . These were laid down in the Act , ending the setting of tolls by the Commissioners . The Act also specified that he had three years to put the river in order , which he appears to have achieved , since he then leased it to a group of merchants . 
 From 1808 , a number of detractors argued that the navigation was in a poor condition , hoping to force Hollis to concede water rights to mills , and traffic declined . Another Act of 1811 allowed Hollis to raise the tolls , and eight years later , he held a meeting at the Winchester Guildhall , explaining why he needed to raise the tolls further . The meeting asked him to postpone his next Bill for a year , in return for which they would give him £ 1 @,@ 200 for one year 's tolls , wharfage and rent , he would spend £ 600 on repairs , and the remaining £ 600 would amount to 5 per cent interest on the estimated value of the navigation , which was then £ 12 @,@ 000 . He obtained his Act of Parliament a year later , which raised the tolls , but the Commissioners reduced freight charges at the same time , resulting in the operation being more profitable for Hollis and less so for the barge owners . 
 = = = Decline = = = 
 Hollis raised mortgages to pay for improvements , but receipts were down to £ 1 @,@ 821 in 1839 , the last full year of operation before the London and Southampton Railway opened . The receipts were obtained from tolls , as all freight was moved by independent carriers . At this point , Hollis gave control of the navigation to members of his family . His son managed it until 1841 , when a banker called W. W. Bulpett , who was a mortgagee , took over . In 1847 he was given notice to quit by the Hollis family , despite having done a good job , but he refused . F. W. Hollis eventually obtained most of the shares from the other family members , and started legal action to remove Bulpett . Railway competition had caused a sharp drop in receipts , from £ 1 @,@ 012 in 1843 to £ 430 in 1861 , and payments to shareholders and <unk> ceased in 1850 and 1857 . In 1863 , Bulpett was replaced by Mr Clarke , formerly the manager of the Andover Canal , but Bulpett returned when he won the action brought by Hollis . 
 However , his re @-@ instatement was short lived , as the navigation ceased to operate in January 1869 , the last month in which tolls were collected . <unk> of £ 19 @,@ 708 were outstanding , of which £ 2 @,@ 607 dated from the original construction by Pyott . A plan to buy the waterway by J. R. Stebbings of Southampton in 1871 fell through . A further attempt to buy the navigation was made in 1909 by Patrick O <unk> , an estate agent from Southsea . He created a company called the Itchen Navigation Ltd , with a capital of £ 20 @,@ 000 , but they were unable to establish who owned it , and so the company never traded . 
 = = = Extensions = = = 
 During the life of the canal , there were several proposals to link the canal to the Basingstoke Canal , to provide an inland route between London and Southampton . The first was in 1788 , and was initiated by the Basingstoke Canal company , six months after they started work on their main line . A survey for a proposed route was made , but no further progress occurred . 
 The Basingstoke committee then investigated a link to the Andover Canal , but in December 1792 , interest switched back to a link with the Itchen . A meeting was held in Southampton , which was chaired by the mayor and included James D 'Arcy on the committee . It became part of a much grander scheme to link Bristol to Salisbury , and onwards to London , but although most of this soon died away , the Itchen to Basingstoke link was still being considered in 1796 , by which time it was called the London and Southampton Ports Junction Canal . Two routes were surveyed by different engineers , one costing £ 127 @,@ 000 and the other £ 157 @,@ 566 . 
 The main focus was on providing a safe route between London and Southampton , in view of the war with France at the time and the threat to shipping using a coastal route . However , prices were rising , and there were a number of other canal schemes in difficulty at the time , which resulted in it being put on hold until 1807 . Meanwhile , the Grand Surrey Canal was being proposed in 1800 , and Ralph Dodd the main promoter suggested that it could easily be extended to join the Itchen . The previous scheme received more attention in 1807 , by which time it had become the Portsmouth , Southampton and London Junction Canal . From Winchester it would pass through Alresford , Alton and Farnham , to join either the Basingstoke Canal at Aldershot or the Wey and Godalming Navigations at Godalming . To speed construction , it was suggested that the 2 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) summit tunnel could be replaced by a 7 @-@ mile ( 11 km ) railway , with the tunnel being built in due course . 
 Widely divergent costs for the project were discussed . The original estimate was £ 140 @,@ 000 if the railway was built , and £ 200 @,@ 000 if the tunnel was built . Opponents suggested the cost would be nearer £ 700 @,@ 000 , and John Rennie estimated the tunnel line would cost £ 440 @,@ 790 in 1809 . Opponents argued that the real intent was to improve the water supply for the Basingstoke Canal or to line the pockets of George Hollis , the owner of the Itchen Navigation . There was considerable interest in the scheme , as 1 @,@ 244 shares of £ 100 had been subscribed by early 1809 , but with opposition from land and mill owners , and Rennie 's report indicating much higher costs , the project was dropped . 
 One final proposal was made in 1902 . Experiments had been carried out on the Wey and Godalming using electric traction to pull the barges . The scheme was for a 64 @-@ mile ( 103 km ) canal from Ditton on the River Thames through Guildford , Godalming and Alton to join the Itchen at Winchester . 250 @-@ ton barges would be pulled along from the towpath by engines fed from overhead catenary wires . However , although such a system was operational in France , nothing came of the proposal . 
 = = = Closure = = = 
 Although the navigation ceased to operate from January 1869 , Woodmill Lock remained in use , to enable barges to reach <unk> Mill at West End , which was on the main river channel just above the start of the first cut . Most of the bridges over the navigation were owned by the navigation , and their condition deteriorated . The manager , Mr Bulpett , was notified that he had 21 days to repair Shawford Bridge in 1879 . He replied to the Winchester Highway Board that the navigation was insolvent , and he would help them to transfer responsibility for it to the county council . The Board carried out temporary repairs , when Bulpett agreed that the navigation would meet the full cost of repairing it properly if it ever reopened . The following year , Bulpett was threatened with legal action over the state of Bishopstoke Bridge , but at this point it was agreed that the navigation had no income , and could not be sold , and so the county would have to maintain the bridges . 
 In 1911 , a Mr Bowker from Shawford successfully applied for the towpath to be diverted , but this was overturned when Rev. J H Du Boulay appealed against the decision . The diversion was sanctioned in 1914 , although there have been doubts about the legality of the action , and subsequently two further diversions were made , at <unk> , near the southern end and at Hockley , near the northern end . No maintenance was carried out on the waterway until the formation of Catchment Boards . Thus responsibility for the waterway as a drainage channel passed to the Hampshire Catchment Board in 1942 , and some work was carried out to maintain the integrity of the waterway . These responsibilities later passed to the Southern Water Authority , and now reside with the Environment Agency . 
 In the 1960s , the value of the towpath as a leisure amenity began to be recognised . The Deputy County Clerk for Hampshire walked along the towpath from end to end in 1966 , together with members of the Ramblers Association . He decided that rather than challenge the legality of the towpath diversions , he would invite the local authorities through which the navigation ran to assume responsibility for maintaining the towpath . These organisations were Southampton County Borough Council , Eastleigh Borough Council , Winchester Rural District Council and Winchester City Council . The construction of weirs at most of the locks by the Southern Water Authority resulted in water levels being restored on significant parts of the navigation . The powers of the navigation were enshrined in Acts of Parliament obtained in 1665 , 1767 , 1795 , 1802 , 1811 and 1820 , none of which have been repealed . 
 = = = Restoration = = = 
 The newer technologies of road and rail led to the navigation falling into disuse . Some lengths of the system were drained or allowed to overgrow with vegetation . Increasingly the difference between the canal and the river became less obvious , although it is still possible to identify remains of the original locks . The threat to the remains which the construction of the M3 motorway posed spurred the Winchester Tenants and Residents Association and the local branch of the Inland Waterways Association into action in 1975 , with both suggesting that the waterway could be restored . The two groups later co @-@ operated , and the Itchen Navigation Preservation Society was formed . 
 Little progress was made , but in 2005 the Environment Agency and the Hampshire and Isle of Wight Wildlife Trust promoted the formation of the Itchen Navigation Trust . They were committed to conserving the remains , rather than a full restoration to navigable standards . A request was made to the Heritage Lottery Fund in the United Kingdom for funds to restore the watercourse . Known as The Itchen Navigation Heritage Trail Project , funding was granted and a five @-@ year restoration project began . Work has included widening the aperture at College Mead Lock and the construction of a bypass channel around Malm Lock to assist the movement of fish and other aquatic fauna . The navigation has been designated a European Special Area of Conservation as well as a Site of Special Scientific Interest , due to the rich diversity of wildlife found along the system , and its historical importance . 
 = = Route = = 
 The official head of the canal was at Blackbridge Wharf , Winchester , just to the south of Wharf Mill , a grade II listed water mill dating from 1885 , and College Walk , which spans the river at Blackbridge , an eighteenth @-@ century stone bridge which is also grade II listed . Below the bridge , the channel splits , with the river flowing to the west and the navigation to the east . Blackbridge Wharf was accessed by Wharf Bridge , the oldest surviving bridge over the navigation , dating from the 1760s . Close by , the manager 's house , a warehouse and some stables have also survived . The navigation flows past the grounds of Winchester College , which uses the waterway for rowing practice . The rowing eights use a winding basin just above the remains of St Catherine 's Hill Lock , which now contains a modern sluice mechanism , and was the location of a water @-@ powered sawmill , located to the west of the lock . 
 It passes St Catherine 's Hill , an Iron Age hill fort and some plague pits , which were common graves for victims of the 1666 plague . It then passes under the former Didcot , Newbury and Southampton Railway , whose line from Winchester to Shawford Junction was operational between 1891 and 1966 , before being diverted through a culvert under junction 11 of the M3 motorway . Originally this was the site of a bridge which carried the road from Winchester to Botley , but this was replaced by a full headroom concrete tunnel in the late 1930s , when the junction between that road and the new Winchester Bypass was built over the navigation . When the M3 motorway was constructed , following almost the same line as the bypass where it crossed the navigation , the tunnel was reduced to a culvert , although the original plans for the motorway would have destroyed most of the top pound . The building of the M3 across Twyford Down , a small area of ancient chalk downland , was controversial at the time , but the removal of the Winchester Bypass which ran to the west of St Catherine 's Hill close to the navigation and its conversion back to grassland has brought tranquility back to the valley . The canal is on the western edge of Twyford Down , and continues through Twyford Lane End Lock before it briefly rejoins the river . Some 220 yards ( 200 m ) south of the junction are Tumbling Bay Hatches , originally used to control levels in the water meadows to the east of the river . A modern sluice was installed just to the north of the 19th century hatches in 1971 , and controls flow to the Twyford Drain , the main channel to the east of the navigation , which follows the river channel almost to Shawford Bridge . Modern maps , however , label the drain as the River Itchen . 
 A leat from this stretch was created at around the time of the construction of the canal to provide water for the Twyford Mead water meadows . Farming of the water meadows continued until around 1930 , after the closure of the navigation itself . It was a labour @-@ intensive method of land management , but the controlled flooding of the meadows , with the deposition of silt from the water , enabled the land to produce two crops of hay per year , as well as grazing for sheep and cattle . Demonstrations of the techniques used to flood the meadows are still carried out occasionally . 
 = = = Below Twyford = = = 
 The next lock is Compton Lock , the only one built on a river section . It is also called Compton Place Lock or Twyford Lock , and the extra flow compared to other locks may explain the erosion that has taken place , resulting in a circular area of water between the upper and lower gates . Just above Shawford Bridge , the river and navigation diverged , with Shawford Mill just below the junction . The building still stands . The bridge is a modern construction , and is located at a point where the towpath crosses to the western bank . Just to the south is a weir at the site of Shawford Single Gates , which probably ensured the mill had an adequate head of water . The village of Twyford lies to the east , and the Twyford Drain splits , with the western channel rejoining the river below the mill , and the eastern channel continuing as a relief channel . There are two more locks on the navigation , called Malm Lock and College Mead Lock , before the navigation rejoins the river . By the junction is the intake for <unk> Water Treatment Works . 
 After some 450 yards ( 410 m ) , the river continues straight ahead , and another cut begins , turning sharply to the right . Soon the remains of <unk> Lock are reached , which include an eel trap . The design of the gates , which included vents near the top of the structure , to allow surplus water to pass through , was clearly shown in a drawing dating from 1880 . Below it were <unk> Single Gates , probably used to maintain water levels for a mill , of which some brickwork remains . There were hatches to allow water to return to the river channel either side of the gates , one of which is now a modern sluice . The navigation runs along an embankment for about 450 yards ( 410 m ) , which is 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) high , before it reaches Allbrook Lock . This was moved in 1838 , when the railway line was built , and was repaired in 1944 . It has a chamber built of bricks , whereas the other locks are turf @-@ sided . A bridge carries the <unk> over the tail of the lock , having been widened since it was first built . At the head of the lock is a gauging station , where the Environment Agency measure the flow and level of the water . 
 The navigation turns to the west , passing under the railway line , and then loops back to return to the eastern side of the railway . It runs along the northern edge of some railway sidings which form part of Eastleigh Works , to reach <unk> Lock . This was unusual , as it included a bypass channel to take excess water around the lock , whereas the other locks used vents in the gates . Just below the lock , the navigation rejoins the river channel . At Barton Bay , the Barton River leaves the navigation , following a course to the west of the channel . A horse bridge carried the towpath over the river , which used to supply water to Barton Peveril Mill . The next cut began a little further south , with Bishopstoke or Stoke Lock at the head of it . There are four bridges on Bishopstoke Road , as it crosses the Barton River , the navigation , the river channel and the tailrace of Shears Mill , Bishopstoke . The mill was a large four @-@ storey building , which was demolished in the 1920s . Four years before demolition , two water turbines of 20 @-@ inch ( 51 cm ) and 36 @-@ inch ( 91 cm ) diameter were installed , and were retained after the demise of the mill , in the hope that they could be used to generate DC power for the village . Several community groups are looking at the possibility of restoring the water turbines to generate electricity . 
 The next lock is Conegar Lock , which was also called Stoke Conegar or <unk> Lock . Just above it are some hatches which supplied water to the adjacent water meadows . They were built of dressed stone , and are the best @-@ preserved of the original hatches . There is no modern sluice at Conegar Lock , and the change in level has resulted in fast @-@ flowing rapids which have cut back the channel above the lock . A little further south at Fish House Bay , the navigation crossed the Barton River diagonally , as the mill stream made its way back to the main river . A footbridge on the eastern bank carried the towpath over the Barton River , but the navigation below this point is dry , with its line occupied by a vegetable garden . 
 = = = Below Conegar = = = 
 The next section is the least preserved part of the navigation , which skirted to the east of Eastleigh Sewage Treatment Works , to a point where it was crossed by the railway from Eastleigh to Gosport . Two lengths have been filled in , and although there is a footpath , it follows the approximate route of the navigation , rather than the actual towpath . The railway bridge was built in 1841 and originally had two arches , one for the navigation , and another for the landowners . Replacement was necessary in 1979 , and the bridge was demolished . Part of it was replaced by an embankment , but a large @-@ diameter concrete tube was provided , or sufficient size to carry the navigation should it be reinstated . The next lock is Lock House Lock , which was also called <unk> Lock . The name reflects the fact that there was a lock @-@ keeper 's cottage by the structure , but this has long since disappeared . 
 The navigation then passes to the east of Southampton Airport , while further east is the river channel and the Itchen Valley Country Park . Between the two waterways is Decoy Covert , a small wood which contained a duck decoy . The lock nearby is called Decoy Pond Lock , below which is Sandy Lock . There is little water in this section , since its main supply has been cut off , and although there are springs along this section , the channel is periodically blocked where occupation bridges have been replaced by earth embankments . Sandy Lock has much barbed wire in it , possibly dumped when the wartime defences of the airport were dismantled . The final lock on this section is Mans Bridge Lock , shortly after the modern crossing by the M27 motorway . The cut then rejoins the main river , and passes under the A27 road . The current bridge was constructed in 1975 , and replaced a bailey bridge erected during the Second World War . Just below it is a single arched stone bridge dating from the early nineteenth century , which was the original course of the road . It has been restored and is used as a footbridge . 
 The final lock was the sea lock at Woodmill . There are no visible remains of it , although its location can still be seen . The mill was to the west , and now forms part of the Woodmill Outdoor Activities Centre , with the main building used as a canoe shop . The centre was set up in the late 1960s , and is a registered charity . The navigation officially continued downstream to a wharf at Northam , and although there was never a towpath on the tidal section , the Itchen Way long distance footpath follows the eastern bank of the river for most of the way . Nothing remains of Northam Quay , and the bridge has been rebuilt twice since the first construction of 1796 , the last time in 1954 . The river also passes under the <unk> Cobden Bridge , and a railway bridge built in 1866 , with two sets of round iron columns supporting the structure over the main channel , which retains most of its original appearance and now forms part of the West Coastway Line . 
 = = Flora and fauna = = 
 The Itchen Navigation supports a rich flora and fauna , and one benefit of the 5 @-@ year grant @-@ funded restoration project has been the regular monitoring and publishing of reports to document this . Annual reports on the populations of birds , bats , otters , water voles and butterflies , damselflies and dragonflies have been produced , with occasional reports on other aspects , while the Environment Agency has produces fisheries reports . As part of the project , a number of engineering works have been carried out to stabilise the banks , and trees have been cut back to reduce the amount of shade and encourage the growth of marginal vegetation . In the case of the water vole survey , this has been concentrated on the sections where work has been carried out , whereas the butterfly , damselfly and dragonfly survey has tended to cover the whole navigation . <unk> berms containing marginal plants have been placed along the banks . The project has tried to avoid the installation of revetments , as the vertical faces prevent wildlife accessing the banks , but where a revetment is necessary to combat erosion , it has been built of oak and a berm placed in front of it to soften the edge . 
 In recognition of the fact that many people use the towpath to exercise their dogs , dog dips have been installed at Allbrook and Shawford . These provide easy access into the water for dogs , and owners are encouraged to only allow dogs to swim at these locations , to conserve the bank in other places . The water vole surveys have followed the best practice described in the Water <unk> Conservation Handbook ( 2006 ) , and have also recorded evidence of otter , brown rat and American mink populations . While carrying out the work , the surveyors have also counted sightings of kingfisher , heron , moorhen and coot . The bat survey recorded common pipistrelle , soprano pipistrelle , Daubenton 's , noctule and <unk> bats in 2011 . Bat boxes have been erected near Allbrook , and there was some evidence that they were being used . The 2009 fisheries survey recorded large numbers of young Atlantic salmon in the lower river , but although fish weirs have been provided , wild parr were not recorded near Winchester . Above there , a large population of brown trout thrives . Eels were monitored for the first time in 2009 , when their distribution was found to be variable . 
 = = Points of interest = = 
 = Stephanie McMahon = 
 Stephanie Marie McMahon Levesque ( born Stephanie Marie McMahon ; September 24 , 1976 ) is an American businesswoman , professional wrestling valet , professional wrestler , minority owner , and the Chief Brand Officer ( CBO ) of WWE . 
 A fourth @-@ generation wrestling promoter as a member of the McMahon family , she has worked for WWE since she was a teenager ( modeling T @-@ shirts and other merchandise for various WWE catalogs ) working her way up to receptionist , then in various front office jobs up to and including her current CBO position . She is the great @-@ granddaughter of Roderick " Jess " McMahon , granddaughter of Vincent J. McMahon , daughter of WWE Chairman and CEO Vince McMahon and retired CEO / United States Senate candidate Linda McMahon , the younger sister of WWE part @-@ owner / wrestler Shane McMahon , and wife of WWE executive / wrestler Paul " Triple H " Levesque . 
 McMahon began appearing regularly on @-@ air for WWE ( then WWF as the World Wrestling Federation ) in 1999 as a part of a storyline with The Undertaker . After a brief on @-@ screen relationship with Test , she was engaged to Triple H — whom she married both on @-@ screen and later in real life — which resulted in The McMahon @-@ Helmsley Faction storyline . She has held the WWF Women 's Championship once . In 2001 , she was the on @-@ screen owner of Extreme Championship Wrestling during The Invasion . The following year , she was the SmackDown General Manager , but stopped appearing regularly on television after an " I Quit " match with her father Vince . 
 After only making sporadic appearances for several years , McMahon began appearing regularly on Raw in 2008 as the Raw brand general manager before disappearing once again . By mid @-@ 2013 , McMahon returned to regular on @-@ air appearances in the WWE , this time under the gimmick of an unctuous , judgmental , bullying owner along with on @-@ screen chief operating officer , her husband , Triple H. From 2013 to 2016 , they acted as a power couple known as " The Authority , " making what were often shady decrees while claiming only to be concerned for " what 's best for business , " all the while romanticizing each other in the process with public displays of affection . The Authority would later expand into a stable with its co @-@ leaders Triple H and herself . In April 2016 , The Authority quietly disbanded . She is currently the <unk> of Raw . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Stephanie Marie McMahon was born on September 24 , 1976 in Williamstown , New Jersey to Linda and Vince McMahon . She has one brother , Shane McMahon . Soon after her birth , the family moved to Greenwich , Connecticut . There , she attended the selective Greenwich Country Day School , throughout her elementary school years . At the age of 13 , McMahon appeared in World Wrestling Federation ( WWF ) merchandise catalogs , modeling T @-@ shirts and hats . After graduating from Greenwich High School , she attended Boston University and in 1998 earned a degree in Communications . After graduating in 1998 , she began working for the WWF full @-@ time . 
 = = Business career = = 
 McMahon entered WWF as a model , for WWF Sales and merchandise , but started her WWF career as an Account Executive for the WWF sales office in New York . In her early years with the company , she did reception work , creative design , television production , and acted as a ring performer . After spending time as the director of creative writing , a job she had by 2002 , she was promoted to Senior Vice President of Creative Writing in 2006 . 
 = = = Executive Vice President = = = 
 McMahon was promoted to executive vice president of Creative in 2007 . She was responsible for overseeing the creative process ( Storylines ) for all television and pay @-@ per @-@ view programming . She oversaw all aspects of talent management and branding as well as live event booking and marketing , as well as all social and digital media properties . 
 As Executive vice @-@ president , Creative she was able to spearhead the upbringing of the WWE app , which has been downloaded over 20 million times . She was also able to launch a huge partnership with the USO metropolitan Washington , the social media company Tout , and was able to partner with Yahoo to bring WWE content . Stephanie also lead WWE 's Creative coalition for their Anti Bullying Campaigns . In addition to her duties , she was responsible for the day @-@ to @-@ day operations for <unk> 
 = = = Chief Brand Officer = = = 
 On December 4 , 2013 WWE announced the promotion of Stephanie to chief brand officer , where she will now lead efforts to further enhance WWE 's brand reputation among key constituents including advertisers , media , business partners , and investors . McMahon will also serve as the lead ambassador of WWE and work with business units to support key growth initiatives . Stephanie will also lead WWE 's targeted youth and moms marketing programs . 
 McMahon 's new position enabled her to spearhead the continued partnership with General Mills ' <unk> 's brand . On February 5 , 2014 , Stephanie McMahon along with CMO and <unk> Michelle Wilson announced a partnership between WWE and KaBOOM ! to build a playground for WWE 's annual WrestleMania week in Louisiana . McMahon earned a combined salary of over $ 775 @,@ 000 between her corporate role and as an on @-@ screen talent in 2013 . She also owns over $ 77 million in WWE stock . On April 15 , 2014 during WWE 's annual Business Partners Summit , Stephanie confirmed a new WWE logo that would debut the night after WWE SummerSlam although it 's already showing up on WWE products like the WWE Network and NXT . On August , 5th at the Needham fireside conference , Stephanie alongside with her husband Triple H , and WWE Chief strategy and financial officer George Barrios , discussed the Creative side of WWE , the WWE Network , and the difference between WWE and UFC . 
 = = Job titles = = 
 Account executive and receptionist – 1998 – 2002 
 Director , Creative Television – 2002 – 2006 
 Responsible for the creative design , plans , and initiatives for WWE television . 
 Senior vice @-@ president , Creative Writing – 2006 – 2007 
 Responsible for overseeing the creative writing process , development , and management of WWE creative team . 
 Executive vice @-@ president , Creative Development and Operations – 2007 – 2013 
 Responsible for the creative development for all of WWE television including live and televised events and pay per views , as well as event bookings . Stephanie also served as a backstage producer / director . 
 Chief brand officer 2013 – present 
 Responsible for leading WWE 's effort 's and brand reputation among key constituencies including investors , media , business partners , and advertisers . As well as marketing mom and kids initiatives . 
 = = Professional wrestling career = = 
 = = = World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment / WWE = = = 
 = = = = Relationship with Test ( 1999 ) = = = = 
 In early 1999 , at the suggestion of WWF writer Vince Russo McMahon debuted as the sweet daughter of Vince McMahon during an on @-@ screen storyline involving Vince and The Undertaker . The Undertaker stalked and abducted McMahon at the end of the April Backlash pay @-@ per @-@ view , which culminated in him almost marrying her in the middle of the ring the next night on Raw , before being rescued by Stone Cold Steve Austin . 
 McMahon then began an on @-@ screen relationship with wrestler Test , which led to a rivalry between him and her older brother Shane . After Test defeated Shane at SummerSlam in a " Love Her Or Leave Her Match " , McMahon and Test went on to team together in a match on September 20 , 1999 , with the couple defeating Jeff Jarrett and Debra . The couple were eventually engaged , but during the in @-@ ring ceremony , Triple H showed a video which revealed that he had drugged McMahon and taken her to Las Vegas , Nevada where they were married in a drive @-@ through ceremony . McMahon seemed to abhor Triple H at first , but at the inaugural Armageddon event , after Triple H defeated her father in a No Holds Barred Match , left with him after embracing . McMahon confronted Vince the next night on Raw and revealed the wedding was a planned event , which was a revenge plot against her father for the aforementioned kidnappings , thus turning her into a villain . 
 = = = = McMahon @-@ Helmsley era ( 2000 – 2001 ) = = = = 
 In late 1999 , with Vince McMahon absent as a result of injuries inflicted upon him by Triple H at the Armageddon Pay @-@ per @-@ view , Triple H and McMahon became the on @-@ screen owners of the WWF , a period known as the " McMahon @-@ Helmsley Era " ( slightly different from the modern era of " The Authority " ) and dominated by the McMahon @-@ Helmsley Faction . Triple H held the WWF Championship and McMahon held the WWF Women 's Championship after defeating champion Jacqueline with the help of Tori and D @-@ Generation X on the March 28 edition of SmackDown ! On the edition of June 6 of SmackDown , McMahon successfully defended her title against Lita and on the edition of June 16 of SmackDown . Stephanie reconciled with her father and brother at WrestleMania 2000 when they helped Triple H defend his title against The Rock , leaving Linda McMahon as the only fan @-@ favorite in the McMahon family . 
 In mid 2000 , a love triangle storyline began featuring McMahon , Triple H and Kurt Angle . The storyline continued at Unforgiven when Triple H defeated Angle with a Pedigree following a low blow from McMahon , proving her loyalty to him . McMahon later became Angle 's manager and was in his corner when he defeated The Rock for the WWF Championship at No Mercy . The alliance was short lived , however , as after The Rock performed his Rock Bottom maneuver on McMahon at No Mercy , Triple H attacked Angle , considering it his fault that McMahon was hurt due to her managing Angle at the time . On the August 21 , 2000 episode of Raw , McMahon lost the WWF 's Women 's Championship to Lita despite the interferences from Angle and Triple H after special referee , The Rock , performed a spinebuster on McMahon . 
 The internal disputes between the McMahons led to Linda McMahon being in a comatose and wheel @-@ chair bound state due to the stress of being asked for a divorce by Vince , who took the opportunity to have a public affair with Trish Stratus . McMahon briefly feuded with Stratus , defeating her at No Way Out . Over the next few weeks , Vince made it clear that he favored McMahon over Stratus , allowing McMahon to bully and verbally abuse Stratus . At WrestleMania X @-@ Seven , Shane McMahon defeated Vince in a street fight . During the match , Stratus slapped Vince and chased Stephanie from ringside , apparently upset with Vince 's constant misogynistic treatment of her . 
 = = = = The Invasion and divorce from triple H ( 2001 – 2002 ) = = = = 
 McMahon later revealed that she had purchased Extreme Championship Wrestling and intended to bankrupt the WWF ( in reality , the ownership of ECW assets at this time was highly disputed ) , along with her brother Shane , who had become the on @-@ screen owner of World Championship Wrestling ( WCW ) , and the two rosters merged to form a " supergroup " known as The Alliance . 
 Her team " The Alliance " consisting of her brother Shane , former WCW Champion Booker T. , Rob Van Dam , Kurt Angle and Steve Austin were defeated by " Team WWF " consisting of The Undertaker , Kane , Big Show , Chris Jericho & The Rock at the Survivor Series in a five @-@ on @-@ five , Winner Takes All elimination match . The night after The Alliance was defeated , Shane and McMahon were banished from WWF television . McMahon returned in January 2002 when Triple H made a comeback as a fan @-@ favorite , but the good couple began having problems , as McMahon began acting like a nagging and clingy wife . 
 As part of the storyline , the couple " divorced " after McMahon claimed to be pregnant in order to trick Triple H into renewing their marital vows . Triple H later discovered that she was lying through and left her at the altar during the renewal ceremony . As a result , after Triple H won the Royal Rumble , McMahon appointed herself special guest referee in a match between Kurt Angle and Triple H at No Way Out with Triple H 's WrestleMania Undisputed WWF Championship shot on the line . Though Angle won thanks to McMahon 's biased officiating , Triple H defeated him the next night to regain his title shot . McMahon then aligned herself with former enemy , Chris Jericho . Despite interference by McMahon , Jericho lost to Triple H at WrestleMania X8 on March 17 . On the March 25 episode of Raw , Jericho and McMahon lost to Triple H in a Triple Threat match for the Undisputed Championship , with the stipulation that , if McMahon was pinned , she would be forced to leave the WWF ; In the match , Triple H pinned McMahon . 
 = = = = General manager of SmackDown ! ( 2002 – 2003 ) = = = = 
 On July 18 , 2002 , McMahon returned to the WWE ( formerly WWF until a lawsuit from the World Wildlife Fund ) as the general manager of SmackDown . In contrast to her McMahon @-@ Helmsley era villain character , Stephanie became a fan favorite , as she began to favor fan favorite wrestlers at that time . She feuded with Raw General Manager Eric Bischoff . On October 31 , 2002 at the Halloween party Stephanie McMahon and Eric Bischoff shared a kiss while McMahon was dressed as a witch and Bischoff was disguised as her father underneath a mask . McMahon was given credit for the return of the WWE United States Championship and for the creation of the WWE Tag Team Championship . She was also credited with signing Hulk Hogan back to SmackDown ! , which caused friction between herself and her father . 
 Meanwhile , Vince McMahon began to resent Stephanie 's attempts to stop him from pursuing an affair with Sable . The feud culminated in the controversial first ever " Father – Daughter ' I Quit ' match " at No Mercy . McMahon was accompanied by her mother , the CEO of WWE Linda McMahon , and Sable accompanied Vince McMahon in their match . McMahon lost when Linda , at ringside threw in a towel on her behalf because Vince would not release a choke he had on her with a lead pipe . As a result of losing the match , McMahon disappeared from WWE television for two years . The match was made to write Stephanie out of storylines as she was marrying Paul " Triple H " Levesque that week . 
 = = = = Sporadic appearances ( 2005 – 2007 ) = = = = 
 McMahon returned as a villain once again in October 2005 , she , along with her father and , in a surprise twist , her mother fired Raw announcer Jim Ross . 
 A visibly pregnant McMahon also returned on the March 6 , 2006 episode of Raw , approaching Shawn Michaels backstage and claiming to have abdominal pains . When Michaels left to get her some water , McMahon pulled out an unmarked substance out of her brassiere and poured it into his bottle of water . This substance caused him to become groggy during his match against Shane later in the night , which he lost as a result . McMahon also appeared at the WWE Hall of Fame induction ceremony on April 1 , 2006 and in a backstage vignette with her immediate family at WrestleMania 22 . 
 McMahon returned during a backstage segment in April 2007 at WrestleMania 23 , visiting her father before his " Battle of the Billionaires " match . After her father returned to Raw after faking his own death , McMahon publicly revealed that her father had an illegitimate child , who was among the WWE roster . On the taped edition of Raw that aired September 3 , 2007 , McMahon , along with her mother Linda and her brother Shane , made several appearances to confront Mr. McMahon about the child , who was later revealed to be Hornswoggle , turning into a fan favourite . On Raw 's 15 Year Anniversary episode , she appeared along with Shane in a segment — also involving her husband Triple H and Hornswoggle — which ended with her kissing her real life husband Triple H , to humiliate her father on Raw . 
 = = = = General manager of Raw ( 2008 – 2009 ) = = = = 
 After the severe injuries sustained by Vince on the June 23 , 3 @-@ hour edition of Raw , Shane appeared requesting for the Raw Superstars to stand together during what was a ' turbulent time ' . Shane 's plea was ignored , and subsequently , for the next two weeks , McMahon and Shane urged the superstars to show solidarity . The following week , Shane announced Mike Adamle as their choice to be the new Raw General Manager . 
 After Adamle stepped down as General Manager , Stephanie soon became in charge of the brand and ( reignited her feud ) and had altercations with Chris Jericho in the following weeks , which involved her firing him ( although he was later reinstated ) . After her father Vince returned , the family began a feud with Randy Orton , who began the storyline by punting Vince in the head . After a few weeks of feuding , Orton and his alliance , The Legacy , punted Shane in the head and performed an RKO on McMahon . Following the attack , he was chased out of the ring by Triple H , who is her real @-@ life husband . The rivalry between Orton , The Legacy and The <unk> heated up when Orton attacked and kissed Stephanie . Triple H and the Legacy rivalry continued at WrestleMania XXV , where Triple H defended the WWE Championship against Orton . The following month , Orton won the championship at Backlash . After Backlash McMahon left Raw and took a hiatus from WWE television . 
 = = = = Sporadic appearances ( 2010 – 2013 ) = = = = 
 McMahon appeared on the November 1 episode of Raw in a pre @-@ taped segment , where she dreams that Vince McMahon awoke from a coma after his doctor , played by actor and one @-@ time WWE employee Freddie Prinze Jr . , informed him that his wife Linda had invested millions in her campaign as she runs for senate . Vince 's heart rate elevated more and more as Prinze informed him on what was " wrong " with WWE since he went into a coma . After beginning to feel better , Vince realizes that he has a serious case of " the runs " , in which he gets out of bed and walks to the bathroom , in which he is covered in campaign signs , that block his backside . McMahon suddenly wakes up from her dream and asks her husband , Triple H ( off @-@ screen and voice work only ) , if Vince was still in a coma , in which Triple H replies " Yeah , he 's in a coma . I 'm pretty sure he 's brain dead . " ; McMahon responds by saying " thank God , " and then lays back down . 
 McMahon made an appearance as a guest speaker at the WrestleMania XXVII Press Conference . Several months later , she appeared in a backstage segment at SummerSlam to wish CM Punk luck in his match . Upon offering to shake his hand , Punk declined and insulted her : " I would , but ... I know where that hand 's been . " The following night on Raw , McMahon appeared backstage with CM Punk and threatened him : " ... in the end , people always get what they deserve . " 
 On July 23 , 2012 , McMahon made an appearance on the 1000th episode of Raw where she confronted and then slapped Paul Heyman to convince him to accept a match between Brock Lesnar and Triple H at SummerSlam . On April 6 , 2013 , McMahon inducted former on @-@ screen rival Trish Stratus into the WWE Hall of Fame . 
 On June 3 , 2013 , McMahon made an appearance to reveal her decision not to allow Triple H to compete that night . On the June 17 Raw , McMahon confronted new Divas Champion AJ Lee . On the July 8 Raw , McMahon fired Vickie Guerrero from the position of Raw Managing Supervisor when the WWE Universe voted " Failed " during Guerrero 's job evaluation . 
 = = = = The Authority ( 2013 – 2016 ) = = = = 
 On the August 19 episode of Raw , Stephanie turned heel when she interrupted Daniel Bryan and supported the actions of her husband at SummerSlam the previous night , telling Bryan that he wasn 't suitable to be the face of the company . Later in the night Stephanie stood beside Triple H and her father as they celebrated Randy Orton 's WWE Championship Coronation , during which Daniel Bryan was attacked by The Shield and subsequently by Orton . In November 2013 , McMahon signed a three @-@ year performers contract with the WWE , confirming her as a regular on its programming . She and Triple H continued to rule the company as a controlling " power couple " dubbed The Authority . Swearing that their actions were " best for business " , the pair would belittle and punish any talent that went against their ideology , and formed a particular vendetta against Daniel Bryan . McMahon was at ringside when Triple H lost to Bryan at WrestleMania XXX . 
 In June 2014 , as part of the ongoing storyline with Bryan , McMahon threatened to fire his wife Brie Bella if Bryan did not relinquish the WWE World Heavyweight Championship , which forced Brie to quit before slapping McMahon in the face . On the June 16 episode of Raw , Roman Reigns spiked the coffee Vickie Guerrero gave to McMahon , causing Stephanie to throw up on Vickie and leave with Triple H to the hospital . Vickie later gave Reigns a chance in the battle royal , which he would win . On the June 23 episode of Raw , Vickie lost in a pudding match against McMahon with her job on the line , after interference by Alicia Fox , Layla and Rosa Mendes . Vickie ultimately lost the match and was fired , however she got her retribution over McMahon by throwing her into the mud pool . After Brie quit , McMahon put Brie 's sister Nikki in several handicap matches as punishment . Brie returned to television on the July 21 episode of Raw , appearing in the crowd leading to confrontation between the two . McMahon got arrested with the assault of battery , because she slapped Brie , who was not a ( kayfabe ) WWE employee The following week , McMahon granted Brie her job back and a match at SummerSlam against her in order to get Brie to drop the lawsuit . On the August 4 episode of Raw , after their contract signing , Stephanie pedigreed both twins . At SummerSlam , Nikki turned on Brie , allowing Stephanie to hit a pedigree on Brie having Stephanie win her first pay per view match in over 10 years . 
 On the October 27 episode of Raw , after John Cena , the # 1 contender for the WWE World Heavyweight Championship , rejected an offer to join the Authority , Triple H announced a Traditional Survivor Series tag team elimination match , with a team representing the Authority facing a team captained by Cena . On the November 3 episode of Raw , Vince McMahon announced that if Team Authority loses at Survivor Series , the Authority will be ousted from power . During the match , Triple H tried to get the last member of Team Cena , Dolph Ziggler , eliminated by attacking two referees and placing Seth Rollins ( who was also the final member of Team Authority ) on top of Ziggler and calling crooked referee Scott Armstrong into the ring to make the count , however the debuting Sting came out and attacked Armstrong and Triple H , giving Team Cena the win and thus disbanding The Authority . Stephanie and Triple H appeared on the episode of Raw after Survivor Series stating that without them the company would be driven to the ground . They were then escorted out of the arena by the returning Daniel Bryan and only to be insulted by <unk> for letting him down and the McMahon family before exiting the arena . On the December 29 episode of Raw , The Authority was brought back in power by John Cena , and she and her husband entered and stepped on the entrance ramp celebrating their return with a glass of champagne and a kiss . Stephanie and Triple H then proceeded to fire Erick Rowan , Ryback and Dolph Ziggler . 
 On the July 13 episode of Raw , Stephanie interrupted Team Bella ( The Bella Twins and Alicia Fox ) to introduce Becky Lynch , Charlotte , and then @-@ NXT Women 's Champion Sasha Banks , calling for a " revolution " in the WWE Divas division . While Lynch and Charlotte allied with Paige , Banks would ally with Tamina and Naomi , leading to a brawl between the three teams . 
 = = = = Raw commissioner ( 2016 – present ) = = = = 
 On the July 11 episode of Raw , Mr. McMahon announced Stephanie as the commissioner of Raw , while Shane was named commissioner of SmackDown in order for them to compete against each other in the upcoming re @-@ established brand extension . The following week on Raw , Stephanie appointed Mick Foley as the Raw General Manager . The next week on Raw , Stephanie and Mick Foley announced the WWE Universal Championship would be the main championship on Raw . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 McMahon began dating Paul Levesque , better known as Triple H , in 2000 during their scripted romance . They were engaged on Valentine 's Day in 2003 and were married on October 25 , 2003 . In a radio interview with Opie and Anthony in 2004 , Levesque claimed he began dating McMahon after being apart from his previous girlfriend , Joanie " Chyna " Laurer , for some time , despite Laurer 's claims his relationship with McMahon began while they were still together . After their marriage , Stephanie took her husband 's surname and legally changed her middle name to ' McMahon ' . 
 She and Levesque have three daughters . On January 8 , 2006 , WWE announced McMahon and Levesque were expecting their first child , due on July 27 , 2006 . McMahon continued to work and travel with WWE throughout her pregnancy , giving birth to Aurora Rose Levesque on July 24 , 2006 . The couple had their second child , a daughter named Murphy Claire Levesque , on July 28 , 2008 , and their third daughter , Vaughn Evelyn Levesque , on August 24 , 2010 . 
 = = Other media = = 
 McMahon has appeared on The Howard Stern Show , Jimmy Kimmel Live ! , and Opie and Anthony . In May 2000 , Stephanie appeared at the <unk> River Rave on @-@ stage with friend , Cali , to introduce Godsmack and sign autographs in the festival area . In November 2001 , McMahon appeared on a special episode of NBC 's The Weakest Link where WWF personalities competed against each other for their respective charities . She made it to the final two but lost to Triple H. On August 14 , 2005 , McMahon along with Stacy Keibler , appeared on the season five finale of MTV 's Punk 'd , where she assisted with the prank played on Triple H. 
 On March 28 , 2009 , McMahon appeared alongside her mother on Business News Network 's The Market Morning Show . McMahon as well has made several appearances on various ESPN shows . On November 11 , 2009 , McMahon appeared on an episode of Food Network 's Dinner : Impossible alongside wrestler Big Show . In October 2013 , Stephanie became the honorary chairperson for the special Olympics of Connecticut . 
 Stephanie has also appeared in WWE video games WWF Wrestlemania 2000 , WWF SmackDown ! , WWF No Mercy , WWF SmackDown ! 2 : Know Your Role , WWF SmackDown ! Just Bring It , WWE RAW 2 , WWE Wrestlemania X8 , WWE SmackDown ! Shut Your Mouth , WWE Crush Hour , WWE Wrestlemania XIX , WWE SmackDown ! Here Comes The Pain , WWE ' 13 , WWE 2K14 , WWE 2K16 , and WWE <unk> and was periodically featured during the first season of the E ! television series Total Divas . On December 2 , 2014 , WWE released the WWE Fit Series , starring McMahon as a trainer in a fitness video designed for women . Triple H starred in a similar video for men titled WWE Power Series . 
 McMahon , appeared in a voice over role as herself in the new direct @-@ to @-@ video animated film Scooby @-@ Doo ! and WWE : Curse of the Speed Demon . 
 = = In wrestling = = 
 Finishing moves 
 Pedigree ( Double underhook facebuster ) – adopted from her husband 
 Signature moves 
 Clothesline 
 DDT 
 Hair @-@ pull snapmare 
 Lou Thesz press 
 Monkey flip 
 Neck snap 
 Powerbomb 
 Slap 
 Spear 
 Surfboard 
 Wrestlers managed 
 Triple H 
 Linda McMahon 
 Kurt Angle 
 Chris Jericho 
 Mr. America / Hulk Hogan / Hollywood Hulk Hogan 
 Zach Gowen 
 Ric Flair 
 Edge and Christian 
 Seth Rollins 
 Mr. McMahon 
 Shane McMahon 
 Nicknames 
 " The Billionaire Princess / Baroness " 
 " The Queen of Queens " 
 " The Billion Dollar Princess " 
 " Daddy 's Little Girl " 
 Entrance themes 
 " Break It Down " by The DX Band ( 2000 ) 
 " My Time " by The DX Band ( 1999 – 2002 ) 
 " Bodies " by Drowning Pool ( 2001 ) 
 " No Chance in Hell " performed by Peter <unk> and composed by Jim Johnston ( 1999 ; 2013 ; 2014 ) 
 " The Game " by Motörhead ( January 8 , 2001 – 2013 ) 
 " King of Kings " by Motörhead ( August 18 , 2013 – November 24 , 2014 ; December 29 , 2014 – May 2 , 2016 ; used while part of The Authority ) 
 " All Grown Up " by Jacki @-@ O ( 2002 – 2013 ) 
 " Welcome to the Queendom " by Jacki @-@ O ( 2013 – present ) 
 = = Championships and accomplishments = = 
 Pro Wrestling Illustrated 
 Feud of the Year ( 2002 ) vs Eric Bischoff 
 Feud of the Year ( 2013 ) vs. Daniel Bryan As a member of The Authority 
 Most Hated Wrestler of the Year ( 2013 ) As a member of The Authority 
 Most Hated Wrestler of the Year ( 2014 ) With Triple H 
 Woman of the Year ( 2000 ) 
 Wrestling Observer Newsletter 
 Worst Non @-@ Wrestling Personality ( 2001 – 2003 ) 
 Worst on Interviews ( 2001 – 2003 ) 
 WWE / World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment 
 WWF Women 's Championship ( 1 time ) 
 Slammy Awards ( 2 times ) 
 Insult of the Year ( 2013 ) – for insulting Big Show 
 Rivalry of the Year ( 2014 ) – The Authority vs. Daniel Bryan 
 Vincent J. McMahon Legacy of Excellence Award ( 2016 ) 
 = = = Other honors = = = 
 Four @-@ time Most Powerful Women in Cable honoree by Cable magazine – 2009 , 2011 , 2012 , and 2013 
 2010 : Fairfield County Business Journal 40 Under 40 Award 
 2013 : Multichannel News Woman to Watch 
 2013 : Honorary Chairperson of the Special Olympics of Connecticut . 
 2014 : Broadcasting and Cable and Multichannel News " Women in the Game " 
 2014 : Eisenhower USA fellow 
 2016 : Digital Entertainment Executives to watch 
 2016 : Multichannel News TV Wonder Woman 
 = Taunton by @-@ election , 1887 = 
 The Taunton by @-@ election of 1887 was held on 23 April 1887 in Taunton , Somerset , following the succession of the incumbent , Samuel Charles Allsopp , to the peerage upon the death of his father , becoming 2nd Baron Hindlip . One of Lord Hindlip 's brothers , Alfred Percy Allsopp , stood for the Conservative Party , while James Harris Sanders was the candidate for the Liberal Party . Allsopp was elected , with a majority of 536 votes ( 23 @.@ 1 % ) . 
 Although they had considered not contesting the election because the area was a Conservative stronghold , the Liberals decided to do so in order to generate a discussion on the issue of Home Rule for Ireland . Allsopp was in agreement with the Conservative policy , which was to maintain full governmental control over Ireland , and pass further Coercion Acts to reduce lawlessness in that country . Sanders , who had lost two previous elections for the Liberal Party , was in favour of devolution of powers to Ireland . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Vacancy and nominations = = = 
 At the 1886 general election , Samuel Allsopp held his seat in parliament unopposed for the Conservative Party . In April 1887 , his father , Henry Allsopp , 1st Baron Hindlip , died . As a result of this , Samuel Allsopp succeeded , entering the House of Lords as a peer . This left the parliamentary consistency of Taunton vacant . The Conservative Party offered Samuel Allsopp 's brother , Alfred Percy Allsopp ( commonly known as Percy Allsopp ) the chance to contest the vacancy . Initially it was reported that the Liberal Party would not contest the seat if Percy Allsopp was the only Conservative candidate , but a meeting of the local executive could not reach a consensus : some believed that as the area was so strongly Conservative , a large loss would be damaging to the party , while others wanted to generate a debate on Home Rule . Despite the Taunton executive of the Conservative Party selecting Percy Allsopp as their preferred candidate , the town 's Mayor , Samuel Farrant , declared that he would also stand for the Conservatives , which led to concern within that party that a split of the votes could result in a Liberal candidate being elected . Farrant later withdrew his candidacy , leaving Allsopp as the Conservative 's sole representative . After their initial uncertainty , the Liberals opted to give the Taunton electorate the opportunity to show their views on Home Rule , and chose James Harris Sanders , of London , as their candidate . 
 = = = Candidates = = = 
 Alfred Percy Allsopp was the seventh , and youngest , son of Henry Allsopp , 1st Baron Hindlip , and at the time of the election , was resident in Lichfield , Staffordshire . He often accompanied his brother during his time in office in Taunton , and had occasionally represented him in the town . The Taunton Courier noted that at one dinner , he " made a great impression by the perspicacity of his utterances , by the breadth of view they indicated , and by his fluency of speech . " He was a partner in Samuel Allsopp & Sons , which along with Guinness and Bass was one of the largest brewers in the world . 
 James Harris Sanders , commonly Harris Sanders , was born in Tavistock , Devon , the second son of Richard Sanders . Sanders had previously stood in the 1886 general election in Harborough , South Leicestershire , and in the King 's Lynn by @-@ election in the same year , losing both . The Western Times described him as " an unexceptionable candidate " , while the Taunton Courier elaborated on his past election performances , and commented that he was " becoming accustomed to acting as a political <unk> " . 
 = = = Home Rule = = = 
 Home Rule was the key issue in British politics in the late 1880s . The debate revolved around granting Ireland more powers to govern themselves . William Ewart Gladstone , the Liberal Prime Minister , proposed the First Home Rule Bill in April 1886 , aiming to devolve power to Ireland . The Conservatives were opposed to the Bill , and were joined by a number of Liberal members in defeating the Bill . This caused a split in the Liberal party , the creation of the Liberal Unionist Party , and a fresh general election , just a year after the last . At the 1886 general election , the Conservatives entered government with Lord <unk> as Prime Minister . They formed a majority with the Liberal Unionists . 
 = = Election campaign = = 
 At the Conservative Assembly meeting at which Allsopp was formally nominated as the party 's candidate , one of his nominators , Mr J. Standfast , decried the situation in Ireland . He called upon the people of Taunton to show that they " disapproved of the murders , and robberies , and outrages which were so common in Ireland , and were not prepared to hand over to the instigators of those crimes the government of that island . " Allsopp did not initially campaign heavily , while he grieved for his father , but he did leave an advert in the Taunton Courier stating his support for the Conservative government 's position on the administration of Ireland . He noted that his views mirrored those of his brother , the previous MP . During his campaigning , Allsopp drew parallels between the 1881 Coercion Bill , which Gladstone had introduced , with the proposed Crimes Bill , which Gladstone and Sanders both opposed . He accused them of hypocrisy , and claimed that those in support of Home Rule did not understand what it meant . He spoke of his hope for the Crimes Bill to be passed , and his belief that it would end the " misery and distress " in Ireland . 
 At Sanders ' nomination , the Liberal candidate spoke of his " entire concurrence " with Gladstone 's proposals . At a meeting shortly thereafter , Sanders seconded a resolution raised by a fellow Liberal member protesting " against the attempt to impose coercion upon Ireland for ever . " Sanders then highlighted the Corrupt Practices Act , and appealed to the party members to not only avoid engaging in any corruption , but to remain honourable at all times . He spoke at length about the virtues of Liberalism , and what he described as the sad history of Ireland under English rule . The following Monday , which was Easter Monday , Sanders travelled to London to take part in demonstrations against the Perpetual Crimes Bill . As the election drew close , Sanders issued a statement that he had deposited £ 1 @,@ 500 in a local bank , of which £ 500 would be split as rewards if people presented evidence of bribery and corruption in the election that led to a conviction . The other £ 1 @,@ 000 was set aside for a possible petition against the election result . 
 The two sides both adopted mottoes during the election : the Conservatives called for people to " Vote for Allsopp and liberty " , while the Liberals used " No Coercion , vote for Sanders . " Cartoons were distributed by the Liberals , illustrating the recent evictions in Ireland . In reaction , the Conservatives posted pictures of " brutal outrages " that had been recently committed in that country . 
 = = Result = = 
 The vote was held on Saturday 23 April 1887 , with the booths open for twelve hours from eight in the morning . There were seven polling stations across Taunton , which was busy as it was market day . The Taunton Courier reported that party colours of both sides were on display , but that there was more " Conservative blue " than the tri @-@ colour and Union Jack of the Liberals . Campaigning continued throughout the day , but was conducted in a civil manner . Two hours into the voting it was announced that a third of the constituency had voted , and the Conservatives declared that they were leading by a ratio of two to one . Bad weather in the middle of the day caused a lull in the voting , but the polls were very busy throughout the afternoon when the weather cleared , as most of the town only worked half of the day . Based upon their polling on the day , the Conservatives continued to claim victory during the afternoon . The votes were counted in the Municipal Office , and the results were announced at quarter @-@ past nine in the evening . Allsopp received 1 @,@ 426 votes to Sanders ' 890 , granting him a 536 majority . Both Allsopp and Sanders spoke briefly to praise the Returning Officer , and Allsopp was then called upon to give a speech . During that speech , Allsopp thanked the people of Taunton , and gently mocked Sanders for the money he had banked in case of corruption . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Despite initial suggestions that a petition would be lodged against the result by Sanders , including an strong assertion in the Pall Mall Gazette , such a petition was eventually abandoned . Allsopp entered parliament , becoming the 18th new Member of Parliament to be elected since the general election in 1886 . Allsopp served as the Member for Taunton until the 1895 general election . 
