 = Edward VIII = 
 Edward VIII ( Edward Albert Christian George Andrew Patrick David ; 23 June 1894 – 28 May 1972 ) was King of the United Kingdom and the Dominions of the British Empire , and Emperor of India , from 20 January 1936 until his abdication on 11 December the same year . 
 Edward was the eldest son of King George V and Queen Mary . He was created Prince of Wales on his sixteenth birthday , nine weeks after his father succeeded as king . As a young man , he served in the British Army during the First World War and undertook several overseas tours on behalf of his father . 
 Edward became king on his father 's death in early 1936 . He showed impatience with court protocol , and caused concern among politicians by his apparent disregard for established constitutional conventions . Only months into his reign , he caused a constitutional crisis by proposing marriage to Wallis Simpson , an American who had divorced her first husband and was seeking a divorce from her second . The prime ministers of the United Kingdom and the Dominions opposed the marriage , arguing that the people would never accept a divorced woman with two living ex @-@ husbands as queen consort . Additionally , such a marriage would have conflicted with Edward 's status as the titular head of the Church of England , which at the time opposed the remarriage of divorced people if their former spouses were still alive . Edward knew that the British government , led by Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin , would resign if the marriage went ahead , which could have forced a general election and would ruin his status as a politically neutral constitutional monarch . Choosing not to end the relationship , Edward abdicated . He was succeeded by his younger brother Albert , who chose George VI as his regnal name . With a reign of 326 days , Edward was one of the shortest @-@ reigning monarchs in British history . 
 After his abdication , he was created Duke of Windsor . He married Simpson in France on 3 June 1937 , after her second divorce became final . Later that year , the couple toured Germany . During the Second World War , he was at first stationed with the British Military Mission to France but , after private accusations that he held Nazi sympathies , he was appointed Governor of the Bahamas . After the war , Edward spent the rest of his life in retirement in France . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Edward was born on 23 June 1894 at White Lodge , Richmond Park , on the outskirts of London during the reign of his great @-@ grandmother Queen Victoria . He was the eldest son of the Duke and Duchess of York ( later King George V and Queen Mary ) . His father was the son of the Prince and Princess of Wales ( later King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra ) . His mother was the eldest daughter of the Duke and Duchess of Teck ( Francis and Mary Adelaide ) . At the time of his birth , he was third in the line of succession to the throne , behind his grandfather and father . As a great @-@ grandson of the monarch in the male line , Edward was styled His Highness Prince Edward of York at birth . 
 He was baptised Edward Albert Christian George Andrew Patrick David in the Green Drawing Room of White Lodge on 16 July 1894 by Edward White Benson , Archbishop of Canterbury . The names were chosen in honour of Edward 's late uncle , who was known to his family as " Eddy " or Edward , and his great @-@ grandfather King Christian IX of Denmark . The name Albert was included at the behest of Queen Victoria for her late husband Albert , Prince Consort , and the last four names – George , Andrew , Patrick and David – came from the Patron Saints of England , Scotland , Ireland and Wales . He was always known to his family and close friends by his last given name , David . 
 As was common practice with upper @-@ class children of the time , Edward and his younger siblings were brought up by nannies rather than directly by their parents . One of Edward 's early nannies often abused him by pinching him before he was due to be presented to his parents . His subsequent crying and wailing would lead the Duke and Duchess to send him and the nanny away . The nanny was discharged after her mistreatment of the children was discovered . 
 Edward 's father , though a harsh disciplinarian , was demonstrably affectionate , and his mother displayed a frolicsome side with her children that belied her austere public image . She was amused by the children making tadpoles on toast for their French master , and encouraged them to confide in her . 
 = = Education = = 
 Initially Edward was tutored at home by Helen <unk> . When his parents travelled the British Empire for almost nine months following the death of Queen Victoria in 1901 , young Edward and his siblings stayed in Britain with their grandparents , Queen Alexandra and King Edward VII , who showered their grandchildren with affection . Upon his parents ' return , Edward was placed under the care of two men , Frederick Finch and Henry Hansell , who virtually brought up Edward and his brothers and sister for their remaining nursery years . 
 Edward was kept under the strict tutorship of Hansell until nearly 13 . He was taught German and French by private tutors . Edward took the examination to enter Osborne Naval College , and began there in 1907 . Hansell had wanted Edward to enter school earlier , but his father disagreed . Following two years at Osborne College , which he did not enjoy , Edward moved on to the Royal Naval College at Dartmouth . A course of two years followed by entry into the Royal Navy was planned . When his father ascended the throne on 6 May 1910 , following the death of Edward VII , Edward automatically became Duke of Cornwall and Duke of Rothesay , and he was created Prince of Wales a month later on 23 June 1910 , his 16th birthday . Preparations began in earnest for his future duties as king . He was withdrawn from his naval course before his formal graduation , served as midshipman for three months aboard the battleship Hindustan , then immediately entered Magdalen College , Oxford , for which , in the opinion of his biographers , he was underprepared intellectually . A keen horseman , he learned how to play polo with the university club . He left Oxford after eight terms without any academic qualifications . 
 = = Prince of Wales = = 
 Edward was officially invested as Prince of Wales in a special ceremony at Caernarvon Castle on 13 July 1911 . The investiture took place in Wales , at the instigation of the Welsh politician David Lloyd George , Constable of the Castle and Chancellor of the Exchequer in the Liberal government . Lloyd George invented a rather fanciful ceremony in the style of a Welsh pageant , and coached Edward to speak a few words in Welsh . 
 When the First World War broke out in 1914 , Edward had reached the minimum age for active service and was keen to participate . He had joined the Grenadier Guards in June 1914 , and although Edward was willing to serve on the front lines , Secretary of State for War Lord Kitchener refused to allow it , citing the immense harm that would occur if the heir to the throne were captured by the enemy . 
 Despite this , Edward witnessed trench warfare first @-@ hand and attempted to visit the front line as often as he could , for which he was awarded the Military Cross in 1916 . His role in the war , although limited , made him popular among veterans of the conflict . Edward undertook his first military flight in 1918 , and later gained a pilot 's licence . 
 Throughout the 1920s , Edward , as Prince of Wales , represented his father , King George V , at home and abroad on many occasions . His rank , travels , good looks , and unmarried status gained him much public attention , and at the height of his popularity , he was the most photographed celebrity of his time . He took a particular interest in science and in 1926 was president of the British Association for the Advancement of Science when his alma mater , Oxford University , hosted the society 's annual general meeting . 
 He also visited the poverty @-@ stricken areas of the country , and undertook 16 tours to various parts of the Empire between 1919 and 1935 . On a tour of Canada in 1919 , he acquired the Bedingfield ranch , near <unk> , Alberta , and in 1924 , he donated the Prince of Wales Trophy to the National Hockey League . From January to April 1931 , he and his brother , Prince George , travelled 18 @,@ 000 miles on a tour of South America , voyaging out on the ocean liner Oropesa , and returning via Paris and an Imperial Airways flight from Paris – Le Bourget Airport that landed specially in Windsor Great Park . 
 His attitudes towards many of the Empire 's subjects and various foreign peoples , both during his time as Prince of Wales and later as Duke of Windsor , were little commented upon at the time , but have soured his reputation subsequently . In 1920 , he wrote of Indigenous Australians " they are the most revolting form of living creatures I 've ever seen ! ! They are the lowest known form of human beings & are the nearest thing to monkeys . " 
 In 1919 the Prince agreed to be President of the organising committee for the proposed British Empire Exhibition at Wembley Park , north @-@ west London . The Prince wished the Exhibition to include " a great national sports ground " , and so played a part in the creation of Wembley Stadium . 
 = = Romances = = 
 In 1917 , during the First World War , Edward began a love affair with Parisian courtesan Marguerite <unk> , who kept a collection of his indiscreet letters after he broke off the affair in 1918 to begin one with an English married woman , Freda Dudley Ward , a textile heiress . In 1923 , <unk> was acquitted in a spectacular murder trial after she shot her husband in the London Savoy . 
 Edward 's womanising and reckless behaviour during the 1920s and 1930s worried Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin , King George V , and those close to the prince . Alan Lascelles , Edward 's private secretary for eight years during this period , believed that " for some hereditary or physiological reason his normal mental development stopped dead when he reached adolescence " . George V was disappointed by Edward 's failure to settle down in life , disgusted by his affairs with married women , and was reluctant to see him inherit the Crown . " After I am dead , " George said , " the boy will ruin himself in 12 months . " 
 In 1929 , Time magazine reported that Edward teased his sister @-@ in @-@ law , Elizabeth , the wife of his younger brother Albert , by calling her " Queen Elizabeth " . The magazine asked if " she did not sometimes wonder how much truth there is in the story that he once said he would renounce his rights upon the death of George V – which would make her nickname come true " . Edward 's brother and sister @-@ in @-@ law had two children , including Princess Elizabeth , the future Queen Elizabeth II . George V favoured his son Albert ( " Bertie " ) , and granddaughter Elizabeth ( " Lilibet " ) , and told a courtier , " I pray to God that my eldest son [ Edward ] will never marry and have children , and that nothing will come between Bertie and Lilibet and the throne . " 
 In 1930 , George V gave Edward the lease of Fort Belvedere , in Windsor Great Park . There , Edward continued his relationships with a series of married women , including Freda Dudley Ward and Lady Furness , the American wife of a British peer , who introduced the prince to her friend and fellow American Wallis Simpson . Simpson had divorced her first husband , U.S. naval officer Win Spencer , in 1927 . Her second husband , Ernest Simpson , was a British @-@ American businessman . Wallis Simpson and the Prince of Wales , it is generally accepted , became lovers while Lady Furness travelled abroad , though Edward adamantly insisted to his father that he was not intimate with her , and that it was not appropriate to describe her as his mistress . Edward 's relationship with Simpson , however , further weakened his poor relationship with his father . Although King George V and Queen Mary met Simpson at Buckingham Palace in 1935 , they later refused to receive her . 
 Edward 's affair with an American divorcee led to such grave concern that the couple were followed by members of the Metropolitan Police Special Branch , who examined in secret the nature of their relationship . An undated report detailed a visit by the couple to an antique shop , where the proprietor later noted " that the lady seemed to have POW [ Prince of Wales ] completely under her thumb . " The prospect of having an American divorcee with a questionable past having such sway over the heir apparent led to anxiety among government and establishment figures . 
 = = Reign = = 
 King George V died on 20 January 1936 , and Edward ascended the throne as King Edward VIII . The next day , he broke royal protocol by watching the proclamation of his own accession from a window of St James 's Palace in the company of the then still @-@ married Simpson . He became the first monarch of the British Empire to fly in an aircraft when he flew from Sandringham to London for his Accession Council . 
 Edward caused unease in government circles with actions that were interpreted as interference in political matters . His comment during a tour of depressed villages in South Wales that " something must be done " for the unemployed coal miners was seen as an attempt to guide government policy , though it has never been clear what sort of remedy he had in mind . Government ministers were reluctant to send confidential documents and state papers to Fort Belvedere , because it was clear that Edward was paying little attention to them , and it was feared that Simpson and other house guests might read them , improperly or inadvertently disclosing information that could be detrimental to the national interest . 
 Edward 's unorthodox approach to his role also extended to the currency which bore his image . He broke with the tradition that on coinage each successive monarch faced in the opposite direction to his or her predecessor . Edward insisted that he face left ( as his father had done ) , to show the parting in his hair . Only a handful of test coins were struck before the abdication , and when George VI succeeded to the throne he also faced left , to maintain the tradition by suggesting that , had any coins been minted featuring Edward 's portrait , they would have shown him facing right . 
 On 16 July 1936 , an Irish fraudster called Jerome Bannigan , alias George Andrew McMahon , produced a loaded revolver as Edward rode on horseback at Constitution Hill , near Buckingham Palace . Police spotted the gun and pounced on him ; he was quickly arrested . At Bannigan 's trial , he alleged that " a foreign power " had approached him to kill Edward , that he had informed MI5 of the plan , and that he was merely seeing the plan through to help MI5 catch the real culprits . The court rejected the claims and sent him to jail for a year for " intent to alarm " . It is now thought that Bannigan had indeed been in contact with MI5 , but the veracity of the remainder of his claims remains open . 
 In August and September , Edward and Simpson cruised the Eastern Mediterranean on the steam yacht <unk> . By October it was becoming clear that the new king planned to marry Simpson , especially when divorce proceedings between the Simpsons were brought at Ipswich Assizes . Preparations for all contingencies were made , including the prospect of the coronation of King Edward and Queen Wallis . Because of the religious implications of any marriage , plans were made to hold a secular coronation ceremony , not in the traditional religious location of Westminster Abbey , but in the Banqueting House in Whitehall . 
 Although gossip about his affair was widespread in the United States , the British media kept voluntarily silent , and the public knew nothing until early December . 
 = = Abdication = = 
 On 16 November 1936 , Edward invited British Prime Minister Stanley Baldwin to Buckingham Palace and expressed his desire to marry Wallis Simpson when she became free to remarry . Baldwin informed him that his subjects would deem the marriage morally unacceptable , largely because remarriage after divorce was opposed by the Church of England , and the people would not tolerate Simpson as queen . As king , Edward was the titular head of the Church of England , and the clergy expected him to support the Church 's teachings . 
 Edward proposed an alternative solution of a morganatic marriage , in which he would remain king but Simpson would not become queen . She would enjoy some lesser title instead , and any children they might have would not inherit the throne . This too was rejected by the British Cabinet as well as other Dominion governments , whose views were sought pursuant to the Statute of Westminster 1931 , which provided in part that " any alteration in the law touching the Succession to the Throne or the Royal Style and Titles shall hereafter require the assent as well of the Parliaments of all the Dominions as of the Parliament of the United Kingdom . " The Prime Ministers of Australia ( Joseph Lyons ) , Canada ( Mackenzie King ) and South Africa ( J. B. M. Hertzog ) made clear their opposition to the king marrying a divorcee ; their Irish counterpart ( Éamon de Valera ) expressed indifference and detachment , while the Prime Minister of New Zealand ( Michael Joseph Savage ) , having never heard of Simpson before , vacillated in disbelief . Faced with this opposition , Edward at first responded that there were " not many people in Australia " and their opinion did not matter . 
 Edward informed Baldwin that he would abdicate if he could not marry Simpson . Baldwin then presented Edward with three choices : give up the idea of marriage ; marry against his ministers ' wishes ; or abdicate . It was clear that Edward was not prepared to give up Simpson , and he knew that if he married against the advice of his ministers , he would cause the government to resign , prompting a constitutional crisis . He chose to abdicate . 
 Edward duly signed the instruments of abdication at Fort Belvedere on 10 December 1936 in the presence of his younger brothers : Prince Albert , Duke of York , next in line for the throne ; Prince Henry , Duke of Gloucester ; and Prince George , Duke of Kent . The next day , the last act of his reign was the royal assent to His Majesty 's Declaration of Abdication Act 1936 . As required by the Statute of Westminster , all the Dominions consented to the abdication . 
 On the night of 11 December 1936 , Edward , now reverted to the title and style of a prince , explained his decision to abdicate in a worldwide radio broadcast . He famously said , " I have found it impossible to carry the heavy burden of responsibility and to discharge my duties as king as I would wish to do without the help and support of the woman I love . " Edward departed Britain for Austria the following day ; he was unable to join Simpson until her divorce became absolute , several months later . His brother , Prince Albert , Duke of York , succeeded to the throne as George VI . George VI 's elder daughter , Princess Elizabeth , became first in the line of succession , as heiress presumptive . 
 = = Duke of Windsor = = 
 On 12 December 1936 , at the accession meeting of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom , George VI announced he was to make his brother " His Royal Highness The Duke of Windsor " . He wanted this to be the first act of his reign , although the formal documents were not signed until 8 March the following year . During the interim , Edward was universally known as the Duke of Windsor . George VI 's decision to create Edward a royal duke ensured that he could neither stand for election to the House of Commons nor speak on political subjects in the House of Lords . 
 Letters Patent dated 27 May 1937 re @-@ conferred the " title , style , or attribute of Royal Highness " upon the Duke of Windsor , but specifically stated that " his wife and descendants , if any , shall not hold said title or attribute " . Some British ministers advised that the reconfirmation was unnecessary since Edward had retained the style automatically , and further that Simpson would automatically obtain the rank of wife of a prince with the style Her Royal Highness ; others maintained that he had lost all royal rank and should no longer carry any royal title or style as an abdicated king , and be referred to simply as " Mr Edward Windsor " . On 14 April 1937 , Attorney General Sir Donald Somervell submitted to Home Secretary Sir John Simon a memorandum summarising the views of Lord Advocate T. M. Cooper , Parliamentary Counsel Sir Granville Ram , and himself : 
 We incline to the view that on his abdication the Duke of Windsor could not have claimed the right to be described as a Royal Highness . In other words , no reasonable objection could have been taken if the King had decided that his exclusion from the lineal succession excluded him from the right to this title as conferred by the existing Letters Patent . 
 The question however has to be considered on the basis of the fact that , for reasons which are readily understandable , he with the express approval of His Majesty enjoys this title and has been referred to as a Royal Highness on a formal occasion and in formal documents . In the light of precedent it seems clear that the wife of a Royal Highness enjoys the same title unless some appropriate express step can be and is taken to deprive her of it . 
 We came to the conclusion that the wife could not claim this right on any legal basis . The right to use this style or title , in our view , is within the prerogative of His Majesty and he has the power to regulate it by Letters Patent generally or in particular circumstances . 
 The Duke of Windsor married Simpson , who had changed her name by deed poll to Wallis Warfield , in a private ceremony on 3 June 1937 , at Château de Candé , near Tours , France . When the Church of England refused to sanction the union , a County Durham clergyman , the Reverend Robert Anderson Jardine ( Vicar of St Paul 's , Darlington ) , offered to perform the ceremony , and the Duke accepted . The new king , George VI , forbade members of the Royal Family to attend to the lasting resentment of the Duke and Duchess of Windsor . Edward had particularly wanted his brothers the Dukes of Gloucester and Kent and his second cousin Louis Mountbatten to attend the ceremony . 
 The denial of the style Her Royal Highness to the Duchess of Windsor caused further conflict , as did the financial settlement – the Government declined to include the Duke or Duchess on the Civil List , and the Duke 's allowance was paid personally by George VI . The Duke compromised his position with his brother by concealing the extent of his financial worth when they informally agreed on the amount of the allowance . Edward 's wealth had accumulated from the revenues of the Duchy of Cornwall paid to him as Prince of Wales and ordinarily at the disposal of an incoming king . George VI also paid Edward for Sandringham House and Balmoral Castle , which were Edward 's personal property , inherited from his father , George V , and thus did not automatically pass to George VI on his accession . Relations between the Duke of Windsor and the rest of the Royal Family were strained for decades . Edward became embittered against his mother , Queen Mary , writing to her in 1939 : " [ your last letter ] destroy [ ed ] the last vestige of feeling I had left for you ... [ and has ] made further normal correspondence between us impossible . " In the early days of George VI 's reign the Duke telephoned daily , importuning for money and urging that the Duchess be granted the style of Royal Highness , until the harassed king ordered that the calls not be put through . 
 The Duke had assumed that he would settle in Britain after a year or two of exile in France . King George VI ( with the support of Queen Mary and his wife Queen Elizabeth ) threatened to cut off Edward 's allowance if he returned to Britain without an invitation . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 In October 1937 , the Duke and Duchess visited Germany , against the advice of the British government , and met Adolf Hitler at his Obersalzberg retreat . The visit was much publicised by the German media . During the visit the Duke gave full Nazi salutes . The former Austrian ambassador , Count Albert von <unk> @-@ Pouilly @-@ <unk> , who was also a second cousin once removed and friend of George V , believed that Edward favoured German fascism as a bulwark against communism , and even that he initially favoured an alliance with Germany . According to the Duke of Windsor himself , the experience of " the unending scenes of horror " during the First World War led him to support appeasement . Hitler considered Edward to be friendly towards Nazi Germany and thought that Anglo @-@ German relations could have been improved through Edward if it were not for the abdication . Albert Speer quoted Hitler directly : " I am certain through him permanent friendly relations could have been achieved . If he had stayed , everything would have been different . His abdication was a severe loss for us . " 
 The Duke and Duchess settled in France . In May 1939 , the Duke was commissioned by NBC to give a radio broadcast ( his first since abdicating ) during a visit to the battlefields of Verdun . In it he appealed for peace , saying " I am deeply conscious of the presence of the great company of the dead , and I am convinced that could they make their voices heard they would be with me in what I am about to say . I speak simply as a soldier of the Last War whose most earnest prayer it is that such cruel and destructive madness shall never again overtake mankind . There is no land whose people want war . " The broadcast was heard across the world and by millions in America . It was widely seen as supporting appeasement , and the BBC refused to broadcast it . It was broadcast outside the United States on shortwave radio and was reported in full by British broadsheet newspapers . 
 On the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939 , they were brought back to Britain by Louis Mountbatten on board HMS Kelly , and the Duke , although an honorary field marshal , was made a major @-@ general attached to the British Military Mission in France . In February 1940 , the German ambassador in The Hague , Count Julius von Zech @-@ <unk> , claimed that the Duke had leaked the Allied war plans for the defence of Belgium , which the Duke later denied . When Germany invaded the north of France in May 1940 , the Windsors fled south , first to Biarritz , then in June to Spain . In July the pair moved to Lisbon , where they lived at first in the home of Ricardo de Espírito Santo , a Portuguese banker with both British and German contacts . 
 Under the code name Operation Willi , Nazi agents , principally Walter Schellenberg , plotted unsuccessfully to persuade the Duke to leave Portugal and return to Spain , kidnapping him if necessary . Lord Caldecote wrote a warning to Winston Churchill : " [ the Duke ] is well @-@ known to be pro @-@ Nazi and he may become a centre of intrigue . " Churchill threatened the Duke with a court @-@ martial if he did not return to British soil . In July 1940 , Edward was appointed Governor of the Bahamas and on 1 August the Duke and Duchess left Lisbon on the American Export Lines steamship Excalibur , which was specially diverted from its usual direct course to New York City so that they could be dropped off at Bermuda on the 9th . They left Bermuda for Nassau on the Canadian steamship Lady Somers on 15 August , arriving two days later . 
 The Duke did not enjoy being governor , and referred to the islands as " a third @-@ class British colony " . The British Foreign Office strenuously objected when the Duke and Duchess planned to cruise aboard a yacht belonging to a Swedish magnate , Axel Wenner @-@ Gren , whom American intelligence wrongly believed to be a close friend of Luftwaffe commander Hermann Göring . The Duke was praised for his efforts to combat poverty on the islands , although he was as contemptuous of the Bahamians as he was of most non @-@ white peoples of the Empire . He said of Étienne Dupuch , the editor of the Nassau Daily Tribune : " It must be remembered that Dupuch is more than half Negro , and due to the peculiar mentality of this Race , they seem unable to rise to prominence without losing their equilibrium . " He was praised , even by Dupuch , for his resolution of civil unrest over low wages in Nassau in 1942 , even though he blamed the trouble on " mischief makers – communists " and " men of Central European Jewish descent , who had secured jobs as a pretext for obtaining a deferment of draft " . He resigned the post on 16 March 1945 . 
 Many historians have suggested that Hitler was prepared to reinstate Edward as king in the hope of establishing a fascist Britain . It is widely believed that the Duke and Duchess sympathised with fascism before and during the Second World War , and were moved to the Bahamas to minimise their opportunities to act on those feelings . In 1940 he said : " In the past 10 years Germany has totally reorganised the order of its society ... Countries which were unwilling to accept such a reorganisation of society and its concomitant sacrifices should direct their policies accordingly . " During the occupation of France , the Duke asked the German forces to place guards at his Paris and Riviera homes ; they did so . In December 1940 , the Duke gave Fulton Oursler of Liberty magazine an interview at Government House in Nassau . The interview was published on 22 March 1941 and in it the Duke was reported to have said that " Hitler was the right and logical leader of the German people " and that the time was coming for President Franklin D. Roosevelt to mediate a peace settlement . Oursler conveyed the content of the interview to the President in a private meeting at the White House on 23 December 1940 . The Duke protested that he had been misquoted and misinterpreted . 
 The Allies became sufficiently disturbed by German plots revolving around the Duke that President Roosevelt ordered covert surveillance of the Duke and Duchess when they visited Palm Beach , Florida , in April 1941 . Duke Carl Alexander of Württemberg ( then a monk in an American monastery ) had told the Federal Bureau of Investigation that the Duchess had slept with the German ambassador in London , Joachim von Ribbentrop , in 1936 , had remained in constant contact with him , and had continued to leak secrets . 
 Author Charles Higham claimed that Anthony Blunt , an MI5 agent , acting on orders from the British Royal Family , made a successful secret trip to Schloss Friedrichshof in Germany towards the end of the war to retrieve sensitive letters between the Duke of Windsor and Adolf Hitler and other leading Nazis . What is certain is that George VI sent the Royal Librarian , Owen Morshead , accompanied by Blunt , then working part @-@ time in the Royal Library as well as for British intelligence , to Friedrichshof in March 1945 to secure papers relating to the German Empress Victoria , the eldest child of Queen Victoria . Looters had stolen part of the castle 's archive , including surviving letters between daughter and mother , as well as other valuables , some of which were recovered in Chicago after the war . The papers rescued by Morshead and Blunt , and those returned by the American authorities from Chicago , were deposited in the Royal Archives . 
 After the war , the Duke admitted in his memoirs that he admired the Germans , but he denied being pro @-@ Nazi . Of Hitler he wrote : " [ the ] Führer struck me as a somewhat ridiculous figure , with his theatrical posturings and his bombastic pretensions . " In the 1950s , journalist Frank Giles heard the Duke blame British Foreign Secretary Anthony Eden for helping to " precipitate the war through his treatment of Mussolini ... that 's what [ Eden ] did , he helped to bring on the war ... and of course Roosevelt and the Jews " . 
 = = Later life = = 
 At the end of the war , the couple returned to France and spent the remainder of their lives essentially in retirement as the Duke never occupied another official role after his wartime governorship of the Bahamas . The Duke 's allowance was supplemented by government favours and illegal currency trading . The City of Paris provided the Duke with a house at 4 Route du Champ d <unk> , on the Neuilly @-@ sur @-@ Seine side of the Bois de Boulogne , for a nominal rent . The French government exempted him from paying income tax , and the couple were able to buy goods duty @-@ free through the British embassy and the military commissary . In 1951 , the Duke produced a ghost @-@ written memoir , A King 's Story , in which he expresses disagreement with liberal politics . The royalties from the book added to their income . Nine years later , he penned a relatively unknown book , A Family Album , chiefly about the fashion and habits of the Royal Family throughout his life , from the time of Queen Victoria to that of his grandfather and father , and his own tastes . 
 The Duke and Duchess effectively took on the role of celebrities and were regarded as part of café society in the 1950s and 1960s . They hosted parties and shuttled between Paris and New York ; Gore Vidal , who met the Windsors socially , reported on the vacuity of the Duke 's conversation . The couple doted on the pug dogs they kept . 
 In June 1953 , instead of attending the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in London , the Duke and Duchess watched the ceremony on television in Paris . The Duke said that it was contrary to precedent for a Sovereign or former Sovereign to attend any coronation of another . The Duke was paid to write articles on the ceremony for the Sunday Express and Woman 's Home Companion , as well as a short book , The Crown and the People , 1902 – 1953 . 
 In 1955 , they visited President Dwight D. Eisenhower at the White House . The couple appeared on Edward R. Murrow 's television interview show Person to Person in 1956 , and a 50 @-@ minute BBC television interview in 1970 . That year , they were invited as guests of honour to a dinner at the White House by President Richard Nixon . 
 The Royal Family never fully accepted the Duchess . Queen Mary refused to receive her formally . However , the Duke sometimes met his mother and brother George VI , and attended George 's 1952 funeral . Queen Mary remained angry with Edward and indignant over his marriage to Wallis : " To give up all this for that " , she said . In 1965 , the Duke and Duchess returned to London . They were visited by Elizabeth II , Princess Marina , Duchess of Kent , and Mary , Princess Royal and Countess of Harewood . A week later , the Princess Royal died , and they attended her memorial service . In 1967 , they joined the Royal Family for the centenary of Queen Mary 's birth . The last royal ceremony the Duke attended was the funeral of Princess Marina in 1968 . He declined an invitation from Elizabeth II to attend the investiture of the Prince of Wales in 1969 , replying that Prince Charles would not want his " aged great @-@ uncle " there . 
 In the 1960s , the Duke 's health deteriorated . In December 1964 , he was operated on by Michael E. DeBakey in Houston for an aneurysm of the abdominal aorta , and in February 1965 a detached retina in his left eye was treated by Sir Stewart Duke @-@ Elder . In late 1971 , the Duke , who was a smoker from an early age , was diagnosed with throat cancer and underwent cobalt therapy . Queen Elizabeth II visited the Windsors in 1972 while on a state visit to France ; however , only the Duchess appeared with the royal party for a <unk> . 
 = = = Death and legacy = = = 
 On 28 May 1972 , the Duke died at his home in Paris , less than a month before his 78th birthday . His body was returned to Britain , lying in state at St George 's Chapel , Windsor Castle . The funeral service was held in the chapel on 5 June in the presence of the Queen , the Royal Family , and the Duchess of Windsor , who stayed at Buckingham Palace during her visit . He was buried in the Royal Burial Ground behind the Royal Mausoleum of Queen Victoria and Prince Albert at Frogmore . Until a 1965 agreement with Queen Elizabeth II , the Duke and Duchess had planned for a burial in a cemetery plot they had purchased at Green Mount Cemetery in Baltimore , where the Duchess 's father was interred . Frail , and suffering increasingly from dementia , the Duchess died 14 years later , and was buried alongside her husband as " Wallis , Duchess of Windsor " . 
 In the view of historians such as Philip Williamson , the popular perception today that the abdication was driven by politics rather than religious morality is false , and arises because divorce has become much more common and socially acceptable . To modern sensibilities , the religious restrictions that prevented Edward from continuing as king while married to Simpson " seem , wrongly , to provide insufficient explanation " for his abdication . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 23 June 1894 – 28 May 1898 : His Highness Prince Edward of York 
 28 May 1898 – 22 January 1901 : His Royal Highness Prince Edward of York 
 22 January – 9 November 1901 : His Royal Highness Prince Edward of Cornwall and York 
 9 November 1901 – 6 May 1910 : His Royal Highness Prince Edward of Wales 
 6 May – 23 June 1910 : His Royal Highness The Duke of Cornwall 
 23 June 1910 – 20 January 1936 : His Royal Highness The Prince of Wales 
 in Scotland : His Royal Highness The Prince Edward , Duke of Rothesay 
 20 January – 11 December 1936 : His Majesty The King 
 occasionally , with regard to India : His Majesty The King @-@ Emperor 
 11 December 1936 – 8 March 1937 : His Royal Highness The Prince Edward 
 8 March 1937 – 28 May 1972 : His Royal Highness The Duke of Windsor 
 Edward began use of the title immediately upon abdication , in accordance with George VI 's declaration to his Accession Council , but several months passed before the title was formalised by Letters Patent . 
 His full style as king was " His Majesty , Edward the Eighth , by the Grace of God , of Great Britain , Ireland , and of the British Dominions beyond the Seas , King , Defender of the Faith , Emperor of India " . 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 British Commonwealth and Empire honours 
 KG : Knight of the Garter , 1910 
 ISO : Companion of the Imperial Service Order , 1910 
 MC : Military Cross , 1916 
 GCMG : Grand Master and Knight Grand Cross of St Michael and St George , 1917 
 GBE : Grand Master and Knight Grand Cross of the British Empire , 1917 
 KStJ : Knight of Justice of St John , 1917 
 GCVO : Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order , 1920 
 PC : Privy Counsellor , ( United Kingdom ) 1920 
 <unk> : Knight Grand Commander of the Star of India , 1921 
 <unk> : Knight Grand Commander of the Indian Empire , 1921 
 RVC : Royal Victorian Chain , 1921 
 KT : Knight of the Thistle , 1922 
 KP : Knight of St Patrick , 1927 
 PC : Privy Counsellor ( Canada ) , 1927 
 GCB : Knight Grand Cross of the Bath , 1936 
 FRS : Royal Fellow of the Royal Society 
 Upon his accession , Edward became sovereign of the various orders of the British Commonwealth and Empire , including those he had been appointed to prior to becoming king . After his abdication , the King , Edward 's brother , reinstated his pre @-@ accession honours . 
 Foreign honours 
 Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour , 1912 
 Knight of the Golden Fleece , 1912 
 Knight of the Order of the Elephant , 1914 
 Grand Cross of the Royal Norwegian Order of St Olav , 1914 
 Knight of the Order of the Most Holy Annunciation , 1915 
 Croix de Guerre , 1915 
 Order of St George , 1916 
 Order of Michael the Brave , 1918 
 War Merit Cross , 1919 
 Grand Cordon of Mohamed Ali , 1922 
 Knight of the Order of the Seraphim , 1923 
 Collar of the Order of Carol I , 1924 
 Order of Merit , First Class , 1925 
 Grand Cross of the Order of the Condor of the Andes , 1931 
 Grand Cross of the Order of the Sun , 1931 
 Grand Cross of the United Orders of Christ and Aviz , 1931 
 Grand Cross of the Order of the Southern Cross , 1933 
 Grand Cross of the Order of Saint Agatha , 1935 
 = = = = Military = = = = 
 Mid . , 22 June 1911 : Midshipman , Royal Navy 
 Lt , 17 March 1913 : Lieutenant , Royal Navy 
 Lt , 18 November 1914 : Lieutenant , 1st Battalion , Grenadier Guards , British Army . ( First World War , Flanders and Italy ) 
 Capt. , 10 March 1916 : Captain , British Army 
 Maj , 1918 : Temporary Major , British Army 
 Col. , 15 April 1919 : Colonel , British Army 
 Capt. , 8 July 1919 : Captain , Royal Navy 
 Gp Capt. , 5 December 1922 : Group Captain , Royal Air Force 
 Air <unk> , 1 September 1930 : Air Marshal , Royal Air Force 
 1 January 1935 : Admiral , Royal Navy ; General , British Army ; Air Chief Marshal , Royal Air Force 
 21 January 1936 : Admiral of the Fleet , Royal Navy ; Field Marshal , British Army ; Marshal of the Royal Air Force 
 Major @-@ Gen. , 3 September 1939 : Major @-@ General , British Army 
 = = = = Honorary degrees = = = = 
 Hon LLD : Edinburgh , Toronto , Alberta and Queen 's University Kingston ( Ontario ) 1919 , Melbourne 1920 , Cambridge and Calcutta 1921 , St Andrews and Hong Kong 1922 , Witwatersrand 1925 
 Hon DCL : Oxford 1921 
 DSc and Hon <unk> : London 1921 
 DLitt : Benares 1921 
 = = = Arms = = = 
 As Prince of Wales , Edward 's arms were the royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom , differenced with a label of three points argent , with an inescutcheon representing Wales surmounted by a coronet ( identical to those of Charles , the current Prince of Wales ) . As Sovereign , he bore the royal arms undifferenced . After his abdication , he used the arms again differenced by a label of three points argent , but this time with the centre point bearing an imperial crown . 
 = = Ancestry = = 
 = Operation Mistral 2 = 
 Operation Mistral 2 , officially codenamed Operation Maestral 2 , was a Croatian Army ( Hrvatska vojska – HV ) and Croatian Defence Council ( Hrvatsko vijeće obrane – HVO ) offensive in western Bosnia and Herzegovina on 8 – 15 September 1995 as part of the Bosnian War . Its objective was to create a security buffer between Croatia and positions held by the Bosnian Serb Army of Republika Srpska ( Vojska Republike Srpske – VRS ) and to put the largest Bosnian Serb @-@ held city , Banja Luka , in jeopardy by capturing the towns of Jajce , Šipovo and Drvar . The combined HV and HVO forces were under the overall command of HV Major General Ante Gotovina . 
 The operation commenced during a North Atlantic Treaty Organisation ( NATO ) air campaign against the VRS codenamed Operation Deliberate Force , targeting VRS air defences , artillery positions and storage facilities largely in the area of Sarajevo , but also elsewhere in the country . Days after commencement of the offensive , the VRS positions to the right and to the left of the HV and the HVO advance were also attacked by the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( Armija Republike Bosne i Hercegovine – ARBiH ) in Operation Sana . The offensive achieved its objectives and set the stage for further advances of the HV , HVO and ARBiH towards Banja Luka , contributing to the resolution of the war . 
 The offensive , together with Operation Sana , caused controversy among military analysts regarding the issue of whether NATO airstrikes or the two ground offensives contributed more towards the resolution of the Bosnian War , and to what extent ARBiH , HVO and HV advances were helped by , or conversely the VRS hampered by , NATO bombing . In 2011 , five former Croatian military personnel were convicted of war crimes for the summary execution of five Bosnian Serb soldiers and an unknown civilian during the offensive . 
 = = Background = = 
 As the Yugoslav People 's Army ( Jugoslovenska narodna armija – JNA ) withdrew from Croatia following the acceptance and start of implementation of the Vance plan , its 55 @,@ 000 officers and soldiers born in Bosnia and Herzegovina were transferred to a new Bosnian Serb army , which was later renamed the Army of Republika Srpska ( Vojska Republike Srpske – VRS ) . This re @-@ organisation followed the declaration of the Serbian Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 9 January 1992 , ahead of the referendum on the independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina that took place between 29 February and 1 March 1992 . This declaration would later be cited by the Bosnian Serbs as a pretext for the Bosnian War . Bosnian Serbs began fortifying the capital , Sarajevo , and other areas on 1 March 1992 . On the following day , the first fatalities of the war were recorded in Sarajevo and Doboj . In the final days of March , Bosnian Serb forces bombarded Bosanski Brod with artillery , resulting in a cross @-@ border operation by the Croatian Army ( Hrvatska vojska – HV ) 108th Brigade . On 4 April 1992 , JNA artillery began shelling Sarajevo . There were other examples of the JNA directly supported the VRS , such as during the capture of Zvornik in early April 1992 , when the JNA provided artillery support from Serbia , firing across the Drina River . At the same time , the JNA attempted to defuse the situation and arrange negotiations elsewhere in the country . 
 The JNA and the VRS in Bosnia and Herzegovina faced the Army of the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina ( Armija Republike Bosne i Hercegovine – ARBiH ) and the Croatian Defence Council ( Hrvatsko vijeće obrane – HVO ) , reporting to the Bosniak @-@ dominated central government and the Bosnian Croat leadership respectively , as well as the HV , which occasionally supported HVO operations . In late April 1992 , the VRS was able to deploy 200 @,@ 000 troops , hundreds of tanks , armoured personnel carriers ( APCs ) and artillery pieces . The HVO and the Croatian Defence Forces ( Hrvatske obrambene snage – HOS ) could field approximately 25 @,@ 000 soldiers and a handful of heavy weapons , while the ARBiH was largely unprepared with nearly 100 @,@ 000 troops , small arms for less than a half of their number and virtually no heavy weapons . Arming of the various forces was hampered by a United Nations ( UN ) arms embargo that had been introduced in September 1991 . By mid @-@ May 1992 , when those JNA units which had not been transferred to the VRS withdrew from Bosnia and Herzegovina to the newly declared Federal Republic of Yugoslavia , the VRS controlled approximately 60 percent of Bosnia and Herzegovina . The extent of VRS control was extended to about 70 percent of the country by the end of 1992 . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 By 1995 , the ARBiH and the HVO had developed into better @-@ organised forces employing comparably large numbers of artillery pieces and good defensive fortifications . The VRS was not capable of penetrating their defences even where its forces employed sound military tactics , for instance in the Battle of Orašje in May and June 1995 . After recapture of the bulk of the Republic of Serb Krajina ( the Croatian Serb @-@ controlled areas of Croatia ) in Operation Storm in August 1995 , the HV shifted its focus to western Bosnia and Herzegovina . The shift was motivated by a desire to create a security zone along the Croatian border , establish Croatia as a regional power and gain favours with the West by forcing an end to the Bosnian War . The government of Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomed the move as it contributed to their goal of gaining control over western Bosnia and the city of Banja Luka — the largest city in the Bosnian Serb @-@ held territory . 
 In the final days of August 1995 , NATO launched Operation Deliberate Force — an air campaign targeting the VRS . This campaign was launched in response to the second Markale massacre of 28 August , which came on the heels of the Srebrenica massacre . Airstrikes began on 30 August , initially targeting VRS air defences , and striking targets near Sarajevo . The campaign was briefly suspended on 1 September and its scope was expanded to target artillery and storage facilities around the city . The bombing resumed on 5 September , and its scope extended to VRS air defences near Banja Luka by 9 September as NATO had nearly exhausted its list of targets near Sarajevo . On 13 September , the Bosnian Serbs accepted NATO 's demand for the establishment of an exclusion zone around Sarajevo and the campaign ceased . 
 = = Order of battle = = 
 As the NATO bombing generally targeted VRS around Sarajevo , western Bosnia remained relatively calm following Operation Storm , except for probing attacks launched by the VRS , HVO or ARBiH near Bihać , Drvar and Glamoč . At the time the HV , HVO and ARBiH were planning a joint offensive in the region . The main portion of the offensive was codenamed Operation Maestral ( Croatian name for maestro wind ) , or more accurately Operation Maestral 2 . Within a month , the HV and HVO had planned an operation to capture the towns of Jajce , Šipovo and Drvar , and position their forces to threaten Banja Luka . Major General Ante Gotovina was placed in command of the combined HV and HVO forces earmarked for the offensive . 
 The forces were deployed in three groups . Operational Group ( OG ) North , tasked with capturing Šipovo and Jajce , consisted of 11 @,@ 000 troops and included the best units available to Gotovina — the 4th Guards and the 7th Guards Brigades , the 1st Croatian Guards Brigade ( 1 @.@ hrvatski gardijski zdrug – 1st HGZ ) of the HV and three HVO guards brigades . The rest of the force was organised into OG West and OG South , and consisted of five HV Home Guard regiments and three reserve infantry brigades . These two groups were to pin down the troops of the VRS 2nd Krajina Corps in the vicinity of Drvar , and attempt to advance on the town . Once OG North had completed its tasks , it was to turn back and capture Drvar . Gotovina 's forces were deployed between the ARBiH 5th Corps on their left , and the 7th Corps on their right . The ARBiH forces were to advance on the flanks of the HV and the HVO , in a separate but coordinated offensive codenamed Operation Sana . 
 In the area of the combined HV and HVO offensive , the VRS had its 2nd Krajina Corps , commanded by Major General Radivoje Tomanić , and the 30th Infantry Division of the 1st Krajina Corps , commanded by Major General Momir Zec . Tomanić , who set up his headquarters in Drvar , was in overall command in western Bosnia . Tomanić and Zec commanded a combined force of approximately 22 @,@ 000 troops . They considered the ARBiH to be a greater threat in the area and only deployed between 5 @,@ 000 and 6 @,@ 000 troops directly against the HV , consisting of one motorised and six infantry or light infantry brigades fielded along the frontline and one brigade in reserve . 
 = = Timeline = = 
 = = = First stage : 8 – 11 September = = = 
 The first stage of the offensive was planned to overcome VRS defences extending across mountains north of Glamoč , guarding southern approaches to Šipovo and Jajce . The attack was launched in the morning of 8 September . The 7th and the 4th Guards Brigades spearheaded the attack , striking towards the Mlinište Pass and <unk> Hill respectively . The first line of VRS defences was breached by 10 : 00 , which allowed the 1st HGZ to push through the 4th Guards Brigade and outflank Mount Vitorog and the particularly strong VRS defences there . The 1st HGZ was quickly reinforced by the 60th Guards Battalion and the special police in attacks against the VRS positions on Vitorog . The farthest advance achieved on the initial day of the offensive was achieved by the 4th Guards Brigade , which advanced 5 kilometres ( 3 @.@ 1 miles ) . The 7th Guards Brigade and the 1st HGZ advanced considerably less distance , while the supporting efforts of OG South and OG West launched that day against Drvar made little progress . 
 On 9 September , the HV and HVO defeated the bulk of the main VRS defences of the 3rd Serbian and 7th Motorised Brigades , achieving a key breakthrough . The 1st HGZ pushed back the VRS from Vitorog , and the 7th Guards Brigade advanced 8 kilometres ( 5 @.@ 0 miles ) , capturing the Mlinište Pass , while the 4th Guards Brigade secured <unk> Hill . The next day , the HV and the HVO were only able to advance 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 miles ) , as the VRS deployed a battalion of M @-@ 84 tanks detached from the 1st Armoured Brigade . At this point , the HV and the HVO had achieved the objectives of the first stage of the offensive . That day , the 7th Corps of the ARBiH launched its attack on the right flank of the HV and the HVO assault . It engaged VRS elements tenaciously defending Donji Vakuf . 
 On 11 September , OG North paused offensive operations while the 4th and 7th Guards Brigades moved into reserve . They were replaced with the 1st and the 2nd Guards Brigades of the HVO , which became the spearhead of OG North . A probing attack by the 2nd Guards Brigade achieved some gains towards Jajce along the rim of the Kupres Plateau . OGs South and West made another effort to capture Drvar , but were beaten back by VRS infantry supported by artillery and M @-@ 87 Orkan rockets . 
 = = = Second stage : 12 – 13 September = = = 
 The second stage of the offensive commenced on 12 September . Its objective was the capture of Šipovo and Jajce by OG North after it successfully breached the VRS defences north of Glamoč . As the 7th Motorised Brigade of the VRS was forced to withdrawn from positions near Vitorog in order to defend Šipovo , the rapid advance of the HV and the HVO meant the VRS could not consolidate a defensive line . On the same day , the HV deployed three Mil Mi @-@ 24 helicopter gunship sorties against VRS armour and artillery , and the HVO 1st Guards Brigade was able to reach Šipovo and capture the town . Its advance was also supported by the 1st HGZ , which advanced to outflank the VRS near Šipovo . The assault was also supported by the 60th Guards Battalion , the General Staff Reconnaissance Sabotage Company , heavy artillery and multiple rocket launchers . As the VRS positions around Šipovo began to give way , the 2nd Guards Brigade advanced against Jajce , reaching a point within 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 miles ) south of the town by the end of the day . Its advance was supported by the 22nd Sabotage Detachment and the special police . 
 On 13 September , as the 2nd Guards Brigade was approaching Jajce , the VRS withdrew from Donji Vakuf to avoid being surrounded , and the ARBiH captured the town . The 5th Corps of the ARBiH , on the left flank of the HV and HVO offensive , began its assault against the VRS 2nd Krajina Corps , moving south from Bihać towards Bosanski Petrovac . The HV 81st Guards Battalion was inserted into the operation to support the HVO exploitation forces , and when it approached Mrkonjić Grad it clashed with the VRS 7th Motorised Brigade defending the town . By the end of the day the 2nd Guards Brigade had reached Jajce . The civilian population of Jajce was evacuated when its capture appeared imminent . The 2nd Guards Brigade entered the deserted town , recapturing the <unk> had been lost to the VRS in Operation Vrbas ' 92 , nearly three years before . Its capture prevented the 7th Corps of the ARBiH from advancing any further as its frontline facing the VRS all but disappeared . The 7th Corps then detached a substantial part of its force and sent them as reinforcements to the 5th Corps . 
 = = = Third stage : 14 – 15 September = = = 
 The third stage of the operation centred on the capture of Drvar , the secondary objective of the overall offensive . VRS defences around the town held until 14 September , when Gotovina detached a reinforced battalion from the 7th Guards Brigade held in the reserve of OG North and deployed it against Drvar . A renewed push by OGs West and South , combined with a rapid advance by the ARBiH 5th Corps against Bosanski Petrovac threatened to isolate Drvar , and the VRS withdrew from the town . 
 The ARBiH 5th Corps captured Kulen Vakuf on 14 September , and Bosanski Petrovac the next day . It linked up with HV forces at the <unk> Pass , 12 kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 miles ) southeast of the town on the road to Drvar . The link @-@ up was not smooth , as a friendly fire incident occurred , resulting in casualties . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The combined HV and HVO force penetrated VRS defences by up to 30 kilometres ( 19 miles ) capturing 2 @,@ 500 square kilometres ( 970 square miles ) , and demonstrating the improved skill of HV planners . More significantly , Operation Mistral 2 , as well as Operation Sana , as the first in a string of offensives launched shortly before the end of the Bosnian War , were crucial in applying pressure on the Bosnian Serbs . They also set the stage for further HV and HVO advances in Operation Southern Move . 
 The Central Intelligence Agency analysed the effects of Operation Deliberate Force and Operations Maestral 2 and Sana , and noted that the NATO air campaign did not degrade VRS combat capability as much as was expected , because the airstrikes were never primarily directed at field @-@ deployed units but at command and control infrastructure . This analysis noted that , while the NATO air campaign did degrade VRS capabilities , the final offensives by the HV , HVO and the ARBiH did the most damage . The analysis further concluded that the ground offensives , rather than the NATO bombardment , were responsible for bringing the Bosnian Serbs to the negotiation table and the war to its end . However , author Robert C. Owen argues that the HV would not have advanced as rapidly as it did had NATO not intervened and hampered the VRS defence by denying it long @-@ range communications . 
 Operation Mistral 2 , along with the near @-@ concurrent Operation Sana , created a large number of refugees from the areas previously controlled by the VRS . Their number was variously reported and the estimates range from 655 killed civilians and 125 @,@ 000 refugees , reported by Radio @-@ Television Republika Srpska in 2010 , to approximately 40 @,@ 000 refugees reported in 1995 — both by Bosnian Serb sources . The latter figure was reported to encompass the entire contemporary populations of the towns of Jajce , Šipovo , Mrkonjić Grad and Donji Vakuf fleeing or being evacuated . At the time , the UN spokesman in Sarajevo estimated the number of refugees at 20 @,@ 000 . The refugees fled to VRS @-@ controlled areas around Brčko and Banja Luka , adding to the 50 @,@ 000 refugees who had been sheltering in Banja Luka since Operation Storm . 
 During the Trial of Gotovina et al before the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia , Reynaud <unk> compared Operations Mistral 2 and Storm in his capacity as an expert witness for the prosecution . <unk> pointed out that civilian property and infrastructure at less risk in the aftermath of Operation Mistral 2 , as Gotovina had issued much more strict orders in that respect , establishing companies specifically tasked with security and imposing a curfew in Jajce . The HV and the HVO sustained losses of 74 killed and 226 wounded in the operation . 
 In 2007 , Croatian authorities received information that the commanding officer of the 7th Guards Brigade , Brigadier Ivan Korade , had ordered the killing of VRS prisoners of war during the offensive . Charges of war crimes were brought against seven soldiers of the brigade , specifying that they executed Korade 's orders to kill one VRS prisoner and one unknown man in the village of <unk> near Glamoč , and four VRS prisoners in the village of Mlinište . Five defendants were convicted and the remaining two acquitted in October 2011 . Two of them were sentenced to six years in prison , one of them to five years and the remaining two to two years ' imprisonment . Korade was never tried , as he committed suicide following a standoff with police officers who sought to apprehend him in relation to a quadruple murder committed in late March 2008 . 
 = Cretaceous – Paleogene extinction event = 
 The Cretaceous – Paleogene ( K – Pg ) extinction event , also known as the Cretaceous – Tertiary ( K – T ) extinction , was a mass extinction of some three @-@ quarters of the plant and animal species on Earth — including all non @-@ avian dinosaurs — that occurred over a geologically short period of time approximately 66 million years ago . With the exception of some ectothermic species in aquatic ecosystems like the leatherback sea turtle and crocodiles , no tetrapods weighing more than 55 pounds ( 25 kilos ) survived . It marked the end of the Cretaceous period and with it , the entire Mesozoic Era , opening the Cenozoic Era that continues today . 
 In the geologic record , the K – Pg event is marked by a thin layer of sediment called the K – Pg boundary , which can be found throughout the world in marine and terrestrial rocks . The boundary clay shows high levels of the metal iridium , which is rare in the Earth 's crust but abundant in asteroids . 
 As originally proposed in 1980 by a team of scientists led by Luis Alvarez , it is now generally thought that the K – Pg extinction was triggered by a massive comet or asteroid impact 66 million years ago and its catastrophic effects on the global environment , including a lingering impact winter that made it impossible for plants and plankton to carry out photosynthesis . The impact hypothesis , also known as the Alvarez hypothesis , was bolstered by the discovery of the 180 @-@ kilometre @-@ wide ( 112 mi ) Chicxulub crater in the Gulf of Mexico in the early 1990s , which provided conclusive evidence that the K – Pg boundary clay represented debris from an asteroid impact . The fact that the extinctions occurred at the same time as the impact provides strong situational evidence that the K – Pg extinction was caused by the asteroid . It was possibly accelerated by the creation of the Deccan Traps . However , some scientists maintain the extinction was caused or exacerbated by other factors , such as volcanic eruptions , climate change , or sea level change , separately or together . 
 A wide range of species perished in the K – Pg extinction . The most well @-@ known victims are the non @-@ avian dinosaurs . However , the extinction also destroyed a plethora of other terrestrial organisms , including certain mammals , pterosaurs , birds , lizards , insects , and plants . In the oceans , the K – Pg extinction killed off plesiosaurs and the giant marine lizards ( <unk> ) and devastated fish , sharks , mollusks ( especially ammonites , which became extinct ) and many species of plankton . It is estimated that 75 % or more of all species on Earth vanished . Yet the devastation caused by the extinction also provided evolutionary opportunities . In the wake of the extinction , many groups underwent remarkable adaptive radiations — a sudden and prolific divergence into new forms and species within the disrupted and emptied ecological niches resulting from the event . Mammals in particular diversified in the Paleogene , producing new forms such as horses , whales , bats , and primates . Birds , fish and perhaps lizards also radiated . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The K – Pg boundary represents one of the most dramatic turnovers in the fossil record for various calcareous <unk> that formed the calcium deposits that gave the Cretaceous its name . The turnover in this group is clearly marked at the species level . Statistical analysis of marine losses at this time suggests that the decrease in diversity was caused more by a sharp increase in extinctions than by a decrease in speciation . The K – Pg boundary record of dinoflagellates is not as well @-@ understood , mainly because only microbial cysts provide a fossil record , and not all dinoflagellate species have cyst @-@ forming stages , thereby likely causing diversity to be underestimated . Recent studies indicate that there were no major shifts in dinoflagellates through the boundary layer . 
 = = Extinction patterns = = 
 The K – Pg extinction event was severe , global , rapid , and selective . In terms of severity , the event eliminated a vast number of species . Based on marine fossils , it is estimated that 75 % or more of all species were made extinct by the K – Pg extinction event . 
 The event appears to have affected all continents at the same time . Non @-@ avian dinosaurs , for example , are known from the Maastrichtian of North America , Europe , Asia , Africa , South America and Antarctica , but are unknown from the Cenozoic anywhere in the world . Similarly , fossil pollen shows devastation of the plant communities in areas as far apart as New Mexico , Alaska , China , and New Zealand . 
 Even though the boundary event was severe , there was significant variability in the rate of extinction between and within different clades . Species that depended on photosynthesis declined or became extinct as atmospheric particles blocked sunlight and reduced the solar energy reaching the Earth 's surface . This plant extinction caused a major reshuffling of the dominant plant groups . <unk> , insectivores and carrion @-@ eaters survived the extinction event , perhaps because of the increased availability of their food sources . No purely herbivorous or carnivorous mammals seem to have survived . Rather , the surviving mammals and birds fed on insects , worms , and snails , which in turn fed on dead plant and animal matter . Scientists hypothesize that these organisms survived the collapse of plant @-@ based food chains because they fed on detritus ( non @-@ living organic material ) . 
 In stream communities , few animal groups became extinct because such communities rely less directly on food from living plants and more on detritus that washes in from the land , buffering them from extinction . Similar , but more complex patterns have been found in the oceans . Extinction was more severe among animals living in the water column than among animals living on or in the sea floor . Animals in the water column are almost entirely dependent on primary production from living phytoplankton , while animals living on or in the ocean floor feed on detritus or can switch to detritus feeding . <unk> and mollusks ( including ammonites , rudists , freshwater snails and mussels ) , and those organisms whose food chain included these shell builders , became extinct or suffered heavy losses . For example , it is thought that ammonites were the principal food of mosasaurs , a group of giant marine reptiles that became extinct at the boundary . The largest air @-@ breathing survivors of the event , crocodyliforms and <unk> , were semi @-@ aquatic and had access to detritus . Modern crocodilians can live as scavengers and can survive for months without food , and their young are small , grow slowly , and feed largely on invertebrates and dead organisms or fragments of organisms for their first few years . These characteristics have been linked to crocodilian survival at the end of the Cretaceous . 
 After the K – Pg extinction event , biodiversity required substantial time to recover , despite the existence of abundant vacant ecological niches . 
 <unk> have left a geological record since at least the Ordovician times , and their mineral fossil skeletons can be tracked across the K – Pg boundary . There is no evidence of mass extinction of these organisms , and there is support for high productivity of these species in southern high latitudes as a result of cooling temperatures in the early Paleocene . Approximately 46 % of diatom species survived the transition from the Cretaceous to the Upper Paleocene . This suggests a significant turnover in species , but not a catastrophic extinction of diatoms , across the K – Pg boundary . 
 The occurrence of planktonic foraminifera across the K – Pg boundary has been studied since the 1930s . Research spurred by the possibility of an impact event at the K – Pg boundary resulted in numerous publications detailing planktonic <unk> extinction at the boundary . However , there is debate ongoing between groups that think the evidence indicates substantial extinction of these species at the K – Pg boundary , and those who think the evidence supports multiple extinctions and expansions through the boundary . 
 Numerous species of benthic foraminifera became extinct during the K – Pg extinction event , presumably because they depend on organic debris for nutrients , since the biomass in the ocean is thought to have decreased . However , as the marine microbiota recovered , it is thought that increased speciation of benthic foraminifera resulted from the increase in food sources . <unk> recovery in the early Paleocene provided the food source to support large benthic <unk> assemblages , which are mainly detritus @-@ feeding . Ultimate recovery of the benthic populations occurred over several stages lasting several hundred thousand years into the early Paleocene . 
 = = = Marine invertebrates = = = 
 There is variability in the fossil record as to the extinction rate of marine invertebrates across the K – Pg boundary . The apparent rate is influenced by the lack of fossil records rather than actual extinction . 
 <unk> , a class of small crustaceans that were prevalent in the upper Maastrichtian , left fossil deposits in a variety of locations . A review of these fossils shows that ostracod diversity was lower in the Paleocene than any other time in the Cenozoic . However , current research cannot ascertain whether the extinctions occurred prior to or during the boundary interval itself . 
 Approximately 60 % of late @-@ Cretaceous Scleractinia coral genera failed to cross the K – Pg boundary into the Paleocene . Further analysis of the coral extinctions shows that approximately 98 % of colonial species , ones that inhabit warm , shallow tropical waters , became extinct . The solitary corals , which generally do not form reefs and inhabit colder and deeper ( below the photic zone ) areas of the ocean were less impacted by the K – Pg boundary . Colonial coral species rely upon symbiosis with photosynthetic algae , which collapsed due to the events surrounding the K – Pg boundary . However , the use of data from coral fossils to support K – Pg extinction and subsequent Paleocene recovery must be weighed against the changes that occurred in coral ecosystems through the K – Pg boundary . 
 The numbers of cephalopod , echinoderm , and bivalve genera exhibited significant diminution after the K – Pg boundary . Most species of brachiopods , a small phylum of marine invertebrates , survived the K – Pg extinction event and diversified during the early Paleocene . 
 Except for nautiloids ( represented by the modern order <unk> ) and <unk> ( which had already diverged into modern octopodes , squids , and cuttlefish ) all other species of the molluscan class Cephalopoda became extinct at the K – Pg boundary . These included the ecologically significant <unk> , as well as the ammonoids , a group of highly diverse , numerous , and widely distributed shelled cephalopods . Researchers have pointed out that the reproductive strategy of the surviving nautiloids , which rely upon few and larger eggs , played a role in <unk> their <unk> counterparts through the extinction event . The ammonoids utilized a planktonic strategy of reproduction ( numerous eggs and planktonic larvae ) , which would have been devastated by the K – Pg extinction event . Additional research has shown that subsequent to this elimination of ammonoids from the global biota , nautiloids began an evolutionary radiation into shell shapes and complexities theretofore known only from ammonoids . 
 Approximately 35 % of echinoderm genera became extinct at the K – Pg boundary , although taxa that thrived in low @-@ latitude , shallow @-@ water environments during the late Cretaceous had the highest extinction rate . Mid @-@ latitude , deep @-@ water echinoderms were much less affected at the K – Pg boundary . The pattern of extinction points to habitat loss , specifically the drowning of carbonate platforms , the shallow @-@ water reefs in existence at that time , by the extinction event . 
 Other invertebrate groups , including rudists ( reef @-@ building clams ) and <unk> ( giant relatives of modern scallops ) , also became extinct at the K – Pg boundary . 
 = = = Fish = = = 
 There are substantial fossil records of jawed fishes across the K – Pg boundary , which provides good evidence of extinction patterns of these classes of marine vertebrates . Within cartilaginous fish , approximately 7 out of the 41 families of <unk> , modern sharks , suffered during this event and Batoids , skates and rays , lost nearly all the identifiable species , while more than 90 % of teleost fish ( bony fish ) families survived . 
 While the deep sea realm was able to remain seemingly unaffected , there was an equal loss between the open marine apex predators and the <unk> demersal feeders on the continental shelf . The loss and origination of sharks and <unk> at family level are more pronounced . Sharks and Batoids first appeared in the Danian Age 66 to 61 @.@ 6 million years ago , starting with two shark families ( Carcharhinidae , <unk> ) and a single batoid family ( Torpedinidae ) , resulting in a total origination percentage of only 8 % of marine animals . Only 25 shark families and nine batoid families survived the K @-@ T boundary event . In the late cretaceous period , the Maastrichtian age , 28 shark families and 13 batoid families thrived , before the event occurred . Forty @-@ seven of all marine genera cross the K / T boundary , 85 % being sharks . Batoids display with 15 % a comparably low survival rate . 
 There is evidence of a mass kill of bony fishes at a fossil site immediately above the K – Pg boundary layer on Seymour Island near Antarctica , apparently precipitated by the K – Pg extinction event . However , the marine and freshwater environments of fishes mitigated environmental effects of the extinction event . 
 = = = Terrestrial invertebrates = = = 
 Insect damage to the fossilized leaves of flowering plants from fourteen sites in North America were used as a proxy for insect diversity across the K – Pg boundary and analyzed to determine the rate of extinction . Researchers found that Cretaceous sites , prior to the extinction event , had rich plant and insect @-@ feeding diversity . However , during the early Paleocene , flora were relatively diverse with little predation from insects , even 1 @.@ 7 million years after the extinction event . 
 = = = Terrestrial plants = = = 
 There is overwhelming evidence of global disruption of plant communities at the K – Pg boundary . Extinctions are seen both in studies of fossil pollen , and fossil leaves . In North America , the data suggests massive devastation and mass extinction of plants at the K – Pg boundary sections , although there were substantial <unk> changes before the boundary . In North America , approximately 57 % of plant species became extinct . In high southern hemisphere latitudes , such as New Zealand and Antarctica , the mass die @-@ off of flora caused no significant turnover in species , but dramatic and short @-@ term changes in the relative abundance of plant groups . In some regions , the Paleocene recovery of plants began with <unk> by fern species , represented as a fern spike in the geologic record ; this same pattern of fern recolonization was observed after the 1980 Mount St. Helens eruption . 
 Due to the wholesale destruction of plants at the K – Pg boundary , there was a proliferation of saprotrophic organisms , such as fungi , that do not require photosynthesis and use nutrients from decaying vegetation . The dominance of fungal species lasted only a few years while the atmosphere cleared and there was plenty of organic matter to feed on . Once the atmosphere cleared , photosynthetic organisms , like ferns and other plants , returned . <unk> appears to have enhanced the ability of flowering plants to survive the extinction , probably because the additional copies of the genome such plants possessed allowed them to more readily adapt to the rapidly changing environmental conditions that followed the impact . 
 = = = Amphibians = = = 
 There is limited evidence for extinction of amphibians at the K – Pg boundary . A study of fossil vertebrates across the K – Pg boundary in Montana concluded that no species of amphibian became extinct . Yet there are several species of Maastrichtian amphibian , not included as part of this study , which are unknown from the Paleocene . These include the frog <unk> lancensis and the <unk> <unk> <unk> ; therefore some amphibians do seem to have become extinct at the boundary . The relatively low levels of extinction seen among amphibians probably reflect the low extinction rates seen in freshwater animals . 
 = = = Non @-@ archosaur reptiles = = = 
 The two living non @-@ archosaurian reptile taxa , <unk> ( turtles ) and <unk> ( lizards and tuataras ) , along with <unk> ( semi @-@ aquatic archosauromorphs that would die out in the early Miocene ) , survived across the K – Pg boundary . Over 80 % of Cretaceous turtle species passed through the K – Pg boundary . Additionally , all six turtle families in existence at the end of the Cretaceous survived into the Paleogene and are represented by living species . Living <unk> include the tuataras ( the only living rhynchocephalians ) and the squamates . The rhynchocephalians were a widespread and relatively successful group of <unk> during the early Mesozoic , but began to decline by the mid @-@ Cretaceous , though they were very successful in the Late Cretaceous of South America . They are represented today by a single genus located exclusively in New Zealand . 
 The order <unk> , which is represented today by lizards , including snakes and <unk> ( worm lizards ) , radiated into various ecological niches during the Jurassic and was successful throughout the Cretaceous . They survived through the K – Pg boundary and are currently the most successful and diverse group of living reptiles with more than 6 @,@ 000 extant species . Many families of terrestrial squamates became extinct at the boundary , such as <unk> and <unk> , and fossil evidence indicates they suffered very heavy losses in the KT event , only recovering 10 million years after it . Giant non @-@ archosaurian aquatic reptiles such as mosasaurs and plesiosaurs , which were the top marine predators of their time , became extinct by the end of the Cretaceous . The ichthyosaurs had already disappeared before the mass extinction occurred . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The archosaur clade includes two surviving groups , crocodilians and birds , along with the various extinct groups of non @-@ avian dinosaurs and pterosaurs . 
 = = = = <unk> = = = = 
 Ten families of crocodilians or their close relatives are represented in the Maastrichtian fossil records , of which five died out prior to the K – Pg boundary . Five families have both Maastrichtian and Paleocene fossil representatives . All of the surviving families of crocodyliforms inhabited freshwater and terrestrial environments — except for the <unk> , which lived in freshwater and marine locations . Approximately 50 % of crocodyliform representatives survived across the K – Pg boundary , the only apparent trend being that no large crocodiles survived . <unk> survivability across the boundary may have resulted from their aquatic niche and ability to burrow , which reduced susceptibility to negative environmental effects at the boundary . <unk> and colleagues suggested in 2008 that juvenile marine crocodyliforms lived in freshwater environments like modern marine crocodile juveniles , which would have helped them survive where other marine reptiles became extinct ; freshwater environments were not as strongly affected by the K – Pg extinction event as marine environments . 
 The <unk> , a generally crocodile @-@ like group of uncertain phylogeny ( possibly archosaurian ) also survived the event , only to become extinct in the Miocene . 
 = = = = Pterosaurs = = = = 
 One family of pterosaurs , <unk> , was definitely present in the Maastrichtian , and it likely became extinct at the K – Pg boundary . These large pterosaurs were the last representatives of a declining group that contained 10 families during the mid @-@ Cretaceous . Several other pterosaur lineages may have been present during the Maastrichtian , such as the ornithocheirids , pteranodontids and / or <unk> , as well as a possible <unk> , though they are represented by fragmentary remains that are difficult to assign to any given group . While this was occurring , modern birds were undergoing diversification ; traditionally it was thought that they replaced archaic birds and pterosaur groups , possibly due to direct competition , or they simply filled empty niches , but there is no correlation between pterosaur and avian diversities that are conclusive to a competition hypothesis , and small pterosaurs were present in the Late Cretaceous . 
 = = = = Birds = = = = 
 Most paleontologists regard birds as the only surviving dinosaurs ( see Origin of birds ) . It is thought that all non @-@ avian theropods became extinct , including then @-@ flourishing groups like enantiornithines and <unk> . Several analyses of bird fossils show divergence of species prior to the K – Pg boundary , and that duck , chicken and ratite bird relatives coexisted with non @-@ avian dinosaurs . Large collections of bird fossils representing a range of different species provides definitive evidence for the persistence of archaic birds to within 300 @,@ 000 years of the K – Pg boundary . The absence of these birds in the Paleogene is evidence that a mass extinction of archaic birds took place there . A small fraction of the Cretaceous bird species survived the impact , giving rise to today 's birds . The only bird group known for certain to have survived the K – Pg boundary is the Aves . <unk> may have been able to survive the extinction as a result of their abilities to dive , swim , or seek shelter in water and marshlands . Many species of avians can build burrows , or nest in tree holes or termite nests , all of which provided shelter from the environmental effects at the K – Pg boundary . Long @-@ term survival past the boundary was assured as a result of filling ecological niches left empty by extinction of non @-@ avian dinosaurs . 
 = = = = Non @-@ avian dinosaurs = = = = 
 Excluding a few controversial claims , scientists agree that all non @-@ avian dinosaurs became extinct at the K – Pg boundary . The dinosaur fossil record has been interpreted to show both a decline in diversity and no decline in diversity during the last few million years of the Cretaceous , and it may be that the quality of the dinosaur fossil record is simply not good enough to permit researchers to distinguish between the options . Since there is no evidence that late Maastrichtian non @-@ avian dinosaurs could burrow , swim or dive , they were unable to shelter themselves from the worst parts of any environmental stress that occurred at the K – Pg boundary . It is possible that small dinosaurs ( other than birds ) did survive , but they would have been deprived of food , as herbivorous dinosaurs would have found plant material scarce and carnivores would have quickly found prey in short supply . 
 The growing consensus about the endothermy of dinosaurs ( see dinosaur physiology ) helps to understand their full extinction in contrast with their close relatives , the crocodilians . <unk> ( " cold @-@ blooded " ) crocodiles have very limited needs for food ( they can survive several months without eating ) while endothermic ( " warm @-@ blooded " ) animals of similar size need much more food to sustain their faster metabolism . Thus , under the circumstances of food chain disruption previously mentioned , non @-@ avian dinosaurs died , while some crocodiles survived . In this context , the survival of other endothermic animals , such as some birds and mammals , could be due , among other reasons , to their smaller needs for food , related to their small size at the extinction epoch . 
 Whether the extinction occurred gradually or suddenly has been debated , as both views have support from the fossil record . A study of 29 fossil sites in Catalan Pyrenees of Europe in 2010 supports the view that dinosaurs there had great diversity until the asteroid impact , with over 100 living species . However , more recent research indicates that this figure is obscured by taphonomical biases and the sparsity of the continental fossil record . The results of this study , which were based on estimated real global biodiversity , showed that between 628 and 1078 non @-@ avian dinosaur species were alive at the end of the Cretaceous and underwent sudden extinction after the Cretaceous – Paleogene extinction event . Alternatively , interpretation based on the fossil @-@ bearing rocks along the Red Deer River in Alberta supports the gradual extinction of non @-@ avian dinosaurs ; during the last 10 million years of the Cretaceous layers there , the number of dinosaur species seems to have decreased from about 45 to about 12 . Other scientists have pointed out the same . 
 Several researchers support the existence of Paleocene dinosaurs . Evidence of this existence is based on the discovery of dinosaur remains in the Hell Creek Formation up to 1 @.@ 3 m ( 4 @.@ 3 ft ) above and 40 thousand years later than the K – Pg boundary . Pollen samples recovered near a fossilized hadrosaur femur recovered in the Ojo Alamo Sandstone at the San Juan River indicate that the animal lived during the Cenozoic , approximately 64 @.@ 5 Ma ( about 1 million years after the K – Pg extinction event ) . If their existence past the K – Pg boundary can be confirmed , these hadrosaurids would be considered a dead clade walking . Scientific consensus is that these fossils were eroded from their original locations and then re @-@ buried in much later sediments ( also known as reworked fossils ) . 
 = = = Mammals = = = 
 All major Cretaceous mammalian lineages , including monotremes ( egg @-@ laying mammals ) , multituberculates , marsupials and placentals , <unk> , and gondwanatheres survived the K – Pg extinction event , although they suffered losses . In particular , marsupials largely disappeared from North America , and the Asian <unk> , primitive relatives of extant marsupials , became extinct . In the Hell Creek beds of North America , at least half of the ten known multituberculate species and all eleven marsupial species are not found above the boundary . <unk> in Europe and North America survived relatively unscathed and quickly bounced back in the Palaeocene , but Asian forms were decimated , never again to represent a significant component on mammalian faunas . 
 Mammalian species began diversifying approximately 30 million years prior to the K – Pg boundary . Diversification of mammals stalled across the boundary . Current research indicates that mammals did not explosively diversify across the K – Pg boundary , despite the environment niches made available by the extinction of dinosaurs . Several mammalian orders have been interpreted as diversifying immediately after the K – Pg boundary , including <unk> ( bats ) and Cetartiodactyla ( a diverse group that today includes whales and dolphins and even @-@ toed ungulates ) , although recent research concludes that only marsupial orders diversified after the K – Pg boundary . 
 K – Pg boundary mammalian species were generally small , comparable in size to rats ; this small size would have helped them find shelter in protected environments . In addition , it is postulated that some early monotremes , marsupials , and placentals were semiaquatic or burrowing , as there are multiple mammalian lineages with such habits today . Any burrowing or semiaquatic mammal would have had additional protection from K – Pg boundary environmental stresses . 
 = = Evidence = = 
 = = = North American fossils = = = 
 In North American terrestrial sequences , the extinction event is best represented by the marked discrepancy between the rich and relatively abundant late @-@ Maastrichtian <unk> record and the post @-@ boundary fern spike . 
 At present the most informative sequence of dinosaur @-@ bearing rocks in the world from the K – Pg boundary is found in western North America , particularly the late Maastrichtian @-@ age Hell Creek Formation of Montana . This formation , when compared with the older ( approximately 75 Ma ) Judith River / Dinosaur Park Formations ( from Montana and Alberta respectively ) provides information on the changes in dinosaur populations over the last 10 million years of the Cretaceous . These fossil beds are geographically limited , covering only part of one continent . 
 The middle – late Campanian formations show a greater diversity of dinosaurs than any other single group of rocks . The late Maastrichtian rocks contain the largest members of several major clades : Tyrannosaurus , Ankylosaurus , Pachycephalosaurus , Triceratops and Torosaurus , which suggests food was plentiful immediately prior to the extinction . 
 In addition to rich dinosaur fossils , there are also plant fossils that illustrate the reduction in plant species across the K – Pg boundary . In the sediments below the K – Pg boundary the dominant plant remains are angiosperm pollen grains , but the actual boundary layer contains little pollen and is dominated by fern spores . More usual pollen levels gradually resume above the boundary layer . This is reminiscent of areas blighted by modern volcanic eruptions , where the recovery is led by ferns , which are later replaced by larger angiosperm plants . 
 = = = Marine fossils = = = 
 The mass extinction of marine plankton appears to have been abrupt and right at the K – Pg boundary . Ammonite genera became extinct at or near the K – Pg boundary ; however , there was a smaller and slower extinction of ammonite genera prior to the boundary that was associated with a late Cretaceous marine regression . The gradual extinction of most <unk> bivalves began well before the K – Pg boundary , and a small , gradual reduction in ammonite diversity occurred throughout the very late Cretaceous . Further analysis shows that several processes were in progress in the late Cretaceous seas and partially overlapped in time , then ended with the abrupt mass extinction . The diversity of marine life decreased when the climate near the K @-@ T boundary increased in temperature . The temperature increased about three to four degrees very rapidly between 65 @.@ 4 and 65 @.@ 2 million years ago , which is around the time of the extinction event . Not only did the climate temperature increase , but the water temperate decreased causing a drastic decrease in marine diversity . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The scientific consensus is that the asteroid impact at the K – Pg boundary left tsunami deposits and sediments around the area of the Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico . These deposits have been identified in the La Popa basin in northeastern Mexico , platform carbonates in northeastern Brazil , and Atlantic deep @-@ sea sediments . 
 = = Duration = = 
 The length of time taken for the extinction to occur is a controversial issue , because some theories about the extinction 's causes require a rapid extinction over a relatively short period ( from a few years to a few thousand years ) while others require longer periods . The issue is difficult to resolve because of the Signor – Lipps effect ; that is , the fossil record is so incomplete that most extinct species probably died out long after the most recent fossil that has been found . Scientists have also found very few continuous beds of fossil @-@ bearing rock which cover a time range from several million years before the K – Pg extinction to a few million years after it . The sedimentation rate and thickness of K @-@ Pg clay from three sites suggest short duration of event , perhaps less than ten thousand years . 
 = = Chicxulub asteroid impact = = 
 = = = Evidence for impact = = = 
 In 1980 , a team of researchers consisting of Nobel prize @-@ winning physicist Luis Alvarez , his son geologist Walter Alvarez , and chemists Frank Asaro and Helen Michel discovered that sedimentary layers found all over the world at the Cretaceous – Paleogene boundary contain a concentration of iridium many times greater than normal ( 30 , 160 and 20 times in three sections originally studied ) . Iridium is extremely rare in Earth 's crust because it is a <unk> element , and therefore most of it traveled with the iron as it sank into Earth 's core during planetary differentiation . As iridium remains abundant in most asteroids and comets , the Alvarez team suggested that an asteroid struck the Earth at the time of the K – Pg boundary . There were earlier speculations on the possibility of an impact event , but this was the first hard evidence of an impact . 
 This hypothesis was viewed as radical when first proposed , but additional evidence soon emerged . The boundary clay was found to be full of minute spherules of rock , crystallized from droplets of molten rock formed by the impact . Shocked quartz and other minerals were also identified in the K – Pg boundary . Shocked minerals have their internal structure deformed , and are created by intense pressures such as those associated with nuclear blasts or meteorite impacts . The identification of giant tsunami beds along the Gulf Coast and the Caribbean also provided evidence for impact , and suggested that the impact may have occurred nearby — as did the discovery that the K – Pg boundary became thicker in the southern United States , with meter @-@ thick beds of debris occurring in northern New Mexico . 
 Further research identified the giant Chicxulub crater , buried under Chicxulub on the coast of Yucatán , as the source of the K – Pg boundary clay . Identified in 1990 based on work by geophysicist Glen Penfield in 1978 , the crater is oval , with an average diameter of roughly 180 kilometres ( 110 mi ) , about the size calculated by the Alvarez team . The discovery of the crater — a necessary prediction of the impact hypothesis — provided conclusive evidence for a K – Pg impact , and strengthened the hypothesis that the extinction was caused by an impact . 
 In 2007 , a hypothesis was put forth that argued the impactor that killed the dinosaurs belonged to the Baptistina family of asteroids . Concerns have been raised regarding the reputed link , in part because very few solid observational constraints exist of the asteroid or family . Indeed , it was recently discovered that 298 Baptistina does not share the same chemical signature as the source of the K – Pg impact . Although this finding may make the link between the Baptistina family and K – Pg impactor more difficult to substantiate , it does not preclude the possibility . A 2011 WISE study of reflected light from the asteroids of the family estimated the break @-@ up at 80 Ma , giving it insufficient time to shift orbits and impact the Earth by 66 Ma . 
 In a 2013 paper , Paul <unk> of the Berkeley Geochronology Center reported that the date of the asteroid event is 66 @.@ 043 ± 0 @.@ 011 million years ago , based on argon – argon dating . He further posits that the mass extinction occurred within 32 @,@ 000 years of this date . 
 = = = Effects of impact = = = 
 In March 2010 , an international panel of scientists endorsed the asteroid hypothesis , specifically the Chicxulub impact , as being the cause of the extinction . A team of 41 scientists reviewed 20 years of scientific literature and in so doing also ruled out other theories such as massive volcanism . They had determined that a 10 @-@ to @-@ 15 @-@ kilometre ( 6 @.@ 2 to 9 @.@ 3 mi ) space rock hurtled into Earth at Chicxulub on Mexico 's Yucatán Peninsula . The collision would have released the same energy as 100 <unk> of TNT ( 420 <unk> ) , over a billion times the energy of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . 
 The consequences of the Chicxulub impact were of global extent . Some of these phenomena were brief occurrences that immediately followed the impact , but there were also long @-@ term geochemical and climatic disruptions that were catastrophic to the ecology . 
 The reentry of ejecta into Earth 's atmosphere would include a brief ( hours long ) but intense pulse of infrared radiation , killing exposed organisms . Global firestorms likely resulted from the heat pulse . Recent research indicates that the global debris layer deposited by the impact contained enough soot to suggest that the entire terrestrial biosphere had burned . 
 The impact would have inhibited photosynthesis by creating a dust cloud that blocked sunlight for up to a year . Further , the asteroid struck a region of sulfur @-@ rich carbonate rock , much of which was vaporized , thereby injecting sulfuric acid aerosols into the stratosphere , which might have reduced sunlight reaching the Earth 's surface by more than 50 % , and would have caused rain and ocean water to become acidic . The acidification of the oceans would kill many organisms that build shells from calcium carbonate . At Brazos section , the paleo @-@ sea surface temperature dropped as much as 7 ℃ for decades after the impact . It would take at least ten years for such aerosols to dissipate , and would account for the extinction of plants and phytoplankton , and of organisms dependent on them ( including predatory animals as well as herbivores ) . Some creatures whose food chains were based on detritus would have a reasonable chance of survival . 
 If widespread fires occurred , they would have increased the CO 
 2 content of the atmosphere and caused a temporary greenhouse effect once the dust clouds and aerosol settled , and this would have exterminated the most vulnerable organisms that survived the period immediately after the impact . 
 Most paleontologists now agree that an asteroid did hit the Earth at approximately the end of the Cretaceous , but there is an ongoing dispute whether the impact was the sole cause of the extinctions . 
 = = Alternative hypotheses = = 
 The fact that the extinctions occur at the same time as the Chicxulub asteroid impact strongly supports the impact hypothesis of extinction . However , some scientists continue to dispute the role of the Chicxulub impact in driving the extinction , and to suggest that other events may have contributed to the end @-@ Cretaceous mass extinction . In particular , volcanic eruptions , climate change , sea level change , and other impact events have been suggested to play a role in driving the K – Pg extinction . 
 = = = Deccan Traps = = = 
 Before 2000 , arguments that the Deccan Traps flood basalts caused the extinction were usually linked to the view that the extinction was gradual , as the flood basalt events were thought to have started around 68 Mya and lasted more than 2 million years . The most recent evidence shows that the traps erupted over a period of 800 @,@ 000 years spanning the K – Pg boundary , and therefore may be responsible for the extinction and the delayed biotic recovery thereafter . 
 The Deccan Traps could have caused extinction through several mechanisms , including the release of dust and sulfuric aerosols into the air , which might have blocked sunlight and thereby reduced photosynthesis in plants . In addition , Deccan Trap volcanism might have resulted in carbon dioxide emissions that increased the greenhouse effect when the dust and aerosols cleared from the atmosphere . 
 In the years when the Deccan Traps hypothesis was linked to a slower extinction , Luis Alvarez ( who died in 1988 ) replied that paleontologists were being misled by sparse data . While his assertion was not initially well @-@ received , later intensive field studies of fossil beds lent weight to his claim . Eventually , most paleontologists began to accept the idea that the mass extinctions at the end of the Cretaceous were largely or at least partly due to a massive Earth impact . However , even Walter Alvarez has acknowledged that there were other major changes on Earth even before the impact , such as a drop in sea level and massive volcanic eruptions that produced the Indian Deccan Traps , and these may have contributed to the extinctions . The duration of event was less than 10 ky , and the time span is too short to be explained by Deccan volcanism . Geophysical models and high @-@ precision radiometric dating suggest that the Chicxulub impact could have triggered some of the largest Deccan eruptions , and potentially could have triggered eruptions at active volcanoes anywhere on Earth . 
 = = = Multiple impact event = = = 
 One other crater also appears to have been formed at about the time of the K – Pg boundary . Other crater @-@ like topographic features have also been proposed as impact craters formed in connection with <unk> @-@ Paleogene extinction . This suggests to some the possibility of near @-@ simultaneous multiple impacts , perhaps from a fragmented asteroidal object , similar to the Shoemaker – Levy 9 impact with Jupiter . In addition to the 180 km ( 110 mi ) Chicxulub Crater , there is the 24 km ( 15 mi ) <unk> crater in Ukraine ( 65 @.@ 17 ± 0 @.@ 64 Ma ) , the 20 km ( 12 mi ) <unk> crater in the North Sea ( 59 @.@ 5 ± 14 @.@ 5 Ma ) possibly formed by bolide impact , and the controversial and much larger 600 km ( 370 mi ) Shiva crater . Any other craters that might have formed in the Tethys Ocean would have been obscured by tectonic events like the northward drift of Africa and India . 
 = = = Maastrichtian sea @-@ level regression = = = 
 There is clear evidence that sea levels fell in the final stage of the Cretaceous by more than at any other time in the Mesozoic era . In some Maastrichtian stage rock layers from various parts of the world , the later layers are terrestrial ; earlier layers represent shorelines and the earliest layers represent seabeds . These layers do not show the tilting and distortion associated with mountain building , therefore , the likeliest explanation is a " regression " , that is , a drop in sea level . There is no direct evidence for the cause of the regression , but the explanation currently accepted as most likely is that the mid @-@ ocean ridges became less active and therefore sank under their own weight . 
 A severe regression would have greatly reduced the continental shelf area , which is the most species @-@ rich part of the sea , and therefore could have been enough to cause a marine mass extinction . However research concludes that this change would have been insufficient to cause the observed level of ammonite extinction . The regression would also have caused climate changes , partly by disrupting winds and ocean currents and partly by reducing the Earth 's albedo and therefore increasing global temperatures . 
 Marine regression also resulted in the loss of <unk> seas , such as the Western Interior Seaway of North America . The loss of these seas greatly altered habitats , removing coastal plains that ten million years before had been host to diverse communities such as are found in rocks of the Dinosaur Park Formation . Another consequence was an expansion of freshwater environments , since continental runoff now had longer distances to travel before reaching oceans . While this change was favorable to freshwater vertebrates , those that prefer marine environments , such as sharks , suffered . 
 = = = Multiple causes = = = 
 In a review article , J. David Archibald and David E. <unk> discussed a scenario combining three major postulated causes : volcanism , marine regression , and extraterrestrial impact . In this scenario , terrestrial and marine communities were stressed by the changes in and loss of habitats . Dinosaurs , as the largest vertebrates , were the first affected by environmental changes , and their diversity declined . At the same time , particulate materials from volcanism cooled and dried areas of the globe . Then , an impact event occurred , causing collapses in photosynthesis @-@ based food chains , both in the already @-@ stressed terrestrial food chains and in the marine food chains . The major difference between this hypothesis and the single @-@ cause hypotheses is that its proponents view the suggested single causes as either not sufficient in strength to cause the extinctions or not likely to produce the taxonomic pattern of the extinction . 
 = = Recovery and radiation = = 
 The K – Pg extinction had a profound effect on the evolution of life on Earth . The elimination of dominant Cretaceous groups allowed other organisms to take their place , spurring a remarkable series of adaptive radiations in the Paleogene . The most striking example is the replacement of dinosaurs by mammals . After the K – Pg extinction , mammals evolved rapidly to fill the niches left vacant by the dinosaurs . Within mammalian genera , new species were approximately 9 @.@ 1 % larger after the K – Pg boundary . 
 Other groups also underwent major radiations . Based on molecular sequencing and fossil dating , <unk> appeared to radiate after the K – Pg boundary . They even produced giant , flightless forms , such as the herbivorous <unk> and <unk> , and the predatory <unk> . The extinction of Cretaceous lizards and snakes may have led to the radiation of modern groups such as iguanas , monitor lizards , and boas . On land , giant <unk> and enormous <unk> snakes appeared , and in the seas , giant sea snakes radiated . Teleost fish diversified explosively , filling the niches left vacant by the extinction . Groups appearing in the Paleocene and Eocene include billfish , tunas , eels , and flatfish . Major changes are also seen in Paleogene insect communities . Many groups of ants were present in the Cretaceous , but in the Eocene ants became dominant and diverse , with larger colonies . Butterflies diversified as well , perhaps to take the place of leaf @-@ eating insects wiped out by the extinction . The advanced mound @-@ building termites , Termitidae , also appear to have risen in importance . 
 = Nala ( The Lion King ) = 
 Nala is a fictional lioness , a character who appears in the Disney Lion King franchise . Introduced in the animated film The Lion King in 1994 , Nala subsequently appears as a less prominent character in the film 's sequels The Lion King II : Simba 's Pride ( 1998 ) and The Lion King 1 ½ ( 2004 ) . In the original film , the adult Nala was voiced by American actress Moira Kelly . Young Nala 's speaking voice is provided by actress <unk> Calame , while singers Laura Williams and Sally Dworsky provide the singing voices of young and adult Nala respectively . 
 Nala is introduced as the childhood best friend of Simba , and ultimately becomes his wife by the end of The Lion King . Several years after Simba 's uncle Scar has killed Simba 's father Mufasa and usurped the throne , Nala desperately ventures into the jungle to find help . Upon unexpectedly reuniting with a grown Simba , who she had long been tricked by Scar into presuming dead , Nala encourages him to return to Pride Rock , overthrow his uncle and ultimately become king . As Simba 's queen , Nala has a daughter , Kiara , whose story is explored in The Lion King : Simba 's Pride . 
 Nala is the most significant female character in The Lion King . As the film was inspired by William Shakespeare 's tragedy Hamlet , Nala is considered to be The Lion King 's equivalent of Hamlet 's love interest Ophelia , although differences remain between the two characters . Many early concepts first developed for Nala were eventually abandoned , including a brother and father for the character , as well as her being romantically pursued by Scar . While critical reception towards Nala has been generally mixed – both film and feminist critics complained about the character 's lack of involvement in the story and supposedly submissive demeanor during the song " Can You Feel the Love Tonight " – Kelly 's vocal performance has been praised . 
 Nala appears in the Broadway musical adaptation of the film , first played by singer Heather Headley . The character also appears in the television series The Lion Guard , with Gabrielle Union replacing Kelly as the voice of Nala . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Conception and writing = = = 
 Film critic James Berardinelli identified Nala as The Lion King 's " sole significant female character . " Screenwriter Linda Woolverton conceived Nala " as part of a gradual progression ... which have driven recent public conversation about what young girls should be able to expect from their cinematic role models . " In early versions of the screenplay , Nala has a younger brother named Mheetu , who enjoys accompanying his sister and her best friend Simba on their adventures . Pronounced " me too " , the character 's name alludes to this personality trait . At one point , Simba was supposed to save the cub from a wildebeest stampede , and Nala would eventually become responsible for protecting Mheetu from Simba 's tyrannical uncle Scar . Nala also had a fox friend named Bhati . According to Woolverton , Mheetu and Bhati were eventually written out of the film because their stories were beginning to distract from Simba 's , in addition to the Mheetu @-@ Scar subplot making the film too dark when combined with the death of Simba 's father Mufasa . At one point , Nala also had a father ; the character was similarly abandoned . 
 Because The Lion King was originally conceived as a much more mature and adult @-@ oriented film , Nala was supposed to have been banished from the Pride Lands as punishment for rejecting Scar 's romantic advances . This idea was to have been further explored in Scar 's song " Be Prepared ( Reprise ) " , during which Scar demands that Nala become his queen , but the musical number was ultimately cut from the final film because the scene was considered too " creepy . " Matthew Roulette of <unk> believes that the scene was abandoned because of the characters ' significant age difference . 
 Nala means " gift " in Swahili . The character has a mother , whose name is never mentioned in the film ; however , she is credited as <unk> during the film 's end credits . Candice Russel of the Sun @-@ Sentinel believes that Nala contributes to the film 's love story – " an indispensable factor in Disney cartoon features " – in addition to convincing Simba to return to Pride Rock . It has been observed that , unlike Disney 's three previous animated efforts ( The Little Mermaid ( 1989 ) , Beauty and the Beast ( 1991 ) and Aladdin ( 1992 ) , the romantic relationship between Nala and Simba is not main plot of the film . Ella Ceron of Thought Catalog observed that " At [ Simba 's ] return , she 's not exactly the friendliest little kitten , either ... but is willing to overlook her own hurt ego in the spirit of their friendship . She believes in Simba , and doesn ’ t understand why he wouldn ’ t want to fight for his right to rule . " 
 = = = Voice and music = = = 
 The speaking voice of adult Nala is provided by American actress Moira Kelly . Kelly was first informed that Disney was scheduling auditions for the role of Nala by her agent . Despite not having been the directors ' first choice for the role initially , Kelly was allowed to audition nonetheless because the filmmakers had been longing to hear different voices . Kelly believes that the directors were searching for a specific " quality of voice ... a sort of authoritative voice but with a lot of warmth " to compliment Nala 's sensible yet nurturing personality . After a series of callbacks , during which Kelly returned to Disney several times to read the character 's lines , the final decision eventually came down to be between Kelly and one other actress . It was not until several months after her audition that Kelly would finally be contacted and offered the part ; Disney 's initial first choice for the role remains undisclosed . Actor Matthew Broderick , voice of Simba , had already begun recording alongside another actress who had been cast as Nala before that actress was eventually replaced with Kelly . Broderick was not informed about his original co @-@ star being recast , and only learned that Nala was actually voiced by Kelly at the film 's premiere . 
 The film 's entire recording process took approximately three years to complete , during which Kelly 's sessions were held in both the United States and Canada , while her co @-@ stars Broderick and Jeremy Irons , voice of Scar , were recording in the United States and England , respectively . Each main cast member recorded their dialogue separately , which took Kelly some time to get used to because she had grown accustomed to working with several other actors at a time on the sets of live @-@ action films . For The Lion King , a director would often take the place of another actor for Kelly to act opposite of . Vocally , Kelly decided to approach the role as though she were reading to a child , explaining , " it 's kind of fun to play with different voices and try to color the lines for the child so they can imagine it more fully " , which she admitted is different than how the actress would approach a live @-@ action role . Because Nala is a " very straight character " , determining what kind of voice she would use for her was not a particularly challenging task . Additionally , the filmmakers would also film Kelly 's performances in order to incorporate her own facial expressions into her character 's design , the process of which impressed the actress . In her film debut , actress <unk> Calame voices young Nala . According to Calame 's official website , Nala remains the actress ' " biggest role to date " . A classically trained pianist and chorister , Laura Williams provides the singing voice of young Nala , which can be heard in the song " I Just Can 't Wait to Be King " ; the singer was 15 years old at the time . Meanwhile , singer @-@ songwriter Sally Dworsky provides the singing voice of adult Nala , which is heard during the song " Can You Feel the Love Tonight " . The film 's love theme , " Can You Feel the Love Tonight " ' s lyrics were re @-@ written approximately 15 times , according to lyricist Tim Rice , who wrote the song alongside composer Elton John . At one point , the producers wanted the song to be a comical duet performed by supporting characters Timon and Pumbaa , despite the fact that John had originally composed the song with Nala and Simba in mind . However , John lobbied in favor of " Can You Feel the Love Tonight " being a love song performed as a duet by Nala and Simba , with which the filmmakers ultimately agreed . 
 It is rare for the cast of a film to reprise their respective roles in its sequel , but The Lion King 's sequels hold the distinction of having the majority of its original cast return , including Kelly . When asked by Disney if she was interested in reprising her role as Nala in The Lion King II : Simba 's Pride , Kelly immediately accepted , joking , " Sure , you wanna do a third , fourth , fifth ? I 'm right there " . In the case of The Lion King 1 ½ , it took the actress only a few days to record her character 's dialogue due to Nala 's comparatively smaller role in the film ; much of Nala 's footage from the first film was simply reused accordingly . Elton John 's official website cites Kelly among the film 's cast of actors who " would grace any red carpet . " Kelly 's performance as Nala is responsible for introducing the actress to a younger audience . Previously , she had been better known for appearing in more adult @-@ oriented live @-@ action films at that time . In 2011 , Kelly revealed that fans of the film rarely recognize her speaking voice as the voice of Nala , although Robert DeSalvo of <unk> claims that the actress " has a ... distinctive voice that The Lion King fans will instantly recognize as the voice of adult Nala . " 
 = = Characterization and themes = = 
 A straight woman character , Kelly described Nala as a sensible and nurturing yet authoritative character , while Amber Leab of Bitch Flicks described her as strong , independent and intelligent . According to Oh My Disney , Nala serves as " the proverbial glue that keeps The Lion King together " , from whose perspective the audience watches the film because she " says EXACTLY what we ’ re thinking " . Occupying the role of the film 's female lead , Nala is The Lion King 's most important female character , who contributes to the film 's " small romance element " . Often identified as the film 's <unk> , Taylor Orci of The Atlantic felt that " Nala is really the agent of change in The Lion King " , dismissing Simba as a " rich , lazy boyfriend . " Leab observed that The Lion King 's male characters tend to " take the center stage " while " female characters take a backseat to the action . " Lenka <unk> of Masaryk University wrote in her thesis " 1990s Hollywood Break @-@ Away Hits : A Feminist Perspective " that she was not particularly surprised by the film 's lack of strong roles for women because of its Shakespearean source material , dubbing the film " an old traditional fairy tale with all its traditional features " , including patriarchy and monarchism . Writing for the University of Waterloo 's Kinema , Vicky Wong believes that Nala reinforces the film 's " take your place " motif , reminding main character Simba of his responsibilities . In his book <unk> Stories , Framing Culture : Traditional Story and <unk> in Children 's Literature , author John Stephens credits Nala with teaching Simba about responsibility – " the lesson the hero must learn before he can become an adult " . 
 Including Nala , The Lion King has only three major female characters in comparison to the film 's total of nine male ones . Shepherd University 's Emmylou Allen observed that Nala is introduced " as a dominating young girl " who ultimately matures into " a strong woman " by the film 's conclusion . Mouse Morality : The Rhetoric of Disney Animated Film author Annalee R. Ward wrote that Nala 's role in The Lion King reflected " a 1990s feminist reversal " . In her book Biblical Allusions , author Lindsay Bacher acknowledged that Nala is often depicted as a stronger and more responsible character than Simba , despite observations that The Lion King 's female characters lack agency . Leab identified Nala as Simba 's " equal " who is " a more naturally sound leader throughout the film , while Simba tends to be comparatively a bit more immature and in need of multiple characters propelling him into responsible / rightful action . " Physically , Nala is also a stronger and more skilled fighter than Simba , proven by the character 's ability to overwhelm him in battle , which is reminiscent " of the physical power of lionesses in the real nature . " However , as strong as she is , Nala has little impact elsewhere ; author Brian K. Pennington wrote in his book Teaching Religion and Violence that " Nala 's assertions of gender equality are clearly groundless , since only a male lion can stop Scar . " New York 's David <unk> dismissed Nala 's athleticism as nothing more than Disney 's attempt to " disguise [ the film 's ] essential boss @-@ daddy ethos . " Bacher believes that had The Lion King featured Nala as the Pride Lands ' hero as opposed to Simba , the film could have avoided having a " patriarchal structure . " Leab concluded that " the main and most problematic aspects of the film " remain that The Lion King " boils down to the fact that an entire group of strong female characters are unable to confront a single male oppressor ; to do so , they need to be led by a dominant male . " Leab continued , " It almost sucks more that Nala is such a strong ... female character and still ends up constrained by this plot device " , accusing the film of depicting women as weak . 
 Alongside Faline from Bambi ( 1942 ) and Maid Marian from Robin Hood ( 1973 ) added , Nala belongs to a trio of Disney heroines who , after having been separated from their love interests for several years , eventually reunite with them . Stephens believes that Nala and Simba 's separation allows the characters to fall in love " properly " upon reuniting as young adults . Because The Lion King is loosely based on William Shakespeare 's tragedy Hamlet , Nala is considered to be the film 's " representative " of the Hamlet character Ophelia , Hamlet 's love interest . Both characters ' relationships with and opinions of their love interests are similar , however , there are several differences between the two women . While identifying Nala as " the closest character in The Lion King to Ophelia , " Shepherd University 's Emmylou Allen acknowledged in her article " Shakespeare in the Pride Lands " that " their similarities are not as great as their contrasts . " Unlike Ophelia , Nala does not succumb to insanity , nor does she eventually die . Instead , Nala establishes herself as " a physically powerful ally " by encouraging Simba to return to Pride Rock , and helping the character overthrow Scar . Additionally , Nala is a more stubborn character than Ophelia , the latter of whom is quite passive and obedient . While Ophelia is raised by a single father , Nala is raised solely by her mother , which inspired Allen to believe that Nala is a manifestation of how Ophelia would have turned out had she been raised by a woman instead of a man , concluding , " Nala is able to show the potential that Ophelia could have had . " . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Film and television = = = 
 A young Nala debuted in The Lion King ( 1994 ) as the best friend of Simba , who she often accompanies on his adventures throughout the Pride Lands . Simba invites Nala to visit the forbidden Elephant Graveyard with him , despite his father Mufasa 's orders . The cubs are soon ambushed by Shenzi , Banzai and Ed , a trio of hyenas chosen by Simba 's treacherous uncle Scar to kill Simba in order to improve his own chances of becoming king , but are ultimately rescued by Mufasa . The following day , however , Nala is devastated to learn from Scar that both Simba and Mufasa have perished during a wildebeest stampede . With both Simba and Mufasa dead , Scar usurps the throne and becomes king . Several years into Scar 's tyrannical rule , which has left the kingdom barren and starving , a desperate Nala ventures into the jungle in search of help , where she attempts to eat a warthog named Pumbaa ; little does she know that the warthog is actually a friend of Simba 's , who is in fact alive and well . While defending Pumbaa from Nala , Simba recognizes Nala , and the two finally reunite only to argue over why Simba is refusing to face his responsibilities and return to Pride Rock . Upon learning that Simba has eventually decided to return to Pride Rock and face Scar , Nala travels back to the Pride Lands to assist him . Surprised to find Simba alive , Scar forces his guilt @-@ ridden nephew to " admit " to the pride that he is responsible for Mufasa 's death , which was in fact caused by Scar himself by throwing Mufasa off a cliff into the stampede . Upon learning the truth , Simba forces his uncle to admit his crime to the pride , and a battle ensues between the pride and Scar 's army of hyenas . Simba eventually defeats Scar and becomes king , with Nala ultimately becoming his queen . 
 In the film 's first direct @-@ to @-@ video sequel The Lion King II : Simba 's Pride ( 1998 ) , Nala appears in a less prominent role as Queen of the Pride Lands and mother of Kiara , the spirited daughter of her and Simba . Nala observes that Kiara , of whom Simba is very protective , has inherited her father 's rebellious personality and love of adventure . When Kiara befriends Zira 's son Kovu , a young lion from an exiled pride of Scar 's followers known as the Outsiders , Nala is much more tolerant of their relationship than Simba , and convinces him to offer Kovu a chance to prove himself trustworthy . In The Lion King 1 ½ ( 2004 ) , which focuses instead on Timon and Pumbaa 's friendship , Nala 's role is virtually identical to that of her appearance in The Lion King because filmmakers simply reused most of the character 's footage from the first film . 
 Voiced by actress Gabrielle Union , Nala reprises her role as Queen of the Pride Lands in the television series The Lion Guard , the 2016 premiere of which was preceded by the made @-@ for @-@ television film The Lion Guard : Return of the Roar ( 2015 ) . Set within the same time frame as The Lion King II : Simba 's Pride , the show revolves around Nala and Simba 's son Kion who , being their second @-@ born cub after Kiara , has been appointed The Lion Guard responsible for protecting the Pride Lands . Although a fan of the Lion King franchise , Union avoided watching previous Lion King films in preparation for the role because she wanted to " put [ her ] own stamp " on the character . 
 = = = Musical = = = 
 In the Broadway musical adaptation of The Lion King , the role of Nala was originated by Trinidadian @-@ American singer Heather Headley . Her Broadway debut , at first auditioning for the role proved a challenge for the singer due to her Ragtime contract , which her agent was eventually successful in getting her released from . Director Julie Taymor felt that Nala 's journey in the film was underdeveloped and among the story 's weaker elements , and thus decided to " strengthen " the character 's narrative for Broadway . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception towards Nala has been generally mixed ; both film and feminist critics have accused the film of lacking empowering roles for female characters , including Nala . James Berardinelli of ReelViews appreciated the fact that " after three animated motion pictures centered upon the love of two people from different worlds " , the love story between Nala and Simba has been relegated to that of " a subplot . " Desson Howe of The Washington Post advised parents to remind their daughters that despite the fact that Nala " pads in the supportive shadows , awaiting her inevitable marriage to Simba , it doesn 't mean human girls can 't grow up to be monarchs too . " 
 Nala 's role and demeanor during the film 's romantic " Can You Feel the Love Tonight " sequence has drawn criticism in regards to her " submissive behaviour " . The New York Times ' Janet Maslin cited the film 's lack of a strong heroine among its weaknesses , dismissing Nala and Simba 's interaction throughout " Can You Feel the Love Tonight " as " obligatory " and " gratuitous " . Joel W. Martin wrote in the Journal of Religion and Film , " One song later , [ Nala and Simba ] have fallen in love . Playing one day , they literally tumble down a hillside in the jungle , and he ends up on top of her . This time , she does not bear her teeth , but instead , shows ' bedroom eyes ' " . Martin ultimately accused the scene 's " reversal of positions " of " establish [ ing ] male dominance . " Criticizing the film for " being merely distracting when it could have been both meaningful and instructive " , Robert <unk> of Slant Magazine wrote , " Small potatoes , then , when Simba 's former childhood friend and betrothed queen Nala ... unexpectedly reappears in his duty @-@ free , protein @-@ rich life , demanding he return to his kingly responsibilities and coaxing the lion to sleep tonight with arguably the most blatant ' fuck me now ' face to ever appear in a PG @-@ rated film . " 
 However , the character has garnered positive reviews as well . Sara Franks @-@ Allen of ScreenCrush wrote that " If being a Disney princess is about being a good role model for little girls , then Nala has a lot in her favor " , elaborating , " She 's strong enough to take down Simba , ventures out on her own to find help for her pride and calls Simba out for ignoring his responsibilities . " Meanwhile , Ella Ceron of Thought Catalog ranked Nala 14th on her list of " The 16 Most Awesome Female Characters From Disney Movies " . Responsible for introducing the seasoned actress to a younger audience , Kelly 's vocal performance as Nala has garnered critical acclaim . Writing for The Washington Post , Desson Howe hailed Kelly 's voice acting as " terrific . " Jeremy Gerard of Variety commended Kelly for voicing the character " beautifully " . PopSugar ranked Kelly among the website 's " Favorite Animated Voices " , writing , " there are a lot of great voices in Disney 's The Lion King ... but Moira Kelly has a unique quality to her voice , and I remember reveling in it as a youngster anytime the adult Nala was on the screen . " Official Disney Blogs published an article entitled " We All Thought it … But Nala Actually Said It " , which cites the character 's most revered quotes . The blog also ranked Nala eighth on the website 's " Definitive Ranking of Disney Cats " list . In a 2014 interview , actor Eddie Redmayne admitted that Nala was his first " celebrity crush " , having been specifically attracted to the character 's " sweet " face and singing voice , referring to the experience as his " sexual awakening " . 
 = Born This Way : The Remix = 
 Born This Way : The Remix is the second remix album by American recording artist Lady Gaga , released on November 18 , 2011 by Interscope . This album contains remixes of multiple songs off of Gaga 's second studio album , Born This Way . It was also released as part of the Born This Way : The Collection , a special edition release including the 17 @-@ track version of Gaga 's second studio album and a DVD release of the HBO concert special Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden . Most of the remixes had been available in the remix EPs released alongside each single from Born This Way . Musically , the album is an electronic and dance record ; there are also influences of Europop , techno and dubstep within the composition . 
 Critics gave mixed reviews for the album , with their general complaint being that the release was unnecessary . Most of them , however , complimented The Weeknd , Twin Shadow and <unk> LG 's remixes . It earned an overall score of 57 out of 100 , on review aggregator site Metacritic . Commercially , Born This Way : The Remix achieved minor success , entering the charts in ten countries . Its highest position was attained in Japan , where it reached top @-@ twenty , while in the United States , it failed to reach the top @-@ 100 of the Billboard 200 albums chart . 
 = = Background = = 
 In October 2011 , Lady Gaga announced plans to release a remix album titled Born This Way : The Remix . The album contains fourteen remixes of tracks from her second studio album , Born This Way , only seven of which are unreleased . Born This Way : The Remix was also released as part of Born This Way : The Collection , a special edition release including the 17 @-@ track version of Gaga 's second studio album and a DVD release of the HBO concert special Lady Gaga Presents the Monster Ball Tour : At Madison Square Garden . The remixers featured for the songs on the album include mainly techno musicians like Sultan & Ned Shepard , electropop producers like Goldfrapp and Metronomy , indie rock upstarts like Twin Shadow and Two Door Cinema Club , and remixer The Weeknd . 
 Most of the remixes had been available in the remix EPs released alongside each single from Born This Way . The first remix commissioned was the Twin Shadow remix of " Born This Way " , released in March 2011 . This was followed by the Goldfrapp remix of " Judas " in May 2011 , which was released to Gaga 's YouTube channel . The Wild Beasts remix of " You and I " was released in August 2011 , and the proceeds from the sales helped to raise awareness to the ways people can support independent labels that lost stock in the PIAS Recordings UK warehouse fire . 
 Regarding the inspiration behind the remix , Hayden Thorpe from Wild Beasts group told The Guardian : " The <unk> of this match was perhaps what compelled us to take it on . Gaga in many ways is the epitome of what we are not . She is the butcher to our butter knife . The essential thrill is always to keep eluding what is expected of us and what we expect of ourselves . " The last of the remix to be released was The Weeknd 's take on " Marry the Night " which featured Illangelo , thus earning him a co @-@ producer credit on it . 
 = = Composition = = 
 The album opens with the Zedd remix of " Born This Way " which begins with some minimalist beat followed by loud synths , and consists of a techno breakdown . The Goldfrapp remix of " Judas " follows as the second track ; the remix consists of industrial music and Gaga 's vocals are converted to a slow , low @-@ key moan making it almost like a man 's voice . Foster the People remixed " The Edge of Glory " and introduced a new break down from the 3 : 20 time sequence . Producers The Weeknd and Illangelo kept the overall feel of " Marry the Night " intact , but introduced vocals by Abel <unk> of The Weeknd and a steely looping drum machine . Jason Lipshultz from Billboard described the addition as " directly conflict [ ing ] with Gaga 's M.O. But like so many of these remixes , the Weeknd marries his vision of the song to Gaga 's gorgeous voice without losing the original 's integrity . " <unk> 's voice can be heard in spots on the song , adding an occasional " Ooh yeah " and a moan ; ultimately at the 2 : 20 mark , the song collapses on itself and ditches the percussion for infrequent piano notes . The remix of " Black Jesus + Amen Fashion " retains the most of the composition of its original counterpart , although it introduces a new synth by Michael Woods , thus turning it into a rave @-@ trance track . The Horrors remix of Born This Way album track " Bloody Mary " consisted of Gaga 's vocals fading in and out of sequence . " Scheiße " featured influences from The Knife song " Heartbeats " ( 2003 ) as well as <unk> ' " We Like to Party " ( 1999 ) . " Electric Chapel " ' s composition is completely changed by Two Door Cinema , altering the dark mood of the song to a fun and engaging one . The Metronomy remix of " You and I " varies little from its original equivalent , while dubstep is introduced in the Hurts remix of " Judas " , with a different conclusion . Sultan & Ned Shepard 's remix of " The Edge of Glory " , the last track on the album , features pumping drums and slinking synths . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 After its release , Born This Way : The Remix received mixed reviews from critics . It earned an overall score of 57 out of 100 , on review aggregator site Metacritic . Jason Lipshultz from Billboard commented that the album did not re @-@ invent anything new in terms of remix composition , but instead " gives less recognizable artists a platform to tinker with these complex pop schemes . " He added that the album is not essential listening for non @-@ Gaga diehards , " but electronica fans who have yet to drink the Mother Monster <unk> @-@ aid will find plenty of <unk> produced club tracks to groove to . The album is a great avenue for fans to digest new versions of their favorite songs of the year , as well as discover artists that are trying to command audiences the way Gaga so masterfully does . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic gave the album three out of five stars , commenting that " some remixes take considerable liberty , ditching verses or hooks , whatever catches their fancy . So , it ’ s a remix album not for <unk> travelers but rather the hardcore Little Monsters , the kind who love every gesture grand or small from Gaga , but it also displays enough imagination to appeal to those listeners who fall into neither camp and are only looking for some darkly elastic dance . " Harley Brown of Consequence of Sound website was impressed with the diversity of remixes on the album , prompting him to comment that " just in time for the holiday season , there ’ s something for everyone on Born This Way : The Remix . And , unlike many remix albums featuring one song reworked again and again , this Remix comprises a diverse tracklist to match the diverse list of remixers . " 
 Jody Rosen from Rolling Stone gave a mixed review of the album , wondering why the remix album was necessary to be released in the first place . She nevertheless added that " [ t ] he album has some diverting moments . Goldfrapp 's down @-@ tempo ' Judas ' is less a remix than a smart cover , and the Weeknd and Illangelo re @-@ imagine ' Marry the Night ' as a strobe @-@ y , atmospheric R & B epic . But there are two or three duds for each winner — like the bludgeoning ' Scheiße ' , a gratuitous exercise that strives to make a dance @-@ floor thumper out of a song that was born that way . " Rosen 's view was shared by Paul Rice from Slant Magazine , who gave the album a rating of two out of five stars . Rice 's main complaint was that " [ c ] <unk> artists cry out for the remix treatment more than others , usually those whose vocal talents are relatively straightforward and could benefit from the extra fuss . " He added that Gaga was not such an artist and that the original Born This Way album " in particular , is too big and untamed , full of too many of its own references and styles , from Springsteen to Madonna . As such , it 's best enjoyed on its own flawed , bombastic terms . " Nick Levine , reviewing the album for BBC Music felt that most of the tracks are already available as digital downloads and CD singles , " so it 's easy to dismiss Born This Way : The Remix as inessential and , yes , a cash @-@ in . But taken as a whole , this release offers enough revelations to suggest the original album is worth revisiting . That additional purpose , whether intentional or not , feels at least partly fulfilled . " Levine complimented The Weeknd and Twin Shadow 's remixes , while criticizing Foster the People and Sultan & Ned Shepard for their predictable remixes . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In the United Kingdom , Born This Way : The Remix entered the UK Albums Chart at number 77 , for the issue dated December 12 , 2011 . In Japan , the album sold 12 @,@ 120 copies in its first week , and debuted at number 14 on the Japanese Albums Chart . In its second week , the album fell down to number 19 while selling 6 @,@ 650 copies . It has been certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan ( RIAJ ) for shipment of 100 @,@ 000 copies . In the United States , the album debuted outside the top 100 of the Billboard 200 albums chart , at number 105 , while debuting at number three on the Dance / Electronic Albums chart . As of April 2016 , Born This Way : The Remix has sold 62 @,@ 000 copies in the US according to Nielsen SoundScan . Other nations where the album attained top @-@ 100 positions included Italy , France and Spain . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits and personnel adapted as per Born This Way : The Remix liner notes and as per Allmusic . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Franz Burgmeier = 
 Franz Burgmeier ( born 7 April 1982 ) is a Liechtenstein footballer , who plays as a midfielder for Vaduz in the Swiss Super League . Born in Triesen , Burgmeier was a burgeoning footballer and keen skier , until he gave up the latter sport at 16 following a serious injury . Having been a youth player for Triesen , he started his professional career with Vaduz . Burgmeier won several Liechtensteiner Cups with Vaduz , who were promoted to the Swiss Challenge League in 2001 , and played in the UEFA Cup . After two unsuccessful attempts to win promotion to the Swiss Super League , Burgmeier left for Aarau in 2005 . He spent only one season with Aarau before a move to the previous season 's runners @-@ up Basel in 2006 . His two seasons with Basel were broken up by a loan spell with Thun , before he moved to England with Darlington in August 2008 , where he played for one year . 
 Burgmeier has won 99 caps and scored nine goals for his country . He is a right @-@ footed player who is either a left midfielder or left back , with the ability to deliver a good cross . He made his international debut in 2001 against Spain and three years later scored one of the goals that helped secure his country 's first point in World Cup qualification matches . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Burgmeier was born in Triesen , Liechtenstein , a small town with a population of 4 @,@ 500 , close to the border with Switzerland . He is the younger son of Heinz and <unk> , following Patrick Burgmeier , who played football for Vaduz and USV Eschen / Mauren . From a young age , Franz played both football and skied . He played for the Liechtenstein youth team in Swiss competitions from ages 11 to 16 , winning the championship when he was 13 . However , at 16 , a knee injury , which he suffered while skiing , nearly ended his football career and prompted him to stop the former sport . 
 Burgmeier has a girlfriend , Monica , who lives in Switzerland . She also plays football , as a full back , in National League B. 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Vaduz = = = 
 Burgmeier started out as a youth at Triesen before moving to Vaduz in 2000 . Although based in his home country , like all Liechtenstein clubs Vaduz played league football in Switzerland — at the time in the third tier — but also competed in the Liechtenstein Football Cup . In Burgmeier 's first season the team won promotion to the Challenge League and won the Liechtenstein Cup with a 9 – 0 defeat against <unk> in the final . He scored his first goal at the higher level on 31 July 2001 , in a postponed game from the first round of the season , which finished in a 4 – 1 victory against Thun . However , Vaduz finished in 11th place in the Fall Season , before results improved and they finished in second place in the Final Table , avoiding being relegated . The team also successfully defended their Liechtenstein Cup defeating USV Eschen / Mauren 6 – 1 in the final . 
 Vaduz 's success in their nation 's cup ensured they gained access to the UEFA Cup , and in August 2002 , Burgmeier scored his first European goal during a 1 – 1 with Livingston , the Scottish side 's first game in Europe . In the second leg , Vaduz had a late goal disallowed during a 0 – 0 , and so they went out in the qualifying round for the third successive year , losing on the away goals rule . Vaduz topped the Fall Season table that season , but failed to win promotion to the Swiss Super League after finishing fourth in the Final League . Their failure was offset with another victory in the Liechtenstein Cup , this time defeating <unk> in the final . 
 In June 2003 , he was set to join St. Gallen ; however , the deal never went through because the Swiss side could not afford the transfer fee . Instead he started with Vaduz , who came closer to gaining promotion but were again unsuccessful , after they lost in the promotion – relegation play @-@ off match . Burgmeier scored one of the goals in the second leg against Neuchâtel <unk> , but <unk> M <unk> scored to ensure Neuchâtel won over the two legs , and Vaduz stayed in the Challenge League . Despite his side defending their Liechtenstein Cup , Burgmeier missed the final . 
 However , their cup success helped Vaduz to another UEFA Cup , which resulted in their first win in the competition with a 4 – 2 aggregate victory against FAI Cup @-@ holders Longford Town in July 2004 . Burgmeier netted his second European goal during the ties , during the 3 – 2 second @-@ leg victory , before they were defeated in the second qualifying round to Belgian @-@ side Beveren , during which Burgmeier was injured forcing him to undergo a knee operation and miss the first month of the league season . Vaduz repeated their efforts domestically , defeating USV Eschen / Mauren in the cup and reaching the promotion play @-@ off game . However , they were defeated by Schaffhausen and were left with only ten players on secure contracts for the following season . Burgmeier himself left Vaduz after five years with the club , during which he played 115 league games and scored 27 goals . 
 = = = Aarau = = = 
 Burgmeier , instead , moved to Aarau in Switzerland . His debut came in a 2 – 0 league defeat to Thun , before he was substituted near the end of the second half . Aarau were in the Super League , and finished seventh in Burgmeier 's only season with the club , in which he played 35 league games . His only league goal came in the second round of matches against St. Gallen , but he also scored in both the first two rounds of the Swiss Cup — his first games in the cup since Vaduz were not eligible for the competition — before they were eliminated in the quarter @-@ finals on penalties . His form with Aarau won Burgmeier the Liechtensteiner Footballer of the Year award , one point ahead of fellow international Mario Frick , and also earned him a move to Basel , for whom he signed a three @-@ year contract . 
 = = = Basel = = = 
 Burgmeier 's first role with Basel was to play in the <unk> as they defeated German @-@ side FC Köln 2 – 1 , to share the trophy with Zürich . Basel had finished the previous season as runners @-@ up in the league to Zürich on goal difference and so qualified for the following season 's UEFA Cup . Burgmeier made his Basel debut in the competition as they defeated Kazakhstan 's <unk> 3 – 1 on 13 July , before he was replaced by Scott Chipperfield . The second leg ended in a draw , sending Basel through . The second qualifying round draw gave Burgmeier a chance to return to Vaduz . He was a substitute in both games as his new team won on away goals . They went on to qualify for the group stages , in which they finished bottom of their division , with two points from four games . Burgmeier scored his first goal for his new club in a 4 – 2 away defeat against Sion , but again the side only ranked in the Championship behind Zürich , this time by one point . Their disappointment was offset by an extra time victory over <unk> in the final of the Swiss Cup . 
 Burgmeier injured his ankle at the start of the 2007 – 08 season , and after playing only four league games , Thun signed him on a six @-@ month loan deal in January 2008 . He played 17 times for Thun , who finished bottom of the Super League . Thun were also knocked out of the Swiss Cup by Burgmeier 's main employers in the semi @-@ finals . On 13 July 2008 , his contract with Basel was terminated early to allow him to find himself a new club after just 23 league appearances because he was seen as surplus to requirements by manager Christian Gross . 
 = = = Darlington = = = 
 While playing for Liechtenstein against England in a 2004 European Championships qualifying match at Old Trafford in 2003 , Burgmeier was spotted by Max Houghton . Although Liechtenstein lost 2 – 0 , Houghton was impressed by Burgmeier 's stamina and effort . When Burgmeier was released by Basel in 2008 , Houghton , then 12 years old , suggested to his grandfather , George Houghton , who was chairman of English side Darlington that he should be given a trial . Following a successful trial , Burgmeier , who was keen to move abroad , was signed by the League Two @-@ side on a one @-@ year contract at the end of August 2008 to become the first Liechtensteiner to play in England . 
 Burgmeier made his debut on 23 August , in a 2 – 1 defeat to Gillingham at The Darlington Arena . He scored his first goal for Darlington in a 2 – 1 win against Port Vale on 13 September . Manager Dave Penney praised Burgmeier for the start he made to the club , both as a goal scorer and creator , which also helped him to play his way into the affections of the club 's supporters . When Burgmeier won his 49th cap for Liechtenstein against Wales , it was his fourth in the two months since he joined Darlington . It took him past the club record three caps of Canadian Jason de Vos and New Zealander Adrian Webster , with a coach @-@ load of Darlington fans there to see him play at the Millennium Stadium . His next cap clashed with Darlington 's FA Cup first round replay with Conference North @-@ side Droylsden , in which they were defeated . 
 Darlington 's promotion campaign was dealt a blow in February 2009 , when club chairman George Houghton placed the club in administration . As a result , the club were deducted 10 points , a penalty from which they could not recover finally finishing 12th . Burgmeier finished with two goals during the season having played 35 games , but like the rest of the playing squad , was told he could find a new club by Darlington 's administrators . 
 = = = Return to Vaduz = = = 
 Following Darlington 's financial problems , Burgmeier returned home to Liechtenstein and signed with his former club Vaduz on a one @-@ year contract after the end of the 2008 – 09 season . 
 = = International career = = 
 Burgmeier is a Liechtenstein international who made his debut in a 2002 World Cup qualifier against Spain on 5 September 2001 . It was the penultimate game of the side 's qualifying campaign , in which they lost all eight games without scoring a goal . Despite starting the qualifying round for 2004 European Championships with a 1 – 1 draw with Macedonia , Liechtenstein lost their remaining games to finish bottom of their group . Burgmeier featured in seven of the qualification matches . 
 Burgmeier scored his first international goal in April 2003 in a friendly against Saudi Arabia to give Liechtenstein a 1 – 0 victory . On 10 October 2004 , he scored his first competitive international goal as he helped Liechtenstein to record their first point in World Cup qualification matches . He and Thomas Beck scored Liechtenstein 's goals in a 2 – 2 with Portugal at the <unk> Stadion . Burgmeier describes the draw as the " biggest moment of my career " . Three days later , Burgmeier scored two more goals as Liechtenstein earned their first World Cup win with a 4 – 0 victory against Luxembourg . They followed it up with a 0 – 0 draw against Slovakia and another victory over Luxembourg , to finish the qualifying campaign with eight points from their 12 matches . Burgmeier played in nine games . 
 Liechtenstein won another two games in their following qualifying campaign — for the 2008 European Championships . They had started with four defeats , in the last of which Burgmeier scored a consolation goal in a 4 – 1 win for Northern Ireland . A 1 – 0 victory against Latvia and a draw with Iceland followed , but Liechtenstein picked up only seven points to finish bottom of their group , with Burgmeier playing in all but one game . 
 Having earned eight points during the 2006 World Cup qualification games , Burgmeier said the target in the 2010 campaign was to pick up " as many points as possible " , adding , " For us , the target is not to qualify but to just take each game as it comes , enjoy the matches , and try and do as well as possible . " He won his 50th cap in a 4 – 0 friendly defeat to Slovakia on 19 November 2008 . Burgmeier has scored seven goals and picked up a number of opposition shirts which he plans to put in a hall of fame . 
 On 15 November 2014 , he scored his second Euro qualifier and winning goal over Moldova . 
 = = = International goals = = = 
 Scores and results list Liechtenstein 's goal tally first . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of 28 September 2015 . 
 = = = International = = = 
 As of 28 September 2015 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Vaduz 
 Swiss Challenge League ( 1 ) : 2013 – 14 
 Liechtensteiner Cup ( 11 ) : 2000 – 01 , 2001 – 02 , 2002 – 03 , 2003 – 04 , 2004 – 05 , 2009 – 10 , 2010 – 11 , 2012 – 13 , 2013 – 14 , 2014 – 15 , 2015 – 16 
 Basel 
 <unk> ( 1 ) : 2005 – 06 ( shared ) 
 Swiss Cup ( 1 ) : 2006 – 07 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 Liechtensteiner Footballer of the Year ( 1 ) : 2005 – 06 
 = S Club 7 = 
 S Club 7 are an English pop group created by former Spice Girls manager Simon Fuller consisting of members Tina Barrett , Paul Cattermole , Rachel Stevens , Jo O 'Meara , Hannah Spearritt , Bradley McIntosh , and Jon Lee . The group was formed in 1998 and quickly rose to fame by starring in their own BBC television series , Miami 7 . In their five years together , S Club 7 had four UK number @-@ one singles , one UK number @-@ one album , and a string of hits throughout Europe , including a top @-@ ten single in the United States , Asia , Latin America and Africa . They recorded four studio albums , released 11 singles and went on to sell over 10 million albums worldwide . Their first album , S Club ( 1999 ) , had a strong 1990s pop sound , similar to many artists of their time . However , through the course of their career , their musical approach changed to a more dance and R & B sound which is heard mostly in their final album , Seeing Double ( 2002 ) . 
 The concept and brand of the group was created by Simon Fuller , also their manager through 19 Entertainment ; they were signed to Polydor Records . Their show lasted four series and saw the group travel across the United States , eventually ending up in Barcelona . It became popular in 100 different countries where the show was watched by over 90 million viewers . The show , which was a children 's sitcom , often mirrored real @-@ life events which had occurred in S Club , including the relationship of Spearritt and Cattermole , as well as Cattermole 's eventual departure from the group . As well as the popularity of their television series , S Club 7 won two BRIT Awards — in 2000 for British breakthrough act and in 2002 , for best British single . In 2001 , the group earned the Record of the Year award . Their song " Reach " was used in the arcade dance game <unk> in " EZ 2 Dancer UK Move " . Cattermole departed the group in 2002 , citing " creative differences " , and the group changed their name from S Club 7 to simply S Club . Their penultimate single reached number five in the UK charts , and their final album failed to make the top ten . Following Cattermole 's departure , the group fought many rumours presuming that they were about to split . However , on 21 April 2003 , during a live onstage performance , S Club announced that they were to disband . 
 After a five @-@ year split , it was announced in October 2008 that O 'Meara , Cattermole , and McIntosh were to perform a mini @-@ reunion tour . The tour consisted of a series of university and nightclub gigs , where they performed a set list consisting of a selection of songs from their greatest hits album . After O 'Meara , Cattermole and McIntosh reunited , rumours persisted that all the original members would reunite . In October 2014 , it was confirmed that the original lineup would reunite for the first time in over a decade for BBC Children in Need , later announcing a UK reunion tour for 2015 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1997 – 98 : Formation = = = 
 Simon Fuller has commented that he came upon the concept of S Club 7 the day after he was fired by the Spice Girls in 1997 . He selected the members for the group after auditioning from over 10 @,@ 000 hopefuls ; Stevens was the only member of the group who did not audition to gain admittance into the group . Instead , two producers from 19 Management approached her and asked her to go into the studio to record a demo tape for Fuller . Both O 'Meara and Cattermole were spotted by producers from 19 and asked to audition . After the auditions had been advertised in The Stage , Lee , Spearritt , Barrett and McIntosh auditioned . After some final adjustments , including the removal of three original members , S Club 7 was formed . 
 Once the final line @-@ up was decided , they flew to Italy to become acquainted with each other . Speaking about this first meeting , Stevens remarked that the group " felt comfortable with each other from the beginning " . Several members of the group have since stated that the ' S ' in S Club 7 stands for Simon , after the group 's creator , although the official line has always been ambiguous . The group 's entry on the Popjustice website states that at one point they were nearly called " Sugar Club " instead of the name that stuck . Another theory is that the group is so @-@ named because " S " is the first letter of the word " seven " . McIntosh , in a December 2012 interview , said a lot of Simon Fuller 's success has been based on the number 19 ( owning 19 Entertainment ) ; therefore , as " S " is the 19th letter of the alphabet , the " S " was put into S Club 7 . 
 = = = 1999 – 2000 : S Club television series = = = 
 S Club 7 first came to public attention in 1999 , when they starred in their own television series , Miami 7 . The show first aired on CBBC on BBC One and was a children 's sitcom based on the lives of the group who had moved to Miami , Florida in search of fame in America . The show was also launched in the United States , airing on Fox Family , and later on ABC Family ; it was retitled S Club 7 in Miami for American audiences . The show eventually celebrated worldwide success and was watched by 90 million viewers in over 100 different countries . The group also filmed two specials between the first two series of their show . The first , Back to the ' 50s — which aired on CITV , instead of CBBC — told the story of how the group found themselves back in 1959 . In the second TV special , Boyfriends & Birthdays , Stevens ' boyfriend gave her an ultimatum of staying with him or remaining with S Club . 
 Within the television series , and the parallel branding , each member of S Club 7 had their own character , which contained exaggerated forms of their real life counterparts as well as their own identifiable " S Club colour " . Hannah Spearritt , for example , had an " S Club colour " of yellow which , as Spearritt describes , mirrors her own personality : " bright and happy " . US media characterized S Club 7 as " The Monkees for the next generation " . However , Joel <unk> — the vice president of the Fox Family Channel — stated that Miami 7 is " far more relationship driven " than The Monkees , and that " kids today are more sophisticated " . 
 Following on from Miami 7 , S Club 7 released the theme music to the show as their debut single on 9 June 1999 . The up @-@ tempo " Bring It All Back " reached number @-@ one in the United Kingdom singles charts , and after selling more than 600 @,@ 000 copies , was made BPI certified Platinum . Commenting on the chart position of " Bring It All Back " , the group felt " nervous and on @-@ edge " before they discovered they had reached number one . Once they had received the phone call from the record company , the group celebrated the news with " cheers , shouting and crying " . The group 's success escalated and much like Fuller 's marketing campaign for the Spice Girls , they were set to become a " marketable commodity " . As evidence for this , global toy manufacturer Hasbro agreed upon an exclusive licensing agreement with 19 Management which included worldwide rights in the fashion doll category ; singing S Club 7 dolls were later released onto the market . An official magazine , fan club , and accompanying Miami 7 scrapbook were also launched furthering 19 Management 's corporate aim . 
 Over the course of the year , the group enjoyed more success in the charts after their second single , " S Club Party " , entered the UK charts at number @-@ two and went straight to number @-@ one in New Zealand . Their third single was a double A @-@ side and featured the ballad , co @-@ written by Cathy Dennis , " Two in a Million " and retro @-@ styled , up @-@ tempo " You 're My Number One " . The former was the first single where O 'Meara took leads vocals , setting the standard for future S Club 7 releases ; the single also reached number @-@ two in the UK charts . Following the success of their television show and released singles , the group released their debut album S Club in October 1999 . The album quickly rose to number @-@ two in the UK charts , and then became certified Double Platinum . The album consisted of a variety of styles including motown and salsa tracks . 
 Due to the increasing demand for the group with gruelling schedules including spending over thirteen weeks in America filming the first series of their show and their subsequent television specials , the members often felt that the travelling back and forth from the UK and the US was " perhaps more tiring than what we were actually going out to America to do " . Paul Cattermole once commented that the speed of the schedule sometimes caused a " kind of dreamscape in your head " , as the group often felt " <unk> and tired " . On top of the filming schedules , the group often performed at high profile pop music festivals such as Party in the Park where they performed for 100 @,@ 000 fans . The intensity of the schedule would be a constant battle for the group and was going to continue to take its toll for all the years S Club 7 were together . In spite of this , the group always remained in solidarity that they were all good friends , " cared for each other a lot " and supported each other through difficult times in the group . 
 = = = 2000 – 01 : 7 = = = 
 In February 2000 , the group won the ' British Breakthrough Act ' award at the 2000 BRIT Awards . In April 2000 , S Club 's second TV series , L.A. 7 ( renamed S Club 7 in L.A. in the US ) , was released . The series saw the group depart from Miami and move to Los Angeles to seek a record deal . It introduced the song " Reach " , another retro @-@ styled uptempo track , which was co @-@ written by Cathy Dennis and aired as the main theme tune to the second series . " Reach " was released as a single in May 2000 and reached number @-@ two in the UK charts . It arguably became one of the group 's most successful singles , paving the way for the group 's second album , 7 which was released on 12 June 2000 . This album was a departure from the overtly pop stylings of S Club , with tracks styled more towards R & B than the traditional nineties pop sound of their debut album . It reached number @-@ one in the UK charts becoming certified Triple Platinum , and a certified Gold record in the US . The second single from the album , " Natural " , featured Stevens as lead vocalist . It reached number three in September 2000 . 
 S Club 7 took an active part in promoting several charities during their time as a band . As well as performing for Children in Need , the band launched , on 25 September 2000 , a new television series called S Club 7 Go Wild ! , which saw each band member support an endangered species . Teaming up with the World Wildlife Fund , each member travelled to different destinations worldwide with a hope to raise awareness about the seven endangered creatures , including the Siberian tiger and the hyacinth macaw . In October 2000 , they launched the annual Poppy Appeal Campaign with Dame Thora Hird and supported Woolworth 's Kids First Campaign throughout 1999 and 2000 . The group also recorded vocals for " It 's Only Rock ' N ' Roll " , which raised money for Children 's Promise , an alliance of seven children 's charities : Barnardo 's , Children in Need , ChildLine , The Children 's Society , Comic Relief , NCH and the NSPCC . A cover of The Rolling Stones song , the group contributed to the vocals alongside many popular artists , including Mary J. Blige , Natalie Imbruglia and the Spice Girls ; it entered the UK charts at number @-@ nineteen . Also , during that time they filmed two <unk> : " Artistic Differences " and their " Christmas Special " . 
 In November 2000 , S Club 7 were invited to provide the official song for the UK 's BBC Children in Need Campaign 2000 , so a new song , the ballad " Never Had a Dream Come True " , was recorded . The song became popular in the US market eventually taking the group to appear on MTV 's TRL to perform the song and chosen to appear at the " Now That 's What I Call Music " US Edition . After topping the UK charts in December 2000 , the song was added to a re @-@ release of the 7 album , along with another new track , a cover of Stevie Wonder 's " Lately " . 
 = = = 2001 – 02 : Sunshine and Cattermole 's departure = = = 
 " Never Had a Dream Come True " had marked a more mature direction for the group whilst still retaining their pop sensibilities , a direction which continued into their third studio album , Sunshine . The album contained what was to become one of S Club 's most popular tracks , " Don 't Stop Movin ' " . The song was released in April 2001 , marked a high point for the group as the single went straight to number @-@ one , went Platinum and became the seventh best selling single of 2001 . McIntosh , who takes lead vocals with O 'Meara in the track , said he was " nervous " about taking lead vocals and was worried how people would react . However , after the song went in at number @-@ one , he felt as though he was " supported by the fans " and his fears were alleviated . McIntosh also remarked that the single had broken new ground for the group , and Cattermole thought it to be their " best song by miles " . The group won the Record of the Year award for the song , and in February 2002 , the single won the group their second BRIT Award for best British single . The song has since been covered by The Beautiful South for their 2004 album <unk> , <unk> and <unk> Songs , as well as by Starsailor who recorded it for BBC Radio 1 's Live Lounge . 
 By spring 2001 , the group were " desperate " to start touring ; it was something which they had always wanted to do , but couldn 't because things were " always so hectic " . After spending most of early 2001 rehearsing , the S Club Party 2001 tour began on 19 May 2001 . Describing the tour , Stevens remarked that seeing a crowd of over 13 @,@ 000 fans each night coming to see them was " such an unbelievable feeling " , and the other members of the group shared an " adrenaline rush " as well as a wave of emotion before going on stage . Once the tour was over , the group had to fly back to the United States in order to film the third series of their television show , Hollywood 7 . This third series , which was still set in Los Angeles , was the group 's favourite to film because they had more acting experience and could " drop their shoulders " and start to enjoy themselves . The group , however , had to continuously cope with intense schedules and early starts whilst recording for the programme , something which , although the group felt " laid back " about it at the time , was to eventually take its toll and lead to the demise of the band . Hollywood 7 began airing in September 2001 and dealt with the issue of an on @-@ screen kiss between Spearritt and Cattermole , who had begun dating in real life . Their relationship , which was kept secret for six months , was well received by the band who claimed it had made them all closer as friends . Hollywood 7 aired alongside a new CBBC reality show , S Club Search , which invited children to extend the S Club brand and audition to form a younger version of the band . The new group were to be chosen to sing with S Club 7 on Children in Need 2001 and go on tour with them on their future S Club 7 Carnival 2002 tour . The eight children who went on to form the band named themselves S Club Juniors and had six top ten UK hits . 
 The effects of the group 's charity single , " Never Had a Dream Come True " , were felt when the group handed over £ 200 @,@ 000 to Children in Need , from the sales of the CD after the release of " Don 't Stop Movin ' " in April 2001 . As a result , S Club 7 were invited back and asked to record a second consecutive Children in Need single , in November 2001 . It was decided that " Have You Ever " , a song co @-@ written by Chris Braide and Cathy Dennis , was to be released for the charity campaign . After the success of the previous year 's single , the performance on the night featured many primary school children who had pre @-@ recorded their own versions of the chorus , including the S Club Juniors who they made their first television appearance . The band felt " overjoyed " that they could , once again , contribute to the Children in Need campaign , feeling that it meant a lot to them to be involved and feeling privileged to be able to help ; they also commented that it was nice for British school children to be involved in raising money for charity . The single was another success for the group and became their fourth number @-@ one , as well as the 21st biggest selling single of 2001 . 
 In January 2002 , S Club 7 embarked upon their second arena tour , S Club 7 Carnival 2002 , which aimed to please fans by <unk> their songs to fit with a carnival @-@ like theme with music styles from different countries of the world . Speaking about the tour , McIntosh described it as " older show " , a change from S Club Party 2001 , which was " more like bubblegum " , with Paul Cattermole comparing 2001 's " theatrical " tour with the Carnival tour as a more " glitzy , concert stage " . The tour was generally well received by the children 's media , describing the show as " diverse " and " dazzling " , whereas the group was criticised by the broadsheets as being " like a compilation of toddler @-@ friendly Eurovision entries " although conceding that it was a " slick , decent @-@ value show " . Cattermole was also criticised when he was dubbed overweight and a " heavy @-@ footed dancer " . After the success of their last three singles , all of which had made it to number @-@ one , S Club 7 failed to top the charts when they released their ninth single , " You " ; it reached number @-@ two in the UK . The single , which was described as a " <unk> @-@ bright , tongue @-@ in @-@ cheek 50s pastiche " , was to be Paul Cattermole 's last single with the band and led the way for a series of events that was to unravel S Club 7 's time at the top of the charts , which would ultimately cause the band to split . 
 In March 2002 , Paul Cattermole told The Sun newspaper that it was time for him to " move on " from the group and he wanted to go back to his " rock roots " , which heralded back to the time he was part of a nu metal band formed at school in 1992 . Talking about his former musical venture three months before he left S Club 7 , Cattermole described the band — called Skua — as having a " Limp Bizkit vibe " as well as comparing their style to Rage Against the Machine . Cattermole 's resignation came as Skua had decided to reform , and he found it a perfect time to make the transition back from pop to rock as S Club 7 's record contracts were up for renewal . Skua released their first album in October 2014 titled <unk> Cattermole stayed with the band until June 2002 , featuring in four out of thirteen episodes of the group 's final television series , Viva S Club , and performing his final concert with the group for Party at the Palace , which was part of Queen Elizabeth II 's Golden Jubilee celebrations . 
 = = = 2002 – 03 : Seeing Double , Greatest Hits and break @-@ up = = = 
 After Cattermole 's departure , vowing to not disband , the remaining six members stayed together under the name S Club . Despite losing a member of the group , the future remained positive as , although they were very sad to see Cattermole leave the group , they were " delighted " to have extended their contracts meaning they could look forward to new material , a new series of their television show as well as their first feature film . However , media reports of the time weren 't so optimistic stating that , as neither the Spice Girls nor Take That had survived once they lost a member of their group , it would be difficult for S Club to remain together in an industry which has a " horrible habit of leaving bands in tatters once the first member has left " . After only peaking at number @-@ five in the UK charts with Alive , their first single as a six , was S Club 's positivism diminished . Although their progressive musical style was once again furthered with the release of their fourth studio album , Seeing Double , it failed to make an impact on the UK charts , stalling at number @-@ seventeen . S Club 's time at the top of the charts was slowly coming to an end , and when O 'Meara announced that she had an immobilising back condition which could have left her in a wheelchair , and she was unable to take part in television performances , the group was left devastated . 
 In April 2003 , S Club released their first feature film , Seeing Double , directed by music @-@ video director Nigel Dick , which was to be the last time the group would be seen on @-@ screen together . Unlike its television predecessors , the film moved into the realm of children 's fantasy , and saw the group fighting evil scientist Victor Gaghan in his quest to clone the world 's pop stars . The film 's release was marked by many rumours that the group were about to split , which were quickly denied by the six . However , ten days after the release of their movie , the rumours were confirmed when it was announced live on stage — during their S Club United tour on 21 April 2003 – that , after a final single and greatest hits album , S Club would part ways . The band cited a mutual split , expressing it was simply a time " to move on and face new challenges " . Many fans felt " betrayed " and " disappointed " by the breakup , as well as " angry " due to the group denying rumours only two weeks before at the Seeing Double premiere . Many compared the demise of the group to that of fellow pop band Steps , as they too had denied their intentions until the moment before their split , after which they were accused of acting out of " greed and cynicism " . Since the split , the members of S Club have commented on how exhausting being in the band was , due to hectic schedules and long filming days . 
 In 2003 S Club confirming the split " wasn 't a final straw " , Spearritt has remarked that the group had felt it appropriate wanting to do their own thing ; she had constantly felt " drained " whilst with S Club . The final single was a double A @-@ side , coupling " Love Ain 't Gonna Wait for You " , from their fourth album Seeing Double , with a new ballad , " Say Goodbye " . Returning to the style of their first single , " Say Goodbye " saw vocals shared around the group . The single reached number @-@ two in the UK , beaten to the top spot by R. Kelly 's " Ignition ( Remix ) " , and was included on S Club 's greatest hits album , Best : The Greatest Hits of S Club 7 , released in June 2003 . This compilation brought together the group 's releases with a previously unreleased track , " Everybody Get Pumped " and 7 track " Bring the House Down " . The album reached number @-@ two in the United Kingdom . S Club eventually disbanded after the release of " Say Goodbye " on 26 May 2003 . 
 On 27 April 2003 , it was reported that Spearritt 's parents had hired lawyers to chase payments owed to them by Simon Fuller and his management company . They claimed that out of the € 75 million fortune the band made for Fuller , they only received € 150 @,@ 000 a year of it . There was also controversy when the band had to travel economy class to America and when Fuller did not turn up for the premiere of Seeing Double . The criticism put to Fuller was similar of that in 1997 when the Spice Girls fired him for being too controlling . After the group split up , the S Club Juniors rebranded to " S Club 8 " , and went on to film CBBC show I Dream , releasing their third studio album under the same name . The group disbanded in 2005 . 
 = = = 2008 – 14 : S Club 3 , S Club 4 and S Club Party = = = 
 From October 2008 , O 'Meara , McIntosh , and Cattermole reunited and started performing in pubs and clubs across Britain . This was shortly after O 'Meara 's son Lenny was born . On 12 November 2008 , a bottle was thrown at O 'Meara during an S Club 3 performance in Bradford ; it left her with a severe cut to the head , requiring treatment at a nearby Hospital . A 20 @-@ year @-@ old man was arrested , and the attack was thought to have something to do with her performance on Celebrity Big Brother , where nearly 50 @,@ 000 complaints were received about her and two other female contestants ' apparent racist bullying toward Bollywood actress Shilpa Shetty . In late 2008 , some sources stated that Barrett and Lee were to start touring with the group sometime in the following year . It was also stated that a new greatest hits album , Ain 't No Party : The Ultimate Collection of S Club 7 was set for release later the following year . Both of these rumours turned out to be false . Lee was pursuing his acting career along with Spearritt , Barrett was on hiatus , and Stevens was starring in Strictly Come Dancing . Cattermole was absent from a gig at the Plug Club in Sheffield in February 2009 . On 12 November , S Club 3 turned on the Mansfield Christmas Lights . In early 2010 , the group decided to take their gigs further . They booked some venues in Egypt for April . On 19 April 2010 , S Club 3 were the headlining act at the Tottenham Carnival . The group made an appearance at Gay <unk> in Doncaster and Yorkshire on 21 August . 
 In January 2011 , O 'Meara and McIntosh made several performances in Dublin without Cattermole . On 2 February 2011 , O 'Meara , McIntosh and Cattermole played at Keele University , followed by a guest appearance at Aberystwyth University on 20 February 2011 . On 18 March 2011 they played to a sellout crowd at the University of Hull , a move which saw local media refer to the show as " the comeback of the century " . The group subsequently performed at Butlin 's in Bognor Regis and various university Freshers ' Week events , with a scheduled tour of Australia in May 2012 . In March 2011 , O 'Meara stated on Facebook that all seven members would be reunited for the first time since 2002 . On 29 March 2011 , the group all went to see Lee perform as Frankie Valli in Jersey Boys on stage . They posed for photos afterwards . On 29 November 2011 it was revealed by several publications , that S Club had hopes to reunite in 2012 for a possible tour , following on the success from Steps . However , Barrett confirmed through her Twitter page that the rumours of a reunion were completely fabricated . However , on 12 December 2011 , she announced on Twitter in response to a fan : " right now i 'll just say <unk> possible so we 'll see ! ! x " In an interview on ITV 's This Morning Spearritt stated that her and her former bandmates are just " too busy " for a reunion . 
 In March 2012 , it was speculated that all seven members would reform for seven one @-@ off gigs and appearances , with possibility of a two @-@ album record deal . On 30 April , Barrett spoke out about the speculations on Radio 5 . She revealed that the group had been " talking about it " and stated that a reunion is likely to happen if they come up with a " good plan " . She was also pursuing her solo career at that time , she was the only group member who didn 't during the break @-@ up . In spring 2012 the group , now renamed ' S Club Party ' set out on a tour of Australia with other noughties ' hit group , Big <unk> . On 30 May 2012 , S Club featured on Australia 's Channel 7 The Morning Show , announcing they are in the country for a national tour from 23 May to 2 June 2012 . Subsequent to this appearance , a video of the performance was uploaded to YouTube , where the reaction was largely negative with many viewers expressing the opinion that the performance was uncomfortable to watch , with the absence of the four other members of the original band causing some disillusionment among childhood fans of the group . 
 On 12 June 2012 , Spearritt denied the reunion plans and stated that she will not return to S Club or continue her music career and will keep on pursuing her acting career . She stated " It 's cool that bands like Steps are getting back together , because it 's worked out for lots of people . But I don 't see it in my plans at all . In the future , I hope I 'll still be working and being able to do what I love . I feel very lucky at the minute , and doing theatre has really opened more doors for me . So as long as I can keep doing what I love , I 'm very lucky . " On 24 March 2013 , Stevens said to the Daily Mirror that a reunion could still happen : " We met up not long ago and we talked about it and we still are talking about it . We are all in the same head space , talking about how special it was and we do all want to celebrate what we had . So it 's definitely a possibility . " 
 In 2014 , Cattermole later re @-@ ignited reunion rumours following a tweet to his former group mates . Barrett performed with O 'Meara , McIntosh and Cattermole at Birmingham Pride 2014 and other gigs after that ; meaning that the group was known as ' S Club 4 ' . After this , Jo , Bradley and Tina have performed at a number of events as ' S Club Party ' . 
 = = = 2014 – present : Original line @-@ up reunion and Bring It All Back 2015 = = = 
 In August 2014 , it was reported that the band would be reforming under the backing of Simon Fuller . Cattermole denied these reports the next day , but said a reunion was " God damn close to happening " . On 22 October , it was confirmed that all seven members of S Club 7 would reunite for the BBC Children in Need telethon ; the reunion aired on 14 November 2014 , with S Club 7 performing a medley of four of their greatest hits : " S Club Party " , " Reach " , " Bring It All Back " and " Don 't Stop Movin ' " . Popjustice announced that the band plan on having a press conference on Monday , 17 November 2014 , where they are to unveil their " huge plans " for 2015 . On 17 November 2014 , S Club 7 announced their plans for an arena reunion tour , promptly titled Bring It All Back 2015 , which toured the UK in May 2015 . 
 In March 2015 , during an interview with Graham Norton on BBC Radio 2 , the group confirmed plans to re @-@ release their 2003 greatest hits , Best : The Greatest Hits of S Club 7 that forthcoming May , and that it may contain the previously unreleased track " Rain " . On 28 April 2015 , it was confirmed that the re @-@ issue of the Best album would release on 4 May , and would include " Rain " , as well as " Friday Night " from the S Club album . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 On 20 March 2001 , Cattermole , Lee and McIntosh were caught with cannabis in London 's Covent Garden ; they were cautioned by police at Charing Cross Police Station and released without charge . After the event , their publicity firm Henry 's House released a public apology stating they were " very stupid " and " very sorry " , admitting to having made a " stupid mistake " . At the time , BT and Cadbury , who had sponsorship deals with S Club 7 , said they were " very disappointed " to learn of the caution but said they would keep their contracts with the band . However , cereal firm Quaker Oats ended talks with 19 Entertainment after learning of the police caution . It was rumoured that merchandising company PMS International were to take out an £ 800 @,@ 000 lawsuit against the band for declining sales as a direct result of the drugs scandal . However , this came to nothing and any doubts over the future of sponsorship ended when Pepsi signed the band up less than a month after the drugs caution . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 The style of music S Club 7 normally falls under is pop , or more specifically bubblegum pop , as well as manufactured pop . This is certainly the case for their first album , S Club where simple lyrics , three @-@ chord structures and danceable beats define it so . Their first two singles saw vocals shared equally amongst the seven members of the group , and it was not until their third single , " Two in a Million " that O 'Meara became known as their lead vocalist . Although the band were to progressively change their style over the four years they were together , even their first album had many tracks atypical of the pop genre : " You 're My Number One " , " Love Train " and " Everybody Wants Ya " were motown driven whereas " Viva La Fiesta " and " It 's A Feel Good Thing " , were both " bouncy , salsa @-@ driven Latino songs " . 
 Over the years , their style and direction changed progressively with each new album . Their second album 7 , had songs which had styles far removed from the traditional pop songs rival pop bands of the nineties were releasing . With the release of " Natural " in 2000 , S Club 7 showcased a new , R & B @-@ lite sound . The release of their third album , Sunshine , gave audiences their biggest change : the album contained tracks such as the disco @-@ influenced , " Don 't Stop Movin ' " and the R & B ballad , " Show Me Your Colours " . The album marked a more mature approach for the band . 
 With the departure of Cattermole , S Club released their fourth and final album , Seeing Double which contained many songs with styles not yet explored by the group . The group released " Alive " which was a " power @-@ packed dance floor filler " , a style which matched that of their final single " Love Ain 't Gonna Wait for You " . The album also contained many other dance tracks and songs far removed from their original bubblegum pop stylings , such as the " sex for the CBBC generation " in " Hey Kitty Kitty " . Although , in one review , referring to " Gangsta Love " , " S Club 's spiritual home is the suburban disco , not urban underground clubs , and their attempt to go garage on " Gangsta Love " ends up amusing rather than authentic " . Throughout their releases , S Club 7 always kept their original pop roots , with songs such as " Reach " , " You " and " Say Goodbye " 
 = = Members = = 
 = = Discography = = 
 S Club ( 1999 ) 
 7 ( 2000 ) 
 Sunshine ( 2001 ) 
 Seeing Double ( 2002 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = Tours = = 
 = 1989 FA Charity Shield = 
 The 1989 FA Charity Shield ( also known as the Tennent 's Charity Shield for sponsorship reasons ) was the 67th Charity Shield , an annual English football match played between the winners of the previous season 's Football League and FA Cup . It was held at Wembley Stadium on 12 August 1989 . The match was contested by Arsenal , champions of the 1988 – 89 Football League and Liverpool , who beat Everton in the final of the 1988 – 89 FA Cup . Watched by a crowd of 63 @,@ 149 , Liverpool won the match 1 – 0 . 
 This was Arsenal 's 10th Shield appearance and Liverpool 's 14th . The two clubs had met in the last game of the previous season , in a title decider at Anfield which Arsenal won 2 – 0 with a late goal from Michael Thomas . Both clubs also faced each other in the Makita International Tournament at Wembley the previous month ; Arsenal won the match 1 – 0 . Journalists previewing the game argued this year 's Shield had lost its spectacle given Liverpool 's recent successes in the event as well as the prospect of Arsenal beating Liverpool for a third time . 
 New signing Glenn Hysén made his competitive debut for Liverpool and Ian Rush started ahead of fellow striker John Aldridge . For Arsenal , Gus Caesar replaced Steve Bould in the starting team . The only goal of the match came in the first half – a long ball from Barry Venison floated around the Arsenal defence and found Peter Beardsley in the penalty area to score . Afterwards Liverpool manager Kenny Dalglish spoke of his delight at his team 's performance and the Arsenal manager George Graham was complimentary of his opponents . 
 = = Background = = 
 The FA Charity Shield was founded in 1908 as a successor to the Sheriff of London Charity Shield . It was a contest between the respective champions of the Football League and Southern League , which then became an event for select teams of amateur and professional players by 1913 . In 1921 , it was played between the Football League champions and FA Cup winners for the first time ; this became standard practise from 1930 . Wembley Stadium acted as the host of the Shield from 1974 . 
 Arsenal qualified for the 1989 FA Charity Shield as winners of the 1988 – 89 Football League First Division . The team played Liverpool at Anfield in the final game of the season and needed to win by two clear goals to be crowned champions . Alan Smith scored for Arsenal early in the second half to make it 1 – 0 , and Michael Thomas 's goal with seconds left of the match ensured the team won the league title . Liverpool , days before the league encounter with Arsenal , defeated Everton to win the 1989 FA Cup Final which meant they obtained the other Charity Shield place . 
 This was Arsenal 's first appearance in the Charity Shield in 10 years ; prior to the game they had won seven Shields ( 1930 , 1931 , 1933 , 1934 , 1938 , 1948 and 1953 ) , and lost three ( 1935 , 1936 and 1979 ) . By contrast , Liverpool had won seven previous Shields outright ( 1966 , 1974 , 1976 , 1979 , 1980 , 1982 and 1988 ) , shared two with Manchester United ( 1965 and 1977 ) and one apiece with Everton ( 1986 ) and West Ham United ( 1984 ) . The club was runners @-@ up in three Shields ( 1971 , 1983 and 1984 ) . 
 = = Pre @-@ match = = 
 This was the second time in a fortnight that Arsenal and Liverpool had played each other ; at the end of July , the two teams competed in the Makita International Tournament at Wembley . Arsenal won the game by a single goal to win the tournament and then on their pre @-@ season travels beat Argentinian champions Independiente . The spectacle of the Charity Shield was lost on certain football journalists previewing the match , because of Liverpool 's recent successes in the Shield as well as the prospect of Arsenal beating Liverpool for a third time in succession . David Lacey wrote in The Guardian of 12 August 1989 : " The FA Charity Shield is now more of a pre @-@ season finale than a pipe opener for the main event , " and Stuart Jones of The Times went further in his assessment of its decline : 
 Whereas it was once an eagerly @-@ awaited showpiece , it resembles in the modern age little more than another public training exercise for sides who are increasingly being invited to practise for the season in more lucrative and prestigious events on foreign fields . 
 Liverpool striker Ian Rush , who in the previous season sustained a knee injury and was treated for shingles and hepatitis , said before the match : " I 'm in great shape . Fitter than I have been since I came back from Italy . " 
 = = Match = = 
 = = = Team selection = = = 
 Arsenal was without injured defender Steve Bould , but Nigel Winterburn returned to full action , as did Brian Marwood – he recovered from a successful Achilles tendon operation . Manager George Graham deployed a 5 – 3 – 2 formation ; Gus Caesar was brought into the defence to replace Bould . 
 Liverpool had no injury concerns for the game other than long @-@ term absentee Gary Gillespie ; New signing Glenn Hysén made his competitive debut for the club and striker John Aldridge was named on the substitutes bench ; manager Kenny Dalglish lined the team up in a 4 – 4 – 2 formation . Alan Hansen , who had missed Liverpool 's final nine matches of the previous season , was restored as captain . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 Liverpool created the first chance of the game in the 20th minute . A pass from John Barnes sent Steve Nicol clear to shoot , but his effort saw the ball roll wide of the far post . Liverpool created a further opportunity six minutes after – from a free @-@ kick delivered by Barnes on the left , Rush managed to <unk> his marker and head the ball in the direction of the Arsenal goal . It however hit the near post and rebounded in the direction of Arsenal goalkeeper John Lukic . Minutes after the half @-@ hour mark , Liverpool scored the opening goal – a long ball from Barry Venison went behind the Arsenal defence and reached Peter Beardsley . <unk> , he controlled the ball and shot it with his right foot to score . Arsenal 's Kevin Richardson missed a chance to level the scoreline after good play by Lee Dixon ; from outside the penalty box he scuffed his shot and the ball went over the crossbar . 
 Liverpool continued to dominate proceedings in the second half ; The Observer football correspondent Frank McGhee noted Arsenal 's " obvious need for a more adventurous approach . " The club 's fans demanded Marwood 's introduction to the match , and in the 58th minute the player came on for Caesar . This meant Arsenal 's formation was tweaked to 4 – 4 – 2 , with a flat back four defence . Arsenal found it hard to contain the Liverpool attack ; Lukic saved an effort from Beardsley one @-@ handed , but only could turn the ball out for a corner . A pass by Ronnie Whelan managed to split the Arsenal defence and find Nicol ; Winterburn however put an end to the move with a tackle . David Burrows 's attempt on goal was blocked by O 'Leary later on and Lukic did enough to save Rush 's shot with his legs . 
 = = = Details = = = 
 = = Post @-@ match = = 
 Dalglish was pleased with Liverpool 's game and told the press : " The most important thing is that we got our own standard of football right . We were the better team in all departments and we know that if we get it right then we will be there or thereabouts . " Hysén , the man of the match , said of his centre @-@ back partner Hansen : " It is so easy playing alongside Alan . He tells you where to go and what position to take up . " He saw similarities with Liverpool and playing for a national team : " The standards are so amazingly high . I just want to win things with them . " 
 Graham praised his opponents – " There is no need to take anything away from Liverpool because they were terrific , " and felt his team could have been more clinical . He described Arsenal 's performance as " below par " and was upbeat about the season ahead : " This might have done us the world of good . We will be all right by next week – don 't worry about that . " 
 = Port of Rijeka = 
 The Port of Rijeka ( Croatian : Luka Rijeka ) is a seaport in Rijeka , Croatia , located on the shore of the Kvarner Gulf in the Adriatic Sea . The first records of the port date to 1281 . It was the main port of the Kingdom of Hungary in the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century , of Yugoslavia between World War II and 1991 , and of Croatia after its independence . Today , it is the largest port in Croatia with a cargo throughput of 10 @.@ 9 million tonnes ( 2015 ) , mostly oil , general cargo and bulk cargo , and 161 @,@ 883 Twenty @-@ foot equivalent units ( TEUs ) . In 2008 , the Port of Rijeka recorded 4 @,@ 376 ship arrivals . It is managed by the Port of Rijeka Authority . 
 In 2011 , Luka Rijeka d.d. , a concessionaire of the Port of Rijeka signed a contract of strategic partnership with International Container Terminal Services Inc . ( ICTSI ) and Jadranska vrata d.d. , the second concessionaire of the Port of Rijeka , to operate the container terminal . The partnership aims to expand the terminal 's capacity to 600 @,@ 000 TEUs . The development master plan , devised by Rotterdam Maritime Group , calls for further expansion of the port facilities by 2030 , including construction of a large container terminal in Omišalj on Krk Island . The third concessionaire is Jadranski naftovod ( JANAF ) , which operates an oil terminal in Omišalj . 
 = = History = = 
 The first record of a port in Rijeka dates back to 1281 , when the Great Council of the Republic of Venice reported a conflict of Venetian merchants and ship owners from Zadar and Rab . In 1719 , the Port of Rijeka was granted a charter as a free port by Holy Roman Emperor Charles VI , and the first road connecting the port to the hinterland , the Caroline road , was completed in 1728 . The inland connections were gradually improved by the construction of the Josephina and Louisiana roads in 1779 and 1810 respectively . 
 In 1776 , Rijeka became a corpus separatum within the Habsburg Monarchy , known under its Hungarian / Italian name of Fiume , and was transferred to the Kingdom of Hungary in order to foster trade . Following the Austro @-@ Hungarian Compromise of 1867 , Rijeka gained greater importance as the sole Hungarian seaport , and in the second half of the 19th century a new artificial harbor was completed , as well as railway lines to Budapest via Zagreb and to Pivka in present @-@ day Slovenia , where the railway joined the Austrian Southern Railway connecting Vienna and Trieste . The development in this period boosted the Port of Rijeka to rank tenth in transport volume among European ports as it reached a peak in 1913 . In the second half of the 19th century , a large breakwater was built along with wharfs in the city of Rijeka itself , moving the shoreline between 100 metres ( 330 feet ) and 200 metres ( 660 feet ) . In the period , railway infrastructure was also built to the north of the port , along with storage facilities , administrative buildings and other necessary structures . The railway facilities were designed by Jozsef <unk> , while the port itself was designed by Hilarion Pascal , who had previously designed the Port of Marseille , and Antal <unk> . The design was presented as a model port at the <unk> in Vienna in 1873 and at the Exposition Universelle in Paris in 1878 . 
 After the defeat of Austria @-@ Hungary in World War I and the Treaty of Rapallo of 1920 , Rijeka became an independent city @-@ state known as the Free State of Fiume . That marked the beginning of the port 's decline , as it lost a large portion of its major market , Hungary . Italy annexed Rijeka in 1924 by the Treaty of Rome , and the port became peripherally located , with no modern railway or road links to the rest of the country , further adding to the already obvious economic decline . 
 During World War II , Rijeka was targeted by around 30 Allied bombing raids , and in 1945 the retreating Germans damaged approximately 90 % of the port facilities . Among the ships sunk in the port was the German auxiliary cruiser <unk> , which would later be raised and repaired to become the Yugoslav Navy Yacht Galeb . The city of Rijeka purchased the ship , which was subsequently moored in the port and eventually opened as a museum in 2011 . 
 Following World War II and the Paris Peace Treaties , Rijeka became a part of Croatia and Yugoslavia . This provided the Port of Rijeka with a new market and sparked further development . A bulk cargo terminal was completed in 1967 , followed by warehouses in <unk> in 1978 . In 1979 , a container terminal in Sušak , a phosphate terminal in Rijeka and a timber terminal in Bršica were added . Joining them were a livestock terminal in Bršica and a general cargo terminal with a roll @-@ on / roll @-@ off ramp in the Bakar area in 1982 and 1983 respectively . The greatest volume of cargo was recorded in 1980 , when 20 @.@ 2 million tonnes , including 13 @.@ 1 million tonnes of liquid cargo , were transported . The port suffered another period of stagnation in the 1990s due to the Croatian War of Independence , when a portion of the port 's shipping switched to Trieste and Koper . Since 1996 , the volume of operations of the Port of Rijeka has again been gradually growing . 
 = = Port of Rijeka Authority = = 
 The Port of Rijeka Authority was founded in 1996 by the Republic of Croatia as the first port authority in the country . It is tasked with planning and strategic development , including the issuing of concessions and permits , supervision , safety of navigation in the port area , security and fire protection , as well as waste management . Business operations are managed by the port concessionaires : Luka Rijeka d.d. , Jadranski naftovod ( JANAF ) and Jadranska vrata d.d. and their subcontractors . 
 In March 2010 , the port authorities of Trieste , Ravenna , Venice and Koper established the North Adriatic Ports Association ( NAPA ) in Trieste with the aim of enhancing the position of the ports in the European Union and its transport patterns . The Port of Rijeka joined the NAPA in November 2010 . The NAPA aims to harmonize information systems and organizational setup of the member ports in order to attract shipping . The project is scheduled to be completed by 2013 . Besides the NAPA , the Port of Rijeka is also a member of the <unk> network of the European Sea Ports Organisation , the International Harbour Masters ' Association , Association Internationale <unk> et Ports , the Croatian Association of Port Authorities and the International Association of Ports and Harbors . 
 The Port of Rijeka Authority operates a traffic control centre , located in the new passenger terminal . The traffic control system comprises an Electronic Chart Display and Information System using radar sensors and an Automatic Identification System , as well as additional systems such as a VHF system , <unk> data , Closed @-@ circuit television monitoring of the port and data processing systems . In 2011 , the port authority was commended as one of top four port authorities of the year globally . 
 = = Transport facilities = = 
 The Port of Rijeka is located on the Kvarner Gulf in the northern Adriatic Sea , centered on the city of Rijeka . The facilities include terminals and other structures in the city and in the area reaching from the Bay of Bakar , where the bulk cargo terminal is located , approximately 13 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 1 miles ) east of Rijeka , to Bršica to the west of Rijeka , where there is a multi @-@ purpose terminal . The Port of Rijeka is at the southern terminus of the Pan @-@ European transport network Corridor Vb , representing a maritime extension of the rail and road routes leading to and from Rijeka . They include modern roads such as the A6 motorway , forming a part of the European route E65 and connecting Zagreb , Budapest and Vienna , and the A7 motorway , a part of the European route E61 and the E65 . Rail links comprise single @-@ track railway lines to Zagreb and to Pivka , Slovenia . There are plans to upgrade to a high @-@ performance , double @-@ track railway . 
 The port comprises several terminals : 
 Bulk Cargo Terminal – handles coal , iron ore and bulk cargo ; 4 million tonnes annual capacity ; accommodates Capesize ships ; located in the Bay of Bakar , 13 kilometres ( 8 @.@ 1 miles ) east of Rijeka 
 Cereal Terminal – handles and storage of cereals and oilseeds ; 1 million tonnes annual capacity ; western part of the Port of Rijeka 
 Container and Ro @-@ Ro Terminal – handles intermodal containers ; contains a roll @-@ on / roll @-@ off ramp ; accommodates Panamax ships , located in the eastern part of the port ; operated by Jadranska vrata d.d. 
 General Cargo Terminal – handles general cargo , salt and cement ; 2 million tonnes annual capacity ; western part of the port 
 Timber Terminal – handles , stores and processes timber ; 500 @,@ 000 tonnes annual capacity ; eastern part of the port 
 <unk> Terminal – cargo storage , processing and packaging facilities ; occupies 41 @.@ 7 hectares ( 103 acres ) 10 kilometres ( 6 @.@ 2 miles ) from Rijeka , providing motorway and rail access 
 <unk> Terminal – handles and stores refrigerated and frozen food ; 100 @,@ 000 tonnes annual capacity ; western part of the port 
 Bršica Terminal – handles livestock , timber and general cargo ; 60 @,@ 000 tonnes of annual capacity ; located 60 kilometres ( 37 miles ) to the west from Rijeka 
 Passenger Terminal – 11 piers ; serving 200 @,@ 000 passengers per year , largely traveling by lines serving nearby islands and other ports along the Adriatic coast . 
 Liquid Cargo Terminal – two Capesize berths ( 30 @-@ metre ( 98 ft ) draft ) ; located in Omišalj Bay ( operated by JANAF ) and <unk> Bay ( operated by <unk> d.d. ) , both on Krk Island ; annual capacity of 24 million tonnes of oil ; 130 @,@ 000 tonnes storage capacity ; the terminal is linked to a pipeline operated by JANAF and the <unk> petrochemical plant in Omišalj 
 The port has 58 berths and two additional berths in the Liquid Cargo Terminal , 150 @-@ hectare ( 370 @-@ acre ) total port area , and 335 @,@ 000 square metres ( 3 @,@ 610 @,@ 000 square feet ) of enclosed warehouses . 
 = = Business operations = = 
 The port of Rijeka is the largest port in Croatia , handling the largest portion of the country 's imports and exports . In 2008 , <unk> ships docked at Rijeka itself , 872 at Bršica , 818 at Bakar , and 268 at Omišalj — a total of <unk> . In 2010 , the Port of Rijeka transported 10 @.@ 2 million tonnes of cargo , a 9 % drop from 2009 . However the figure represents a 69 % increase of dry cargo transport volume compared to 2002 . The 2010 figure includes 5 @.@ 6 million tonnes of liquid cargo , 2 @.@ 3 million tonnes of general cargo , 2 @.@ 0 million tonnes of bulk cargo and 254 @,@ 000 tonnes of timber . The container terminal recorded a substantial growth of business in past years . 137 @,@ 048 TEUs were transported through the port in 2010 , marking a 5 % rise in turnover compared to 2009 and a ninefold increase over 2002 . The Port of Rijeka also serves passenger and ferry lines operated by Jadrolinija to the nearby islands of Cres , Mali Lošinj , Susak , Ilovik , Unije , Rab and Pag , as well as to Adriatic ports further south , such as Split and Dubrovnik . The line to Split and Dubrovnik also serves the islands of Hvar , Korčula and Mljet . The passenger terminal serves approximately 200 @,@ 000 passengers each year . As of August 2011 , there are three concessionaires operating in the Port of Rijeka : Luka Rijeka d.d. , Jadranska vrata d.d. and JANAF . 
 = = = Luka Rijeka = = = 
 In 2010 , Luka Rijeka d.d. reported a net profit of 32 @,@ 000 kuna ( 4 @,@ 300 euro ) , a sharp decline from 3 @.@ 5 million kuna ( 0 @.@ 47 million euro ) the previous year . Total income in 2010 reached 210 @.@ 4 million kuna ( 28 @.@ 4 million euro ) , down from 228 @.@ 9 million kuna ( 30 @.@ 9 million euro ) in 2009 . In 2010 , the company had 935 employees . It is listed at the Zagreb Stock Exchange , with a share capital of 598 million kuna ( 80 @.@ 8 million euro ) . Luka Rijeka d.d. is owned by the state ( 72 @.@ 7 % ) , Croatian Healthcare Fund ( 8 @.@ 1 % ) and other stockholders , none of which owns more than 5 % of the stock . 
 Denis <unk> has been the chairman of the board of the company since 2002 . The appointment is limited to a five @-@ year term , but in May 2011 , <unk> 's term was extended for the second time . 
 Luka Rijeka 's concession in the Port of Rijeka is valid until 2012 , and a request to renew the concession for another 30 years has been filed . Luka Rijeka uses 117 hectares ( 290 acres ) of land operated by the Port of Rijeka Authority . 
 = = = Jadranska vrata = = = 
 The Jadranska vrata d.d. company was founded as a Luka Rijeka d.d. subsidiary , and was tasked with operating the container cargo terminal located in the <unk> district of Rijeka . As of August 2011 , International Container Terminal Services Inc . ( ICTSI ) acquired a 51 % share in the company , becoming a strategic partner . The company has also become prominent under its English name — Adriatic Gate Container Terminal . Jadranska vrata d.d. has acquired a separate concession to operate the container terminal in the Port of Rijeka until 2041 . Antonio P. Passaro was appointed as chief executive officer of Jadranska vrata d.d. by ICTSI in 2011 . 
 = = = Jadranski naftovod = = = 
 Jadranski naftovod ( JANAF ) operates an oil terminal at Omišalj , Krk Island . In 2010 , the JANAF transported 6 @.@ 4 million tonnes of oil , a 7 % drop from 6 @.@ 9 million tonnes in 2009 . In 2010 , JANAF recorded annual revenue of 464 @.@ 9 million kuna ( 62 @.@ 8 million euro ) , down less than 1 % from 2009 , and annual net profit of 118 @.@ 5 million kuna ( 16 million euro ) , up 11 % from the previous year . However , JANAF operations include other facilities and services besides the oil terminal concession in the Port of Rijeka . JANAF is a joint stock company owned by the Croatian Pension Insurance Institute ( 50 @.@ 5 % ) , INA ( 16 % ) , the Republic of Croatia ( 14 @.@ 5 % ) and other shareholders owning less than 10 % of stock each . JANAF 's chairman of the board is Ante Markov . As of March 31 , 2011 , JANAF had 383 employees working in the Omišalj terminal and other JANAF facilities in Croatia . 
 = = Future expansion = = 
 In 2011 , Luka Rijeka d.d. , operator of the Port of Rijeka , signed a contract of strategic partnership with the ICTSI and Jadranska vrata <unk> .. The partnership aims to expand the capacity of the container terminal to 600 @,@ 000 TEUs . The contract also stipulates that the concession regarding operation of the terminal is to last for 30 years with an investment of 54 million euro . It is estimated that ICTSI and Luka Rijeka d.d. will invest up to one billion kuna ( 135 million euro ) in the Port of Rijeka . Upgrades of other port terminals are also planned , with investments through the World Bank and through build @-@ operate @-@ transfer and public – private partnership schemes . They include cargo terminals in the city of Rijeka and the new passenger terminal opened in October 2009 . 
 The Port of Rijeka development master plan , devised by Rotterdam Maritime Group , specifies further expansion of port facilities by 2030 , including the construction of a large container terminal in Omišalj on Krk Island , near the JANAF Omišalj oil terminal . The container terminal would increase the annual capacity of the port by 2 @.@ 5 million TEUs . The plan requires construction of a high performance railway to Zagreb and a rail link planned by Croatian Railways to the proposed island terminal . The new line entails building a new bridge to Krk Island in addition to the existing Krk Bridge . The plan also includes expansion of the existing terminals , and is estimated to require an additional US $ 150 million . Likewise , an expansion of the Liquid Cargo Terminal is planned , as well as an expansion of the Bakar Bay facility , where a car terminal is planned . The expansion of the port , improvement of transportation links and the strategic partnership are aimed at establishing Rijeka as the largest container port on the Adriatic Sea . 
 = Populous : The Beginning = 
 Populous : The Beginning is a strategy and god @-@ style video game . It is the third entry in the Populous video game series , developed by Bullfrog Productions in 1998 . The PC version of the game was released November 30 , 1998 and a PlayStation version was later developed and released on April 2 , 1999 . 
 Unlike earlier games in the series , which cast the player in the role of a god influencing loyal followers , The Beginning took a radical departure and placed the player in the role of a shaman , who directly leads her tribe against opponents . Throughout the twenty @-@ five missions of the campaign , the player leads their tribe across a solar system , dominating enemy tribes and tapping new sources of magic , with the ultimate goal of the shaman attaining godhood herself . 
 Populous : The Beginning was the first entry in the series to use true 3D computer graphics ; Bullfrog waited four years after Populous II : Trials of the Olympian Gods so that the graphics technology could catch up to their vision for a new and different game in the series . The developers considered the addition of terrain deformation and manipulation , combined with " smart " villagers who automatically attended to tasks , to add an entirely new dimension to the series . The game 's original title was Populous : The Third Coming before being changed prior to the beta release . 
 Populous : The Beginning plays very differently from earlier titles and received mixed reviews . Reviewers noted the excellent graphics , while complaints were directed at the artificial intelligence and the indecision in game design between being a real time strategy title and a god game . GamePro 's Peter Olafson wrote that Populous : The Beginning was a good game but was " without a quintessential quality that defined Populous . " 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Populous : The Beginning places the player in control of a female shaman and the tribe which follows her . Unlike the previous games in the series , The Beginning allows the player to directly control the action of followers , by ordering them to build structures or attack enemies . In the campaign , the player must fight the opposing Dakini ( red ) , Chumara ( yellow ) and Matak ( green ) tribes for dominion over the solar system . Enemy tribes also have shamans , and on later levels all inhabit the same world . While the objective is almost always to eliminate all of the members of the other tribes , there are often specific ways this can be achieved . Sometimes the player must use magic spells gained from worship at special monuments such as stone heads or " Vaults of Knowledge " ; in other cases , the player only needs to overwhelm the enemies with superior numbers . The game has no formal resource management ; new units are created automatically at houses , and training new troops costs nothing except mana . Only wood from trees is required to build new structures . 
 The game is played from a 3D third person perspective with the camera at a variable height and capable of rotating 360 ° , enabling the player to quickly move across the planet 's terrain . While the terrain 's topology is a torus , the map is locally projected onto a sphere to give the illusion of a planet . On maps where there is no fog of war , players can see what opponents are doing at any time . Extensive support for 3D acceleration enables the player to view the game in 16 @-@ bit or 32 @-@ bit colour . The landscape and real @-@ time structure building and follower movement are also shown . 
 The player commands different types of followers , each of which has advantages and disadvantages in combat . The most basic unit is the Brave , which builds huts , towers , and military buildings . Braves are trained to become other units : tough melee Warriors ; weak , long @-@ range , <unk> ; Preachers , who convert enemy units and prevent enemy preachers from converting friendly troops ; and Spies , who perform espionage functions . Shamans are physically weaker than warriors , but can cast powerful spells and can be reincarnated if killed . Some spells will disappear after use . Other spells can slowly be replenished for continued use ; the rate of spell regeneration depends upon the player 's number of followers . Examples of spells include " Landbridge " , which raises the sea floor to create bridges across the sea ; " Swarm " , which sends a horde of insects to sow confusion in enemy ranks ; and " Tornado " , which creates a cyclone to destroy buildings . There are twenty @-@ six spells in total , which are slowly learned throughout the campaign . 
 Populous : The Beginning supports multiplayer , either by modem connection ( limited to two players ) , IPX , or over the Internet through an external matchmaking service . The game 's official web site provided a lobby service until January 8 , 2004 . Populous : The Beginning allows for a maximum game size of four players playing against each other . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Populous : The Beginning does not take place on Earth . Rather , the game takes place in a planetary system of twenty @-@ five unnamed planets . There is no indication as to whether the game takes place in the future or past , as the universe within the game is seemingly unconnected with reality . While many of the planets are predominantly grasslands dotted with trees , other worlds feature wildly different terrains , such as a volcanic world and a planet almost entirely covered by water . These worlds are inhabited by four human tribes , represented by their color : the green " Matak " , the yellow " Chumara " , and the red " Dakini " . The fourth blue tribe , controlled by the player , is never officially mentioned by name . Each of the tribes is generally hostile to one another , though alliances exist on some worlds . The reasoning for the hostilities is never explained other than the starting cutscene stating that the other ( non @-@ player ) tribes " would destroy us " . While all the tribes are ruled by a single female shaman , no other females are seen in the game , except in cutscenes ; all the followers recruited in the game are male . In addition to the organized tribes are ' <unk> ' , neutral characters who cluster in groups around trees and water . Though they cannot attack or be attacked , players can use the Shaman 's Convert spell to bring <unk> under her tribe 's control . 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Populous : The Beginning takes place before the first two games in the series . The player controls the Blue tribe , pitted against the three enemy tribes which control most of the solar system . The player 's destiny as Shaman is to become a deity ; only by defeating all the enemies in the system can the player 's shaman become omnipotent . The player begins on the planet furthest from the sun , and attacks each planet in sequence . Along the way , the Shaman can learn new skills and magic to defeat her ( usually ) much more powerful enemies . Victory requires the player to either destroy the opposition , or on occasion perform special actions . The player loses if his or her Shaman is killed and there are no remaining followers , if the Shaman is killed and there is no circle of reincarnation , or the player runs out of time on timed levels . Upon beating back the other tribes , the Shaman ascends to godhood , and further helps her people conquer the Matak , Chumara and Dakini in one final conflict . 
 = = Development = = 
 Populous : The Beginning was the first in the series developed with entirely 3D graphics . The game was published more than four years after Populous II : Trials of the Olympian Gods with developers stating the delay was due to waiting for the hardware specifications to come along enough that they would allow them to do something very different and new . Producer Stuart Whyte said of the work , " We 're really proud of what we 've done in software because it does look really nice . " 
 The Populous series inspired the term " god game " , with players assuming the role of an omniscient being who lead his people to new territories or into battle . Alan Wright , the game 's project leader , stressed both the departure Populous : The Beginning took from previous titles in the series , as well as distinguishing itself from similar games like Command & Conquer . The elements of smart villagers and terrain @-@ reforming , he said , " adds a whole level of gameplay not found in those titles . " Bullfrog representative Brian Allen asserted that these departures distinguished Populous : The Beginning from other real @-@ time strategy games on the market at the time . In some aspects , the developers were forced to remove features due to technical constraints ; for example , the " Plague " spell from previous Populous titles was dropped because in practice the spell was too frustrating . 
 Originally , the game was known as Populous : The Third Coming , but the name was changed by the time the game was shown in a fully playable beta form in late 1998 . The game was the first in the series to be made without Populous creator Peter Molyneux , who had left Bullfrog to create Lionhead Studios . The music was composed by Mark Knight , who had joined Bullfrog 's team in 1997 . 
 Bullfrog released the Populous : The Beginning — Undiscovered Worlds in 1999 . The expansion was only made available in the UK and US . The add @-@ on offered twelve new single @-@ player and twelve multiplayer levels , with a continuation of the storyline begun in the previous game , where the player takes on the role of a new shaman who must restore peace to the solar system . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Populous : The Beginning received generally favorable reviews on release with some strong criticisms to follow . IGN 's Ward Trent was especially smitten with the immersive 3D graphics . Edge stated , " previous Bullfrog games have always placed gameplay above graphical finesse , but that 's no longer the case . " GameSpot 's reviewer Ron Dulin appreciated how The Beginning was a daring revamp of the series , instead of a safe , slightly modified sequel ( like the earlier Populous II : Trials of the Olympian Gods ) . Computer and Video Games rated The Beginning as a " better play " than the original . 
 Complaints about the game centered on the difficulty of controlling followers , the simplicity of gameplay , and the tension between game styles . The game 's AI allowed followers to automatically construct buildings , but this led to problems directing them in the midst of a hectic battle . IGN noted that with the player 's followers automatically going about daily life , the replay value was lowered even with the multiplayer options . Others agreed that the automation rendered gameplay too simple , with no upgrades or serious resource management , a sentiment PC Gamer expressed when they wrote that the missions " become mind @-@ numbingly repetitive " . 
 Populous : The Beginning played very differently from earlier titles . Edge concluded that while the more rigid play format of The Beginning was new to the series , it had the effect of making the end result " less show @-@ stopping " ; Edge believed that the game was caught between the god game and RTS genres , and did not excel at either . <unk> subsequently decided the game failed to live up to the previous games in the series . More charitably , GamePro 's Peter Olafson wrote : " Populous : The Beginning is not a bad game , in fact a good one ; but it 's a different game — one without a quintessential quality that defined Populous . " 
 = New Jersey Route 413 = 
 Route 413 is a 0 @.@ 76 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 22 km ) long state highway in New Jersey , United States . It is an eastward extension into New Jersey of the longer Pennsylvania Route 413 . The western terminus is in Burlington in the middle of the Burlington – Bristol Bridge crossing of the Delaware River at the New Jersey – Pennsylvania state border ; the eastern terminus is at an intersection with U.S. Route 130 . Despite the east – west orientation , Route 413 runs north – south , but PA Route 413 is signed north – south . Prior to the 1953 renumbering , Route 413 was Route <unk> , a prefixed spur of Route 25 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 New Jersey Route 413 begins at the state line , midway along the Burlington – Bristol Bridge , as a continuation of Pennsylvania State Route 413 . The highway heads northward , heading along Reed Street , and there is an intersection with Delaware Avenue West , and soon after , intersections with West Pearl Street , and a local highway . Passing a few residences , Route 413 intersects with West Pearl Street , and enters a more commercial type of region . The next intersection with Brown Street is jammed with houses , and nearby is a large parking lot . 
 At the intersection with Veterans Drive and Conover Street , Route 413 splits into a divided highway , and the highway intersects with West Broad Street . After West Broad Street , Route 413 merges back in , passing several more commercial buildings and heading into John Fitzgerald Kennedy Park . The route parallels to the east of Washington Street , where it heads into a roundabout and terminates at an intersection with U.S. Route 130 ( Camden Avenue ) in Burlington . 
 = = History = = 
 In the 1927 renumbering of highways in New Jersey , U.S. Route 130 was assigned as a part of New Jersey State Highway Route 25 , which made up U.S. Route 1 and U.S. Route 9 as well . During that renumbering in 1927 , Route 413 was originally New Jersey State Highway Route S @-@ 25 , a prefixed spur of State Highway Route 25 . The highway remained intact along its alignment in Keim Road to the Burlington – Bristol Bridge until January 1 , 1953 . 
 On January 1 , 1953 , the New Jersey State Highway Department performed a second renumbering of state highways . State Highway Route 25 , which had run at the southern terminus with Route 130 , was decommissioned for the sole designation . Since State Highway Route 25 was decommissioned , State Highway Route S @-@ 25 would be orphaned and was decommissioned that day . The Highway Department renumbered S @-@ 25 's alignment to NJ 413 , which continued as Pennsylvania Route 413 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = HMS Algerine ( <unk> ) = 
 HMS Algerine was the lead ship of her namesake class of minesweepers built for the Royal Navy during World War II , the Algerine @-@ class minesweepers . Initially assigned to the North Sea , she was transferred to lead the 12th Minesweeping Flotilla . The Flotilla were posted to the Mediterranean to assist with Operation Torch . In 1942 , after a successful mine clearing operation off <unk> , she was torpedoed by the Italian submarine <unk> , causing Algerine to sink , leaving only eight survivors . 
 = = Description = = 
 Algerine displaced 850 long tons ( 860 t ) at standard load and 1 @,@ 125 long tons ( 1 @,@ 143 t ) at deep load . The ship had an overall length of 225 feet ( 68 @.@ 6 m ) , a beam of 35 feet 6 inches ( 10 @.@ 8 m ) and a draught of 8 feet 6 inches ( 2 @.@ 6 m ) . She was powered by Parsons geared steam turbines , driving two shafts , which gave a maximum speed of 16 @.@ 5 knots ( 30 @.@ 6 km / h ; 19 @.@ 0 mph ) . 
 The ship mounted one single 4 @-@ inch Mk XIX gun . Algerine had four single mounts for 20 @-@ millimetre ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) Oerlikon 20 mm autocannon , and she was fitted with two depth charge rails , and four depth charge throwers . 
 = = Career = = 
 Algerine was laid down on 15 March 1941 , by Harland & Wolff , Belfast , and launched on 22 December 1941 . She was the eighth ship of the Royal Navy to be named Algerine . After being completed , the ship was commissioned on 24 March 1942 , and adopted by Sittingbourne due to a Warship Week campaign . 
 = = = 1942 = = = 
 Algerine joined the 9th Minesweeping Flotilla in May 1942 and began action in minesweeping , escorting , and patrolling duties on the east side of England . She was proposed as leader for the 12th Minesweeping Flotilla , which would participate in action abroad . Her sister ships from the 9th Flotilla , Alarm and Albacore , joined her , as did Acute , and Cadmus . In October , she was put forward to go to the Mediterranean to assist Operation Torch , but her departure was delayed due to repair work . The other four ships in her flotilla left for Gibraltar as escorts to a convoy . Four days after the other ships left , Algerine escorted convoy <unk> to Oran . 
 In early November , she helped recover the escort destroyer Cowdray off Algiers after Cowdray was damaged by an aerial attack . On 15 November , Algerine and Alarm were positioned off <unk> , clearing mines . The mission had been successful , with 46 mines cleared ; but , Algerine was torpedoed by the Italian <unk> @-@ class submarine <unk> , commanded by Lieutenant commander Rino Erler . The submarine had first fired two torpedoes at the middle ship in the trio , then fired another two torpedoes at the final ship , Algerine : Algerine suffered heavy casualties and sank . The converted merchant vessel <unk> rescued 32 men , of whom only 8 survived , internal wounds killing 24 . The survivors had been on a Carley raft . 
 Algerine 's wreck lies at 1 @,@ 100 ft ( 340 m ) on the northern coast of Algeria . 
 = Daniel S. Schanck Observatory = 
 The Daniel S. Schanck Observatory is a former astronomical observatory on the Queens Campus of Rutgers University in New Brunswick , New Jersey , United States . It is located along George Street near the corner with Hamilton Street at the side of the car park to Kirkpatrick Chapel , to the northwest of Old Queens and Geology Hall . 
 The two @-@ story Greek Revival building of the observatory was designed by architect Willard Smith after the Tower of the Winds in Athens and was built in 1865 . It was named after New York City businessman Daniel S. Schanck , who donated a large portion of the funds to construct and equip the observatory . Outfitted with telescopes , clocks , and other scientific equipment donated to Rutgers , the Schanck Observatory served as the university 's first astronomical observatory and was used to provide instruction to its students through the nineteenth and early twentieth century . 
 The observatory has not been in use since the 1960s . As part of the Queens Campus , the Schanck Observatory was included on the New Jersey Register of Historic Places and the National Register of Historic Places in 1973 . The building was renovated in 2012 . 
 = = History , architecture , and use = = 
 In 1864 , Rutgers College was named New Jersey 's sole land grant college which provided federal funding under the Morrill Act of 1862 for the development of engineering , scientific , agricultural , and military education . Previously , the college 's curriculum focused on the classics and liberal arts . David Murray ( 1830 – 1905 ) , professor of mathematics , natural philosophy and astronomy , proposed building the school 's first astronomical observatory to the college 's president , William Henry Campbell ( 1808 – 1890 ) , and its board of trustees . It would be the college 's fourth building . 
 The cost of construction and equipment amounted to US $ 6 @,@ 166 ( 2013 : US $ 86 @,@ 845 @.@ 07 ) , of which US $ 2 @,@ 400 ( 2013 : US $ 33 @,@ 802 @.@ 82 ) was donated by Daniel S. Schanck ( 1812 – 1872 ) . Schanck , a New York City businessman with roots in Monmouth County , New Jersey , was not an alumnus of the college , but was convinced to donate after being approached by friends of the college . Several years later , his son , Daniel S. Schanck ( 1853 – 1901 ) , would enroll in the college 's scientific course , and earn a bachelor 's degree ( <unk> ) in 1875 . 
 In 1865 , the trustees hired architect Willard Smith who provided a plan for a small two @-@ story octagonal Greek Revival building designed after the Tower of the Winds , a first @-@ century BC structure located in the agora of Athens , Greece that housed an ancient water clock and sundial . The observatory was constructed from " painted brick , with wood cornices and entrance porch , brownstone floor and steps " and featured a " small gable roofed Corinthian entrance porch with columns at the front corners , flat pilasters against the wall , entablature , and pediment . " Rutgers equipped the observatory with " a 6 @.@ 5 @-@ inch equatorial refracting telescope , a meridian circle with four @-@ inch object glass for transit observations , a sidereal clock , a mean solar clock ... <unk> , repeating circle , and other instruments . " Some of the equipment was donated by private individuals and by the college 's two literary societies , the Peithessophian and <unk> Societies . 
 The Schanck Observatory was dedicated on June 18 , 1866 with an address given by Joseph P. Bradley ( 1813 – 1892 ) , a Rutgers College alumnus ( A.B. 1836 ) and prominent attorney who four years later was installed as an Associate Justice on the Supreme Court of the United States . The observatory would be used for the instruction of students into the early twentieth century . However , it fell out of use before 1960 . Physics and Astronomy professor Paul L. Leath indicated that the observatory very accurately measured time through precise measurements of the transit of the sun . However , in later years , as trees grew around the building , and as the light pollution was introduced from street lights and a neighboring parking deck , the building could no longer be used for observation . The university 's astronomy department operates a modern observatory — the Robert A. <unk> Astronomical Observatory — that is located on the roof of the Serin Physics Laboratory ( built 1963 ) on the Busch Campus . The <unk> Observatory houses a 0 @.@ 5 meter telescope that was installed in 1996 . 
 As one of the six extant buildings on the university 's Queens Campus , the oldest buildings at Rutgers , the Schanck Observatory was included on the New Jersey Register of Historic Places and the National Register of Historic Places in 1973 . 
 The building fell into disrepair , and its equipment was damaged after several acts of vandalism in which unknown persons illegally entered the building and stole key components of the telescope . A restoration of the observatory building by Wu & Associates of Cherry Hill , New Jersey , was completed in 2012 . 
 = The Almost Nearly Perfect People = 
 The Almost Nearly Perfect People : The Truth About the Nordic Miracle is a 2014 nonfiction book by British journalist Michael Booth . In the book , Booth focuses on the five Nordic countries — Denmark , Iceland , Norway , Finland and Sweden — dedicating a section of the book to each one . He began writing the book after migrating from England to Denmark , based on his perceptions of the Nordic region before and after moving . He wanted to present an alternative perspective to the extremely positive depiction of the region in British media . The book received mixed reviews : some critics found it to be overly critical with poor humour , others praised its tone and <unk> . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Michael Booth began writing The Almost Nearly Perfect People when he moved from England to Denmark about 15 years before its publication in 2014 . Before moving , he had perceived Scandinavians to be a " bearded , woolly jumper @-@ wearing , recycling bunch of people " , but afterwards was surprised by how different each of the Nordic countries seemed to be . He wanted to write a book to explore these differences and to explain what he saw as a " fascinating dysfunctional family dynamic " between the five Nordic neighbors . He was further inspired by the " Nordic wave " phenomenon that gained popularity in the 2000s and 2010s when the western world became fascinated with the Nordic countries and their ways of life . In particular , he wanted to investigate Denmark 's consistently high scores on various happiness indexes , since these figures conflicted with his own observations that " they didn 't seem that happy " , and also challenge the perception that the Nordic nations as a group are " little jolly green countries in the north " . 
 Booth undertook four years of research while writing the book , including travelling to each of the countries and interviewing prominent political and cultural figures of each nationality . In writing about each country , he tried to examine both their successes and their weaknesses to " rebalance the utopian view " of Scandinavia held by many British people and to present a different perspective of the region than the extremely positive depiction in a lot of British media . The tone of the book was inspired by Simon Winder 's Germania , which combines humour with an historical and travel @-@ based narrative . 
 The book was published in English on 14 February 2014 by Jonathan Cape . Its first publication , however , was in September 2013 as a Danish translation . Although the manuscript was in English , it was translated and published first in Denmark . On 23 October 2014 , the book was translated into Finnish . The Polish translation came on 7 October 2015 . In addition , a Norwegian translation of the book is planned . 
 = = Content = = 
 The Almost Nearly Perfect People is divided into five sections for Denmark , Iceland , Norway , Finland and Sweden . Beginning with Denmark , Booth explains the Danish concept of <unk> ( " cosy times " ) , which he sees as conformism . He criticises the Danish population 's environmental footprint and notes that their taxation rate and levels of personal debt are among the highest in the world . Moving to Iceland , Booth details the banking practices that led to the collapse of the country 's largest banks in the 2008 financial crisis , as well as the popular belief among Icelanders in the existence of <unk> ( elves ) . 
 In Norway , he highlights the rise of far @-@ right politics , the widespread opposition to immigration , and the multiple high @-@ profile Norwegian neo @-@ Nazis . He notes that despite having a " nature @-@ loving " reputation , Norway has a large ecological footprint , and that the sale of fossil fuels accounts for much of the country 's wealth . He recounts Finland 's history of heavy alcohol consumption and its high rates of murder , suicide , and antipsychotic drug use . He explains the Finnish concept of <unk> and what he sees as the resulting obsession with machismo . 
 Sweden receives Booth 's strongest criticism , where consumerist influences are blamed for the apparent downfall of the Nordic model of social democracy and recurrent failures of the Swedish justice system . He argues that Sweden , with its strict rules of social etiquette , has a strong culture of conformity . 
 Denmark 
 Chapter 1 - Happiness 
 Chapter 2 - Bacon 
 Chapter 3 - Gini 
 Chapter 4 - <unk> 
 Chapter 5 - Chicken 
 Chapter 6 - Vikings 
 Chapter 7 - 72 per cent 
 Chapter 8 - Hot @-@ tub <unk> 
 Chapter 9 - The bumblebee 
 Chapter 10 - Denim dungarees 
 Chapter 11 - The Law of <unk> 
 Chapter 12 - <unk> 
 Chapter 13 - Legoland and Other Spiritual Sites 
 Chapter 14 - The happiness delusion 
 Iceland 
 Chapter 1 - <unk> 
 Chapter 2 - Bankers 
 Chapter 3 - Denmark 
 Chapter 4 - Elves 
 Chapter 5 - Steam 
 Norway 
 Chapter 1 - <unk> 
 Chapter 2 - <unk> 
 Chapter 3 - The new Quislings 
 Chapter 4 - <unk> 
 Chapter 5 - Bananas 
 Chapter 6 - Dutch disease 
 Chapter 7 - Butter 
 Finland 
 Chapter 1 - Santa 
 Chapter 2 - Silence 
 Chapter 3 - Alcohol 
 Chapter 4 - Sweden 
 Chapter 5 - Russia 
 Chapter 6 - School 
 Chapter 7 - Wives 
 Sweden 
 Chapter 1 - Crayfish 
 Chapter 2 - Donald Duck 
 Chapter 3 - Stockholm syndrome 
 Chapter 4 - Integration 
 Chapter 5 - <unk> 
 Chapter 6 - Somali pizza 
 Chapter 7 - The party 
 Chapter 8 - Guilt 
 Chapter 9 - <unk> 
 Chapter 10 - Class 
 Chapter 11 - Ball bearings 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Almost Nearly Perfect People received mixed reviews from critics : 
 <unk> <unk> described the book for The Guardian as a " comprehensive and occasionally downright hilarious explanation of the Nordic miracle " and praised its " companionable , lightly mocking tone " . 
 Alwyn Turner gave the book 4 ( out of 5 ) stars in a review for The Daily Telegraph , writing that " if [ Booth 's ] tone is sometimes a little too jokey , his enthusiasm is contagious " and that " the real joy of the book " lay in the collection of interesting trivia . 
 The Literary Review 's Bernard Porter found the book to be " a thoroughly entertaining read , written brilliantly " , but criticised its largely impressionistic nature and the lack of sources and references . 
 Ian Thomson of The Guardian described the book as " informative , if strenuously humorous " , but felt that Booth 's " schoolboy humour " was at times " pretty embarrassing " . 
 Anna <unk> , writing for the Rationalist Association , felt that Booth relied too much on quoted studies and surveys and ought to have included more interviews with " ordinary locals " . 
 The Financial Times ' Richard Milne wrote that , despite Booth 's tendency to reinforce some stereotypes , " Behind the jokey tone is a lot of good material " , and described the book as " a welcome rejoinder to those who cling to the idea of the Nordic region as a promised land " . 
 Sara <unk> opined in the GB Times that the book 's section on Iceland was somewhat superficial and that Booth 's analysis of Sweden was too critical , but nevertheless , " while he does make a lot of fun of the Nordic countries , I think you can feel his affection for the inhabitants too . " 
 = Port Chicago disaster = 
 The Port Chicago disaster was a deadly munitions explosion that occurred on July 17 , 1944 , at the Port Chicago Naval Magazine in Port Chicago , California , United States . Munitions detonated while being loaded onto a cargo vessel bound for the Pacific Theater of Operations , killing 320 sailors and civilians and injuring 390 others . Most of the dead and injured were enlisted African @-@ American sailors . 
 A month later , unsafe conditions inspired hundreds of servicemen to refuse to load munitions , an act known as the Port Chicago Mutiny . Fifty men ‍ — ‌ called the " Port Chicago 50 " ‍ — ‌ were convicted of mutiny and sentenced to long prison terms . Forty @-@ seven of the 50 were released in January 1946 ; the remaining three served additional months in prison . 
 During and after the trial , questions were raised about the fairness and legality of the court @-@ martial proceedings . Due to public pressure , the United States Navy reconvened the courts @-@ martial board in 1945 ; the court affirmed the guilt of the convicted men . Widespread publicity surrounding the case turned it into a cause célèbre among certain Americans ; it and other race @-@ related Navy protests of 1944 – 45 led the Navy to change its practices and initiate the desegregation of its forces beginning in February 1946 . In 1994 , the Port Chicago Naval Magazine National Memorial was dedicated to the lives lost in the disaster . 
 = = Background = = 
 The town of Port Chicago was located on Suisun Bay in the estuary of the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers . Suisun Bay is connected to the Pacific Ocean by San Francisco Bay . In 1944 , the town was a little more than a mile from a U.S. Navy munitions depot , the Port Chicago Naval Magazine , which was later expanded and renamed the Concord Naval Weapons Station but is now called the Military Ocean Terminal Concord . The original magazine was planned in 1941 with construction beginning shortly after the attack on Pearl Harbor . The first ship to dock at Port Chicago was loaded on December 8 , 1942 . 
 Munitions transported through the magazine included bombs , shells , naval mines , torpedoes and small arms ammunition . The munitions , destined for the Pacific Theater of Operations , were delivered to the Port Chicago facility by rail then individually loaded by hand , crane and winch onto cargo ships for transport to the war zones . From the beginning , all the enlisted men employed as loaders at Port Chicago were African American ; all their commanding officers were White . Each of the enlisted men had been specifically trained for one of the naval ratings during his stay at Naval Station Great Lakes ( NSGL ) but the men were instead put to work as stevedores . None of the new recruits had been instructed in ammunition loading . 
 = = = Quality of men = = = 
 At NSGL , the enlisted African Americans who tested in the top 25 to 40 percent were selected for non @-@ labor battalion assignments . Port Chicago was manned by workers drawn from those remaining . The Navy determined that the quality of African @-@ American petty officers at Port Chicago suffered because of the absence of high @-@ scoring black men , and that overall levels of competence were further reduced by the occasional requirement for Port Chicago to supply drafts of men with clear records for transfer to other stations . The Navy 's General Classification Test ( <unk> ) results for the enlisted men at Port Chicago averaged 31 , putting them in the lowest twelfth of the Navy . Officers at Port Chicago considered the enlisted men unreliable , emotional and lacking the capacity to understand or remember orders or instructions . 
 Black laborers at Port Chicago were led by black petty officers who were regarded by some workers as incompetent and ineffective in voicing their men 's concerns to higher authority . Petty officers were seen as having aims fundamentally different from those of their men ‍ — ‌ they were described later as " slave drivers " and " Uncle Toms " . They and their men sometimes struck an antagonistic relationship . 
 Captain Merrill T. Kinne ‍ — ‌ commander of the Port Chicago facility at the time of the explosion ‍ — ‌ had served in the Navy from 1915 to 1922 and had returned to the Navy from civilian life in 1941 to be posted aboard a general cargo ship . Prior to his being sent to command Port Chicago , Kinne had no training in the loading of munitions and very little experience in handling them . White loading officers serving underneath Kinne had not been trained in supervising enlisted personnel or in handling munitions until they had been posted to Mare Island Navy Yard , after which they were considered adequate to the task by the Navy . 
 = = = Speed contests and safety training = = = 
 Since April 1944 when Captain Kinne assumed command of Port Chicago , the loading officers had been pushing the enlisted men to load the explosive cargoes very quickly ; 10 short tons ( 9 @.@ 1 t ) per hatch per hour had been set as the desired level by Captain Nelson Goss , Commander Mare Island Navy Yard , whose jurisdiction included Port Chicago Naval Magazine . Most loading officers considered this goal too high . On a prominent chalkboard , Kinne tallied each crew 's average tonnage per hour . The junior officers placed bets with each other in support of their own 100 @-@ man crews ‍ — ‌ called " divisions " at Port Chicago ‍ — ‌ and coaxed their crews to load more than the others . The enlisted men were aware of the unsanctioned nature of the bets and knew to slow down to a more reasonable pace whenever a senior officer appeared . The average rate achieved at Port Chicago in the months leading up to July 1944 was 8 @.@ 2 short tons ( 7 @.@ 4 t ) per hatch per hour ; commercial stevedores at Mare Island performed only slightly better at 8 @.@ 7 short tons ( 7 @.@ 9 t ) per hatch per hour . 
 There was no system at Port Chicago for making sure officers and men were familiar with safety regulations . Two formal lectures and several informal lectures were given to the enlisted men by commanding officers , but follow @-@ up confirmation of retained knowledge did not take place . Safety regulations were posted at a single location at the pier but not within each of the barracks ‍ — ‌ Kinne did not think the enlisted men would be able to comprehend such a list . The International Longshore and Warehouse Union ( <unk> ) responded to word of unsafe practices by offering to bring in experienced men to train the battalion but Navy leadership declined the offer , fearing higher costs , slower pace , and possible sabotage from civilian longshoremen . No enlisted man stationed at Port Chicago had ever received formal training in the handling and loading of explosives into ships . Even the officers did not receive training : Lieutenant Commander Alexander Holman , loading officer at Port Chicago whose duties included officer training , had initiated a search for training materials and samples but failed to organize a training class before disaster struck . 
 = = = Winch maintenance = = = 
 Powered winches were used on cargo ships to speed the handling of heavy loads . One winch was operated at each of the ship 's five cargo holds . During loading operations , the winches were worked hard , requiring steady maintenance to remain operable . Winch brakes ‍ — ‌ a safety feature provided for stopping the load from falling if the winch 's main power was lost ‍ — ‌ were not often used by a skilled winch operator , as the load could be more quickly maneuvered using various power settings than by application of the brakes . Disused brakes sometimes seized up and stopped working . The winches on the SS E. A. Bryan were steam @-@ powered and showed signs of wear , even though the ship was only five months old . 
 On July 13 , 1944 , the day that the E. A. Bryan docked at Port Chicago , the ship 's No. 1 winch brakes were found stuck in the " off " position , meaning that the winch could be operated freely , but lacked the critical stopping capability if steam pressure was interrupted . The ship 's chief mate and chief engineer were called to examine the winch but it was never determined whether the brake was made operational . During loading operations on July 15 the winch at No. 2 hold began making a hammering noise . A steady application of grease quietened it through the night until its main bearing could be replaced the next morning on July 16 . On the afternoon of July 17 , a bleeder valve on winch No. 4 required immediate repair . Albert Carr , a civil service plumber from Pittsburg , California , was called to replace it ; it was his first day at Port Chicago . Carr pulled a broken nipple out of the bleeder valve and replaced both the nipple and the valve from new stock taken from Port Chicago 's shop . While at work he witnessed a man accidentally drop a naval artillery shell two feet onto the wooden pier but there was no detonation . Carr waited until the African @-@ American winch operator tested the newly repaired winch then hurriedly left the pier , thinking that the whole operation appeared unsafe . 
 = = = Munitions handling = = = 
 The enlisted men were leery of working with deadly explosives but were told by officers that the larger munitions were not active and could not explode ‍ — ‌ that they would be armed with their fuzes upon arrival at the combat theater . Handling of larger munitions , such as bombs and shells , involved using levers and crowbars from boxcars , in which they were packed tightly with <unk> ‍ — ‌ lifting the heavy , grease @-@ coated cylinders , rolling them along the wooden pier , packing them into nets , lifting them by winch and boom , lowering the bundle into the hold , then dropping individual munitions by hand a short distance into place . This series of actions was rough enough that damaged naval shells sometimes leaked identification dye from their ballistic caps . 
 Commander Paul B. Cronk , head of a Coast Guard explosives @-@ loading detail tasked with supervision of the working dock , warned the Navy that conditions were unsafe and ripe for disaster . The Navy refused to change its procedures and Cronk withdrew the detail . 
 = = Explosion = = 
 The Liberty ship SS E. A. Bryan docked at the inboard , landward side of Port Chicago 's single 1 @,@ 500 ft ( 460 m ) pier at 8 : 15 a.m. on July 13 , 1944 . The ship arrived at the dock with empty cargo holds but was carrying a full load of 5 @,@ 292 barrels ( 841 @,@ 360 liters ) of bunker C heavy fuel oil for its intended trip across the Pacific Ocean . At 10 a.m. that same day , seamen from the ordnance battalion began loading the ship with munitions . After four days of around @-@ the @-@ clock loading , about 4 @,@ 600 tons ( 4 @,@ 173 metric tons ) of explosives had been stored in its holds . The ship was about 40 % full by the evening of July 17 . 
 At 10 p.m. on July 17 , Division Three 's 98 men were loading E. A. Bryan with 1 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 450 kg ) bombs into No. 3 hold , 40 mm shells into No. 5 hold and fragmentation cluster bombs into No. 4 hold . Incendiary bombs were being loaded as well ; these bombs weighed 650 lb ( 290 kg ) each and were " live " ‍ — ‌ they had their fuzes installed . The incendiary bombs were being loaded carefully one at a time into No. 1 hold ‍ — ‌ the hold with a winch brake that might still have been inoperative . 
 A boxcar delivery containing a new airborne anti @-@ submarine depth charge design , the Mark 47 armed with 252 lb ( 114 kg ) of torpex , was being loaded into No. 2 hold . The torpex charges were more sensitive than TNT to external shock and container dents . On the pier , resting on three parallel rail spurs , were sixteen rail cars holding about 430 short tons ( 390 t ) of explosives . In all , the munitions on the pier and in the ship contained the equivalent of approximately 2 @,@ 000 short tons ( 1 @,@ 800 t ) of TNT . 
 One hundred and two men of the Sixth Division , many fresh from training at NSGL , were busy rigging the newly built Victory ship SS Quinault Victory ( also spelled <unk> ) in preparation for loading it with explosives , a task that was to begin at midnight . The Quinault contained a partial load of fuel oil , some of which was of a type that released flammable fumes as it sat , or upon agitation . The fuel , taken aboard at Shell Oil Company 's Martinez refinery mid @-@ day on July 17 , would normally be sluiced to other fuel tanks in the following 24 hours . 
 Sixty @-@ seven officers and crew of the two ships were at their stations , and various support personnel were present such as the three @-@ man civilian train crew and a Marine sentry . Nine Navy officers and 29 armed guards watched over the procedure . A Coast Guard fire barge with a crew of five was docked at the pier . An officer who left the docks shortly after 10 p.m. noticed that the Quinault ′ s propeller was slowly turning over and that the men of Division Three were having trouble pulling munitions from the rail cars because they had been packed so tightly . 
 At 10 : 18 p.m. , witnesses reported hearing a noise described as " a metallic sound and rending timbers , such as made by a falling boom . " Immediately afterward , an explosion occurred on the pier and a fire started . Five to seven seconds later a more powerful explosion took place as the majority of the ordnance within and near the SS E. A. Bryan detonated in a fireball seen for miles . An Army Air Forces pilot flying in the area reported that the fireball was 3 mi ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) in diameter . Chunks of glowing hot metal and burning ordnance were flung over 12 @,@ 000 ft ( 3 @,@ 700 m ) into the air . The E. A. Bryan was completely destroyed and the Quinault was blown out of the water , torn into sections and thrown in several directions ; the stern landed upside down in the water 500 ft ( 150 m ) away . The Coast Guard fire boat CG @-@ <unk> @-@ F was thrown 600 ft ( 180 m ) upriver , where it sank . The pier , along with its boxcars , locomotive , rails , cargo , and men , was blasted into pieces . Nearby boxcars ‍ — ‌ waiting within their revetments to be unloaded at midnight ‍ — ‌ were bent inward and crumpled by the force of the shock . The port 's barracks and other buildings and much of the surrounding town were severely damaged . Shattering glass and a rain of jagged metal and undetonated munitions caused many more injuries among military personnel and civilians , although no one outside the immediate pier area was killed . Nearly $ 9 @.@ 9 million worth of damage ( $ 133 million in current value ) was caused to U.S. Government property . <unk> at the University of California , Berkeley sensed the two shock waves traveling through the ground , determining the second , larger event to be equivalent to an earthquake measuring 3 @.@ 4 on the Richter magnitude scale . 
 All 320 of the men on duty at the pier died instantly , and 390 civilians and military personnel were injured , many seriously . Among the dead were all five Coast Guard personnel posted aboard the fire barge . African Americans hurt and killed totaled 202 dead and 233 injured , which accounted for 15 % of all African @-@ American naval casualties during World War II . Naval personnel worked quickly to contain the fires and to prevent other explosions . Injuries were treated , those seriously injured were hospitalized , and uninjured servicemen were evacuated to nearby stations . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the fires had been contained there remained the gruesome task of cleaning up ‍ — ‌ body parts and corpses littered the bay and port . Of the 320 dead , only 51 could be identified . Most of the uninjured sailors volunteered to help clean up and rebuild the base ; Division Two was separated into a group that would stay and clean up and a group that would be moved out . This section of Division Two and all of Divisions Four and Eight were transferred to Camp Shoemaker , about 30 mi ( 48 km ) south , where they were assigned barracks duty until July 31 , 1944 . The men of Divisions One , Five and Seven were reassigned other duty in distant locations and shipped out . The cleanup detail from Division Two dug into the wreckage of the pier and began tearing out the damaged portions . Beginning in August , Divisions Four and Eight and both sections of Division Two moved to the Ryder Street Naval Barracks in Vallejo , California , across a short channel from Mare Island , where they were assigned barracks duties with no ship @-@ loading . The men were in a state of shock ; all were nervous . Many of them inquired about obtaining a 30 @-@ day " survivor 's leave " sometimes given by the Navy to sailors who had survived a serious incident where their friends or shipmates had died , but no 30 @-@ day leaves were granted , not even to those who had been hospitalized with injuries . White officers , however , received the leave , causing a major grievance among the enlisted men . 
 A Naval Board of Inquiry was convened on July 21 , 1944 , to find out what had happened . The official proceeding lasted for 39 days and included interviews with witnesses who were officers , civilians and enlisted men . Ordnance experts were questioned as well as inspectors who had overseen previous loading procedures . Five African Americans were questioned , none of whom were later to refuse to load ammunition . Captain Kinne 's posted division tonnage results came to light in the inquiry but Kinne stated that the competition to load the most tonnage did not make for unsafe conditions ; he implied that any junior officers who said so did not know what they were talking about . 
 The inquiry covered possible explosion scenarios involving sabotage , faulty fueling procedures , failure of the moorings of the Quinault Victory , defects in munitions , the presence of a super sensitive element in the ordnance , problems with steam winches and rigging , rough handling by loaders and organizational problems within the base . The Navy determined that the tonnage contest between divisions was not at fault , although the Judge Advocate warned that " the loading of explosives should never be a matter of competition . " The officers in charge were cleared of guilt . The report stated that the cause of the explosion could not be determined , but implied that a mistake made by the enlisted men in the handling of the ordnance was most likely at root . No mention was made of the men 's lack of training in the handling of explosives . 
 The Navy asked Congress to give each victim 's family $ 5 @,@ 000 . Representative John E. Rankin ( D @-@ Mississippi ) insisted the amount be reduced to $ 2 @,@ 000 when he learned most of the dead were black men . Congress settled on $ 3 @,@ 000 in compensation . Years later , on March 4 , 1949 , the heirs of eighteen merchant seamen killed in the explosion were granted a total of $ 390 @,@ 000 after gaining approval of their consent decrees in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California . 
 A memorial ceremony was held for the victims on July 31 , 1944 , at Port Chicago . Admiral Carleton H. Wright , Commander , 12th Naval District , spoke of the unfortunate deaths and the need to keep the base operating during a time of war . He gave Navy and Marine Corps Medals for bravery to four officers and men who had successfully fought a fire in a rail car parked within a revetment near the pier . The remains of 44 of the victims were interred at Golden Gate National Cemetery , Sections L and H , with 17 men identified by name and the rest provided with headstones reading " Unknown U.S. Sailor . " 
 Wright soon began implementing a plan to have two groups of white sailors load ammunition in rotation with black sailors : one division of 100 men at Mare Island and another at Port Chicago . No plan was forwarded to use black officers to command the black sailors , and no plan included any form of desegregation . Wright sent a report of the incident to Washington , DC , telling his superior officers that the men 's " refusal to perform the required work arises from a mass fear arising out of the Port Chicago explosion . " Wright 's report was passed to President Franklin D. Roosevelt by Secretary of the Navy James Forrestal who added his opinion that it was " mass fear " motivating the work stoppage . Forrestal told Roosevelt that white units of munitions loaders were to be added to the rotation " ... to avoid any semblance of discrimination against negroes [ sic ] . " Roosevelt forwarded a copy to his wife Eleanor , knowing of her ongoing advocacy of civil rights for African Americans . 
 = = Port Chicago mutiny = = 
 = = = Initial actions = = = 
 Divisions Two , Four and Eight ‍ — ‌ reinforced with replacement sailors fresh from training at NSGL ‍ — ‌ were taken to Mare Island Navy Yard where there was an ammunition depot and loading piers . On August 8 , 1944 , the USS Sangay docked to be loaded with naval mines and other munitions . 328 men were asked , not ordered , to resume the dangerous task of ammunition loading ; all said they were afraid and that they would not load munitions under the same officers and conditions as before . It was a mass work stoppage , which would have been called a strike if the workers had been civilians . 
 The Navy would not countenance such conduct , especially in time of war . Seventy of the men changed their minds after their superior officers made it clear that loading ammunition was their duty . On August 9 , 258 African @-@ American sailors in the ordnance battalion continued to refuse to load ammunition . These men were taken under guard to a barge that was used as a temporary military prison or " brig , " despite having been built to accommodate only 75 men . Most of the men in the brig had not been given a direct order ‍ — ‌ they had simply been asked if they were going to load ships or not , and to step to one side if not . All said they were afraid of another explosion . Civilian stevedore contractors were called to replace the imprisoned men in loading the Sangay . 
 Among the prisoners , Seaman First Class Joseph Randolph " Joe " Small , a winch operator in Division Four and a natural leader who called cadence when his division marched , was asked by officers to assemble a handful of reliable men as a team of acting petty officers and to keep the other prisoners on good behavior . On August 10 , there had been conflicts between the prisoners and their guards as the prisoners were marched to the mess hall for meals . There was also a brief fight in the mess hall , and some prisoners were seen sharpening spoons into makeshift knives . Small sensed a general air of rebelliousness among the prisoners . To counteract the rising tension and offset the disaster he saw coming , Small convened a short meeting that evening aboard the crowded barge and told the prisoners to " knock off the horseplay " , stay out of trouble and obey the shore patrol guards ( who were black ) and the officers , because the alternative ( white Marines as guards ) would be worse . He said to the men , " We 've got the officers by the balls ‍ — ‌ they can do nothing to us if we don 't do anything to them . If we stick together , they can 't do anything to us . " 
 On August 11 , 1944 , the 258 men from the prison barge were marched to a nearby sports field and lectured by Admiral Wright who told them that troops fighting on Saipan desperately needed the ammunition they were supposed to be loading and that continued refusal to work would be treated as mutinous conduct , which carried the death penalty in times of war . Wright , who had seen nearly 400 of his men killed in 1942 in the Battle of Tassafaronga , said that although loading ammunition was risky , death by firing squad was the greater hazard . 
 After the admiral departed , the men were ordered to separate themselves into two groups , one for those willing to obey all orders and one for those not willing . To a man , Division Eight chose to obey all orders . Divisions Two and Four were split by the decisions of their men : Small and 43 others chose to form a group unwilling to obey every order . These 44 were taken back to the brig and the remaining 214 were sent to barracks . On the morning of August 12 , six men from Divisions Two and Four who had put themselves in the obey @-@ all @-@ orders group failed to show up for work call ; these six were confined to the brig , making 50 prisoners in all . These 50 were identified by the Navy as mutineers . 
 Throughout August , all 258 sailors were taken to Camp Shoemaker and questioned . Forty @-@ nine of the 50 " mutineers " were imprisoned in the camp 's brig . Joe Small was placed in solitary confinement . Each of the men was interviewed by officers , sometimes in the presence of an armed guard . Questions focused on identifying " ringleaders " of the work @-@ stoppage and on what was said by whom at the meeting on the prison barge . The men were asked to sign statements summarizing the interrogation , but the officer 's version rarely matched the enlisted man 's recollection of the interview . Some men , upon seeing that the written statements did not reflect what they had said , refused to sign . Others felt they had no choice but to sign ‍ — ‌ they were being ordered to do so by an officer . Several men refused to give any statement at all . Others spoke freely , thinking that the officer was there as defense counsel . 
 After all the interviews concluded , the group of 208 men were convicted in summary courts @-@ martial of disobeying orders , Article 4 of the Articles for the Government of the United States Navy ( Rocks and Shoals ) . Each man was subject to forfeiture of three months ' pay . A few of them were held as witnesses in the upcoming mutiny trial . The rest were split into smaller groups and shipped out to various places in the Pacific Theater . Carl Tuggle , one of the 208 , said in 1998 that a group of prisoners including himself were assigned menial tasks such as cleaning latrines and picking up cigarette butts at a series of Pacific islands . After returning from active duty they each received bad conduct discharges , which meant the loss of virtually all veterans ' benefits . 
 = = = Port Chicago 50 = = = 
 The 50 remaining men ‍ — ‌ soon to be known as the " Port Chicago 50 " ‍ — ‌ were formally charged in early September 1944 with disobeying orders and making a mutiny " with a deliberate purpose and intent to override superior military authority " . This was a crime punishable by death since the United States was at war . Even if the men were not given death sentences , they could get prison terms of 15 years . 
 The Navy set up the court @-@ martial in a disused Marine barracks building at Treasure Island , halfway between Oakland and San Francisco . Reporters from the major and local newspapers were invited to watch the proceedings ; Navy public relations officers gave reporters copies of photographs and press statements describing the trial as the first mutiny trial in World War II and the largest mass trial the Navy had ever convened . Chosen to head the seven @-@ man court was Rear Admiral Hugo Wilson Osterhaus , United States Naval Academy , class of 1900 . The prosecution team was led by Lieutenant Commander James F. Coakley who had recently served as deputy chief prosecutor in Alameda County under district attorney Earl Warren . Defending the accused men were six Navy lawyers , one as leader of the team and one attorney for every 10 men . Lieutenant Gerald E. Veltmann headed the defense . 
 Veltmann and his team talked to the accused men prior to the trial to prepare their defense . They discovered that not all of the 50 were experienced ship loaders . Two of the men taken to the brig had never before loaded ammunition ‍ — ‌ they were permanently assigned as cooks because of physical conditions making them unsuited to loading . The two cooks had responded " no " when asked if they would load munitions . Another of the 50 , who had a broken wrist in a sling was also asked if he would load ammunition , to which he replied that he would not . More importantly , Veltmann sensed that the men had not conspired to seize command from their superior officers . In a pre @-@ trial brief , Veltmann cited the definition of mutiny from Winthrop 's Military Law and Precedents and asked that the mutiny charges be dismissed as the formal charges against the 50 men failed to allege that they conspired together deliberately to " usurp , subvert or override superior military authority " . Coakley opposed with a brief stating that , under military law , a persistent refusal to work by two or more men ‍ — ‌ something that might be called a " strike " among civilians ‍ — ‌ was sufficient proof of a conspiracy to override superior military authority and was equivalent to mutiny . Osterhaus agreed with Coakley and refused Veltmann 's motion ; the trial would proceed as planned . 
 = = = Prosecution = = = 
 The trial started on September 14 with each of the 50 men pleading " not guilty " . Coakley began his prosecution by calling officers from Port Chicago and Mare Island as witnesses . Commander Joseph R. Tobin of Ryder Street Naval Barracks said that he personally ordered six or seven of the men to load munitions on August 9 but was unable to verify if any others were so ordered . He said that the men he had spoken with were willing to follow any order except to load munitions ; that each man expressed fear of another explosion . Tobin verified that the men were not aggressive or disrespectful . Lieutenant Ernest Delucchi , Commander of Division Four at Port Chicago , testified that he personally ordered only four of the 50 defendants to load munitions . Delucchi described overhearing men of Division Eight say to his men , " Don 't go to work for the white motherfuckers " but , under cross @-@ examination , was unable to identify who said it . Veltmann objected to this hearsay but was overruled after Coakley explained it was evidence toward conspiracy . 
 On September 15 , Delucchi continued his testimony , saying that some of his men told him they would obey all orders and perform all work except loading ammunition because they were afraid of it . Delucchi confirmed that a cook and a man with a broken wrist were among the 25 men in his division that now sat among the 50 accused . Delucchi added that the cook and a second man were sailors he did not consider " up to par " ; the cook in particular was prone to nervous attacks and was seen as a liability at the pier . 
 Later in the trial , Lieutenant Carleton Morehouse ‍ — ‌ Commander of Division Eight at Port Chicago ‍ — ‌ took the stand to say that at the first sign of problems on August 9 , he assembled his men and read their names off alphabetically , ordering each man to work . Ninety @-@ six of 104 refused and were sent to the prison barge , but all of these men agreed to work after hearing Admiral Wright 's speech on August 11 ; none of Morehouse 's men were on trial for mutiny . Morehouse confirmed to Veltmann that some of his men had said they were afraid to handle ammunition . Following Morehouse , Lieutenant James E. Tobin , Commander of Division Two , took the stand . Lieutenant Tobin ( no relation to Commander Joseph R. Tobin ) related that 87 of his men initially refused to work but that number was reduced to 22 after Admiral Wright talked about the firing squad . Tobin said he put three additional men in the brig the next morning when they , too , refused to work , saying they were afraid . Tobin affirmed that one of the accused men from Division Two was permanently assigned the job of cook because he weighed 104 lb ( 47 kg ) and was considered too small to safely load ammo . 
 The next few days of testimony were filled with accounts from African @-@ American enlisted men from Divisions Two , Four and Eight , who were not standing accused of mutiny . Some of these men had already been convicted of disobeying orders in summary courts @-@ martial . The testimony of the men agreed on several points : that there had been talk among them of a mass work @-@ stoppage leading up to August 9 , that some men ( none of the accused 50 ) had passed around and signed a petition to avoid loading ammunition , and that Joe Small had spoken at the meeting on the prison barge and had urged the men to obey their officers and to conduct themselves in an orderly fashion . Some men said Small 's speech included words to the effect of having the officers " by the tail " or " by the ass " . Coakley was challenged by Veltmann when he attempted to bring the men 's signed statements in as evidence but the court allowed the statements to be used to refresh the men 's memories of their answers to interrogation . 
 Coakley summed up his prosecution case on September 22 . His aim was to show the court that a conspiracy had taken place ‍ — ‌ the mass of accounts from officers and men appeared to support the conclusion that ringleaders and agitators had forced a rebellion against authority . Veltmann pointed out that few of the accused had been ordered to load ammunition , meaning that they could not all be guilty of the charge of disobeying orders . Veltmann stressed that much of the testimony was hearsay and failed to establish a conspiracy or a mutiny . The court , however , seemed to side with Coakley on all points , settling each objection in favor of the prosecution . 
 = = = Defense = = = 
 Veltmann scored a victory at the beginning of his defense : he moved and was granted that each officer 's testimony could only be applied to the men they had specifically named as having been given the order to work . In principle , this ruling was favorable , but in practice it would only benefit the men if the court had been attentively keeping notes for each accused man . Instead , the court was observed by reporters to be drowsy at times , with one particular judge regularly nodding off . 
 Starting on September 23 and continuing for over three weeks , each of the accused men was brought to the witness stand to testify in his defense . The general trend of the men 's responses was that all of them were willing to obey any order except to load ammunition , all were afraid of another explosion , and none had been approached by " ringleaders " persuading them not to work ‍ — ‌ each had made his own decision . Each man said that he himself had not coerced others to refuse to work . Some of the men related how , following the official interrogation at Camp Shoemaker , they had been under great pressure to sign statements containing things they had not said . Some men said that , at the meeting on the barge , Joe Small had not urged a mutiny and had not uttered any phrase to the effect of having the officers " by the balls " . On the witness stand , Small himself denied saying any such thing , though he would admit to it decades later in interviews . 
 Coakley 's cross @-@ examinations began with an attempt to have the signed statements admitted as evidence . Veltmann objected that each statement was obtained under duress and was not voluntary . Coakley characterized the statements as not being confessions requiring voluntary conditions but merely " admissions " that had no such requirement . Osterhaus ruled that Coakley could not introduce the statements as evidence but that he could ask the defendants questions based on what each man 's signed statement contained . 
 Some of the men who had been named as having been given direct orders to work testified that they had not been given any such order . Seaman Ollie E. Green ‍ — ‌ who had accidentally broken his wrist one day prior to the first work @-@ stoppage on August 9 ‍ — ‌ said that though he had heard an officer in prior testimony name him as one who had been given a direct order , the officer had only asked him how his wrist was doing , to which he responded " not so good . " 
 At the end of his testimony , Green told the court that he was afraid to load ammunition because of " them officers racing each division to see who put on the most tonnage , and I knowed the way they was handling ammunition it was liable to go off again . If we didn 't want to work fast at that time , they wanted to put us in the brig , and when the exec came down on the docks , they wanted us to slow up . " This was the first that the newspaper reporters had heard of speed and tonnage competition between divisions at Port Chicago , and each reporter filed a story featuring this revelation to be published the next day . Naval authorities quickly issued a statement denying Green 's allegation . 
 Another one of the men gave the surprising testimony that Lieutenant Commander Coakley had threatened to have him shot after he refused to answer some questions during interrogation at Camp Shoemaker . Seaman Alphonso McPherson held fast to his testimony even when faced by Coakley in cross @-@ examination . Coakley denied threatening anyone , exclaiming that such an idea was a personal affront . Veltmann responded that this line of evidence was news to him , too . The next day , Coakley gave the press a statement accusing Veltmann of coaching McPherson . 
 October 9 , 1944 , was another in a string of days consisting of accused men testifying on the witness stand . This day , however , Thurgood Marshall , chief counsel for the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People ( NAACP ) , sat in on the proceedings . Marshall had flown to the Bay Area on a special wartime travel priority arranged by Navy Secretary Forrestal . The NAACP had given the mutiny trial top importance due to the U.S. Navy 's policy of putting Negroes into dirty and dangerous jobs with no hope of advancement . Although Marshall was allowed to observe the trial , as a civilian he was ineligible to take an official role in the men 's defense . After hearing five of the men defend themselves , Marshall spoke to the 50 men and then conferred with Veltmann 's defense team . The next day , Marshall held a press conference , charging that Judge Advocate Coakley was handling the case in a prejudicial manner . Marshall said that , from a review of the proceedings and his conversations with the accused , he could only see these men being tried for lesser charges of individual insubordination , not mass mutiny . 
 The defense continued a few more days with testimony from a Navy psychiatrist who verified that the immense explosion would generate fear in each man . A black petty officer under Delucchi testified that he had heard no derogatory remarks or conspiratorial comments and that it had been a surprise to everybody when all of the men suddenly refused to march toward the docks on August 9 . 
 Marshall held another press conference on October 17 to announce that the NAACP was requesting a formal government investigation into the working conditions that had led the men to strike . He called attention to three aspects : the Navy policy that put the great majority of African Americans into segregated shore duty , the unsafe munitions handling practices and lack of training that had led to the catastrophic detonation ‍ — ‌ and the unfair manner in which 50 of 258 men had been singled out as <unk> when their actions concerning loading ammunition after the explosion were not significantly different from the other 208 men . Marshall pointed to the men of Division One who had refused to load ammunition prior to August 9 , but had been shipped out and given other duty , not arrested and court @-@ martialled . 
 Coakley 's rebuttal witnesses consisted of officers who had interrogated the prisoners at Camp Shoemaker . The rebuttal fared poorly , as Veltmann was able to elicit from them that some of the accused men had not been informed they could refuse to make a statement , that some of the interrogations had taken place with an armed sentry standing guard , that very few of the prisoners ' explanations that they had been afraid of another explosion had been laid down in the statements , and that the officers had emphasized portions of the interrogations that would satisfy Coakley 's requirement for evidence of conspiracy . Coakley 's last rebuttal witness testified on October 19 , and the whole court took October 20 off to allow both sides to prepare closing arguments . 
 = = = Closing arguments = = = 
