 = = Development = = 
 After development of the original Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney was finished , the writer and director Shu Takumi 's boss , Shinji Mikami , told him that they should make an Ace Attorney trilogy , with a grand finale in the third game 's last case . Development of the game began immediately when Takumi returned to work from his vacation : the producer , Atsushi Inaba , called him in to a meeting , and told Takumi that he wanted him to write the script for five episodes before the game went into full production , with a deadline of three and a half months . Takumi thought that this was " completely insane " , as it had taken him an average of more than a month to write each of the four episodes for the first Ace Attorney ; additionally , he felt that he did not have any " tricks " left to use for mysteries or any story threads to work off of . He wanted to protest , but still ended up having to do it . As soon as he returned to his desk , he drafted a work schedule : he scheduled two and a half month to write the dialogue , with half a month per episode , leaving him with a month to create the first prototype and figure out the " tricks " to be used in the mysteries . He doubted that he would be able to do it in time , but managed to write the whole script by the deadline . However , due to issues with memory on the game 's cartridge , one episode ended up having to be cut from the game ; it was later used as the third episode of the third game . 
 After finishing writing the dialogue , Takumi was called into another meeting with Inaba , and was told to add a new gameplay mechanic to the investigations . Takumi wanted to keep the gameplay simple enough for his mother to be able to play it , and keep it focused on the core concept of finding lies ; according to him , he immediately had a vision of the psyche lock system during the meeting with Inaba , but still asked for three days to come up with an idea . He found it easy to formulate the idea , but it took over a month to create the system ; the biggest problem was how to visually represent the psyche locks . Takumi also drew storyboards for the episodes ' openings , which consisted of series of detailed drawings that show what is happening . He also drew rough sketches of cut @-@ in illustrations ; it was only decided after all the text had been written what scenes would have illustrations made for them . While the game 's opening features the judge , it was originally supposed to have featured a demon instead ; this was because Takumi was playing Devil May Cry at the time , and had liked its opening . As Takumi wanted the first three Ace Attorney games to be part of one larger work , he did not want the first game to look outdated in comparison to later ones , so it was decided to keep the same graphics for main characters such as Phoenix , Maya and Edgeworth throughout all their appearances , and not make updates to them . The game 's music was composed by Naoto Tanaka under the pseudonym Akemi Kimura . 
 As the dialogue @-@ integrated " tutorial " in the first Ace Attorney was well received , the inclusion of one in Justice for All was considered a " major point " . While the first game 's tutorial involved Phoenix being helped through his first trial by his mentor Mia and the judge , this could not be used twice , which led to the idea of giving Phoenix a temporary amnesia from a blow to the head . Takumi included a circus and magic in the game 's third episode ; he really wanted to do this , as performing magic is a hobby of his . The episode includes two themes that he wanted to explore : the difficulties in forming a cohesive team with different people , and a person who against the odds tries to make something whole . The former was reflected in how the circus members come together at the end , while the latter was reflected in the character Moe . Several different versions of the fourth episode were created , partially because of them running out of memory on the game 's cartridge , but also because of the popularity of the character of Miles Edgeworth : Takumi had originally planned to let Edgeworth be the prosecutor in all episodes , but when they were in full production the development team learned that the character had become popular , which led to Takumi feeling that he had to use the character more carefully and sparingly . Because of this , he created the character Franziska von Karma , to save Edgeworth for the game 's last case , and avoid a situation where he – a supposed prodigy – loses every case . The character Pearl Fey was originally intended to be a rival character around the same age as Maya , only appearing in the game 's second episode ; one of the game 's designers suggested that it would be more dramatic if she were much younger , so Takumi wrote her as an eight @-@ year @-@ old . As he ended up liking her , he included her in other episodes as well . 
 = = Release = = 
 The game was originally released by Capcom for the Game Boy Advance on October 18 , 2002 in Japan ; a Nintendo DS version followed on October 26 , 2006 in Japan , on January 16 , 2007 in North America , and on March 16 , 2007 in Europe . A PC port of the Game Boy Advance version , developed by a company called <unk> , was released in Japan in an episodic format , starting on April 15 , 2008 . A Wii version was released through WiiWare on January 26 , 2010 in Japan , on February 15 , 2010 in North America , and on February 19 , 2010 in Europe . 
 A high @-@ definition iOS version of the first three Ace Attorney games , Ace Attorney : Phoenix Wright Trilogy HD , was released in Japan on February 7 , 2012 , and in the West on May 30 , 2013 . Another collection of the first three games , Phoenix Wright : Ace Attorney Trilogy , was released for the Nintendo 3DS in Japan on April 17 , 2014 , in North America on December 9 , 2014 , and in Europe on December 11 , 2014 . 
 = = = Localization = = = 
 Starting with Justice for All , the series localization direction has been handled by Janet Hsu ; by the time she joined Capcom 's localization team in 2005 , the first Ace Attorney had already been localized , with the original localization team having decided to do a full localization , changing the setting from Japan to Los Angeles . While Hsu thought that this was the right choice to make , as it made the characters and dialogue more relatable and made for an emotional experience closer to what players of the Japanese version experience , it resulted in issues with each following game . According to the localization editor , Brandon Gay , Justice for All was one of their largest games to localize due to its focus on the story , and how it needs to convey the whole game world and its characters through just text ; this made it a challenge to make the characters relatable for an American audience . Another thing the localization team had to keep in mind was to ensure that recurring characters were consistent with how they behave in the first Ace Attorney . According to JP <unk> , another staff member working on the localization , there was a lot of pressure on them to make a good localization , as the first game 's localization had been well received ; he also felt that there was room for creativity due to the game 's style and subject , with room for humor that might not fit in other localizations . A lot of the humor in the original was based on Japanese wordplay ; these jokes had to be redone entirely for the English release . Hsu felt that the game was more demanding than previous projects she had worked on , as the localizers " almost have to become [ the characters ] " in order to get the nuance and motivations right due to their complexity . 
 One of the first decisions Hsu had to make was how to localize Maya 's hometown and the mysticism of the Fey clan . She came up with the idea that the localized versions of the Ace Attorney games take place in Los Angeles in an alternative universe where anti @-@ Japanese laws like the California Alien Land Law of 1913 were not passed , anti @-@ Japanese sentiments were not powerful , and where Japanese culture flourished . This dictated what should be localized and what should be kept Japanese ; things relating to the Fey clan and the Kurain channeling technique were kept Japanese , as that was Maya 's heritage , while Japanese foods that were not widely known in the West were changed . Despite the setting in the United States in the localized version , the Japanese justice system of the original remained intact in the localization , as changing it would have altered the entire game structure . As the localization team wanted to keep the humor in the Japanese names for the characters , it was decided to make the English names contain the same kinds of double meanings : character name puns were based on their personalities or backgrounds , or were visual gags . A lot of the names were determined with the original Japanese name in mind ; for the game 's third episode , several Japanese names were used without changes , since they were English puns to begin with . For some other characters , the names had to be altered heavily from the Japanese originals . Due to the dramatic feeling of the last episode , the characters in it were given names that sounded more like real names , while still making use of deeper meanings . Takumi personally approved all the English names ; for one of the names , Takumi and the localization team had a discussion for days , as Takumi did not think the English name conveyed the same feeling as the Japanese one . 
 According to Gay , characters with " extreme personality quirks " were both fun and stressful to write : for the clown Moe , he found it challenging to get the balance right between his silly jokes and the seriousness of his dialogue . Among other challenging characters to write for were <unk> , who led to " heated arguments " about how to get his personality and tone right ; and Morgan Fey , whose " very old style " of speaking in the Japanese version was difficult to translate to English . One aspect they had to change due to cultural differences was a conversation with the lecherous character Director <unk> , where an animation of him grabbing in the air with his hands is played while he talks about Pearl . According to Hsu , the Japanese version is considered funny to Japanese people , as <unk> is set up as the " butt of the joke " , and Phoenix reacts negatively to him , while it would have been considered sickening to an American audience . They were unable to change the animation , so the dialogue was rewritten to instead be directed at an adult nurse . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Justice for All holds a score of 76 / 100 at the review aggregator Metacritic based on 51 critics , indicating generally favorable reviews . 
 Writers for Famitsu praised the mix of seriousness and comedy , and liked the characters ' quirkiness and the pacing of the conversations . John Walker at Eurogamer called the game " splendidly crazy as ever " and " the most joyfully daft fun imaginable " . Tom East at Official Nintendo Magazine called the script fantastic . Joe Juba at Game Informer found the game entertaining , calling the writing hilarious and the problem @-@ solving clever , with the two aspects complimenting each other well . Aaron Thomas at GameSpot liked the game , praising the game 's story and calling the characters its greatest strength . He thought that the pacing was better than the first Ace Attorney 's , but still found the game to be a step back : he felt that the game often reuses the same kinds of twists from the first . Gerald Villoria at GameSpy called the episodes well structured and stronger than the ones in first game , and called the dialogue sharp . Mikel Reparaz at GamesRadar said that the script , while entertaining , contains " long stretches of meaningless dialogue " and tends to leave the player knowing what happened and how to prove it before Phoenix does . He initially liked the new rival character Franziska , but thought that she only becomes increasingly obnoxious . Craig Harris at IGN said that the episodes are well @-@ written , with enthusiasm and personality , making them hard to put down . 
 Walker found the court sections " maddening " due to how the game sometimes requires very specific evidence to be presented , with evidence that he found reasonable being rejected , forcing him to resort to guessing ; he wished that the health meter would have been replenished through correct answers , or that it had been removed from the game entirely . Bryan Vore at Game Informer found the investigation sections tedious at times , but found them to be helped by how the psyche @-@ locks add " courtroom drama " to the investigations . Juba thought that the game 's reliance on text made the investigations move slowly , but that the game becomes an " irresistible adventure " when the text is mixed with gameplay in the trials . Thomas found the psyche @-@ locks interesting , but underwhelming as the only new feature . East said that the psyche @-@ locks were what made the investigations fun . Reparaz liked how the psyche @-@ lock mechanic adds " a new dimension of weirdness " to the game . Both Harris and Thomas wished that the game had been less linear , with more possible wrong paths to take or more endings . Thomas , Reparaz and East wished that the Nintendo DS @-@ exclusive gameplay features introduced in the first game 's final episode had been used in Justice for All , with Reparaz calling it disappointing but " not a huge deal " . Villoria and East said that the game does not last very long ; Walker did not consider it short , but found it to not last as long as the first game . 
 Vore said that the game is lacking in " advanced graphics and interface " , but felt that it makes up for it through its charm and intrigue . Thomas called the character designs outstanding , but thought that the reused art assets for returning characters and locations from the first game made it feel like Capcom had " cut some corners " . He called the music " uniformly outstanding and used masterfully " , both for conveying various moods throughout the story , and for characters ' personalities . Harris found the music " moody and appropriate " , but wished that there had been a full voice @-@ over as an option . He said that the game 's art was nice , but not more than that . Thomas called the localization outstanding despite finding some errors , finding it impressive how smoothly Capcom was able to localize such a text @-@ heavy game . Harris liked the game 's localization , saying that the localization team 's writing was what made the game design work so well . Walker called the localization incredible , and said that while there are a few spelling errors and grammatical errors in the text , it did not bother him much as the localization was included in the Japanese Nintendo DS release . 
 = Bjorøy Tunnel = 
 The Bjorøy Tunnel ( Norwegian : <unk> ) is a 2 @,@ 012 @-@ metre ( 6 @,@ 601 ft ) long subsea road tunnel in Hordaland county , Norway . The tunnel is part of the Norwegian County Road 207 which connects the island of Bjorøy in the municipality of Fjell to the mainland near Håkonshella and <unk> in the city @-@ municipality of Bergen . It crosses underneath the Vatlestraumen strait , reaching 88 metres ( 289 ft ) below mean sea level . It serves as a fixed link for the 900 residents of the islands of Bjorøy and Tyssøy as well as a large number of cottage owners who vacation on the islands . The first proposal was launched in 1980 , and construction started on 29 September 1993 . There were severe problems because the tunneling encountered an area of sandstone , causing a year 's delay . The total construction cost was NOK 59 million . It opened on 7 May 1996 and remained a toll road until 29 January 2005 . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 The Bjorøy Tunnel is a subsea tunnel which runs below the Vatlestraumen strait between the island of Bjorøy and the mainland of Bergen . It carries two lanes of Hordaland County Road 207 . It is the only fixed link for the islands of Bjorøy and Tyssøy ( Tyssøy is connected to Bjorøy by a bridge ) . The tunnel is 2 @,@ 012 metres ( 6 @,@ 601 ft ) long and reaches 88 m ( 289 ft ) below mean sea level . The maximum gradient is 10 degrees ( about 18 % grade ) . It is one of few tunnels in Norway without mobile telephone coverage , although there are emergency telephones that connect to the operation center of the Norwegian Public Roads Administration , and the tunnel will receive coverage with the future Norwegian Public Safety Radio . 
 Before the construction of the Bjorøy Tunnel , the geology of the area was thought to consist entirely of metamorphic basement rocks similar to those exposed on the surrounding islands . The Jurassic sediments encountered in the tunnel included breccia and conglomerate in contact with the underlying gneisses and a sandstone with coal fragments , some of which was quite unconsolidated . Spore and pollen samples gave an Oxfordian age ( Late Jurassic ) for the sequence . The sedimentary rocks appear to have been deposited into an eroded depression caused by a fault zone , which later reactivated , disrupting the bedding and causing steep dips . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Planning = = = 
 Since 1966 , Bjorøy had been served by the <unk> – <unk> Ferry . The plans for a tunnel to Bjorøy were first launched by the engineer Jack Jahnsen in 1980 . These were based on the then under construction Vardø Tunnel , which became the first subsea tunnel in Norway when it opened in 1982 . He had a meeting at his place on 18 December 1980 , to which the three municipal councilors from Bjorøy also were invited , where he tried to get support for the tunnel , which would be the topic of a municipal council meeting on 20 December . The council unanimously voted in favour of establishing a committee to look into the tunnel . The committee was established on 6 January 1981 and concluded with that there were three alternative possibilities to build a fixed link to Bjorøy : a bridge from the island over <unk> <unk> via Vestre <unk> , <unk> and <unk> to <unk> <unk> on Litlesotra ; a tunnel under Vatlestraumen to Håkonshella ; or a bridge over Vatlestraumen to Håkonshella or <unk> . 
 At the time , a bridge to Litlesotra was estimated to cost NOK 111 million , a tunnel was estimated to cost NOK 36 million , while a bridge over Vatlestraumen was estimated to cost NOK 74 million . All three included a road connection to Tyssøy , with the bridge proposals costing NOK 16 million for the Tyssøy connection , and the tunnel having a cost of NOK 4 million , in part because the earthworks volume from the tunnel could be used to build a mole with a short bridge . Seismology tests were done in August 1983 , and they concluded that the ground had good conditions : the <unk> material laid mostly only 1 @-@ meter ( 3 ft 3 in ) deep , albeit at times as deep as 7 meters ( 23 ft ) . The proposed tunnel crossing followed a mountain ridge , and the maximum depth was between 40 and 45 metres ( 131 and 148 ft ) , although the topography went steep down to those depths . 
 The plans were presented to Johan J. Jakobsen , Minister of Transport and Communications , and cooperation was started with the Norwegian Public Roads Administration to find a suitable connection to Tyssøy , so that they could also take advantage of the tunnel . To connect the two islands , it was chosen to build across <unk> , which was shallow and 175 metres ( 574 ft ) wide . In 1987 , Kaare Hartman joined the committee and proposed that the tunnel be built with borrowed money , guaranteed by land @-@ owners on the islands , and repaid using tolls . At the time the project was not on any prioritized investment list , and this way the project was not dependent on public grants . On 7 September 1987 , Hartmann reached agreement with Norges <unk> to borrow the estimated NOK 50 million . The bank had a guarantee in the income from the tunnel . 
 However , Norges <unk> had to withdraw , as it was not permitted to invest in non @-@ shipping investments . Instead , a loan was taken in Bergens <unk> . Four land @-@ owners made a guarantee for NOK 9 million , with a judicial registration covering an area of 347 hectares ( 860 acres ) . They hoped that the value of their land would increase after the tunnel had been built . The same amount was also guaranteed by Fjell Municipality . Public grants were also secured , so the debt would be NOK 27 to 30 million . The planning was done by Chr . F. <unk> , for which the municipality paid the costs . Statistics from the ferry showed that 26 @,@ 400 cars and 93 @,@ 902 people had taken it in 1986 , which had grown to 40 @,@ 400 and 121 @,@ 000 in 1989 . The estimates were for a 90 % increase until 2000 , given an opening in 2002 . A bid for the project was gathered from Selmer – Furuholmen , which gave a maximum price of NOK 55 million , given that construction started in 1989 . 
 On 12 December 1989 , the committee sent an official offer to Hordaland Public Roads Administration whereby they , as a company under establishment , offered to fully finance the tunnel . The plans called for tolls of NOK 51 for a car and an investment cost of NOK 47 million . The plans were at first nearly discarded by the administration , as they felt it was impossible for a community of 400 people to finance such a large project without other grants . However , it became evident that the administration was spending NOK 2 million per year on the ferry service , and as the ferry soon would have to be replaced , this would increase to NOK 3 to 5 million per year . On 1 October 1990 , the issue was considered by Hordaland Transport Board , which approved the plans . This was followed up by Hordaland County Council on 19 June 1991 , which involved NOK 27 million being financed by debt and NOK 28 to 33 million being financed through reduced subsidies to the ferry . 
 The plans were met with criticism from locals on the Bergen side where the tunnel would emerge . They stated that the plans had " cheap solutions " and had unnecessary negative impact on their local environment . This included the demolishing of a football field and lack of noise barriers . Bergen Municipality demanded that the costs of a new field be paid for by the project , and that the tunnel be slightly extended . A new estimate was made , which increased the price by NOK 10 @.@ 3 million ; however , Hordaland Public Roads Administration protested , stating that it would give an inferior road technically , that the existing development plans permitted the construction , and that the noise would not exceed the permitted limits . They concluded that should these demands remain , the increased costs would terminate the project . On 16 November 1992 , Bergen City Council voted to allow the tunnel , under the condition that the tunnel project financed a new football field . The decision was appealed by lawyers representing the local community , but this was rejected by Hordaland County Governor on 30 August 1993 . 
 Originally the unlimited company Bjorøy og Tyssøy ANS had been attempted established with capital from locals , but instead the company <unk> Bjorøy – Tyssøy AS was established on 29 September 1993 . Capital for NOK 40 @,@ 000 was paid by Fjell Municipality , NOK 20 @,@ 000 by Sund Municipality and NOK 10 @,@ 000 by Jack Jahnsen . The plans were sent to the Ministry of Transport and Communications in October 1992 , who started working on a proposal for parliament in January 1993 . Issues raised by the ministry were that the loans had been issued in 1987 , and whether the land estimated value of the guaranteed real estate was real . The project was presented to the Parliament of Norway , who must approve all toll roads . By then the costs were estimated at NOK 61 @.@ 5 million , including NOK 4 @.@ 5 million in ordinary county grants and NOK 30 million in extraordinary county grants . The proposal estimated annual toll collection costs to NOK 825 @,@ 000 , with the collection taking place on Bjorøy . It was originally planned that the toll plaza would be manned between 06 : 00 and 22 : 00 , meaning passing would be free at night . 
 An agreement was made between the ministry , the tunnel company and the county municipality on 6 January 1994 to build the tunnel . The company had the right to collect tolls for up to 15 years on fees dictated by the county municipality , and would have to pay NOK 27 million for the tunnel , with the county paying for the rest of the costs . The construction would be the responsibility of Hordaland Public Roads Administration , with the tunnel company only responsible for their part of the financing and the collection of tolls . An agreement was made with Selmer , whereby they would charge NOK 59 @,@ 422 @,@ 500 and take the risk of the project , including any expenditures for unknown geological conditions or similar costs increases . They were also responsible for an insurance to reclaim the investments should it be proven impossible to build the tunnel . 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The construction of the tunnel started on 29 September 1993 , with the original plans calling for the tunnel to open on 15 June 1995 . The original construction consisted of blasting from Bjorøy , but by January 1994 there were problems with water leaks through cracks . The contractor described these as " common problems " when building tunnels , but that construction would be delayed by up to two weeks . To keep up with the schedule , the company started also blasting from the mainland . However , the problems increased , and by September the tunnel was leaking 600 liters ( 130 imp gal ; 160 U.S. gal ) per minute , which was 50 % more than estimated . This caused extra work to be done on the exterior to the tunnel , and costs had increased by several tens of millions of kroner . In particular , a different type of rock had been struck , and 60 tonnes ( 59 long tons ; 66 short tons ) of concrete had been injected without this giving the desired effects . 
 On 30 September , Selmer stopped construction from the Bjorøy side , although it continued from the mainland . About 750 metres ( 2 @,@ 460 ft ) from the Bjorøy side , the construction found a section of sandstone , the upper Jurassic Bjorøy formation , a condition that had never been encountered during subsea tunnel construction before . Geological engineers stated that there was no known solution to overcoming the problem , and that if the contractor had blasted into the area , the tunnel would have been filled with sand and water within minutes . 
 On a meeting on 10 October , O. T. Blindheim , a geological consulting company , and Selmer presented three alternatives : continued injection of cement , recommended by Blindheim ; freezing , recommended by Selmer because it was the cheapest , but would take more time ; and use of a water @-@ tight shield . A technical committee was established , and on 16 December they recommended the use of cement injection combined with a ring of drainage holes around the tunnel before blasting . The method was to be continually tested , and if it was insufficient , freezing could be used . As the tunnel advanced , the hole was to be continuously secured using carbon fibre @-@ reinforced carbon gunite , self @-@ boring bolts , steel ribs and full pouring . Work was taken up after a meeting on 27 March 1995 , and on 16 August the final blast was made . Representatives from Selmer stated that the method they had chosen had resulted in international interest for the tunnel , and they had demonstrated it to several international delegations . 
 = = = Tolls and auxiliary roads = = = 
 The grants were only given for the tunnel to Bjorøy , and not for the necessary roads that would connect Tyssøy to Bjorøy . This caused local controversy , as some people on Bjorøy disagreed that the tolls on the Bjorøy Tunnel should pay for the Tyssøy Bridge . On 13 May 1993 , the costs of the connection to Tyssøy were estimated at NOK 5 million . The issue was not resolved when the construction of the tunnel started . The original costs for the bridge were for NOK 11 @.@ 4 million , including a 20 metres ( 66 ft ) long bridge with a clearance of 10 meters ( 33 ft ) . This was later reduced to 10 metres ( 33 ft ) length and 5 meters ( 16 ft ) , which reduced the costs to NOK 9 @.@ 4 million . Of this , the county paid NOK 4 million , while the two municipalities had advanced the transporting earthwork from the tunnel to the sound . On 22 January 1996 , the tunnel company agreed to advance the construction costs and collect it from the tolls , with Sund Municipality guaranteeing for the debt . 
 On 2 February 1996 , the tunnel company had an agreement with Bru og <unk> , which operates the Bergen Toll Ring , to collect the tolls in the tunnel using the Autopass automatic toll collection system . A manual collection system was estimated to cost NOK 1 @.@ 4 million per year , while an automated system was estimated at NOK 0 @.@ 4 million . The tunnel opened on 7 May 1996 , the same day the last ferry ran . Originally the plan was to charge tolls similar to the ferry . With a manual system , it would not be possible to charge for two @-@ wheeled vehicles and passengers , so the fares for other vehicles were raised slightly . In 1995 , it had cost NOK 44 for a single passing with a car on the ferry . The tolls were set to NOK 120 for all types of vehicles , except two @-@ wheelers , and NOK 72 was charged per travel with pre @-@ paid ticket books . Bus riders had to pay for two extra zones . The toll plaza was open a few hour each week to allow people to purchase discounted tickets . 
 The contract for the construction of the bridge to Tyssøy was announced on 20 August 1996 , and was won by NCC Eeg @-@ Henriksen Anlegg , who wanted NOK 8 @.@ 5 million for the job . The link opened on 27 September 1997 . In 2000 , a public meeting was held in which it was proposed to reduce the rates and instead prolong the collection time , but this was rejected . In 1999 , the Norwegian Public Roads Administration reported that the Bjorøy Tunnel had the cheapest administration costs per passing , at NOK 7 @.@ 32 , of all small toll companies . The tolls were removed on 29 January 2005 , after eight years and eight months , almost half the stipulated time . 
 On 19 January 2004 , the freight ship <unk> ran aground on the unmarked underwater bank of <unk> in Vatlestraumen , located above the tunnel . The accident cost 18 people their lives and was the most extensive and costly oil spill in Norwegian history . In an attempt to avoid similar incidents occurring again , the Norwegian Coastal Administration started in May 2012 to blast away the bank , increasing the depth from 9 to 14 meters ( 30 to 46 ft ) . This allows the sailing width though Vatlestraumen to increase by 250 meters ( 820 ft ) . The work required the tarp covering the tunnel to be removed , causing increased leaks in the tunnel during the work period . The project was highly controversial amongst the islanders and the plans were approved by only a single decisive vote in the municipal council . Islanders were especially concerned that the work might damage the tunnel . Calculations conducted by the Coastal Administration conclude that there is no chance of this occurring , as the blasting is taking place 65 meters ( 213 ft ) above the tunnel . 
 = Smedley Butler = 
 Smedley Darlington Butler ( July 30 , 1881 – June 21 , 1940 ) was a United States Marine Corps major general , the highest rank authorized at that time , and at the time of his death the most decorated Marine in U.S. history . During his 34 @-@ year career as a Marine , he participated in military actions in the Philippines , China , in Central America and the Caribbean during the Banana Wars , and France in World War I. Butler is well known for having later become an outspoken critic of U.S. wars and their consequences , as well as exposing the Business Plot , an alleged plan to overthrow the U.S. government . 
 By the end of his career , Butler had received 16 medals , five for heroism . He is one of 19 men to receive the Medal of Honor twice , one of three to be awarded both the Marine Corps Brevet Medal and the Medal of Honor , and the only Marine to be awarded the Brevet Medal and two Medals of Honor , all for separate actions . 
 In 1933 , he became involved in a controversy known as the Business Plot , when he told a congressional committee that a group of wealthy industrialists were planning a military coup to overthrow Franklin D. Roosevelt , with Butler selected to lead a march of veterans to become dictator , similar to other Fascist regimes at that time . The individuals involved all denied the existence of a plot and the media ridiculed the allegations . A final report by a special House of Representatives Committee confirmed some of Butler 's testimony . 
 In 1935 , Butler wrote a book entitled War Is a Racket , where he described and criticized the workings of the United States in its foreign actions and wars , such as those he was a part of , including the American corporations and other imperialist motivations behind them . After retiring from service , he became a popular activist , speaking at meetings organized by veterans , pacifists , and church groups in the 1930s . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Smedley Butler was born July 30 , 1881 , in West Chester , Pennsylvania , the eldest of three sons . His parents , Thomas and Maud ( née Darlington ) Butler , were descended from local Quaker families . Both of his parents were of entirely English ancestry , all of which had been in what is now the United States since the 1600s . His father was a lawyer , a judge and , for 31 years , a Congressman and chair of the House Naval Affairs Committee during the Harding and Coolidge administrations . His maternal grandfather was Smedley Darlington , a Republican Congressman from 1887 to 1891 . 
 Butler attended the West Chester Friends Graded High School , followed by The Haverford School , a secondary school popular with sons of upper @-@ class Philadelphia families . A Haverford athlete , he became captain of its baseball team and quarterback of its football team . Against the wishes of his father , he left school 38 days before his seventeenth birthday to enlist in the Marine Corps during the Spanish – American War . Nevertheless , Haverford awarded him his high school diploma on June 6 , 1898 , before the end of his final year ; his transcript stated he completed the Scientific Course " with Credit " . 
 = = Military career = = 
 = = = Spanish – American War = = = 
 In the anti @-@ Spanish war fervor of 1898 , Butler lied about his age to receive a direct commission as a Marine second lieutenant . He trained in Washington D.C. at the Marine Barracks on the corner of 8th and I Streets . In July 1898 , he went to Guantánamo Bay , Cuba , arriving shortly after its invasion and capture . His company soon returned to the U.S. and after a short break , he was assigned to the armored cruiser USS New York for four months . He came home to be mustered out of service in February 1899 , but on 8 April 1899 , he accepted a commission as a first lieutenant in the Marine Corps . 
 = = = Philippine – American War = = = 
 The Marine Corps sent him to Manila , Philippines . On garrison duty with little to do , Butler turned to alcohol to relieve the boredom . He once became drunk and was temporarily relieved of command after an unspecified incident in his room . 
 In October 1899 , he saw his first combat action when he led 300 Marines to take the town of <unk> , from Filipino rebels known as Insurrectos . In the initial moments of the assault , his first sergeant was wounded . Butler briefly panicked , but quickly regained his composure and led his Marines in pursuit of the fleeing enemy . By noon the Marines had dispersed the rebels and taken the town . One Marine had been killed and ten were wounded . Another 50 Marines had been incapacitated by the humid tropical heat . 
 After the excitement of this combat , garrison duty again became routine . Butler had a very large Eagle , Globe , and Anchor tattoo made which started at his throat and extended to his waist . He also met Littleton Waller , a fellow Marine with whom he maintained a lifelong friendship . When Waller received command of a company in Guam , he was allowed to select five officers to take with him ; he chose Butler . Before they had departed , their orders were changed and they were sent to China aboard the USS Solace to help put down the Boxer Rebellion . 
 = = = Boxer Rebellion = = = 
 Once in China , Butler was initially deployed at Tientsin . He took part in the Battle of Tientsin on July 13 , 1900 and in the subsequent <unk> Expedition , during which he saw the mutilated remains of Japanese soldiers . When he saw another Marine officer fall wounded , he climbed out of a trench to rescue him . Butler was then himself shot in the thigh . Another Marine helped him get to safety , but also was shot . Despite his leg wound , Butler assisted the wounded officer to the rear . Four enlisted men would receive the Medal of Honor in the battle . Butler 's commanding officer , Major Littleton W. T. Waller , personally commended him and wrote that " for such reward as you may deem proper the following officers : Lieutenant Smedley D. Butler , for the admirable control of his men in all the fights of the week , for saving a wounded man at the risk of his own life , and under a very severe fire . " Commissioned officers were not then eligible to receive the Medal of Honor , and Butler instead received a promotion to captain by brevet while he recovered in the hospital , two weeks before his nineteenth birthday . 
 He was eligible for the Marine Corps Brevet Medal when it was created in 1921 , and was one of only 20 Marines to receive it . His citation reads : 
 The Secretary of the Navy takes pleasure in transmitting to First Lieutenant Smedley Darlington Butler , United States Marine Corps , the Brevet Medal which is awarded in accordance with Marine Corps Order No. 26 ( 1921 ) , for distinguished conduct and public service in the presence of the enemy while serving with the Second Battalion of Marines , near Tientsin , China , on 13 July 1900 . On 28 March 1901 , First Lieutenant Butler is appointed Captain by brevet , to take rank from 13 July 1900 . 
 = = = The Banana Wars = = = 
 Butler participated in a series of occupations , police actions , and interventions by the United States in Central America and the Caribbean , commonly called the Banana Wars because their goal was to protect American commercial interests in the region , particularly those of the United Fruit Company . This company had significant financial stakes in the production of bananas , tobacco , sugar cane , and other products throughout the Caribbean , Central America and the northern portions of South America . The U.S. was also trying to advance its own political interests by maintaining its influence in the region and especially its control of the Panama Canal . These interventions started with the Spanish – American War in 1898 and ended with the withdrawal of troops from Haiti and President Franklin D. Roosevelt 's Good Neighbor Policy in 1934 . After his retirement , Butler became an outspoken critic of the business interests in the Caribbean , criticizing the ways in which U.S. businesses and Wall Street bankers imposed their agenda on United States foreign policy during this period . 
 = = = = Honduras = = = = 
 In 1903 , Butler was stationed in Puerto Rico on Culebra Island . Hearing rumors of a Honduran revolt , the United States government ordered his unit and a supporting naval detachment to sail to Honduras , 1 @,@ 500 miles ( 2 @,@ 414 km ) to the west , to defend the U.S. Consulate in Honduras . Using a converted banana boat renamed the Panther , Butler and several hundred Marines landed at the port town of Puerto Cortés . In a letter home , he described the action : they were " prepared to land and shoot everybody and everything that was breaking the peace " , but instead found a quiet town . The Marines re @-@ boarded the Panther and continued up the coast line looking for rebels at several towns , but found none . 
 When they arrived at Trujillo , however , they heard gunfire , and came upon a battle in progress that had been waged for 55 hours between rebels called <unk> and Honduran government soldiers at a local fort . At the sight of the Marines , the fighting ceased and Butler led a detachment of Marines to the American consulate , where he found the consul , wrapped in an American flag , hiding among the floor beams . As soon as the Marines left the area with the shaken consul , the battle resumed and the <unk> soon controlled the government . During this expedition Butler earned the first of his nicknames , " Old <unk> Eye " . It was attributed to his feverish , bloodshot eyes — he was suffering from some unnamed tropic fever at the time — which enhanced his penetrating and bellicose stare . 
 = = = = Marriage and business = = = = 
 After the Honduran campaign , Butler returned to Philadelphia . He married Ethel Conway Peters of Philadelphia in Bay Head , New Jersey , on June 30 , 1905 . His best man at the wedding was his former commanding officer in China , Lieutenant Colonel Littleton W. T. Waller . The couple eventually had three children : a daughter , Ethel Peters Butler ( Mrs. John <unk> ) , and two sons , Smedley Darlington , Jr. and Thomas Richard . 
 Butler was next assigned to garrison duty in the Philippines , where he once launched a resupply mission across the stormy waters of Subic Bay after his isolated outpost ran out of rations . In 1908 , he was diagnosed as having a nervous breakdown and received nine months sick leave which he spent at home . He successfully managed a coal mine in West Virginia , but returned to active duty in the Marine Corps at the first opportunity . 
 = = = = Central America = = = = 
 From 1909 to 1912 , Butler served in Nicaragua , enforcing U.S. policy , and once again led his battalion to the relief of a rebel @-@ besieged city , this time Granada , and again , with a 104 @-@ degree fever . In December 1909 , he commanded the 3d Battalion , 1st Marine Regiment , on the Isthmus of Panama . On August 11 , 1912 , he was temporarily detached to command an expeditionary battalion with which he participated in the Battle of Masaya on September 19 , 1912 and the bombardment , assault and capture of <unk> Hill , Nicaragua in October 1912 . He remained in Nicaragua until November 1912 , when he rejoined the Marines of 3d Battalion , 1st Marine Regiment , at Camp Elliott , Panama . 
 = = = = Veracruz , Mexico , and first Medal of Honor = = = = 
 Butler and his family were living in Panama in January 1914 when he was ordered to report as the Marine officer of a battleship squadron massing off the coast of Mexico , near Veracruz , to monitor a revolutionary movement . He did not like leaving his family and the home they had established in Panama and he intended to request orders home as soon as he determined he was not needed . 
 On March 1 , 1914 , Butler and Navy Lieutenant ( later Admiral ) Frank Fletcher went ashore in Veracruz and made their way to Jalapa , Mexico and back . A purpose of the trip was to allow Butler and Fletcher to discuss the details of a future expedition into Mexico . Fletcher 's plan required Butler to make his way into the country and develop a more detailed invasion plan while inside its borders . It was a spy mission and Butler was enthusiastic to get started . When Admiral Fletcher explained the plan to the commanders in Washington , D.C. , they agreed to it . Butler was given the go @-@ ahead . He entered Mexico and made his way to the U.S. Consulate in Mexico City , posing as a railroad official named " Mr. Johnson " . He and the chief railroad inspector scoured the city , saying they were searching for a lost railroad employee ; there was no lost employee , and in fact the employee they said was lost never existed . The ruse gave Butler access to various areas of the city . In the process of the so @-@ called search , they located weapons in use by the Mexican army , and determined the sizes of units and states of readiness . They updated maps and verified the railroad lines for use in an impending US invasion . On March 7 , 1914 , he returned to Veracruz with the information he had gathered and presented it to his commanders . The invasion plan was eventually scrapped when authorities loyal to Victoriano Huerta detained a small American naval landing party in Tampico , Mexico , which became known as the Tampico Affair . 
 When President Woodrow Wilson discovered that an arms shipment was about to arrive in Mexico , he sent a contingent of Marines and sailors to Veracruz to intercept it on April 21 , 1914 . Over the next few days , street fighting and sniper fire posed a threat to Butler 's force , but a door @-@ to @-@ door search rooted out most of the resistance . By April 26 , the landing force of 5 @,@ 800 Marines and sailors secured the city , which they held for the next six months . By the end of the conflict , the Americans reported 17 dead and 63 wounded and the Mexican forces had 126 dead and 195 wounded . After the actions at Veracruz , the United States decided to minimize the bloodshed and changed their plans from a full invasion of Mexico to simply maintaining the city of Veracruz . For his actions on April 22 , Butler was awarded his first Medal of Honor . The citation reads : 
 For distinguished conduct in battle , engagement of Vera Cruz , 22 April 1914 . Major Butler was eminent and conspicuous in command of his battalion . He exhibited courage and skill in leading his men through the action of the 22d and in the final occupation of the city . 
 After the occupation of Veracruz , many military personnel received the Medal of Honor , an unusually high number that diminished somewhat the prestige of the award . The Army presented one , nine went to Marines and 46 were bestowed upon Navy personnel . During World War I , Butler , then a major , attempted to return his Medal , explaining he had done nothing to deserve it . The medal was returned with orders to keep it and to wear it as well . 
 = = = = Haiti and second Medal of Honor = = = = 
 In 1915 , members of the populace killed the Haitian president <unk> Guillaume Sam . In response , the United States ordered the USS Connecticut to Haiti with Major Butler and a group of Marines on board . On October 24 , 1915 , an estimated 400 Cacos ambushed Butler 's patrol of 44 mounted Marines when they approached Fort <unk> . Surrounded by Cacos the Marines maintained their perimeter throughout the night . The next morning , they charged the much larger enemy force by breaking out in three directions . The startled Haitians fled . In early November Butler and a force of 700 Marines and sailors returned to the mountains to clear the area . At their temporary headquarters base at Le <unk> they fought off an attack by about 100 Cacos . After the Americans took several other forts and ramparts during the following days , only Fort Rivière , an old French @-@ built stronghold atop Montagne Noire , was left . 
 For the operation , Butler was given three companies of Marines and some sailors from the USS Connecticut , about 100 men . They encircled the fort , and gradually closed in on it . Butler reached the fort from the southern side with the 15th Company and found a small opening in the wall . The Marines entered through the opening and engaged the Cacos in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat . Butler and the Marines took the rebel stronghold on November 17 , 1915 , an action for which he received his second Medal of Honor , as well as the Haitian Medal of Honor . The entire battle lasted less than twenty minutes . Only one Marine was injured in the assault when he was struck by a rock and lost two teeth . All 51 Haitians in the Fort were killed . Butler 's exploits impressed Assistant Secretary of the Navy Franklin D. Roosevelt , who recommended the award based upon Butler 's performance during the engagement . Once the medal was approved and presented in 1917 , Butler achieved the distinction , shared with Dan Daly , of being the only Marines to receive the Medal of Honor twice for separate actions . The citation reads : 
 For extraordinary heroism in action as Commanding Officer of detachments from the 5th , 13th , 23d Companies and the Marine and sailor detachment from the U.S.S. Connecticut , Major Butler led the attack on Fort Rivière , Haiti , 17 November 1915 . Following a concentrated drive , several different detachments of Marines gradually closed in on the old French bastion fort in an effort to cut off all avenues of retreat for the Caco bandits . Reaching the fort on the southern side where there was a small opening in the wall , Major Butler gave the signal to attack and Marines from the 15th Company poured through the breach , engaged the Cacos in hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat , took the bastion and crushed the Caco resistance . Throughout this perilous action , Major Butler was conspicuous for his bravery and forceful leadership . 
 Subsequently , as the initial organizer and commanding officer of the Gendarmerie d <unk> , the native police force , Butler established a record as a capable administrator . Under his supervision , social order , administered by the dictatorship , was largely restored and many vital public works projects were successfully completed . He recalled later that , during his time in Haiti , he and his troops " hunted the Cacos like pigs . " 
 = = = World War I = = = 
 During World War I Butler was , to his disappointment , not assigned to a combat command on the Western Front . He made several requests for a posting in France , writing letters to his personal friend , Wendell Cushing Neville . While Butler 's superiors considered him brave and brilliant , they described him as " unreliable . " 
 In October 1918 , he was promoted to the rank of brigadier general at the age of 37 and placed in command of Camp Pontanezen at Brest , France , a debarkation depot that funneled troops of the American Expeditionary Force to the battlefields . The camp had been unsanitary , overcrowded and disorganized . U.S. Secretary of War Newton Baker sent novelist Mary Roberts Rinehart to report on the camp . She later described how Butler tackled the sanitation problems . Butler began by solving the problem of mud : " [ T ] he ground under the tents was nothing but mud , [ so ] he had raided the wharf at Brest of the duckboards no longer needed for the trenches , carted the first one himself up that four @-@ mile hill to the camp , and thus provided something in the way of protection for the men to sleep on . " General John J. Pershing authorized a <unk> shoulder patch for the units . This earned Butler another nickname , " Old <unk> . " For his exemplary service he was awarded both the Army Distinguished Service Medal and Navy Distinguished Service Medal and the French Order of the Black Star . The citation for the Army Distinguished Service Medal states : 
 The President of the United States of America , authorized by Act of Congress , July 9 , 1918 , takes pleasure in presenting the Army Distinguished Service Medal to Brigadier General Smedley Darlington Butler , United States Marine Corps , for exceptionally meritorious and distinguished services to the Government of the United States , in a duty of great responsibility during World War I. Brigadier General Butler commanded with ability and energy Pontanezen Camp at Brest during the time in which it has developed into the largest embarkation camp in the world . Confronted with problems of extraordinary magnitude in supervising the reception , entertainment and departure of the large numbers of officers and soldiers passing through this camp , he has solved all with conspicuous success , performing services of the highest character for the American Expeditionary Forces . 
 The citation for the Navy Distinguished Service Medal states : 
 The President of the United States of America takes pleasure in presenting the Navy Distinguished Service Medal to Brigadier General Smedley Darlington Butler , United States Marine Corps , for exceptionally meritorious and distinguished services in France , during World War I. Brigadier General Butler organized , trained and commanded the 13th Regiment Marines ; also the 5th Brigade of Marines . He commanded with ability and energy Camp Pontanezen at Brest during the time in which it has developed into the largest embarkation camp in the world . Confronted with problems of extraordinary magnitude in supervising the reception , entertainment and departure of large numbers of officers and soldiers passing through the camp , he has solved all with conspicuous success , performing services of the highest character for the American Expeditionary Forces . 
 Following the war , he became Commanding General of the Marine Barracks at Marine Corps Base Quantico , Virginia . At Quantico , he transformed the wartime training camp into a permanent Marine post . During a training exercise in western Virginia in 1921 , he was told by a local farmer that Stonewall Jackson 's arm was buried nearby , to which he replied , " Bosh ! I will take a squad of Marines and dig up that spot to prove you wrong ! " Butler found the arm in a box . He later replaced the wooden box with a metal one , and reburied the arm . He left a plaque on the granite monument marking the burial place of Jackson 's arm ; the plaque is no longer on the marker but can be viewed at the Chancellorsville Battlefield visitor 's center . 
 = = = China and stateside service = = = 
 From 1927 to 1929 , Butler was commander of the Marine Expeditionary Force in China and , while there , cleverly parlayed his influence among various generals and warlords to the protection of U.S. interests , ultimately winning the public acclaim of contending Chinese leaders . When Butler returned to the United States in 1929 he was promoted to major general , becoming , at age 48 , the youngest major general of the Marine Corps . He directed the Quantico camp 's growth until it became the " showplace " of the Corps . Butler won national attention by taking thousands of his men on long field marches , many of which he led from the front , to Gettysburg and other Civil War battle sites , where they conducted large @-@ scale re @-@ enactments before crowds of distinguished spectators . 
 In 1931 , Butler violated diplomatic norms by publicly recounting gossip about Benito Mussolini in which the dictator allegedly struck and killed a child with his speeding automobile in a hit @-@ and @-@ run accident . The Italian government protested and President Hoover , who strongly disliked Butler , forced Secretary of the Navy Charles Francis Adams III to court @-@ martial him . Butler became the first general officer to be placed under arrest since the Civil War . He apologized to Secretary Adams and the court @-@ martial was canceled with only a reprimand . 
 = = Director of Public Safety = = 
 At the urging of Butler 's father , in 1924 , the newly elected mayor of Philadelphia W. Freeland Kendrick asked him to leave the Marines to become the Director of Public Safety , the official in charge of running the city 's police and fire departments . Philadelphia 's municipal government was notoriously corrupt and Butler initially refused . Kendrick asked President Calvin Coolidge to intervene . Coolidge contacted Butler and authorized him to take the necessary leave from the Corps . At the request of the President , Butler served in the post from January 1924 until December 1925 . He began his new job by assembling all 4 @,@ 000 of the city police into the Metropolitan Opera House in shifts to introduce himself and inform them that things would change while he was in charge . He replaced corrupt police officers and , in some cases , switched entire units from one part of the city to another , undermining local protection rackets and profiteering . 
 Within 48 hours of taking over , Butler organized raids on more than 900 speakeasies , ordering them padlocked and , in many cases , destroyed . In addition to raiding the speakeasies , he also attempted to eliminate other illegal activities : bootlegging , prostitution , gambling and police corruption . More zealous than he was political , he ordered crackdowns on the social elite 's favorite hangouts , such as the Ritz @-@ Carlton and the Union League , as well as on drinking establishments that served the working class . Although he was effective in reducing crime and police corruption , he was a controversial leader . In one instance he made a statement that he would promote the first officer to kill a bandit and stated , " I don 't believe there is a single bandit notch on a policeman 's guns [ sic ] in this city , go out and get some . " Although many of the local citizens and police felt that the raids were just a show , the raids continued for several weeks . 
 He implemented programs to improve city safety and security . He established policies and guidelines of administration , and developed a Philadelphia police uniform that resembled that of the Marine Corps . Other changes included military @-@ style checkpoints into the city , bandit chasing squads armed with sawed @-@ off shotguns , and armored police cars . The press began reporting on the good and the bad aspects of Butler 's personal war on crime . The reports praised the new uniforms , the new programs and the reductions in crime but they also reflected the public 's negative opinion of their new Public Safety director . Many felt that he was being too aggressive in his tactics and resented the reductions in their civil rights , such as the stopping of citizens at the city checkpoints . Butler frequently swore in his radio addresses , causing many citizens to suggest his behavior , particularly his language , was inappropriate for someone of his rank and stature . Some even suggested Butler acted like a military dictator , even charging that he wrongfully used active @-@ duty Marines in some of his raids . Major R. A. Haynes , the federal Prohibition commissioner , visited the city in 1924 , six months after Butler was appointed . He announced that " great progress " had been made in the city and attributed that success to Butler . 
 Eventually Butler 's leadership style and the directness of actions undermined his support within the community . His departure seemed imminent . Mayor Kendrick reported to the press , " I had the guts to bring General Butler to Philadelphia and I have the guts to fire him . " Feeling that his duties in Philadelphia were coming to an end , Butler contacted General Lejeune to prepare for his return to the Marine Corps . Not all of the city felt he was doing a bad job , though , and when the news started to break that he would be leaving , people began to gather at the Academy of Music . A group of 4 @,@ 000 supporters assembled and negotiated a truce between him and the mayor to keep him in Philadelphia for a while longer , and the President authorized a one @-@ year extension for him . 
 Butler devoted much of his second year to executing arrest warrants , cracking down on crooked police and enforcing prohibition . On January 1 , 1926 , his leave from the Marine Corps ended and the President declined a request for a second extension . Butler received orders to report to San Diego and he prepared his family and his belongings for the new assignment . In light of his pending departure , Butler began to defy the Mayor and other key city officials . On the eve of his departure , he had an article printed in the paper stating his intention to stay and " finish the job " . The mayor was surprised and furious when he read the press release the next morning and demanded his resignation . After almost two years in office , Butler resigned under pressure , stating later that " cleaning up Philadelphia was worse than any battle I was ever in . " 
 = = Military retirement = = 
 When Commandant of the Marine Corps Major General Wendell C. Neville died July 8 , 1930 , Butler , at that time the senior major general in the Corps , was a candidate for the position . Although he had significant support from many inside and outside the Corps , including John Lejeune and Josephus Daniels , two other Marine Corps generals were seriously considered , Ben H. Fuller and John H. Russell . Lejeune and others petitioned President Hoover , garnered support in the Senate and flooded Secretary of the Navy Charles Adams 's desk with more than 2 @,@ 500 letters of support . With the recent death of his influential father , however , Butler had lost much of his protection from his civilian superiors . The outspokenness that characterized his run @-@ ins with the Mayor of Philadelphia , the " unreliability " mentioned by his superiors when opposing a posting to the Western Front , and his comments about Benito Mussolini resurfaced . In the end , the position of Commandant went to Fuller , who had more years of commissioned service than Butler and was considered less controversial . Butler requested retirement and left active duty on October 1 , 1931 . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Even before retiring from the Corps , Butler began developing his post @-@ Corps career . In May 1931 , he took part in a commission established by Oregon Governor Julius L. Meier . The commission laid the foundations for the Oregon State Police . He began lecturing at events and conferences and after his retirement from the Marines in 1931 , he took this up full @-@ time . He donated much of his earnings from his lucrative lecture circuits to the Philadelphia unemployment relief . He toured the western United States , making 60 speeches before returning for his daughter 's marriage to Marine aviator Lieutenant John <unk> . Her wedding was the only time that he wore his dress blue uniform after he left the Marines . 
 = = = Senate campaign = = = 
 Butler announced his candidacy for the U.S. Senate in the Republican primary in Pennsylvania in March 1932 as a proponent of Prohibition , known as a " dry " . Butler allied with Gifford Pinchot , but was defeated in the April 26 , 1932 primary election with only 37 @.@ 5 % of the vote to incumbent Senator James J. Davis 's 60 % . A third candidate received the remainder of the votes . According to biographer Mark Strecker , Butler then moved politically to the far left , voting for Norman Thomas of the Socialist Party for president in 1936 . 
 = = = Bonus Army = = = 
 During his Senate campaign , Butler spoke out forcefully about the veterans bonus . Veterans of World War I , many of whom had been out of work since the beginning of the Great Depression , sought immediate cash payment of Service Certificates granted to them eight years earlier via the World War Adjusted Compensation Act of 1924 . Each Service Certificate , issued to a qualified veteran soldier , bore a face value equal to the soldier 's promised payment , plus compound interest . The problem was that the certificates ( like bonds ) , matured 20 years from the date of original issuance , thus , under extant law , the Service Certificates could not be redeemed until 1945 . In June 1932 , approximately 43 @,@ 000 marchers — 17 @,@ 000 of whom were World War I veterans , their families , and affiliated groups — protested in Washington , D.C. The Bonus Expeditionary Force , also known as the " Bonus Army " , marched on Washington to advocate the passage of the " soldier 's bonus " for service during World War I. After Congress adjourned , bonus marchers remained in the city and became unruly . On July 28 , 1932 , two bonus marchers were shot by police , causing the entire mob to become hostile and riotous . The FBI , then known as the United States Bureau of Investigation , checked its fingerprint records to obtain the police records of individuals who had been arrested during the riots or who had participated in the bonus march . 
 The veterans made camp in the Anacostia flats while they awaited the congressional decision on whether or not to pay the bonus . The motion , known as the Patman bill , was decisively defeated , but the veterans stayed in their camp . Butler arrived with his young son Thomas , in mid @-@ July the day before the official eviction by the Hoover administration . He walked through the camp and spoke to the veterans ; he told them that they were fine soldiers and they had a right to lobby Congress just as much as any corporation . He and his son spent the night and ate with the men , and in the morning Butler gave a speech to the camping veterans . He instructed them to keep their sense of humor and cautioned them not to do anything that would cost public sympathy . On July 28 , army cavalry units led by General Douglas MacArthur dispersed the Bonus Army by riding through it and using gas . During the conflict several veterans were killed or injured and Butler declared himself a " Hoover @-@ for @-@ Ex @-@ President @-@ Republican " . 
 = = = Lectures = = = 
 He became widely known for his outspoken lectures against war profiteering , U.S. military adventurism , and what he viewed as nascent fascism in the United States . 
 In December 1933 , Butler toured the country with James E. Van Zandt to recruit members for the Veterans of Foreign Wars ( VFW ) . He described their effort as " trying to educate the soldiers out of the sucker class . " In his speeches he denounced the Economy Act of 1933 , called on veterans to organize politically to win their benefits , and condemned the FDR administration for its ties to big business . The VFW reprinted one of his speeches with the title " You Got to Get Mad " in its magazine Foreign Service . He said : " I believe in ... taking Wall St. by the throat and shaking it up . " He believed the rival veterans ' group the American Legion was controlled by banking interests . On December 8 , 1933 , he said : " I have never known one leader of the American Legion who had never sold them out — and I mean it . " 
 In addition to his speeches to pacifist groups , he served from 1935 to 1937 as a spokesman for the American League Against War and Fascism . In 1935 , he wrote the exposé War Is a Racket , a trenchant condemnation of the profit motive behind warfare . His views on the subject are summarized in the following passage from the November 1935 issue of the socialist magazine Common Sense : 
 I spent 33 years and four months in active military service and during that period I spent most of my time as a high class muscle man for Big Business , for Wall Street and the bankers . In short , I was a racketeer , a gangster for capitalism . I helped make Mexico and especially Tampico safe for American oil interests in 1914 . I helped make Haiti and Cuba a decent place for the National City Bank boys to collect revenues in . I helped in the raping of half a dozen Central American republics for the benefit of Wall Street . I helped purify Nicaragua for the International Banking House of Brown Brothers in 1902 – 1912 . I brought light to the Dominican Republic for the American sugar interests in 1916 . I helped make Honduras right for the American fruit companies in 1903 . In China in 1927 I helped see to it that Standard Oil went on its way unmolested . Looking back on it , I might have given Al Capone a few hints . The best he could do was to operate his racket in three districts . I operated on three continents . 
 = = = Business Plot = = = 
 In November 1934 , Butler claimed the existence of a political conspiracy by business leaders to overthrow President Roosevelt , a series of allegations that came to be known in the media as the Business Plot . A special committee of the House of Representatives headed by Representatives John W. McCormack of Massachusetts and Samuel Dickstein of New York , who was later alleged to have been a paid agent of the NKVD , heard his testimony in secret . The McCormack @-@ Dickstein committee was a precursor to the House Committee on Un @-@ American Activities . 
 In November 1934 , Butler told the committee that one Gerald P. MacGuire told him that a group of businessmen , supposedly backed by a private army of 500 @,@ 000 ex @-@ soldiers and others , intended to establish a fascist dictatorship . Butler had been asked to lead it , he said , by MacGuire , who was a bond salesman with Grayson M – P Murphy & Co . The New York Times reported that Butler had told friends that General Hugh S. Johnson , former head of the National Recovery Administration , was to be installed as dictator , and that the J.P. Morgan banking firm was behind the plot . Butler told Congress that MacGuire had told him the attempted coup was backed by three million dollars , and that the 500 @,@ 000 men were probably to be assembled in Washington , D.C. the following year . All the parties alleged to be involved publicly said there was no truth in the story , calling it a joke and a fantasy . 
 In its report , the committee stated that it was unable to confirm Butler 's statements other than the conversations with MacGuire . No prosecutions or further investigations followed , and historians have questioned whether or not a coup was actually contemplated . Historians have not reported any independent evidence apart from Butler 's report on what MacGuire told him . Schmidt says Maguire was an " inconsequential trickster . " The news media dismissed the plot , with a New York Times editorial characterizing it as a " gigantic hoax " . When the committee 's final report was released , the Times said the committee " purported to report that a two @-@ month investigation had convinced it that General Butler 's story of a Fascist march on Washington was alarmingly true " and " ... also alleged that definite proof had been found that the much publicized Fascist march on Washington , which was to have been led by Major . Gen. Smedley D. Butler , retired , according to testimony at a hearing , was actually contemplated " . The individuals involved all denied the existence of a plot , despite evidence to the contrary . The media ridiculed the allegations , although a final report by a special House of Representatives Committee confirmed some of Butler 's accusations 
 The McCormack @-@ Dickstein Committee confirmed some of Butler 's testimony in its final report . " In the last few weeks of the committee 's official life it received evidence showing that certain persons had made an attempt to establish a fascist organization in this country ... There is no question that these attempts were discussed , were planned , and might have been placed in execution when and if the financial backers deemed it expedient . " 
 = = Death = = 
 Upon his retirement , Butler bought a home in Newtown Square , Pennsylvania , where he lived with his wife . In June 1940 , he checked himself into the hospital after becoming sick a few weeks earlier . His doctor described his illness as an incurable condition of the upper gastro @-@ intestinal tract that was probably cancer . His family remained by his side , even bringing his new car so he could see it from the window . He never had a chance to drive it . On June 21 , 1940 , Smedley Butler died in the Naval Hospital in Philadelphia . 
 The funeral was held at his home , attended by friends and family as well as several politicians , members of the Philadelphia police force and officers of the Marine Corps . He was buried at Oaklands Cemetery near West Chester , Pennsylvania . Since his death in 1940 , his family has maintained his home as it was when he died , including a large quantity of memorabilia he had collected throughout his varied career . 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 = = = Military awards = = = 
 In addition to the Medal of Honor and his other American military decorations , Butler received several awards from other countries including the Haitian National Order of Honour and Merit and the French Order of the Black Star . 
 = = = Other honors and recognition = = = 
 The USS Butler ( DD @-@ 636 ) , a Gleaves @-@ class destroyer , was named in his honor in 1942 . This vessel participated in the European and Pacific theaters of operations during the Second World War . She was later converted to a high speed minesweeper . 
 The Boston , Massachusetts , chapter of Veterans for Peace is called the Smedley D. Butler Brigade in his honor . 
 Butler was featured in the 2003 Canadian documentary film The Corporation . 
 In his book My First Days in the White House , Senator Huey Long of Louisiana stated that , if elected to the presidency , he would name Butler as his Secretary of War . 
 His childhood home at West Chester , The Butler House , was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1980 . 
 = = Published works = = 
 Butler , Smedley ; Burks , Arthur J. ( 1927 ) . Walter Garvin in Mexico . Philadelphia : Dorrance . OCLC <unk> . 
 — — ; de Ronde , Philip ( 1935 ) . Paraguay : A Gallant Little Nation : The Story of Paraguay 's War with Bolivia . OCLC <unk> . 
 — — ( 1934 ) . Speech . Smedley Butler Talks on Black Shirts in America , Philadelphia . Hearst Vault Material , <unk> , 1447 . 
 — — ; <unk> , Anne Cipriano . The Papers of General Smedley Darlington Butler , USMC , 1915 – 1918 . OCLC <unk> . 
 — — ; Murphy , William R. Letter to William R. Murphy , 1925 April 25 . OCLC <unk> . 
 — — ; <unk> , Anne Cipriano ( 1992 ) . General Smedley Darlington Butler : The Letters of a Leatherneck , 1898 – 1931 . Praeger . ISBN 0 @-@ 275 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . Retrieved October 14 , 2007 . 
 — — ( July 1929 ) . " The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science " . American Marines in China . OCLC <unk> . 
 — — ( 1933 ) . Old <unk> Eye . New York : Farrar & Rinehart . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 01 @-@ 1 . OCLC <unk> . 
 — — ; Lejeune , John Archer ; Miller , J. Michael ( 2002 ) . My Dear Smedley : Personal Correspondence of John A. <unk> and Smedley D. Butler , 1927 – 1928 . Marine Corps Research Center . 
 — — ( 2003 ) [ 1935 ] . War Is a Racket . Los Angeles : Feral House . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 86 @-@ 5 . 
 = King vulture = 
 The king vulture ( Sarcoramphus papa ) is a large bird found in Central and South America . It is a member of the New World vulture family Cathartidae . This vulture lives predominantly in tropical lowland forests stretching from southern Mexico to northern Argentina . It is the only surviving member of the genus Sarcoramphus , although fossil members are known . 
 Large and predominantly white , the king vulture has gray to black ruff , flight , and tail feathers . The head and neck are bald , with the skin color varying , including yellow , orange , blue , purple , and red . The king vulture has a very noticeable yellow fleshy caruncle on its beak . This vulture is a scavenger and it often makes the initial cut into a fresh carcass . It also displaces smaller New World vulture species from a carcass . King vultures have been known to live for up to 30 years in captivity . 
 King vultures were popular figures in the Mayan codices as well as in local folklore and medicine . Although currently listed as least concern by the IUCN , they are decreasing in number , due primarily to habitat loss . 
 = = Taxonomy and systematics = = 
 The king vulture was originally described by Carl Linnaeus in 1758 in the tenth edition of his Systema Naturae as Vultur papa , the type specimen originally collected in Suriname . It was reassigned to the genus Sarcoramphus in 1805 by French zoologist André Marie Constant Duméril . The generic name is a New Latin compound formed from the Greek words <unk> ( sarx , " flesh " , the combining form of which is <unk> ) and <unk> ( <unk> , " crooked beak of bird of prey " ) . The genus name is often misspelled as <unk> , improperly retaining the Greek rough breathing despite agglutination with the previous word @-@ element . The bird was also assigned to the genus <unk> by Constantin Wilhelm Lambert Gloger in 1841 , but this classification is not used in modern literature since Sarcoramphus has priority as the earlier name . The species name is derived from Latin word papa " bishop " , alluding the bird 's plumage resembling the clothing of one . The king vulture 's closest living relative is the Andean condor , Vultur gryphus . Some authors have even put these species in a separate subfamily from the other New World vultures , though most authors consider this subdivision unnecessary . 
 There are two theories on how the king vulture earned the " king " part of its common name . The first is that the name is a reference to its habit of displacing smaller vultures from a carcass and eating its fill while they wait . An alternative theory reports that the name is derived from Mayan legends , in which the bird was a king who served as a messenger between humans and the gods . This bird was also known as the " white crow " by the Spanish in Paraguay . It was called <unk> in Nahuatl , derived from <unk> " collar " and <unk> " bird of prey " . 
 The exact systematic placement of the king vulture and the remaining six species of New World vultures remains unclear . Though both are similar in appearance and have similar ecological roles , the New World and Old World vultures evolved from different ancestors in different parts of the world . Just how different the two are is currently under debate , with some earlier authorities suggesting that the New World vultures are more closely related to storks . More recent authorities maintain their overall position in the order Falconiformes along with the Old World vultures or place them in their own order , Cathartiformes . The South American Classification Committee has removed the New World vultures from Ciconiiformes and instead placed them in Incertae sedis , but notes that a move to Falconiformes or Cathartiformes is possible . Like other New World vultures , the king vulture has a diploid chromosome number of 80 . 
 = = = Fossil record and evolution = = = 
 The genus Sarcoramphus , which today contains only the king vulture , had a wider distribution in the past . The Kern vulture ( Sarcoramphus <unk> ) , lived in southwestern North America during the mid @-@ Pliocene ( <unk> ) , some 3 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 5 million years ago ) . It was a little @-@ known component of the Blancan / <unk> faunal stages . The only material is a broken distal humerus fossil , found at Pozo Creek , Kern County , California . As per Loye H. Miller 's original description , " [ c ] <unk> with [ S. papa ] the type conforms in general form and curvature except for its greater size and robustness . " The large span in time between the existence of the two species suggests that the Kern vulture might be distinct , but as the fossil is somewhat damaged and rather non @-@ diagnostic , even assignment to this genus is not completely certain . During the Late Pleistocene , another species probably assignable to the genus , Sarcoramphus <unk> , occurred in Peru . A supposed king vulture relative from Quaternary cave deposits on Cuba turned out to be bones of the eagle @-@ sized hawk <unk> <unk> ( formerly in <unk> ) . 
 Little can be said of the evolutionary history of the genus , mainly because remains of other Neogene New World vultures are usually younger or even more fragmentary . The <unk> held sway over the ecological niche of the extant group especially in North America . The Kern vulture seems to slightly precede the main bout of the Great American Interchange , and it is notable that the living diversity of New World vultures seems to have originated in Central America . The Kern vulture would therefore represent a northwards divergence possibly sister to the S. <unk> – S. papa lineage . The fossil record , though scant , supports the theory that the ancestral king vultures and South American condors separated at least some 5 mya . 
 = = = Bartram 's " painted vulture " = = = 
 A " painted vulture " ( " Sarcoramphus sacra " or " S. papa sacra " ) is described in William Bartram 's notes of his travels in Florida during the 1770s . This bird 's description matches the appearance of the king vulture except that it had a white , not black , tail . Bartram describes the bird as being relatively common and even claimed to have collected one . However , no other naturalists record the painted vulture in Florida and sixty years after the sighting its validity began to be questioned , leading to what John Cassin described as the most inviting problem in North American ornithology . An independent account and painting was made of a similar bird by Eleazar Albin in 1734 . 
 While most early ornithologists defended Bartram 's honesty , Joel Asaph Allen argued that the painted vulture was mythical and that Bartram mixed elements of different species to create this bird . Allen pointed out that the birds ' behavior , as recorded by Bartram , is in complete agreement with the caracara 's . For example , Bartram observed the birds following wildfires to scavenge for burned insects and box turtles . Such behavior is typical of <unk> , but the larger and shorter @-@ legged king vultures are not well adapted for walking . The northern crested caracara ( <unk> <unk> ) was believed to be common and conspicuous in Bartram 's days , but it is notably absent from Bartram 's notes if the painted vulture is accepted as a Sarcoramphus . However , Francis Harper argued that the bird could , as in the 1930s , have been rare in the area Bartram visited and could have been missed . 
 Harper noticed that Bartram 's notes were considerably altered and expanded in the printed edition , and the detail of the white tail appeared in print for the first time in this revised account . Harper believed that Bartram could have tried to fill in details of the bird from memory and got the tail coloration wrong . Harper and several other researchers have attempted to prove the former existence of a king vulture relative in Florida at this late date , suggesting that the population was in the process of extinction and finally disappeared during a cold spell . Additionally , William <unk> , noting the tendency of birds to form Floridian subspecies , suggested that the white tail could be a sign that the painted vulture was a subspecies of the king vulture . 
 = = Description = = 
 Excluding the two species of condors , the king vulture is the largest of the New World vultures . Its overall length ranges from 67 – 81 centimeters ( 27 – 32 in ) and its wingspan is 1 @.@ 2 – 2 meters ( 4 – 6 @.@ 6 ft ) . Its weight ranges from 2 @.@ 7 – 4 @.@ 5 kilograms ( 6 – 10 lb ) . An imposing bird , the adult king vulture has predominantly white plumage , which has a slight rose @-@ yellow tinge to it . In stark contrast , the wing coverts , flight feathers and tail are dark grey to black , as is the prominent thick neck ruff . The head and neck are devoid of feathers , the skin shades of red and purple on the head , vivid orange on the neck and yellow on the throat . On the head , the skin is wrinkled and folded , and there is a highly noticeable irregular golden crest attached on the cere above its orange and black bill ; this caruncle does not fully form until the bird ’ s fourth year . 
 The king vulture has the largest skull and braincase , and strongest bill of the New World vultures . This bill has a hooked tip and a sharp cutting edge . The bird has broad wings and a short , broad , and square tail . The irises of its eyes are white and bordered by bright red sclera . Unlike some New World vultures , the king vulture lacks eyelashes . It also has gray legs and long , thick claws . 
 The vulture is minimally sexually dimorphic , with no difference in plumage and little in size between males and females . The juvenile vulture has a dark bill and eyes , and a downy , gray neck that soon begins to turn the orange of an adult . Younger vultures are a slate gray overall , and , while they look similar to the adult by the third year , they do not completely molt into adult plumage until they are around five or six years of age . Jack <unk> of the Center for the Study of Tropical Birds in San Antonio , Texas reviewed the plumage of birds in captivity of various ages and found that ventral feathers were the first to begin turning white from two years of age onwards , followed by wing feathers , until the full adult plumage was achieved . The final immature stages being a scattered black feathers in the otherwise white lesser wing coverts . 
 The vulture 's head and neck are featherless as an adaptation for hygiene , though there are black bristles on parts of the head ; this lack of feathers prevents bacteria from the carrion it eats from ruining its feathers and exposes the skin to the sterilizing effects of the sun . 
 Dark @-@ plumaged immature birds may be confused with turkey vultures , but soar with flat wings , while the pale plumaged adults could feasibly be confused with the wood stork , although the latter 's long neck and legs allow for easy recognition from afar . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The king vulture inhabits an estimated 14 million km2 ( 5 @.@ 4 million mi2 ) between southern Mexico and northern Argentina . In South America , it does not live west of the Andes , except in western Ecuador , north @-@ western Colombia and far north @-@ western Venezuela . It primarily inhabits undisturbed tropical lowland forests as well as savannas and grasslands with these forests nearby . It is often seen near swamps or marshy places in the forests . This bird is often the most numerous or only vulture present in primary lowland forests in its range , but in the Amazon rainforest it is typically outnumbered by the greater yellow @-@ headed vulture , while typically outnumbered by the lesser yellow @-@ headed , turkey and American black vulture in more open habitats . King vultures generally do not live above 1500 m ( 5000 ft ) , although are found in places at 2500 m ( 8000 ft ) altitude east of the Andes , and have been rarely recorded up to 3300 m ( 10000 ft ) They inhabit the emergent forest level , or above the canopy . Pleistocene remains have been recovered from Buenos Aires Province in central Argentina , over 700 km ( 450 mi ) south of its current range , giving rise to speculation on the habitat there at the time which had not been thought to be suitable . 
 = = Ecology and behavior = = 
 The king vulture soars for hours effortlessly , only flapping its wings infrequently . While in flight , its wings are held flat with slightly raised tips , and from a distance the vulture can appear to be headless while in flight . Its wing beats are deep and strong . Birds have been observed engaging in tandem flight on two occasions in Venezuela by naturalist Marsha <unk> , who has proposed it could be a part of courtship behaviour . 
 Despite its size and gaudy coloration , this vulture is quite inconspicuous when it is perched in trees . While perched , it holds its head lowered and thrust forward . It is non @-@ migratory and , unlike the turkey , lesser yellow @-@ headed and American black vulture , it generally lives alone or in small family groups . Groups of up to 12 birds have been observed bathing and drinking in a pool above a waterfall in Belize . One or two birds generally descend to feed at a carcass , although occasionally up to ten or so may gather if there is significant amount of food . King vultures have lived up to 30 years in captivity , though their lifespan in the wild is unknown . This vulture uses urohidrosis , defecating on its legs , to lower its body temperature . Despite its bill and large size , it is relatively unaggressive at a kill . The king vulture lacks a voice box , although it can make low croaking noises and wheezing sounds in courtship , and bill @-@ snapping noises when threatened . Its only natural predators are snakes , which will prey upon the vulture 's eggs and young , and large cats such as jaguars , which may surprise and kill an adult vulture at a carcass . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The king vulture eats anything from cattle carcasses to beached fish and dead lizards . Principally a carrion eater , there are isolated reports of it killing and eating injured animals , newborn calves and small lizards . 
 Although it locates food by vision , the role smell has in how it specifically finds carrion has been debated . Consensus has been that it does not detect odours , and instead follows the smaller turkey and greater yellow @-@ headed vultures , which do have a sense of smell , to a carcass , but a 1991 study demonstrated that the king vulture could find carrion in the forest without the aid of other vultures , suggesting that it locates food using an olfactory sense . The king vulture primarily eats carrion found in the forest , though it is known to venture onto nearby savannas in search of food . Once it has found a carcass , the king vulture displaces the other vultures because of its large size and strong bill . However , when it is at the same kill as the larger Andean condor , the king vulture always defers to it . Using its bill to tear , it makes the initial cut in a fresh carcass . This allows the smaller , weaker @-@ beaked vultures , which can not open the hide of a carcass , access to the carcass after the king vulture has fed . The vulture ’ s tongue is rasp @-@ like , which allows it to pull flesh off of the carcass ’ s bones . Generally , it only eats the skin and harder parts of the tissue of its meal . The king vulture has also been recorded eating fallen fruit of the <unk> palm when carrion is scarce in Bolívar state , Venezuela . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The reproductive behaviour of the king vulture in the wild is poorly known , and much knowledge has been gained from observing birds in captivity , particularly at the Paris Menagerie . An adult king vulture sexually matures when it is about four or five years old , with females maturing slightly earlier than males . The birds mainly breed during the dry season . King vultures mate for life and generally lay a single unmarked white egg in its nest in a hollow in a tree . To ward off potential predators , the vultures keep their nests foul @-@ smelling . Both parents incubate the egg for the 52 to 58 days before it hatches . If the egg is lost , it will often be replaced after about six weeks . The parents share incubating and brooding duties until the chick is about a week old , after which they often stand guard rather than brood . The young are semi @-@ altricial — they are helpless when born but are covered in downy feathers ( truly altricial birds are born naked ) , and their eyes are open at birth . Developing quickly , the chicks are fully alert by their second day , and able to beg and wriggle around the nest , and preen themselves and peck by their third day . They start growing their second coat of white down by day 10 , and stand on their toes by day 20 . From one to three months of age , chicks walk around and explore the vicinity of the nest , and take their first flights at about three months of age . 
 = = Conservation = = 
 This bird is a species of least concern to the IUCN , with an estimated range of 14 million km2 ( 5 @.@ 4 million mi2 ) and between 10 @,@ 000 and 100 @,@ 000 wild individuals . However , there is evidence that suggests a decline in population , though it is not significant enough to cause it to be listed . This decline is due primarily to habitat destruction and poaching . Although distinctive , its habit of perching in tall trees and flying at altitude render it difficult to monitor . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 The king vulture is one of the most common species of birds represented in the Mayan codices . Its glyph is easily distinguishable by the knob on the bird ’ s beak and by the concentric circles that make up the bird ’ s eyes . Sometimes the bird is portrayed as a god with a human body and a bird head . According to Mayan mythology , this god often carried messages between humans and the other gods . It is also used to represent <unk> , the thirteenth day of the month in the Mayan calendar ( 13 Reed ) . An ocellated turkey ( Meleagris ocellata ) was also considered to be the bird depicted , but the hooked bill and wattle point to the raptor . 
 The bird ’ s blood and feathers were also used to cure diseases . The king vulture is also a popular subject on the stamps of the countries within its range . It appeared on a stamp for El Salvador in 1963 , Belize in 1978 , Guatemala in 1979 , Honduras in 1997 , Bolivia in 1998 , and Nicaragua in 1999 . 
 Because of its large size and beauty , the king vulture is an attraction at zoos around the world . The king vulture is one of several bird species with an AZA studbook , which is kept by Shelly Collinsworth of the Fort Worth Zoo . 
 = William R. Purnell = 
 Rear Admiral William Reynolds Purnell ( 6 September 1886 – 3 March 1955 ) was an officer in the United States Navy who served in World War I and World War II . A 1908 graduate of the United States Naval Academy , he captained destroyers during World War I. He was awarded the Navy Cross for his role in protecting convoys against German submarines as commander of the USS Lamson . 
 He was promoted to rear admiral in November 1941 . During World War II , he was Chief of Staff of the ill @-@ fated Asiatic Fleet at the start of the Pacific War . He later served as Assistant Chief of Naval Operations for Materiel . He was the Navy representative on the Joint Committee on New Weapons and Equipment , and , from September 1942 , the Navy representative on the Military Policy Committee , the three @-@ man committee that oversaw the Manhattan Project . Purnell helped coordinate its activities with those of the Navy . In 1945 , he travelled to Tinian as the representative of the Military Policy Committee , and coordinated preparations for the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki with senior Army and Navy commanders in the Pacific . He retired from the Navy in 1946 and died in 1955 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 William Reynolds Purnell was born in Bowling Green , Missouri , on 6 September 1886 . In 1908 , he graduated from the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis . He was commissioned as an ensign in 1910 . During World War I , he commanded the destroyers USS Lamson , USS Patterson , USS Rowan , and USS Montgomery . For his services , he was awarded the Navy Cross . His citation read : 
 The President of the United States of America takes pleasure in presenting the Navy Cross to Lieutenant Commander William Reynolds Purnell , United States Navy , for distinguished service in the line of his profession as Commanding Officer of the USS Lamson , engaged in the important , exacting and hazardous duty of patrolling the waters infested with enemy submarines and mines , in escorting and protecting vitally important convoys of troops and supplies through these waters , and in offensive and defensive action , vigorously and unremittingly prosecuted against all forms of enemy naval activity during World War I. 
 In January 1917 , while he was serving on the Rowan , he married Ada Dodge Curtiss , the daughter of Walter Phelps Dodge and the ex @-@ wife of Gerald S. Curtiss . They had one son , William Reynolds Purnell , Jr . 
 After the war , he commanded the tanker USS <unk> from 1934 to 1936 . Alternating duty afloat with service ashore , he then became secretary to the General Board . He commanded the cruiser USS New Orleans from January to December 1939 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Purnell became Chief of Staff of Admiral Thomas C. Hart 's Asiatic Fleet . Purnell represented the United States at a planning conference in Singapore in April 1941 at which American , British , Dutch , Australian , and New Zealand commanders attempted to coordinate their plans for an increasingly likely war with Japan . He was promoted to rear admiral in November 1941 . On 7 December , Purnell played golf with Hart . War broke out the next morning . The Japanese advanced quickly and the Asiatic Fleet moved from the Philippines to Java in January . As the Japanese closed in on Java , Purnell flew to Broome on 25 February . 
 In Australia , Purnell became Chief of Staff to Vice Admiral William A. <unk> , the Commander , US Naval Forces , Southwest Pacific . When <unk> departed in May 1942 , Purnell took his place . He too left Australia in June 1942 , for duty in Washington , DC , in the Office of the Commander in Chief , United States Fleet , Admiral Ernest J. King . For his services , he was awarded the Navy Distinguished Service Medal . His citation read : 
 The President of the United States of America , authorized by Act of Congress , July 9 , 1918 , takes pleasure in presenting the Navy Distinguished Service Medal to Rear Admiral William Reynolds Purnell , United States Navy , for especially meritorious service as Chief of Staff to Commander in Chief , Asiatic Fleet , and Commander U.S. Forces , Southwest , Pacific , since the outbreak of war for duties involving great responsibility connected with formulation plans , counseling their application and aid in directing execution , especially of offensive missions of forces of this command which have resulted in substantial damage to the enemy together with skill and tact displayed in negotiating , conferring and dealing with Commanders of the Allied Forces during World War II . 
 Purnell became Deputy Chief of Naval Operations for Materiel . He was also the Navy representative on the Joint Committee on New Weapons and Equipment , and , from September 1942 , the Navy representative on the Military Policy Committee , the three @-@ man committee that oversaw the Manhattan Project . Purnell helped coordinate the activities of the Manhattan Project with those of the Navy , particularly the navy 's thermal diffusion research , and he helped provide scientists and technicians from the Navy for the project . 
 In February 1945 , Purnell arranged for Commander Frederick Ashworth to go to Guam to brief Fleet Admiral Chester Nimitz on the project . He provided Ashworth with a letter from King stressing the project 's importance and the need for secrecy . Ashworth selected a base site for the Manhattan Project 's operations . He inspected facilities on Guam and Tinian , and chose the latter . 
 Tinian 's harbor suffered from congestion due to extensive base development work , and ships sometimes took months to unload . The director of the Manhattan Project , Major General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , went to Purnell , who arranged for an order from King to Nimitz stating that all shipments related to the Manhattan Project and the 509th Composite Group had to be unloaded immediately on arrival , regardless of the consequent disruption to the port 's operations . 
 Problems like this underlined the value of having high @-@ ranking officers on hand to deal with local commanders to make decisions on the spot if necessary . In drawing up an organization for command of the Manhattan Project 's operations , Groves and Purnell agreed that Purnell should to be present on Tinian as both the representative of the Military Policy Committee and the personal representative of Admiral King . He was joined by Brigadier General Thomas F. Farrell , the Manhattan Project 's Deputy for Operations , and the two shared responsibility for coordinating the Manhattan Project 's activities with the senior Army and Navy commanders in the Pacific . Along with Captain William S. Parsons , the director of Project Alberta , they formed what became informally known as the " Tinian Joint Chiefs " . 
 Purnell was the first proponent of the idea that two atomic attacks , one following quickly after the other , would be required to end the war . This was something that Groves and Purnell discussed a number of times . " I knew that with him and Farrell on the ground at Tinian , " Groves wrote . " There would be no unnecessary delay in exploiting our success " after the bombing of Hiroshima . The main difficulty with the second mission , then scheduled for 11 August , was the weather , which was predicted to be good until 9 August but bad for at least five days starting on 10 August . Parsons agreed to work the assembly team around the clock to get the Fat Man bomb ready by the evening of 8 August . 
 Before Major Charles Sweeney took off on the mission , Purnell took him aside and asked him if he knew how much the bomb cost . Sweeney did not know ; Purnell told him it was about $ 2 billion . He then asked if Sweeney knew how much his aircraft was worth . This Sweeney did know ; over half a million dollars . Purnell then told him : " I 'd suggest you keep those relative values in mind for this mission . " 
 = = Later life = = 
 After the war , Purnell served as a member of the Army @-@ Navy Evaluation Board during Operation Crossroads . He retired from the Navy in October 1946 , and moved to Palo Alto , California , where he died on 5 March 1955 . He was buried in Golden Gate National Cemetery . He was survived by his wife , Ada Dodge Purnell , and his son , William R. Purnell , Jr . 
 = Adam Air Flight 172 = 
 Adam Air Flight 172 refers to an accident suffered by a Boeing 737 @-@ 300 , when it landed in Surabaya at the end of a scheduled domestic passenger flight from Ngurah Rai Airport to Juanda Airport . On 21 February 2007 , the plane bent on landing , with the fuselage cracking in the middle of the passenger section . All six of Adam Air 's remaining 737s were immediately grounded , and five of them were back in regular service later that year . This incident caused further concerns regarding the safety of flights operated by Adam Air , which had received much criticism after the 1 January 2007 crash of Flight 574 . 
 = = Aircraft = = 
 The aircraft , a Boeing 737 @-@ 33A , registration PK @-@ <unk> , was acquired by Adam Air in January 2007 , having previously been operated by Brazilian operator <unk> . The aircraft was manufactured in 1994 . 
 = = Accident = = 
 The plane bent upon landing at Juanda International Airport , with the fuselage breaking in the middle of the passenger section . The landing was particularly hard , with baggage being ejected from cabin lockers into the cabin space . The tail section of the plane was bent down compared to the rest of the plane . Subsequent flights to the airport were diverted to alternate airports . Adam Air 's fleet of Boeing 737 @-@ 300s were grounded for safety inspections in the interim . Immediately after the accident , Adam Air repainted the aircraft , covering the original orange livery with a plain white exterior . This is legally permissible , so long as no evidence is destroyed . Also in the immediate aftermath , a large number of passengers cancelled their flights with Adam Air , saying they had " lost faith " in the airline . They were all refunded in full . 
 = = Grounding of Adam Air 's 737s = = 
 As a result of the incident , all six remaining Adam Air 737s were immediately grounded awaiting safety checks . Vice @-@ President of Indonesia , Jusuf Kalla , said that all Boeing 737 @-@ 300s should be checked . He eventually decided the entire Indonesian fleet of 737s should be checked , but did not ground any more aircraft . There were also suggestions that Adam Air should be suspended from all operations until the entire fleet could be checked , with MP Abdul Hakim saying " It will be good for the company and the government ... until the flight authorities can determine if Adam Air is still worthy as national aircraft company " . 
 The Indonesian Transport Ministry said that if the aircraft showed signs of problems , the checks would be expanded to cover all 737s operating in Indonesia . On 5 March , it was reported that five of the six aircraft had returned to normal operations , but the sixth was still undergoing a full maintenance overhaul at maintenance , repair and overhaul firm , <unk> <unk> facility . Adam Air had resumed its normal schedule by 9 March 2007 . 
 = = Investigation = = 
 The accident was investigated by the National Transportation Safety Committee ( <unk> ) . Investigators compiled data from the Indonesian weather agency and from the air traffic control center in Surabaya in an attempt to determine the cause . Officials state the aircraft did pass safety checks prior to its departure . Boeing announced that they would also provide technical assistance to both the authorities and the airline during the course of the investigation . 
 The final report from the NTSC stated that the probable cause of the accident was an excessive sink rate upon touchdown , following an <unk> approach . In the report , the <unk> noted that the approach was unstable below 200 feet ( 61 m ) , with a vertical speed occasionally greater than 2500 fpm . The vertical acceleration on landing was measured at 5 g . Additionally , the aircraft initially touched down with the right main gear approximately 4 metres ( 13 ft ) outside of the runway edge . 
 The investigation further revealed that there was no technical malfunction on the aircraft prior to touchdown . 
 The flight crew was criticised for not maintaining a sterile cockpit during the landing , with excessive non @-@ flight related discussion going on throughout the flight . 
 Unusually for an aircraft accident investigation , the investigative committee was not provided information as to the identities of the flight crew of the aircraft . 
 = = Maintenance concerns = = 
 The safety record of Adam Air was heavily criticised , especially in the aftermath of Flight 574 . Pilots reported repeated and deliberate breaches of international safety regulations , with aircraft being flown in non @-@ airworthy states for months at a time . They claimed that there had been such incidents as requests to sign documents to allow an aircraft to fly while not having the authority to and while knowing the plane to be not airworthy , flying a plane for several months with a damaged door handle , swapping parts between aircraft to avoid mandatory replacement deadlines , being ordered to fly aircraft after exceeding the take @-@ off limit of five times per pilot per day , flying an aircraft with a damaged window , using spare parts from other aircraft to keep planes in the air , and the ignoring of pilots ' requests not to take off due to unsafe aircraft . The Associated Press quoted one pilot as saying that " Every time you flew , you had to fight with the ground staff and the management about all the regulations you had to violate . " They also claim that if pilots confronted their seniors in the airline , they were grounded or docked pay . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The Indonesian government announced plans immediately after the accident to ban jets over ten years of age for any commercial purpose . The age limit had been 35 years or 70 @,@ 000 landings . Indonesia also announced plans to reshuffle the Transportation Ministry in response to this incident , Flight 574 and the loss of the ferries MV <unk> Nusantara and MV <unk> 1 . Among those to be replaced were the directors of air and sea transports and the chairman of the National Committee for Transportation Safety . Indonesia also intended to introduce a new system of ranking airlines according to their safety record , with a level one ranking meaning the airline has no serious issues , a level two ranking meaning the airline must fix problems , and a level three rating forcing the airline to be shut down . 
 = Aonchotheca forresteri = 
 Aonchotheca forresteri is a parasitic nematode that infects the marsh rice rat ( Oryzomys palustris ) in Florida . Occurring mainly in adults , it inhabits the stomach . It is much more common during the wet season , perhaps because its unknown intermediate host is an earthworm that only emerges when it rains . The worm was discovered in 1970 and formally described in 1987 . Originally classified in the genus Capillaria , it was reclassified in Aonchotheca in 1999 . A. forresteri is small and narrow @-@ bodied , with a length of 13 @.@ 8 to 19 @.@ 4 mm in females and 6 @.@ 8 to 9 @.@ 2 mm in males . Similar species such as A. putorii differ in features of the alae and spicule ( organs in the male ) , the size of the female , and the texture of the eggs . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Aonchotheca forresteri was discovered during a survey of the endoparasites of Florida marsh rice rats ( Oryzomys palustris ) by John Kinsella from 1970 to 1972 , and is one of several new parasite species in this study , which was done because there were no previous comprehensive studies of the endoparasites of the species . Together with Danny Pence , Kinsella described the worm in a 1987 paper as Capillaria forresteri ; the specific name honors Donald J. Forrester of the College of Veterinary Medicine , University of Florida . Kinsella and Pence described it as one of many species of Capillaria , a large and taxonomically difficult genus . They suggested that it may be closest to some other small species that live in the digestive systems of mammals , such as the very similar C. putorii , which is found in a variety of carnivorans in North America and Europe . In 1982 , Moravec had placed Capillaria putorii and a number of related species in a separate genus , Aonchotheca , and in 1999 <unk> and Bain transferred Capillaria forresteri and various other species to that genus from Capillaria . Thus , the species is now known as Aonchotheca forresteri . 
 = = Description = = 
 Aonchotheca forresteri is a small , narrow @-@ bodied worm . It is narrowest at the front and increases in width to about three fourths of its length . The cuticle , the surface layer , is smooth . Females are 13 @.@ 8 to 19 @.@ 4 mm long , averaging 16 @.@ 9 mm , which makes them substantially longer than female A. putorii , and 55 to 70 ( average 62 ) μm wide . The eggs are smooth , lacking the elaborate pattern on the surface seen in A. putorii , and are 53 to 58 ( 54 ) μm long and 21 to 24 ( 21 ) μm broad . The esophagus , the frontmost part of the digestive system , is 2 @.@ 9 to 3 @.@ 9 ( 3 @.@ 6 ) mm long and is lined by 36 to 45 ( 40 ) cells known as <unk> . The vulva is located 66 to 105 ( 83 ) μm behind the end of the esophagus and the anus is near the end of the worm , which is rounded . 
 At 6 @.@ 8 to 9 @.@ 2 ( 7 @.@ 7 ) mm , males are only about half as long as females . Their maximum width is 34 to 42 ( 37 ) μm . The length of the esophagus is 2 @.@ 3 to 3 @.@ 0 ( 2 @.@ 6 ) mm , of which the muscular pharynx makes up 260 to 315 ( 273 ) μm , and is lined by 35 to 42 ( 37 ) <unk> . The back region of the worm is 4 @.@ 5 to 6 @.@ 2 ( 5 @.@ 1 ) mm long . The back , or rectal , opening of the digestive tube is located near the end of the worm , and the length of the cloaca is 530 to 576 ( 550 ) μm . Near the back end , there are two alae ( ridges ) at the sides ( laterally ) , which are 40 to 55 ( 46 ) μm long ; these are located at 10 to 15 μm from another , small ala at the tip . In A. putorii , the lateral alae are much longer and reach the ala at the tip . The spicule , a <unk> structure that functions in reproduction , is curved at the tip and hardened and has a length of 380 to 426 ( 406 ) μm . It is smaller than that of the similar A. <unk> from North American chipmunks and larger than that of A. <unk> from various North American and European small rodents , but about as long as that of A. putorii , which however lacks the curved tip . 
 = = Distribution and ecology = = 
 Marsh rice rats from Paynes Prairie , Alachua County ; Cedar Key , Levy County ; and Lake <unk> , Highlands County , all in Florida , have yielded A. forresteri . In Paynes Prairie , the type locality , 82 of 178 animals examined were infected with 1 to 50 ( average 10 ) worms , but in Cedar Key only a single rat contained one worm . The worms were found in the front part , or fundus , of the stomach , with their front ends in the <unk> tissue and their back ends projecting into the inside . 
 In Paynes Prairie , there was no significant difference in rate of infection between males and females , but only 4 % of juveniles were infected , compared to 52 % of adults . Most species of Capillaria occur in multiple hosts , but A. forresteri has been found only in the marsh rice rat , even though several other small mammals ( the round @-@ tailed muskrat , Neofiber alleni ; cotton mouse , Peromyscus gossypinus ; hispid cotton rat , Sigmodon hispidus ; and marsh rabbit , Sylvilagus palustris ) occur in Paynes Prairie . The rice rat eats more animal food than any of those , and perhaps A. forresteri has an intermediate host that is not eaten by the other species . A. forresteri is markedly more prevalent in the wet season ( spring ) than the dry season ( autumn ) , perhaps because rainfall patterns influence the habits of the rice rat in some way . One possibility is that the intermediate host is an earthworm or other oligochaete worm that moves to the surface when it rains . 
 = Killswitch Engage = 
 Killswitch Engage is an American metalcore band from Westfield , Massachusetts , formed in 1999 after the disbanding of Overcast and Aftershock . Killswitch Engage 's current lineup consists of vocalist Jesse Leach , guitarists Joel Stroetzel and Adam Dutkiewicz , bassist Mike D 'Antonio , and drummer Justin Foley . The band has released seven studio albums and one DVD . Their latest album , Incarnate , was released on March 11 , 2016 . 
 Killswitch Engage rose to fame with its 2004 release The End of Heartache , which peaked at number 21 on the Billboard 200 , and was certified gold by the RIAA in December 2007 for over 500 @,@ 000 shipments in the United States . The title track , " The End of Heartache " , was nominated for a Grammy Award in 2005 for Best Metal Performance , and a live DVD titled ( Set This ) World Ablaze was released in 2005 . Killswitch Engage has performed at festivals such as Soundwave Festival , Wacken Open Air , Reading and Leeds Festivals , Ozzfest , Download Festival , Rock on the Range , Rock Am Ring , Mayhem Festival , Monsters of Rock , <unk> , Knotfest and Heavy <unk> . The band has sold over four million records in the U.S. and has been considered notable within the New Wave of American Heavy Metal . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early years and debut album ( 1999 – 2001 ) = = = 
 Killswitch Engage formed following the disbandment of metalcore bands Overcast and Aftershock in 1999 . After Overcast broke up in 1998 , bassist Mike D 'Antonio jammed with Aftershock guitarist Adam Dutkiewicz . Dutkiewicz , now playing drums , recruited guitarist Joel Stroetzel from Aftershock and vocalist Jesse Leach of the band Nothing Stays Gold ( who were signed to a record label owned by Dutkiewicz 's brother Tobias , who was also the vocalist in Aftershock ) to form a new band , Killswitch Engage . The band 's name is derived from an episode of the television series The X @-@ Files entitled " Kill Switch " , written by William Gibson , who gave the episode this title after meeting the industrial band Kill Switch ... <unk> . 
 In 1999 , Killswitch Engage recorded a demo containing four tracks , including " <unk> " , the first song written by the band . The demo was first released at the band 's first show , opening for melodic death metal act In Flames , in November 1999 . They released their self @-@ titled debut album the following year . Although initially the album was not a financial success and did not land on any charts , it attracted the interest of Carl Severson , who worked at Roadrunner Records at the time . Severson handed Killswitch Engage to several Roadrunner representatives . Mike Gitter , a talent agent of the company , contacted D 'Antonio , attended several of the band 's shows , and offered the band a recording contract with Roadrunner . Realizing that Roadrunner had the resources to promote and distribute Killswitch Engage releases , the band accepted his offer , declining several offers from smaller labels . 
 = = = Alive or Just Breathing ( 2001 – 2004 ) = = = 
 For a brief time in 2000 and 2001 , ex @-@ Overcast guitarist Pete Cortese joined Killswitch Engage , but left when he became a father . Killswitch Engage began writing new material for their second album in November 2001 . Mixed in January at Backstage Studios by producer Andy Sneap , the album was titled Alive or Just Breathing for lyrics in the song " Just Barely Breathing " . A music video for the single " My Last Serenade " increased the band 's exposure , and the album peaked at number 37 on the Top Heatseekers chart . 
 Following Alive or Just Breathing 's release , the album having been written and recorded for two guitarists , the band decided to expand and become a fivesome ; Dutkiewicz moved to guitar and former Aftershock drummer Tom Gomes filled in the vacant drummer position . After Leach was married on April 20 , 2002 and began touring again he fell into a depression . Leach left the band a few days before the band was meant to play a show and sent the band members an e @-@ mail telling them he had quit . D 'Antonio said in an interview that " after three years of hanging out with the dude , and considering him a brother , to just get an email was a little bit harsh . " 
 The band immediately started to search for a replacement vocalist and found Howard Jones of Blood Has Been Shed . Jones disliked the band 's sound when he first heard it . He commented , " I was like , ' Meh . ' I come from hardcore and dirtier metal , and Killswitch sounded so clean . But the more I listened to it , I realized there 's some really good songs here " . After hearing about Leach 's vocal problems , Jones contacted the band and was accepted as the replacement . Philip Labonte of All That Remains tried out for lead vocals but lost to Jones , who had to quickly memorize seven songs for his debut at the 2002 Hellfest . 
 The new lineup played on the Road Rage tour in the United Kingdom and the Netherlands in 2002 with 36 Crazyfists and Five Pointe O. Touring continued through the New Year 's Day , and in 2003 the first song to feature Jones , " When Darkness Falls " , appeared on the soundtrack of the 2003 horror film Freddy vs. Jason . Following the 2003 Ozzfest , drummer Gomes left the band because he wished to spend more time with his wife , to pursue his band Something of a Silhouette , and because he was tired of touring . He was replaced by Justin Foley of Blood Has Been Shed , and Foley 's first tour with the band was the MTV2 Headbangers Ball in 2003 . 
 = = = The End of Heartache ( 2004 – 2006 ) = = = 
 The End of Heartache was released on May 11 , 2004 , and peaked at number 21 on the Billboard 200 with 38 @,@ 000 sales in its first week , and it also peaked at number 39 on the Australian Albums Chart . The album went on to sell more than 500 @,@ 000 copies in the U.S and was certified gold on December 7 , 2007 . The album received mostly positive reviews , with Jon Caramanica of Rolling Stone calling the album a " stunning collection , retaining much of their signature musical brutality " . Eduardo Rivadavia of AllMusic commented " riffs upon riffs are piled sky @-@ high into each number that follows , it 's the unpredictable rhythmic shifts used to build and then relieve internal pressure that fuel the Killswitch Engage power source " . 
 " The End of Heartache " became the main single for the movie Resident Evil : Apocalypse , and in 2005 the song was nominated for Best Metal Performance for the 47th Grammy Awards . In late 2004 , The End of Heartache was re @-@ released as a special edition album , with a second disc featuring various live performances , a Japanese bonus track , and a re @-@ recorded version of " <unk> " . During the summer of 2005 , the band returned for Ozzfest , and on November 1 , 2005 , Alive or Just Breathing was re @-@ released as part of Roadrunner Records ' 25th anniversary . On November 22 , 2005 , the live DVD ( Set This ) World Ablaze was released , which contained a live concert at the Palladium in Worcester , Massachusetts , an hour @-@ long documentary , and all the band 's music videos . The DVD was certified gold in the US on April 8 , 2006 . 
 = = = As Daylight Dies ( 2006 – 2007 ) = = = 
 Killswitch Engage played the Reading and Leeds Festivals in August 2006 , having already played Australian dates without Dutkiewicz , who was suffering from back problems and needed corrective surgery . On May 23 , 2006 , the song " This Fire Burns " was released on the WWE <unk> Intent album . The track was intended to be the new theme song for WWE wrestler Randy Orton ; however , it was scrapped and later became the theme song for the WWE Judgment Day 2006 pay @-@ per @-@ view . " This Fire Burns " was used as the entrance theme for WWE wrestler CM Punk ( along with his stables the Straight Edge Society and The New Nexus ) from 2006 until 2011 and was later re @-@ released as " This Fire " on the As Daylight Dies Special Edition . 
 Recorded in three months , As Daylight Dies was released on November 21 , 2006 and peaked at number 32 on the Billboard 200 chart with 60 @,@ 000 sales in its first week . " As Daylight Dies " proved to be one of their biggest albums yet . It also entered the Australian Albums Chart at number 29 . Mixed by Dutkiewicz , the album received mostly positive reviews — Thom Jurek of Allmusic called it " a Top Five metal candidate for 2006 for sure " . Decibel Magazine contributor Nick Terry said " To call As Daylight Dies addictive would be an understatement . That it outdoes its already impressive enough predecessor could almost go without saying " . Cosmo Lee of Stylus Magazine commented " the album is astonishingly badly sequenced " , though he praised the album as being " less emotionally heavy @-@ handed , and a lot more fun " . As of November 27 , 2007 , As Daylight Dies has sold more than 500 @,@ 000 units in the US . 
 The album 's first single , " My Curse " , peaked at number 21 on the Hot Mainstream Rock Tracks chart , and is featured in the video games Sleeping Dogs , Guitar Hero III : Legends of Rock , Burnout Dominator and Burnout Paradise and is available as downloadable content for the Rock Band series . " The Arms of Sorrow " peaked at number 31 on the same chart . The band 's cover of Dio 's " Holy Diver " , originally recorded for a Kerrang ! compilation album titled High Voltage , peaked at number 12 on the Mainstream Rock charts . Early in 2007 , the band had to cancel three of its European tour dates with The Haunted due to Dutkiewicz 's back problems . He required emergency back surgery and was replaced on the tour by Soilwork guitarist Peter <unk> . 
 Due to Dutkiewicz 's back problems in early 2007 , he was replaced by Damageplan and The Mercy Clinic frontman Patrick Lachman during the No Fear Tour . Dutkiewicz recovered and was able to finish the No Fear tour , and the band began filming its video for As Daylight Dies 's second single , " The Arms of Sorrow " . On August 6 , 2007 , Dutkiewicz was forced to leave the Warped Tour so he could fully recover from his back surgery and continue daily physical therapy . He was replaced by Killswitch 's guitar technician Josh <unk> for select songs , until his return on August 14 , 2007 . 
 = = = Second self @-@ titled album ( 2007 – 2011 ) = = = 
 Killswitch Engage entered the studio in October 2008 to start recording their next album with Dutkiewicz and Brendan O 'Brien co @-@ producing the album . In mid @-@ February , bassist Mike D 'Antonio confirmed in an interview with Metal Hammer that " drums were finished " , and that he had " finished up the last few bass fixes " . He also stated that Howard [ Jones ] was in Atlanta finishing vocals , and that " it shouldn 't be too much longer now . " From March to May , Killswitch Engage was a part of Disturbed 's Music as a Weapon IV festival along with Lacuna Coil , Chimaira , Suicide Silence , Bury Your Dead and more . On April 14 , the band announced the name of their album as Killswitch Engage , the second time the band has self @-@ titled an album . The album was released on June 30 , 2009 , debuting at No. 7 on the Billboard 200 , marking the band 's highest chart position for an album . In July and August , Killswitch Engage took part in Mayhem Festival with headliners Marilyn Manson , Slayer , Bullet for My Valentine and others . In February 2010 , Killswitch Engage announced that vocalist Howard Jones would not be performing with Killswitch Engage during their winter tour with The Devil Wears Prada and Dark <unk> ; during the time , All That Remains vocalist Philip Labonte was substituting for Jones until he could return . At least one source speculated that Jones ' hiatus was due to back pain . On March 18 , 2010 , original vocalist Jesse Leach returned to the band for a series of songs . From then on , Leach and Labonte performed as substitute vocalists for the remainder of the tour . 
 In 2010 , the band contributed the track " My Obsession " to the God of War : Blood & Metal soundtrack . The band was later added as late replacement to 2010 's Download Festival in June , after original sub @-@ headliner , Wolfmother could not attend as scheduled . Afterward , Killswitch Engage took a break from the road , and its members pursued other interests . Adam Dutkiewicz formed the band Times of Grace with Leach and released the debut album " The Hymn of a Broken Man " on January 18 , 2011 . Along with Dutkiewicz and Leach , Times of Grace added Joel Stroetzel to their tour lineup . Justin Foley provided the drum tracking for the band Unearth on their album " Darkness in the Light " , released on July 5 , 2011 . Foley also traveled with the band for their 2011 summer tour . D 'Antonio started the hardcore band Death Ray Vision , with Shadows Fall vocalist Brian Fair and former Killswitch Engage guitarist Pete Cortese . 
 = = = Jones ' departure and Disarm the Descent ( 2011 – 2015 ) = = = 
 In an interview with FTC , Gun Shy Assassin , Mike D 'Antonio had stated that the band was currently in the works for a sixth studio album . D 'Antonio stated , " Currently , everyone is individually writing demos for the next Killswitch Engage record . There is no release date yet , but I would assume it will be out early 2012 . " Adam Dutkiewicz followed that up with a statement on the Killswitch Engage Facebook , saying " YO ! Its Adam D ! We 're about to begin writing our new record . Thanks to all of our fans for waiting so friggin ' patiently ... now let 's turn on the " riff faucet " and RAGE ! " On December 1 , 2011 , Mike D 'Antonio posted online that Killswitch Engage should be entering the studio around February / March 2012 to record their sixth album expected around summer 2012 . He also stated that the band had eight demos finished for the new record . 
 On January 4 , 2012 , the band announced via the band 's official website , along with their other official sources , that Howard Jones had left the band after his nine @-@ year membership with them . In the statement , the band did not disclose the reason for this decision out of respect for Jones , but simply thanked him for his nine years with the band and wished him well , as well as thanking the fans for their support as they began the search for a new lead singer . Soon after the announcement of Jones 's departure , rumors began that Phil Labonte of All That Remains would officially take over lead vocals due to his previous history with the band , although Labonte quickly dispelled the rumor . Many vocalists were considered in the search for a new one for the band . The band 's search for a new singer concluded in February with the announcement that original lead vocalist Jesse Leach would return to the band , as the band felt that Leach 's energy , as well as his overall comfort and command of both the old and new material , made him the clear choice during auditions . Following Leach 's return , the band continued to the process of recording their new album and touring . On April 22 , 2012 , the band performed Leach 's first show since 2002 at the New England Metal and Hardcore Fest . 
 On June 20 , 2012 , the demo version of a new song titled " This Is Confrontation " was leaked on YouTube . Not long after the song was leaked , the videos were soon deleted . Later , the band took part in Metal Hammer 's " Trespass America Festival " headlined by Five Finger Death Punch with additional support from God Forbid , Emmure , Pop Evil , Trivium and <unk> . The band performed this song live , confirming the song 's title " No End in Sight " . Not long after the album was confirmed , the song was streamed publicly again . In October 2012 , with Jesse back at the helm , Killswitch Engage announced they would be celebrating the ten year anniversary of their seminal album , " Alive or Just Breathing " with a US Tour through November / December 2012 , in which they would be playing the album live , in its entirety . Support on the tour came from fellow Massachusetts natives Shadows Fall and <unk> . 
 The album Disarm the Descent was released April 1 , 2013 in the UK . The album debuted at # 15 in the UK charts while debuting at # 7 in the Billboard top 200 April 2 in the US . The first single " In Due Time " was released on February 5 , 2013 . The album has received critical acclaim from reviewers , and has been labeled as a " true standout " and " nothing short of amazing " . It was announced in December 2013 that " In Due Time " was nominated for " Best Metal Performance " at the 2014 Grammy Awards , but lost to " God Is Dead ? " by Black Sabbath . A tour in May 2013 was done to promote the new album . With Miss May I , Darkest Hour , The Word Alive and <unk> as support . As I Lay Dying was originally supposed to be on the tour but dropped due to criminal charges from frontman Tim Lambesis . The band also did a co @-@ headliner with fellow Heavy Metal act Lamb of God in the October 2013 with Testament and Huntress as support for both bands . The band did a small headliner on the east coast for Halloween 2014 . With All That Remains , Death Ray Vision and City of Homes supporting . 
 = = = Incarnate ( 2015 – present ) = = = 
 In an interview with <unk> , Jesse Leach announced that the band will start demoing new material " in the coming months " . 
 On February 25 , 2015 the band released a 40 second snippet of a new single titled " Loyalty " . The track appears on the Catch The Throne : The Mixtape Volume 2 to promote the HBO TV series Game of Thrones . The mixtape also features appearances from various other metal and rap acts such as Anthrax and Snoop Dogg . 
 On March 30 , 2015 , Mike D 'Antonio stated that the band had completed demoing material for its next studio album . 
 Killswitch Engage took part in a summer tour in July 2015 , opening up for Rise Against with support from letlive . 
 On December 10 , 2015 the band premiered a new song entitled " Strength of the Mind " on Revolver . 
 The band also did a small Christmas 2015 tour on the East Coast with Unearth , Act of Defiance and 68 . 
 On December 16 , 2015 it was revealed that the band 's upcoming seventh album , released on March 11 , 2016 , would be titled Incarnate . With a tour being set to take part in March of this year , Memphis May Fire and 36 Crazyfists will be the support . 
 = = Musical style and lyrical themes = = 
 Killswitch Engage primarily play metalcore , combining sounds from extreme metal and hardcore . Like some modern metalcore bands , Killswitch Engage vocally combine singing , screaming vocals , and growls in their music . 
 Killswitch Engage 's music mixes " crushing " riffs , double bass drum patterns , power chords , dual @-@ guitar harmonies , often punctuated with pinch harmonic squeals in their music and breakdowns that one can expect from the metalcore genre . Their music is influenced by <unk> metal scene , New York hardcore and thrash metal . 
 In 2009 , MTV , while naming " The Greatest Metal Bands of All Time " , said that Killswitch Engage have been " called one of the founders of metalcore " . Jason D. Taylor of Allmusic said Alive or Just Breathing is " a pure metal album that seemingly has ignored any fashionable trend and instead relies solely on skill and expertise to sculpt some of the meatiest heavy metal since the glory days of Metallica and Slayer . " 
 Both current vocalist Jesse Leach and former vocalist Howard Jones write lyrics that are considered positive . Jesse Leach stated on ( Set This ) World Ablaze , that the lyrics contain " unity , positivity , [ and ] love . " On the lyrical themes of Killswitch Engage , Ultimate Guitar reviewer Amy Sciarretto notes : 
 On Killswitch Engage 's 2009 self @-@ titled album , Howard Jones states the change in lyrical themes : 
 = = Members = = 
 Timeline 
 = = Discography = = 
 Killswitch Engage ( 2000 ) 
 Alive or Just Breathing ( 2002 ) 
 The End of Heartache ( 2004 ) 
 As Daylight Dies ( 2006 ) 
 Killswitch Engage ( 2009 ) 
 Disarm the Descent ( 2013 ) 
 Incarnate ( 2016 ) 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Grammy Award 
 Metal Hammer Golden Gods Awards 
 Boston Music Awards 
 Loudwire Music Awards 
 = Tomahawk ( album ) = 
 Tomahawk is the debut studio album by American experimental rock band Tomahawk . Recorded after a meeting between vocalist Mike Patton and guitarist Duane Denison , the album features members of Faith No More , The Jesus Lizard , Helmet and Melvins . The band toured with Tool in support of the record , but were not well received by Tool 's fans . 
 Released on October 30 , 2001 , through Patton 's record label Ipecac Recordings , Tomahawk has received positive attention from critics , with most appraisals drawing attention to the versatility of Patton 's vocals . The album charted in both Australia and the United States , reaching a peak of number 20 in the Billboard Independent Albums countdown . 
 = = Production = = 
 For Tomahawk , the band is composed of Mike Patton , vocalist for Faith No More and Mr. Bungle ; Duane Denison , guitarist for The Jesus Lizard ; Kevin Rutmanis , bass player for Melvins ; and John Stanier , drummer for Helmet . Patton and Denison met in 2000 at a Mr. Bungle concert in Nashville , Tennessee , and began exchanging music . From there , the two began to jam together with a view to releasing an album . Patton described the new group as " the closest thing to a rock band I 've been involved with for a while " . 
 The band hired Joe <unk> to produce the album ; <unk> had previously worked with Emmylou Harris and The Judds . The album was released through Ipecac Recordings , the record label owned by Patton and Greg <unk> . Ipecac is also home to Rutmanis ' band Melvins , whose vocalist and guitarist Buzz Osborne had previously collaborated with Patton as a member of Fantômas . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Tomahawk was released on October 30 , 2001 . The album was supported by a tour in which the band supported Tool ; however , Tools fans were unreceptive to Tomahawk and frequently booed their performances . 
 Writing for AllMusic , Blake Butler rated Tomahawk four stars out of five , describing the album as " moody , violent , beautiful , sarcastic , <unk> , silly [ and ] heartstopping " . Butler praised Patton 's versatility , calling the vocalist " a complete and utter musical visionary , and a mind @-@ blowing and standard @-@ warping genius " . Pitchfork 's Luke Buckman award the album a rating of 7 out of 10 , similarly highlighting Patton 's vocals as exemplary . Buckman called Patton " one of the greatest male vocalists around today " ; and felt that " Flashback " and " Cul de Sac " were among the album 's best songs . Mark Reed of Drowned in Sound rated the album 8 out of 10 , noting the " wit " and " style " of the songwriting . Reed felt that the album was among the most conventional of those recorded by Patton , but still described it as featuring " <unk> , <unk> vocals , dark lyrics rich in black humour , swathes of crunchy guitars and some of the most unusual rhythms to be played by human hands since time began " . 
 Writing for the Boston Herald , Butch <unk> rated Tomahawk three stars out of four , finding that it " makes mincemeat out of the new @-@ metal Johnny @-@ come @-@ <unk> " . <unk> described the album as having " an updated ' 70s hard rock approach that echoes Blue Öyster Cult at its sinister best " , and found the opening song " Flashback " to be a " head @-@ crushing pleasure " . Reviewing a leg of the album 's supporting tour for The Irish Times , Peter Crawley felt that " Sir Yes Sir " was a highlight of the album , due to Patton 's " dark <unk> " and Rutmanis ' " drilling bassline " . Writing for CMJ New Music Monthly , Dana Buoniconti compared the album to the soundtracks of David Lynch 's film and television work — specifically likening " Honeymoon " and " Sweet Smell of Success " to the Twin Peaks theme . Buoniconti found Tomahawk to be " unsettling and unwholesome " , but " thoroughly appealing " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs written and composed by Tomahawk ( Mike Patton , Duane Denison , Kevin Rutmanis and John Stanier ) . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Tomahawk reached its highest chart position on the United States Independent Albums chart , reaching a peak position of 20 and spending two weeks in that chart . It also reached a peak of 31 in that country 's Top Heatseekers chart . It spent one week in the Australian ARIA Charts , reaching number 37 . 
 = Pirates of the Caribbean ( film series ) = 
 Pirates of the Caribbean is a series of fantasy swashbuckler films produced by Jerry Bruckheimer and based on Walt Disney 's theme park ride of the same name . Directors of the series include Gore Verbinski ( 1 – 3 ) , Rob Marshall ( 4 ) , and Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg ( 5 ) . The series was most notably written by Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio ( 1 – 4 ) ; other writers include Stuart Beattie ( 1 ) , Jay Wolpert ( 1 ) , and Jeff Nathanson ( 5 ) . The stories followed the adventures of Captain Jack Sparrow ( Johnny Depp ) , Hector Barbossa ( Geoffrey Rush ) , Joshamee Gibbs ( Kevin McNally ) , Will Turner ( Orlando Bloom ) , and Elizabeth Swann ( Keira Knightley ) . The films take place in a fictional historical setting ; a world ruled largely by alternative versions of the British Empire , the East India Company and the Spanish Empire , with pirates representing freedom from the ruling powers . 
 The film series started with their first release on the big screen in 2003 with Pirates of the Caribbean : The Curse of the Black Pearl , which received positive reviews from the critics and grossed US $ 654 million worldwide . After the first film 's success , Walt Disney Pictures revealed that a trilogy was in the works . The franchise 's second film , subtitled Dead Man 's Chest , was released three years later in 2006 ; the sequel proved successful , breaking financial records worldwide the day of its premiere . Dead Man 's Chest ended up being the number one film of the year upon earning almost $ 1 @.@ 1 billion to @-@ date at the worldwide box office . The third film in the series , subtitled At World 's End , followed in 2007 , and Disney released a fourth film , subtitled On Stranger Tides , in 2011 in conventional 2D , Digital 3 @-@ D and IMAX 3D . On Stranger Tides succeeded in also grossing more than $ 1 billion , becoming the second film in the franchise and only the eighth film in history to achieve this . 
 So far , the film franchise has grossed $ 3 @.@ 73 billion worldwide ; it is the eleventh highest @-@ grossing film series of all @-@ time and it was the first franchise where more than one film grossed $ 1 billion worldwide . 
 A fifth film , subtitled Dead Men Tell No Tales , is set to be released on May 26 , 2017 . 
 = = Films = = 
 = = = The Curse of the Black Pearl ( 2003 ) = = = 
 Blacksmith Will Turner teams up with eccentric pirate Captain Jack Sparrow to save Turner 's love , Elizabeth Swann , from undead pirates led by Jack 's former mutinous first mate , Captain Barbossa . Jack wants revenge against Barbossa , who left him stranded on an island before stealing his ship , the Black Pearl , along with 882 pieces of cursed Aztec Gold . 
 = = = Dead Man 's Chest ( 2006 ) = = = 
 Lord Cutler Beckett of the East India Trading Company arrests Will and Elizabeth for aiding Captain Jack Sparrow in the previous film . Beckett offers clemency if Will agrees to search for Jack 's compass in a bid to find the Dead Man 's Chest – and inside , the heart of villainous Davy Jones – which would give Beckett control of the seas . However , Jack wants the Chest to escape from an unpaid debt with Jones , who raised the Black Pearl from the seabed ( after it was sunk by Beckett ) and made Jack captain for 13 years in exchange for 100 years of service aboard Jones ' ship . 
 = = = At World 's End ( 2007 ) = = = 
 Lord Beckett gains power over Davy Jones , and with the help of Jones ' ship , the Flying Dutchman , he is now executing his plans to extinguish piracy forever . To stand against the East India Trading Co . , Will , Elizabeth , Barbossa , and the crew of the Black Pearl set out to rescue Captain Jack Sparrow from Davy Jones ' Locker . As one of the Nine Pirate Lords , Jack is needed in order to summon an ancient goddess with the power to defeat Beckett 's forces . 
 = = = On Stranger Tides ( 2011 ) = = = 
 Captain Jack Sparrow is on a quest to find the fabled Fountain of Youth and crosses paths with a former lover , Angelica . She forces Jack aboard the Queen Anne 's Revenge , a ship captained by the infamous pirate Blackbeard , Angelica 's father . Both are also in search of the Fountain ; Angelica to save her father 's soul , Blackbeard to escape a prophecy of his demise at the hands of a one @-@ legged man . Joining the hunt is former pirate captain Barbossa , now a privateer in King George II 's Navy , who is in a race against the Spanish for the Fountain of Youth . 
 = = = Dead Men Tell No Tales ( 2017 ) = = = 
 " Thrust into an all @-@ new adventure , a down @-@ on @-@ his @-@ luck Captain Jack Sparrow ( Johnny Depp ) finds the winds of ill @-@ fortune blowing even more strongly when deadly ghost pirates led by his old nemesis , the terrifying Captain Salazar ( Javier Bardem ) , escape from the Devil 's Triangle , determined to kill every pirate at sea , including him . Captain Jack 's only hope of survival lies in seeking out the legendary Trident of Poseidon , a powerful artifact that bestows upon its possessor total control over the seas . " 
 = = Short film = = 
 = = = Tales of the Code : <unk> ( 2008 ) = = = 
 <unk> Scarlett ( Lauren Maher ) and Giselle ( Vanessa Branch ) fix each other up for their wedding , in which they would each marry their groom . Upon realizing that both their grooms were the same man – Jack Sparrow – the two wenches find themselves in an auction led by the Auctioneer . The short film serves as a prequel to The Curse of the Black Pearl , explaining just why Jack Sparrow 's boat , the Jolly Mon , was seen sinking at the beginning of the whole story , and explaining why wenches Scarlett and Giselle were so upset with him , and it also implies how Cotton lost his tongue . The plot took inspiration from the " Auction scene " from the original ride . 
 The short was directed by James Ward <unk> , and was only included as a special feature in the US 15 disc 3D Blu @-@ ray / 2D Blu @-@ ray / DVD + Digital Copy box set that includes Pirates 1 – 4 ; and in the similar UK 5 @-@ disc set . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = First film = = = 
 In the early 1990s screenwriters Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio conceived a supernatural spin on the pirate genre after completing work on Aladdin , but there was no interest from any studio . Undeterred , the writing team refused to give up the dream , waiting for a studio to pick up their take on a pirate tale . Disney had Jay Wolpert write a script based on the Pirates of the Caribbean , which producer Jerry Bruckheimer rejected , feeling it was " a straight pirate movie " . Bruckheimer brought Stuart Beattie in to rewrite the script in March 2002 , due to his knowledge of piracy , and later that month Elliott and Rossio were brought in . Elliott and Rossio , inspired by the opening narration of the Pirates of the Caribbean ride , decided to give the film a supernatural edge . As the budget rose , Michael Eisner and Robert Iger threatened to cancel the film , though Bruckheimer changed their minds when he showed them concept art and animatics . 
 In June 2002 Gore Verbinski signed on to direct The Curse of the Black Pearl , and Johnny Depp and Geoffrey Rush signed on the following month to star . Verbinski was attracted to the idea of using modern technology to resurrect a genre , one that had disappeared after the Golden Age of Hollywood , and recalled his childhood memories of the ride , feeling the film was an opportunity to pay tribute to the " scary and funny " tone of it . Depp was attracted to the story as he found it quirky : rather than trying to find treasure , the crew of the Black Pearl were trying to return it in order to lift their curse ; also , the traditional mutiny had already taken place . Verbinski approached Rush for the role of Barbossa , as he knew he would not play it with attempts at complexity , but with a simple villainy that would suit the story 's tone . Orlando Bloom read the script after Rush , with whom he was working on Ned Kelly , suggested it to him . Keira Knightley came as a surprise to Verbinski : he had not seen her performance in Bend It Like Beckham and was impressed by her audition . Tom Wilkinson was negotiated with to play Governor Swann , but the role went to Jonathan Pryce , whom Depp idolized . 
 Shooting for The Curse of the Black Pearl began on October 9 , 2002 and wrapped by March 7 , 2003 . Before its release , many executives and journalists had expected the film to flop , as the pirate genre had not been successful for years , the film was based on a theme @-@ park ride , and Depp rarely made a big film . However , The Curse of the Black Pearl became both a critical and commercial success . 
 = = = Second and third films = = = 
 After seeing how well the first film was made , the cast and crew signed for two sequels to be shot back @-@ to @-@ back , a practical decision on Disney 's part to allow more time with the same cast and crew . Writers Ted Elliott and Terry Rossio knew that with an ensemble cast , they weren 't free to invent totally different situations and characters , as with the Indiana Jones and James Bond series , and so had to retroactively turn The Curse of the Black Pearl into the first of a trilogy . They wanted to explore the reality of what would happen after Will Turner and Elizabeth Swann 's embrace at the end of the first film , and initially considered the Fountain of Youth as the plot device . They settled on introducing Davy Jones , the Flying Dutchman and the Kraken , a mythology mentioned twice in the first film . They introduced the historical East India Trading Company ( also mentioned in the first film ) , which for them represented a counterpoint to the themes of personal freedom represented by pirates . 
 Filming for the sequels began on February 28 , 2005 , with Dead Man 's Chest finishing on March 1 , 2006 , and At World 's End on January 10 , 2007 . The second film was also the first Disney theatrical feature film with the computer @-@ generated Walt Disney Pictures logo . 
 = = = Fourth film = = = 
 Rossio and Elliot discovered the novel On Stranger Tides during production of Dead Man 's Chest and At World 's End and decided to use it as the basis for a fourth film . As Gore Verbinski was unavailable , Bruckheimer invited Rob Marshall to direct the film . Elliott and Rossio decided to do a stand @-@ alone film , with a story that would support new characters , and incorporate elements from the novel , such as Blackbeard , the Fountain of Youth and mermaids — the latter two having been already alluded to in the previous films . Depp , Rush , Greg Ellis and Kevin McNally returned to their roles , and the cast saw the additions of Ian McShane as Blackbeard and Penélope Cruz as Angelica , Blackbeard 's daughter and Jack Sparrow 's love interest . A further addition was Richard Griffiths as King George II of Great Britain . After the costly production of two simultaneous films , Disney tried to scale down the fourth installment , giving a lower budget , which led to cheaper locations and fewer scenes with special effects . It was also filmed in 3D , with cameras similar to the ones used in Avatar . 
 Filming for On Stranger Tides began June 14 , 2010 and ended on November 19 , 2010 . It was released in the United States on May 20 , 2011 . With a budget of $ 378 @.@ 5 million , On Stranger Tides holds the record for most expensive film ever made . 
 = = = Fifth film = = = 
 On January 14 , 2011 , it was confirmed that Terry Rossio would write the screenplay for the fifth installment , without his co @-@ writer Ted Elliott . On January 11 , 2013 , Jeff Nathanson signed on to write the script for the film . On May 29 , 2013 , it was announced that Norwegian directors Joachim Rønning and Espen Sandberg were selected to direct . On August 22 , 2013 , the two revealed that the title of the fifth film would be Dead Men Tell No Tales , alluding to the line well @-@ known from the Pirates of the Caribbean theme park attractions . They also confirmed that they were working on the film , speaking highly of Jeff Nathanson 's " funny and touching " script and that they are inspired by the first film , The Curse of the Black Pearl . On September 10 , 2013 , Disney pushed back the film 's initial 2015 release , with sources indicating that a Summer 2016 release is likely . Producer Jerry Bruckheimer revealed that script issues were behind the delay , and that Jeff Nathanson was at work on a second attempt based on a well @-@ received outline . While Disney originally announced a release on July 7 , 2017 , Dead Men Tell No Tales is now set to be released on May 26 , 2017 . 
 A spokesman for the Australian Arts Minister confirmed that the fifth installment was set to shoot in Australia after the government agreed to repurpose $ 20 million of tax incentives originally intended for the remake of 20 @,@ 000 Leagues Under the Sea . According to Australian film industry sources , pre @-@ production started in late September 2014 with filming expected to commence in February 2015 . This was officially confirmed by Disney and Ian Walker the Queensland Arts Minister on October 2 , 2014 , stating that filming will take place exclusively in Australia , being the largest production to ever shoot in the country . Village Roadshow Studios and Port Douglas were officially confirmed as filming locations . Production began in Australia on February 17 , 2015 and wrapped on July 9 , 2015 . 
 = = Principal cast = = 
 = = Crew and other = = 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office performance = = = 
 The Pirates of the Caribbean film series was successful at the box office , with each film grossing over $ 600 million , and all at some point ranking among the fifty highest @-@ grossing films of all time . It became the first ever series to own two billion @-@ dollar films , these being Dead Man 's Chest and On Stranger Tides , but other series have followed ( the Batman series , the Marvel Cinematic Universe and Transformers ) . 
 The Curse of the Black Pearl was the third highest @-@ grossing 2003 film in North America ( behind The Lord of the Rings : The Return of the King and Finding Nemo ) and fourth worldwide ( behind The Return of the King , Finding Nemo and The Matrix Reloaded ) . Dead Man 's Chest was the most successful film of 2006 worldwide , and At World 's End led the worldwide grosses in 2007 , though being only fourth in North America ( behind Spider @-@ Man 3 , Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix and Shrek the Third ) . On Stranger Tides was the third highest @-@ grossing film of 2011 worldwide ( behind Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 and Transformers : Dark of the Moon ) and the fifth in North America . All of the sequels broke box office records upon release , of which the most notable are the opening @-@ weekend record in North America ( Dead Man 's Chest ) , the Memorial @-@ Day weekend record in North America ( At World 's End ) and the opening @-@ weekend record outside North America ( On Stranger Tides ) . 
 = = = Critical and public response = = = 
 The series is noted for its high quality of acting talent , and is one of the aspects of the films that is always praised . The visual and practical effects are considered some of the best ever done on film , so much so that audiences believed certain CGI elements of the films were real and done practically . The plot and story to the first three sequels received mixed reviews , with the general consensus that they were too bloated and convoluted to follow . Pirates of the Caribbean is noted for reinvigorating the pirates genre of film after decades of either no pirate films , or failed films . The success of the series saw Disney try to replicate Pirates ' success by launching films such as Prince of Persia : The Sands of Time and The Lone Ranger . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = = = Academy Awards = = = = 
 Together , all the first three films were nominated for a total of 11 Academy Awards , of which a single award was won . 
 = = = = Golden Globe Awards = = = = 
 Together , all the four films were nominated for a total of 2 Golden Globe Awards , of which neither were won . 
 = = = = MTV Movie Awards = = = = 
 Together , all the first three films were nominated for a total of 13 MTV Movie Awards , of which 4 were won . 
 = = = = Teen Choice Awards = = = = 
 Together , all the four films were nominated for a total of 25 Teen Choice Awards , of which 16 were won . 
 = California State Route 266 = 
 State Route 266 ( SR 266 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of California . The route is a connector between Nevada State Route 264 and Nevada State Route 266 , intersecting SR 168 and thus providing a connection to the rest of the Owens Valley . Portions of the route were added to the state highway system in 1931 , and became part of SR 168 in the 1964 state highway renumbering . SR 266 was officially designated in 1968 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 State Route 266 begins at the western terminus of Nevada State Route 266 at the Nevada state line . The route travels west @-@ northwest , then turns to the west for another 1 @.@ 8 miles ( 2 @.@ 9 km ) before approaching Oasis , the only unincorporated community that the route passes through . At Oasis , SR 266 intersects SR 168 , which serves as the gateway into the Owens Valley from Nevada . Upon leaving Oasis , SR 266 continues to the west briefly , then turns north @-@ northwest . Within the last 7 miles ( 11 km ) , SR 266 slowly curves northwest as the route approaches the Nevada state line . The route ends at the state line at the southern terminus of Nevada State Route 264 . 
 The section of SR 266 from the western terminus to the junction with SR 168 is designated by the California State Legislature as eligible by law for the State Scenic Highway System ; however , it has not officially been designated by Caltrans as such . The entire route , consisting of two lanes for two @-@ way traffic , traverses on the flat land in the Fish Lake Valley east of the White Mountains , and it can serve as transportation of agricultural goods between California and Nevada via the route 's only junction State Route 168 . In the event that SR 168 is closed , SR 266 connects to Nevada State Route 264 , which intersects with U.S. Route 6 in order to provide an alternate access to California . 
 = = History = = 
 The segment of present @-@ day SR 266 from Oasis to the Nevada state line ( now Nevada State Route 264 ) was incorporated into the State Highway System in 1931 as Legislative Route 63 ; it had formed part of the Midland Trail , one of the first auto trails crossing the entire country . The route remained unchanged until 1965 , when in that year the route 's name was designated as Mono County Road 101 . In 1984 , the definition was modified to <unk> the segment as an extension of State Route 168 in order for that route to be connected to Nevada . Two years later , in 1986 , there was a construction of a new segment traveling east from Oasis and connecting to Nevada State Route 266 . When the extension was complete , the two segments – the SR 168 extension and the newly completed – were assigned SR 266 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 Except where prefixed with a letter , postmiles were measured on the road as it was in 1964 , based on the alignment that existed at the time , and do not necessarily reflect current mileage . R reflects a realignment in the route since then , M indicates a second realignment , L refers an overlap due to a correction or change , and T indicates postmiles classified as temporary ( for a full list of prefixes , see the list of postmile definitions ) . Segments that remain unconstructed or have been relinquished to local control may be omitted . The entire route is in Mono County . 
 = Plasma ( physics ) = 
 Plasma ( from Greek <unk> , " anything formed " ) is one of the four fundamental states of matter , the others being solid , liquid , and gas . A plasma has properties unlike those of the other states . 
 A plasma can be created by heating a gas or subjecting it to a strong electromagnetic field , applied with a laser or microwave generator . This decreases or increases the number of electrons , creating positive or negative charged particles called ions , and is accompanied by the dissociation of molecular bonds , if present . 
 The presence of a significant number of charge carriers makes plasma electrically conductive so that it responds strongly to electromagnetic fields . Like gas , plasma does not have a definite shape or a definite volume unless enclosed in a container . Unlike gas , under the influence of a magnetic field , it may form structures such as filaments , beams and double layers . 
 Plasma is the most abundant form of ordinary matter in the Universe ( of the forms proven to exist ; the more abundant dark matter is hypothetical and may or may not be explained by ordinary matter ) , most of which is in the rarefied intergalactic regions , particularly the intracluster medium , and in stars , including the Sun . A common form of plasma on Earth is produced in neon signs . 
 Much of the understanding of plasma has come from the pursuit of controlled nuclear fusion and fusion power , for which plasma physics provides the scientific foundation . 
 = = Properties and parameters = = 
 = = = Definition = = = 
 Plasma is an electrically neutral medium of unbound positive and negative particles ( i.e. the overall charge of a plasma is roughly zero ) . It is important to note that although the particles are unbound , they are not ‘ free ’ in the sense of not experiencing forces . When a charged particle moves , it generates an electric current with magnetic fields ; in plasma , the movement of a charged particle affects and is affected by the general field created by the movement of other charges . This governs collective behavior with many degrees of variation . Three factors are listed in the definition of a plasma stream : 
 The plasma approximation : Charged particles must be close enough together that each particle influences many nearby charged particles , rather than just interacting with the closest particle ( these collective effects are a distinguishing feature of a plasma ) . The plasma approximation is valid when the number of charge carriers within the sphere of influence ( called the Debye sphere whose radius is the Debye screening length ) of a particular particle is higher than unity to provide collective behavior of the charged particles . The average number of particles in the Debye sphere is given by the plasma parameter , " Λ " ( the Greek uppercase letter Lambda ) . 
 Bulk interactions : The Debye screening length ( defined above ) is short compared to the physical size of the plasma . This criterion means that interactions in the bulk of the plasma are more important than those at its edges , where boundary effects may take place . When this criterion is satisfied , the plasma is <unk> . 
 Plasma frequency : The electron plasma frequency ( measuring plasma oscillations of the electrons ) is large compared to the electron @-@ neutral collision frequency ( measuring frequency of collisions between electrons and neutral particles ) . When this condition is valid , electrostatic interactions dominate over the processes of ordinary gas kinetics . 
 = = = Ranges of parameters = = = 
 The factors of a plasma stream can vary by many orders of magnitude , but the properties of plasmas with apparently disparate parameters may be very similar ( see plasma scaling ) . The following chart considers only conventional atomic plasmas and not exotic phenomena like quark gluon plasmas : 
 = = = Degree of ionization = = = 
 For plasma to exist , ionization is necessary . The term " plasma density " by itself usually refers to the " electron density " , that is , the number of free electrons per unit volume . The degree of ionization of a plasma is the proportion of atoms that have lost or gained electrons , and is controlled mostly by the temperature . Even a partially ionized gas in which as little as 1 % of the particles are ionized can have the characteristics of a plasma ( i.e. , response to magnetic fields and high electrical conductivity ) . The degree of ionization , <formula> , is defined as <formula> , where <formula> is the number density of ions and <formula> is the number density of neutral atoms . The electron density is related to this by the average charge state <formula> of the ions through <formula> , where <formula> is the number density of electrons . 
 = = = Temperatures = = = 
 Plasma temperature is commonly measured in kelvins or electronvolts and is , informally , a measure of the thermal kinetic energy per particle . High temperatures are usually needed to sustain ionization , which is a defining feature of a plasma . The degree of plasma ionization is determined by the electron temperature relative to the ionization energy ( and more weakly by the density ) , in a relationship called the Saha equation . At low temperatures , ions and electrons tend to recombine into bound states — atoms — and the plasma will eventually become a gas . 
 In most cases the electrons are close enough to thermal equilibrium that their temperature is relatively well @-@ defined , even when there is a significant deviation from a Maxwellian energy distribution function , for example , due to UV radiation , energetic particles , or strong electric fields . Because of the large difference in mass , the electrons come to thermodynamic equilibrium amongst themselves much faster than they come into equilibrium with the ions or neutral atoms . For this reason , the ion temperature may be very different from ( usually lower than ) the electron temperature . This is especially common in weakly ionized technological plasmas , where the ions are often near the ambient temperature . 
 = = = = Thermal vs. nonthermal plasmas = = = = 
 Based on the relative temperatures of the electrons , ions and neutrals , plasmas are classified as " thermal " or " non @-@ thermal " . Thermal plasmas have electrons and the heavy particles at the same temperature , i.e. they are in thermal equilibrium with each other . <unk> plasmas on the other hand have the ions and neutrals at a much lower temperature ( sometimes room temperature ) , whereas electrons are much " hotter " ( <formula> ) . 
 = = = = Complete vs. incomplete ionization = = = = 
 A plasma is sometimes referred to as being " hot " if it is nearly fully ionized , or " cold " if only a small fraction ( for example 1 % ) of the gas molecules are ionized , but other definitions of the terms " hot plasma " and " cold plasma " are common . Even in a " cold " plasma , the electron temperature is still typically several thousand degrees Celsius . Plasmas utilized in " plasma technology " ( " technological plasmas " ) are usually cold plasmas in the sense that only a small fraction of the gas molecules are ionized . 
 = = = Plasma potential = = = 
 Since plasmas are very good electrical conductors , electric potentials play an important role . The potential as it exists on average in the space between charged particles , independent of the question of how it can be measured , is called the " plasma potential " , or the " space potential " . If an electrode is inserted into a plasma , its potential will generally lie considerably below the plasma potential due to what is termed a Debye sheath . The good electrical conductivity of plasmas makes their electric fields very small . This results in the important concept of " <unk> " , which says the density of negative charges is approximately equal to the density of positive charges over large volumes of the plasma ( <formula> ) , but on the scale of the Debye length there can be charge imbalance . In the special case that double layers are formed , the charge separation can extend some tens of Debye lengths . 
 The magnitude of the potentials and electric fields must be determined by means other than simply finding the net charge density . A common example is to assume that the electrons satisfy the Boltzmann relation : 
 <formula> 
 Differentiating this relation provides a means to calculate the electric field from the density : 
 <formula> 
 It is possible to produce a plasma that is not <unk> . An electron beam , for example , has only negative charges . The density of a non @-@ neutral plasma must generally be very low , or it must be very small , otherwise it will be dissipated by the repulsive electrostatic force . 
 In astrophysical plasmas , Debye screening prevents electric fields from directly affecting the plasma over large distances , i.e. , greater than the Debye length . However , the existence of charged particles causes the plasma to generate , and be affected by , magnetic fields . This can and does cause extremely complex behavior , such as the generation of plasma double layers , an object that separates charge over a few tens of Debye lengths . The dynamics of plasmas interacting with external and self @-@ generated magnetic fields are studied in the academic discipline of magnetohydrodynamics . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Plasma with a magnetic field strong enough to influence the motion of the charged particles is said to be magnetized . A common quantitative criterion is that a particle on average completes at least one gyration around the magnetic field before making a collision , i.e. , <formula> , where <formula> is the " electron <unk> " and <formula> is the " electron collision rate " . It is often the case that the electrons are magnetized while the ions are not . <unk> plasmas are anisotropic , meaning that their properties in the direction parallel to the magnetic field are different from those perpendicular to it . While electric fields in plasmas are usually small due to the high conductivity , the electric field associated with a plasma moving in a magnetic field is given by <formula> ( where <formula> is the electric field , <formula> is the velocity , and <formula> is the magnetic field ) , and is not affected by Debye shielding . 
 = = = Comparison of plasma and gas phases = = = 
 Plasma is often called the fourth state of matter after solid , liquids and gases , despite plasma typically being an ionized gas . It is distinct from these and other lower @-@ energy states of matter . Although it is closely related to the gas phase in that it also has no definite form or volume , it differs in a number of ways , including the following : 
 = = Common plasmas = = 
 Plasmas are by far the most common phase of ordinary matter in the universe , both by mass and by volume . Essentially , all of the visible light from space comes from stars , which are plasmas with a temperature such that they radiate strongly at visible wavelengths . Most of the ordinary ( or baryonic ) matter in the universe , however , is found in the intergalactic medium , which is also a plasma , but much hotter , so that it radiates primarily as X @-@ rays . 
 In 1937 , Hannes Alfvén argued that if plasma pervaded the universe , it could then carry electric currents capable of generating a galactic magnetic field . After winning the Nobel Prize , he emphasized that : 
 In order to understand the phenomena in a certain plasma region , it is necessary to map not only the magnetic but also the electric field and the electric currents . Space is filled with a network of currents which transfer energy and momentum over large or very large distances . The currents often pinch to filamentary or surface currents . The latter are likely to give space , as also interstellar and intergalactic space , a cellular structure . 
 By contrast the current scientific consensus is that about 96 % of the total energy density in the universe is not plasma or any other form of ordinary matter , but a combination of cold dark matter and dark energy . Our Sun , and all stars , are made of plasma , much of interstellar space is filled with a plasma , albeit a very sparse one , and intergalactic space too . Even black holes , which are not directly visible , are thought to be fuelled by accreting ionising matter ( i.e. plasma ) , and they are associated with astrophysical jets of luminous ejected plasma , such as M87 's jet that extends 5 @,@ 000 light @-@ years . 
 In our solar system , interplanetary space is filled with the plasma of the Solar Wind that extends from the Sun out to the heliopause . However , the density of ordinary matter is much higher than average and much higher than that of either dark matter or dark energy . The planet Jupiter accounts for most of the non @-@ plasma within the orbit of Pluto ( about 0 @.@ 1 % by mass , or 10 − 15 % by volume ) . 
 Dust and small grains within a plasma will also pick up a net negative charge , so that they in turn may act like a very heavy negative ion component of the plasma ( see dusty plasmas ) . 
 = = Complex plasma phenomena = = 
 Although the underlying equations governing plasmas are relatively simple , plasma behavior is extraordinarily varied and subtle : the emergence of unexpected behavior from a simple model is a typical feature of a complex system . Such systems lie in some sense on the boundary between ordered and disordered behavior and cannot typically be described either by simple , smooth , mathematical functions , or by pure randomness . The spontaneous formation of interesting spatial features on a wide range of length scales is one manifestation of plasma complexity . The features are interesting , for example , because they are very sharp , spatially intermittent ( the distance between features is much larger than the features themselves ) , or have a fractal form . Many of these features were first studied in the laboratory , and have subsequently been recognized throughout the universe . Examples of complexity and complex structures in plasmas include : 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> or string @-@ like structures , also known as <unk> currents , are seen in many plasmas , like the plasma ball , the aurora , lightning , electric arcs , solar flares , and supernova remnants . They are sometimes associated with larger current densities , and the interaction with the magnetic field can form a magnetic rope structure . High power microwave breakdown at atmospheric pressure also leads to the formation of filamentary structures . ( See also Plasma pinch ) 
 <unk> also refers to the self @-@ focusing of a high power laser pulse . At high powers , the nonlinear part of the index of refraction becomes important and causes a higher index of refraction in the center of the laser beam , where the laser is brighter than at the edges , causing a feedback that focuses the laser even more . The tighter focused laser has a higher peak brightness ( irradiance ) that forms a plasma . The plasma has an index of refraction lower than one , and causes a defocusing of the laser beam . The interplay of the focusing index of refraction , and the defocusing plasma makes the formation of a long filament of plasma that can be micrometers to kilometers in length . One interesting aspect of the <unk> generated plasma is the relatively low ion density due to defocusing effects of the ionized electrons . ( See also <unk> propagation ) 
 = = = Shocks or double layers = = = 
 Plasma properties change rapidly ( within a few Debye lengths ) across a two @-@ dimensional sheet in the presence of a ( moving ) shock or ( stationary ) double layer . Double layers involve localized charge separation , which causes a large potential difference across the layer , but does not generate an electric field outside the layer . Double layers separate adjacent plasma regions with different physical characteristics , and are often found in current carrying plasmas . They accelerate both ions and electrons . 
 = = = Electric fields and circuits = = = 
 <unk> of a plasma requires that plasma currents close on themselves in electric circuits . Such circuits follow Kirchhoff 's circuit laws and possess a resistance and inductance . These circuits must generally be treated as a strongly coupled system , with the behavior in each plasma region dependent on the entire circuit . It is this strong coupling between system elements , together with nonlinearity , which may lead to complex behavior . Electrical circuits in plasmas store inductive ( magnetic ) energy , and should the circuit be disrupted , for example , by a plasma instability , the inductive energy will be released as plasma heating and acceleration . This is a common explanation for the heating that takes place in the solar corona . Electric currents , and in particular , magnetic @-@ field @-@ aligned electric currents ( which are sometimes generically referred to as " Birkeland currents " ) , are also observed in the Earth 's aurora , and in plasma filaments . 
 = = = Cellular structure = = = 
 Narrow sheets with sharp gradients may separate regions with different properties such as magnetization , density and temperature , resulting in cell @-@ like regions . Examples include the magnetosphere , heliosphere , and <unk> current sheet . Hannes Alfvén wrote : " From the cosmological point of view , the most important new space research discovery is probably the cellular structure of space . As has been seen in every region of space accessible to in situ measurements , there are a number of ' cell walls ' , sheets of electric currents , which divide space into compartments with different magnetization , temperature , density , etc . " 
 = = = Critical ionization velocity = = = 
 The critical ionization velocity is the relative velocity between an ionized plasma and a neutral gas , above which a runaway ionization process takes place . The critical ionization process is a quite general mechanism for the conversion of the kinetic energy of a rapidly streaming gas into ionization and plasma thermal energy . Critical phenomena in general are typical of complex systems , and may lead to sharp spatial or temporal features . 
 = = = <unk> plasma = = = 
 <unk> plasmas are created in a magneto @-@ optical trap ( MOT ) by trapping and cooling neutral atoms , to temperatures of 1 <unk> or lower , and then using another laser to ionize the atoms by giving each of the outermost electrons just enough energy to escape the electrical attraction of its parent ion . 
 One advantage of ultracold plasmas are their well characterized and tunable initial conditions , including their size and electron temperature . By adjusting the wavelength of the ionizing laser , the kinetic energy of the liberated electrons can be tuned as low as 0 @.@ 1 K , a limit set by the frequency bandwidth of the laser pulse . The ions inherit the <unk> temperatures of the neutral atoms , but are quickly heated through a process known as disorder induced heating ( <unk> ) . This type of non @-@ equilibrium ultracold plasma evolves rapidly , and displays many other interesting phenomena . 
 One of the metastable states of a strongly nonideal plasma is Rydberg matter , which forms upon condensation of excited atoms . 
 = = = Non @-@ neutral plasma = = = 
 The strength and range of the electric force and the good conductivity of plasmas usually ensure that the densities of positive and negative charges in any sizeable region are equal ( " <unk> " ) . A plasma with a significant excess of charge density , or , in the extreme case , is composed of a single species , is called a non @-@ neutral plasma . In such a plasma , electric fields play a dominant role . Examples are charged particle beams , an electron cloud in a Penning trap and positron plasmas . 
 = = = Dusty plasma / grain plasma = = = 
 A dusty plasma contains tiny charged particles of dust ( typically found in space ) . The dust particles acquire high charges and interact with each other . A plasma that contains larger particles is called grain plasma . Under laboratory conditions , dusty plasmas are also called complex plasmas . 
 = = = <unk> plasma = = = 
 <unk> plasma is a type of thermal plasma which acts like an impermeable solid with respect to gas or cold plasma and can be physically pushed . Interaction of cold gas and thermal plasma was briefly studied by a group led by Hannes Alfvén in 1960s and 1970s for its possible applications in insulation of fusion plasma from the reactor walls . However , later it was found that the external magnetic fields in this configuration could induce kink instabilities in the plasma and subsequently lead to an unexpectedly high heat loss to the walls . In 2013 , a group of materials scientists reported that they have successfully generated stable impermeable plasma with no magnetic confinement using only an <unk> @-@ pressure blanket of cold gas . While spectroscopic data on the characteristics of plasma were claimed to be difficult to obtain due to the high pressure , the passive effect of plasma on synthesis of different nanostructures clearly suggested the effective confinement . They also showed that upon maintaining the impermeability for a few tens of seconds , screening of ions at the plasma @-@ gas interface could give rise to a strong secondary mode of heating ( known as viscous heating ) leading to different kinetics of reactions and formation of complex nanomaterials . 
 = = Mathematical descriptions = = 
 To completely describe the state of a plasma , we would need to write down all the particle locations and velocities and describe the electromagnetic field in the plasma region . However , it is generally not practical or necessary to keep track of all the particles in a plasma . Therefore , plasma physicists commonly use less detailed descriptions , of which there are two main types : 
 = = = Fluid model = = = 
 Fluid models describe plasmas in terms of smoothed quantities , like density and averaged velocity around each position ( see Plasma parameters ) . One simple fluid model , magnetohydrodynamics , treats the plasma as a single fluid governed by a combination of Maxwell 's equations and the Navier – Stokes equations . A more general description is the two @-@ fluid plasma picture , where the ions and electrons are described separately . Fluid models are often accurate when <unk> is sufficiently high to keep the plasma velocity distribution close to a Maxwell – Boltzmann distribution . Because fluid models usually describe the plasma in terms of a single flow at a certain temperature at each spatial location , they can neither capture velocity space structures like beams or double layers , nor resolve wave @-@ particle effects . 
 = = = Kinetic model = = = 
 Kinetic models describe the particle velocity distribution function at each point in the plasma and therefore do not need to assume a Maxwell – Boltzmann distribution . A kinetic description is often necessary for collisionless plasmas . There are two common approaches to kinetic description of a plasma . One is based on representing the smoothed distribution function on a grid in velocity and position . The other , known as the particle @-@ in @-@ cell ( PIC ) technique , includes kinetic information by following the trajectories of a large number of individual particles . Kinetic models are generally more computationally intensive than fluid models . The Vlasov equation may be used to describe the dynamics of a system of charged particles interacting with an electromagnetic field . In magnetized plasmas , a <unk> approach can substantially reduce the computational expense of a fully kinetic simulation . 
 = = Artificial plasmas = = 
 Most artificial plasmas are generated by the application of electric and / or magnetic fields through a gas . Plasma generated in a laboratory setting and for industrial use can be generally categorized by : 
 The type of power source used to generate the plasma — DC , RF and microwave 
 The pressure they operate at — vacuum pressure ( < 10 <unk> or 1 Pa ) , moderate pressure ( ~ 1 Torr or 100 Pa ) , atmospheric pressure ( 760 Torr or 100 kPa ) 
 The degree of ionization within the plasma — fully , partially , or weakly ionized 
 The temperature relationships within the plasma — thermal plasma ( <formula> ) , non @-@ thermal or " cold " plasma ( <formula> ) 
 The electrode configuration used to generate the plasma 
 The magnetization of the particles within the plasma — magnetized ( both ion and electrons are trapped in Larmor orbits by the magnetic field ) , partially magnetized ( the electrons but not the ions are trapped by the magnetic field ) , non @-@ magnetized ( the magnetic field is too weak to trap the particles in orbits but may generate Lorentz forces ) 
 = = = Generation of artificial plasma = = = 
 Just like the many uses of plasma , there are several means for its generation , however , one principle is common to all of them : there must be energy input to produce and sustain it . For this case , plasma is generated when an electric current is applied across a dielectric gas or fluid ( an electrically non @-@ conducting material ) as can be seen in the image to the right , which shows a discharge tube as a simple example ( DC used for simplicity ) . 
 The potential difference and subsequent electric field pull the bound electrons ( negative ) toward the anode ( positive electrode ) while the cathode ( negative electrode ) pulls the nucleus . As the voltage increases , the current stresses the material ( by electric polarization ) beyond its dielectric limit ( termed strength ) into a stage of electrical breakdown , marked by an electric spark , where the material transforms from being an insulator into a conductor ( as it becomes increasingly ionized ) . The underlying process is the Townsend avalanche , where collisions between electrons and neutral gas atoms create more ions and electrons ( as can be seen in the figure on the right ) . The first impact of an electron on an atom results in one ion and two electrons . Therefore , the number of charged particles increases rapidly ( in the millions ) only " after about 20 successive sets of collisions " , mainly due to a small mean free path ( average distance travelled between collisions ) . 
 = = = = Electric arc = = = = 
 With ample current density and ionization , this forms a luminous electric arc ( a continuous electric discharge similar to lightning ) between the electrodes . Electrical resistance along the continuous electric arc creates heat , which dissociates more gas molecules and ionizes the resulting atoms ( where degree of ionization is determined by temperature ) , and as per the sequence : solid @-@ liquid @-@ gas @-@ plasma , the gas is gradually turned into a thermal plasma . A thermal plasma is in thermal equilibrium , which is to say that the temperature is relatively homogeneous throughout the heavy particles ( i.e. atoms , molecules and ions ) and electrons . This is so because when thermal plasmas are generated , electrical energy is given to electrons , which , due to their great mobility and large numbers , are able to disperse it rapidly and by elastic collision ( without energy loss ) to the heavy particles . 
 = = = Examples of industrial / commercial plasma = = = 
 Because of their sizable temperature and density ranges , plasmas find applications in many fields of research , technology and industry . For example , in : industrial and extractive metallurgy , surface treatments such as plasma spraying ( coating ) , etching in microelectronics , metal cutting and welding ; as well as in everyday vehicle exhaust cleanup and fluorescent / luminescent lamps , while even playing a part in supersonic combustion engines for aerospace engineering . 
 = = = = Low @-@ pressure discharges = = = = 
 Glow discharge plasmas : non @-@ thermal plasmas generated by the application of DC or low frequency RF ( < 100 kHz ) electric field to the gap between two metal electrodes . Probably the most common plasma ; this is the type of plasma generated within fluorescent light tubes . 
 <unk> coupled plasma ( CCP ) : similar to glow discharge plasmas , but generated with high frequency RF electric fields , typically 13 @.@ 56 MHz . These differ from glow discharges in that the sheaths are much less intense . These are widely used in the microfabrication and integrated circuit manufacturing industries for plasma etching and plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition . 
 <unk> Arc Plasma Source : a device to produce low temperature ( ~ <unk> ) high density plasmas ( HDP ) . 
 <unk> coupled plasma ( ICP ) : similar to a CCP and with similar applications but the electrode consists of a coil wrapped around the chamber where plasma is formed . 
 Wave heated plasma : similar to CCP and ICP in that it is typically RF ( or microwave ) . Examples include <unk> discharge and electron cyclotron resonance ( ECR ) . 
 = = = = Atmospheric pressure = = = = 
 Arc discharge : this is a high power thermal discharge of very high temperature ( ~ 10 @,@ 000 K ) . It can be generated using various power supplies . It is commonly used in metallurgical processes . For example , it is used to smelt minerals containing Al2O3 to produce aluminium . 
 Corona discharge : this is a non @-@ thermal discharge generated by the application of high voltage to sharp electrode tips . It is commonly used in ozone generators and particle precipitators . 
 Dielectric barrier discharge ( DBD ) : this is a non @-@ thermal discharge generated by the application of high voltages across small gaps wherein a non @-@ conducting coating prevents the transition of the plasma discharge into an arc . It is often mislabeled ' Corona ' discharge in industry and has similar application to corona discharges . It is also widely used in the web treatment of fabrics . The application of the discharge to synthetic fabrics and plastics <unk> the surface and allows for paints , glues and similar materials to adhere . 
 <unk> discharge : this is a nonthermal plasma generated by the application of RF power ( e.g. , 13 @.@ 56 MHz ) to one powered electrode , with a grounded electrode held at a small separation distance on the order of 1 cm . Such discharges are commonly stabilized using a noble gas such as helium or argon . 
 " Piezoelectric direct discharge plasma : " is a nonthermal plasma generated at the high @-@ side of a piezoelectric transformer ( PT ) . This generation variant is particularly suited for high efficient and compact devices where a separate high voltage power supply is not desired . 
 = = History = = 
 Plasma was first identified in a Crookes tube , and so described by Sir William Crookes in 1879 ( he called it " radiant matter " ) . The nature of the Crookes tube " cathode ray " matter was subsequently identified by British physicist Sir J.J. Thomson in 1897 . The term " plasma " was coined by Irving Langmuir in 1928 , perhaps because the glowing discharge molds itself to the shape of the Crookes tube ( <unk> <unk> – a thing moulded or formed ) . Langmuir described his observations as : 
 Except near the electrodes , where there are sheaths containing very few electrons , the ionized gas contains ions and electrons in about equal numbers so that the resultant space charge is very small . We shall use the name plasma to describe this region containing balanced charges of ions and electrons . 
 = = Research = = 
 Plasmas are the object of study of the academic field of plasma science or plasma physics , including sub @-@ disciplines such as space plasma physics . There are multiple journals devoted to the subject ( see list ) . It involves the following fields of active research ( see also list of articles ) : 
 = Neaira ( hetaera ) = 
 Neaira ( / <unk> / ; Greek : <unk> ) , also Neaera ( / <unk> / ) , was a hetaera who lived in the 4th century BC in ancient Greece . She was brought to trial between 343 and 340 BC , accused of marrying an Athenian citizen illegally and misrepresenting her daughter as an Athenian citizen . 
 The speech made against Neaira in this trial by Apollodorus is preserved as Demosthenes ' fifty @-@ ninth speech , though the speech is often attributed to Pseudo @-@ Demosthenes , who seems to have worked on many of the speeches given by Apollodorus . The speech provides more details than any other about prostitutes of antiquity , and consequently a great deal of information about sex trade in the ancient Greek city @-@ states ( poleis ) . 
 = = Speech Against Neaira = = 
 The speech Against Neaira is the source of most of the details of Neaira 's biography . It concerns a case brought against Neaira when she was about fifty by Apollodorus ' son @-@ in @-@ law Theomnestus , though apart from a brief introduction of the case given by Theomnestus , Apollodorus delivered the entirety of the speech . The case revolves around the accusation that Neaira , a foreigner , married an Athenian citizen , and that she was attempting to pass off her own children as Athenian citizens . 
 While the speech revolves around the life of Neaira , this is of little importance to the substance of the accusations . The details seem to be part of the speech in the hope that the salacious accusations will hide the weakness of Apollodorus ' case . The accuracy of the evidence given in the speech has been questioned , and is known to contain both lies and inaccuracies . Despite this , the speech tells us much about the life of an accomplished hetaera , and is extremely valuable to historians as a source on women 's lives in classical Greece . Indeed , it is our most reliable extant source on prostitution in the classical world , and one of our best sources on women 's lives and gender relations in general for the period . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Life with Nikarete = = = 
 Neaira was probably born in the first decade of the fourth century BC . Her place of birth is unknown , and the earliest event in her life that we know of is her purchase when she was a young girl by Nikarete . Nikarete trained the girls she purchased to be hetaerae , calling them her daughters in order to increase the price her customers would pay , and lived with them in Corinth . 
 Neaira 's work as a prostitute started before she reached puberty . She is twice described by Apollodorus as having sex for money before she came of age , though possibly due to her age he implies that she was not yet a hetaera . During this time , the orator Lysias was a prominent guest in Nikarete 's brothel and a regular customer of <unk> , another of Nikarete 's girls . In order to reward her for her services , he arranged for her to be initiated into the Eleusinian Mysteries , and funded the journey . Neaira was at this time about twelve or thirteen , and Nikarete accompanied them . Neaira visited Athens again for the Great Panathenaea of 378 , this time accompanying <unk> of Thessaly , a young aristocrat . 
 = = = Leaving Nikarete and Corinth = = = 
 Around 376 BC , <unk> of Corinth and <unk> of Lefkada paid thirty minae to purchase Neaira from Nikarete , at the high end of prices for hetaerae . When the men married , they agreed to let Neaira buy her freedom for twenty minae , which , with the aid of gifts and loans from her former customers , she did . As part of this deal , Neaira agreed to no longer work as a prostitute in Corinth , and so left the city for Athens with Phrynion , who had helped her buy her freedom . 
 Neaira was certainly living with Phrynion in Athens by 373 BC , when he took her to a feast given by the general Chabrias to celebrate his victory in the Pythian Games . During this celebration , Apollodorus says , Neaira was sexually assaulted by the guests and slaves of Chabrias while she was drunk and asleep . Due to this and other mistreatment by Phrynion , in 372 BC Neaira left his household and went to Megara , taking with her her clothing and jewellery , two maids , and other possessions belonging to Phrynion . 
 = = = Life with Stephanus = = = 
 In Megara , Neaira continued to work as a hetaera , and in 371 met Stephanus . Stephanus offered to act as her patron if she returned with him to Athens . Apollodorus claims that with her she brought two sons and a daughter to Athens , but modern commentators have largely concluded that the sons in question were in fact those of Stephanus , by an Athenian woman . Indeed , Christopher Carey points out that one of the sons , at least , was probably a legitimate son of Stephanus , being named after his father , and John Buckler notes that Apollodorus contradicts himself on whether Neaira 's alleged sons were hers by another man , or hers by Stephanus . 
 Phrynion learnt that Neaira was back in Athens , and attempted to take her back from Stephanus . Stephanus resisted , claiming that as Neaira was a free woman he had no right ; a claim which Phrynion proceeded to challenge in court , though he was persuaded to settle the case by arbitration instead . The arbitrators decided that Neaira was indeed free , and that in addition to this she was her own <unk> ( mistress ) ; this was an extremely unusual decision in a society where all citizen women , at least , had a kyrios ( master ) . Despite this unusual level of freedom , however , Neaira was compelled to split her time between the two men as they agreed , without any input herself . 
 = = = Trial = = = 
 Sometime between 343 and 340 BC , Neaira was brought to trial by Theomnestus on behalf of his father @-@ in @-@ law Apollodorus , accused of <unk> ( representing herself as a citizen when in fact she was not ) . If she was convicted , the maximum penalty Neaira faced was being sold into slavery and having her property sold . Neaira herself would not have been permitted to speak at her trial , though she was probably present . 
 The only surviving record of the trial is the speech given by Theomnestus and Apollodorus against Neaira and Stephanus , and the outcome is unknown . No records of Neaira exist after the trial . Modern commentators have noted the weaknesses in Apollodorus ' arguments , though as the outcome of an Athenian trial depended heavily on what the parties involved could persuade the jury to accept , and how much of their dishonesty they could get away with , we cannot say for certain that the suit failed . 
 = Serranus Clinton Hastings = 
 Serranus Clinton Hastings ( November 22 , 1814 – February 18 , 1893 ) was a 19th @-@ century politician , rancher and a prominent lawyer in the United States . He studied law as a young man and moved to the Iowa District in 1837 to open a law office . Iowa became a territory a year later , and he was elected a member of the House of Representatives of the Iowa Territorial General Assembly . When the territory became the state of Iowa in 1846 , he won an election to represent the state in the United States House of Representatives . After his term ended , he became Chief Justice of the Iowa Supreme Court . He resigned after one year in office and moved to California . He was appointed to the California Supreme Court as Chief Justice a few months later . He won an election to be Attorney General of California , and assumed office shortly after his term as Chief Justice ended . He began practicing law again as Attorney General . He earned a small fortune with his law practice and used that fortune to finance his successful real estate venture . In 1878 , he founded the Hastings College of the Law with a donation of US $ 100 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hastings was born in Watertown , Jefferson County , New York , on November 22 , 1814 to Robert Collins Hastings and Patience Brayton . Robert Collins Hastings was a good friend and supporter of DeWitt Clinton , whom Serranus gets his middle name from . When Robert died in 1824 , the family moved to St. Lawrence County , New York . He completed a six @-@ year course at Gouverneur Academy , and in 1834 , he became taught and became the principal at Norwich Academy , located in Chenango County , New York . He introduced the Hamiltonian system of instruction and the <unk> system of mathematics to the academy . In 1835 , he resigned from his position at the academy to study law . 
 Hastings began to study law with Charles Thorpe , Esq . , of Norwich . After a few months of study , he decided to move to Lawrenceburg , Indiana . He completed his legal studies there with Daniel S. Majors , Esq . He did not immediately enter the practice of law and instead became an editor of the Indiana Signal , where he supported Martin Van Buren in his presidential campaign . He moved to Terre Haute , Indiana , in December 1836 and underwent a legal examination by Judge Porters of the Circuit Court . 
 = = Career = = 
 In January 1837 , Hastings moved to the Iowa District , which was part of the Wisconsin Territory . He settled in Burlington for a short time and then moved to Bloomington , which would later become Muscatine , Iowa . He was examined by Judge Irwin , was admitted to the bar , and opened a law office . Shortly after this , he was commissioned Justice of the Peace by Wisconsin Territorial Governor Henry Dodge . He had jurisdiction over the 90 miles between Burlington , Iowa , and Davenport , Iowa , the western boundary was undefined . He only had one case to deal with : a man accused of stealing US $ 30 from a citizen and $ 3 from the court . He found the man guilty and sentenced him to be tied to an oak tree , receive 33 lashes across his back , be transported across the Mississippi River to Illinois , and be banished from the territory forever . When Iowa Territory was organized in 1838 , he won an election to represent Muscatine County , Louisa County , and Slaughter County in the House of Representatives of the Iowa Territorial General Assembly . He served from November 12 , 1838 , to January 25 , 1839 . He was reelected to that position in 1839 , this time representing Muscatine County and Johnson County from November 4 , 1839 , to January 14 , 1840 . In 1840 , a border conflict with Missouri called the Honey War took place . He received the military title of Major and helped capture a sheriff . No battle took place , and the two states compromised on the border issue . 
 Hastings married Azalea <unk> on June 10 , 1840 , in Muscatine , Iowa . They had two children while living in Muscatine , Marshall and Clara L. He was elected to the Legislative Council that year , representing Muscatine County and Johnson County again , and served from November 3 , 1840 to January 15 , 1841 . He was re @-@ elected the following year , and served from December 6 , 1841 to February 18 , 1842 . He was not elected to the Fifth and Sixth General Assemblies . He was elected President of the Legislative Council for the Seventh General Assembly , and also represented Muscatine County and Johnson County on the council . He served from May 5 , 1845 to June 11 , 1845 . He was elected to the council for the Eight General Assembly , which was also the final one since Iowa was to become a state on December 28 , 1846 . He represented the same counties he had previously , and served from December 1 , 1845 to January 19 , 1846 . During his time on the Legislative Council he helped compile the " Blue Book " of Iowa laws . It became known as the " Old Blue Book " and was the first legal code for the Iowa , Nebraska , Dakota , and Montana Territories . 
 In 1846 , Hastings was nominated to represent Iowa at large in the United States House of Representatives as a Democrat . On December 29 , 1846 , he was elected over the Whig candidate G. C. R. Mitchell . He was the second youngest member serving in Congress at that time . He served during the second session of the 29th United States Congress , which ended on March 3 , 1847 . Close to a year after his term ended as a member of the House of Representatives , Governor Ansel Briggs appointed him as the third Chief Justice of the Iowa Supreme Court . He started his term on January 26 , 1848 , and resigned on January 14 , 1849 to move to California , his family deciding to stay in Iowa . 
 Hastings settled in Benicia , California , and a few months later , California legislature selected him to be the first Chief Justice of the California Supreme Court . He started his term on December 20 , 1849 , but the court did not assemble until March 4 , 1850 . In 1851 , his family moved from Iowa to live with him in California . During his term as Chief Justice he ran for the office of Attorney General of California . Elections were held on September 3 , 1851 , and he won with 52 @.@ 2 % of the votes . The Whig candidate , William D. Fair , received the rest of the votes . His term as Chief Justice ended in December 1851 , and he assumed office as Attorney General on January 5 , 1852 . While serving as Attorney General , he could practice law as well , something he could not do as Chief Justice . The wealth he earned during this time became the foundation of the larger fortune he would later earn in real estate . He ended his two @-@ year term on January 2 , 1854 . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Hastings continued to practice law after his term as Attorney General ended , and also became a member of the Henley , Hastings & Co. bank firm located in Sacramento , California . The banking firm failed , with little loss to him though . Around 1857 , he left professional life , and started investing in real estate . He and his wife had seven more children after this : Charles Foster Dio . , Douglas , Uhler , Robert Paul , Flora Azalea , Ella , and Lillie . He gradually acquired around one hundred lots of real estate in San Francisco , and bought large tracts of land in Solano , Napa , Lake , and Sacramento counties . In 1861 , he put up many four @-@ room buildings in the south side of San Francisco for the poor with the money he earned in real estate . The rent was $ 10 a month , and as a business venture it was a success . By 1862 , he was worth $ 900 @,@ 000 , which was largely attributed to his real estate investments . In 1865 , he traveled to Europe ; four years later he accompanied William H. Seward to view the recently purchased territory of Alaska . Hastings College of Law , the law department of the University of California , was founded on March 28 , 1878 with his donation of $ 100 @,@ 000 . The college offered him the position of dean and he accepted the offer . He was professor of comparative jurisprudence at the college as well , a position he held until 1887 . He helped establish St. Catherine Academy in Benicia , California , with a donation of $ 6 @,@ 000 . He also helped publish two volumes of the botany of the Pacific coast . His contribution to botany would later be recognized by having the plant genus <unk> named after him . 
 Hastings died at the age of 78 on February 18 , 1893 in San Francisco , California . He was buried at St. Helena Public Cemetery in St. Helena , California . 
 = Datchet Bridge = 
 Datchet Bridge , also known as The Divided Bridge , was a road bridge which crossed the River Thames at Datchet from 1706 until it was demolished in 1848 . It was situated on the reach between Old Windsor Lock and Romney Lock and linked Windsor on the Berkshire bank to Datchet on the Buckinghamshire side . The bridge replaced a ferry service which had operated at the site since at least the middle of the 13th century . 
 The first Datchet Bridge was a wooden bridge commissioned by Queen Anne as the crossing was a convenient back @-@ way to Windsor Castle . Responsibility for the upkeep and maintenance of the crossing later passed to the counties of Berkshire and Buckinghamshire over whose boundary the bridge spanned . There followed many decades of dispute between the counties over who should pay for what . This culminated in 1836 with each county deciding to build their own half , in different materials and not touching in the middle . The resulting " crazy erection " , Buckinghamshire 's side in wood and Berkshire 's in iron , known as The Divided Bridge , was demolished in 1848 and is the only case on the Thames where an established bridge crossing site has completely disappeared . 
 = = Background = = 
 Datchet on the north bank of the River Thames has existed as a settlement since before 990 but the first recorded mention of a river crossing is in 1224 when Henry III gave John le <unk> a " great oak " with which to make a boat for " passage of Datchet " . In 1278 Edward I paid for William of Eton to a build a " great barge " for Datchet Ferry . Although the Crown had provided for the vessels , the right to operate the ferry and collect tolls sat with the Lord of the Manor of Datchet . This continued until 1680 when the then Lord of the Manor , Colonel Andrew Pitcairn Wheeler , sold the Manor of Datchet to Budd <unk> but kept back the ferry rights which he subsequently mortgaged for £ 1000 ( equivalent to £ 146 @,@ 000 today ) . In 1699 Wheeler wrote to William III complaining that a wall built by the King along the Windsor bank was adversely affecting the ferry trade . To settle the complaint the Crown purchased the ferry rights from Colonel Wheeler for £ 7000 ( equivalent to £ 883 @,@ 000 today ) . 
 The crossing was important to the Crown as the road through Datchet and across the Thames provided a convenient short route from London to Windsor Castle and the ferry was much used by Royalty and courtiers . Privy Purse records show two payments from Elizabeth of York to the Datchet ferryman in 1502 and similarly from Princess Mary in 1522 and her father Henry VIII between 1530 and 1532 . In Elias Ashmole 's account of the 1520 Procession of the order of the Garter he describes how Queen Catherine after watching the procession returned to Windsor Castle from Colnbrook by way of " the <unk> [ sic ] next way to the castle . " The ferry however did not always provide a quick and efficient service . In 1678 the ferryman , Matthew Hale , received a formal rebuke from Charles II 's Secretary of State , Henry Coventry , for unduly delaying a Royal Messenger . Coventry warned Hale in no uncertain terms : 
 Despite Coventry 's warning Royal dissatisfaction with the inefficient service provided by the Hale Family , who by 1706 had kept the ferry for over 150 years , continued to grow . This culminated in the decision by Queen Anne to provide a fixed bridge crossing on the site . 
 = = Queen Anne 's bridge = = 
 In 1706 a wooden bridge was built by order of Queen Anne to replace the ferry between Datchet , Buckinghamshire and Windsor , Berkshire . It was made of oak provided by the Surveyor General of Woods South of the Trent , Edward Wilcox , who was ordered to fell " sufficient non @-@ navy timber " from the Royal forest " for the better convenience of our passage from our Castle at Windsor " . The building work was supervised by the Surveyor General , Samuel Travers and the final cost was £ 1000 ( equivalent to £ 151 @,@ 000 today ) The better convenience of passage was further enhanced by Queen Anne 's intimate friend Sarah Churchill , Duchess of Marlborough and her husband the first Duke who then lived at Langley and who had a carriage drive built from their house , over the bridge and on to Windsor Castle . 
 Unlike the upstream toll bridges at Windsor and Maidenhead , the crossing at Datchet was toll @-@ free for both River and road and quickly became a popular crossing . Seeking compensation for loss of income on their bridges , the corporations of Windsor and Maidenhead made claims to the Treasury . In 1708 Windsor was granted an ex @-@ gratia payment of £ 55 ( equivalent to £ 8300 today ) plus £ 25 and £ 20 to two tenants ( equivalent to £ 3600 and £ 2900 respectively ) . Maidenhead 's complaint , not made until 1714 , was noted but no compensation paid . 
 The bridge was initially maintained by the Crown which paid £ 800 ( equivalent to £ 115 @,@ 000 today ) for repairs in 1737 and in 1770 replaced the original all @-@ wood structure with a bridge of ten wooden arches on stone piers . By 1794 the bridge was " absolutely dangerous for carriages to pass over it and a stone one [ was ] now in contemplation . " Later the same year the central arches of the new bridge collapsed during heavy flooding and King George III deciding that he did not wish to finance the rebuilding instead instated a temporary free ferry . There followed many years of wrangling between the Crown and the counties of Berkshire and Buckinghamshire over who should bear the cost of the building and maintenance of the bridge as the county boundary ran down the centre of the channel of the Thames thus cutting the bridge in half . The matter was forced by the intervention of John Richards , the Rector of Datchet who was also a lawyer ; Richards took legal action and the resulting judgement from the King 's Bench in 1809 was that the two counties must equally share the rebuilding costs , a total of £ 2 @,@ 375 each ( equivalent to £ 155 @,@ 400 today ) . The counties , forced to co @-@ operate , built a new wooden bridge on the old stone piers which was opened by Queen Charlotte and Princess Elizabeth on 4 December 1812 . 
 = = The Divided Bridge = = 
 The co @-@ operation was short @-@ lived and arguments over maintenance started again in 1834 when the Buckinghamshire side needed repairs and Berkshire refused to contribute . Lack of maintenance led to the bridge collapsing once more in 1836 and the counties came up with the unique solution of each building their own half . Buckinghamshire decided to rebuild with wooden railings whilst Berkshire built its half in iron suspended by chains . Kelly 's Directory of 1847 noted : 
 " Datchet is separated from Windsor by the river Thames , over which is a very singular bridge ; one half of it is kept in repair by the county of Bucks and the other half by Berks . The former has a wooden railing and the latter an iron one , suspended by chains , but neither the Bucks nor Berks sides touch each other . " 
 Even during the building the counties would not work together and had to be ordered by the Lord Chancellor to " proceed in such a manner as not to impede each other " . Consequently when the bridge was finished the two sides did not touch in the middle with Berkshire 's final span being cantilevered out from the last Berkshire stone pier thus needing no support from the Buckinghamshire side . The result was an unsatisfactory , ungainly structure , sarcastically noted on opening as having " scarce a bridge upon the River Thames which surpasses it " . The centre gap was apparent during the Divided Bridge 's whole lifetime and lacking structural integrity the " hideous monstrosity " quickly became unsafe : 
 " It was no wonder that when Wombwell took his caravans across the crazy erection , the elephant @-@ van broke through and the beast in it nearly came to an untimely end . " 
 The dispute between the counties was resolved once and for all in 1848 when the Windsor Improvement Act 1848 decreed the dismantling of the Divided Bridge and the building of two new road bridges , Victoria Bridge slightly upstream , and Albert Bridge slightly downstream . Both new bridges opened in 1851 . Once the Divided Bridge was demolished the old Windsor to Datchet road was rerouted over Victoria Bridge and the Berkshire side became part of the private grounds of Windsor Castle . This is the only case on the entire Thames where a main bridge crossing has completely disappeared . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 A small plaque erected by the Datchet Parish Council in 2000 is the only reminder of the Divided Bridge . Datchet High Street which once continued on over the bridge to Berkshire ends abruptly at the Thames and the bank on the Buckinghamshire side is now occupied by a marina car park . The Crown and Angel public house on the Berkshire bank depicted in many of the contemporary drawings of the bridge was demolished at the same time as the bridge ; a Victorian estate cottage now stands its place . 
 = M @-@ 137 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 137 is a state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan that serves as a spur route to the Interlochen Center for the Arts and Interlochen State Park . It starts at south of the park and runs north between two lakes in the area and through the community of Interlochen to US Highway 31 ( US 31 ) in Grand Traverse County . The highway was first shown without a number label on maps in 1930 and labelled after an extension the next year . The highway 's current routing was established in the 1950s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 137 at the south of Interlochen State Park at an intersection with Vagabond Lane . Farther south , the roadway continues as County Road 137 ( CR 137 ) . The state highway is a two @-@ lane road that meanders north , connecting to the front gate of the state park and the Interlochen Center for the Arts . The road runs along the isthmus between Green and Duck lakes north of the Green Lake Airport . North of the school , the highway passes through a wooded section before entering the community of Interlochen itself near the Green Lake Township Hall . There M @-@ 137 runs almost due north , crossing a line of the Great Lakes Central Railroad before terminating at its connection with the rest of the state trunkline system at US 31 at Interlochen Corners . The roadway continues north of US 31 as South Long Lake Road after the M @-@ 137 designation ends . 
 M @-@ 137 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) like other state highways in Michigan . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic that uses the roadways under its jurisdiction . These volumes are expressed using a metric called annual average daily traffic , which is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . MDOT 's surveys in 2010 showed that 4 @,@ 868 vehicles used the highway daily . No section of M @-@ 137 has been listed on the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 A highway along the route of M @-@ 137 connecting US 31 south to the state park was added to the state highway system during the first half of 1930 , initially lacking a designation label on the state maps of the time . This routing was extended by 0 @.@ 9 miles ( 1 @.@ 4 km ) and labelled as M @-@ 137 on maps in 1931 . The former route through the campus of the Interlochen Center for the Arts was abandoned as a roadway on March 26 , 1956 , after M @-@ 137 was realigned to pass to the east of the school and extended further south through the state park area . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Grand Traverse County . 
 = Henry Burrell ( admiral ) = 
 Vice Admiral Sir Henry Mackay Burrell , KBE , CB ( 13 August 1904 – 9 February 1988 ) was a senior commander in the Royal Australian Navy ( RAN ) . He served as Chief of the Naval Staff ( CNS ) from 1959 to 1962 . Born in the Blue Mountains , Burrell entered the Royal Australian Naval College in 1918 as a thirteen @-@ year @-@ old cadet . His first posting at sea was aboard the cruiser HMAS Sydney . During the 1920s and 1930s , Burrell served for several years on exchange with the Royal Navy , specialising as a navigator . Following the outbreak of World War II , he filled a key liaison post with the US Navy , and later saw action as commander of the destroyer HMAS Norman , earning a mention in despatches . 
 Promoted captain in 1946 , Burrell played a major role in the formation of the RAN 's Fleet Air Arm , before commanding the flagship HMAS Australia in 1948 – 49 . He captained the light aircraft carrier HMAS Vengeance in 1953 – 54 , and was twice Flag Officer of the Australian Fleet , in 1955 – 56 and 1958 . Burrell was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in 1955 and a Companion of the Order of the Bath in 1959 . As CNS , he began a major program of acquisitions for the Navy , including new helicopters , minesweepers , submarines and guided @-@ missile destroyers . He also acted to reverse a plan by the government of the day to dismantle the Fleet Air Arm . Knighted in 1960 , Burrell retired to his farm near Canberra in 1962 and published his memoirs , Mermaids Do Exist , in 1986 . He died two years later , aged eighty @-@ three . 
 = = Early career = = 
 Henry Mackay Burrell was born at Wentworth Falls , in the Blue Mountains district of New South Wales . He was the third child and only son of schoolteacher Thomas Burrell and his wife Eliza . Henry 's father , who had emigrated from England , joined the Australian Imperial Force at the age of fifty @-@ five during World War I , seeing active service in Egypt . His grandfather and great @-@ grandfather had served in the Royal Navy . Henry attended Parramatta High School before entering the Royal Australian Naval College , Jervis Bay , on 1 January 1918 , at the age of thirteen . A keen sportsman , he competed in rugby union , tennis and hockey , winning colours for hockey . Burrell graduated from the college in 1921 and became a midshipman the next year . He went to sea first aboard the light cruiser HMAS Sydney and then the destroyer HMAS Stalwart . Posted to the United Kingdom for further training in 1924 , he served on the light cruiser HMS Caledon and the battleship HMS Malaya . In April 1925 , he was promoted to sub @-@ lieutenant , rising to lieutenant by July 1926 . 
 After attending a Royal Navy course in 1930 , Burrell became a specialist navigator , and saw service aboard the minesweeper HMS Pangbourne , destroyers HMAS Tattoo and Stuart , and cruiser HMAS Brisbane . He married Margaret MacKay at Scots ' Church , Melbourne , on 27 December 1933 . Burrell was promoted to lieutenant commander in July 1934 , and graduated from an advanced navigation course the following year . 
 Burrell served on exchange with the Royal Navy as navigator aboard the cruisers HMS Coventry and HMS Devonshire , the latter during her tour of duty in the Spanish Civil War . Described as being " egalitarian " and " approachable " , his familiarity with ratings earned him the criticism of Devonshire 's captain ; Burrell however believed that a close relationship between officers and men was necessary for the smooth running of a ship . After completing the Royal Navy 's staff course in 1938 , he returned to Australia and was appointed staff officer ( operations ) at the Navy Office , Melbourne , in March 1939 . It was Burrell 's first shore @-@ based position , and he spent the next four months bringing naval sections of the War Book ( preparations for war ) up to date . 
 = = World War II = = 
 Burrell was still based at the Navy Office when World War II broke out in September 1939 . A reorganisation of the headquarters in May 1940 saw him promoted to commander and given the new role of Director of Operations , overseeing troop convoys and their air cover , local defence , and staffing issues . Burrell 's " full knowledge of Australian naval plans and resources " led to Prime Minister Robert Menzies personally nominating him to participate in staff talks with representatives of the Royal Navy and US Navy in October . Soon after , he was posted as the first Australian naval attaché to Washington , D.C. , in an effort to improve communications with the US in light of the threat from Japan . Burrell was credited with helping to foster closer cooperation between the two navies in the Pacific region . He also warned the Australian government that Britain and the US would adopt a " Germany @-@ first " strategy in the event of war with Japan , and that the US was prepared to weaken its Pacific fleet to help secure the Atlantic . 
 Posted to Britain , Burrell was appointed commanding officer of the newly commissioned N @-@ class destroyer HMAS Norman on 15 September 1941 . The ship 's first operation was transporting a Trade Union Congress delegation led by Sir Walter Citrine to Archangel , Russia . After returning to Britain , she steamed to the Indian Ocean to join Admiral Sir James Somerville 's Eastern Fleet at Addu Atoll , Maldives , on 26 February 1942 . Following the Eastern Fleet 's withdrawal to Kilindini , Kenya , Norman took part in the capture of Diego Suarez on Madagascar on 7 May . Later that month , she was reassigned to the Mediterranean and in June was involved in Operation Vigorous , an unsuccessful attempt to resupply the besieged island of Malta . Transferred back to the Indian Ocean , Burrell led Norman in the second campaign of the Battle of Madagascar in September , and was mentioned in despatches on 19 February 1943 for his " bravery and resource " during the operation . By this time Norman was escorting convoys in the Pacific , before deploying to the South Atlantic for anti @-@ submarine duties in April – May . 
 On 23 June 1943 , Burrell relinquished command of Norman and returned to the Navy Office , Melbourne , as Director of Plans . Having been divorced from his first wife Margaret in November 1941 , he married mineralogist Ada Weller ( also known as Ada Coggan ) on 21 April 1944 ; the couple had a son and two daughters . Burrell took charge of the RAN 's latest Tribal @-@ class destroyer , HMAS Bataan , at her commissioning in Sydney on 25 May 1945 . Arriving on the scene too late to see action , the ship was deployed to Japan via the Philippines in July , docking in Tokyo on 31 August . There she participated in the formal surrender ceremonies that took place on 2 September aboard USS Missouri . Bataan remained in Japan as Australian Squadron representative until November , assisting with the repatriation of inmates from Japanese prisoner @-@ of @-@ war camps . On a mission to one such camp at Sendai , Burrell located crewmen from the light cruiser HMAS Perth , which had been sunk in the early hours of 1 March 1942 during the Battle of Sunda Strait ; 320 of her complement of 680 survived the sinking , 105 dying in captivity . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 Burrell 's first appointment following the cessation of hostilities was as commander of the 10th Destroyer Flotilla . He was promoted captain in June 1946 , and became Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff ( DCNS ) that October . As DCNS , Burrell played a major role in establishing the Navy 's Fleet Air Arm and preparing for the introduction of carrier @-@ based aircraft . He was appointed an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to Governor @-@ General William McKell in July 1947 . From October 1948 to the end of 1949 , Burrell served as commanding officer of the heavy cruiser HMAS Australia , flagship of the RAN . Posted to Britain in 1950 , he attended the Imperial Defence College , London , and spent two years as Assistant Australian Defence Representative . He took command of the light aircraft carrier HMAS Vengeance on 2 December 1952 , less than three weeks after she was commissioned into the RAN after transfer from the Royal Navy . The ship began working up for deployment to the Korean War in June 1953 , but in the end her place was taken by the carrier HMAS Sydney . Vengeance was involved in a collision with HMAS Bataan near the Cocos Islands on 5 April 1954 , while acting as part of the escort for the Royal Yacht of Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip during their inaugural tour of Australia , but continued on duty . 
 Completing his tour as captain of Vengeance , Burrell briefly resumed the role of Deputy Chief of the Naval Staff in August 1954 . The following month he was made an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to the Queen . Burrell was appointed a Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the 1955 New Year Honours . In February he became Flag Officer of the Australian Fleet , with the acting rank of rear admiral ; this was made substantive in July . On 12 May 1956 , he hoisted his standard aboard the recently arrived aircraft carrier HMAS Melbourne , marking her replacement of sister ship HMAS Sydney as flagship of the RAN . Burrell was posted soon afterwards to the Navy Office , Canberra , to redevelop the service 's officer structure , leading to a new General List of officers ' seniority . He served as Second Naval Member ( Personnel ) from September 1956 until January 1958 , when he again became Flag Officer of the Australian Fleet . Appointed a Companion of the Order of the Bath in the 1959 New Years Honours , Burrell was raised to vice admiral on 24 February and became First Naval Member , the Chief of the Naval Staff ( CNS ) . He succeeded Vice Admiral Sir Roy Dowling . 
 As CNS , Vice Admiral Burrell had to contend with a threat by Defence Minister Athol Townley to disband the Navy 's fixed @-@ wing Fleet Air Arm capability by 1963 , but gained approval for a major vessel re @-@ equipment drive that was to include new submarines , destroyers , minesweepers , and auxiliaries . This led among other things to the procurement of British Oberon @-@ class submarines , selected by Burrell when his original preference for an Australian @-@ built craft proved too expensive , as well as Ton @-@ class minesweepers and the Navy 's first purpose @-@ designed hydrographic survey ship , HMAS Moresby . The re @-@ equipment program also resulted in augmentation of the RAN 's rotary @-@ wing assets with Westland Wessex anti @-@ submarine warfare helicopters . Most significant was the purchase of three Charles F. Adams @-@ class guided @-@ missile destroyers , a decision of " ingenuity and forethought " on the part of Burrell and Navy Minister John Gorton , according to historian Tom Frame . The CNS and his minister enjoyed a close working relationship ; Burrell declared that Gorton " deserves our thanks for his efforts " , and Gorton called Burrell " one of the most honest , sincere and most dedicated sailors " . 
 The purchase of the destroyers signalled a shift in reliance for equipment from Britain to the United States that was contrary to prevailing Australian defence policy at the time , particularly in what historian Jeffrey Grey described as " the most British of the Australian services , the RAN " , and provoked pressure from the Royal Navy and UK shipbuilders , which had lobbied for purchase of their County @-@ class destroyer . Burrell later declared that the superiority of the US weapons system was a key factor in his preference for the Adams design over the County class . On a mission overseas to discuss trends and acquisitions in January 1960 , he was rebuffed by Britain 's Chief of the Defence Staff , Admiral of the Fleet Lord Louis Mountbatten , who mistakenly thought him responsible for the imminent dissolution of the RAN 's Fleet Air Arm , but warmly welcomed by the US Chief of Naval Operations , Admiral Arleigh Burke . As it happened , Burrell would gain credit for maintaining the integrity of the FAA , and its fixed @-@ wing component remained viable until the early 1980s . He was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire in the Queen 's Birthday Honours , gazetted on 3 June 1960 . In June 1961 , he met with his opposite numbers in the Army and Air Force at a Chiefs of Staff Committee conference to discuss the necessity of Australia acquiring nuclear weapons ; the chiefs agreed that the probability such a capability would be required was remote but that it should remain an option under certain circumstances , a position the defence forces maintained during the ensuing decade . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Burrell made his farewell to the Australian Fleet aboard HMAS Melbourne at Jervis Bay on 8 February 1962 . He left the Navy on 23 February , and was succeeded as CNS by Vice Admiral Hastings Harrington . Burrell retired to <unk> Park , his property near Braidwood in the Southern Tablelands of New South Wales . His son Stuart followed him into the Royal Australian Naval College in 1963 . In retirement Burrell enjoyed horse racing both as a gambler and as the owner of several successful mounts . During the 1960s , he was also a member of the ACT Regional Selection Committee of the Winston Churchill Memorial Trusts . 
 Burrell suffered a serious heart attack in 1980 , having been diagnosed with cardiac problems shortly after his retirement from the Navy . His wife Ada died in August the following year . In 1986 , Burrell published his memoirs as Mermaids Do Exist : The Autobiography of Vice @-@ Admiral Sir Henry Burrell , reflecting on what he described as a " lucky " career , and offering his thoughts on maritime strategy . He died on 9 February 1988 in Woden Valley Hospital . Survived by his three children , Sir Henry Burrell was buried in Gungahlin , Australian Capital Territory , following a private funeral . The Burrell Cup doubles tennis trophy , established by the admiral in 1955 , completed its fifty @-@ eighth year of competition in March 2013 . 
 = British contribution to the Manhattan Project = 
 Britain contributed to the Manhattan Project by helping initiate the effort to build the first atomic bombs in the United States during World War II , and helped carry it through to completion in August 1945 by supplying crucial expertise . Following the discovery of nuclear fission in uranium , scientists Rudolf Peierls and Otto Frisch at the University of Birmingham calculated , in March 1940 , that the critical mass of a metallic sphere of pure uranium @-@ 235 was as little as 1 to 10 kilograms ( 2 @.@ 2 to 22 @.@ 0 lb ) , and would explode with the power of thousands of tons of dynamite . The Frisch – Peierls memorandum prompted Britain to create its own atomic bomb project , known as Tube Alloys . Mark Oliphant , an Australian physicist working in Britain , was instrumental in making the British results known in the United States , and this encouraged the expansion of the American Manhattan Project . Initially the British project was larger and more advanced , but after the United States entered the war , the American project soon outstripped and dwarfed its British counterpart . The British government then decided to shelve its own nuclear ambitions , and participate in the American project . 
 In August 1943 , the prime minister , Winston Churchill , and President Franklin Roosevelt signed the Quebec Agreement , which provided for cooperation between the two countries . The Quebec Agreement established the Combined Policy Committee and the Combined Development Trust to coordinate the efforts of the United States , the United Kingdom and Canada . A British Mission led by Wallace Akers assisted in the development of gaseous diffusion technology in New York . Britain also produced the powdered nickel required by the gaseous diffusion process . Another mission , led by Oliphant who acted as deputy director at the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory , assisted with the electromagnetic separation process . As head of the British Mission to the Los Alamos Laboratory , James Chadwick led a multinational team of distinguished scientists that included Sir Geoffrey Taylor , James Tuck , Niels Bohr , Peierls , Frisch , and Klaus Fuchs , who was later revealed to be a Soviet atomic spy . Four members of the British Mission became group leaders at Los Alamos . William Penney observed the bombing of Nagasaki and participated in the Operation Crossroads nuclear tests in 1946 . 
 Cooperation ended with the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 , known as the McMahon Act , and Ernest Titterton , the last British government employee , left Los Alamos on 12 April 1947 . Britain then proceeded with its own nuclear weapons programme , and became the third country to test an independently developed nuclear weapon in October 1952 . 
 = = Origins = = 
 The 1938 discovery of nuclear fission in uranium , by Lise Meitner and Otto Hahn , raised the possibility that an extremely powerful atomic bomb could be created . Refugees from Nazi Germany and other fascist countries were particularly alarmed by the notion of a German nuclear weapon project . In the United States , three of them , Leo Szilard , Eugene Wigner and Albert Einstein , were moved to write the Einstein – Szilárd letter to United States President Roosevelt warning of the danger . This led to the President creating the Briggs Advisory Committee on Uranium . In Britain , Nobel Prize in Physics laureates George Paget Thomson and William Lawrence Bragg were sufficiently concerned to take up the matter . Their concerns reached the Secretary of the Committee of Imperial Defence , Major General Hastings Ismay , who consulted with Sir Henry Tizard . Like many scientists , Tizard was sceptical of the likelihood of an atomic bomb being developed , reckoning the odds against success at 100 @,@ 000 to 1 . 
 Even at such long odds , the danger was sufficiently great to be taken seriously . Thomson , at Imperial College London , and Mark Oliphant , an Australian physicist at the University of Birmingham , were tasked with carrying out a series of experiments on uranium . By February 1940 , Thomson 's team had failed to create a chain reaction in natural uranium , and he had decided that it was not worth pursuing . But at Birmingham , Oliphant 's team had reached a strikingly different conclusion . Oliphant had delegated the task to two German refugee scientists , Rudolf Peierls and Otto Frisch , who could not work on the University 's radar project because they were enemy aliens and therefore lacked the necessary security clearance . They calculated the critical mass of a metallic sphere of pure uranium @-@ 235 , the only fissile isotope found in significant quantity in nature , and found that instead of tons , as everyone had assumed , as little as 1 to 10 kilograms ( 2 @.@ 2 to 22 @.@ 0 lb ) would suffice , which would explode with the power of thousands of tons of dynamite . 
 Oliphant took the Frisch – Peierls memorandum to Tizard , and the MAUD Committee was established to investigate further . It directed an intensive research effort , and in July 1941 , produced two comprehensive reports that reached the conclusion that an atomic bomb was not only technically feasible , but could be produced before the war ended , perhaps in as little as two years . The Committee unanimously recommended pursuing the development of an atomic bomb as a matter of urgency , although it recognised that the resources required might be beyond those available to Britain . A new directorate known as Tube Alloys was created to coordinate this effort . Sir John Anderson , the Lord President of the Council , became the minister responsible , and Wallace Akers from Imperial Chemical Industries ( ICI ) was appointed the director of Tube Alloys . 
 = = Early Anglo @-@ American cooperation = = 
 In July 1940 , Britain had offered to give the United States access to its scientific research , and the Tizard Mission 's John Cockcroft briefed American scientists on British developments . He discovered that the American project was smaller than the British , and not as far advanced . As part of the scientific exchange , the Maud Committee 's findings were conveyed to the United States . Oliphant , one of the Maud Committee 's members , flew to the United States in late August 1941 , and discovered that vital information had not reached key American physicists . He met the Uranium Committee , and visited Berkeley , California , where he spoke persuasively to Ernest O. Lawrence , who was sufficiently impressed to commence his own research into uranium at the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory . Lawrence in turn spoke to James B. Conant , Arthur H. Compton and George B. Pegram . Oliphant 's mission was a success ; key American physicists became aware of the potential power of an atomic bomb . Armed with British data , Vannevar Bush , the director of the Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) , briefed Roosevelt and Vice President Henry A. Wallace in a meeting at the White House on 9 October 1941 . 
 The British and Americans exchanged nuclear information , but did not initially combine their efforts . British officials did not reply to an August 1941 offer by Bush and Conant to create a combined British and American project . In November 1941 , Frederick L. Hovde , the head of the London liaison office of OSRD , raised the issue of cooperation and exchange of information with Anderson and Lord Cherwell , who demurred , ostensibly over concerns about American security . Ironically , it was the British project that had already been penetrated by atomic spies for the Soviet Union . 
 Yet the United Kingdom did not have the manpower or resources of the United States , and despite its early and promising start , Tube Alloys fell behind its American counterpart and was dwarfed by it . Britain was spending around £ 430 @,@ 000 per year on research and development , and Metropolitan @-@ Vickers was building gaseous diffusion units for uranium enrichment worth £ 150 @,@ 000 ; but the Manhattan Project was spending £ 8 @,@ 750 @,@ 000 on research and development , and had let construction contracts worth £ 100 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 at the fixed wartime rate of four dollars to the pound . On 30 July 1942 , Anderson advised the prime minister , Winston Churchill , that : " We must face the fact that ... [ our ] pioneering work ... is a dwindling asset and that , unless we capitalise it quickly , we shall be outstripped . We now have a real contribution to make to a ' merger . ' Soon we shall have little or none . " 
 By then , the positions of the two countries had reversed from what they were in 1941 . The Americans had become suspicious that the British were seeking commercial advantages after the war , and Brigadier General Leslie R. Groves , Jr . , who took over command of the Manhattan Project on 23 September 1942 , wanted to tighten security with a policy of strict compartmentalisation similar to the one that the British had imposed on radar . American officials decided that the United States no longer needed outside help . The Secretary of War , Henry L. Stimson , felt that since the United States was doing " ninety percent of the work " on the bomb , it would be " better for us to go along for the present without sharing anything more than we could help " . In December 1942 , Roosevelt agreed to restricting the flow of information to what Britain could use during the war , even if doing so slowed down the American project . In retaliation , the British stopped sending information and scientists to America , and the Americans then stopped all information sharing . 
 The British considered how they would produce a bomb without American help . A gaseous diffusion plant to produce 1 kilogram ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) of weapons @-@ grade uranium per day was estimated to cost up to £ 3 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 in research and development , and anything up to £ 50 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 to build in wartime Britain . A nuclear reactor to produce 1 kilogram ( 2 @.@ 2 lb ) of plutonium per day would have to be built in Canada . It would take up to five years to build and cost £ 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . The project would also require facilities for producing the required heavy water for the reactor costing between £ 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 and £ 10 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 , and for producing uranium metal £ 1 @,@ 500 @,@ 000 . The project would need overwhelming priority , as it was estimated to require 20 @,@ 000 workers , many of them highly skilled , 500 @,@ 000 tons of steel , and 500 @,@ 000 kW of electricity . Disruption to other wartime projects would be inevitable , and it was unlikely to be ready in time to affect the outcome of the war in Europe . The unanimous response was that before embarking on this , another effort should be made to obtain American cooperation . 
 = = Cooperation resumes = = 
 By March 1943 Conant decided that British help would benefit some areas of the project . In particular , the Manhattan Project could benefit enough from assistance from James Chadwick , the discoverer of the neutron , and one or two other British scientists to warrant the risk of revealing weapon design secrets . Bush , Conant and Groves wanted Chadwick and Peierls to discuss bomb design with Robert Oppenheimer , and Kellogg still wanted British comments on the design of the gaseous diffusion plant . 
 Churchill took up the matter with Roosevelt at the Washington Conference on 25 May 1943 , and Churchill thought that Roosevelt gave the reassurances he sought ; but there was no follow @-@ up . Bush , Stimson and William Bundy met Churchill , Cherwell and Anderson at 10 Downing Street in London . None of them were aware that Roosevelt had already made his decision , writing to Bush on 20 July 1943 with instructions to " renew , in an inclusive manner , the full exchange with the British Government regarding Tube Alloys . " 
 Stimson , who had just finished a series of arguments with the British about the need for an invasion of France , was reluctant to appear to disagree with them about everything , and spoke in conciliatory terms about the need for good post @-@ war relations between the two countries . For his part , Churchill disavowed interest in the commercial applications of nuclear technology . The reason for British concern about the post @-@ war cooperation , Cherwell explained , was not commercial concerns , but so that Britain would have nuclear weapons after the war . Anderson then drafted an agreement for full interchange , which Churchill re @-@ worded " in more majestic language " . News arrived in London of Roosevelt 's decision on 27 July , and Anderson was dispatched to Washington with the draft agreement . Churchill and Roosevelt signed what became known as the Quebec Agreement at the Quebec Conference on 19 August 1943 . 
 The Quebec Agreement established the Combined Policy Committee to coordinate the efforts of the United States , United Kingdom and Canada . Stimson , Bush and Conant served as the American members of the Combined Policy Committee , Field Marshal Sir John Dill and Colonel J. J. Llewellin were the British members , and C. D. Howe was the Canadian member . Llewellin returned to the United Kingdom at the end of 1943 and was replaced on the committee by Sir Ronald Ian Campbell , who in turn was replaced by the British Ambassador to the United States , Lord Halifax , in early 1945 . Dill died in Washington , D.C. , in November 1944 and was replaced both as Chief of the British Joint Staff Mission and as a member of the Combined Policy Committee by Field Marshal Sir Henry Maitland Wilson . 
 Even before the Quebec Agreement was signed , Akers had already cabled London with instructions that Chadwick , Peierls , Oliphant and Francis Simon should leave immediately for North America . They arrived on 19 August , the day it was signed , expecting to be able to talk to American scientists , but were unable to do so . Two weeks would pass before American officials learnt of the contents of the Quebec Agreement . Over the next two years , the Combined Policy Committee met only eight times . 
 The first occasion was on 8 September 1943 , on the afternoon after Stimson discovered that he was the chairman . The first meeting established a Technical Subcommittee chaired by Major General Wilhelm D. Styer . Because the Americans did not want Akers on the Technical Subcommittee due to his ICI background , Llewellin nominated Chadwick , whom he also wanted to be Head of the British Mission to the Manhattan Project . The other members were Richard C. Tolman , who was Groves 's scientific adviser , and C. J. Mackenzie , the president of the Canadian National Research Council . It was agreed that the Technical Committee could act without consulting the Combined Policy Committee whenever its decision was unanimous . The Technical Subcommittee held its first meeting on 10 September , but negotiations dragged on . The Combined Policy Committee ratified the proposals in December 1943 , by which time several British scientists had already commenced working on the Manhattan Project in the United States . 
 There remained the issue of cooperation between the Manhattan 's Project 's Metallurgical Laboratory in Chicago and the Montreal Laboratory . At the Combined Policy Committee meeting on 17 February 1944 , Chadwick pressed for resources to build a nuclear reactor at what is now known as the Chalk River Laboratories . Britain and Canada agreed to pay the cost of this project , but the United States had to supply the heavy water . At that time , the United States controlled , by a supply contract , the only major production site on the continent , that of the Consolidated Mining and Smelting Company at Trail , British Columbia . Given that it was unlikely to have any impact on the war , Conant in particular was cool about the proposal , but heavy water reactors were of great interest . Groves was willing to support the effort and supply the heavy water required , but with certain restrictions . The Montreal Laboratory would have access to data from the research reactors at Argonne and the X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor at Oak Ridge , but not from the production reactors at the Hanford Site ; nor would they be given any information about plutonium . This arrangement was formally approved by the Combined Policy Committee meeting on 19 September 1944 . The Canadian ZEEP ( Zero Energy Experimental Pile ) reactor went critical on 5 September 1945 . 
 Chadwick supported British involvement in the Manhattan Project to the fullest extent , abandoning any hopes of a British project during the war . With Churchill 's backing , he attempted to ensure that every request from Groves for assistance was honoured . While the pace of research was easing as the war entered its final phase , these scientists were still in great demand , and it fell to Anderson , Cherwell and Sir Edward Appleton , the Permanent Secretary of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research , which was responsible for Tube Alloys , to prise them away from the wartime projects in which they were invariably engaged . 
 The September 1944 Hyde Park Agreement extended both commercial and military cooperation into the post @-@ war period . Part of the Quebec Agreement specified that nuclear weapons would not be used against another country without mutual consent . In June 1945 , Wilson agreed that the use of nuclear weapons against Japan would be recorded as a decision of the Combined Policy Committee . 
 = = Gaseous diffusion project = = 
 Tube Alloys made its greatest advances in gaseous diffusion technology , and Chadwick had originally hoped that the pilot plant at least would be built in Britain . Gaseous diffusion technology was devised by Simon and three expatriates , Nicholas Kurti from Hungary , Heinrich Kuhn from Germany , and Henry Arms from the United States , at the Clarendon Laboratory in 1940 . The prototype gaseous diffusion equipment , two two @-@ stage models and two ten @-@ stage models , was manufactured by Metropolitan @-@ Vickers at a cost of £ 150 @,@ 000 for the four units . Two single @-@ stage machines were later added . Delays in delivery meant that experiments with the single @-@ stage machine did not commence until June 1943 , and with the two @-@ stage machine until August 1943 . The two ten @-@ stage machines were delivered in August and November 1943 , but by this time the research programme they had been built for had been overtaken by events . 
 The Quebec Agreement allowed Simon and Peierls to meet with representatives of Kellex , who were designing and building K @-@ 25 , the American gaseous diffusion plant , Union Carbide and Carbon , who would operate it , and Harold Urey 's Substitute Alloy Materials ( SAM ) Laboratories at Columbia University , the Manhattan Project 's centre tasked with research and development of the process . The year 's loss of cooperation cost the Manhattan Project dearly . The corporations were committed to tight schedules , and the engineers were unable to incorporate British proposals that would involve major changes . Nor would it be possible to build a second plant . Nonetheless , the Americans were still eager for British assistance , and Groves asked for a British mission to be sent to assist the gaseous diffusion project . In the meantime , Simon and Peierls were attached to Kellex . 
 The British mission consisting of Akers and fifteen British experts arrived in December 1943 . This was a critical time . Severe problems had been encountered with the Norris @-@ Adler barrier . Nickel powder and electro @-@ deposited nickel mesh diffusion barriers were pioneered by American chemist Edward Adler and British interior decorator Edward Norris at the SAM Laboratories . A decision had to be made whether to persevere with it or switch to a powdered nickel barrier based upon British technology that had been developed by Kellex . Up to this point , both were under development . The SAM Laboratory had 700 people working on gaseous diffusion and Kellex had about 900 . The British experts conducted a thorough review , and agreed that the Kellex barrier was superior , but felt that it would be unlikely to be ready in time . Kellex 's technical director , Percival C. Keith , disagreed , arguing that his company could get it ready and produce it more quickly than the Norris @-@ Adler barrier . Groves listened to the British experts before he formally adopted the Kellex barrier on 5 January 1944 . 
 The United States Army assumed responsibility for procuring sufficient quantities of the right type of powdered nickel . In this , the British were able to help . The only company that manufactured it was the Mond Nickel Company at Clydach in Wales . By the end of June 1945 , it had supplied the Manhattan Project with 5 @,@ 000 long tons ( 5 @,@ 100 t ) of nickel powder , paid for by the British government and supplied to the United States under Reverse Lend @-@ Lease . 
 The Americans planned to have the K @-@ 25 plant in full production by June or July 1945 . Having taken two years to get the prototype stages working , the British experts regarded this as incredibly optimistic , and felt that , barring a miracle , it would be unlikely to reach that point before the end of 1946 . This opinion offended their American counterparts and dampened the enthusiasm for cooperation , and the British mission returned to the United Kingdom in January 1944 . Armed with the British Mission 's report , Chadwick and Oliphant were able to persuade Groves to reduce K @-@ 25 's enrichment target ; the output of K @-@ 25 would be enriched to weapons grade by being fed into the electromagnetic plant . Despite the British Mission 's pessimistic forecasts , K @-@ 25 was producing enriched uranium in June 1945 . 
 After the rest of the mission departed , Peierls , Kurti and Fuchs remained in New York , where they worked with Kellex . They were joined there by Tony Skyrme and Frank Kearton , who arrived in March 1944 . Kurti returned to England in April 1944 and Kearton in September . Peierls moved on to the Los Alamos Laboratory in February 1944 ; Skyrme followed in July , and Fuchs in August . 
 = = Electromagnetic project = = 
 On 26 May 1943 , Oliphant wrote to Appleton to say that he had been considering the problem of electromagnetic isotope separation , and believed that he had devised a better method than Lawrence 's , one which would result in a five to tenfold improvement in efficiency , and make it more practical to use the process in Britain . His proposal was reviewed by Akers , Chadwick , Peierls and Simon , who agreed that it was sound . While the majority of scientific opinion in Britain favoured the gaseous diffusion method , there was still a possibility that electromagnetic separation might be useful as a final stage in the enrichment process , taking uranium that had already been enriched to 50 per cent by the gaseous process , and enriching it to pure uranium @-@ 235 . Accordingly , Oliphant was released from the radar project to work on Tube Alloys , conducting experiments on his method at the University of Birmingham . 
 Oliphant met Groves and Oppenheimer in Washington , D.C. , on 18 September 1943 , and they attempted to persuade him to join the Los Alamos Laboratory , but Oliphant felt that he would be of more use assisting Lawrence on the electromagnetic project . Accordingly , the Technical Subcommittee directed that Oliphant and six assistants would go to Berkeley , and later move on to Los Alamos . Oliphant found that he and Lawrence had quite different designs , and that the American one was frozen , but Lawrence , who had expressed a desire for Oliphant to join him on the electromagnetic project as early as 1942 , was eager for Oliphant 's assistance . Oliphant secured the services of a fellow Australian physicist , Harrie Massey , who had been working for the Admiralty on magnetic mines , along with James Stayers and Stanley Duke , who had worked with him on the cavity magnetron . This initial group set out for Berkeley in a B @-@ 24 Liberator bomber in November 1943 . Oliphant found that Berkeley had shortages of key skills , particularly physicists , chemists and engineers . He prevailed on Sir David Rivett , the head of the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research in Australia , to release Eric Burhop to work on the project . His requests for personnel were met , and the British mission at Berkeley grew in number to 35 , two of whom , Robin Williams and George Page , were New Zealanders . 
 Members of the British mission occupied several key positions in the electromagnetic project . Oliphant became Lawrence 's de facto deputy , and was in charge of the Berkeley Radiation Laboratory when Lawrence was absent . His enthusiasm for the electromagnetic project was rivalled only by Lawrence 's , and his involvement went beyond scientific problems , extending to policy questions such as whether to expand the electromagnetic plant , although in this he was unsuccessful . The British chemists made important contributions , particularly Harry <unk> and Philip Baxter , a chemist who had been research manager at ICI , was sent to the Manhattan Project 's Clinton Engineering Works at Oak Ridge , Tennessee , in 1944 in response to a request for assistance with uranium chemistry , and became personal assistant to the general manager . His status as an ICI employee was of no concern to Groves . The British mission was given complete access to the electromagnetic project , both in Berkeley and at the Y @-@ 12 electromagnetic separation plant in Oak Ridge . While some of the British mission remained at Berkeley or Oak Ridge only for a few weeks , most stayed until the end of the war . Oliphant returned to Britain in March 1945 , and was replaced as head of the British mission in Berkeley by Massey . 
 = = Los Alamos Laboratory = = 
 When cooperation resumed in September 1943 , Groves and Oppenheimer revealed the existence of the Los Alamos Laboratory to Chadwick , Peierls and Oliphant . Oppenheimer wanted all three to proceed to Los Alamos as soon as possible , but it was decided that Oliphant would go to Berkeley to work on the electromagnetic process and Peierls would go to New York to work on the gaseous diffusion process . The task then fell to Chadwick . The original idea , favoured by Groves , was that the British scientists would work as a group under Chadwick , who would farm out work to them . This was soon discarded in favour of having the British Mission fully integrated into the laboratory . They worked in most of its divisions , only being excluded from plutonium chemistry and metallurgy . 
 First to arrive was Otto Frisch and Ernest Titterton and his wife Peggy , who reached Los Alamos on 13 December 1943 . At Los Alamos Frisch continued his work on critical mass studies , for which Titterton developed electronic circuitry for high voltage generators , X @-@ ray generators , timers and firing circuits . Peggy Titterton , a trained physics and metallurgy laboratory assistant , was one of the few women working at Los Alamos in a technical role . Chadwick arrived on 12 January 1944 , but only stayed for a few months before returning to Washington , D.C. 
 When Oppenheimer appointed Hans Bethe as the head of the laboratory 's prestigious Theoretical ( T ) Division , he offended Edward Teller , who was given his own group , tasked with investigating Teller 's " Super " bomb , and eventually assigned to Enrico Fermi 's F Division . Oppenheimer then wrote to Groves requesting that Peierls be sent to take Teller 's place in T Division . Peierls arrived from New York on 8 February 1944 , and subsequently succeeded Chadwick as head of the British Mission at Los Alamos . Egon Bretscher worked in Teller 's Super group , as did Anthony French , who later recalled that " never at any time did I have anything to do with the fission bomb once I went to Los Alamos . " Four members of the British Mission became group leaders : Bretscher ( Super Experimentation ) , Frisch ( Critical Assemblies and Nuclear Specifications ) , Peierls ( Implosion Hydrodynamics ) and George Placzek ( Composite Weapon ) . 
 Niels Bohr and his son Aage , a physicist who acted as his father 's assistant , arrived on 30 December on the first of several visits as a consultant . Bohr and his family had escaped from occupied Denmark to Sweden . A De Havilland Mosquito bomber brought him to England where he joined Tube Alloys . In America , he was able to visit Oak Ridge and Los Alamos , where he found many of his former students . Bohr acted as a critic , a facilitator and a role model for younger scientists . He arrived at a critical time , and several nuclear fission studies and experiments were conducted at his instigation . He played an important role in the development of the uranium tamper , and in the design and adoption of the modulated neutron initiator . His presence boosted morale , and helped improve the administration of the laboratory to strengthen ties with the Army . 
 Nuclear physicists knew about fission , but not the hydrodynamics of conventional explosions . As a result , there were two additions to the team that made significant contributions in this area of physics . First was James Tuck whose field of expertise was in shaped charges used in anti tank weapons for armour piercing . In terms of the plutonium bomb the scientists at Los Alamos were trying to wrestle with the idea of the implosion issue . Tuck was sent to Los Alamos in April 1944 and used a radical concept of explosive lensing which was then put into place . Tuck also designed the Urchin initiator for the bomb working closely with Seth Neddermeyer . This work was crucial to the success of the plutonium atomic bomb : Italian @-@ American scientist Bruno Rossi later stated that without Tuck 's work the plutonium bomb could not have exploded in August 1945 . The other was Sir Geoffrey Taylor , an important consultant who arrived a month later to also work on the issue . Taylor 's presence was desired so much at Los Alamos , Chadwick informed London , " that anything short of kidnapping would be justified " . He was sent , and provided crucial insights into the Rayleigh – Taylor instability . The acute need for scientists with an understanding of explosives also led Chadwick to obtain the release of William Penney from the Admiralty , and William Marley from the Road Research Laboratory . Peierls and Fuchs worked on the hydrodynamics of the explosive lenses . Bethe considered Fuchs " one of the most valuable men in my division " and " one of the best theoretical physicists we had . " 
 William Penney worked on means to assess the effects of a nuclear explosion , and wrote a paper on what height the bombs should be detonated at for maximum effect in attacks on Germany and Japan . He served as a member of the target committee established by Groves to select Japanese cities for atomic bombing , and on Tinian with Project Alberta as a special consultant . Along with Group Captain Leonard Cheshire , sent by Wilson as a British representative , he watched the bombing of Nagasaki from the observation plane Big Stink . He also formed part of the Manhattan Project 's post @-@ war scientific mission to Hiroshima and Nagasaki that assessed the extent of the damage caused by the bombs . 
 Bethe declared that : 
 For the work of the theoretical division of the Los Alamos Project during the war the collaboration of the British Mission was absolutely essential ... It is very difficult to say what would have happened under different conditions . However , at least , the work of the Theoretical Division would have been very much more difficult and very much less effective without the members of the British Mission , and it is not unlikely that our final weapon would have been considerably less efficient in this case . 
 From December 1945 on , members of the British Mission began returning home . Peierls left in January 1946 . At the request of Norris Bradbury , who had replaced Oppenheimer as laboratory director , Fuchs remained until 15 June 1946 . Eight British scientists , three from Los Alamos and five from the United Kingdom , participated in Operation Crossroads , the nuclear tests at Bikini Atoll in the Pacific . With the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 , known as the McMahon Act , all British government employees had to leave . Titterton was granted a special dispensation , and remained until 12 April 1947 . The British Mission ended when he departed . Carson Mark remained , as he was a Canadian government employee . He remained at Los Alamos , becoming head of its Theoretical Division in 1947 , a position he held until he retired in 1973 . He became a United States citizen in the 1950s . 
 = = Feed materials = = 
 The Combined Development Trust was proposed by the Combined Policy Committee on 17 February 1944 . The declaration of trust was signed by Churchill and Roosevelt on 13 June 1944 . The trustees were approved at the Combined Policy Committee meeting on 19 September 1944 . The United States trustees were Groves , who was elected chairman , geologist Charles K. Leith , and George L. Harrison . The British trustees were Sir Charles Hambro , the head of the British Raw Materials Mission in Washington , D.C. , and Frank Lee from HM Treasury . Canada was represented by George C. Bateman , a deputy minister and member of the Canadian Combined Resources Board . Each of the three governments had its own raw materials resources staff , and the Combined Development Trust was a means of coordinating their efforts . 
 The role of the Combined Development Trust was to purchase or control the mineral resources needed by the Manhattan Project , and to avoid competition between the three . Britain had little need for uranium ores while the war continued , but was anxious to secure adequate supplies for its own nuclear weapons programme when it ended . Half the funding was to come from the United States and half from Britain and Canada . The initial $ 12 @.@ 5 million was transferred to Groves from an account in the office of the United States Secretary of the Treasury Henry Morgenthau , Jr . , that was not subject to the usual accounting auditing and oversight . By the time Groves resigned from the Trust at the end of 1947 , he had deposited $ 37 @.@ 5 million into an account he controlled at the Bankers Trust . Payments were then made from this account . 
 Britain took the lead in securing control of the world 's major source of ore in the Belgian Congo . They also negotiated deals with Swedish companies to acquire ore from there . Oliphant had approached the Australian High Commissioner in London , Sir Stanley Bruce , in August 1943 about uranium supplies from Australia , and Anderson made a direct request to the prime minister of Australia , John Curtin , during the latter 's visit to Britain in May 1944 to initiate mineral exploration in Australia in places where uranium deposits were believed to exist . As well as uranium , the Combined Development Trust secured supplies of thorium from Brazil , Netherlands East Indies , Sweden and Portugal . At the time uranium was believed to be a rare mineral , and the more abundant thorium was seen as a possible alternative , as it could be irradiated to produce uranium @-@ 233 , another isotope of uranium suitable for making atomic bombs . 
 = = Intelligence = = 
 In December 1943 , Groves sent Robert R. Furman to Britain to establish a London Liaison Office for the Manhattan Project to coordinate scientific intelligence with the British government . Groves selected the head of the Manhattan District 's security activities , Captain Horace K. Calvert , to head the London Liaison Office with the title of Assistant Military Attaché . He worked in cooperation with Lieutenant Commander Eric Welsh , the head of the Norwegian Section of MI6 , and Michael Perrin from Tube Alloys . An Anglo @-@ American intelligence committee was formed by Groves and Anderson in November 1944 , consisting of Perrin , Welsh , Calvert , Furman and R. V. Jones . 
 At the urging of Groves and Furman , the Alsos Mission was created on 4 April 1944 under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Boris Pash to conduct intelligence in the field relating to the German nuclear energy project . The more experienced British considered creating a rival mission , but in the end agreed to participate in the Alsos Mission as a junior partner . In June 1945 , Welsh reported that the German nuclear physicists captured by the Alsos Mission were in danger of being executed by the Americans , and Jones arranged for them to be moved to Farm Hall , a country house in Huntingdonshire used for training by MI6 and the Special Operations Executive ( SOE ) . The house was bugged , and the conversations of the scientists were recorded . 
 = = Results = = 
 Groves appreciated the early British atomic research and the British scientists ' contributions to the Manhattan Project , but stated that the United States would have succeeded without them . He considered British assistance " helpful but not vital " , but at the same time , acknowledged that " without active and continuing British interest , there probably would have been no atomic bomb to drop on Hiroshima . " He considered Britain 's key contributions to have been encouragement and support at the intergovernmental level , scientific aid , the production of powdered nickel in Wales , and preliminary studies and laboratory work . 
 Cooperation did not long survive the war . Roosevelt died on 12 April 1945 , and the Hyde Park Agreement was not binding on subsequent administrations . In fact , it was physically lost . When Wilson raised the matter in a Combined Policy Committee meeting in June , the American copy could not be found . The British sent Stimson a photocopy on 18 July 1945 . Even then , Groves questioned the document 's authenticity until the American copy was located years later in the papers of Vice Admiral Wilson Brown , Jr . , Roosevelt 's naval aide , apparently <unk> by someone unaware of what Tube Alloys was , who thought it had something to do with naval guns . 
 Harry S. Truman , who had succeeded Roosevelt on the latter 's death , Clement Attlee , who had replaced Churchill as prime minister in July 1945 , Anderson and United States Secretary of State James F. Byrnes conferred while on a boat cruise on the Potomac River , and agreed to revise the Quebec Agreement . On 15 November 1945 , Groves , Robert P. Patterson and George L. Harrison met a British delegation consisting of Anderson , Wilson , Malcolm MacDonald , Roger Makins and Denis Rickett to draw up a communiqué . They agreed to retain the Combined Policy Committee and the Combined Development Trust . The Quebec Agreement 's requirement for " mutual consent " before using nuclear weapons was replaced with one for " prior consultation " , and there was to be " full and effective cooperation in the field of atomic energy " , but in the longer Memorandum of Intention , signed by Groves and Anderson , this was only " in the field of basic scientific research " . Patterson took the communiqué to the White House , where Truman and Attlee signed it on 16 November 1945 . 
 The next meeting of the Combined Policy Committee on 15 April 1946 produced no accord on collaboration , and resulted in an exchange of cables between Truman and Attlee . Truman cabled on 20 April that he did not see the communiqué he had signed as obligating the United States to assist Britain in designing , constructing and operating an atomic energy plant . Attlee 's response on 6 June 1946 " did not mince words nor conceal his displeasure behind the nuances of diplomatic language . " At issue was not just technical cooperation , which was fast disappearing , but the allocation of uranium ore . During the war this was of little concern , as Britain had not needed any ore , so all the production of the Congo mines and all the ore seized by the Alsos Mission had gone to the United States , but now it was also required by the British atomic project . Chadwick and Groves reached an agreement by which ore would be shared equally . 
 The McMahon Act , which was signed by Truman on 1 August 1946 , and went into effect at midnight on 1 January 1947 , ended technical cooperation . Its control of " restricted data " prevented the United States ' allies from receiving any information . The remaining scientists were denied access to papers that they had written just days before . The terms of the Quebec Agreement remained secret , but senior members of Congress were horrified when they discovered that it gave the British a veto over the use of nuclear weapons . The McMahon Act fuelled resentment from British scientists and officials alike , and led directly to the British decision in January 1947 to develop its own nuclear weapons . In January 1948 , Bush , James Fisk , Cockcroft and Mackenzie concluded an agreement known as the modus vivendi , that allowed for limited sharing of technical information between the United States , Britain and Canada . 
 As the Cold War set in , enthusiasm in the United States for an alliance with Britain cooled as well . A September 1949 poll found that 72 per cent of Americans agreed that the United States should not " share our atomic energy secrets with England " . The reputation of the British Mission to Los Alamos was tarnished by the 1950 revelation that Fuchs was a Soviet atomic spy . It damaged the relationship between the United States and Britain , and provided ammunition for Congressional opponents of cooperation like Senator Bourke B. Hickenlooper . 
 British wartime participation in the Manhattan Project provided a substantial body of expertise that was important to the subsequent success in October 1952 of the United Kingdom 's nuclear weapons programme , although it was not without important gaps , such as in the field of plutonium metallurgy . The development of the independent British nuclear deterrent led to the Atomic Energy Act being amended in 1958 , and to a resumption of the nuclear Special Relationship between America and Britain under the 1958 US – UK Mutual Defence Agreement . 
 = John Lennon = 
 John Winston Ono Lennon , MBE ( born John Winston Lennon ; 9 October 1940 – 8 December 1980 ) was an English singer and songwriter who co @-@ founded the Beatles , the most commercially successful band in the history of popular music . With fellow member Paul McCartney , he formed a lucrative songwriting partnership . 
 Born and raised in Liverpool , Lennon became involved in the skiffle craze as a teenager ; his first band , the Quarrymen , evolved into the Beatles in 1960 . When the group disbanded in 1970 , Lennon embarked on a solo career that produced the albums John Lennon / Plastic Ono Band and Imagine , and songs such as " Give Peace a Chance " , " Working Class Hero " , and " Imagine " . After his marriage to Yoko Ono in 1969 , he changed his name to John Ono Lennon . Lennon disengaged himself from the music business in 1975 to raise his infant son Sean , but re @-@ emerged with Ono in 1980 with the new album Double Fantasy . He was murdered three weeks after its release . 
 Lennon revealed a rebellious nature and acerbic wit in his music , writing , drawings , on film and in interviews . Controversial through his political and peace activism , he moved to Manhattan in 1971 , where his criticism of the Vietnam War resulted in a lengthy attempt by Richard Nixon 's administration to deport him , while some of his songs were adopted as anthems by the anti @-@ war movement and the larger counterculture . 
 As of 2012 , Lennon 's solo album sales in the United States exceeded 14 million and , as writer , co @-@ writer , or performer , he is responsible for 25 number @-@ one singles on the US Hot 100 chart . In 2002 , a BBC poll on the 100 Greatest Britons voted him eighth and , in 2008 , Rolling Stone ranked him the fifth @-@ greatest singer of all time . He was posthumously inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1987 , and into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame twice , as a member of the Beatles in 1988 and as a solo artist in 1994 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = 1940 – 57 : Early years = = = 
 Lennon was born in war @-@ time England , on 9 October 1940 at Liverpool Maternity Hospital , to Julia ( née Stanley ) and Alfred Lennon , a merchant seaman of Irish descent , who was away at the time of his son 's birth . His parents named him John Winston Lennon after his paternal grandfather , John " Jack " Lennon , and then @-@ Prime Minister Winston Churchill . His father was often away from home but sent regular pay cheques to 9 Newcastle Road , Liverpool , where Lennon lived with his mother ; the cheques stopped when he went absent without leave in February 1944 . When he eventually came home six months later , he offered to look after the family , but Julia — by then pregnant with another man 's child — rejected the idea . After her sister , Mimi Smith , twice complained to Liverpool 's Social Services , Julia handed the care of Lennon over to her . In July 1946 Lennon 's father visited Smith and took his son to Blackpool , secretly intending to emigrate to New Zealand with him . Julia followed them — with her partner at the time , ' Bobby ' Dykins — and after a heated argument his father forced the five @-@ year @-@ old to choose between them . Lennon twice chose his father , but as his mother walked away , he began to cry and followed her . It would be 20 years before he had contact with his father again . 
 Throughout the rest of his childhood and adolescence he lived with his aunt and uncle , Mimi and George Smith , who had no children of their own , at Mendips , 251 Menlove Avenue , Woolton . His aunt purchased volumes of short stories for him , and his uncle , a dairyman at his family 's farm , bought him a mouth organ and engaged him in solving crossword puzzles . Julia visited Mendips on a regular basis , and when John was 11 years old he often visited her at 1 Blomfield Road , Liverpool , where she played him Elvis Presley records , taught him the banjo , and showed him how to play " Ain 't That a Shame " by Fats Domino . In September 1980 , Lennon commented about his family and his rebellious nature : 
 Part of me would like to be accepted by all facets of society and not be this <unk> lunatic poet / musician . But I cannot be what I am not ... I was the one who all the other boys ' parents — including Paul 's father — would say , ' Keep away from him ' ... The parents instinctively recognised I was a troublemaker , meaning I did not conform and I would influence their children , which I did . I did my best to disrupt every friend 's home ... Partly out of envy that I didn 't have this so @-@ called home ... but I did ... There were five women that were my family . Five strong , intelligent , beautiful women , five sisters . One happened to be my mother . [ She ] just couldn 't deal with life . She was the youngest and she had a husband who ran away to sea and the war was on and she couldn 't cope with me , and I ended up living with her elder sister . Now those women were fantastic ... And that was my first feminist education ... I would infiltrate the other boys minds . I could say , " Parents are not gods because I don 't live with mine and , therefore , I <unk> 
 He regularly visited his cousin , Stanley Parkes , who lived in Fleetwood . Seven years Lennon 's senior , Parkes took him on trips and to local cinemas . During the school holidays , Parkes often visited Lennon with Leila Harvey , another cousin , often travelling to Blackpool two or three times a week to watch shows . They would visit the Blackpool Tower Circus and see artists such as Dickie Valentine , Arthur Askey , Max <unk> and Joe Loss , with Parkes recalling that Lennon particularly liked George Formby . After Parkes 's family moved to Scotland , the three cousins often spent their school holidays together there . Parkes recalled , " John , cousin Leila and I were very close . From Edinburgh we would drive up to the family croft at Durness , which was from about the time John was nine years old until he was about 16 . " He was 14 years old when his uncle George died of a liver haemorrhage on 5 June 1955 ( aged 52 ) . 
 Lennon was raised as an Anglican and attended Dovedale Primary School . From September 1952 to 1957 , after passing his Eleven @-@ Plus exam , he attended Quarry Bank High School in Liverpool , and was described by Harvey at the time as , " A happy @-@ go @-@ lucky , good @-@ humoured , easy going , lively lad . " He often drew comical cartoons which appeared in his own self @-@ made school magazine called The Daily Howl , but despite his artistic talent , his school reports were damning : " Certainly on the road to failure ... hopeless ... rather a clown in class ... wasting other pupils ' time . " 
 His mother bought him his first guitar in 1956 , an inexpensive <unk> Champion acoustic for which she " lent " her son five pounds and ten shillings on the condition that the guitar be delivered to her own house , and not Mimi 's , knowing well that her sister was not supportive of her son 's musical aspirations . As Mimi was sceptical of his claim that he would be famous one day , she hoped he would grow bored with music , often telling him , " The guitar 's all very well , John , but you 'll never make a living out of it " . On 15 July 1958 , when Lennon was 17 years old , his mother , walking home after visiting the Smiths ' house , was struck by a car and killed . 
 Lennon failed all his GCE O @-@ level examinations , and was accepted into the Liverpool College of Art only after his aunt and headmaster intervened . Once at the college , he started wearing Teddy Boy clothes and acquired a reputation for disrupting classes and ridiculing teachers . As a result , he was excluded from the painting class , then the graphic arts course , and was threatened with expulsion for his behaviour , which included sitting on a nude model 's lap during a life drawing class . He failed an annual exam , despite help from fellow student and future wife Cynthia Powell , and was " thrown out of the college before his final year " . 
 = = = 1957 – 70 : The Quarrymen to the Beatles = = = 
 = = = = 1957 – 66 : Formation , commercial break @-@ out and touring years = = = = 
 At age 15 , Lennon formed the skiffle group , the Quarrymen . Named after Quarry Bank High School , the group was established by him in September 1956 . By the summer of 1957 , the Quarrymen played a " spirited set of songs " made up of half skiffle and half rock and roll . Lennon first met Paul McCartney at the Quarrymen 's second performance , held in Woolton on 6 July at the St. Peter 's Church garden fête , after which he asked McCartney to join the band . 
 McCartney says that Aunt Mimi " was very aware that John 's friends were lower class " , and would often patronise him when he arrived to visit Lennon . According to Paul 's brother Mike , McCartney 's father was also disapproving , declaring Lennon would get his son " into trouble " , although he later allowed the fledgling band to rehearse in the McCartneys ' front room at 20 Forthlin Road . During this time , the 18 @-@ year @-@ old Lennon wrote his first song , " Hello Little Girl " , a UK top 10 hit for The Fourmost nearly five years later . 
 McCartney suggested his friend George Harrison as the lead guitarist . Lennon thought Harrison ( then 14 years old ) was too young . McCartney engineered an audition on the upper deck of a Liverpool bus , where Harrison played " Raunchy " for Lennon and was asked to join . Stuart Sutcliffe , Lennon 's friend from art school , later joined as bassist . Lennon , McCartney , Harrison and Sutcliffe became " The Beatles " in early 1960 . In August that year , the Beatles engaged for a 48 @-@ night residency in Hamburg , Germany , and desperately in need of a drummer , asked Pete Best to join them . Lennon was now 19 , and his aunt , horrified when he told her about the trip , pleaded with him to continue his art studies instead . After the first Hamburg residency , the band accepted another in April 1961 , and a third in April 1962 . Like the other band members , Lennon was introduced to Preludin while in Hamburg , and regularly took the drug , as well as amphetamines , as a stimulant during their long , overnight performances . 
 Brian Epstein , the Beatles ' manager from 1962 , had no prior experience of artist management , but had a strong influence on their early dress code and attitude on stage . Lennon initially resisted his attempts to encourage the band to present a professional appearance , but eventually complied , saying , " I 'll wear a bloody balloon if somebody 's going to pay me " . McCartney took over on bass after Sutcliffe decided to stay in Hamburg , and drummer Ringo Starr replaced Best , completing the four @-@ piece line @-@ up that would endure until the group 's break @-@ up in 1970 . The band 's first single , " Love Me Do " , was released in October 1962 and reached No. 17 on the British charts . They recorded their debut album , Please Please Me , in under 10 hours on 11 February 1963 , a day when Lennon was suffering the effects of a cold , which is evident in the vocal on the last song to be recorded that day , " Twist and Shout " . The Lennon – McCartney songwriting partnership yielded eight of its fourteen tracks . With few exceptions — one being the album title itself — Lennon had yet to bring his love of wordplay to bear on his song lyrics , saying : " We were just writing songs ... pop songs with no more thought of them than that — to create a sound . And the words were almost irrelevant " . In a 1987 interview , McCartney said that the other Beatles idolised John : " He was like our own little Elvis ... We all looked up to John . He was older and he was very much the leader ; he was the quickest wit and the smartest . " 
