 In his closing argument , Coakley described a chronological sequence of mutinous occurrences , beginning at Camp Shoemaker shortly after the explosion when two and a half companies were mixed together for two weeks . Coakley stated that conspiratorial talk among the men about refusing to work and trying to get out of loading ammunition was the root of their August 9 mass refusal . Coakley described how the mutiny continued in the barge when Joe Small spoke to the men and asked them to stick together . Coakley entered into the record his definition of mutiny : " Collective insubordination , collective disobedience of lawful orders of a superior officer , is mutiny . " He gave his opinion that men who admitted in time of war that they were afraid to load ammunition were of a low moral character and were likely to give false testimony . 
 Veltmann denied that there was a mutinous conspiracy , saying the men were in a state of shock stemming from the horrific explosion and the subsequent cleanup of human body parts belonging to their former battalion mates . He said the conversations at Camp Shoemaker were simply those of men who were trying to understand what had happened , and that these discussions were not mutinous nor could they provide the groundwork for conspiracy . Veltmann argued that Small 's brief four- or five @-@ minute speech to the men on the barge was given in the performance of his duty to maintain order , a duty placed upon him by his superiors . Veltmann restated that the established legal definition of mutiny was a concerted effort to usurp , subvert or override military authority , and that there had been no such action or intent . Refusal to obey an order was not mutiny . 
 = = = Verdict = = = 
 On October 24 , 1944 , Admiral Osterhaus and the other six members of the court deliberated for 80 minutes and found all 50 defendants guilty of mutiny . Each man was reduced in rank to Seaman Apprentice and sentenced to 15 years of hard labor to be followed by dishonorable discharge . The men were held under guard while their sentences were passed to Admiral Wright for review . On November 15 , Wright reduced the sentences for 40 of the men : 24 were given 12 years , 11 were given 10 years and the five youngest sailors were given eight @-@ year sentences . The full 15 @-@ year sentences remained in place for ten of the men including Joe Small and Ollie Green . In late November , the 50 men were transferred to the Federal Correctional Institution , Terminal Island in San Pedro Bay near the Port of Los Angeles and the Port of Long Beach . 
 = = = Appeal and release = = = 
 During the 12 days that he watched the court @-@ martial proceedings , Thurgood Marshall began to formulate an appeal campaign . Marshall had noticed that none of the men 's grievances had been aired in court . Directly after the court closed the case , Marshall sent a letter to Secretary Forrestal asking why only blacks were assigned the task of loading munitions ; why had they not been trained for that task ; why were they forced to compete for speed ; why were they not given survivor 's leaves ; and why had they not been allowed to rise in rank . Forrestal replied weakly , saying that a predominance of black men were stationed at Port Chicago so of course they would be working there to load munitions . Forrestal pointed out that there was no discrimination because other naval weapons stations were manned by white crews loading munitions . The Navy Secretary said that the men had not been promoted because their time at Port Chicago had been a " trial period " , and that they were not given 30 @-@ day leaves because he thought it best for men to get quickly back to duty to prevent them from building up mental and emotional barriers . 
 Marshall ‍ — ‌ working as special counsel for the NAACP Legal Defense Fund ‍ — ‌ determined that the first course of action should be a publicity campaign mounted with the aim of gathering public support for the release of the men . In November 1944 , Marshall wrote an incendiary piece for The Crisis magazine , published by the NAACP . Pamphlets were printed and distributed , and editorials denouncing the trial appeared from African @-@ American publishers in January 1945 . Petitions began to circulate , collecting thousands of names of citizens who demanded a reversal of the mutiny verdict . Protest meetings were held and powerful people in sympathy to the cause were asked to bring pressure to bear . Eleanor Roosevelt sent Secretary Forrestal a copy of NAACP 's " Mutiny " pamphlet in April 1945 , asking him to take special care in this case . 
 Marshall obtained written permission from each of the 50 convicted men for him to appeal their case when it came up for review in Washington , DC in front of the Judge Advocate General of the Navy . On April 3 , 1945 , he appeared to present his arguments . Marshall 's appeal made the case that no direct order was given to all 50 of the defendants to load munitions and that even if orders had been given to certain individuals , disobeying the orders could not constitute mutiny . He said that Coakley deliberately misled the court on the definition of " mutiny " and that the mass of evidence he introduced was hearsay , thus inadmissible . Marshall wrote that " [ t ] he accused were made scapegoats in a situation brought about by a combination of circumstances . [ … ] Justice can only be done in this case by a complete reversal of the findings . " Marshall said " I can 't understand why whenever more than one Negro disobeys an order it is mutiny . " 
 The office of the Secretary of the Navy ordered Admiral Wright to reconvene the courts @-@ martial , this time with instructions to disregard the hearsay testimony . Admiral Osterhaus once again called the court to session for deliberation and on June 12 , 1945 , the court reaffirmed each of the mutiny convictions and sentences . Admiral Wright stuck by his reduced sentences . 
 After the surrender of Japan and the cessation of hostilities , the Navy was no longer able to justify such severe sentences as a warning to other potentially dissident servicemen and labor battalions . In September 1945 , the Navy shortened each of the 50 mutiny sentences by one year . Captain Harold Stassen recommended in October that the Navy reduce the sentences to just two years for men with good conduct records and three years for the rest , with credit for time served . Finally , on January 6 , 1946 , the Navy announced that 47 of the 50 men were being released . These 47 were paroled to active duty aboard Navy vessels in the Pacific Theater , where the men were assigned menial duties associated with post @-@ war base detail . Two of the 50 prisoners remained in the prison 's hospital for additional months recuperating from injuries , and one was not released because of a bad conduct record . Those of the 50 who had not committed later offenses were given a general discharge from the Navy " under honorable conditions " . In all , the Navy granted clemency to about 1 @,@ 700 imprisoned men at this time . 
 = = Political and social effect = = 
 The Port Chicago disaster highlighted systemic racial inequality in the Navy . A year before the disaster , in mid @-@ 1943 , the U.S. Navy had over 100 @,@ 000 African Americans in service but not one black officer . In the months following the disaster , the Pittsburgh Courier , a newspaper with a large nationwide subscription primarily of African Americans , related the incident and the subsequent mutiny trial in their Double V campaign , a push for victory over not just the Axis powers but also over racial inequality at home . The mutiny trial was seen as underscoring the tense race relations in the armed forces at the time . 
 Late in 1944 , under conditions of severe racism , a race riot broke out in Guam at a naval base . In March 1945 a Seabee battalion of 1 @,@ 000 African @-@ American men staged a hunger strike at their base , Naval Base Ventura County in Port Hueneme , California , in protest of discriminatory conditions . In the weeks following the latter incident , Fleet Admiral Ernest King and Secretary Forrestal worked with civilian expert Lester Granger on a plan for total integration of the races within the Navy . The Port Chicago disaster had helped catalyze the drive to implement new standards . 
 Beginning in 1990 , a campaign led by 25 U.S. Congressmen was unsuccessful in having the convicts exonerated . Gordon Koller , Chief Petty Officer at the time of the explosion , was interviewed in 1990 . Koller stated that the hundreds of men like him who continued to load ammunition in the face of danger were " the ones who should be recognized " . In 1994 , the Navy rejected a request by four California lawmakers to overturn the courts @-@ martial decisions . The Navy found that racial inequities were responsible for the sailors ' ammunition @-@ loading assignments but that no prejudice occurred at the courts @-@ martial . 
 In the 1990s , Freddie Meeks , one of the few still alive among the group of 50 , was urged to petition the President for a pardon . Others of the Port Chicago 50 had refused to ask for a pardon , reasoning that a pardon is for guilty people receiving forgiveness ; they continued to hold the position that they were not guilty of mutiny . Meeks pushed for a pardon as a way to get the story out , saying " I hope that all of America knows about it ... it 's something that 's been in the closet for so long . " In September 1999 , the petition by Meeks was bolstered by 37 members of Congress including George Miller , the U.S. representative for the district containing the disaster site . The 37 Congressmen sent a letter to President Bill Clinton and in December 1999 , Clinton pardoned Meeks , who died in June 2003 . Efforts to posthumously exonerate all 50 sailors have continued . In 2004 , author Robert L. Allen was reported as saying " ... even for today it 's important to have these convictions set aside . " 
 = = Port Chicago Naval Magazine National Memorial = = 
 The Port Chicago Naval Magazine National Memorial was dedicated in 1994 to the lives lost in the explosion . The National Park Service ( NPS ) was directed to design and maintain the memorial . Congressman George Miller pushed for the memorial to be upgraded to national park status in 2002 , in the knowledge that such status would help the site " become more competitive for federal funds to upgrade and enhance facilities and education materials " . This effort did not result in a change of status . In 2006 , a local newspaper article highlighted the precarious position of the disused chapel within the grounds of the Concord Naval Weapons Station , a chapel that had been previously dedicated to the memory of those fallen in the explosion . The 1980 chapel was said by local historian John <unk> to be unsalvageable due to lead paint and its dilapidated condition . <unk> called attention to the stained glass windows , which were crafted in 1991 as a tribute to the disaster , noting that they could be dismantled and remounted at the memorial site . In March 2008 , NPS was directed by Congress to manage the memorial , after passage of a bill introduced in 2007 by Miller . On July 10 , 2008 , Senator Barbara Boxer introduced legislation that would expand the memorial site by five acres ( two hectares ) , if the land was judged safe for human health and was excess to the Navy 's needs . The Port Chicago Naval Magazine National Memorial Enhancement Act of 2008 was not put to a vote . On February 12 , 2009 , Miller introduced a similar bill , the Port Chicago Naval Magazine National Memorial Enhancement Act of 2009 ( H.R. 1044 ) , which , in addition to calling for another five acres , allowed for the City of Concord and the East Bay Regional Park District " ... to establish and operate a facility for visitor orientation and parking , administrative offices , and curatorial storage for the Memorial . " President Barack Obama approved and signed the bill in December 2009 . 
 The site is contained within an active military base and requires prior reservation to visit . Visitors are asked to allow 90 minutes per visit and are shuttled to the site in NPS vehicles from the Concord Naval Weapons Station Identification Office . 
 = = <unk> nuclear bomb theory = = 
 The Port Chicago explosion was studied by the Los Alamos National Laboratory team working on the Manhattan project . The resulting damage was seen as being similar to the effects of a relatively small nuclear explosion with destructive power equivalent to 2 @,@ 000 tons of TNT . Paul Masters ‍ — ‌ a photo technician at Los Alamos ‍ — ‌ made copies of some of the study documents and stored them at his home . In 1980 , Peter Vogel discovered one of Masters ' documents in a rummage sale and noticed that one section of text read " Ball of fire mushroom out at 18 @,@ 000 ft in typical Port Chicago fashion " . Vogel ‍ — ‌ a New Mexican information officer @-@ turned @-@ journalist ‍ — ‌ began to research the possibility that the Port Chicago explosion was caused by a nuclear bomb . Beginning in 1982 , Vogel publicly voiced his theory , raising a storm of controversy in the Bay Area press . 
 Vogel continued to hunt for clues for the next 20 years , eventually writing a book and , in 2002 , establishing a website delineating various circumstantial reasons why the Port Chicago explosion could have been nuclear . After failing to find hard evidence to support his theory , Vogel abandoned it in 2005 . Vogel 's website was remounted in 2009 under a different URL . 
 Vogel 's theory has not had any traction among mainstream historians . Nuclear historians Lawrence <unk> and Richard G. Hewlett , in an article from 1993 , took issue both with Vogel 's alleged evidence of weapons effects residues as well as Vogel 's proposed timetable for the production of the bomb itself . " It is impossible that there would have been no noticeable effects that later would have been identifiable as nuclear , " they wrote , " Yet rescue and investigating personnel combed the area immediately after the blast , and the ammunition depot , which was quickly rebuilt , is in use today . These activities , without any reported injuries resulting from residual radioactivity , clearly indicate that only conventional explosives were detonated . " They criticized Vogel for being " silent " about all of the evidence against his theory , and found the persistence in the propagation of the Vogel theory in the media " even in the face of evidence to the contrary " as exemplifying " ... the process by which conspiracy theories and other astounding knowledge claims gain popular attention . " 
 = = Media representations = = 
 In 1990 , Will Robinson and Ken Swartz produced the documentary Port Chicago Mutiny ‍ — ‌ A National Tragedy , about the explosion and trial . They interviewed mutiny convict Joe Small , his defense lawyer Gerald Veltmann , as well as Percy Robinson , a seaman who returned to loading ammunition after the first work @-@ stoppage , and Robert Routh , Jr . , a seaman who was blinded in the blast . Danny Glover provided narration for the story , which included dramatized scenes depicting events as they might have occurred in 1944 . The documentary was nominated for the Peabody Awards and won an Emmy . 
 In 1996 , Dan Collison interviewed Port Chicago sailors for <unk> radio 's PRI @-@ distributed program , This American Life . The men described how they were initially trained for action on ships and were disappointed when they were not assigned to ocean @-@ going ships . Collison interspersed interviews with contemporary news reports about the explosion . 
 The story of the Port Chicago 50 was the basis of Mutiny , a made @-@ for @-@ television movie written by James S. " Jim " <unk> and directed by Kevin Hooks , which included Morgan Freeman as one of three executive producers . Starring Michael Jai White , Duane Martin and David Ramsey as three fictional Navy seamen , the film aired on NBC on March 28 , 1999 . 
 The disaster was featured in " Port Chicago " , a 2002 episode of the NBC / CBS drama television series JAG . 
 The disaster featured prominently in the 2011 novel " Blue Skies Tomorrow " by Sarah Sundin ( the third book in her ' Wings of Glory ' trilogy ) . One of the lead characters , Helen Carlisle , works in the arsenal and assists the wife of an imprisoned ' mutineer ' in her fight for justice . The novel is set in the neighbouring town of <unk> https : / / <unk> / Blue @-@ Skies @-@ Tomorrow @-@ Wings @-@ Glory @-@ ebook / <unk> / <unk> / ref = sr _ 1 _ 7 ? s = books & ie = <unk> & <unk> = <unk> & sr = 1 @-@ 7 & keywords = <unk> + <unk> 
 In 2015 , award @-@ winning writer Steve <unk> ’ s The Port Chicago 50 : Disaster , Mutiny , and the Fight for Civil Rights was a Finalist for the 2014 National Book Award in Young People ’ s Literature . The New York Times called it " just as suitable for adults " and noted that the " seriousness and breadth of <unk> ’ s research can be seen in his footnotes and lists of sources , which include oral histories , documentaries and Navy documents . " 
 = 1943 Surprise Hurricane = 
 The 1943 Surprise hurricane was the first hurricane to be entered by a reconnaissance aircraft . The first tracked tropical cyclone of the 1943 Atlantic hurricane season , this system developed as a tropical storm while situated over the northeastern Gulf of Mexico on July 25 . The storm gradually strengthened while tracking westward and reached hurricane status late on July 26 . Thereafter , the hurricane curved slightly west @-@ northwestward and continued intensifying . Early on July 27 , it became a Category 2 hurricane on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale and peaked with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) . The system maintained this intensity until landfall on the Bolivar Peninsula in Texas late on July 27 . After moving inland , the storm initially weakened rapidly , but remained a tropical cyclone until dissipating over north @-@ central Texas on July 29 . 
 Because the storm occurred during World War II , information and reports were censored by the Government of the United States and news media . Advisories also had to be cleared through the Weather Bureau office in New Orleans , resulting in late releases . This in turn delayed preparations ahead of the storm . In Louisiana , the storm produced gusty winds and heavy rains , though no damage occurred . The storm was considered the worst in Texas since the 1915 Galveston hurricane . Wind gusts up to 132 mph ( 212 km / h ) were reported in the Galveston @-@ Houston area . Numerous buildings and houses were damaged or destroyed . The storm caused 19 fatalities , 14 of which occurred after two separate ships sunk . Overall , damage reached approximately $ 17 million ( 1943 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A partial atmospheric circulation was observed over the extreme Southeastern United States and the eastern Gulf of Mexico as early as July 23 . However , an area of disturbed weather went unnoticed until July 25 , when wind shifts from southeast to northeast were observed in Burrwood and New Orleans in Louisiana , as well as Biloxi , Mississippi . Around 1800 UTC , a tropical storm developed approximately 110 miles ( 180 km ) southeast of the Mississippi River Delta . Moving westward at about 7 mph ( 11 km / h ) , the storm strengthened and became a hurricane late on July 26 . Early on the following day , the storm strengthened into a Category 2 hurricane on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Around that time , the storm also attained its maximum sustained wind speed of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) . 
 Later on July 27 , the first ever reconnaissance aircraft flight into a hurricane occurred . An eye feature with a width of 9 – 10 miles ( 14 – 16 km ) was observed during the flight . Around 1800 UTC on July 27 , the storm made landfall on the Bolivar Peninsula in Texas with winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) . The system was described by the Weather Bureau as , " a small intense storm accompanied by full hurricane winds " . Around the time of landfall , a barometric pressure of 967 mbar ( 28 @.@ 6 inHg ) was observed . Early on July 28 , the system weakened to a Category 1 hurricane , then a tropical storm about six hours later . Later that day , the storm began curving northwestward over east @-@ central Texas . Early on July 29 , it weakened further to a tropical depression . Around 0000 UTC on the following day , the storm dissipated near Whitt , Texas . 
 = = Hurricane hunting = = 
 This was the first hurricane to be intentionally flown into by a reconnaissance aircraft . During the morning hours of July 27 , British pilots were training at Bryan Field in Bryan , Texas and were alerted about a hurricane approaching the Galveston area . Upon becoming informed that the planes would need to be flown away from the storm , they criticized this policy . Instead , Colonel Joe Duckworth made a bet with the British pilots that he could fly his AT @-@ 6 Texan trainer directly into the storm . Duckworth requested that Lt. Colonel Ralph O 'Hair , the only navigator at the field , fly into the hurricane with him . Because neither Duckworth nor O 'Hair believed that the headquarters would approve the flight , they decided to proceed without permission . Thus , Duckworth and O 'Hair became the first hurricane hunters . O 'Hair later compared the weather encountered during the flight to " being tossed about like a stick in a dog 's mouth " . After returning to Bryan Field , Lt. William Jones @-@ Burdick requested to fly into the hurricane with Duckworth , while O 'Hair decided to exit the aircraft . 
 = = Censorship = = 
 The hurricane occurred during World War II , with activity from a German U @-@ boat expected in the Gulf of Mexico . As a result , ship reports were silenced . At the time , the Weather Bureau relied primarily on ship and land weather station observations for issue storm warnings . Additionally , advisories had to be cleared through the Weather Bureau office in New Orleans , Louisiana , causing them to be released hours late ; moreover the advisories contained no forecast information , which would have allowed for preparation before the storm struck . The news media after the hurricane was heavily censored by the government due to national security , as information could not be leaked to the Axis powers about the loss of production of war materials . Reportedly , the Federal Bureau of Investigation shut down a telegraph office in La Porte after a telegram was sent containing information about damage from the hurricane . The only news of this storm was published in Texas and Louisiana . After the loss of life in this storm , the Government of the United States has never censored hurricane advisories again . 
 = = Impact and aftermath = = 
 In Louisiana , light winds were observed , with gusts of 36 mph ( 58 km / h ) at both Burrwood and Lake Charles . Locally heavy rains were reported in some areas , with a 24 @-@ hour precipitation total of 7 @.@ 65 inches ( 194 mm ) in <unk> on July 28 . 
 The storm brought strong winds to Texas , with gusts up to 132 mph ( 212 km / h ) reported at the cooling towers at the Shell Oil Refinery in Deer Park and the Humble Oil Refinery in Baytown . Four towers were destroyed at the latter , while other damage there reduced production of toluene , which is an ingredient of TNT . Some towers were also toppled at the Shell Oil Refinery in Deer Park . As these were the primary refineries producing aviation fuel for World War II , it was decided that news about this loss of production should be censored . A number of other oil derricks were destroyed throughout Chambers and Jefferson counties . At Ellington Field Joint Reserve Base near Houston , strong winds blew off the top of a hangar , destroyed five planes , and injured at least 22 cadets . Thousands in the Houston were left without telephone and electrical service , which caused all three radio stations in the area to go off air . The nearby Houston Yacht Club also suffered heavy damage . At Point Bolivar , located on the Bolivar Peninsula , nearly all homes were destroyed by the high winds . The high school 's physical education building in La Porte , which was originally a three story building , was reduced to only one floor after windows shattered and the support beams toppled , causing the roof to collapse . At nearby Morgan 's Point , a water tower was knocked over . On Galveston Island , a number of brick businesses , buildings , and churches collapsed . 
 Heavy rainfall was observed in some areas of eastern Texas , with up to 19 inches ( 480 mm ) in Port Arthur . There , numerous homes were flooded with 6 to 24 inches ( 150 to 610 mm ) of water , which included damage to furnishings , electric motors and automobiles . In downtown Galveston , a number of streets were inundated with rainwater , though flooding damage was relatively minor . Two children 's polio hospitals suffered leaking roofs and water damage , forcing patients to be evacuated by staff and University of Texas Medical Branch students . About 90 percent of all house and buildings in Texas City suffered either water damage or complete destruction , including plant sites producing war materials . However , they were discouraged from going to shelters due to a polio epidemic there . In Galveston Bay , wind @-@ driven waves flooded the western and southern shores . However , northerly winds across the bay resulted in tides being extremely low . On Galveston Island , a storm surge of 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) was observed . Offshore , the United States Army Corps of Engineers ’ s hopper dredge , Galveston , broke up after being smashed against the north jetty , causing 11 fatalities . The tug Titan began sinking offshore Port Arthur . Three members of the crew drowned after attempting to board a rubber raft , while another person died before the remainder of the crew reached the shore . Overall , the storm killed 19 people and caused $ 17 million ( 1943 USD ) in damage to the Houston area . 
 Following the storm , residents were warned to boil their water and be cautious of potential food contamination due to electrical outages . The War Production Board regional office in Dallas offered relief to the victims of the storm . In La Porte , a makeshift hospital was set up in city hall . At Point Bolivar , where nearly all houses were destroyed , the now @-@ destitute residents were transported by the Galveston chapter of the American Red Cross to Galveston for housing . 
 = Simon Favre = 
 Simon Favre ( May 31 , 1760 – July 3 , 1813 ) was an interpreter of the Muskogean languages , particularly Choctaw and Chickasaw , for the French , British , Spanish and Americans in the part of West Florida that became part of the states of Mississippi and Alabama . The son of another prominent interpreter , Favre spent the late 18th century in the vicinity of Mobile and the Tombigbee River , which changed hands from French to British , and then Spanish control . He became well versed in the language and culture of the Choctaws , and was involved with several treaties between the Europeans and natives . As a young man he had a <unk> mistress with whom he had six known children , then at the age of 41 he was legally married in Mobile to a woman of European descent . Within a few years of his marriage , he moved with his new family from the Tombigbee area to a plantation on the Pearl River . 
 As the power of the Choctaws diminished , Favre became less important as an interpreter , and more important as a facilitator of the political changes occurring along the Gulf Coast . Once the Louisiana Purchase was concluded between France and the United States , American settlers from both inside and outside Spanish West Florida increased pressure on Spain for American control of the territory . While the transfer did not officially take place until 1821 , the Spanish essentially put Florida under the trust of the United States in 1810 , and Favre played a major role in facilitating the transfer , and keeping the Indians informed of the events . Favre was considered the top interpreter in the region by men of prominence , including Governor William C. C. Claiborne of Louisiana who made Favre a justice of the peace , and recommended him for the position of United States agent to the Choctaws . A " talk " that Favre gave to the Choctaws on the eve of the War of 1812 was touted by historian Russell Guerin as a masterpiece of diplomacy , and displayed Favre 's deep understanding of the native language and culture . 
 Favre died in 1813 , leaving many minor children and a substantial estate of more than 5000 acres of land and 57 slaves . He had 13 known children with three different women , and leaves numerous descendants . A well @-@ known descendant is former National Football League quarterback Brett Favre . Simon Favre 's associations with property owners and prominent officials demonstrate that he was a person of very high social standing . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Ancestry = = = 
 Born near Mobile , then a part of French Louisiana , on May 31 , 1760 , Simon Favre was the son of Jean Claude Favre ( 1721 – 1782 ) and Marguerite Wiltz ( 1740 – 1805 ) . His grandfather , Jean Baptiste Favre , came from Royan , France , and by tradition was a cabin boy when Pierre D 'Iberville placed him on shore near Biloxi to make contact with the natives . His father was a government interpreter who was commissioned to explain the terms of the Treaty of Paris ( 1763 ) to the natives upon the conclusion of the French and Indian War . Favre 's mother was the daughter of a Swiss soldier . 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Learning from his father , Favre became fluent in the languages of French , English , Spanish , and the Muskogean languages including Choctaw and Chickasaw . The lands along the Gulf coast were held by the British for nearly two decades following the 1763 Treaty of Paris , but their ability to maintain control diminished during that time . On September 3 , 1783 the British ceded their lands in both East and West Florida to Spain under the Treaty of Versailles . Favre 's father had just died the year before this treaty , and Simon Favre followed his father 's career , also inheriting his father 's plantation on the Pearl River , though continuing to reside in Mobile near his mother . 
 Favre spent his early adult years among the natives along the Tombigbee River , being initially employed by the French as an interpreter of the Choctaw language , but soon coming into the employ of the British and later the Spanish . Favre also understood the Chickasaw language , but at one point his translation was challenged by James Colbert ( grandfather of Holmes Colbert ) , who had married into the Chickasaw tribe , and was asked by the tribe to replace Favre as interpreter . Favre was said to be a confidante and personal friend of the celebrated Choctaw Indian chief Pushmataha . Genealogist <unk> relates that at one point Favre acted as the interpreter between Pushmataha and the military commanders Andrew Jackson and General Thomas Hinds . 
 In 1792 Juan De la Villebeuvre , who worked among the Indians on behalf of the Spanish government , was named a special commissioner to the Choctaws and Chickasaws . Favre 's reputation as a competent and valuable interpreter grew quickly , and in an undated letter to Governor Francisco Carondelet , De la Villebeuvre wrote , " ... I am going to reside with Favre , who is employed by the king [ of Spain ] and who will serve me as interpreter . He is the best one of the province , with a great influence over the minds of the Indians , and he knows how to lead them firmly whenever necessary . " Favre built a house for De la Villebeuvre about 12 miles from the village of the Choctaw chief <unk> with whom Favre had become friendly . 
 Favre was present at Fort Nogales , located in Choctaw territory near the mouth of the Yazoo River , when the Treaty of Nogales was signed on October 28 , 1793 . The treaty was between Spain ( and signed by the king ) and the <unk> , Cherokee , Chickasaw , Choctaw , Creek and <unk> nations . Representing the Choctaws were chiefs <unk> and Pushmataha , while Favre signed as a witness . In January 1794 Favre wrote a letter to Don Manuel <unk> , Spanish commander at Natchez , warning of a great rumor among the Choctaws that the Americans were coming to destroy them . The Choctaws were in difficult straits at the time , from both the consumption of alcohol and from a corn crop failure brought on by an earlier drought . They were stealing horses from other tribes as well as from the Europeans , and Favre himself had three horses stolen while staying near the Tombigbee . De la Villebeuvre felt that these actions were being instigated by the Americans , and Favre was sent to the Choctaw villages to assess the feelings of the natives . 
 Following the Treaty of <unk> on May 10 , 1793 , the Spaniards built a fort on the location where the French had earlier built Fort <unk> , and named it <unk> in honor of the alliance between the Spanish and Indians . In the late 1700s Favre was living near Fort Confederation , but sometime after 1797 moved to St. Stephens . He moved into a house across the road from Augustin Rochon , his future father @-@ in @-@ law . After spending time there and at various other locations along the Tombigbee , Favre returned to Mobile before 1800 where he occupied a house on Loyal Street . While there , he associated with other interpreters including J. B. <unk> and Simon Andry . Favre also maintained very close ties with New Orleans , and he called himself of that city in the 1800 baptismal record for his son Simon . 
 = = = Pearl River = = = 
 After having seven children with two other women , Favre was legally married in Mobile in 1801 to Celeste Rochon . Sometime between 1804 and 1806 , following the birth of two children in Mobile , he moved with his new family to one of his plantations on the Pearl River , near what became Pearlington , Mississippi . This was shortly following the Louisiana Purchase of 1803 , when the Americans were showing a great interest in West Florida , still governed by Spain . Favre then became an important interpreter in the service of the Americans , as well as continuing to work for the Spanish who were eventually compelled to give up control of their Florida lands . 
 While Favre 's importance had initially sprung from his influence with the native tribes , particularly the Choctaws , as the power of these people declined he became much more important as an intermediary during the turbulent times of transition from Spanish to American rule in West Florida . During this period early in the 19th century , the Spanish authorities were losing their hold on West Florida for a variety of reasons . One such reason was piracy , while another was American encroachment following the Louisiana Purchase . Many Americans felt that West Florida should have been included in the purchase . One means used by Spain to attempt to hold on to this region was to commission several important settlers to work for their government . In this regard , Favre was assigned to confirm land deeds that the Spanish were doling out at an accelerated rate , to attempt to stem the tide of American encroachment . Favre also provided intelligence and military maps to the Spanish concerning the activities of not only the Americans , who were applying pressure from outside the jurisdiction , but also rebels along the Pearl River and nearby coast . The rebels , led by Reuben Kemper and his brothers , were causing difficulties from within , and had been attempting to pull West Florida from Spanish control for several years . Under the Spanish , Favre became known as the commander of the District of Bay St. Louis . Many of the land titles that were awarded by Favre were later reviewed by the United States government and appear in the collection of American state papers . 
 With Americans in control of New Orleans , mail from Fort Stoddard , near Mobile , had to pass through Spanish territory to get there . In 1808 the United States Postmaster wrote to the Secretary of the Treasury that Favre , who was still a Spanish subject , served as an agent for the post office , forwarding the mail passing through Spanish lands . 
 Though West Florida was not officially ceded to the United States until 1819 under the provisions of the Adams @-@ Onis Treaty , in November 1810 Spanish governor <unk> , demanding secrecy , essentially delivered both East and West Florida to the United States in trust . This was done in hopes that the " robberies and depredations " upon the citizens would cease , and under the realization that the transfer was inevitable . Soon thereafter American officials began managing the Florida lands , setting up administrative regions within them , and the western part of West Florida ( the part in present @-@ day Louisiana ) was absorbed into the United States under the proclamation of President James Madison . When Louisiana became a state in 1812 , the remainder of West Florida ( the panhandles of Mississippi and Alabama ) was absorbed by the United States . The western part of this newly annexed Mobile District was organized into Hancock and Harrison Counties ( soon a part of the Mississippi Territory ) , and in 1813 American federal troops were stationed there to formalize the transition . 
 = = = Late career and death = = = 
 Just as his father had made the transition from French to British rule , Favre likewise had little difficulty changing his allegiance from the Spanish to the Americans , and he continued to hold a prominent position in the region . In January 1811 Favre was chosen by the Orleans territorial governor William C. C. Claiborne as a magistrate of the " Parish of Biloxi " which was within the territory . When Claiborne became the Louisiana governor following statehood in 1812 , he commissioned Favre as a justice of the peace , and clearly admired him , calling him in a letter an educated and very agreeable man who would make an energetic officer . 
 At the outset of the War of 1812 , the Americans were interested in assessing the alignment of the native tribes in regards to their loyalty to Britain . In August 1812 Claiborne sent Favre to present a talk to the native tribes of West Florida . Favre 's carefully crafted words , presented under Claiborne 's name , provide an example of the diplomatic skill with which Favre was able to address the language and culture of the Muskogean tribes . While the goal of Favre and the governor was to keep the Choctaws and other tribes out of the " white man 's war " , ultimately the Creeks aligned themselves with the British , and the Americans requested assistance from the Choctaws . In a letter to Secretary of War John Armstrong , Claiborne recommended that " Colonel Simon Favre " become a United States agent for the Choctaws . Favre held the rank of Lieutenant Colonel in the Hancock County militia , and early in the War of 1812 he was able to negotiate with the Choctaws to provide assistance against Britain 's Creek allies . 
 Favre died in the summer of 1813 , and though he was living along the Pearl River , court testimony by Peter Moran in 1845 stated that he died in Mobile , and had not been there long before his death . A letter by Mississippi governor David Holmes , dated August 1 , 1813 , mentions the " absence of Colonel Favre at Mobile " and " his subsequent death " . Favre 's daughter Mary stated that he died on July 21 , but an obituary that appeared in a New Orleans newspaper on July 20 gives his death date as July 3 . Several years after his death , in 1817 or 1818 , his widow married Isaac Graves , with whom she had one additional child , and they lived in Pearlington , Mississippi . Graves had been the operator of Favre 's schooner , Pearl , and had very little estate , but following his marriage to Favre 's widow , he utilized Favre 's estate as his own , much to the disadvantage of Favre 's heirs . 
 = = Favre 's " wives " = = 
 While a young man , conducting his business among the Choctaws , Favre consummated a relationship with a native woman named Pistikiokonay , who may have been a daughter of the Choctaw Chief Pushmataha , since there was a documented relationship between Favre and this chief . Over a period of about 15 years Favre sired at least six <unk> with this woman , the first of whom was born in about 1784 . Shortly before 1800 he then had a relationship with a woman whose first name has been given as Rebecca or Rosella , and whose last name has been written as Austin or Ostein , with other spelling variations . In 1800 he had an illegitimate son born of this union , and this son , Simon , Jr . , was later named prominently in his will . In 1801 a number of slave exchanges took place between Favre and Austin , as he prepared to marry another woman . On March 25 , 1801 he was legally married to Celeste Rochon , a daughter of Augustine Rochon and Luisa <unk> of Mobile , with whom he had six more children . 
 = = Land holdings and slaves = = 
 In 1806 Favre began cultivation of land on the Pearl River in what became Hancock County , Mississippi . Favre 's land holdings were extensive , and his will mentions eight different plantations totalling over 5000 acres in area . He also acquired 57 slaves shortly before his death , as they were not mentioned in his will , but later became prominently mentioned during the settlement of his estate . The October 1814 inventory of his personal property includes a list of the 57 slaves , giving the name , age , and value of each . The oldest was 80 and valued at $ 5 @.@ 00 , while the most valuable was a 30 @-@ year @-@ old " cow hunter " valued at $ 900 . Collectively , the slaves were valued at just under $ 15 @,@ 000 . The inventory also mentioned 6200 <unk> ( <unk> acres ) of land valued at $ <unk> , a schooner named Pearl , and 450 head of cattle . 
 One of Favre 's properties on the Pearl River was originally settled by his father in 1767 , and was inherited by Favre upon his father 's death in 1782 . This plantation later became known as the town of Napoleon , and Favre kept a store there that later became a part of the community 's church . In 1961 all the residents of the town were moved when the property was declared within the buffer zone of the John C. Stennis Space Center . Another one of his Pearl River properties became the town of Pearlington , Mississippi , where many of his children , including those of his Choctaw mistress , lived . 
 Though Favre lived in Hancock County in West Florida , and died in Mobile , Mississippi Territory , documents concerning his estate were also filed in New Orleans , Louisiana , probably by his Hancock County attorney , <unk> Pray of Pearlington . By 1826 the estate had been partially settled , and during the October court term Pray submitted a final settlement showing total sales from the estate of just under $ 27 @,@ 000 ( including nearly $ 22 @,@ 000 for slaves ) , while total debts amounted to nearly $ 33 @,@ 000 . However , taking into account unsold assets , the estate appears to have been solvent . 
 = = Family = = 
 Favre 's earliest known children were with his Choctaw mistress named Pistikiokonay . This woman lived in what later became Lauderdale County , Mississippi , though most of her children moved to Hancock County where Favre had two large plantations along the Pearl River . Favre had six known or suspected children with her , the earliest born about 1784 , and the last possibly born about 1805 , though without birth records there is uncertainty among most of the birth years . The oldest child was likely Alexis ( male ) , born about 1784 ( based on a deposition he made in 1844 , calling himself aged 60 ) ; he married a Choctaw named <unk> and had several children . A second child , Katherine , died after 1830 without issue . Louis , possibly the third child , had a wife named " <unk> " and four children ; he died between 1830 and 1835 . Charles , born about 1798 ( deposed in 1856 that he was 58 years old ) , married Carmelite <unk> , had several children , and died by 1868 . Mary , born about 1800 ( aged 70 in the 1870 census ) , never married , but was highly respected in the family and became the <unk> of her father 's estate . Favre 's youngest child with his Choctaw mistress appears to be Jean Baptiste , usually just called Baptiste , who was born about 1805 ( aged about 40 in 1845 ) , married a woman named <unk> , and had two children . 
 In 1800 Favre had an illegitimate son with Rebecca Austin ( also called Rosella Ostein ) , a native of Tombigbee in the District of Mobile . The child , named Simon , was born February 5 , 1800 . Favre left a bequest to the child in 1812 so that he could " be taught to read and write and to learn a trade or profession . " 
 Favre had six children with his legal wife , Celeste Rochon , the oldest of whom was Jean ( John ) , born August 2 , 1802 , died January 7 , 1888 , and married Dianna Edwards . Augustine ( Gus ) was born July 17 , 1804 and had two wives , Eleanor and Mary Jane , whose maiden names are uncertain . The third child of this marriage , <unk> ( <unk> ) , was born December 23 , 1806 , died May 10 , 1875 , and married Mary Moody . Next was Louisa Eucharist , born May 15 , 1809 , who married first James Conerly , and then John L. Armstrong . The fifth child was Marguerite , born January 17 , 1812 , died February 6 , 1908 , and married James Murphy . The last child of this marriage was Carlota , who was confirmed in New Orleans in February 1813 , and thus does not appear in her father 's 1812 will . She is not mentioned as an heir of Simon , so may have died young . 
 Probably the best known of Favre 's descendants is former National Football League quarterback Brett Favre , who descends from Simon 's Choctaw mistress , through their son Louis . 
 = The Good @-@ Morrow = 
 " The Good @-@ Morrow " is a poem by John Donne , published in his 1633 collection Songs and Sonnets . Written while Donne was a student at Lincoln 's Inn , the poem is one of his earliest works and is thematically considered to be the " first " work in Songs and Sonnets . Although referred to as a sonnet , the work does not follow the most common rhyming scheme of such works — a 14 @-@ line poem , consisting of an eight @-@ line stanza followed by a six @-@ line conclusion — but is instead 21 lines long , divided into three stanzas . " The Good @-@ Morrow " is written from the point of view of an awaking lover and describes the lover 's thoughts as he wakes next to his partner . The lover 's musings move from discussing sensual love to spiritual love as he realises that , with spiritual love , the couple are liberated from fear and the need to seek adventure . The poem makes use of biblical and Catholic writings , indirectly referencing the legend of the Seven Sleepers and Paul the Apostle 's description of divine , <unk> love – two concepts with which , as a practising Catholic , Donne would have been familiar . 
 Donne 's cartographic references in the third stanza have been the subject of much analysis , although academics have differed in their interpretation of their meaning and what the lines reference . Robert L. Sharp argues that these references can be logically interpreted as yet another reference to love ; the maps Donne with which would have been familiar were not the Mercator @-@ style maps that are common in the modern era , but instead cordiform maps , which appear in the shape of a heart and allow for the display of multiple worlds , which Donne alludes to in lines 11 to 18 . Julia M. Walker , while noting that Sharp 's work is " essential to an intelligent discussion of this extended image " , disagrees with his conclusions and argues that Donne is actually referring to a map showing one world . 
 = = Background and structure = = 
 Poet John Donne was born on 21 January 1572 to John Donne , a wealthy ironmonger and one of the wardens of the Worshipful Company of <unk> , and his wife Elizabeth . After his father 's death when he was four , Donne was , instead of being prepared to enter a trade , trained as a gentleman scholar ; his family used the money his father had made from <unk> to hire private tutors who trained him in grammar , rhetoric , mathematics , history and foreign languages . Elizabeth was soon remarried to a wealthy doctor , ensuring that the family remained comfortable ; as a result , despite being the son of an ironmonger and portraying himself in his early poetry as an outsider , Donne refused to accept that he was anything other than a gentleman . After study at Hart Hall , Oxford , Donne 's private education eventually saw him study at Lincoln 's Inn , one of the Inns of Court , where he occupied his time with history , poetry , theology and " Humane learning and languages " . It was at Lincoln 's Inn that Donne first began writing poetry , looking upon it as " a life @-@ sign or minor irritation " rather than something which defined him . This early poetry included " The Good @-@ Morrow " as well as many other works which later went on to comprise his collection Songs and Sonnets , published in 1633 , two years after his death ; " The Good @-@ Morrow " is considered , in terms of its theme and maturity , to be the first of this collection 's poems . 
 Sonnets are , canonically , poems of 14 lines with assorted rhyming schemes . Originating in the 14th century works of Petrarch , the most common form of the sonnet is known as the Italian Sonnet : a stanza of eight lines in which the writer lays out a complex thought , followed by a pause and a six @-@ line conclusion " which is characteristically both unpredictable and intense " . This was interlinked with the idea of courtly love , in which the goal of a romance is not simply passion , but a more significant moral perfection . " The Good @-@ Morrow " , although identified by Donne as a sonnet , does not follow this structural layout , although it does follow the thematic one ; Donne used " sonnet " simply to refer to any piece of love poetry , ignoring the fact that " The Good @-@ Morrow " was a 21 @-@ line work divided into three stanzas . 
 = = Poem = = 
 The poem opens with a reference to a Catholic legend as Donne says : 
 I wonder by my <unk> , what thou and I 
 Did , till we loved ? were we not wean 'd till then ? 
 But suck 'd on country pleasures , childishly ? 
 Or snorted we in the Seven Sleepers ' den ? ( lines 1 – 4 ) 
 This refers to the Seven Sleepers , the Catholic legend of seven Christian children , persecuted for their faith during the reign of the Roman emperor Decius , who fled to the shelter of a cave where they slept for more than 200 years . Donne , one of six or seven children and a baptised Catholic during a time of strong anti @-@ Catholic sentiment from both the populace and the government , would certainly have been familiar with the story . 
 And now good @-@ morrow to our waking souls , 
 Which watch not one another out of fear ; 
 For love all love of other sights controls , 
 And makes one little room an everywhere . 
 Let sea @-@ discoverers to new worlds have gone ; 
 Let maps to other , worlds on worlds have shown ; 
 Let us possess one world ; each hath one , and is one . ( lines 8 – 14 ) 
 In this passage , the speaker experiences a sense of wonder , having awoken in bed with his lover ; he makes the discovery that their love makes finding " new worlds " pale in importance . " [ S ] <unk> " also awake , not just bodies , " as if called by love from the sleep of ordinary life and mere lust " . 
 My face in thine eye , thine in mine appears , 
 And true plain hearts do in the faces rest ; 
 Where can we find two better hemispheres 
 Without sharp north , without declining west ? 
 Whatever dies , was not mix 'd equally ; ( lines 15 – 19 ) 
 This passage shows the speaker communicating to his lover that they have proceeded from their former " childish " pleasures to this moment , where their souls have finally awakened ; something " miraculous " has happened , because the speaker feels the sort of love that Paul the Apostle claimed would only be encountered in heaven . 
 If our two loves be one , or thou and I 
 Love so alike that none can slacken , none can die . ( lines 20 – 21 ) 
 While the version found in Songs and Sonnets includes this passage as the last two lines , other manuscripts and a later volume of poetry give the last lines as , " If our two loves be one , both thou and I / Love just alike in all , none of these loves can die " . 
 = = Themes = = 
 A love poem , " The Good @-@ Morrow " is thematically centred on several concepts . The poem is primarily to do with evolving love ; the movement from pure lust , in the first stanza , to a nascent and evolving spirituality which liberates the lovers because they no longer " watch each other out of fear " but can instead see clearly . The lovers ' faith in each other allows them to be brave , unlike the Seven Sleepers , who were forced out of fear to hide their beliefs ; with love , the lovers can allow others to pursue their own dreams , accepting that " Let us possess one world ; each hath one , and is one " – with each other , there is no need to search further for adventure . Harold Bloom notes the intertwining of both sensual and spiritual love , arguing that Donne is suggesting that it is impossible for those buried in sensual love , " busying themselves in mundane matters " , to experience true love . Donne 's emphasis on the importance of spiritual love can be seen from the biblical allusions ; <unk> <unk> states that the tone and wording of the poem is an intentional reference to Paul the Apostle 's description of divine , <unk> love ; " At moments like these ... eros merges with agape . Walls collapse , the veil parts , we know as we are known ; our deepest , truest selves exposed " . Alfred W. Satterthwaite , writing in The <unk> , argues that the story of the Seven Sleepers itself contains this theme ; in the story , the Sleepers awoke to find themselves " thunderstruck " in their new environment , something analogous to " the radiant revelation love grants to the lovers in the poem " . 
 Some scholars , such as William Empson , maintain that the poem also indicates that Donne seriously believed in separate planets and planes , and also the existence of more than one Christ – a belief that Donne later abandoned . Academics also see the poem as a more general allegory of the evolution of minds from childishness , as typified by the first stanza where the lovers " suck 'd on country pleasures , childishly " , towards a more mature form of love . Much has also been made of Donne 's references to compasses and maps in the third stanza . Robert L. Sharp , writing in Modern Language Notes , argues that these references can be logically interpreted as yet another reference to love . The maps Donne would have been familiar with are not the Mercator @-@ style maps , but instead cordiform maps , which appear in the shape of a heart . More than simply heart @-@ shaped , cordiform maps also allow the display of multiple worlds , with opposing hemispheres – and Sharp argues that Donne 's work references such a multiple world map in lines 11 to 18 . 
 Julia M. Walker , writing in The Review of English Studies , notes that Sharp 's work is " essential to an intelligent discussion of this extended image " , but disagrees with his conclusions . In particular , she argues that Sharp 's conclusions are incorrect , and that the actual words of the poem refer to a cordiform map showing a single world rather than one showing two worlds ; " my face on thine eye " , for example , not " eyes " . Instead , Walker suggests that Donne was basing his work on William Cunningham 's <unk> Glasse , a 1559 book which showed a single @-@ leafed cordiform map . More importantly , it gave a way to draw a two @-@ leafed , heart @-@ shaped map that displayed only a single world ; this interpretation would " reconcile and unify " the problems with interpreting " The Good @-@ Morrow " . The essential distinction is thus that , while both interpret Donne 's work as referencing cordiform maps , Sharp sees it as referencing a map showing two worlds , while Walker maintains that the reference is to a map showing only one . 
 = Hot Potato ( video game ) = 
 Hot Potato ! is an action puzzle video game developed by Pukka Games and published by BAM ! Entertainment for the Game Boy Advance . It was released in Europe on June 29 , 2001 , and in North America on July 1 , 2001 . 
 In the game the player must simultaneously drive a bus and clear roads of alien potato beings . The beings are scattered across the street , and by shooting out rows of alien potatoes , they can be cleared from the player 's path . The player must clear a set number of aliens to proceed in the game . Hot Potato received mostly above average reviews from critics ; it received 66 @.@ 42 % and 74 % ratings on review aggregate websites GameRankings and Metacritic respectively . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The game tasks the player with navigating a bus through roads filled with alien potato beings . The player 's bus holds female members of the alien race , and the player can shoot the females from the front of the bus in order to clear the alien potatoes . The aliens come in two colors : red and blue . Aliens are cleared from the road when two like @-@ colored potatoes touch each other , but aliens begin to pile up in the road if two aliens hit each other that are not of the same color . The road is continuously scrolling downwards , forcing the player to make holes in the road wide enough to fit the bus through . The game can end prematurely if the player runs into too many aliens and loses all their lives . 
 Hot Potato features seven missions and seven score challenges . Mission mode requires the player to clear out a set number of an alien species . There are multiple alien species in the mode and the mission does not finish until the player gets rid of enough of a certain species chosen by the game from the road . Score challenge mode tasks the player with clearing away a certain number of aliens in order to reach a pre @-@ determined score . The game contains bonus levels which are longer than normal levels if the player is able to complete missions under a certain time period . 
 = = Development = = 
 Hot Potato was developed for over four years by game designer Dima Pavlovsky before development was picked up by Pukka Games . The game was designed to emulate the success of Tetris with an addictive and original puzzle design . Pukka included the humorous storyline about potato alien beings in the game mostly for laughs and to give the game " charm " . The game was first displayed at the 2001 E3 . 
 The game 's release at a $ 39 @.@ 99 price in the United States was seen by some reviewers as being too expensive . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Hot Potato garnered above mostly positive reception from critics ; it received 66 @.@ 42 % and 74 % ratings on review aggregate websites GameRankings and Metacritic respectively . Eurogamer 's John Bye called the game " curiously amusing " and felt that kids would enjoy the game . IGN 's Craig Harris noted that the game was surprisingly fun to play , and that the game would appeal to a unique niche in the video game market . He criticized it for failing to introduce the player to the point of the game , forcing the player to figure out how to play on their own . Allgame 's Jay <unk> commented that the game provided a surprising amount of challenge , which increased the game 's replayability . GameSpot 's Frank Provo praised the game 's visuals and sound effects , noting that they added to the experience of the game . He felt that the game was not as addictive as some other contemporary puzzle games , but he praised the game nonetheless . Bob Tedeschi of The New York Times commented that Toys ' R ' Us had originally chosen to not distribute Hot Potato , but began to stock the game after it looked like a big seller . 
 = Nunca Voy a Olvidarte = 
 " Nunca Voy a Olvidarte " ( English : " I Am Never Going to Forget You " ) is a song written by Roberto Belester and first recorded by Mexican norteño band Bronco for their album Salvaje y Tierno ( 1991 ) . In the song , the protagonist is leaving and vows to never forget the time he spent with his lover . In 1993 , Mexican singer @-@ songwriter Cristian Castro covered the song on his album , Un Segundo en el Tiempo . Castro 's version peaked at number @-@ one on the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart in the United States became his first number @-@ one single . 
 The song received a Lo Nuestro and a Billboard Latin Music award for Pop Song of the Year . It earned an award for Latin Pop Song of the Year at the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers Awards of 1994 . In the following year , Puerto Rican @-@ American recording artist La India covered the song as the lead single from her album Dicen Que Soy which peaked at number eleven on the Hot Latin Songs chart , number thirteen on the Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart , and number @-@ one on the Billboard Tropical Songs chart . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 " Nunca Voy a Olvidarte " was written by Mexican songwriter Roberto Belester for Bronco 's album Salvaje y Tierno ( 1991 ) . Belester composed songs for several well @-@ known Mexican bands such as Los <unk> 's and Los Bukis . The song tells of a protagonist who is leaving his lover and tells her that he is never going to forget her . In 1993 , Mexican singer @-@ songwriter Cristian Castro covered the song on his second studio album , Un Segundo en el Tiempo , which was produced by Alex Zepeda and released as the lead single from the album . According to Castro , he bought Salvaje y Tierno after hearing " Que No <unk> <unk> " on the radio and wanted to cover " Nunca Voy a Olvidarte " when he listened to it on the CD . The music video for Castro 's cover was produced by Jorge Guerrero Fox Garza and filmed in Cuernavaca which features shots of Castro alone in an old country house near the fireplace and outside on the field remembering a woman he loved . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Nunca Voy a Olvidarte " debuted in the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart at number 31 in the week of August 14 , 1993 , climbing to the top ten two weeks later . The song peaked atop the chart September 18 , 1993 , replacing " Mi Tierra " by Gloria Estefan and was succeeded by " Guadalupe " , by José & Durval , three weeks later . " Nunca Voy a Olvidarte " ended 1993 as the fourth best performing Latin single of the year in the United States . In Mexico City , the song reached number one on the ballads hit parade chart . 
 At the 6th Lo Nuestro Awards in 1994 , " Nunca Voy a Olvidarte " won the award for Pop Song of the Year . In the same year , it was the Pop Song of the Year at the inaugural Billboard Latin Music awards . " Nunca Voy a Olvidarte " was also the " Song of the Year " at the 1994 Eres Awards . At the American Society of Composers , Authors and Publishers Awards of 1994 , the song was awarded Latin Pop Song of the Year . In 2005 , the title was used for a compilation album titled Nunca Voy a Olvidarte ... Los Exitos . In 2009 , the song was included on the compilation album La Historia de los Exitos by Fonovisa Records to celebrate the record label 's 25th anniversary . In 2013 , Castro re @-@ recorded the song for his first live album En Primera Fila : Día 1 . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the Allmusic . 
 Cristian Castro – vocals 
 Roberto Belester – songwriting 
 Alejandro " Alex " Zepeda – producer , arranger 
 = = La India version = = 
 In 1994 , Puerto Rican @-@ American recording artist La India covered the song on her album , Dicen Que Soy which was produced by Sergio George and released as the album 's first single . It was picked by George for India to cover as he felt it was something women could relate to . India 's version was included on the soundtrack for The 24 Hour Woman . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 On the Hot Latin Songs chart , the song debuted at number twenty @-@ one on the week of October 15 , 1994 and peaked at number eleven three weeks later . On the Billboard Latin Pop Songs chart , the song debuted at number fifteen on the week of November 5 , 1994 and peaked at number thirteen a week later . On the Billboard Tropical Songs , the song peaked at number @-@ one on the week of October 29 , 1994 replacing " Quien Eres Tú " by Luis Enrique and was succeeded by " En Las <unk> " by Edgar Joel two weeks later . 
 David Wilson 's found that the melody and arrangements of the song were " generic " . An editor for Latina magazine remarked India 's cover as " sensational " and that it " flattens " Castro 's version of the song . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the Allmusic and Dicen Que Soy liner notes . 
 = Within You Without You = 
 " Within You Without You " is a song written by George Harrison and released on the Beatles ' 1967 album Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band . It was Harrison 's second composition in the Indian classical style , after " Love You To " , and was inspired by his six @-@ week stay in India with his mentor and sitar teacher , Ravi Shankar , over September – October 1966 . Recorded in London without the other Beatles , the song features Indian instrumentation such as sitar , dilruba and tabla , and was performed by Harrison and members of the Asian Music Circle . The recording marked a significant departure from the Beatles ' previous work ; musically , it evokes the Indian devotional tradition , while the overtly spiritual quality of the lyrics reflects Harrison 's absorption in Hindu philosophy and the teachings of the Vedas . Although the song was his only composition on Sgt. Pepper , Harrison 's endorsement of Indian culture was further reflected in the inclusion of yogis such as Paramahansa Yogananda among the crowd depicted on the album cover . 
 With the worldwide success of the album , " Within You Without You " presented Indian classical music to a new audience in the West and contributed to the genre 's peak in international popularity . It also influenced the philosophical direction of many of Harrison 's peers during an era of utopian idealism marked by the Summer of Love . The song has traditionally received a varied response from music critics , some of whom find it lacklustre and pretentious , while others admire its musical authenticity and consider the message to be the most meaningful on Sgt. Pepper . Writing for Rolling Stone , David Fricke described the track as being " at once beautiful and severe , a magnetic sermon about materialism and communal responsibility in the middle of a record devoted to gentle Technicolor anarchy " . 
 On the Beatles ' 2006 remix album Love , the song was mixed with the John Lennon @-@ written " Tomorrow Never Knows " , creating what some reviewers consider to be that project 's most successful mashup . Sonic Youth , Rainer Ptacek , Oasis , Patti Smith , Cheap Trick and the Flaming Lips are among the artists who have covered " Within You Without You " . 
 = = Background and inspiration = = 
 George Harrison began writing " Within You Without You " in early 1967 while at the house of musician and artist Klaus Voormann , in the north London suburb of Hampstead . Harrison 's immediate inspiration for the song came from a conversation they had shared over dinner , regarding the metaphysical space that prevents individuals from recognising the natural forces uniting the world . Following this discussion , Harrison worked out the song 's melody on a harmonium and came up with the opening line : " We were talking about the space between us all " . 
 The song was Harrison 's second composition to be explicitly influenced by Indian classical music , after " Love You To " , which featured Indian instruments such as sitar , tabla and tambura . Since recording the latter track for the Beatles ' Revolver album in April 1966 , Harrison had continued to look outside of his role as the band 's lead guitarist , further immersing himself in studying the sitar , partly under the tutelage of master sitarist Ravi Shankar . Harrison later said that the tune for " Within You Without You " came about through his regularly performing musical exercises known as <unk> , which use the same scales as those found in Indian ragas . 
 " Within You Without You " is the first of many songs in which Harrison espouses Hindu spiritual concepts in his lyrics . Having incorporated elements of Eastern philosophy in " Love You To " , Harrison became fascinated by ancient Hindu teachings after he and his wife , Pattie Boyd , visited Shankar in India over September – October 1966 . Intent on mastering the sitar , Harrison first joined other students of Shankar 's in Bombay , until local fans and the press learned of his arrival . Harrison , Boyd , Shankar and the latter 's partner , Kamala Chakravarty , then relocated to a houseboat on Dal Lake in Srinagar , Kashmir . There , Harrison received personal tuition from Shankar while absorbing religious texts such as Paramahansa Yogananda 's Autobiography of a Yogi and Swami Vivekananda 's Raja Yoga . This period coincided with his introduction to meditation and , during their visit to Vrindavan , he witnessed communal chanting for the first time . 
 The education he received in India , particularly regarding the illusory nature of the material world , resonated with Harrison following his experiences with the hallucinogenic drug LSD ( commonly known as " acid " ) and informed his lyrics to " Within You Without You " . Having considered leaving the Beatles after the completion of their third US tour , on 29 August 1966 , he also gained a philosophical perspective on the effects of the band 's international fame . He later attributed " Within You Without You " to his having " fallen under the spell of the country " after experiencing the " pure essence of India " through Shankar 's guidance . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The song follows the pitches of Khamaj thaat , the Indian equivalent of Mixolydian mode . Written and performed in the tonic key of C ( but subsequently sped up to C # on the official recording ) , it features what musicologist Dominic Pedler terms an " exotic " melody over a constant C @-@ G " root @-@ fifth " drone , which is neither obviously major nor minor in scale . Based on a musical piece that Shankar had written for All India Radio , the structure of the composition adheres to the Hindustani musical tradition and demonstrates Harrison 's advances in the Indian classical genre since " Love You To " . 
 Following a brief alap , which serves to introduce the song 's main musical themes , " Within You Without You " comprises three distinct sections : two verses and a chorus ; an extended instrumental passage ; and a final verse and chorus . The alap consists of tambura drone , over which the main melody is outlined on dilruba , a bow @-@ played string instrument that Boyd began learning in India . Throughout the vocal section of the song – the gat , in traditional Indian composition – the rhythm is a 16 @-@ beat tintal in madhya <unk> ( medium tempo ) . The vocal line is supported throughout by dilruba , in the manner of a sarangi echoing the melody in a khyal piece . The first three words of each verse ( " We were talking " ) have a tritone interval ( E to B ♭ ) , which , in Pedler 's view , enhances the spiritual dissonance that Harrison expresses in his lyrics . 
 Over the instrumental passage , the tabla rhythm switches to a 10 @-@ beat <unk> cycle . A musical dialogue ensues in 5 / 4 time , first between the dilruba and sitar , then between a Western string section and sitar , resolving in melodic unison and together stating a rhythmic cadence , known as a <unk> , to close the middle segment . After this , the drone is again prominent as the rhythm returns to 16 @-@ beat tintal for the final verse and chorus . On the finished recording , the tonal and spiritual tension is relieved by the inclusion of muted canned laughter . 
 In his book Indian Music and the West , Gerry Farrell writes of " Within You Without You " : " The overall effect is of several disparate strands of Indian music being woven together to create a new form . It is a quintessential fusion of pop and Indian music . " Peter Lavezzoli , author of The Dawn of Indian Music in the West , describes the song as " a survey of Indian classical and semiclassical styles " in which " the diverse elements ... are skillfully woven together into an interesting hybrid . If anything , the closest comparison that might be made is to the Hindu devotional song form known as bhajan . " 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 According to Religion News Service writer Steve Rabey , " Within You Without You " " contrast [ s ] Western individualism with Eastern monism " . The lyrics convey basic tenets of Vedanta philosophy , particularly in Harrison 's reference to the concept of maya ( the illusory nature of existence ) , in the lines " And the people who hide themselves behind a wall of illusion / Never glimpse the truth " . Author Joshua Greene paraphrases the song @-@ wide message as : " A wall of illusion separates us from each other … which only turns our love for one another cold . Peace will come when we learn to see past the illusion of differences and come to know that we are one … " The solution espoused by Harrison is for individuals to see beyond the self and each seek change within , further to Vivekananda 's contention in Raja Yoga that " Each soul is potentially divine . The goal is to manifest that divinity … " 
 At times in the song , Harrison distances himself from those who live in ignorance of these apparent truths – saying , " If they only knew " and asking the listener , " Are you one of them ? " In the final verse , he quotes from the gospels of St Matthew and St Mark , lamenting those who " gain the world and lose their soul " . Author Ian MacDonald defends the " accusatory finger " behind such statements , saying : " this is a token of what was then felt to be a revolution in progress : an inner revolution against materialism . " 
 In the context of 1967 , the transcendental theme of Harrison 's lyrics aligned with the philosophy behind the Summer of Love – namely , the search for universality and an ego @-@ less existence . Author Ian Inglis considers the line " With our love we could save the world " to be a " cogent reflection " of the Summer of Love ethos , anticipating the utopian message of Harrison 's composition " It 's All Too Much " and the John Lennon @-@ written " All You Need Is Love " . He adds , with reference to the chorus : " The lyrics are given greater depth by the double meaning of without – ' in the absence of ' and ' outside ' – each of which is perfectly applicable to the song 's sentiments . " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 Harrison recorded " Within You Without You " for the Beatles ' Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band , an album based around Paul McCartney 's vision of a fictitious band that would serve as the Beatles ' alter egos , after their decision to quit touring . Harrison had little interest in McCartney 's concept ; he later admitted that , following his return from India , " my heart was still out there " , and working with the Beatles again " felt like going backwards " . After it was decided to omit " Only a Northern Song " from the album , the song became Harrison 's sole composition on Sgt. Pepper . 
 The recording features musical contributions from only Harrison , Beatles aide Neil Aspinall , and a group of uncredited Indian musicians . As with his Indian accompanists on " Love You To " , Harrison sourced these musicians through the Asian Music Circle in north London . According to author Alan Clayson , Harrison missed a Beatles recording session to attend one of Shankar 's London concerts , an absence that served as " fieldwork " for " Within You Without You " . 
 MacDonald describes the song as " Stylistically … the most distant departure from the staple Beatles sound in their discography " . The basic track was recorded on 15 March 1967 at EMI 's Abbey Road studio 2 in London . The participants sat on a carpet in the studio , which was decorated with Indian tapestries on the walls , with the lights turned low and incense burning . Harrison and Aspinall each played a tambura , while the Indian musicians contributed on tabla , dilruba , tambura and swarmandal . A type of zither , the swarmandal provided the glissando flourishes that introduce the tabla during the alap and signal the return to 16 @-@ beat tintal before the final verse . 
 The session was also attended by Lennon , artist Peter Blake , and John Barham , an English classical pianist and student of Shankar who shared Harrison 's desire to promote Indian music to Western audiences . In Barham 's recollection , Harrison " had the entire structure of the song mapped out in his head " and sung the melody that he wanted the dilruba player to follow . The twin hand @-@ drums of the tabla were close @-@ miked by recording engineer Geoff Emerick , in order to capture what he later described as " the texture and the lovely low resonances " of the instrument . 
 = = = Overdubbing and mixing = = = 
 The first of two overdubbing sessions for " Within You Without You " took place at Abbey Road on 22 March . Two more dilruba parts were added that day , played by an outside musician , after which a reduction mix was carried out , to allow for further overdubs onto the four @-@ track recording . 
 Producer George Martin then arranged the string orchestration , for eight violins and three cellos , based on Harrison 's instructions . The pair worked hard together on the arrangement , ensuring that Martin 's score imitated the slides and bends of the dilrubas . The orchestral parts , performed by members of the London Symphony Orchestra , were added on 3 April . During the same session , Harrison recorded his vocal and a sitar part , the solo of which , in the description of music critic David Fricke , " sings and swings with the clarity and phrasing of his best rockabilly @-@ fired guitar work " . Harrison also overdubbed occasional interjections on acoustic guitar . 
 On 4 April , while preparing the final mixes of the song , in stereo and mono , Harrison added crowd laughter taken from a sound effects tape in the Abbey Road library . Martin and Emerick were both opposed to this addition but deferred to Harrison , who later said that the laughter provided " some light relief " , adding : " You were supposed to hear the audience anyway , as they listen to Sergeant Pepper 's Show . " The completed recording was enhanced in the mixes through the liberal application of automatic double tracking . Before Harrison recorded his vocals the previous day , the track had been edited and sped up sufficiently to reduce it in length from an original 6 : 25 to 5 : 05 . In the process , the song 's key was raised a semitone , to C # . 
 = = Release = = 
 Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band was released on 1 June 1967 , with " Within You Without You " sequenced as the opening track on side two of the LP . Greene notes that for many listeners at the time , the song provided their " first meaningful contact with meditative sound " . In his 1977 book The Beatles Forever , Nicholas Schaffner likened " Within You Without You " to Hermann Hesse 's Siddhartha – an influential novel among the emerging counterculture during the Summer of Love – in terms of the song 's evocation of Hesse 's " idealization of individuality " and " vision of a mysterious East " . Eager to separate the song 's message from the LSD experience at a time when the drug had grown in popularity and influence , Harrison told an interviewer : " It 's nothing to do with pills … It 's just in your own head , the realisation . " 
 Although Harrison later spoke dismissively of the Sgt. Pepper project and its legacy , he conceded that he had enjoyed working on the record 's iconic cover . For this , he asked Blake to include pictures of Indian yogis and religious leaders – including Yogananda , Mahavatar Babaji , Lahiri Mahasaya and Sri Yukteswar – to feature beside images of the Beatles . Among the song 's lyrics , printed on the back cover , the positioning of the words " Without You " behind McCartney 's head served as a clue in the Paul Is Dead rumour , which grew in the United States partly as a result of the Beatles ' failure to perform live after 1966 . 
 In 1971 the song was issued as the title track of an EP release in Mexico . Part of a series of Beatles releases sequenced by Lennon , the EP also included the Harrison @-@ written tracks " Love You To " , " The Inner Light " and " I Want to Tell You " . In 1978 " Within You Without You " appeared as the B @-@ side to the " Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band " / " With a Little Help from My Friends " medley , on singles released in West Germany and some other European countries . An instrumental version of the track , at the original speed and in the key of C , appeared on the Beatles ' 1996 outtakes compilation Anthology 2 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 = = = Contemporary reviews = = = 
 Recalling the song 's release in his book The Beatles Diary , Barry Miles writes : " Some thought it a masterpiece , some a prime example of mock @-@ philosophical babble . Either way , it was pure Harrison . " David Griffiths of Record Mirror praised the album 's musical and lyrical scope , which included " life @-@ enhancing philosophy " , and added : " George Harrison 's ' Within You Without You ' is a beautifully successful and adventurous statement in song of a Yoga truth . " The Times of India 's music critic similarly admired the Beatles for " explor [ ing ] farther reaches in the musical firmament " and described Harrison 's composition as a " memorable " track . In one of the few unfavourable reviews for Sgt. Pepper , Richard Goldstein , writing in The New York Times , said the song was " remarkable " musically and a highlight of the album , yet he considered the lyrics " dismal " and full of " the very clichés the Beatles helped bury " . Allen Evans of the NME found the " deep , rich rhythm " of the tabla " most appealing " , although he bemoaned that it was difficult to decipher the lyrics " because they merge with the sitar music so closely " . 
 According to the Beatles ' official biographer , Hunter Davies , writing in 1968 , some contemporary reviewers speculated that the burst of laughter at the end of " Within You Without You " was inserted by Harrison 's bandmates to mock the song . Davies corrected this misconception , saying : " It was completely George 's idea . " In a review published five months after the release of Sgt. Pepper , Hit Parader considered that the album had not endured as well as the Beatles ' previous works , and opined : " Harrison has produced a soothing , sinuous , exotic sound for ' Within You Without You ' . But even though his repetitious recitation of elementary Far Eastern philosophy is probably intended to reflect the infinity of the universe , it soon becomes a bit monotonous . The laughter at the end seems to be deflating the pretentiousness of the lyrics . " 
 = = = Retrospective assessment = = = 
 The song has continued to invite widely diverse opinions . Writing in 1988 , author and critic Tim Riley dismissed " Within You Without You " as dull and " directionless " , adding that it was " the most dated piece on the record ... [ and ] could easily have been left off with little to no effect " on the album . Conversely , Ian Inglis considers the song to be " absolutely central to the form and content " of its parent album . Among other Beatles biographers , Ian MacDonald views " Within You Without You " as the " conscience " of Sgt. Pepper and " the necessary sermon that comes with the community singing " , and Kenneth Womack terms it " quite arguably , the album 's ethical soul " . 
 Writing for Rough Guides , Chris Ingham admires the track as " beautifully put together " ; he describes it as both " some of the most exotic music released under The Beatles ' name " and a " philosophical meditation on life and love beyond self ... [ that ] , once surrendered to , is a central part of the Pepper experience " . Harrison and Lennon biographer Gary Tillery echoes these sentiments , saying : " ' Within You Without You ' was one of the most original and distinctive songs the Beatles ever created , a gem in the album generally considered the pinnacle of their career . And only one Beatle could be given credit for it . " In his book on the history of ambient music , Mark Prendergast includes " Within You Without You " among the album 's " three outstanding cuts " and deems it to be " the most timeless piece of <unk> psychedelia ever recorded " . 
 Musicologist Allan Moore considers that Harrison 's " command of the quasi @-@ Indian medium is of a very high order " and , with regard to the song 's message , he states : " In its explicit , prescient call to the me @-@ generation , perhaps ' Within You Without You ' is a key track [ on the album ] ... expressing the deepest commitment to the counter @-@ culture . " Writing for PopMatters in November 2009 , Ross Langager attributed a similar significance to the track : 
 Sgt. Pepper is about Britain , and the Summer of Love was always about America . The only song on the album that approaches the ideology and rhetoric of the hippie counterculture was George Harrison 's sole contribution , the lush sitar @-@ washed " Within You Without You " , and it follows that Harrison was the only Beatle to have visited Haight @-@ Ashbury at the peak of the scene . Even then , Eastern philosophy informed the lyric more deeply than did acid culture , and it 's still a dense and stunning composition no matter its ideology . 
 Among reviews of the 2009 remastered Beatles catalogue , Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph described " Within You Without You " as " dour , droning " and Consequence of Sound grouped it with the " major clunkers " on Sgt. Pepper ; by contrast , Sputnikmusic deemed it to be " vital to the album 's diversity of instrumental material " . AllMusic critic Richie Unterberger admires the " nice haunting melody " , but he considers the track overlong and notes the potential for offence in this , " the first Beatles song where [ Harrison 's ] Indian religious beliefs affected the lyrics with full force " . Writing for Ultimate Classic Rock in 2013 , Dave Swanson described it as a " heady masterpiece of ethereal drone " that captures the " pure bliss of 1967 ... in full bloom " while musically exploring " previously uncharted pop group waters " . In his Harrison obituary for Salon.com , in December 2001 , Ira Robbins considered " Within You Without You " to be " the song that most clearly articulated his devotion , both artistic and philosophical , to India " , with a lyric that " pairs worldview and personality in lines that now seem prophetic " . Robbins concluded : " Whether he was warning others or testing his own conviction , the admonition stands . ' The time will come when you see we 're all one / And life flows on within you and without you . ' " 
 Joe Bosso of MusicRadar wrote in 2011 that although Harrison had already introduced Indian instrumentation to the Beatles ' sound , the song served as " his Indian music coming @-@ out party " , and he praised the recording as " a glorious , David Lean @-@ like panorama " . Writing for Rolling Stone in 2002 , David Fricke included the track on his list of the " 25 Essential Harrison Performances " . He described it as , variously , the Beatles ' " purest excursion ... into raga " , and " at once beautiful and severe , a magnetic sermon about materialism and communal responsibility in the middle of a record devoted to gentle Technicolor anarchy " . 
 = = Cultural influence and legacy = = 
 According to Mikal Gilmore of Rolling Stone , Harrison 's interest in Indian culture " spread like wildfire " among his peers as well as their audience . Author Simon Leng writes that " [ ' Within You Without You ' ] , and Harrison 's leadership of the Beatles into Vedic philosophy , sparked the entire fashion for Indian music and a million backpackers ' pilgrimages to Kashmir ... " Juan Mascaró , a professor in Sanskrit studies at Cambridge University , wrote to Harrison after the song 's release , saying : " it is a moving song , and may it move the souls of millions . And there is more to come , as you are only beginning on the great journey . " 
 In the opinion of New Yorker journalist Mark Hertsgaard , the lyrics to " Within You Without You " " contained the album 's most overt expression of the Beatles ' shared belief in spiritual awareness and social change " . Harrison 's espousal of Eastern philosophy dominated the band 's extracurricular activities by mid 1967 , such that , author Peter Doggett writes , with Harrison 's " emerge [ ence ] as the champion of all things Indian ... his power within the group increased " . This in turn led to the Beatles ' endorsement of Transcendental Meditation and their highly publicised attendance at Maharishi Mahesh Yogi 's spiritual retreat in Rishikesh , India , early the following year . 
 Music journalist Rip Rense cites the lyrics to " Within You Without You " as an example of how , in comparison to Lennon and McCartney , " Harrison was deliberately , forthrightly trying to say something [ in his songwriting ] , and often something vast … " Among other contemporary rock musicians , Stephen Stills was so taken with the song that he had its lyrics carved on a stone monument in his yard . Lennon also admired the track , saying of Harrison : " His mind and his music are clear . There is his innate talent , he brought that sound together . " David Crosby – whom Harrison acknowledged as having introduced him to Shankar 's music – described Harrison 's fusion of ideas as " utterly brilliant " , adding : " He did it beautifully and tastefully ... He did it at absolutely the highest level that he could , and I was extremely proud of him for that . " Music critic Ken Hunt describes the song as an " early landmark " in Harrison 's championing of Shankar , and Indian classical music generally , which gained " real global attention " for the first time through the Beatle 's commitment . Peter Lavezzoli also highlights the effect of Sgt. Pepper and its " spiritual centerpiece [ ' Within You Without You ' ] " on Shankar 's popularity , during a year that served as " the annus mirabilis " for Indian music and " a watershed moment in the West when the search for higher consciousness and an alternative world view had reached critical mass " . Musicologist Walter Everett lists Spirit 's " Mechanical World " and the Incredible String Band 's " Maya " , both released in 1968 , and much of the Moody Blues ' 1969 album To Our Children 's Children 's Children as works that were directly influenced by the Beatles ' song . 
 American musician Gary Wright recalls listening to " Within You Without You " repeatedly in the summer of 1967 while touring Europe for the first time , and he says : " I was transported to another place of consciousness . I 'd never heard such sound textures before . " Writing in the " 100 Rock Icons " issue of Classic Rock , in 2006 , singer Paul Rodgers cited the track to support Harrison 's standing as what the magazine called " the Beatles ' musical medicine man " . Rodgers said : " He introduced me and a generation of people worldwide to the wisdom of the East . His thought @-@ provoking ' Within You Without You ' – with sitars , tablas and deep lyrics – was something completely different , even in a world full of unique music . " 
 = = Love remix = = 
 " Within You Without You " was included on the 2006 remix album Love , which was created for the Cirque du Soleil stage show of the same name . Harrison 's vocal appears over the rhythm section from " Tomorrow Never Knows " , after the track opens with Lennon 's lyric from the latter song . Reviewing the album for PopMatters , Zeth Lundy writes : " The ' Within You Without You ' / ' Tomorrow Never Knows ' mash @-@ up , perhaps the most thrilling and effective track on the entire disc , fuses two especially transcendental songs into one : ... a union of two ambiguous , open @-@ ended declarations of spiritual pursuit . " Paul Moody of Uncut similarly considers it to be the " best of all " the mashups on Love , with the two tracks ' " cosmic drones ... fitted together like a glove " . 
 Remixed and remastered by George Martin and his son Giles , " Within You Without You " / " Tomorrow Never Knows " was the first track prepared for Love . Speaking to Mojo magazine in December 2006 , Giles Martin said that he had first created a demo combining the two songs , which he then nervously presented to McCartney and Ringo Starr for their approval . In Martin 's recollection , " they loved it " , which allowed the project to proceed . The Love remix is one of the songs in The Beatles : Rock Band . 
 = = Cover versions = = 
 Big Jim Sullivan , a British session guitarist who became proficient on the sitar , included " Within You Without You " on his album of Indian music @-@ style recordings , titled Sitar Beat and first released in 1967 . In the same year , the Soulful Strings recorded the song for their album Groovin ' with the Soulful Strings , a version that also appeared on the B @-@ side of their most successful single , " Burning Spear " . 
 In 1988 Sonic Youth recorded " Within You Without You " for the NME 's multi @-@ artist tribute Sgt. Pepper Knew My Father . Fricke highlights this recording as an example of how , regardless of its Indian origins , the composition can be interpreted on electric guitar effectively and " with <unk> force " . Big Daddy covered the song on their 1992 Sgt. Pepper tribute album , a release that Moore recognises as " the most audacious " of the many interpretations of the Beatles ' 1967 LP , with " Within You Without You " serving as " the cleverest pastiche " , performed in a free jazz style reminiscent of Ornette Coleman or Don Cherry . Other acts who have covered it for Sgt. Pepper tributes include Oasis , on a BBC Radio 2 project celebrating the album 's 40th anniversary ( 2007 ) ; Easy Star All @-@ Stars ( featuring Matisyahu ) , on Easy Star 's Lonely Hearts Dub Band ( 2009 ) ; and Cheap Trick , on their Sgt. Pepper Live DVD ( 2009 ) . In 2014 , the Flaming Lips , with featured guests <unk> and Morgan Delt , recorded it for their Sgt. Pepper tribute , With a Little Help from My <unk> . 
 Guitarist Rainer Ptacek opened his 1994 album Nocturnes with what AllMusic critic Bob Gottlieb describes as a " stunning instrumental " reading of the song , recorded live in a chapel in Tucson . A version by Angels of Venice appeared on their self @-@ titled album , released in 1999 , and Big Head Todd and the Monsters contributed a recording for Songs from the Material World : A Tribute to George Harrison in 2003 . The following year , Thievery Corporation covered the track on their album The <unk> Sound . Patti Smith included it on her 2007 covers album Twelve , a version that , according to BBC music critic Chris Jones , " sounds like [ the song ] could have been written for her " . Peter Knight and his Orchestra , Firefall , Glenn Mercer , R. Stevie Moore and Les Fradkin are among the other artists who have recorded the song . 
 Dead Can Dance 's 1996 album <unk> includes the track " Indus " , the melody of which was found to be very similar to that of " Within You Without You " . The duo 's singer , Lisa Gerrard , told The Boston Globe that they had subsequently obtained Harrison 's blessing but " the [ record company ] pushed it " , with the result that they were forced to give the former Beatle a partial songwriting credit . In 1978 , the Rutles parodied " Within You Without You " on the track " Nevertheless " , performed by Rikki Fataar . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 According to Ian MacDonald : 
 George Harrison – lead vocals , tambura , sitar , acoustic guitar 
 Uncredited Indian musicians – dilrubas , tabla , swarmandal , tambura 
 Neil Aspinall – tambura 
 Erich Gruenberg , Alan Loveday , Julien Gaillard , Paul Scherman , Ralph Elman , David <unk> , Jack Rothstein , Jack Greene – violins 
 Reginald Kilbey , Allen Ford , Peter Halling – cellos 
 = Herbert J. Ray = 
 Rear Admiral Herbert James Ray ( 1 February 1893 – 3 December 1970 ) was an officer in the United States Navy who served in World War I and World War II . A 1914 graduate of the Naval Academy , he served on the submarines USS H @-@ 2 and N @-@ 3 during World War I. In March 1942 , as Chief of Staff and Aide to the Commandant of the Sixteenth Naval District , Rear Admiral Francis W. Rockwell , he participated in General Douglas MacArthur 's escape from the Philippines . In Australia , he served with MacArthur 's General Headquarters , Southwest Pacific Area staff . In September 1943 , he became Captain of the battleship USS Maryland , which he commanded in the Battle of Tarawa , Battle of Kwajalein , Battle of Saipan and the Battle of Peleliu . In October 1944 , he participated in the Battle of Surigao Strait , in which Maryland joined the other battleships in engaging the Japanese battleships Fusō and Yamashiro and their escorts . Ray left Maryland in December 1944 , and was appointed Deputy Director of the Naval Division of the US Control Group Council for Germany . After VE Day , he became the Junior United States Member of the Tripartite Naval Commission in Berlin . He retired from the Navy on 30 June 1949 , and received a tombstone promotion to rear admiral due to his combat decorations . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Herbert James Ray was born in Milwaukee , Wisconsin , on 1 February 1893 , the son of James Herbert Ray and his wife Mary née <unk> . He was educated at Rhea County High School . In 1910 , he was appointed to the United States Naval Academy at Annapolis , from which he graduated on 6 June 1914 . 
 On graduation , he was commissioned as an ensign , and joined the crew of the battleship USS Minnesota . In July 1915 , he became an instructor for enlisted ratings in Norfolk , Virginia . He then became part of the crew that was assembled for the new battleship USS Nevada in January 1916 , and served on it when it was commissioned in March 1916 . After the United States declared war on Germany , he underwent submariner training on board the submarine tender USS Fulton from June to November 1917 . During the war he served on the submarines USS H @-@ 2 and N @-@ 3 . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 After the war , Ray was posted to the battleship USS Pennsylvania in March 1919 , the submarine tender USS Savannah in July 1919 , and the destroyer USS Meyer February 1920 . He then became the Executive Officer of the destroyer USS Walker . In November 1920 , he helped fit out the destroyer USS Young , and served on it until April 1921 , when he was transferred to the crew of another new destroyer , the USS Macdonough . He helped fit it out , and then served with it until September 1921 . 
 Ray returned to Annapolis as an instructor with the Electrical Engineering and Physics Department from September 1921 to June 1923 . He then served on the transport USS Argonne until December 1924 , when he became the Executive Officer of the destroyer USS Wood . In 1926 , he assumed command of the destroyer USS Farenholt . In July , he became Officer in Charge of the Branch Hydrographic Office in Honolulu . He was Aide and Flag Secretary to the Commander Light Cruiser 2 from May 1928 to June 1930 ; Light Cruiser Divisions , Scouting Fleet from June to September 1930 ; and Light Cruiser 3 from September 1930 to July 1931 . Ray married Helen Louise Jacobs from La Plata , Maryland in 1930 . They had two daughters and two sons . 
 Ray was the Navy Representative on the Joint Army @-@ Navy Selective Services Committee at the War Department in Washington , D.C. , from July 1931 to September 1933 . He then helped fit out the new cruiser USS New Orleans , and became first he First Lieutenant and Damage Control Officer , and then , in February 1935 , he Executive Officer . Following the usual pattern of alternating duty afloat and ashore , he returned to Annapolis in July 1936 for a second two @-@ year tour as an instructor , this time in the Department of English and History . In June 1938 he entered the Naval War College at Newport , Rhode Island . After graduating in June 1939 , he became the Executive Officer of the USS Quincy . 
 = = World War II = = 
 = = = Southwest Pacific = = = 
 In March 1941 , <unk> Chief of Staff and Aide to the Commandant of the Sixteenth Naval District , Rear Admiral Francis W. Rockwell , at Cavite , where he was promoted to captain on 1 July 1941 . He was serving in this capacity when the Pacific War began . He was awarded the Legion of Merit for his part in the fighting . His citation read : 
 For exceptionally meritorious conduct in the performance of outstanding services to the Government of the United States as Chief of Staff in the Sixteenth Naval District at the outbreak of World War II . Captain Ray continuously performed duties of great responsibility during and after the bombing and destruction of Cavite Navy Yard on 10 December 1941 . In the direction of fire fighting at Cavite , in the evacuation of personnel and material to Corregidor , and in the administration of Naval Facilities at Mariveles on Bataan Peninsula , he displayed courage and marked leadership . His close personal contact with the personnel of Motor Torpedo Boat Squadron Three and constant concern with their problems was an outstanding example of leadership and exceptional efficiency in his profession . During this entire period of great stress , he performed exceptionally meritorious service to the government in duties of great responsibility . Captain Ray was sent to Mariveles on 14 December to supervise the work there and Commander <unk> temporarily assumed the duties of Chief of Staff . On completion of a reorganization at Mariveles , Captain Ray was ordered to Queen Tunnel Corregidor and resumed his duties as Chief of Staff . 
 In March 1942 , he participated in General Douglas MacArthur 's escape from the Philippines , for which Ray was awarded the Silver Star . His citation read : 
 For extraordinary heroism and distinguished service in the line of his profession while serving on the Staff of Rear Admiral Francis Rockwell , Commandant , Sixteenth Naval District , during the period 11 to 13 March 1942 , in the Philippine Islands during an extraordinary action a retrograde maneuver involving General Douglas MacArthur . Captain Ray made detailed plans involving exacting preparations for a movement of major strategic importance and of the most hazardous nature , then executed the mission with marked skill and coolness in the face of greatly superior enemy forces . 
 In Australia , Ray served with MacArthur 's General Headquarters , Southwest Pacific Area . One of his sons , Lieutenant James H. Ray , was on the destroyer USS Jarvis when it was lost with all hands on 9 August 1942 . When Ray was ordered back to the United States in January 1943 , MacArthur awarded him the Army Distinguished Service Medal . His citation read : 
 For exceptionally meritorious and distinguished services to the Government of the United States , in a duty of great responsibility in the Southwest Pacific Area during the period from 18 April 1942 to 26 April 1943 . Captain Ray was assigned to General Headquarters , Southwest Pacific Area , upon its establishment , 18 April 1942 , serving as Naval Advisor to the Operations and Intelligence sections of the General Staff from 18 April 1942 to 9 January 1943 . Upon the establishment of the Planning Section of G @-@ 3 , 9 January 1943 , he was assigned as Chief of that section . The accomplishment of the service for which this award is recommended has been completed . This officer has been transferred to another assignment . The entire service of Captain Ray has , since the rendering by him of the service upon which this recommendation is based , been honorable . 
 = = = USS Maryland = = = 
 Ray served in the office of the Commander in Chief United States Fleet , Admiral Ernest J. King from April to September 1943 . He then became Captain of the battleship USS Maryland . The ship had been damaged in the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941 but returned to service . Maryland participated in the Battle of Tarawa in November 1943 as the flagship of Rear Admiral Harry W. Hill 's V Amphibious Force and Southern Attack Force , and her guns participated in the shore bombardment . In February 1944 , she joined in the Battle of Kwajalein , firing at pillboxes and blockhouses on Roi Island . Maryland 's guns supported the Battle of Saipan , silencing a pair of coastal guns . On 22 June , she was torpedoed by a Mitsubishi G4M " Betty " bomber , but was repaired in time to join Rear Admiral Jesse B. Oldendorf ’ s Western Fire Support Group in the Battle of Peleliu . Still with <unk> 's group , but now part of the Vice Admiral Thomas C. Kinkaid 's Seventh Fleet , Maryland participated in the Battle of Leyte in October . In the Battle of Surigao Strait , it joined the other battleships in engaging the Japanese battleships Fusō and Yamashiro and their escorts . Ray was awarded a second Silver Star . His citation read : 
 for gallantry and intrepidity in action as Commanding Officer of the USS Maryland ( BB @-@ 46 ) , which contributed materially to the annihilation of enemy surface forces , including two battleships , on 25 October 1944 , in Surigao Straits , Philippine Islands . Captain Ray , by his capable direction , caused his ship to deliver prolonged and effective gunfire against the enemy 's ships . 
 On 29 November , Maryland was attacked and severely damaged by kamikaze aircraft , and forced to return to Pearl Harbor for repairs . For his services as captain , he was awarded the Bronze Star . 
 = = = Germany = = = 
 Ray left Maryland in December 1944 . He was appointed Deputy Director of the Naval Division of the US Control Group Council for Germany . After VE Day , he became the Junior United States Member of the Tripartite Naval Commission in Berlin . He was promoted to the wartime rank of commodore on 26 June 1945 . He returned to the United States in April 1946 . For his services in Europe , he was awarded a second Legion of Merit . His citation read : 
 For exceptionally meritorious conduct in the performance of outstanding services to the Government of the United States in Germany from 1 March 1945 to 20 December 1945 . Commodore Ray distinguished himself by unusually meritorious accomplishments as Deputy Director of the Naval Division , U.S. Group Control Council for Germany , and later , as Deputy Naval Advisor to the Office of Military Government for Germany ( U.S. ) , and as junior member of the Tri @-@ <unk> Naval Commission meeting in Berlin from 15 August 1945 until 8 December 1945 . In this duty , he contributed in a high degree to the successful conclusion to the Tri @-@ <unk> Naval Commission . He was instrumental in coordinating the Naval work of the U.S. Group Control Council , and other divisions of the U.S. Group Control Council , and in coordinating the efforts of the four powers represented on the Naval Directorate of the Group Control Council for Germany . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Ray became Commander of the San Francisco Group of the Nineteenth Fleet in June 1946 . On 10 July , like many other <unk> , he was reduced in rank to captain again . He served in this capacity until he retired on 30 June 1949 , at which point he received a tombstone promotion to rear admiral due to his combat decorations . He died on 3 December 1970 at Beale Air Force Base Hospital in California . 
 = Fountain of Time = 
 Fountain of Time , or simply Time , is a sculpture by Lorado Taft , measuring 126 feet 10 inches ( 38 @.@ 66 m ) in length , situated at the western edge of the Midway Plaisance within Washington Park in Chicago , Illinois , in the United States . This location is in the Washington Park community area on Chicago 's South Side . Inspired by Henry Austin Dobson 's poem , " Paradox of Time " , and with its 100 figures passing before Father Time , the work was created as a monument to the first 100 years of peace between the United States and Great Britain , resulting from the Treaty of Ghent in 1814 . Although the fountain 's water began running in 1920 , the sculpture was not dedicated to the city until 1922 . The sculpture is a contributing structure to the Washington Park United States Registered Historic District , which is a National Register of Historic Places listing . 
 Part of a larger beautification plan for the Midway Plaisance , Time was constructed from a new type of molded , steel @-@ reinforced concrete that was claimed to be more durable and cheaper than alternatives . It was said to be the first of any kind of finished work of art made of concrete . Before the completion of Millennium Park in 2004 , it was considered the most important installation in the Chicago Park District . Time is one of several Chicago works of art funded by Benjamin Ferguson 's trust fund . 
 Time has undergone several restorations because of deterioration and decline caused by natural and urban elements . During the late 1990s and the first few years of the 21st century it underwent repairs that corrected many of the problems caused by these earlier restorations . Although extensive renovation of the sculpture was completed as recently as 2005 , the supporters of Time continue to seek resources for additional lighting , and the National Trust for Historic Preservation has nominated it for further funding . 
 = = Planning = = 
 Time , along with many other public works in Chicago , was funded by Benjamin Ferguson 's 1905 gift of $ 1 million ( $ 26 @.@ 3 million today ) , to a charitable trust formed to " memorialize events in American History " . Lorado Taft initially conceived a sculpture carved from granite ; an alternative plan was to have it chiseled out of Georgia marble , which it is estimated would have cost $ 30 @,@ 000 ( $ 718 @,@ 283 ) a year for five years . The planned work was intended as part of a Midway beautification which was to include a stream , lagoons , and a series of bridges : a Bridge of Arts at Woodlawn Avenue , a Bridge of Religion at the intersection of Ellis Avenue , and a Bridge of Science at Dorchester Avenue ( formerly Madison Avenue ) . As part of the plan , the two ends of the Midway were to be connected by a canal in the deep depressions linking lagoons in Jackson and Washington Parks . 
 In 1907 , Taft had won the first commission from the Ferguson Fund to create the Fountain of the Great Lakes at the Art Institute of Chicago . Immediately afterwards , inspired by Daniel Burnham 's " Make no little plans " quote , he begin lobbying for a grand Midway beautification plan . In 1912 , Art Institute Trustee Frank G. Logan formally presented Taft 's plans to the fund 's administrators at the Art Institute of Chicago . Taft 's proposed Midway Plaisance beautification plan included two possible commemoration themes . His first choice was to honor the memory of the World 's Columbian Exposition that had been held in Jackson Park in 1893 . His alternative was to commemorate the centennial of the 1814 Treaty of Ghent " marking a century of perfect understanding between England and America " . Since other plans to commemorate the Exposition were under way , the second theme choice was adopted as the justification for a second Taft commission from the Ferguson Fund . Contemporary newspaper accounts anticipated that Taft 's entire Midway beautification plan would be approved easily . 
 Taft 's initial commission from the trust was limited to the creation of a full @-@ sized plaster model of Fountain of Time , under a five @-@ year $ 10 @,@ 000 ( $ 239 @,@ 428 ) annual installment contract signed on February 6 , 1913 . This would enable the model to be evaluated in 1918 . Taft first created a 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) quarter @-@ scale model which received the Trustees ' approval in May 1915 . He eventually produced his full @-@ scale plaster model , 100 feet ( 30 @.@ 5 m ) in width peaking in the center , with an equestrian warrior and a robed model of Father Time with a height of 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) . The installation of this model near its intended location was delayed by Taft 's World War I service with the Y.M.C.A. in France as part of a corps of entertainers and lecturers , but was completed in 1920 . However , Taft 's wider vision of a Chicago school of sculpture , analogous to other philosophical Chicago schools such as the contemporaneous Chicago school of architecture style , had lost momentum after the 1913 dedication of his Fountain of the Great Lakes . The Beaux Arts style had become dated ; instead of funding Taft 's large @-@ scale Midway Plaisance beautification plan , and providing the originally planned granite , bronze or Georgia marble materials , the trust only allocated sufficient funds and support for a concrete sculpture . 
 = = Location and installation = = 
 Time is in the Chicago Park District , in the Washington Park community area on Chicago 's South Side , near the Midway Plaisance . This location , adjoining the University of Chicago campus directly to the East , makes the sculpture a contributing structure to the Washington Park federal Registered Historic District , listed on the National Register of Historic Places . Time is considered to be the most important piece of monumental art in the Park District , which hosts over 100 art works . Its importance stems from its sculptor , its message , the era in which it was created , and the design of its reflecting pool by Howard Van Doren Shaw . Robert Jones , director of design and construction for the Art Institute of Chicago at the time , stated in 1999 that Time was the first finished art piece to be made of any type of concrete . 
 The sculpture is located a few blocks from Taft 's studio , the Lorado Taft Midway Studios , now a Chicago Landmark and National Historic Landmark , located at 60th Street and Ingleside Avenue . Other notable sculptures nearby include Henry Moore 's National Historic Landmark Nuclear Energy , which is on the site of the first self @-@ sustaining nuclear reaction at the University of Chicago . Jackson Park , connected to Washington Park and Time by the Midway Plaisance , hosts the Chicago Landmark Statue of the Republic ; at one time the Midway Plaisance , Jackson Park and Washington Park were jointly known as " South Park " . 
 There is little agreement on the dimensions of Time , with various sources describing it as between 102 to 127 feet ( 31 @.@ 1 to 38 @.@ 7 m ) long . One of the few precise estimates describes it as 126 feet 10 inches ( 38 @.@ 7 m ) long , 23 feet 6 inches ( 7 @.@ 2 m ) wide and 24 feet ( 7 @.@ 3 m ) tall . The sources are often unclear about whether they are describing the width of the reflecting pool from exterior wall to exterior wall , the width of the water within the reflecting pool 's interior walls , the width of the base of the sculpted mass of humanity , the width of the sculpted masses themselves , or the width of the parcel of land upon which Time is built . 
 Water began running in the completed sculpture on September 1 , 1920 , although it was not dedicated to the city until November 15 , 1922 . University of Chicago President Harry Pratt Judson delivered an address at the dedication ceremony at the Midway Plaisance , before contributions from Taft . President of the B.F. Ferguson Trust Charles Hutchinson , and John Barton Payne , President of the South Park Board . 
 = = Design and realization = = 
 The sculpture is made of a form of hollow @-@ cast concrete , reinforced with steel . It was cast in a 4 @,@ 500 @-@ piece mold , using 250 short tons ( 230 t ) of a material described as " concrete @-@ like " , which incorporated pebbles from the Potomac River . This composite material was an innovation at the time . For years , John Joseph Earley of Washington , DC , had used <unk> that seemed durable in the face of elements such as the weather and urban soot and grime . He had determined that by adding crushed pebbles he could create a new concrete mixture more durable than limestone but cheaper than marble or bronze . The reflection from the silica of the crushed stones complemented the durability with artistic beauty ; the same material was used at Chicago 's Fine Arts Building . 
 The sculpture depicts a hooded Father Time carrying a scythe , and watching over a parade of 100 figures arranged in an ellipse , with an overall pyramidal geometry . The allegorical procession depicts the entire spectrum of humanity at various stages of life . The contemporary 1920s Chicago Daily Tribune described the figures as " heroic " , and that choice of adjective has stayed with the piece . The figures are said to be passing in review as they rush through the stages of life , and include soldiers , frolicking children and kissing couples . Father Time is described in various newspaper articles as " huge " , " weird " , and " dominant " . Other Tribune critics described Time as a " pet atrocity " of Taft in large part due to its ugliness . One critic described the white figures as reminiscent of false teeth smiling across the end of the Midway . 
 Time commemorates the first 100 years of peace between the United States and Great Britain after the Treaty of Ghent concluded the War of 1812 on December 24 , 1814 . The design was inspired by the poem " Paradox of Time " by Henry Austin Dobson : " Time goes , you say ? Ah no , Alas , time stays , we go " . Time 's theme has been compared to Shakespeare 's All the world 's a stage monologue in As You Like It , which describes the seven ages of man : infant , schoolboy , lover , soldier , justice , old age , and dementia . Taft 's figures represent birth , the struggle for existence , love , family life , religion , poetry , and war . 
 Although most of the figures are generic representations of human forms in various walks and stages of life , Taft included himself , with one of his assistants following him , along the west side of the sculpture . He is portrayed wearing a smock , with his head bowed and hands clasped behind his back . His daughters served as models for some of the figures . 
 Taft is now better remembered for his books , such as The History of American Sculpture ( 1903 ) , regarded as the first comprehensive work on the subject . However , in his day he was well known for portraits and allegorical public sculpture , of which Fountain of Time is a prime example . It was produced in the period following his assignment to design sculptures for William Le Baron Jenney 's 1893 Horticultural Building for the World 's Columbian Exposition . During this period he designed several large @-@ scale public works , including Fountain of the Great Lakes . Taft resided in Illinois for most of his life and worked in the Midway Studios starting in 1906 . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 Designed without expansion joints , Time is one of a small number of outdoor sculptures made of reinforced pebble / concrete aggregate , few of which have been created since the 1930s . In 1936 , Time 's weather @-@ related cracks were repaired ; further work occurred in 1955 . The sculpture 's subsequent repairs were followed by a rededication celebration in 1966 . Although the sculpture received regular maintenance , early repair crews often did more harm than good , by using techniques such as sandblasting and patching cracks with rigid materials . 
 By the 1980s the sculpture was crumbling ; cracks had developed , details of the figures had worn away , and moisture had eroded the internal structure . In wintertime the fountain had to be protected by a tarp . Weather , air pollution , and vandalism meant that hundreds of thousands of dollars were now needed for restoration . The Chicago Park District , University of Chicago , and Art Institute of Chicago conservators all sponsored restoration work , including drying out the cavity of the hollow sculpture , removal of the deteriorated substructure , a newly designed ventilation system within the piece , a protective exterior coating , and repairs to the reflecting pool . In 1989 Chicago Park District allocated $ 150 @,@ 000 to the repair project , which amount was matched by the Ferguson fund . By the end of 1991 , the Park District had collected $ 320 @,@ 000 of the $ 520 @,@ 000 estimated repair costs from public and private funds , although in 1994 the sculpture still awaited repair . 
 By early 1997 , after almost two decades of activity , the only repairs completed were phase one of the air ventilation system to <unk> the hollow base , the drainage pipes and a new inner roof . Plans now included the erection of a temporary two @-@ story metal building to protect all but the giant Father Time from the harsh winters and to facilitate year @-@ round repair ; the reinforcement of corroded steel interior portions ; the replacement of inconsistent patches ; the substitution of engineered spacing for natural cracks , and finally , hand @-@ brushed concrete <unk> . The temporary building was budgeted at $ 270 @,@ 000 ; the city spent a total of $ 450 @,@ 000 on repairs approved by the Park District that year . 
 On April 19 , 1999 , the $ 1 @.@ 6 million , two @-@ year phase two restoration began , scheduled for completion by May 2001 . Five workers began repairing the cracks , killing biological growth , removing calcium deposits and pollution @-@ blackened gypsum , and coating the 10 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 930 m2 ) surface with a combination of lime putty , adobe cement and sand . The inoperable reflecting pool was not repaired in this phase . Although this phase was completed in 2001 , its effects were not visible until the following year , when the temporary protective structure was unveiled . The repairs were expected to sustain the sculpture for about 30 – 50 years before any further repairs would be necessary . 
 In 2003 , the National Endowment for the Arts committed $ 250 @,@ 000 to the Park District for the conservation and restoration of the reflecting pool . In 2004 , the University of Chicago contributed $ 100 @,@ 000 and the Park District Board $ 845 @,@ 000 to repair the pool and its water circulation system . This work was carried out in the summer of 2005 at a slightly reduced budget , and the fountain was filled with water for the first time in over fifty years . In 2007 , efforts began to add lighting . That same year the sculpture was nominated by Partners in Preservation , a fund for the preservation of historic sites , backed by the National Trust for Historic Preservation and American Express . In a widely publicized contest that included open house events where the public could tour and learn about the competing historic sites , $ 1 million was available for preservation efforts in the Chicago metropolitan area , but the fountain was not one of the 15 winning candidates . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 ' ' Fountain of Time , ' ' before restoration 
 ' ' Fountain of Time , ' ' after restoration ( August 2007 ) 
 = = Fountain of Creation = = 
 Time was intended to be matched by a sister fountain , Fountain of Creation , on the opposite end of the Midway . Work was begun but was never completed . The finished portions of Fountain of Creation , depicting figures from the Greek legend of the repopulation of earth after the great flood , are considered Taft 's final work , and were given to University of Illinois at Urbana @-@ Champaign , his alma mater . The four surviving elements are figures ranging in height from 5 to 7 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 to 2 @.@ 1 m ) , and are collectively named Sons and Daughters of <unk> and Pyrrha . Two of these elements stand outside the entrance to the university 's Main Library , and two others are located at the south side of Foellinger Auditorium . 
 = Blowing from a gun = 
 Blowing from a gun was a method of execution in which the victim is typically tied to the mouth of a cannon and the cannon is fired . George Carter Stent describes the process as follows : 
 The prisoner is generally tied to a gun with the upper part of the small of his back resting against the muzzle . When the gun is fired , his head is seen to go straight up into the air some forty or fifty feet ; the arms fly off right and left , high up in the air , and fall at , perhaps , a hundred yards distance ; the legs drop to the ground beneath the muzzle of the gun ; and the body is literally blown away altogether , not a vestige being seen . 
 Blowing from a gun was a reported means of execution as long ago as the 16th century , by the Mughal Empire , and was used until the 20th century . The method was utilized by Portuguese colonialists in the 16th and 17th centuries , from as early as 1509 across their empire from Ceylon ( modern day Sri Lanka ) to Mozambique to Brazil . The Mughals used the method throughout the 17th century and into the 18th , particularly against rebels . 
 Arguably , the nation most well known to have implemented this type of execution was the British Empire , in its role as paramount power in India , and in particular as a punishment for native soldiers found guilty of mutiny or desertion . Using the methods previously practised by the Mughals , the British began implementing blowing from guns in the latter half of the 18th century , with the most intense period of use being during the 1857 sepoy mutiny , when both the British and the rebelling sepoys used it frequently . 
 The practice is said to have been exceptionally used in Afghanistan in 1930 , against 11 <unk> rebels . 
 = = Rituals = = 
 A commonly reported method of blowing a man from a gun is to tie him in front of the muzzle of the gun and then have him shot . Loading the cannon with an actual cannonball is on occasion reported ; but , more commonly , the use of blank cartridge or grapeshot is attested . The following description of the manner of tying up the convicted is from Afghanistan , 7 July 1839 , ordered by Shuja Shah , during the campaign against Dost Mohammad Khan : 
 The three men were then tied with ropes to the guns , their backs against the muzzle . The rope , fastened to one of the spokes of the wheel , passed with a knot round the arms , over the muzzle of the gun , round the other arm , and then to the spoke of the opposite wheel , which kept the body fixed . 
 Although immobilizing a victim in front of a gun before firing the cannon is by far the most reported method , a case from Istanbul in 1596 alleges that the victim was actually put into the gun and executed in that manner . Some reports exist that attest that on occasion , people were fastened to rockets and blown into the air . This is said to have occurred for a Brahmin under Hyder Ali 's reign ( 1761 – 1782 ) , and also , in an 1800 treason case , in the Maratha Empire . 
 = = Problems with the method = = 
 Things did not always work out according to plan at such executions ; at a mass execution at Firozpur in 1857 , there was an order that blank cartridge should be used , but some loaded with grapeshot instead . Several of the spectators facing the cannons were hit by the grapeshot and some had to amputate limbs as a result . In addition , some of the soldiers had not been withdrawn properly and sustained damages by being hit by whizzing pieces of flesh and bone . In another case , a soldier who was to be shot managed to fall down just as the shot went off , with the resulting scene taking place : 
 One wretched fellow slipped from the rope by which he was tied to the guns just before the explosion , and his arm was nearly set on fire . While hanging in his agony under the gun , a sergeant applied a pistol to his head ; and three times the cap snapped , the man each time wincing from the expected shot . At last a rifle was fired into the back of his head , and the blood poured out of the nose and mouth like water from a briskly handled pump . This was the most horrible sight of all . I have seen death in all its forms , but never anything to equal this man 's end . 
 Others reported with shudders how birds of prey circled above the execution place and swooped down to catch pieces of human flesh in the air , while others were nauseated by the dogs loitering about the place of execution and rushing to the scene to devour some of the " delicacies " spread around as a result of the execution . 
 = = Mughal Empire = = 
 Blowing from a gun as a method of execution has a long and varied history on the Indian sub @-@ continent , and many reports from the mid @-@ 18th century and onwards testify to its varied use . The execution method was used during rebellions and as punishment for a variety of crimes . Here , a focus is chosen upon the Mughal tradition of blowing from guns as a local tradition preceding , for example , the British tradition on the same sub @-@ continent . 
 Several historians note that blowing people from the guns as a method of execution was an " old Mughal punishment " on the Indian sub @-@ continent . Just prior to the institution of the reign of the first Mughal emperor , Babur , his son Humayun is said to have blown from guns 100 Afghan prisoners on 6 March 1526 , in one incident of his father 's many struggles against the Lodi dynasty . During the latter half of the 17th century , members of the Jat people in Northern India rebelled and raided against the Mughal Empire , and the emperor Aurangzeb is said in one account to have ordered one of their leaders blown from a gun . <unk> Singh , said to have been the last Hindu chief of <unk> , close to Aurangabad in today 's Bihar state , was reportedly taken by an unnamed Mughal emperor to Aurungabad , and blown from a gun . The Sikh rebel Banda Singh Bahadur was finally vanquished in 1716 by the emperor <unk> , and after his execution , Banda 's son was ordered to be " blown to bits by a cannon " . 
 While the preceding cases are examples of rebels or military adversaries being blown from guns , the Mughal era also contained a few examples of using this form of execution for other types of perceived crime . For example , in a rather anecdotal story from the times of Jahangir ( r . 1605 – 1627 ) , the emperor had six mullahs blown from guns , for having consented to , and given approval of , the forcible abduction and marriage of a Hindu girl to a Muslim officer . In 1714 , thieves were a severe annoyance to a marching army ; a trap was made , and two thieves caught by the concealed guards were later blown from guns . During a siege in 1719 , the problem of deserters was eventually solved for the commander of the Mughal army by blowing four deserters caught in the act from guns , in presence of his troops . 
 = = Portuguese Empire = = 
 Portuguese colonialists are , in several accounts , charged with having used blowing from a gun as a form of capital punishment in many of their colonies . A short review follows : 
 = = = Sri Lanka = = = 
 The Portuguese explorer Francisco de Almeida is reported to have blown many individuals from guns at Ceylon , around 1509 . During the Dutch siege of Colombo in 1656 , the city population endured extreme famine . One nursing mother became so starved that her production of milk stopped , and her infant was dying . She chose to kill it , and eat it . Once the Portuguese general became aware of her act of cannibalism , he ordered her blown from a gun , but in this particular instance , the clergy and the principal citizens dissuaded him from carrying out the act . 
 = = = Mozambique = = = 
 During explorer Francisco Barreto 's 1569 – 73 campaign in Monomotapa , he at one time imprisoned some 50 Muslim individuals , and had them " impaled , blown from mortars , torn apart on tree @-@ trunks , axed or shot " . In mid @-@ 18th @-@ century Tete , in north @-@ western Portuguese Mozambique , the capital punishment for slaves are said to have been to be blown from guns , and , in the first decade of the 19th century , it is reported that an inveterate raider chief was caught by the Portuguese and blown from a gun . 
 = = = Brazil = = = 
 In 1618 Brazil , native resistance against the Portuguese was unshaken , although a leader of them , Amaro , was taken prisoner and blown from a gun . 
 = = British India = = 
 = = = Before 1857 = = = 
 Blowing from a gun as a method of execution was used , perhaps most well known , by British troops during the Indian Rebellion of 1857 . The British , however , had a long tradition prior to the 1857 rebellion of executing sepoys found guilty of mutiny or desertion in this manner . According to one historian , the British tradition began in 1760 , when the government examined the modes of capital punishment in use . In the district of the 24 <unk> , it was found that the common military mode of capital punishment was flogging to death . Regarding blowing from a gun as an old Mughal punishment , the government opted for this technique , as being , relative to death by flogging , more deterrent , more public and more humane . Already in 1761 , orders were given in <unk> " to fire off at the mouth of a cannon the leader of the thieves who was made prisoner , that others may be deterred " . Technically , in cases of court @-@ martial , it seems that until 1857 the courts were composed of native officers rather than British , but it is added : " although they are presided over , and generally led and ruled , by the superintending officer , whose duty , however , is merely to transcribe the evidence , and assist the native officers with advice and counsel " . 
 In March 1764 , a subedar ( native officer ) thought to entice his troops over to the enemy ; he was court @-@ martialed and blown from a gun in front of the troops . In September the same year , major Hector Munro executed 24 or 25 " ring leaders " who caused a battalion to desert ( the desertion being on account of " lack of rewards " , " scarcity of provisions " and problems with climate and disease ) . <unk> of the execution , one commenter said : " no disposition to mutiny was thenceforth manifested " . In 1775 , a commandant <unk> Sahib incited his men not to embark for Bombay . <unk> Sahib was blown from a gun , and the men embarked to Bombay without causing more trouble for the British . In 1782 , mutinies broke out in Bardhaman and Barrackpore . Three mutineers were sentenced to death by the court in Bardhaman , 2 of whom to be blown from a gun , the last to be hanged . In the Barrackpore trials , 4 of the 5 on trial were sentenced to be blown from a gun , while the last was to receive a thousand lashes and " to be drummed out of the cantonments with a rope around his neck " . During the Third Anglo @-@ Mysore War ( 1789 – 1792 ) , six regiments mutinied over arrears of pay and held their officers confined . When order was restored , two of the most active were blown from guns . Not only mutineers were blown from guns , but also soldiers found guilty of desertion , as is shown from a few cases in 1781 and 1783 . 
 Not only sepoys were executed by being blown from a gun . In 1798 , mutiny broke out in the British unit 1st battalion of the Madras artillery . One British soldier was condemned to be blown from a gun . This , however , seems to have been exceptional , and one historian says that the soldier Forster is the only European on record to have been blown from a gun by the British authorities . 
 In 1804 , during a military engagement , the troops under lieutenant Birch 's command refused to quit the ground of their encampment . Colonel Burn deemed harsh measures were necessary , convened a court @-@ martial , and two of the officers involved were blown from guns and 9 others " severely flogged " . With full approval of the action , the writer observes : “ a measure which , there is every reason to believe , had the best effect , as the corps behaved during the subsequent siege with the greatest steadiness and propriety ” . 
 In the 1806 Vellore Mutiny , beginning with a night massacre of British officers and soldiers , with many sepoys killed during the suppression , 6 individuals were sentenced to be blown from the guns . In 1812 , a plot was discovered at Travancore to kill the European officers ; two ring leaders were blown from the guns , and several others were hanged . In 1819 , six deserters who had joined the ousted rajah of the annexed Kingdom of Nagpur were apprehended by the British and were blown from the guns on 7 February . In 1832 Bangalore , a conspiracy allegedly designed to exterminate all Europeans was discovered . Out of some 100 implicated , 4 were sentenced to be blown from the guns , two others to be shot . 
 Sometimes , although a person was condemned to death , he might hope for a pardon or a commuting of the punishment . In 1784 , a regiment mutinied over lack of pay . Lieutenant General Laing suppressed the rebels and ordered twelve to be blown from guns . The last of the twelve was very lucky , however : Bound to the cannon 's mouth , he had to endure three times that the fuse burnt out . He then asked Lieutenant General Laing whether he was really destined to die in this manner , and Laing chose to pardon him . In 1795 Midnapore , 5 sepoys were condemned in court @-@ martial to be blown from guns on account of mutiny , 3 others to be hanged . Their cases were appealed , however , and their sentences were commuted to be dismissed from service instead . In the 1824 mutiny at Barrackpore , occasioned by the resentment of sepoys to being shipped to the front in the First Anglo @-@ Burmese War , four days after the bloody suppression of the mutiny , one of the leaders , <unk> <unk> of the 47th regiment was found hiding , disguised as a <unk> . In the ensuing court @-@ martial , he was condemned to be blown from a gun , but instead he was hung in chains , and after his death his body was placed in a gibbet for a few months . In 1836 , a sepoy was found guilty of having fled before the enemy and abandoned his European officers . <unk> was condemned to be blown from a gun , but the sentence was commuted into " transportation beyond the sea " . 
 = = = The Great Rebellion = = = 
 To appreciate the scale and frequency of the executions made by the British during the 1857 insurrection , one may , for example , look at the reports of incidents given in merely a single journal , " Allen 's Indian Mail " , for the year 1857 . 
 On 8 June , two sepoys from the 35th light Infantry were blown from guns . 10 June , in Ludhiana , Peshawar , some 40 from the 54th regiment were blown from guns . On 13 June , ten sepoys from the 45th Regiment at Firozpur were blown from guns , two hanged . The same day , in Ambala , 10 sepoys from the 54th regiment suffered the same fate . The 26th of the same month , in Aurungabad , 1 was blown from a gun , 1 hanged , and 3 were shot . On 8 July , in Jhelum , it is assumed that captured rebels would be blown away . On the 19th , Aurungabad , 1 was blown away , 2 shot . On 5 September , <unk> , 6 were blown away . On 17 September , Multan , 1 was blown away , 121 were summarily executed . On 23 September , in Karachi , 1 was blown away , 7 were hanged and 20 deported . ( The local body count on court @-@ martialed individuals then came to 4 blown away , 14 hanged , 22 deported and 3 beheadings . ) At the end of October , in Rohilkhand near Agra , 1 was blown away . On 16 November , Bombay , two sepoys from the 10th regiment were blown away . 
 As an example of official statistics , rather than a collection of newspaper reports , in an 1859 paper to the House of Commons of the United Kingdom on the rebellion in the Peshawar Valley in the Punjab , for the period May – September 1857 , 523 were recorded executed , of them 459 shot by musketry , 20 hanged ( 13 for desertion ) and the last 44 blown from a gun . Of those 44 , 4 were executed on charges of desertion , rather than mutiny . Official July – November statistics for the area about Agra says that of 78 who were given capital sentences , two had their sentence commuted into imprisonment , whereas 4 were blown from guns . Other official statistics , this time from Indore , state that , of 393 sepoys officially punished , 32 were executed , 21 of them by being blown from guns . 
 The preceding cases are examples of execution after formal court martial , and do not , therefore , record deaths as occurring during battle or during informal executions or massacres . 
 Several British were convinced that the sepoy insurgents had blown British women from guns . A specific case , mentioned by several sources , concerns that of Mr. and Mrs. Birch , Mrs. <unk> and Mrs. <unk> , all of whom were said to have been blown from guns at Fatehgarh . 
 = = = After 1857 = = = 
 The Rebellion of 1857 was not the last time that British military used blowing from a cannon as an execution method . In 1871 , for example , 65 members of the Sikh sect <unk> or <unk> were executed by the military , by being blown from guns . 
 = = Afghanistan = = 
 Within Afghanistan , a tradition of using blowing from a gun as capital punishment is attested from the early nineteenth century up to 1930 . Some examples are following : 
 = = = Early cases = = = 
 In 1802 , the forces of Mahmud Shah Durrani inflicted a crushing defeat on the Ghilzai tribes , and to discourage further aggression , he ordered one leader and his two sons blown from guns , as well as building a minaret out of Ghilzai skulls . In 1803 , when Shah <unk> Durrani ousted his half @-@ brother Mahmud from power , he revenged himself on an ally of Mahmud , Ashik , by blowing him from a gun for having captured by means of treachery <unk> 's and Mahmud 's half @-@ brother Zaman Shah Durrani , who had been king of the Durrani Empire prior to having been ousted by Mahmud in 1800 . 
 = = = The iron emir , 1880 – 1901 = = = 
 In 1880 , Abdur Rahman Khan became emir of Afghanistan , and he swiftly gained the nickname " the iron emir " for his perceived brutality and strong rule . For example , one source estimates that , during his 20 years on the throne , an average of 5 @,@ 000 executions a year took place , several by blowing from guns . For example , in December 1889 alone , 24 are recorded as having been blown from guns , and many others executed in other ways . 
 = = = Tajik reign of terror , 1929 = = = 
 In January 1929 , a new cycle of extreme violence broke out in Afghanistan when the Tajik <unk> <unk> became emir . The British minister Humphreys wrote : " None was safe , houses were pillaged indiscriminately , women were ravished and a reign of terror was established unprecedented in the annals of bloody Afghan history " . Political opponents were often blown from guns or executed in other ways . Habibullah 's regime was toppled in October 1929 , and then the <unk> Tajiks were persecuted . An article in The New York Times from 6 April 1930 was headlined with : " Eleven Afghans Blown from Guns at Kabul " . 
 = = In fiction = = 
 In Flashman in the Great Game , written by George MacDonald Fraser and set during the 1857 Indian Rebellion , Harry Flashman , a British Army officer who is impersonating an Indian , is knocked unconscious and captured during a British attack on the camp of Rani <unk> . Flashman is assumed to be a rebel and awakens gagged and tied over the muzzle of a gun . He narrowly manages to avoid execution and has the rebels who were to be executed alongside him freed , an uncharacteristically humane act for a character usually portrayed as a liar , a bully and a scoundrel . 
 = Little Orphant Annie = 
 " Little Orphant Annie " is an 1885 poem written by James Whitcomb Riley and published by the Bowen @-@ Merrill Company . First titled " The Elf Child " , Riley changed the name to " Little Orphant Allie " at its third printing ; however , a typecasting error during printing renamed the poem to its current form . Known as the " Hoosier poet " , Riley wrote the rhymes in nineteenth century Hoosier dialect . As one of his most well known poems , it served as the inspiration for the character Little Orphan Annie upon whom was based a comic strip , plays , radio programs , television shows , and movies . 
 The subject was inspired by Mary Alice " Allie " Smith , an orphan living in the Riley home during her childhood . The poem contains four stanzas ; the first introduces Annie and the second and third are stories she is telling to young children . Each story tells of a bad child who is snatched away by goblins as a result of their misbehavior . The underlying moral and warning is announced in the final stanza , telling children that they should obey their parents and be kind to the unfortunate , lest they suffer the same fate . 
 = = Background = = 
 James Whitcomb Riley was a poet who achieved national fame in the United States during late nineteenth and early twentieth century . " Little Orphant Annie " is one of Whitcomb 's most well known poems . Originally published in the Indianapolis Journal on November 15 , 1885 under the title " The Elf Child " , the poem was inspired by a girl named Mary Alice " Allie " Smith . 
 Mary Alice Smith was born near Liberty , Union County Indiana 25 September 1850 . She lived on a small farm with her parents until ( as one story goes ) both parents died when she was about nine years old some stories say that Mary 's mother died with she was very young and her father , Peter Smith , died when she was ten . Other evidence points to her father being incarcerated at the time . What ever the cause she was considered an orphan . Mary 's uncle , a John Rittenhouse , came to Union County and took the young orphan to his home in Greenfield where he " dressed her in black " and " bound her out to earn her board and keep " . Mary Alice was taken in by Captain Reuben Riley as a " bound " servant to help his wife Elizabeth Riley with the housework and her four children ; John , James , Elva May and Alex . As was customary at that time , she worked alongside the family to earn her board . In the evening hours , she often told stories to the younger children , including Riley . The family called her a " Guest " not a servant and treated her like she was part of their family . Smith did not learn she was the inspiration for the character until the 1910s when she visited with Riley . 
 Riley had previously presented a fictionalized version of Mary Alice Smith in his short story “ Where Is Mary Alice Smith ? , ” published in The Indianapolis Journal of 30 September 1882 . In it , Mary Alice arrives at her benefactor family ’ s home and wastes no time in telling the children a grisly story of murder by decapitation and then later introduces them to her soldier friend Dave who is soon killed upon going off to war . The plot of this short story was heavily incorporated into the 1918 movie adaptation as well as Johnny Gruelle ’ s 1921 storybook . 
 Both “ The Elf Child ” and “ Where Is Mary Alice Smith ? ” were printed in book form for the first time in 1885 in The Boss Girl . 
 “ The Elf Child ” kept its original title in its first two printings , but Riley decided to change its title to " Little Orphant Allie " in an 1889 printing . The printing house incorrectly cast the typeset during the printing , unintentionally renaming the poem to " Little Orphant Annie " . Riley at first contacted the printing house to have the error corrected , but decided to keep the misprint because of the poem 's growing popularity . 
 When reprinted in The Orphant Annie Book in 1908 , the poem was given an additional , introductory verse ( “ Little Orphant Annie she knows riddles , rhymes and things ! … ” ) . 
 During the 1910s and 1920s , the title became the inspiration for the names of Little Orphan Annie and the Raggedy Ann doll , created by fellow Indiana native Johnny Gruelle . The rhyme 's popularity led it to being reprinted many times . It was later compiled with a number of other children 's poems in an illustrated book and sold . 
 The verses of the poem detail the scary stories told by Annie when her housework was done , repeating the phrase " An ' the Gobble @-@ uns ' at gits you ef you don 't watch out ! . " [ sic ] It was popular among children , and many of the letters Whitcomb received from children commented on the poem . It remains a favorite among children in Indiana and is often associated with Halloween celebrations . 
 = = Poem = = 
 Riley recorded readings of several of his poems for the phonograph during the early twentieth century . Only four of the readings were ever released to the public ; one was " Little Orphant Annie " . Written in nineteenth century Hoosier dialect , the words can be difficult to read in modern times ; however , its style helped feed its popularity at the time of its composition . Riley achieved fame not just for writing poetry , but also from his readings . Like most of his poetry , " Little Orphant Annie " was written to achieve the best effect when read aloud . 
 The poem consists of four stanzas , each with twelve lines . Riley dedicated his poem " to all the little ones , " which served as an introduction to draw the attention of his audience when read aloud . The alliteration , parallels , phonetic <unk> and onomatopoeia add effects to the rhymes that become more detectable when read aloud . The exclamatory refrain ending each stanza is spoken with more emphasis . The poem is written in the first person and in a regular iambic meter . It begins by introducing Annie , and then sets a mood of excitement by describing the children eagerly gathering to hear her stories . The next three stanzas are each a story which Annie tells the children . Each story tells of a bad child who is snatched away by goblins and has an underlying moral which is announced in the final stanza , encouraging children to obey their parents and teachers , help their loved ones , and care for the poor and disadvantaged . 
 Little Orphant Annie 
 Little Orphant Annie 's come to our house to stay , 
 An ' wash the cups an ' saucers up , an ' brush the crumbs away , 
 An ' shoo the chickens off the porch , an ' dust the hearth , an ' sweep , 
 An ' make the fire , an ' bake the bread , an ' earn her board @-@ an ' <unk> ; 
 An ' all us other children , when the supper @-@ things is done , 
 We set around the kitchen fire an ' has the <unk> fun 
 A @-@ list 'nin ' to the witch @-@ tales ' at Annie tells about , 
 An ' the Gobble @-@ uns ' at gits you 
 Ef you 
 Don 't 
 Watch 
 Out ! 
 <unk> they wuz a little boy wouldn 't say his prayers , -- 
 An ' when he went to bed at night , away up @-@ stairs , 
 His Mammy <unk> him holler , an ' his Daddy <unk> him bawl , 
 An ' when they turn 't the <unk> down , he <unk> 't there at all ! 
 An ' they <unk> him in the rafter @-@ room , an ' <unk> @-@ hole , an ' press , 
 An ' <unk> him up the <unk> @-@ flue , an ' ever ' <unk> , I guess ; 
 But all they ever found wuz <unk> his pants an ' roundabout : -- 
 An ' the Gobble @-@ uns ' ll git you 
 Ef you 
 Don 't 
 Watch 
 Out ! 
 An ' one time a little girl ' ud <unk> laugh an ' grin , 
 An ' make fun of ever ' one , an ' all her blood @-@ an ' <unk> ; 
 An ' <unk> , when they was " company , " an ' ole folks wuz there , 
 She mocked ' em an ' shocked ' em , an ' said she didn 't care ! 
 An ' <unk> as she kicked her heels , an ' turn 't to run an ' hide , 
 They wuz two great big Black Things a @-@ standin ' by her side , 
 An ' they snatched her through the <unk> ' ' fore she knowed what she 's about ! 
 An ' the Gobble @-@ uns ' ll git you 
 Ef you 
 Don 't 
 Watch 
 Out ! 
 An ' little Orphant Annie says , when the blaze is blue , 
 An ' the lamp @-@ wick sputters , an ' the wind goes woo @-@ oo ! 
 An ' you hear the crickets quit , an ' the moon is gray , 
 An ' the <unk> ' <unk> in dew is all <unk> away , -- 
 You better mind yer <unk> , an ' yer <unk> fond an ' dear , 
 An ' <unk> them ' at loves you , an ' dry the <unk> 's tear , 
 An ' he <unk> the pore an ' needy ones ' at clusters all about , 
 Er the Gobble @-@ uns ' ll git you 
 Ef you 
 Don 't 
 Watch 
 Out ! 
 = = Film adaptations = = 
 " Little Orphant Annie " was made into a silent film by the Selig Polyscope Company in 1918 , featuring Colleen Moore as Annie . She had previously been in A Hoosier Romance , also based on Riley 's work . Riley also appeared in the film as the silent narrator . 
 A short animated film based on the poem was released by <unk> studio in Russia in 1992 , directed by <unk> <unk> . The poem was translated into Russian by Oleg <unk> . 
 = = Derivative work = = 
 In The Orphant Annie Story Book ( 1921 ) , author Johnny Gruelle augments the character ’ s background story and goes to great lengths to soften her image , portraying her as telling pleasant tales of fairies , gnomes and anthropomorphic animals rather than her characteristic horror stories . 
 = = In Popular Culture = = 
 In the TV series , Getting On ( U.S. TV series ) the character of Birdy Lamb recites part of the poem at the end of Episode 3 of Season 3 . 
 = Malin Åkerman = 
 Malin Maria Åkerman ( Swedish pronunciation : [ <unk> ² <unk> ] ; born May 12 , 1978 ) is a Swedish Canadian actress , model and singer . She became known for making appearances in several Canadian productions . In the early 2000s , she had many television and film parts , including The Utopian Society ( 2003 ) and Harold & Kumar Go to White Castle ( 2004 ) . Following a supporting role on the comedy series The Comeback ( 2005 ) , Åkerman gained her first starring roles in the feature films The Heartbreak Kid ( 2007 ) and 27 Dresses ( 2008 ) . 
 Åkerman played Silk Spectre II in the 2009 superhero film Watchmen , a role for which she was nominated for a Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress . The same year , she had supporting and starring roles in both The Proposal and Couples Retreat , two commercial hits that garnered mixed to negative reviews . In 2010 , she became part of the main cast on the comedy series Childrens Hospital . She starred in four feature films in 2012 , including the comedy Wanderlust and the musical film Rock of Ages . In 2012 , she had a recurring role on the sitcom Suburgatory and starred in the short @-@ lived comedy series Trophy Wife from 2013 to 2014 , both of which aired on ABC . 
 Apart from acting and occasional modelling , Åkerman had a brief music career as the lead vocalist for alternative rock band The Petalstones , but eventually left to focus on her acting career . She was married to the band 's drummer Roberto Zincone from 2007 until 2013 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Åkerman was born in Stockholm , Sweden , to aerobics teacher and part @-@ time model Pia ( née Sundström ) and insurance broker Magnus Åkerman . She has one sister , singer Jennifer Åkerman . When she was two years old , the family moved to Canada after her father was offered a job there . Four years later , her parents divorced , and her father moved back to Sweden . Both of her parents remarried , giving Åkerman one half @-@ brother and two half @-@ sisters . After her mother remarried , they moved to Niagara @-@ on @-@ the @-@ Lake , Ontario . Later in her teenage years , her mother divorced again . Åkerman attended many different schools , including Sir Winston Churchill Secondary School in St. Catharines , Ontario . She once attended a Catholic school , though she was raised as a Buddhist . She has recalled some portions of her childhood as " painful " , explaining that " I loved my father very much and I only got to see him during the school holidays . But I think it was an advantage that they split up when I was very young , so I could get used to it . " She visited her father in <unk> , Sweden , during school breaks and talked to him regularly over the phone . She cites her parents as " supportive , positive influences " in her life . 
 As a child , Åkerman had no plans to become an actress . Her mother introduced her to modelling while she was still in primary school , and she later landed several advertising campaign deals , but she decided to quit at age twelve . Four years later she returned to modelling after being discovered by Ford Models in a shopping mall in St. Catharines . She was signed to the agency and later won a contract with skincare company <unk> . She soon moved to Toronto while attending North Toronto Collegiate Institute and later on in her <unk> year , Dante Alighieri Academy . At the age of eighteen , inspired by the " helplessness " she sometimes felt during her childhood , she decided to become a child psychologist . She supported her education by modelling for television commercials and catalogue layouts . While studying for a year at York University in Toronto , she was simultaneously offered guest roles on television as a result of her exposure in commercials . She saw the acting gigs as further opportunities to pay for her education , but found herself enjoying it and decided to drop out of school to become an actress . She moved to Los Angeles , California in 2001 to pursue her acting career full @-@ time . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1997 – 2008 = = = 
 Åkerman made her acting debut on the Canadian science fiction series Earth : Final Conflict in 1997 , in a smaller role as a robot . She originally landed a role on an MTV pilot with Rachel McAdams , but the project was never picked up by the network . In 2000 , she guest starred on Relic Hunter and had a smaller role in the American film The Skulls . The following year , she made appearances on the Canada @-@ based series Doc and Twice in a Lifetime . In 2001 , she moved to Los Angeles , California in hopes of pursuing a broader acting career . At first , she worked as a waitress and stayed at a friend 's house . In 2002 , she received smaller role in the film The Utopian Society . The film was edited by Francesco <unk> , the guitarist for alternative rock band <unk> . <unk> asked Åkerman to help the band with song lyrics and later asked her to sing . Åkerman subsequently became the band 's singer , and they changed their name to The Petalstones . The band 's debut album , Stung , was released in August 2005 , but Åkerman eventually left to focus on her acting career , admitting that she " actually can 't sing " . She described her singing as " sort of a self @-@ made , self @-@ taught , if @-@ you @-@ can 't @-@ hit @-@ the @-@ note @-@ scream @-@ it kind of thing " . 
 In 2004 , she got a small role in the film Harold & Kumar Go to White Castle , but considered moving back to Canada as most of her auditions failed . She was then cast in a supporting role as <unk> on the HBO television series The Comeback , with Lisa Kudrow in the main role . Kudrow played a former sitcom star who tried to restart her career . Åkerman 's appearance on the show garnered media attention and resulted in her being offered more roles . A year later , she guest starred on an episode of Love Monkey and two episodes of Entourage . Before the Entourage episodes aired , she landed a role in the 2007 comedy film The Brothers Solomon . The film was a box office bomb and received largely critical reviews . 
 Åkerman signed up for a role opposite Ben Stiller in the comedy film The Heartbreak Kid , directed by the Farrelly Brothers , in 2006 . She played in the lead female role as Lila , the newly wedded wife of Stiller 's character . The film follows the couple 's honeymoon in Mexico , where Stiller 's character falls in love with another woman and realizes that the marriage was a mistake . A remake of the 1972 film of the same name , it was released in October 2007 to generally poor reviews , as critics deemed it " neither as daring nor as funny " as the directors ' earlier films . Åkerman 's performance garnered more positive reviews ; Desson Thomson of The Washington Post called her a " fabulous comic partner " to Stiller , while Roger Moore of Times Herald @-@ Record asserted that she had outperformed him . The film grossed $ 14 million in its opening weekend in the United States , and went on to gross $ 127 million globally . 
 In 2007 , Åkerman joined the cast of 27 Dresses , a romantic comedy film directed by Anne Fletcher with Katherine Heigl in the lead role . The film follows Heigl 's character Jane , who has always been the bridesmaid and dreams of her own wedding . Åkerman played Jane 's sister Tess . The film was shot during the summer of 2007 , and was released in January 2008 to weak critical reception as it was considered " clichéd and mostly forgettable " . The film was more successful commercially , with a gross of $ 160 million . Åkerman played the title role in Bye Bye Sally , a short film directed by Paul Leyden and based on Lisa <unk> 's short story Everybody Wins . The film premiered at the 2009 Newport Beach Film Festival . 
 = = = 2009 – 11 = = = 
 In 2009 , Åkerman starred as Silk Spectre II in the superhero film Watchmen , an adaptation of Alan Moore 's graphic novel of the same name . Directed by Zack Snyder , the feature film is set in an alternate reality in 1985 where a group of retired vigilantes investigate an apparent conspiracy against them . Snyder favoured Åkerman over other more well @-@ known actresses as he felt that they could not play such a serious part . Åkerman rehearsed with " months of hardcore training " and went on a very strict diet . She wore a brunette wig , high heels and an uncomfortable latex costume , which provided little protection when performing stunts , and she often bruised herself during filming . Åkerman stated that her character carries the emotion of the film as she is the only woman among several men . Premiering in February 2009 , the film received generally favourable reviews , and was a commercial success , grossing $ 185 million worldwide . Although Åkerman was nominated for a Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actress and a Teen Choice Award for her performance in the film , critics were generally negative towards her acting . 
 Åkerman appeared in the 2009 romantic comedy film The Proposal , starring Sandra Bullock and Ryan Reynolds in the lead roles . Åkerman played a supporting role as Gertrude , the ex @-@ girlfriend of Reynolds ' character . Although the film received mixed reviews , it went on to gross $ 317 million worldwide . Also in 2009 , Åkerman starred in the comedy film Couples Retreat , opposite Jon Favreau and Vince Vaughn . The film follows four couples as they travel to a tropical island resort for couples therapy . Åkerman played Ronnie , the wife of Vaughn 's part . She enjoyed playing a mother for the first time and tried to make her character as truthful as possible , which included dyeing her hair brown to not look like a " blonde bombshell " . The film premiered in theatres in October 2009 and grossed $ 34 million in its opening weekend in the United States , entering number one at the box office , and totalled $ 171 million worldwide . Reception for the film was mainly negative , although Åkerman 's performance was met with more positive reactions . 
 In 2010 , Åkerman co @-@ starred as Annie in the Josh Radnor @-@ directed comedy @-@ drama film <unk> . As her character has alopecia , Åkerman shaved off her eyebrows and wore a bald cap to cover her hair . She was originally offered a different part , but felt that she wanted to play Annie as it was different from her previous roles . The film premiered at the Sundance Film Festival in January 2010 and received an audience award for Favorite U.S. Drama . Reviews from critics were polarized , but Åkerman received praise . Later in 2010 , she guest starred on the How I Met Your Mother episode " The Wedding Bride " , and joined the cast of the currently ongoing Adult Swim comedy series Childrens Hospital . Playing the part of the promiscuous Dr. Valerie Flame ( which is itself a part portrayed by Swedish @-@ only speaking " actress " Ingrid Hagerstown as a show @-@ within @-@ a @-@ show ) , Åkerman joined during the series ' second season along with Henry Winkler . The series was originally a web series and Åkerman accepted the role after viewing several webisodes . " It was totally up my alley , my kind of humor " , she said of the series . The same year , she played a supporting role in the romantic comedy film The Romantics with Katie Holmes , Josh Duhamel and Anna Paquin . The film premiered in September 2010 on limited release to generally negative reviews . 
 In 2010 , she starred in Sebastian Gutierrez 's comedy film Elektra <unk> opposite Carla Gugino and Joseph Gordon @-@ Levitt . The film is a sequel to 2009 's Women in Trouble . Åkerman played Trixie , an awkward drug store clerk who falls for Gordon @-@ Levitt 's part , who in turn is obsessed with Gugino 's character , a retired porn star . Åkerman was offered the role during a screening of Women in Trouble . The film premiered in March 2011 on limited release and received generally unfavourable reviews ; critics dismissed its many subplots and called it a " bizarre sex comedy " . Next , Åkerman starred in the lead female role in the film The Bang Bang Club , which follows a group of young photojournalists in South Africa during the final stages of the apartheid . Åkerman played Robin <unk> , a newspaper photo editor . The film premiered during the 2010 Toronto International Film Festival to mixed reviews from the press . In 2010 , Åkerman signed up for a part in newcomer Aaron Harvey 's Catch .44 , a drama @-@ thriller film with Forest Whitaker and Bruce Willis in the male lead roles . The film was generally ignored by critics and movie goers alike . 
 = = = 2012 – present = = = 
 Åkerman had a supporting role in the 2012 comedy film Wanderlust , with Jennifer Aniston and Paul Rudd . The film focuses on an overworked couple who end up at a commune when they try to slow things down . Åkerman played Eva , a woman at the commune . The film received mixed to positive reviews from critics , who were divided regarding its humour , but ultimately praised the cast . Wanderlust underperformed at the box office , earning just over $ 20 million worldwide during its theatrical run . Åkerman appeared in the comedy film The Giant Mechanical Man , which premiered at the Tribeca Film Festival on April 23 , 2012 , to average reviews . She had a supporting role in the 2012 rock musical film Rock of Ages , based on the stage production of the same name . She played Constance Sack , a journalist who interviews Tom Cruise 's character Stacee Jaxx . She hired a vocal coach as her role required her to sing ; she and Cruise recorded a duet of Foreigner 's " I Want to Know What Love Is " ( 1984 ) . Although the film grossed lower than expected , its opening weekend gross in the United States became the third @-@ highest ever for an adaption of a stage production . 
 Åkerman starred in the 2012 bank heist action film Stolen opposite Nicolas Cage . In 2010 , she replaced Lindsay Lohan as Linda Lovelace in the planned film Inferno : A Linda Lovelace Story but the project never entered production . Two other projects , Cottage Country and The Numbers Station , were released in 2013 . She is up for a role in Serpent Girl , based on Matthew Carnahan 's book of the same name . In February 2012 , Åkerman was cast in the ABC comedy pilot The Smart One opposite Portia de Rossi and Jean Smart . The pilot was not ordered to series . In May 2012 , it was revealed that Åkerman will play Blondie frontwoman Debbie Harry in Randall Miller 's film CBGB . In the fall of 2012 , Åkerman guest starred as Alex on two season two episodes of ABC 's Suburgatory . 
 Åkerman played the lead role on the ABC sitcom Trophy Wife . Åkerman played Kate Harrison , the third wife of Pete Harrison ( Bradley Whitford ) . Marcia Gay Harden and Michaela Watkins also star as Pete 's ex @-@ wives . The show received positive reviews , with critics singling out Åkerman for praise . Matt Webb Mitovich of TVLine said she " no less than shines here , coming off as fun @-@ loving but not flaky , warm and not overheated " . Gabriel Mizrahi of The Huffington Post called Åkerman " terrific " and Roth Cornet of IGN singled out her chemistry with co @-@ star Bradley Whitford and her aptitude for physical comedy . Åkerman said that she was initially put off by the title , having previously expressed frustration at constantly being asked to play the " trophy wife . " However , when she read the script , she loved the writing and the character and how " not trophy wife " she is . In 2013 , Akerman was a presenter with Josh <unk> ( Drop Dead Divas ) at Women 's Image Network Awards . 
 Åkerman co @-@ led the critically acclaimed horror comedy The Final Girls in 2015 with Taissa Farmiga , portraying a mother and daughter who are reunited in a slasher film . In 2016 , Akerman costars in Showtime 's ' ' Billions as Lara Axelrod . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Åkerman was born in Sweden and grew up in Canada ; she has " conflicting feelings " for the two countries . In an interview for Toronto Star , she said , " Every time I 'm in Canada I feel more Swedish , and every time I 'm in Sweden I feel more Canadian . I belong in both places and I love them both equally . " She holds both Swedish and Canadian passports . Apart from speaking fluent English and Swedish , she also speaks French and Spanish . She describes herself as a feminist as she believes in equal treatment for both sexes , but also considers that " We [ women ] are different " , adding that she " embrace [ s ] those differences . " She has revealed that she is dyslexic and said that it took her " a long time " to learn her lines . " I get horrified when I have to do table reads with the whole cast , because there ’ s a lot of stuttering coming from me , so I have to do a lot of prep " , she explained . Because of this , she prefers to improvise her lines . 
 Åkerman was raised a Buddhist , which inspired the lotus flower tattoo on her upper back . She also has a tattooed ' Z ' on her right wrist , honouring her husband , Italian musician Roberto Zincone . The two met in 2003 when Åkerman was the lead singer for The Petalstones , for which Zincone served as the drummer . After band practices , they usually socialized , using a dictionary as he could not speak English . They eventually started dating and married at Grand Hotel Moon Valley in Sorrento , Italy on June 20 , 2007 . The couple had one son , Sebastian Zincone , born on April 16 , 2013 . On November 25 , 2013 , the couple announced that they were separating . Zincone filed for divorce on December 2 , 2013 . 
 Åkerman is noted for frequently appearing in nude scenes in her films , such as The Heartbreak Kid and Watchmen . She has stated that she feels comfortable as long as the scenes are not gratuitous . In an interview for Daily Mail , she commented , " I spent a lot of time as a child in Sweden ; it ’ s natural there ... I don 't know many women who go to bed with their husband at night and have sex with a bra on ... So let 's make it real in the movies . " In 2008 , she made her first appearance on AskMen.com 's " 99 Most Desirable Women " list at number 60 . The same year , men 's magazine Maxim placed her at number 59 in their annual " Hot 100 " rankings . The following year , the magazine ranked her at number four . Although admitting that sex appeal is one of the " best assets " , Åkerman considers being beautiful both " a blessing and a curse " , stating , " I tend to get a lot of scripts in which people want me to play the trophy wife , which is frustrating because I want the interesting , meaty roles . " 
 In 2012 , Åkerman travelled to Tanzania with Opportunity International , and has since begun support of their international development work , becoming a Young Ambassador for Opportunity in June 2012 and hosting a fundraiser for Opportunity in October 2012 . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = Captain America : The Winter Soldier = 
 Captain America : The Winter Soldier is a 2014 American superhero film featuring the Marvel Comics character Captain America , produced by Marvel Studios and distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures . It is the sequel to 2011 's Captain America : The First Avenger and the ninth film in the Marvel Cinematic Universe ( MCU ) . The film was directed by Anthony and Joe Russo , with a screenplay by Christopher Markus & Stephen McFeely , who had also written The First Avenger . It stars Chris Evans as Captain America , leading an ensemble cast that includes Scarlett Johansson , Sebastian Stan , Anthony Mackie , Cobie Smulders , Frank Grillo , Emily VanCamp , Hayley Atwell , Robert Redford and Samuel L. Jackson . In Captain America : The Winter Soldier , Captain America , Black Widow , and Falcon join forces to uncover a conspiracy within S.H.I.E.L.D. while facing a mysterious assassin known as the Winter Soldier . 
 A major influence in The Winter Soldier was conspiracy fiction from the 1970s such as Three Days of the Condor , with the script also drawing from the Winter Soldier story arc written by Ed Brubaker . The script was written in 2011 , with the Russo brothers entering negotiations to direct in June 2012 and casting beginning the following month . Principal photography commenced in April 2013 in Los Angeles , California before moving to Washington , D.C. and Cleveland , Ohio . While the directors aimed for more realism , with focus on practical effects and intense stunt work , 2 @,@ 500 visual effects shots were done by six different companies . 
 Captain America : The Winter Soldier premiered in Los Angeles on March 13 , 2014 . It was released internationally on March 26 , 2014 , and in North America on April 4 , 2014 , in 2D , 3D , and IMAX 3D . The film became a critical and commercial success , grossing over $ 714 million worldwide . It also received an Academy Award nomination for Best Visual Effects . A sequel titled Captain America : Civil War also directed by the Russo brothers was released on May 6 , 2016 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Two years after the Battle of New York , Steve Rogers works in Washington D.C. for the espionage agency S.H.I.E.L.D. under Director Nick Fury , while adjusting to contemporary society . Rogers and Agent Natasha Romanoff are sent with S.H.I.E.L.D. ' s counter @-@ terrorism S.T.R.I.K.E. team , led by Agent Rumlow , to free hostages aboard a S.H.I.E.L.D. vessel from Georges Batroc and his mercenaries . Mid @-@ mission , Rogers discovers Romanoff has another agenda : to extract data from the ship 's computers for Fury . Rogers returns to the Triskelion , S.H.I.E.L.D. ' s headquarters , to confront Fury and is briefed about Project Insight : three Helicarriers linked to spy satellites , designed to preemptively eliminate threats . Unable to decrypt the data recovered by Romanoff , Fury becomes suspicious about Insight and asks senior S.H.I.E.L.D. official Alexander Pierce to delay the project . 
 On his way to rendezvous with Maria Hill , Fury is ambushed by assailants led by a mysterious assassin called the Winter Soldier . Fury escapes to Rogers ' apartment , and warns Rogers that S.H.I.E.L.D. is compromised . After handing Rogers a flash drive containing data from the ship , Fury is gunned down by the Winter Soldier . Fury dies in surgery , and Hill recovers the body . The next day , Pierce summons Rogers to the Triskelion . When Rogers withholds Fury 's information , Pierce brands him a fugitive . Hunted by S.T.R.I.K.E. , Rogers meets with Romanoff . Using data in the flash drive they discover a secret S.H.I.E.L.D. bunker in New Jersey , where they activate a supercomputer containing the preserved consciousness of Arnim Zola . Zola reveals that ever since S.H.I.E.L.D. was founded after World War II , Hydra has secretly operated within its ranks , sowing global chaos with the objective of making humanity willing to surrender its freedom in exchange for security . The pair narrowly escape death when a S.H.I.E.L.D. missile destroys the bunker , and realize that Pierce is Hydra 's leader within S.H.I.E.L.D. 
 Rogers and Romanoff enlist the help of former USAF pararescueman Sam Wilson , whom Rogers befriended , and acquire his powered " Falcon " <unk> . Deducing that S.H.I.E.L.D. agent Jasper Sitwell is a Hydra mole , they force him to divulge that Zola developed a data @-@ mining algorithm that can identify individuals who might become future threats to Hydra 's plans . The Insight Helicarriers will sweep the globe , using satellite @-@ guided guns to eliminate these individuals . Rogers , Romanoff , and Wilson are ambushed by the Winter Soldier , who kills Sitwell . During the fight , Rogers recognizes the Winter Soldier as Bucky Barnes , his friend who was captured and experimented upon during WWII . Hill manages to extract the trio to a safehouse where Fury , who had faked his death , is waiting with plans to sabotage the Helicarriers by replacing their controller chips . 
 After the World Security Council members arrive for the Helicarriers ' launch , Rogers broadcasts Hydra 's plot to everyone at the Triskelion . Romanoff , disguised as one of the Council members , disarms Pierce . Fury arrives and forces Pierce to unlock S.H.I.E.L.D 's database so that Romanoff can leak classified information , exposing Hydra to the public . Following a struggle , Fury kills Pierce . Meanwhile , Rogers and Wilson storm two Helicarriers and replace the controller chips , but the Winter Soldier destroys Wilson 's suit and fights Rogers on the third . Rogers fends him off and replaces the final chip , allowing Hill to take control and have the vessels destroy each other . Rogers refuses to fight the Winter Soldier in an attempt to reach his friend , but as the ship collides with the Triskelion , Rogers is thrown out into the Potomac River . The Winter Soldier rescues the unconscious Rogers before disappearing into the woods . With S.H.I.E.L.D. in disarray , Romanoff appears before a Senate subcommittee and Fury , under the cover of his apparent death , heads to Eastern Europe in pursuit of Hydra 's remaining cells . Rogers and Wilson decide to find the Winter Soldier , while Rumlow , who was a double agent for Hydra , is hospitalized following the Triskelion 's destruction . 
 In a mid @-@ credits scene , Baron Wolfgang von Strucker , at a Hydra lab , proclaims that the " age of miracles " has begun as scientists examine an energy @-@ filled scepter and two prisoners : one with superhuman speed , the other with telekinetic powers . In a post @-@ credits scene , the Winter Soldier visits a Bucky memorial at the Smithsonian Institution . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Chris Evans as Steve Rogers / Captain America : 
 A World War II veteran who was enhanced to the peak of human physicality by an experimental serum , frozen in suspended animation , and is now struggling to adjust to the modern world . Describing his character 's adjustment to the modern world , Evans said , " It 's not so much about his shock with [ technology ] ... It 's more about the societal differences . He 's gone from the ' 40s to today ; he comes from a world where people were a little more trusting , the threats not as deep . Now , it 's harder to tell who 's right and wrong . Actions you take to protect people from threats could compromise liberties and privacy . That 's tough for Steve to swallow . " Evans trained in parkour , Brazilian jiu @-@ jitsu , karate , boxing , kickboxing , and gymnastics , as the Russo brothers believed that bringing Rogers into the modern day also meant that he had studied and mastered modern fighting styles and techniques . The filmmakers also looked to make the character 's shield , which has traditionally been used for defense , a more offensive weapon . 
 Scarlett Johansson as Natasha Romanoff / Black Widow : 
 A highly trained spy working for S.H.I.E.L.D. , who partners with Rogers . Screenwriter Christopher Markus said that Black Widow was a " great contrast " to Captain America , describing her as " incredibly modern , not very reverent , and just very straightforward whereas Steve is , you know a man from the 40s . He 's not a boy scout , but he is reserved and has a moral center , whereas her moral center moves . " The Russos added , " She 's a character who lies for a living . That 's what she does . He 's a character who tells the truth . Give them a problem and they 'll have different ways of approaching it . She 's pushing him to modernize , and he 's pushing her to add a certain level of integrity to her life . " When asked about Romanoff 's relationship with Rogers , Johansson said , " By a series of unfortunate encounters , they will be in a situation in which their friendship becomes more intimate . They share many similarities because they live on the defensive without relying on anyone . Also , the two have been working for the government throughout their professional careers . With their friendship they begin to question what they want and what is their true identity . " 
 Sebastian Stan as Bucky Barnes / Winter Soldier : 
 Steve Rogers ' best friend , who has re @-@ emerged as an enhanced brainwashed assassin after being thought killed in action during World War II . About the character , Feige said , " Winter Soldier has been methodically , almost robotically , following orders for 70 years . " Stan said despite his nine @-@ picture deal with Marvel Studios including his appearance in The First Avenger , he was not sure about an imminent return for Bucky , and only heard the sequel was named after the Winter Soldier through a friend attending San Diego Comic @-@ Con. The actor endured five months of physical training to prepare for the role and did historical research stating , " I dove into the whole Cold War thing . I looked at the KGB . I looked at all kinds of spy movies , and all kinds of documentaries about that time , and what it was about . I grabbed anything from that time period . Anything about brainwashing . " Stan also practiced daily with the knife used by the Winter Soldier . Regarding Bucky 's transition into the Winter Soldier , Stan said , " You know , the truth of the situation is although he looks very different and there 's different things about him , it still comes from the same person . I think you 'll get to see that no matter what . I think part of my goal here was to make sure that you see an extension of that version but just a different color of that same version in a way . I think he 's still the same guy ; he 's cut from the same cloth . " Stan stated he felt the character 's introduction in the film was " sort of like a preview of the guy , " with more to the character being explored in The Winter Soldier sequel , Captain America : Civil War . 
 Anthony Mackie as Sam Wilson / Falcon : 
 A former pararescueman trained by the military in aerial combat using a specially designed wing pack . About the role , Mackie said " [ Wilson is ] a really smart guy who went through major military training and becomes a tactical leader . " Remarking , " He 's the first African @-@ American superhero . It makes me feel all the work I 've done has been paying off . I have a son , nephews and nieces , and I love the idea that they can dress up as the Falcon on Halloween . They now have someone they can idolize . That 's a huge honor for me . " Marvel , who cast Mackie because of his " energy and sense of fun , " did not let him read a script before signing on . Mackie spent five months doing two @-@ a @-@ day workouts and eating an 11 @,@ 000 calorie per day diet to get into shape for the role . Commenting on Rogers ' relationship with Wilson , Evans said , " Meeting Mackie 's character , he used to serve , now he works at the VA counseling guys who come home with PTSD — they connect on that level . I think they 're both wounded warriors who don 't bleed on other people . Cap has no one to bleed on . I think Mackie knows how to handle people like that . … Sometimes when things are bad , trusting a stranger is the way to go . " 
 Cobie Smulders as Maria Hill : 
 A high @-@ ranking S.H.I.E.L.D. agent who works closely with Nick Fury . Smulders said she performed some of her own stunts in the film , explaining , " I try to do my own stunts whenever I can . You 're only allowed to do certain stunts . There is an amazing team of stunt people that do most of the work in this film . But , I studied a lot of tae kwon do . I also did a lot of training just with weapons because I 'm not very comfortable around guns . I had to get comfortable because that 's my character 's thing ... I like to get really physical so I feel empowered when I am on set and even though you don 't see it on screen , maybe I am taking people out that you don 't see off camera . " 
 Frank Grillo as Brock Rumlow : 
 Commander of S.H.I.E.L.D. ' s counter @-@ terrorism S.T.R.I.K.E. team . About the character , Grillo said , " He is a bad @-@ ass guy . [ He ] pretty much beats the shit out of everyone in the movie and that 's really it . " Regarding Rumlow 's alter ego , Grillo said , " Very early on the Russos said , ' Look , this is an origin film for this character . We 're gonna discover who this is and this is a big movie with a lot of moving parts , but we 're gonna discover you in this film and , you know , here 's the information about who Brock Rumlow turns into and blah , blah , blah . ' And so we 've had multiple discussions about what comes after that , that thing . So , you know , it 's obvious Rumlow is covered in rubble and burned to crisp at the end , but you see he 's still there . They don 't do that for no reason . " 
 Emily VanCamp as Sharon Carter / Agent 13 : 
 A S.H.I.E.L.D. agent assigned to guard Rogers without his knowledge . About the character , VanCamp said , " I play Agent 13 / Sharon Carter which everyone knows but we don 't really touch on that in this film . We 're just sort of introducing her . When we first see her we realize she 's living next to Captain America ... they sort of have a little thing going on and as we all know in the comic books they had a love affair off and on for years . They had a very complicated relationship . It 's almost as if they are planting the seeds now . Sort of leaving room to go wherever they want to go with it . " Regarding her casting , Joe Russo said , " We wanted someone that Cap would have an immediate interest in . It had to be a strong @-@ willed person , and we felt that Emily 's work on Revenge was a great test tube for what this character could be . She 's obviously very credible with physicality , she holds the screen really well , and she even looks like the character from the books . " 
 Hayley Atwell as Peggy Carter : 
 A retired officer with the Strategic Scientific Reserve and a co @-@ founder of S.H.I.E.L.D. , who is a former love interest of Steve Rogers . On receiving the script , Atwell realized the character " would be 96 , and I would be up to the eyeballs in prosthetics . " The visual effects team was not satisfied with the initial make @-@ up used to make Atwell look older , and eventually resorted to aging her through CGI methods . 
 Robert Redford as Alexander Pierce : 
 A senior leader within S.H.I.E.L.D. , a member of the World Security Council and an old comrade of Nick Fury . Redford was cast in part as an homage to his roles in 1970s thrillers such as Three Days of the Condor , and for what the directors described as " an acting legend playing a villainous role " akin to Henry Fonda in Once Upon a Time in the West . As to what attracted him to the film , Redford said it interested him by being different from his usual work , and that he " wanted to experience this new form of filmmaking that 's taken over where you have kind of cartoon characters brought to life through high technology . " 
 Samuel L. Jackson as Nick Fury : 
 The director of S.H.I.E.L.D. Regarding Fury 's questionable code of ethics , Jackson said , " Almost everything that comes out of Nick Fury 's mouth is a lie in some sense . He has to ask , is he even lying to himself , too ? He has a very good idea of what 's going on but his paranoia keeps him from believing some of it . " Jackson added , " You see Nick Fury the office guy , him going about the day @-@ to @-@ day work of S.H.I.E.L.D. and the politics as opposed to that other stuff . It 's great to have him dealing with Captain America in terms of being able to speak to him soldier to soldier and try to explain to him how the world has changed in another way while he was frozen in time . Some of the people who used to be our enemies are now our allies – him trying to figure out , ' Well , how do we trust those guys ? ' or ' How do we trust the guys that you didn 't trust who don 't trust you ? ' And explaining to him that the black and white of good guys / bad guys has now turned into this gray area . " McFeely said , " Fury represents an obstacle for Steve in some ways . They don 't always agree on how S.H.I.E.L.D. ought to be used . " The writers gave Fury a more prominent role in The Winter Soldier , since within a plot featuring S.H.I.E.L.D. being dismantled , Fury would " take the brunt of it " . They also intended on having a character that had so far been depicted as a self @-@ assured man in charge being depicted as vulnerable , to enhance the sense of danger of the Hydra conspiracy . 
 Additionally , Toby Jones , Maximiliano Hernández , and Garry Shandling reprise their roles from previous Marvel Studios films as Arnim Zola , Jasper Sitwell , and Senator Stern , respectively . Georges St @-@ Pierre plays Georges Batroc , a mercenary and a master of the French form of kickboxing known as savate . Callan Mulvey plays Jack Rollins , a member of S.H.I.E.L.D. ' s S.T.R.I.K.E. unit . Chin Han , Jenny Agutter ( who previously appeared in The Avengers ) , Alan Dale , and Bernard White appear as members of the World Security Council . Comedic actors Danny Pudi and DC Pierson have small roles as a S.H.I.E.L.D. technician and an Apple Store employee , respectively . Gary Sinise narrates a Captain America @-@ themed Smithsonian Institution exhibit , and Stan Lee cameos as a security guard there . Winter Soldier creator Ed Brubaker makes a cameo as a scientist working on the Winter Soldier . Co @-@ director Joe Russo cameos as a doctor , and Christopher Markus and Stephen McFeely cameo as two S.H.I.E.L.D. interrogators . Thomas Kretschmann , Henry Goodman , Elizabeth Olsen and Aaron Taylor @-@ Johnson appear , uncredited , as Baron Wolfgang von Strucker , Dr. List , the Scarlet Witch , and Quicksilver , respectively , in the mid @-@ credits scene . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In April 2011 , before Captain America : The First Avenger was released in theaters , screenwriters Christopher Markus & Stephen McFeely announced Marvel had already hired the duo to work on the film 's sequel . In September 2011 , Chris Evans said that a sequel may not be released until 2014 . In January 2012 , Neal McDonough , who played Dum Dum Dugan in Captain America : The First Avenger , mentioned that a sequel would likely be filmed after the completion of Thor : The Dark World , which would likely have been before the end of 2012 . By March 2012 , Marvel whittled down the possible directors for the sequel to three candidates : George <unk> , F. Gary Gray , and brothers Anthony and Joseph Russo . Walt Disney Studios announced the planned release of the sequel to Captain America : The First Avenger on April 4 , 2014 . Disney stated , " The second installment will pick @-@ up where … The Avengers leaves off , as Steve Rogers continues his affiliation with Nick Fury and S.H.I.E.L.D. and struggles to embrace his role in the modern world . " Markus later elaborated , " I think S.H.I.E.L.D. is the water [ Rogers is ] swimming in . It 's definitely a Captain America movie . You know , if the first movie was a movie about the US Army , then this is a movie about S.H.I.E.L.D ... You will learn about S.H.I.E.L.D. You will learn about where it came from and where it 's going and some of the cool things they have . " In April , F. Gary Gray withdrew his name from consideration , choosing instead to direct the N.W.A biographical film Straight Outta Compton . 
 = = = = Writing = = = = 
 McFeely said the writing process began in the middle of 2011 , around the release of The First Avenger , with him and Markus " noodling on in hopes that there would be a second one and we did a lot of just throwing stuff at the wall and seeing what stuck " . The first few months of writing were a back and forth process with Marvel , but that after an outline was finished , the story did not change much . They opted to set the story in the present day , and , after " experimenting with flashback elements for more period World War II stuff " , decided to abandon the flashbacks as " it became unwieldy . " The film would be " Cap versus the world we all live in today " , while averting excessive comedy regarding the hero 's time displacement , as Markus considered the Captain " the most adaptive man on the planet . " The tone would be more grounded in reality despite the advanced technology to contrast the fantasy elements from both the first Captain America and The Avengers . Despite that , the comic book origins guaranteed that the film would not have verisimilitude . This still proved a challenge in the reveal of Arnim Zola , that had to be extensively rewritten to convey how " this grounded espionage paranoid thriller suddenly screeches to a halt and you switch gears really quickly with this ghost in the machine " that introduces more science fiction elements . 
 Markus and McFeely wanted to adapt Ed Brubaker 's Winter Soldier storyline from the comics , which they described as " the tone of Cap ’ s modern franchise " , but it took the duo six months to convince themselves that they could do it . In the meantime , while thinking how to progress from the war film tone of The First Avenger , the writers settled on the conspiracy genre for the screenplay , and cited Three Days of the Condor , The Parallax View , and Marathon Man as influences , feeling it better conveyed Captain America 's trust issues and contrasting values in the new world he was living in , with Markus saying , " If you put that 1940s man into present day geo @-@ politics everything is going to seem like a conspiracy . It ’ s just going to seem dirty and underhanded and shifty , and people won ’ t be telling the truth . " Three Days of the Condor in particular was used as the main source of the script structure , following the idea that the protagonist is being chased by a threat they , along with the audience , only discover halfway through the film . 
 The writers felt this approach was similar to how Stan Lee reinvented Captain America in the 1960s and 1970s , with " the Captain dealing with all sorts of the same things that the country [ was ] dealing with – Vietnam , Watergate and all that stuff – so he gets to have opinions on that " , thus making the " guy who is ostensibly from the more black and white 1940s react to this ultimately grey world that we live in . " Marvel Studios president Kevin Feige described the film as a political thriller , and as the duo struggled to figure out a third act , Feige suggested that S.H.I.E.L.D. be brought down and have Captain America fight the agency . The writers thought this was a great story point , for implementing " the physical manifestation of Cap changing the world . " Markus even noted how the 1970s comics had similar conspiracies . The Hydra reveal made sure to include returning characters among the undercover villains , as well as references to the comics such as Arnim Zola being kept alive as a machine . Feige later elaborated on the political thriller nature of the film saying , 
 In our attempt to make all of our films feel unique and feel different we found ourselves going back to things like [ Three Days of the Condor ] . Also the other political thrillers of the ' 70s : The Parallax View , All the President 's Men . This was a time that Cap existed in the comics . He found himself in the swinging ' 60s followed by the Watergate Era followed by the Reagan Era followed by where we are today . In the comics it was a hell of a journey for Steve . And we couldn 't take him through those years because in our cinematic universe he was asleep . But we wanted to force him to confront that kind of moral conundrum , something with that ' 70s flavor . And in our film that takes the form of S.H.I.E.L.D. 
 Feige stated that Steve Rogers would be paired with other characters from The Avengers like Black Widow and Nick Fury , because unlike Tony Stark and Thor , who could return to their own supporting casts , Rogers had nowhere else to go , " and it just made sense that he was the one that stayed with what remains of the Avengers at the end of the film . ” The writers considered including Hawkeye , but " he didn ’ t have enough to do and suddenly it seemed like we were giving him short shrift " , leading all of his parts to be fulfilled by Black Widow , and Joe Russo adding that Jeremy Renner 's schedule could not be worked out for him to appear . As to why the Red Skull from The First Avenger did not appear in The Winter Soldier , Joe Russo explained , " I know we have a guy in a computer , but the tone we were chasing was sort of that conspiracy thriller . And we wanted to try and ground the movie as much as we could . And Red Skull , he ’ s a fantastical character and didn ’ t necessarily fit for Cap 2 and especially because it was about the fall of S.H.I.E.L.D. Certainly Hydra exists and that ’ s his legacy , but there ’ s something interesting about the fact that his legacy outlived the skull . And they ’ re still dealing with the demons of it , but not necessarily him . ” 
 Chris McKenna , who worked with the Russo brothers on the sitcom Community , contributed to the script by writing jokes for the film . 
 = = = Pre @-@ production = = = 
 By June 2012 , the Russo brothers entered negotiations to direct the sequel , and Samuel L. Jackson was confirmed to return as S.H.I.E.L.D. leader Nick Fury . Feige sought out the Russos after watching the genre @-@ parodying season 2 finale of Community which they directed , and for the additional ideas they brought to the initial story pitch . Joe Russo detailed that since the intent was for a political thriller , " all the great political thrillers have very current issues in them that reflect the anxiety of the audience . " Thus the brothers opted to include references to drone warfare , targeted killing and global surveillance . Joe even noted how during principal photography , the issues became more topical due to the disclosure of several National Security Agency surveillance @-@ related documents . At the 2012 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International , it was announced that the official title for the sequel is Captain America : The Winter Soldier , and that the Russo brothers would direct the film . After signing on to direct , the Russo brothers met with Ed Brubaker to learn more about where the Winter Soldier character came from , his thinking and the themes behind the character . In July 2012 , Anthony Mackie entered negotiations to star as Falcon alongside Chris Evans in the sequel . Sebastian Stan was also confirmed to be reprising his role as James Barnes . By August 2012 , Anna Kendrick , Felicity Jones , and Imogen Poots were being considered front @-@ runners for a leading role in the film . 
 In September 2012 , Chris Evans stated that filming would begin in March 2013 . Evans also stated that Rogers ' adjustment to the modern world , which was originally set to be included in The Avengers , would be better suited for Captain America : The Winter Soldier . At the end of the month , The Greater Cleveland Film Commission announced that Captain America : The Winter Soldier would film in Cleveland , Ohio after the production was approved for a $ 9 @.@ 5 million tax credit . Producer Nate Moore said that after also serving as a location in The Avengers , Cleveland 's government was helpful in providing large locations for filming , which " provided production value which we probably could not have built in a backlot . " McFeely joked that while writing ambitious action scenes " I did not realize a great American metropolis would say ' Sure , shut down three miles of freeway and go to town ' . " Portions of the film were also scheduled to be shot in California and Washington , D.C. 
 By October , Emilia Clarke , Jessica Brown Findlay , Teresa Palmer , Imogen Poots , and Alison Brie were being considered for Rogers ' love interest in the film , and Scarlett Johansson was brought back to reprise her role as Black Widow . Later in the month , Frank Grillo was testing for the role of the villain Crossbones in the film , and by the end of the month , Grillo closed a deal to portray the character and Cobie Smulders signed on to reprise her role as Maria Hill from The Avengers . 
 In January 2013 , Hayley Atwell , who played Peggy Carter in Captain America : The First Avenger , said that she would not appear in the sequel . However Stanley Tucci , who played Dr. Abraham Erskine in the previous film , later said that Atwell would reappear in a flashback scene . Also in January , Marvel Studios announced that the film would be released in 3D , and Anthony Mackie said filming would begin on April 1 , 2013 . Later that month , Toby Jones , who portrayed Arnim Zola in the first film , said that he would reprise the role in the sequel . By the end of the month , stages were being built for a shoot at Raleigh Manhattan Beach Studios in Los Angeles . 
 In February 2013 , Emily VanCamp entered negotiations to play a female lead in the film . By March 2013 , Maximiliano Hernández was signed to reprise his role as S.H.I.E.L.D. agent Jasper Sitwell from Thor and The Avengers and Robert Redford entered in talks to join the cast , as a high @-@ ranking member of S.H.I.E.L.D , which he later confirmed . Toward the end of March , UFC fighter Georges St @-@ Pierre was cast as a character based on the comics ' Batroc the Leaper in the film . 
 Captain America 's uniform was altered from the ones seen in previous films , with a Kevlar @-@ based ballistic component that would protect Captain America but at the same time function like a military uniform . Joe Russo said , " We wanted to use his Super Soldier outfit from the [ Steve Rogers : Super Soldier series ] as a way to represent , thematically , his place in the world of S.H.I.E.L.D. and the difference between working for S.H.I.E.L.D. and being Captain America . " For the Falcon costume , the filmmakers were interested in adding more of a tactical design than was represented in the comic books , by including real @-@ world webbing , straps and gear and stripping away the more comic book elements . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began on April 1 , 2013 , at the Raleigh Manhattan Beach Studios in Los Angeles , under the working title Freezer Burn . Scenes taking place on the " <unk> Star " were filmed on the Sea Launch Commander , docked in Long Beach , California . In early May , Dominic Cooper confirmed he would return as Howard Stark . On May 14 , 2013 , production moved to Washington , D.C. with filming taking place at the National Mall and the Theodore Roosevelt Bridge . The following day , Garry Shandling was spotted on set reprising his Iron Man 2 role of Senator Stern . Other filming locations in Washington , D.C. included the Willard Hotel and Dupont Circle . 
 Filming in Cleveland began on May 17 and was scheduled to last until mid @-@ June with locations scheduled on the West Shoreway , the Southerly Wastewater Treatment Plant in Cuyahoga Heights and the Lakeview Cemetery Dam . Cleveland was chosen as a stand @-@ in for Washington , D.C , with the city 's East 6th Street doubling as 7th and D Streets in Southwest D.C. Other locations in Cleveland included the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland , the Cleveland Public Library , Cleveland State University , the Cleveland Arcade , Tower City Center , the Cleveland Museum of Art , and the Western Reserve Historical Society . Interior shots were also filmed inside private homes and the Pilgrim Congregational Church in Tremont . Filming in Cleveland concluded on June 27 , 2013 . 
 Trent Opaloch , best known for his work on District 9 and Elysium , was brought in as the director of photography . Opaloch stated that while attempting to emulate the 1970s thrillers that served as inspiration for the writers and directors , the staging and lighting tried to bring realism through " classic framing and naturalistic lighting " , and the filming was done with hand @-@ held cameras . To achieve this , Opaloch used Arri Alexa Plus 4 : 3 cameras with Panavision anamorphic lenses and Codex Digital recorders . Stunt work aimed for realistic action , prioritizing practical effects . The fight scenes were staged for months , with a choreography that aimed to highlight Captain America 's superhuman qualities , and " move away from impressionistic action into specificity " : the raid on the S.H.I.E.L.D. vessel had <unk> as the Captain knocked out enemies to avert detection , and the freeway fight with Winter Soldier was more " last minute " to highlight the characters ' struggle to survive . 
 In contrast to the quick editing and moving cameras of modern action films , The Winter Soldier aimed to feature longer action scenes that felt more visceral and dangerous . The Russos mentioned the bank robbing scene of Heat as a major influence , which they described as " the most intense eight minutes of filmmaking I 've seen in a movie theater " , and action scenes directed by Brian De Palma , such as the vault heist in Mission : Impossible , where " very likable characters are put in impossible situations that the audience is put on the edge on how they 'd escape " . Examples of these types of scenes include the ambushes on Nick Fury in the street and Captain America in the elevator . 
 = = = Post @-@ production = = = 
 Additional photography was filmed in December 2013 and January 2014 , in order for the Russos to accurately show the state of each character after the defeat of S.H.I.E.L.D. , having read the script of Avengers : Age of Ultron to guide their choices . Joss Whedon , director of The Avengers and Avengers : Age of Ultron , wrote and directed the mid @-@ credits scene , which featured Quicksilver , the Scarlet Witch , and Baron Wolfgang von Strucker . The title sequences were created by design firm Sarofsky , who had worked with the Russos since Community . Sarofsky collaborated with comic book artist David W. Mack on the sequences . 
 Anthony Mackie said the Russo brothers relied on minimal use of computer @-@ generated imagery , stating , " The Russos , what they did that was so great was , they wanted to stay with live action , which is a dying art form . If they can build it , they built it . If we could do it , we did it . They wanted to do as little CGI as possible . That 's why the movie looks so great . " Nevertheless , six special effects companies are involved in creating the visual effects of the film , including Industrial Light & Magic ( ILM ) , Scanline VFX , Lola VFX , Luma Pictures , <unk> and The Embassy , with previsualization completed by Proof . The film contained 2 @,@ 500 visual effects shots , with 900 worked on by ILM . The film featured extensive use of digital doubles . Russell Earl , ILM visual effects supervisor , said , " The character that we did the most work on was Falcon . We knew we were going to do CG wings . We also did some shots with wires and some with stunt doubles and head replacement . And we needed a very good digital double . " 
 Lola VFX , who worked on the pre @-@ serum Steve Rogers scenes in this film and Captain America : The First Avenger , also worked on shots featuring an elderly Peggy Carter . This involved digitally transposing the facial features of an elderly actress onto the face of actress Hayley Atwell who had performed her lines with no make @-@ up and only a few tracking markers . 
 The Helicarriers in the film were completely digital . Earl said , " In [ The Avengers ] it was more like an aircraft carrier , now it ’ s an aircraft carrier with the addition of battle ship @-@ sized guns . We were all over the carriers [ with the virtual camera ] . We were on the decks ; we were flying next to them . We had a lot of close ups and different angles . And we didn ’ t just have one ; we had three . On top of that , we had to destroy them all . " This CGI environment was also used in close ups . Earl said , " The challenge was to get in all of the detail to make it feel like it is a real , working ship . We created details down to the railings and all the human @-@ scale stuff . ... For the shots in which we were destroying them , we had to have the internals as well – the hallways , the storage areas . " Many of the shots of Washington , D.C. were digitally created due to numerous flight restrictions in the city which necessitated that locations be recreated by computer . However , aerial footage of the city was filmed and used for live action plate photography for shots involving the Triskelion , which is located on Theodore Roosevelt Island on the Potomac River . 
 350 different versions of the film were made , to accommodate for the different formats it would be released in domestically , while also accounting for international localization and formats . The versions had to be completed in 17 days , versus a normal turnaround time of three to four weeks for contemporary films , to make its theatrical release date . One of the various changes for localization was the contents of Captain America 's notebook list seen at the beginning of the film . The first five items were different depending on where the film was released , while the final five items were the same across all prints . Marvel held online polls allowing fans to select the items featured in each country 's release . 
 = = Music = = 
 In June 2013 , Henry Jackman announced that he would compose the film 's score . About the score Jackman said , " ... it 's 50 % production and all the tricks I 've learnt from spending years in the record industry but then it 's also got the kind of injection of symphonic , thematic , heroic music that all kind of merges into one musical , and hopefully coherent piece " . A soundtrack album was released by Hollywood Records on April 1 , 2014 . 
 = = Release = = 
 Captain America : The Winter Soldier was released in 32 markets on March 26 , 2014 and in North America on April 4 , 2014 , in 2D , 3D and IMAX 3D . The film debuted on 668 IMAX screens worldwide , a record for films releasing in April . The world premiere took place on March 13 , 2014 at the El Capitan Theatre in Hollywood , California . The Paris premiere occurred on March 17 at Le Grand Rex , the London premiere took place on March 20 at Westfield London , the Beijing premiere took place on March 24 and the Cleveland premiere took place on April 1 . Chris Evans and Scarlett Johansson auctioned off passes to one of the premieres for charity . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 In July 2013 , Marvel Studios released a teaser poster depicting a damaged and discolored Captain America shield . The Los Angeles Times said , " the image suggests that [ Captain America ] might see some serious battle in the sequel " while Rolling Stone said , " the image hints at darker themes in the sequel " . Later that month , Marvel Studios head and producer Kevin Feige , directors Joe and Anthony Russo , and cast members Chris Evans , Scarlett Johansson , Samuel L. Jackson , Sebastian Stan , Anthony Mackie , Cobie Smulders , Emily VanCamp , and Frank Grillo held a panel at 2013 San Diego Comic @-@ Con International and presented footage from the film . In addition , Marvel had booths depicting a Smithsonian @-@ type exhibit showing Captain America and the Howling Commandos from Captain America : The First Avenger . At the end of the month , audiences were shown a glimpse of the film along with some of Marvel 's other Phase Two slate of films at Disney XD 's Disney Fandom event . 
 In August 2013 , Feige , Evans , Stan , and Mackie presented a clip of the film at Disney 's D23 Expo . In September 2013 , Marvel announced that it is again partnering with Harley @-@ Davidson , continuing their relationship from Captain America : The First Avenger , with Captain America riding the company 's <unk> Breakout motorcycle in the film . 
 In October 2013 , Marvel released the first trailer for Captain America : The Winter Soldier . The Hollywood Reporter said , " it looks like it 'll live up to the ' political thriller ' that 's been promised for months now . " The Los Angeles Times said , " [ the ] trailer runs 2 ½ minutes and teases plenty of action , conspiracy and clever banter between Captain America and his S.H.I.E.L.D. colleagues , with a smattering of the previously released Comic @-@ Con International and D23 footage . " The Los Angeles Times also noted that the day before the release of the trailer , the studio released " a teaser for a trailer . " The trailer received 23 @.@ 5 million views in the 24 hours after its release . In November 2013 , Jed Whedon , the co @-@ creator of the television series Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. , said that there are plans to reference events from the film into the show , stating , " Nick Fury is in [ Captain America : The Winter Soldier ] , and S.H.I.E.L.D. makes an appearance , so we will definitely try to tee @-@ up some stuff and probably play a little bit of the fallout from that film . " 
 In January 2014 , Disney announced that in honor of the film , Captain America would be making appearances at Disneyland . The meet and greet experience opened March 7 , 2014 and is called Captain America : The Living Legend and Symbol of Courage , located at Innoventions in Tomorrowland . Also in January , Marvel Comics released a prelude digital comic titled , Marvel 's Captain America : The Winter Soldier Infinite Comic , written by Peter David , with art by Rock @-@ He Kim . The comic sees the return of the " Zodiac " , the mysterious weapon first seen in the One @-@ Shot Agent Carter , which has fallen into the wrong hands . Captain America , Black Widow , and Rumlow must track the weapon down and put it back in S.H.I.E.L.D. protection . 
 The first televised advertisement for Captain America : The Winter Soldier aired during Super Bowl XLVIII on February 2 , 2014 . According to The Hollywood Reporter , Disney paid over $ 4 million per 30 @-@ second spot . The Los Angeles Times said , " The clip promoting the April 4 release had a recognizably melancholy tone as Chris Evans ' patriotic hero grapples with the moral ambiguities of the modern age . " Also in February , Gameloft announced that a mobile video game , titled Captain America : The Winter Soldier – The Official Game , would be released in conjunction with the release of the film in late March 2014 for iOS and Android platforms . A few days later General Motors announced that Chevrolet partnered with Marvel Entertainment and provided a specially designed Corvette Stingray C7 for use by the Black Widow in the film . The vehicle debuted at the 2014 Chicago Auto Show , where fans received limited @-@ edition Captain America comic books . Evans was named the grand marshal of the 2014 Daytona 500 to promote the film 's release . Later in the month , a 30 @-@ second television spot received " a lot of attention on social media " for a line featured in the clip . The line , which was said by Captain America , suggests that Nick Fury would die in the film . The Hollywood Reporter noted that it all seemed " a bit too obvious " , noting the fact that Jackson , who plays Fury , is reprising the role in Avengers : Age of Ultron , although pointing out that it could be in a postmortem flashback appearance . 
 In March 2014 , Marvel released the Captain America Experience app , that allowed fans to capture a pictures of themselves with Captain America , and let them share it on Instagram and Twitter using specific hashtags to unlock 10 early screenings of the film across the United States , which took place on March 20 . On March 18 , ABC aired a one @-@ hour television special titled , Marvel Studios : Assembling a Universe , which included a sneak peek of Captain America : The Winter Soldier . On April 1 , 2014 , Evans and Stan rang the opening bell of the New York Stock Exchange in honor of the film 's theatrical release . Jackson appeared in advertisements for Sky Broadband . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Captain America : The Winter Soldier was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment for digital download on August 19 , 2014 and on Blu @-@ ray , Blu @-@ ray 3D , and DVD on September 9 , 2014 . The physical media releases include behind @-@ the @-@ scenes featurettes , audio commentary , deleted scenes , and a blooper reel . 
 The film was also collected in a 13 @-@ disc box set , titled " Marvel Cinematic Universe : Phase Two Collection " , which includes all of the Phase Two films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe . It was released on December 8 , 2015 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Captain America : The Winter Soldier earned $ 259 @.@ 8 million in North America and $ 454 @.@ 7 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $ 714 @.@ 4 million . It became the seventh @-@ highest @-@ grossing film of 2014 worldwide . Deadline.com calculated the net profit for the film to be $ 166 @.@ 2 million , when factoring together " production budgets , P & A , talent participations and other costs , with box office grosses , and ancillary revenues from VOD to DVD and TV , " placing it ninth on their list of 2014 's " Most Valuable Blockbusters " . 
 Captain America : The Winter Soldier made $ 10 @.@ 2 million in Thursday night showings , more than double the midnight gross of its predecessor . It set an April single @-@ day ( $ 36 @.@ 9 million ) and April opening @-@ weekend record ( $ 95 @.@ 0 million ) , while its opening weekend was a 46 % increase over its predecessor . The film held the number one spot at the box office for three consecutive weekends , before being overtaken by The Other Woman in its fourth weekend . It achieved the largest total gross among films released in the month of April . At the end of its theatrical run , the film became the fourth highest @-@ grossing film of 2014 behind American Sniper , The Hunger Games : Mockingjay - Part 1 , and Guardians of the Galaxy . 
 Captain America : The Winter Soldier topped the box office on its opening weekend with $ 75 @.@ 2 million from 32 overseas markets . The film debuted at number one in many territories , including Australia , China , and Russia and set a 3 @-@ day opening @-@ weekend record in China among Disney films , with $ 38 @.@ 81 million . It topped the box office outside North America on two consecutive weekends , followed by two weeks in second , behind Rio 2 . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported an 89 % approval rating with an average rating of 7 @.@ 5 / 10 based on 256 reviews . The website 's consensus reads , " <unk> and politically astute , Captain America : The Winter Soldier is a superior entry in the Avengers canon and is sure to thrill Marvel diehards . " Metacritic , which uses a weighted average , assigned a score of 70 out of 100 based on 47 critics , indicating " generally favorable reviews " . CinemaScore audiences gave Captain America : The Winter Soldier an " A " grade rating on an A + to F scale . 
 Todd McCarthy of The Hollywood Reporter said the film " takes the bold ( for Marvel ) step of reducing CGI spectacle to a relative minimum in favor of reviving the pleasures of hard @-@ driving old @-@ school action , surprising character development and intriguing suspense . " Scott Foundas of Variety said it is " <unk> of the breathless cliffhangers dictated by the genre , but equally rich in the quiet , tender character moments that made the first film unique among recent Marvel fare . " Richard Roeper of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times said , " While not on a par with The Avengers or the first and third Iron Man movies , this is another rock @-@ solid chapter in the big @-@ screen story of Marvel . " Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly noted the topicality of the film , stating , " Captain America : The Winter Soldier is the first superhero film since the terrorist @-@ inflected The Dark Knight that plugs you right into what 's happening now . " Ty Burr of The Boston Globe said the film " delivers all the 3D CGI mayhem audiences have come to expect from the Marvel entertainment juggernaut , but there ’ s darkness and confusion just under its comic @-@ book surface . " Joe Morgenstern of The Wall Street Journal said , " What makes The Winter Soldier so enjoyable , and what will make it so profitable , is its emotional bandwidth — all the vivid , nuanced life lived by its characters in between their frenzied escapades , " and felt it fixed all the shortcomings of The First Avenger " and then some " . 
 Conversely , Kenneth Turan of the Los Angeles Times said , " [ Captain America : The Winter Soldier ] is everything a big budget superhero film should be – except inspired . " Manohla Dargis of The New York Times said , " Like many others of its type , [ Captain America : The Winter Soldier ] gets off to a kinetic start only to lose steam before blowing everything up . " Robbie Collin of The Daily Telegraph said , " You can 't help but feel disappointment that a film with a relatively spicy premise becomes , in the end , so risk @-@ averse . " Mick LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle said the film " has the usual overlong running time [ for the comic book superhero genre ] , the halfhearted feints in the direction of human feeling and the obligatory action sequences that are big without being either exciting or particularly legible . " Joe Williams of the St. Louis Post Dispatch felt " On paper this sequel has some promising elements , but on screen it retreats from the very issues that it raises , and on a shelf next to Captain America : The First Avenger , The Winter Soldier is pale . " Jake Coyle of the Associated Press said the film 's biggest misstep was the handling of Stan 's Winter Soldier , and that it was " getting difficult to tell the Marvel movies apart " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 = = Sequel = = 
 Captain America : Civil War was released on May 6 , 2016 , and again is directed by the Russo brothers . Evans , Johansson , Stan , Mackie , VanCamp and Grillo reprise their roles from The Winter Soldier and they are joined by Robert Downey , Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man , Paul Bettany as Vision , Jeremy Renner as Clint Barton / Hawkeye , Don Cheadle as James " Rhodey " Rhodes / War Machine , Elizabeth Olsen as Wanda Maximoff / Scarlet Witch , Paul Rudd as Scott Lang / Ant @-@ Man , and William Hurt as Thaddeus " Thunderbolt " Ross , all reprising roles from previous MCU films . 
 = The Last One ( Friends ) = 
 " The Last One " is the series finale of the television sitcom Friends . The episode serves as the seventeenth and eighteenth episode of season ten ; the episode 's two parts were classified as two separate episodes . It was written by series creators David Crane and Marta Kauffman , and directed by executive producer Kevin S. Bright . The series finale first aired on NBC in the United States on May 6 , 2004 , when it was watched by 52 @.@ 5 million viewers , making it the most watched entertainment telecast in six years and the sixth most watched overall television series finale in U.S. history , as well as the most watched episode from any television series throughout the decade 2000s on U.S. television . In Canada , the finale aired simultaneously on May 6 , 2004 on Global , and was viewed by 5 @.@ 16 million viewers , becoming the highest viewed episode of the series , and also becoming highest @-@ viewed and highest @-@ rated episode ever in Canada for a sitcom . 
 The series finale closes several long running storylines . Ross Geller ( David Schwimmer ) confesses his love for Rachel Green ( Jennifer Aniston ) , and they decide to resume their relationship ; and Monica Geller ( Courteney Cox ) and Chandler Bing ( Matthew Perry ) adopt twins and move to the suburbs . The episode 's final scene shows the group leaving their apartments for the final time and going to Central Perk for one last cup of coffee . 
 Prior to writing the episode , Crane , Kauffman and Bright watched finales from other sitcoms for inspiration . Kauffman found that she liked the ones that stayed true to the series . Filming took place at Warner Bros. Studios in Burbank , California ; part one was taped on January 16 , and part two on January 23 . The finale was well received by critics and the cast members . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Part 1 = = = 
 Phoebe Buffay ( Lisa Kudrow ) and Joey Tribbiani ( Matt LeBlanc ) pack the belongings of Monica and Chandler , who have accompanied Erica ( Anna Faris ) to the hospital . Rachel leaves Ross ' bedroom after their apparent reunion in the previous episode . Erica gives birth to twins , much to the surprise of Monica and Chandler , who were expecting only one child . At his apartment , Joey shows Phoebe his house @-@ warming gift for Monica and Chandler : a chick and duckling to replace the ones that died . Ross arrives and confesses to the pair that he slept with Rachel . Rachel emerges from her bedroom and , to his disappointment , tells Ross that their night together was " the perfect way to say goodbye " . 
 Later at the Central Perk café , Phoebe convinces Ross to tell Rachel how he feels about her before she leaves for her new job in Paris . As he is about to tell her , Central Perk manager Gunther ( James Michael Tyler ) confesses his love for Rachel . Back at Monica and Chandler 's apartment , Ross decides not to tell Rachel , for fear of rejection . She prepares to leave to catch her flight , but waits long enough for Monica and Chandler to return with the twins , named Erica ( after their biological mother ) and Jack ( after Monica 's father ) . After Rachel leaves , Ross has a change of heart , and Phoebe takes him in her taxi to follow Rachel to the airport . 
 = = = Part 2 = = = 
 Joey returns to his apartment to fetch the chick and the duck he was hiding , but finds they have become trapped in the foosball table . Chandler and Joey decide to break it open when they cannot find any other way of getting the birds out . Phoebe 's reckless driving gets her and Ross to JFK Airport and , after buying a ticket to get past security , they search the information boards for Rachel 's flight number . When they cannot locate her flight on any of the information boards , Ross calls and checks the number with Monica but discovers they are at the wrong airport ; Ross and Phoebe drove to JFK , while Rachel was flying out of nearby Newark Airport . Phoebe phones Rachel , who has already boarded her flight , to stall her for time . When a passenger ( Jim Rash ) overhears Phoebe saying there is a problem with the fictitious " left phalange " of the plane , he gets off the plane , prompting everyone else to leave . Chandler and Joey , who are emotionally attached to the foosball table , find they are unable to bear breaking it open , so Monica nonchalantly offers to do it for them . After they retrieve the birds , Chandler suggests Joey keeps them . 
 Phoebe and Ross arrive at the airport as Rachel boards the plane again . Ross tells her he loves her , but she is unable to deal with his confession and gets on the plane anyway . Ross returns home , dejected , and finds a message from Rachel on the phone . She explains her actions and decides to get off the plane , but the message cuts off . Ross turns around to see Rachel standing in the doorway and they kiss . The following morning , the friends gather in Monica and Chandler 's empty apartment . With some time remaining before Monica and Chandler leave for their new house , the six all leave their keys to the apartment on the kitchen counter and decide to go for one last cup of coffee together , although it is only implied and never stated that this will be at Central Perk . As the last line of the series , Chandler sarcastically quips , " Sure ... where ? " . The final scene is a shot of the apartment , panning round slowly from the living space to the front door . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and music = = = 
 The series ' creators completed the first draft of the hour @-@ long finale in January 2004 , four months prior to its airing on May 6 . Before writing the episode , David Crane , Marta Kauffman and Kevin S. Bright decided to watch the series finales of other sitcoms , paying attention to what worked and what did not . Kauffman found that they liked the ones which stayed true to the series , and they found the finale of The Mary Tyler Moore Show to be the gold standard . The writers had difficulty writing the finale , and spent several days thinking about the final scene without being able to write a word . Crane said that they did not want to do " something high concept , or take the show out of the show " . 
 The music playing as the camera pans across the empty apartment at the end of the episode is " Embryonic Journey " by Jefferson Airplane . The song " Yellow Ledbetter " by the band Pearl Jam is also featured in the episode — after Rachel boards the plane for the first time — making it the first Pearl Jam song to be licensed for a television show . A spokesperson for the group said it was , " simply a matter of the show 's producers asking permission " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The episode was filmed in Los Angeles , California on Stage 24 at Warner Bros. Studios , where Friends had been filmed since its second season . The first part was taped on January 16 , and the second on January 23 , 2004 . After the series finale , Stage 24 was renamed " The Friends Stage " . 
 A month before the filming of the final episode , Aniston said that with each episode it got " harder just to read the lines . " She explained that the cast was " all just nerves and raw emotions [ ... ] No one knows how to feel . We may need to be sedated on the last night . " The producers promised a tearful ending , and the cast admitted their crying was not faked when they filmed their scenes . LeBlanc revealed it had been too much for him and the rest of the cast ; he said Kudrow started crying first , and when he looked at Aniston and Cox they also appeared emotional . Schwimmer , who LeBlanc thought was the " consummate professional " , was also upset , so LeBlanc " just lost it . " Maggie Wheeler , who was Chandler 's " on and off " girlfriend Janice , told People , " the entire cast had to go back and have their makeup redone before starting , " and that Perry broke the tension by saying , " Somebody is gonna get fired . " Perry told the New York Daily News that he did not cry , " but I felt like I was about to for like seven hours . " 
 Although it was planned that some key scenes of the episode would be filmed without an audience in order to avoid leaks of plot spoilers , the producers decided not to worry about the issue and filmed it all in front of the live studio audience . The producers also instigated the rumor that multiple endings would be filmed ; in fact , only one was planned and shot . 
 At the start of each Friends episode filming , the cast would ordinarily be introduced to the studio audience one at a time , but this time the cast headed out for their pre @-@ curtain bow together . " That made me cry , " said Diane Newman , who was the script supervisor of the show . Among the specially invited audience of the taping were Hank Azaria , who played Phoebe 's scientist boyfriend in several episodes over the years ; David Arquette , who filmed his wife Cox and the others backstage with a video camera ; and Wheeler . Missing was Brad Pitt , Aniston 's then @-@ husband ; Pitt told the producers he wanted to be surprised when the finale aired on television . Although some guests were invited , around 75 % of the studio audience were ' ordinary ' members of the public so that their reactions would be congruous with the rest of the series . However , friends , family and colleagues of the cast and crew served as extras throughout the episode . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Promotion , ratings and awards = = = 
 NBC heavily promoted the series finale , which was preceded by weeks of hype . The top price for a 30 @-@ second commercial during the U.S. broadcast was approximately $ 1 million USD . Viewing parties were organized by local NBC affiliates around the United States , including an event at Universal CityWalk featuring a special broadcast of the finale on an outdoor Astrovision screen . It was shown in New York City , where over 3 @,@ 000 people watched it on big screens in parks . The finale was the subject of two episodes of Dateline NBC , one of which ran for two hours . Prior to the airing of the episode , a one @-@ hour retrospective of clips from previous episodes was shown . Following the finale , The Tonight Show with Jay Leno was filmed on the set of the Friends ' Central Perk cafe , which featured the series ' cast as guests . The advertising rates for the finale averaged $ 2 million for 30 seconds of commercial time . This currently remains as the largest advertising rate ever for a sitcom , breaking the previous record held by the Seinfeld finale at $ 1 @.@ 7 million . 
 The finale was watched by 52 @.@ 5 million American viewers , making it the most watched entertainment telecast in six years , and the most watched episode of the decade 2000s on U.S. television . " The Last One " was not the most watched Friends episode in the series ' history ; that distinction belongs to " The One After the Superbowl " which , as the title suggests , aired immediately after Super Bowl XXX on January 28 , 1996 and drew an audience of 52 @.@ 9 million viewers . The Friends finale was the sixth most watched overall series finale in U.S. television history , behind the finales of M * A * S * H , Roots , Cheers , The Fugitive and Seinfeld , which were watched by 125 , 100 , 92 @.@ 5 , 78 and 76 @.@ 3 million viewers , respectively . The retrospective episode was watched by under 36 million viewers , and the finale was the second most @-@ watched television show of the year , behind the Super Bowl . 
 The episode was nominated for two Primetime Emmy Awards at the 56th Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Multi @-@ Camera Sound Mixing for a Series or Special and Outstanding Multi @-@ Camera Picture Editing for a Series , but lost to the final season of Frasier in both categories . 
 = = = Critical reviews = = = 
 Reviews of the series finale were generally positive . Robert Bianco of USA Today described the finale as entertaining and satisfying , and praised it for deftly mixing emotion and humor while showcasing each of the stars . Sarah Rodman of the Boston Herald praised Aniston and Schwimmer for their acting , but felt that their characters ' reunion " felt a bit too neat , even if it was what most of the show 's legions of fans wanted . " Newsday 's Noel Holston called the episode " sweet and dumb and satisfying , " while Roger Catlin of The Hartford Courant felt that newcomers to the series would be " surprised at how laughless the affair could be , and how nearly every strained gag depends on the sheer stupidity of its characters . " 
 An editorial in USA Today highlighted the view of many critics who found problem with the aging cast , commenting , " Friends was getting creaky even as it remained popular . " Heather Havrilesky of Salon.com said that despite the " nauseating hype and the disappointing season and the lackluster finale , it 's important to remember what a great show this was for such a very long time . " Ken Parish Perkins of the Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram gave the finale a B grade , calling it " more touching than comical , more satisfying in terms of closure than knee @-@ slappingly funny . " 
 = = = Response from the staff = = = 
 The cast members reportedly got together in Los Angeles to watch the finale . It was well received by the main cast , who were confident that the fans would have the same reaction . David Schwimmer said , " It 's exactly what I had hoped . We all end up with a sense of a new beginning and the audience has a sense that it 's a new chapter in the lives of all these characters . " At the taping of the episode , the cast and crew passed around yearbooks , custom @-@ made by the production staff , and signed them for each other . The cast gave the producers inscribed Cartier SA watches , while the producers gave the cast Neil Lane jewelry . As the sets were broken down , the cast and crew each got a chunk of the street outside Central Perk in a glass box as a keepsake . 
 There were 3 separate wrap parties - a dinner at the Aniston @-@ Pitt residence on January 19 , 2004 , a sit down at cast hangout Il Sole in West Hollywood on January 22 , and a big party for 1 @,@ 000 guests on January 24 at Los Angeles ' Park Plaza Hotel . At the party at the Park Plaza Hotel , The Rembrandts performed the theme song of Friends , " I 'll Be There for You " , and the cast gave a re @-@ enactment of the pilot episode 's first scene . 
 = A Vision of the Last Judgment = 
 A Vision of the Last Judgment is a painting by William Blake that was designed in 1808 before becoming a lost artwork . The painting was to be shown in an 1810 exhibition with a detailed analysis added to a second edition of his Descriptive Catalogue . This plan was dropped after the exhibition was cancelled , and the painting disappeared . Blake 's notes for the Descriptive Catalogue describe various aspects of the work in a detailed manner , which allow the aspects of the painting to be known . Additionally , earlier designs that reveal similar Blake depiction of the Last Judgment have survived , and these date back to an 1805 precursor design created for Robert Blair 's The Grave . In addition to Blake 's notes on the painting , a letter written to <unk> Humphrey provides a description of the various images within an earlier design of the Last Judgment . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Blake claimed to have seen visions throughout his life , and he claimed that they were a common aspect of life . His understanding of these events was , as he explained , similar to the experiences of biblical prophets . In the commentary to A Vision of the Last Judgment , Blake claimed that the image originated in a particular vision he experienced that allowed him to see the host of Heaven praising God . The actual design of A Vision of the Last Judgment was created in 1808 as an expansion of his 1805 work The Day of Judgment . Blake created this work to be used in Blair 's The Grave , which was published 1808 . 
 The seven foot by five foot painting was to be shown in an 1810 exhibit of Blake 's work , but the exhibit was cancelled after problems resulting from an 1809 exhibit of his works . The actual painting was lost , but earlier versions of the work survived . These include an 1808 watercolour version made for Elizabeth <unk> , wife of George Wyndham , 3rd Earl of Egremont , that was displayed at their Petworth House . A similar illustration in pencil and ink became part of the Rosenwald Collection . Other editions included watercolours made for Thomas Butts in 1806 , 1807 , and 1809 , one for John Flaxman in 1806 ( lost ) , and an 1809 unsold version in tempera . These are in addition to The Day of Judgment made for Blair 's The Grave . 
 The painting was to be discussed in Blake 's Descriptive Catalogue , a work that , in 1809 , described Blake 's feelings about various painters and poets in addition to descriptions of his own works and their various meanings . Blake planned to create another edition for the 1810 collection but the plan was stopped after the exhibition was cancelled . Notes for what Blake planned to write for the works A Vision of the Last Judgment and Public Address survived . The notes were discovered by William Michael Rossetti and first mentioned in a letter to Horace Scudder on 27 November 1864 . Rossetti transcribed the notes for Alexander Gilchrist 's The Life of William Blake , an early biography on Blake . One piece of the work was missing : part of page 71 was sent by Rossetti to Scudder . Blake discussed the 1808 watercolour sold to Ilives in two works , a poem , " The Caverns of the Grave Ive Seen " , written for Ilives provided by Blake with her <unk> and a description of Ilives 's design for Humphry in January 1808 . 
 = = Painting = = 
 The description provided by Blake to Humphrey explains that the work depicts the resurrection . The top of the work depicts Christ on the Throne of Judgment with Heaven opened up across the painting . Behind Christ are the heads of infants which represent creation coming from Jesus . Christ is surrounded by the four <unk> and seven angels that have vials filled with God 's wrath . An image of a tabernacle with a cross inside is depicted above Christ . An image of baptism is to Christ 's right and the Last Supper is to Christ 's left with both representing eternal life . Further to Christ 's right is the resurrection of the just and to the left is the resurrection and subsequent fall of the wicked . Adam and Eve are below Christ , and Abraham and Moses are nearby . Below Moses is Satan wrapped by the Serpent and in the centre is the book of death . At the top is the book of life , and the Christian Church is the figure of a woman on top of the moon . 
 Blake , in his notes to A Vision of the Last Judgment , describes how his design is to work : " If the Spectator could Enter into these Images in his Imagination approaching them on the Fiery Chariot of his <unk> Thought [ ... ] then would he arise from his Grave " . He relies on the word representation frequently in the work , and he tries to represent action in a visible manner that distances his depiction of the apocalypse from a traditional version that disguises the various components of an apocalyptic vision . To Blake , he must create an image of the Last Judgment , then represent the image , and then describe with a written gloss of the work . This creates a layer of representation that separates the audience from the apocalyptic experience , which undermines the concept of apocalypse as both mysterious and directly experienced . 
 In discussing the nature of time , Blake wrote in his notes : " The Greeks represented Chronos or Time as a very Aged Man ; this is Fable , but the Real Vision of Time is in Eternal Youth . I have , however , somewhat accommodated my Figure of Time to the common opinion , as I myself am also infected with it & my Visions also infected , as I see Time Aged , alas , too much so . " 
 = = Themes = = 
 Blake based his portrayal of the apocalypse on his belief that God 's love allowed for a personal apocalypse as part of the human experience . In the notes to the work , he claimed that " whenever any Individual Rejects Error & Embraces Truth a Last Judgment passes upon that Individual " . This idea is connected to views of David Hartley of the " pure disinterested love of God " , and appears in other works by Blake , including his Jerusalem . Also , Blake 's Milton describes the process that an individual goes through during an apocalypse , which includes having to confront their errors and their flaws . There is no peace during the struggle , as it involves a direct interaction between contrary views that would eventually establish the new state . 
 On the details in the painting , Blake claimed that each component had a specific meaning that provides an allegory @-@ like dimension to the work . Blake dismissed the idea of using allegory within his works except , as he wrote in a letter to Butts , 6 July 1803 , " Allegory Address 'd to the intellectual powers , while it is altogether hidden from the <unk> Understanding , is My Definition of the Most Sublime Poetry " . 
 Blake 's philosophical interpretation of time is similar to Samuel Taylor Coleridge 's depiction of the relationship between time and the state of limbo within his poem " Limbo " . Both claim that their understanding of time is connected to the common , contemporary view , but they alter their perspective of time within their works to that of an older person . The figure of time appears in other works by Blake , including as the figure Los and in the illustration Blake made for Edward Young 's Night Thoughts . 
 = Romanticism in Scotland = 
 Romanticism in Scotland was an artistic , literary and intellectual movement that developed between the late eighteenth and the early nineteenth centuries . It was part of the wider European Romantic movement , which was partly a reaction against the Age of Enlightenment , emphasising individual , national and emotional responses , moving beyond Renaissance and Classicist models , particularly to the Middle Ages . 
 In the arts , Romanticism manifested itself in literature and drama in the adoption of the mythical bard Ossian , the exploration of national poetry in the work of Robert Burns and in the historical novels of Walter Scott . Scott also had a major impact on the development of a national Scottish drama . Art was heavily influenced by Ossian and a new view of the Highlands as the location of a wild and dramatic landscape . Scott profoundly affected architecture through his re @-@ building of Abbotsford House in the early nineteenth century , which set off the boom in the Scots Baronial revival . In music , Burns was part of an attempt to produce a canon of Scottish song , which resulted in a cross fertilisation of Scottish and continental classical music , with romantic music becoming dominant in Scotland into the twentieth century . 
 Intellectually , Scott and figures like Thomas Carlyle played a part in the development of historiography and the idea of the historical imagination . Romanticism also influenced science , particularly the life sciences , geology , optics and astronomy , giving Scotland a prominence in these areas that continued into the late nineteenth century . Scottish philosophy was dominated by Scottish Common Sense Realism , which shared some characteristics with Romanticism and was a major influence on the development of Transcendentalism . Scott also played a major part in defining Scottish and British politics , helping to create a romanticised view of Scotland and the Highlands that fundamentally changed Scottish national identity . 
 Romanticism began to subside as a movement in the 1830s , but it continued to significantly affect areas such as music until the early twentieth century . It also had a lasting impact on the nature of Scottish identity and outside perceptions of Scotland . 
 = = Definitions = = 
 See also : Romantic literature in English 
 Romanticism was a complex artistic , literary and intellectual movement that originated in the second half of the eighteenth century in western Europe , and gained strength during and after the Industrial and French Revolutions . It was partly a revolt against the political norms of the Age of Enlightenment which rationalised nature , and was embodied most strongly in the visual arts , music , and literature , but significantly influenced historiography , philosophy and the natural sciences . 
 Romanticism has been seen as " the revival of the life and thought of the Middle Ages " , reaching beyond Rationalist and Classicist models to elevate medievalism and elements of art and narrative perceived to be authentically medieval , in an attempt to escape the confines of population growth , urban sprawl and industrialism , embracing the exotic , unfamiliar and distant . It is also associated with political revolutions , beginning with those in Americana and France and movements for independence , particularly in Poland , Spain and Greece . It is often thought to incorporate an emotional assertion of the self and of individual experience along with a sense of the infinite , transcendental and sublime . In art there was a stress on imagination , landscape and a spiritual correspondence with nature . It has been described by Margaret Drabble as " an unending revolt against classical form , conservative morality , authoritarian government , personal insincerity , and human moderation " . 
 = = Literature and drama = = 
 Although after union with England in 1707 Scotland increasingly adopted English language and wider cultural norms , its literature developed a distinct national identity and began to enjoy an international reputation . Allan Ramsay ( 1686 – 1758 ) laid the foundations of a reawakening of interest in older Scottish literature , as well as leading the trend for pastoral poetry , helping to develop the Habbie stanza as a poetic form . James Macpherson ( 1736 – 96 ) was the first Scottish poet to gain an international reputation . Claiming to have found poetry written by the ancient bard Ossian , he published translations that acquired international popularity , being proclaimed as a Celtic equivalent of the Classical epics . Fingal , written in 1762 , was speedily translated into many European languages , and its appreciation of natural beauty and treatment of the ancient legend has been credited more than any single work with bringing about the Romantic movement in European , and especially in German literature , through its influence on Johann Gottfried von Herder and Johann Wolfgang von Goethe . It was also popularised in France by figures that included Napoleon . Eventually it became clear that the poems were not direct translations from the Gaelic , but flowery adaptations made to suit the aesthetic expectations of his audience . 
 Robert Burns ( 1759 – 96 ) and Walter Scott ( 1771 – 1832 ) were highly influenced by the Ossian cycle . Burns , an Ayrshire poet and lyricist , is widely regarded as the national poet of Scotland and a major influence on the Romantic movement . His poem ( and song ) " Auld Lang Syne " is often sung at Hogmanay ( the last day of the year ) , and " Scots Wha Hae " served for a long time as an unofficial national anthem of the country . Scott began as a poet and also collected and published Scottish ballads . His first prose work , Waverley in 1814 , is often called the first historical novel . It launched a highly successful career , with other historical novels such as Rob Roy ( 1817 ) , The Heart of Midlothian ( 1818 ) and Ivanhoe ( 1820 ) . Scott probably did more than any other figure to define and popularise Scottish cultural identity in the nineteenth century . Other major literary figures connected with Romanticism include the poets and novelists James Hogg ( 1770 – 1835 ) , Allan Cunningham ( 1784 – 1842 ) and John Galt ( 1779 – 1839 ) . One of the most significant figures of the Romantic movement , Lord Byron , was brought up in Scotland until he acquired his English title . 
 Scotland was also the location of two of the most important literary magazines of the era , The Edinburgh Review ( founded in 1802 ) and Blackwood 's Magazine ( founded in 1817 ) , which significantly influenced the development of British literature and drama in the era of Romanticism . Ian Duncan and Alex <unk> suggest that publications like the novels of Scott and these magazines were part of a highly dynamic Scottish Romanticism that by the early nineteenth century , caused Edinburgh to emerge as the cultural capital of Britain and become central to a wider formation of a " British Isles nationalism . " 
 Scottish " national drama " emerged in the early 1800s , as plays with specifically Scottish themes began to dominate the Scottish stage . Theatres had been discouraged by the Church of Scotland and fears of Jacobite assemblies . In the later eighteenth century , many plays were written for and performed by small amateur companies and were not published and so most have been lost . Towards the end of the century there were " closet dramas " , primarily designed to be read , rather than performed , including work by Scott , Hogg , Galt and Joanna Baillie ( 1762 – 1851 ) , often influenced by the ballad tradition and Gothic Romanticism . 
 The Scottish national drama that emerged in the early nineteenth century was largely historical in nature and based around a core of adaptations of Scott 's Waverley novels . The existing repertoire of Scottish @-@ themed plays included Shakespeare 's Macbeth ( c . 1605 ) , Friedrich Schiller 's Maria Stuart ( 1800 ) , John Home 's Douglas ( 1756 ) and Ramsay 's The Gentle Shepherd ( 1725 ) , with the last two being the most popular plays among amateur groups . Ballets with Scottish themes included Jockey and Jenny and Love in the Highlands . Scott was keenly interested in drama , becoming a shareholder in the Theatre Royal , Edinburgh . Baillie 's Highland themed Family Legend was first produced in Edinburgh in 1810 with the help of Scott , as part of a deliberate attempt to stimulate a national Scottish drama . Scott also wrote five plays , of which <unk> Hill ( 1822 ) and MacDuff 's Cross ( 1822 ) were patriotic Scottish histories . Adaptations of the Waverley novels , first performed primarily in minor theatres , rather than the larger Patent theatres , included The Lady in the Lake ( 1817 ) , The Heart of Midlothian ( 1819 ) ( specifically described as a " romantic play " for its first performance ) , and Rob Roy , which underwent over 1 @,@ 000 performances in Scotland in this period . Also adapted for the stage were Guy Mannering , The Bride of Lammermoor and The Abbot . These highly popular plays saw the social range and size of the audience for theatre expand and helped shape theatre @-@ going practices in Scotland for the rest of the century . 
 = = Art = = 
 The Ossian cycle itself became a common subject for Scottish artists , and works based on its themes were created by figures such as Alexander Runciman ( 1736 – 85 ) and David Allan ( 1744 – 96 ) . This period saw a shift in attitudes to the Highlands and mountain landscapes in general , from viewing them as hostile , empty regions occupied by backward and marginal people , to interpreting them as aesthetically pleasing exemplars of nature , occupied by rugged primitives , who were now depicted in a dramatic fashion . Produced before his departure to Italy , Jacob More 's ( 1740 – 93 ) series of four paintings " Falls of Clyde " ( 1771 – 73 ) have been described by art historian Duncan Macmillan as treating the waterfalls as " a kind of natural national monument " and has been seen as an early work in developing a romantic sensibility to the Scottish landscape . Runciman was probably the first artist to paint Scottish landscapes in watercolours in the more romantic style that was emerging towards the end of the eighteenth century . 
 The effect of Romanticism can also be seen in the works of late eighteenth- and early nineteenth @-@ century artists such as Henry Raeburn ( 1756 – 1823 ) , Alexander Nasmyth ( 1758 – 1840 ) and John Knox ( 1778 – 1845 ) . Raeburn was the most significant artist of the period to pursue his entire career in Scotland . He was born in Edinburgh and returned there after a trip to Italy in 1786 . He is most famous for his intimate portraits of leading figures in Scottish life , going beyond the aristocracy to lawyers , doctors , professors , writers and ministers , adding elements of Romanticism to the tradition of Reynolds . He became a knight in 1822 and the King 's limner and painter for Scotland in 1823 . Nasmyth visited Italy and worked in London , but returned to his native Edinburgh for most of his career . He produced work in a range of forms , including his portrait of Romantic poet Robert Burns , which depicts him against a dramatic Scottish background , but he is chiefly remembered for his landscapes and has been seen as " the founder of the Scottish landscape tradition " . The work of Knox continued the theme of landscape , directly linking it with the Romantic works of Scott , and he was also among the first artists to depict the urban landscape of Glasgow . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The Gothic revival in architecture has been seen as an expression of Romanticism , and according to Alvin Jackson , the Scots baronial style was " a Caledonian reading of the gothic " . Some of the earliest evidence of a revival in Gothic architecture are from Scotland . Inveraray Castle , constructed from 1746 with design input from William Adam , incorporates turrets into a conventional Palladian @-@ style house . His son Robert Adam 's houses in this style include Mellerstain and Wedderburn in Berwickshire and Seton House in East Lothian . The trend is most clearly seen at Culzean Castle , Ayrshire , remodelled by Robert from 1777 . 
 Important for the re @-@ adoption of the Scots Baronial in the early nineteenth century was Abbotsford House , the residence of Scott . Re @-@ built for him from 1816 , it became a model for the revival of the style . Common features borrowed from sixteenth- and seventeenth @-@ century houses included battlemented gateways , crow @-@ stepped gables , pointed turrets and machicolations . The style was popular across Scotland and was applied to many relatively modest dwellings by architects such as William Burn ( 1789 – 1870 ) , David Bryce ( 1803 – 1876 ) , Edward Blore ( 1787 – 1879 ) , Edward Calvert ( c . 1847 – 1914 ) and Robert Stodart Lorimer ( 1864 – 1929 ) . Examples in urban contexts include the building of Cockburn Street in Edinburgh ( from the 1850s ) as well as the National Wallace Monument at Stirling ( 1859 – 69 ) . The rebuilding of Balmoral Castle as a baronial palace , and its adoption as a royal retreat by Queen Victoria from 1855 – 58 , confirmed the popularity of the style . 
 In ecclesiastical architecture , a style similar to that developed in England was adopted . Important figures in this movement included Frederick Thomas Pilkington ( 1832 – 98 ) , who developed a new style of church building which accorded with the fashionable High Gothic , but which adapted it for the worship needs of the Free Church of Scotland . Examples include Barclay Viewforth Church , Edinburgh ( 1862 – 64 ) . Robert Rowand Anderson ( 1834 – 1921 ) , who trained in the office of George Gilbert Scott in London before returning to Edinburgh , worked mainly on small churches in the " First Pointed " ( or Early English ) style that is characteristic of Scott 's former assistants . By 1880 , his practice was designing some of the most prestigious public and private buildings in Scotland , such as the Scottish National Portrait Gallery ; the Dome of Old College , Medical Faculty and McEwan Hall , Edinburgh University ; the Central Hotel at Glasgow Central station ; the Catholic Apostolic Church in Edinburgh ; and Mount Stuart House on the Isle of Bute . 
 = = Music = = 
 One characteristic of Romanticism was the conscious creation of bodies of nationalist art music . In Scotland this form was dominant from the late eighteenth century to the early twentieth century . In the 1790s Robert Burns embarked on an attempt to produce a corpus of Scottish national song , building on the work of antiquarians and musicologists such as William Tytler , James Beattie and Joseph Ritson . Working with music engraver and seller James Johnson , he contributed about a third of the eventual songs of the collection known as The Scots Musical Museum , issued between 1787 and 1803 in six volumes . Burns collaborated with George Thomson in A Select Collection of Original Scottish Airs , published from 1793 to 1818 , which adapted Scottish folk songs with " classical " arrangements . Thompson was inspired by hearing Scottish songs sung by visiting Italian castrati at the St Cecilia Concerts in Edinburgh . He collected Scottish songs and obtained musical arrangements from the best European composers , who included Joseph Haydn and Ludwig van Beethoven . Burns was employed in editing the lyrics . A Select Collection of Original Scottish Airs was published in five volumes between 1799 and 1818 . It helped make Scottish songs part of the European cannon of classical music , while Thompson 's work brought elements of Romanticism , such as harmonies based on those of Beethoven , into Scottish classical music . Also involved in the collection and publication of Scottish songs was Scott , whose first literary effort was The <unk> of the Scottish Border , published in three volumes ( 1802 – 03 ) . This collection first drew the attention of an international audience to his work , and some of his lyrics were set to music by Schubert , who also created a setting of Ossian . 
 Perhaps the most influential composer of the first half of the nineteenth century was the German Felix Mendelssohn , who visited Britain ten times , for a total of twenty months , from 1829 . Scotland inspired two of his most famous works , the overture Fingal 's Cave ( also known as the Hebrides Overture ) and the Scottish Symphony ( Symphony No. 3 ) . On his last visit to England in 1847 , he conducted his own Scottish Symphony with the Philharmonic Orchestra before Queen Victoria and Prince Albert . Max Bruch ( 1838 – 1920 ) composed the Scottish Fantasy ( 1880 ) for violin and orchestra , which includes an arrangement of the tune " Hey <unk> <unk> " , best known for its use in the song Scots Wha Hae by Burns . 
 By the late nineteenth century , there was in effect a national school of orchestral and operatic music in Scotland . Major composers included Alexander Mackenzie ( 1847 – 1935 ) , William Wallace ( 1860 – 1940 ) , Learmont Drysdale ( 1866 – 1909 ) , Hamish <unk> ( 1868 – 1916 ) and John McEwen ( 1868 – 1948 ) . Mackenzie , who studied in Germany and Italy and mixed Scottish themes with German Romanticism , is best known for his three Scottish Rhapsodies ( 1879 – 80 , 1911 ) , Pibroch for violin and orchestra ( 1889 ) and the Scottish Concerto for piano ( 1897 ) , all involving Scottish themes and folk melodies . Wallace 's work included an overture , In Praise of Scottish Poesie ( 1894 ) ; his pioneering symphonic poem about his namesake , medieval nationalist William Wallace AD 1305 – 1905 ( 1905 ) ; and a cantata , The Massacre of the Macpherson ( 1910 ) . Drysdale 's work often dealt with Scottish themes , including the overture Tam O ’ Shanter ( 1890 ) , the cantata The Kelpie ( 1891 ) , the tone poem A Border Romance ( 1904 ) , and the cantata <unk> ( 1905 ) . <unk> 's overture The Land of the Mountain and the Flood ( 1887 ) , his Six Scotch Dances ( 1896 ) , his operas Jeanie Deans ( 1894 ) and <unk> ( 1897 ) and choral works on Scottish subjects have been described by I. G. C. Hutchison as the musical equivalent of Abbotsford and Balmoral . McEwen 's more overtly national works include Grey Galloway ( 1908 ) , the Solway Symphony ( 1911 ) and Prince Charlie , A Scottish Rhapsody ( 1924 ) . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 In contrast to Enlightenment histories , which have been seen as attempting to draw general lessons about humanity from history , the German philosopher Johann Gottfried von Herder in his Ideas upon Philosophy and the History of Mankind ( 1784 ) , set out the concept of <unk> , a unique national spirit that drove historical change . As a result , a key element in the influence of Romanticism on intellectual life was the production of national histories . The nature and existence of a national Scottish historiography has been debated among historians . Those authors who consider that such a national history did exist in this period indicate that it can be found outside of the production of major historical narratives , in works of antiquarianism and fiction . 
 An important element in the emergence of a Scottish national history was an interest in antiquarianism , with figures like John Pinkerton ( 1758 – 1826 ) collecting sources such as ballads , coins , medals , songs and artefacts . Enlightenment historians had tended to react with embarrassment to Scottish history , particularly the feudalism of the Middle Ages and the religious intolerance of the Reformation . In contrast many historians of the early nineteenth century rehabilitated these areas as suitable for serious study . Lawyer and antiquarian Cosmo Innes , who produced works on Scotland in the Middle Ages ( 1860 ) , and Sketches of Early Scottish History ( 1861 ) , has been likened to the pioneering history of Georg Heinrich <unk> , one of the first writers to collate the major historical accounts of German history . Patrick Fraser Tytler 's nine @-@ volume history of Scotland ( 1828 – 43 ) , particularity his sympathetic view of Mary , Queen of Scots , have led to comparisons with Leopold von Ranke , considered the father of modern scientific historical writing . Tytler was co @-@ founder with Scott of the Bannatyne Society in 1823 , which helped further the course of historical research in Scotland . Thomas M <unk> 's ( 1797 – 1875 ) biographies of John Knox and Andrew Melville , figures generally savaged in the Enlightenment , helped rehabilitate their reputations . W. F. Skene 's ( 1809 – 92 ) three part study of Celtic Scotland ( 1886 – 91 ) was the first serious investigation of the region and helped spawn the Scottish Celtic Revival . Issues of race became important , with Pinkerton , James Sibbald ( 1745 – 1803 ) and John Jamieson ( 1758 – 1839 ) subscribing to a theory of Picto @-@ <unk> , which postulated a Germanic origin for the Picts and the Scots language . 
 Among the most significant intellectual figures associated with Romanticism was Thomas Carlyle ( 1795 – 1881 ) , born in Scotland and later a resident of London . He was largely responsible for bringing the works of German Romantics such as Schiller and Goethe to the attention of a British audience . An essayist and historian , he invented the phrase " hero @-@ worship " , lavishing largely uncritical praise on strong leaders such as Oliver Cromwell , Frederick the Great and Napoleon . His The French Revolution : A History ( 1837 ) dramatised the plight of the French aristocracy , but stressed the inevitability of history as a force . With French historian Jules Michelet , he is associated with the use of the " historical imagination " . In Romantic historiography this led to a tendency to emphasise sentiment and identification , inviting readers to sympathise with historical personages and even to imagine interactions with them . In contrast to many continental Romantic historians , Carlyle remained largely pessimistic about human nature and events . He believed that history was a form of prophecy that could reveal patterns for the future . In the late nineteenth century he became one of a number of Victorian sage writers and social commentators . 
 Romantic writers often reacted against the empiricism of Enlightenment historical writing , putting forward the figure of the " poet @-@ historian " who would mediate between the sources of history and the reader , using insight to create more than chronicles of facts . For this reason , Romantic historians such as Thierry saw Walter Scott , who had spent considerable effort uncovering new documents and sources for his novels , as an authority in historical writing . Scott is now seen primarily as a novelist , but also produced a nine @-@ volume biography of Napoleon , and has been described as " the towering figure of Romantic historiography in Transatlantic and European contexts " , having a profound effect on how history , particularly that of Scotland , was understood and written . Historians that acknowledged his influence included Chateaubriand , Macaulay , and Ranke . 
 = = Science = = 
 Romanticism has also been seen as affecting scientific enquiry . Romantic attitudes to science varied , from distrust of the scientific enterprise to endorsing a non @-@ mechanical science that rejected the <unk> and the abstract theorising associated with Newton . Major trends in continental science associated with Romanticism include Naturphilosophie , developed by Friedrich Schelling ( 1775 – 1854 ) , which focused on the necessity of reuniting man with nature , and Humboldtian science , based on the work of Alexander von Humboldt ( 1769 – 1859 ) . As defined by Susan Cannon , this form of inquiry placed a stress on observation , accurate scientific instruments and new conceptual tools ; disregarded the boundaries between different disciplines ; and emphasised working in nature rather than the artificial laboratory . <unk> observation above calculation , Romantic scientists were often attracted to the areas where investigation , rather than calculation and theory , was most important , particularly the life sciences , geology , optics and astronomy . 
 James Allard identifies the origins of Scottish " Romantic medicine " in the work of Enlightenment figures , particularly the brothers William ( 1718 – 83 ) and John Hunter ( 1728 – 93 ) , who were , respectively , the leading anatomist and surgeon of their day and in the role of Edinburgh as a major centre of medical teaching and research . Key figures that were influenced by the Hunters ' work and by Romanticism include John Brown ( 1735 – 88 ) , Thomas Beddoes ( 1760 – 1808 ) and John Barclay ( 1758 – 1826 ) . Brown argued in <unk> <unk> ( 1780 ) that life is an essential " vital energy " or " excitability " and that disease is either the excessive or diminished redistribution of the normal intensity of the human organ , which became known as <unk> . This work was highly influential , particularly in Germany , on the development of Naturphilosophie . This work was translated and edited by Beddoes , another graduate of Edinburgh , whose own work , Hygeia , or Essays Moral and Medical ( 1807 ) expanded on these ideas . Following in this vein , Barclay in the 1810 edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica identified physiology as the branch of medicine closest to metaphysics . Also important were the brothers John ( 1763 – 1820 ) and Charles Bell ( 1774 – 1842 ) , who made significant advances in the study of the vascular and nervous systems , respectively . 
 The University of Edinburgh was also a major supplier of surgeons for the royal navy , and Robert Jameson ( 1774 – 1854 ) , Professor of Natural History at Edinburgh , ensured that a large number of these were surgeon @-@ naturalists , who were vital in the Humboldtian and imperial enterprise of investigating nature throughout the world . These included Robert Brown ( 1773 – 1858 ) , one of the major figures in the early exploration of Australia . His later use of the microscope paralleled that noted among German students of Naturphilosophie , and he is credited with the discovery of the cell nucleus and the first observation of Brownian motion . Charles Lyell 's work Principles of Geology ( 1830 ) is often seen as the foundation of modern geology . It was indebted to Humboldtian science in its insistence on measurements of nature , and , according to Noah <unk> , retains a much of the " rhetoric of the sublime " , which is characteristic of Romantic attitudes to landscape . 
 Romantic thinking was also evident in the writings of Hugh Miller , stonemason and geologist , who followed in the tradition of Naturphilosophie , arguing that nature was a pre @-@ ordained progression towards the human race . Publisher , historian , antiquarian and scientist Robert Chambers ( 1802 – 71 ) became a friend of Scott , writing a biography of him after the author 's death . Chambers also became a geologist , researching in Scandinavia and Canada . His most influential work was the anonymously published Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation ( 1844 ) , which was the most comprehensive written argument in favour of evolution before the work of Charles Darwin ( 1809 – 82 ) . His work was strongly influenced by transcendental anatomy , which , drawing on Goethe and Lorenz Oken ( 1779 – 1851 ) , looked for ideal patterns and structure in nature and had been pioneered in Scotland by figures including Robert Knox ( 1791 – 1862 ) . 
 David Brewster ( 1781 – 1868 ) , physicist , mathematician and astronomer , undertook key work in optics , where he provided a compromise between Goethe 's Naturphilosophie @-@ influenced studies and Newton 's system , which Goethe attacked . His work would be important in later biological , geological and astrological discoveries . Diligent measurement in South Africa allowed Thomas Henderson ( 1798 – 1844 ) make the observations that would allow him to be the first to calculate the distance to Alpha Centauri , before returning to Edinburgh to become the first Astronomer Royal for Scotland from 1834 . Influenced by Humboldt , and much praised by him , was Mary Somerville ( 1780 – 1872 ) , mathematician , geographer , physicist , astronomer and one of the few women to gain recognition in science in the period . A major contribution to the " magnetic crusade " declared by Humboldt was made by Scottish @-@ born astronomer John Lamont ( 1805 – 79 ) , head of the observatory in Munich , when he found a decennial period ( ten @-@ year cycle ) in the Earth 's magnetic field . 
 = = Politics = = 
 In the aftermath of the Jacobite risings , a movement to restore Stuart King James II of England to the throne , the British government enacted a series of laws that attempted to speed the process of the destruction of the clan system . Measures included a ban on the bearing of arms , the wearing of tartan and limitations on the activities of the Episcopalian Church . Most of the legislation was repealed by the end of the eighteenth century as the Jacobite threat subsided . 
 Soon after , there was a process of the rehabilitation of highland culture . Tartan had already been adopted for highland regiments in the British army , which poor highlanders joined in large numbers until the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 , but by the nineteenth century it had largely been abandoned by the ordinary people of the region . In the 1820s , tartan and the kilt were adopted by members of the social elite , not just in Scotland , but across Europe . The international craze for tartan , and for idealising a romanticised Highlands , was set off by the Ossian cycle and further popularised by the works of Scott . His " staging " of the royal visit of King George IV to Scotland in 1822 and the king 's wearing of tartan resulted in a massive upsurge in demand for kilts and tartans that could not be met by the Scottish linen industry . Individual clan tartans was largely defined in this period , and they became a major symbol of Scottish identity . This " <unk> " , by which all of Scotland was identified with the culture of the Highlands , was cemented by Queen Victoria 's interest in the country , her adoption of Balmoral as a major royal retreat and her interest in " <unk> " . 
 The romanticisation of the Highlands and the adoption of Jacobitism into mainstream culture have been seen as defusing the potential threat to the Union with England , the House of Hanover and the dominant Whig government . In many countries Romanticism played a major part in the emergence of radical independence movements through the development of national identities . Tom Nairn argues that Romanticism in Scotland did not develop along the lines seen elsewhere in Europe , leaving a " rootless " intelligentsia , who moved to England or elsewhere and so did not supply a cultural nationalism that could be communicated to the emerging working classes . Graeme Moreton and Lindsay Paterson both argue that the lack of interference of the British state in civil society meant that the middle classes had no reason to object to the union . Atsuko Ichijo argues that national identity cannot be equated with a movement for independence . Moreton suggests that there was a Scottish nationalism , but that it was expressed in terms of " Unionist nationalism " . A form of political radicalism remained within Scottish Romanticism , surfacing in events like the foundation of the Friends of the People in 1792 and in 1853 the National Association for the Vindication of Scottish Rights , which was in effect a federation of romantics , radical churchmen and administrative reformers . However , Scottish identity was not directed into nationalism until the twentieth century . 
 = = Philosophy = = 
 The dominant school of philosophy in Scotland in the late eighteenth century and the first half of the nineteenth century is known as Common Sense Realism . It argued that there are certain concepts , such as our existence , the existence of solid objects and some basic moral " first principles " , that are intrinsic to our make @-@ up and from which all subsequent arguments and systems of morality must be derived . It can be seen as an attempt to reconcile the new scientific developments of the Enlightenment with religious belief . The origins of these arguments are in a reaction to the scepticism that became dominant in the Enlightenment , particularly that articulated by Scottish philosopher David Hume ( 1711 – 76 ) . This branch of thinking was first formulated by Thomas Reid ( 1710 – 96 ) in his An Inquiry into the Human Mind on the Principles of Common Sense ( 1764 ) . It was popularised in Scotland by figures including Dugald Stewart ( 1753 – 1828 ) and in England by James Beattie . Stewart 's students included Walter Scott , Walter Chambers and Thomas Brown , and this branch of thought would later be a major influence on Charles Darwin . William Hamilton ( 1788 – 1856 ) attempted to combine Reid 's approach with the philosophy of Kant . 
 Common Sense Realism not only dominated Scottish thought but also had a major impact in France , the United States , Germany and other countries . Victor Cousin ( 1792 – 1867 ) was the most important proponent in France , becoming Minister of Education and incorporating the philosophy into the curriculum . In Germany the emphasis on careful observation influenced Humboldt 's ideas about science and was a major factor in the development of German Idealism . James McCosh ( 1811 – 94 ) brought Common Sense Realism directly from Scotland to North American in 1868 when he became president of Princeton University , which soon became a stronghold of the movement . Noah Porter ( 1811 – 92 ) taught Common Sense Realism to generations of students at Yale . As a result , it would be a major influence on the development of one of the most important offshoots of Romanticism in New England , Transcendentalism , particularly in the writing of Ralph Waldo Emerson ( 1803 – 82 ) . 
 = = Decline = = 
 In literature , Romanticism is often thought to have ended in the 1830s , with a few commentators , like Margaret Drabble , describing it as over by 1848 . Romanticism continued much longer in some places and areas of endeavour , particularly in music , where it has been dated from 1820 to 1910 . The death of Scott in 1832 has been seen as marking the end of the great romantic generation , and Scottish literature and culture in general lost some of its international prominence from this point . Scott 's reputation as a writer also went into decline in the late nineteenth century , only recovering in the twentieth . Economic and social change , particularly the better communications brought by the railways , decreased the ability of Edinburgh to function as an alternative cultural capital to London , with its publishing industry moving to London . Lack of opportunities in politics and letters led many talented Scots to leave for England and elsewhere . The sentimental <unk> tradition of J. M. Barrie and George MacDonald , of those that continued to pursue Scottish topics at the end of the nineteenth century , was seen by Tom Nairn as " sub @-@ romantic " . 
 In art , the tradition of Scottish landscape painting continued into the later nineteenth century , but Romanticism gave way to influences including French Impressionism , Post @-@ Impressionism and eventually Modernism . The Scots baronial style continued to be popular until the end of the nineteenth century , when other styles began to dominate . Although Romanticism persisted in music much longer than in almost every area , it fell out of fashion in the twentieth century and anti @-@ Romantic currents in Britain virtually buried Victorian and Edwardian music not written by Edward Elgar or Arthur Sullivan . The idea of the historical imagination was replaced with the source @-@ based empiricism championed by Ranke . <unk> Ash has noted that after the death of Scott , Scottish national history lost its momentum , and the Scottish literati stopped writing Scottish histories . Colin Kidd has observed a change of attitudes to historical writing and suggests that this was one reason for a lack of the development of political nationalism . In science , the rapid expansion of knowledge increased a tendency towards specialisation and professionalism and a decline of the polymath " man of letters " and amateurs that had dominated Romantic science . Common Sense Realism began to decline in Britain in the face of the English empiricism outlined by John Stuart Mill in his An Examination of Sir William Hamilton 's Philosophy ( 1865 ) . 
 = = Influence = = 
 Scotland can make a claim to have begun the Romantic movement with writers such as Macpherson and Burns . In Scott it produced a figure of international fame and influence , whose virtual invention of the historical novel would be picked up by writers across the world , including Alexandre Dumas and Honoré de Balzac in France , Leo Tolstoy in Russia and Alessandro Manzoni in Italy . The tradition of Scottish landscape painting significantly influenced art in Britain and elsewhere through figures like J. M. W. Turner , who took part in the emerging Scottish " grand tour " . The Scottish baronial style influenced buildings in England and was taken by Scots to North America , Australia and New Zealand . In music , the early efforts of men like Burns , Scott and Thompson helped insert Scottish music into European , particularly German , classical music , and the later contributions of composers like <unk> were part of a Scottish contribution to the British revival of interest in classical music in the late nineteenth century . 
 The idea of history as a force and the romantic concept of revolution were highly influential on transcendentalists like Emerson , and through them on American literature in general . Romantic science maintained the prominence and reputation that Scotland had begun to obtain in the Enlightenment and helped in the development of many emerging fields of investigation , including geology and biology . According to Robert D. <unk> , " to some the nineteenth century seems to be the century of Scottish science " . Politically the initial function of Romanticism as pursued by Scott and others helped to diffuse some of the tension created by Scotland 's place in the Union , but it also helped to ensure the survival of a common and distinct Scottish national identity that would play a major part in Scottish life and emerge as a significant factor in Scottish politics from the second half of the twentieth century . Externally , modern images of Scotland worldwide , its landscape , culture , sciences and arts , are still largely defined by those created and popularised by Romanticism . 
 = Chevrolet Cobalt SS = 
 The Chevrolet Cobalt SS is a line of three sport compact versions of the Chevrolet Cobalt built on the General Motors Delta platform at Lordstown Assembly in Ohio , United States . It featured two forced induction inline @-@ four Ecotec engines , as well as a third naturally aspirated engine in 1SS trim , later called the Cobalt Sport . 
 The Cobalt SS was GM 's first foray into the tuner market , launching with a 205 hp ( 153 kW ; 208 PS ) supercharged 2 @.@ 0 L engine in late 2004 as a 2005 model , paired with the F35 manual of Opel . The following year , a naturally aspirated 1SS model equipped with GM 's new 2 @.@ 4 L , 171 hp ( 128 kW ; 173 PS ) engine was added ; it had both automatic and manual transmission options . The supercharged version continued until it was discontinued after 2007 for a more economical turbocharged 2 @.@ 0 L engine producing 260 hp ( 194 kW ; 264 PS ) making it the manual only , highest trim Cobalt in the second quarter of 2008 ( See timeline ) . 
 The powertrain of the Cobalt SS received generally positive reviews , especially the turbocharged version , the car drew criticism for its interior quality , and its exterior styling , which was described as too reminiscent of its predecessor , the Cavalier . Reports surfaced in May 2009 that General Motors planned to eliminate the Cobalt SS as soon as December 2009 , but they proved to be untrue . Production continued , but ordering options for late 2010 models were limited , and production of all Cobalts ended in June 2010 . The car has been replaced by the Cruze , but a high performance version to directly replace the Cobalt SS has not yet been announced , nor any possible powertrains . 
 = = Model details = = 
 = = = Overview = = = 
 Of the five engines General Motors has placed in the Cobalt since its launch , three have been designated SS . The first was launched in 2004 as a 2005 model with a new powertrain that had debuted one year earlier on the Saturn ION Red Line . It was available as a Supercharged coupe only . The naturally aspirated 2 @.@ 4 L LE5 engine was the next SS to launch in late 2005 as a 2006 model , available as both a coupe and sedan for the duration of its run . However , in late 2007 , at the same time the announcement cancelling the SS Supercharged was made , GM also announced that the 2 @.@ 4 L would be renamed " Cobalt Sport " , rendering Chevrolet without a Cobalt SS for the first half of the 2008 model year . The 2 @.@ 0 L LNF turbocharged Cobalt was the last to launch in the second quarter of 2008 ; initially available only as a coupe until a sedan option was offered for the 2009 model year but again deleted for 2010 after less than 500 were produced . 
 All three models of the Cobalt SS feature four wheel , anti @-@ lock disc brakes . Compared to the base Cobalt , the SS has lower front and rear fascias for a more aggressive look with integrated foglamps , side rocker moldings , interior accents , and a chrome exhaust tip . Exclusive to the 2 @.@ 0 L Cobalt are a titanium @-@ faced sport analogue cluster with a 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) speedometer , an A @-@ pillar mounted boost gauge , reclining front bucket seats with two @-@ tone leather @-@ appointed seating surfaces , vertical adjusting head restraints and driver @-@ side lumbar and height adjusters , and a sport @-@ tuned <unk> suspension with a 24 mm front stabilizer bar and 22 mm rear stabilizer bar . 
 = = = SS Supercharged = = = 
 Available as a coupe only , the SS Supercharged featured the 2 @.@ 0 L LSJ Ecotec engine with an Eaton M62 Roots type supercharger and air @-@ to @-@ liquid intercooler . The engine makes 205 hp ( 153 kW ) at 5600 rpm and 200 lb · ft ( 271 N · m ) at 4400 rpm . 18 @-@ inch broad @-@ spoke wheels with <unk> / <unk> summer Pirelli tires are standard . Optional for the LSJ was a performance package coded <unk> that added <unk> bucket seats and a limited slip differential ( LSD ) . LSD was optional for 2005 models ( performance package came with LSD ) and was standard in 2007 + models . The <unk> option continues in the LNF Cobalt , but adds only the LSD . The car has become notable for a high profile spoiler that was standard in 2005 , but optional from 2008 when a lower profile spoiler used on all other Cobalt <unk> became an option . 
 GM offers dealer @-@ installed performance upgrade packages called " stage kits " that are covered by factory warranty . The Stage 1 kit consists of new fuel injectors and a reprogram of the ECU , and yields up to a 30 hp ( 22 kW ) improvement . The Stage 2 kit consists of new fuel injectors and the same reprogram with a smaller serpentine belt and pulley for the supercharger , producing a 36 hp improvement and 18 <unk> of torque . Both stage 1 and 2 kits increase the engine redline to 7 @,@ 000 rpm . The Stage 3 kit consists of a smaller , 76 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) supercharger pulley , a 2 @-@ pass intercooler end plate and a customizable replacement ECU . The Stage 3 ECU allows for the use of a 50 @-@ shot of nitrous , 100 octane fuel and an adjustable redline from 6 @,@ 750 to 8 @,@ 000 rpm . Stage 3 produces 248 hp ( 185 kW ) using 93 octane fuel , up to 260 hp ( 194 kW ) using 100 octane fuel , and much higher power with nitrous . Stage 3 is for track use only , and to emphasize this , air conditioning is disabled with the Stage 3 ECU . 
 A problem frequently encountered with the car , due to a combination of its high torque , front drive , and short first gear is wheel hop , wheelspin and a general lack of traction . Items like upgraded front and rear trans and motor mounts would eliminate this . The GM Performance Division later tried to rectify these problems in the turbocharged car by providing wider , stickier tires and stronger axles . 
 = = = SS Turbocharged = = = 
 The LSJ engine did not meet emissions requirements for the 2008 model year , and General Motors ' contract with Eaton had expired . The non @-@ supercharged 2 @.@ 4 L Cobalt SS also lost its Super Sport designation for the 2008 model year and was renamed " Sport " . However , in fall 2007 , a more powerful Cobalt SS was announced for the second quarter of 2008 . The car would be equipped with the 2 @.@ 0 L , turbocharged , direct injected , VVT , LNF Ecotec engine , making 260 hp ( 194 kW ) at 5300 rpm and 260 lb · ft ( 353 N · m ) at 2000 rpm , and remain mated to the F35 5 @-@ speed manual transmission . The engine had been introduced in a rear wheel drive application for the 2007 GM Kappa platform , which includes the Saturn Sky , Pontiac Solstice , and Opel GT . 
 Also new for the 2008 SS were SS @-@ embroidered sport seats with suede @-@ like <unk> inserts , several new exterior colors , and wider 18 @-@ inch ( 460 mm ) forged , split @-@ spoke wheels with <unk> / <unk> Continental AG tires , reminiscent of those offered for the Chevrolet Corvette C6 . The car 's electronics are also new , and along with greater assist in poor traction conditions , add a " no @-@ lift @-@ shift " feature which allows the driver to maintain turbocharger boost during <unk> . During a no @-@ lift @-@ shift , the driver shifts normally by depressing the clutch , but the accelerator pedal is held wide open . Also new is " launch control " , which feathers the throttle at roughly 4800 rpm until engagement of the clutch , allowing more consistent launches in competitive situations . To use the feature the driver presses twice on the traction control button which first turns off traction control , and then notifies the driver through the Driver 's Information Center that the launch control of Competitive Mode has been enabled . However , turbocharged Cobalt owners have found that better times can be achieved while racing when the car is manually launched . These features help propel the car from 0 to 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) in a class @-@ leading 5 @.@ 5 seconds , and a quarter mile time of 13 @.@ 9 seconds at 102 @.@ 5 mph ( 165 @.@ 0 km / h ) . 
 New for 2009 is the aforementioned four @-@ door sedan option , as well as an optional " reconfigurable performance display " ( RPD ) for the coupe only . The $ 295 option replaces the boost gauge in the A @-@ pillar , and allows the driver manipulation of traction control , stability control , " shift points " , and the engagement of Competition Mode , as well as information regarding the car 's engine torque and horsepower , g @-@ force , boost , wideband air fuel ratio , barometric pressure , temperature , and battery voltage . For 2010 , RPD is standard , as is a power sunroof . The red / ebony and grey / ebony interior color options are also dropped , as is the turbocharged sedan . 
 A stage 1 kit which raises power to 290 hp ( 216 kW ) and 340 lb · ft ( 461 N · m ) was made available in October 2009 after several delays . The kit can be installed by the owner of the car , but final alteration of the vehicle 's engine control unit must take place at a GM dealer . 
 = = = SS Naturally aspirated = = = 
 Chevrolet introduced a naturally aspirated Cobalt SS in the fall of 2005 , as a 2006 model available as both a coupe and sedan . It featured the 2 @.@ 4 L LE5 Ecotec engine with variable valve timing , making 171 hp at 5 @,@ 600 rpm and 163 lb @-@ ft at 5000 rpm , later upped to 167 lb · ft ( 226 N · m ) at 4500 rpm . The LE5 engine was new for 2006 and was introduced on both the FWD Delta platform and RWD Kappa platform . For the 2006 and 2007 model years the car was called SS , or " 1SS " , but was replaced with the moniker " Cobalt Sport " for 2008 with the anticipated introduction of the turbocharged super sport car later on in the model year . For the first time , a 4 @-@ speed automatic transmission was offered , the <unk> . The 5 @-@ speed manual is also different from the Cobalt SS Supercharged , it is the <unk> <unk> transmission with different ratios that is offered for the 2 @.@ 2 L <unk> engine in the Cobalt LS and LT . 
 Other changes over the supercharged car are notable but not drastic ; 17 @-@ inch broad @-@ spoke wheels with narrower <unk> / <unk> all @-@ season Pirelli tires are standard , as is the low profile spoiler . 2 @.@ 4 L and 2 @.@ 2 L Sport Package Cobalts have a 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) speedometer with optional white face gauges . The car rides on the FE3 suspension , superior and more sport @-@ tuned to that of base Cobalts but less refined than the <unk> on the supercharged and turbocharged cars . Brakes on the <unk> naturally aspirated and supercharged model are identical , but the turbocharged model receives an upgraded Brembo braking system The front and rear bumpers are the same , but the front lacks a lip accessory and the bottom of the rear fascia is slightly different . With the negligible exception of exterior styling and some interior trims , the vehicle is identical to the Pontiac G5 GT . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Reviews of the supercharged Cobalt SS were generally positive . While the Cavalier received very negative reviews , the supercharged Cobalt was seen as an improvement , and a worthy first entry for GM into the tuner market . However , the general fit and finish was poor , and power levels were not up to par with other competitors . Journalist Thom Blackett said , " When compared with more contemporary cars including the Dodge Neon SRT @-@ 4 and the Subaru <unk> , that SS badge seems to lose some of its luster . " The F35 transmission has also been deemed inferior to that in the newest of generation of Honda 's Civic Si . Critics also disliked the heavy wheels which negatively affected handling , as well as the spoiler which obstructed rearward visibility . Speaking of the high profile aero wing , automotive journalist Alexandra Straub said , " the deck @-@ lid spoiler was directly in my line @-@ of @-@ sight when looking out of the rearview mirror . It 's almost like it cut everything in half . " Some Cobalt SS owners have traded spoilers with lower trim owners to obtain a less aggressive look , or traded the entire <unk> with Cobalt LS owners , for whom a rear spoiler is merely optional . The naturally aspirated Cobalt SS has been seen as an improvement over the base models with its slightly more potent 2 @.@ 4 L engine , but notably inferior to the supercharged car . The powertrain of the 2008 turbocharged Cobalt SS received rave reviews . John Neff of <unk> said , " The GM Performance Division completely reworked the Cobalt SS for 2008 , swapping in a more powerful turbocharged engine , upgrading the rest of the <unk> , and tweaking the entire package on the world 's most demanding race tracks , including the famed Nürburgring in Germany . The result is – and we 're not kidding here – the most impressive performance car to wear a bow @-@ tie badge on sale today . " Journalists were impressed with the performance of the car in relation to the price ; Neff added that the " 2009 Cobalt SS Turbo is freakishly good at going fast and the best bang @-@ for @-@ the @-@ buck value below $ 30 @,@ 000 . " Ron <unk> of Motor Trend said , " at only $ 22 @,@ 995 , the SS could stand for Super Steal . " The MSRP was raised to $ 24 @,@ 095 for the 2009 model year . 
 The Nürburgring @-@ tuned suspension gives the SS some of the best handling characteristics of any General Motors front wheel drive vehicle , and the suspension is stiffer and more refined than the supercharged car . Since the interior is hardly changed other than the seats , those criticisms remain . Of the interior in the turbocharged sedan , Car and Driver said it " is constructed primarily of plastics cheap enough to be rejected from a Chinese toy factory ; the Tata Nano probably has a fancier parking @-@ brake lever . " The new Cobalt was the winner in its price class ( under $ 30 @,@ 000 ) of Car and Driver 's 2008 Lightning Lap competition at Virginia International Raceway , beating lap times of several cars in the $ <unk> $ 60 @,@ 000 class , including the Mitsubishi Lancer Evolution X. 
 = = Racing = = 
 Four Chevrolet Cobalt SS 's were used in the Continental Challenge Street Tuner class in 2009 . 
 = New Jersey Route 5 = 
 Route 5 is a 3 @.@ 18 @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 12 km ) state highway located entirely in Bergen County , New Jersey , United States . It runs from U.S. Route 1 / 9 in Ridgefield east down the New Jersey Palisades to end at County Route 505 ( River Road ) at the Hudson River in Edgewater . The route is a two- to four @-@ lane undivided highway its entire length , passing mostly through wooded residential neighborhoods . The route passes under Route 63 in Palisades Park , with access to that route provided by Bergen Boulevard , and intersects the southern terminus of Route 67 in Fort Lee . 
 The route was designated in 1916 as part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 10 , which was to run from Paterson east to the terminal of the Fort Lee Ferry in Edgewater , using the Paterson and Hackensack Turnpike between Paterson and Hackensack , the Bergen Turnpike from Hackensack to Ridgefield , and a new alignment between Ridgefield and Edgewater . In 1927 , the route was renumbered to Route 5 , with initial plans to build a new alignment for the route between Ridgefield and Little Ferry . Route 5 was also planned to run concurrent with Route 6 ( now U.S. Route 46 ) between Paterson and Ridgefield . However , the plans were modified in 1929 to build Route 6 on a new alignment and have Route 5 end at Route 1 ( now U.S. Route 1 / 9 ) in Ridgefield . The former alignment was designated as Route 10N with maintenance eventually turned over to the county . The eastern terminus of Route 5 was moved to its current location by the 2000s . In 2007 , construction began to improve the route in Palisades Park by replacing bridges and widening the road , with work expected to be completed in later 2009 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 5 begins at an intersection with U.S. Route 1 / 9 ( North Broad Avenue ) in Ridgefield , heading east as a two @-@ lane undivided road through residential areas . It crosses County Route 31 ( Maple Avenue ) and enters Palisades Park . In Palisades Park , the road passes over Delia Avenue and turns south as it heads through wooded residential neighborhoods . Route 5 passes under Route 63 and enters Fort Lee , where the route immediately intersects Bergen Boulevard , which provides access to Route 63 . From there , the road heads east through wooded neighborhoods before turning north onto Glen Road . 
 Route 5 comes to an intersection with County Route 29 ( Anderson Avenue ) and County Route 54 ( Central Boulevard ) , where the route continues east on Central Boulevard as a four @-@ lane undivided road through inhabited areas . It meets the southern terminus of Route 67 ( Palisade Avenue ) and continues south along that road . After 0 @.@ 36 mi ( 0 @.@ 58 km ) of following Palisade Avenue , Route 5 makes a left turn onto a two @-@ lane road , with County Route 27 continuing south on Palisade Avenue . The route descends the New Jersey Palisades on a winding road with hairpin turns , crossing into Edgewater . In Edgewater , the road briefly heads through commercial areas before ending at County Route 505 ( River Road ) along the Hudson River . 
 = = History = = 
 Pre @-@ 1927 Route 10 was legislated in 1916 to run from Paterson east by way of Hackensack and Ridgefield to the Public Service Railway 's Fort Lee Ferry at Edgewater . From Paterson it used the existing Paterson and Hackensack Turnpike ( Market Street and Essex Street ) to Hackensack and the Bergen Turnpike ( Hudson Street ) to Ridgefield . Rather than use existing roads from Ridgefield down the Palisades to Edgewater , a whole new route was surveyed with better grades . This road was built by 1922 . At its east end , Route 10 ran south several blocks on River Road to the ferry , just south of Dempsey Avenue . In Ridgefield , Broad Avenue was used to get between the new alignment and Bergen Turnpike . 
 In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route 10 was renumbered to Route 5 . Plans at the time were to build a new alignment from east of Ridgefield to Little Ferry southeast of Hackensack and form Route S5 ( now Route 93 ) along the old road from Little Ferry to Ridgefield . The new Route 6 would share the alignment of Route 5 from Paterson to west of Hackensack , where it would turn southeast onto a new alignment to Little Ferry , then run with Route 5 again to east of Ridgefield and split onto its own alignment to the George Washington Bridge . 
 In 1929 , the routes were redefined . Route 6 would be a completely new alignment from Paterson to the George Washington Bridge , and Route 5 would only run east from Route 1 ( Broad Avenue , now U.S. Route 1 / 9 ) in Ridgefield . The alignment of Route 10 west of Ridgefield was designated Route 10N until it was eventually turned over to the county . Route 5 retained its routing in the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering . By the 2000s , the section of Route 5 along River Road to the former ferry was removed . In June 2007 , construction began on a $ 24 @.@ 6 million project to improve the route through Palisades Park . This project , which is to be completed later in 2009 , will involve the replacement of the bridge over Delia Avenue , the removal of a bridge over an abandoned rail line , and the widening of the two @-@ lane road to include a shoulder . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Bergen County . 
 = Lisa Hannigan = 
 Lisa Margaret Hannigan ( born 12 February 1981 ) is an Irish singer , songwriter , and musician . She began her musical career as a member of Damien Rice 's band . Since beginning her solo career in 2007 she has released two albums : Sea Sew ( 2008 ) and Passenger ( 2011 ) . Hannigan 's music has received award nominations both in Ireland and the USA . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Hannigan was born in Dublin but grew up in <unk> , County Meath , Ireland . She attended primary school at Scoil <unk> Naofa in <unk> and secondary school at The King 's Hospital in <unk> and enrolled at Trinity College , Dublin to study Art History . 
 = = Career = = 
 While still in college , Hannigan met Damien Rice at a concert in Dublin in early 2001 . Rice enlisted Hannigan to sing on his 2002 album O and his later album " 9 " , featured in the hit " 9 Crimes " . She toured with Rice as part of his band during that period , lending vocal support and occasionally playing electric guitar , bass guitar or drums . 
 In 2007 , Hannigan returned to Dublin and began a solo career . Some of Hannigan 's live recordings were made available through trading networks radio shows . These recordings included : " Willy " by Joni Mitchell , " Be My Husband " by Nina Simone ( from the 1965 album Pastel Blues ) , " Mercedes Benz " by Janis Joplin and " Love Hurts " by Roy Orbison . Hannigan also performed live with her own band , called The Daisy <unk> Quartet and contributed guest vocals to the recordings of Mic Christopher , The Frames and Herbie Hancock . 
 = = = Sea Sew = = = 
 Lisa Hannigan 's debut solo album , titled Sea Sew , was rehearsed in a barn in <unk> and recorded in Dublin before being released in Ireland in September 2008 . The lead single , " Lille " , was made available as a free Internet download and other tracks were available for preview on her Myspace page . The sleeve featured needle @-@ work by Hannigan . Some music critics called the recording one of the best Irish albums of the year . 
 Sea Sew received favourable reviews in the Los Angeles Times and The New York Times . The single " Lille " , released in August 2008 on Irish and American radio stations . Hannigan performed at Electric Picnic 2008 . Hannigan was the opening act for singer @-@ songwriter Jason Mraz on his U.S. tour in 2008 . 
 That year , she appeared on the charity album Even Better Than the Disco Thing and performed a duet of Mick Flannery 's new song " Christmas Past " with Flannery on Tony Fenton 's Christmas Special on Today FM . In December 2008 , she made her UK solo debut at St Johns Church in London . Hannigan signed with ATO Records in the U.S. , where her album was released in February 2009 . 
 Sea Sew was nominated for the Choice Music Prize and Best Irish Album at the Meteor Music Awards in January 2009 . 
 That year , Hannigan appeared on the American television shows Jay Leno and The Colbert Report . In 2009 , Hannigan also appeared on the BBC 's Later ... with Jools Holland , performing her song " I Don 't Know " . Sea Sew rose in the UK charts following this appearance and she performed at Glastonbury 2009 music festival and went on tour later in the year . She performed at the nomination ceremony and she was greeted by confused journalists wondering " Lisa who ? " . 
 Hannigan performed at Electric Picnic 2009 Later in 2009 , she toured the United States with David Gray and performed solo shows in New York , Los Angeles and London . She then began a tour of Ireland to finish the year . Hannigan 's song " An Ocean and a Rock " was used in a 2009 Irish video supporting same @-@ sex marriage entitled " Sinéad 's Hand " . As part of an advertisement campaign for Oxfam 's Make Trade Fair , Hannigan was drenched in melted chocolate and she participated in the Irish musical collective The Cake Sale with lead vocal on the track Some Surprise , which was played on the US television series Grey 's Anatomy . 
 Hannigan also contributed to the 2009 charity album , Sparks n ' Mind , released in aid of Aware . 
 In 2009 , a broadcast of Other Voices was recorded . 
 " Braille " from the album Sea Sew was also used in the film Ondine in 2009 . 
 = = = Passenger = = = 
 Hannigan recorded her second album , titled Passenger , at Bryn <unk> Studios in North Wales with producer Joe Henry and engineer Ryan Freeland . The album was released in the US and Canada on 20 September 2011 , and on 7 October in Ireland and the UK . 
 Hannigan performed at the Eurosonic Festival in 2012 when Ireland was the " Spotlight Country " . 
