 = = = At Swim = = = 
 Hannigan announced on her website that her third album - produced in collaboration with Aaron <unk> - would be released during 2016 . The album is titled At Swim and is expected to be released on August 19 , 2016 . On May 24 , 2016 Hannigan revealed a short teaser in relation to the albums launch . " Prayer To The Dying " and " Ora " are two tracks which have appeared among promotional material in the lead up to the release . Lisa will tour Ireland extensively in the lead up to the album release . " Praying To The Dying " appeared on iTunes ( only on pre @-@ orders ) and Spotify on June 9 and 10 respectively . It appeared on the New Music Friday playlist on Spotify Germany , Ireland , Sweden and UK . 
 = = = Soundtracks and film work = = = 
 In 2004 Hannigan credited on soundtrack for " Closer " ( song : Cold Water , arranged and performed by Damien Rice and Lisa Hannigan , featuring <unk> Long ) . 
 In 2007 Hannigan credited on soundtrack for " Shrek the Third " ( song : 9 Crimes , performed by Damien Rice and Lisa Hannigan ) . 
 In 2009 Hannigan credited on soundtrack for " Ondine " ( songs : Braille , Lille , written and performed by Lisa Hannigan ) . 
 In 2013 Hannigan contributed vocals to the soundtrack for Alfonso Cuarón 's film Gravity . 
 In 2014 Hannigan provided vocals along with John Smith for the Steven Price conducted soundtrack for the Brad Pitt blockbuster ' Fury ' . On September 14 , Lisa performed in the Roundhouse for the iTunes Concert Series . 
 In 2014 she voiced the character of Bronagh , the Selkie mother of the main characters in the animated film Song of the Sea , and provided several songs to the film 's soundtrack . 
 In 2015 , she sang a version of " Danny Boy " for the seventh episode of the second season of Fargo . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Her music has received critical praise , airplay and award nominations both in her native Ireland and the United States . In 2008 , her debut album Sea Sew spawned the single " Lille " , a Choice Music Prize nomination , two Meteor Music Awards nominations and a Mercury Prize nomination . 
 Hannigan performs using " broken @-@ down , wheezy old instruments " . Herbie Hancock said of her vocals , " there 's so much jazz in the notes and phrases that she picks . She was singing the ninths , the elevenths of the chords ... I mean some of the things sound like choices that Miles would have made . " 
 = = Discography = = 
 Sea Sew ( 2008 ) 
 Passenger ( 2011 ) 
 At Swim ( 2016 ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 = = = Hot Press Readers ' Poll = = = 
 Hannigan has four Hot Press Readers ' Poll awards . She won Best Debut Album , Best Irish Album , Best Irish Track and Best Female in 2009 . 
 = = = Choice Music Prize = = = 
 Hannigan 's debut album , Sea Sew , was nominated for the Choice Music Prize in January 2009 . 
 Hannigan 's second album , Passenger , was nominated for the Choice Music Prize in January 2012 and she also lost out to Jape that year . 
 = = = Meteor Music Awards = = = 
 Hannigan and her work was nominated in the Best Irish Female and Best Irish Album categories at the Meteor Music Awards in 2009 . She was the only solo artist nominated in more than one category at the awards . She lost to Imelda May and The Script 's self @-@ titled album respectively . 
 = = = Mercury Prize = = = 
 Sea Sew was nominated for the Mercury Prize on 21 July 2009 . It was Hannigan 's first nomination . 
 Hannigan was referred to as 2009 's " token folk nominee " in the UK , with the NME calling her a " token folkie " . One British journalist even claimed she was " truly obscure " and part of the " moribund sensitive singer @-@ songwriter genre " . Ed Power , writing in the Irish Independent , criticised such claims , wondering if Jape ( whose album Ritual beat Hannigan to the Choice Music Prize ) had come close to receiving a Mercury nomination — " Or , for that matter , how many of the judges had even heard of him " . 
 = Leslie Morshead = 
 Lieutenant General Sir Leslie James Morshead , KCB , KBE , CMG , DSO , ED ( 18 September 1889 – 26 September 1959 ) was an Australian soldier , teacher , businessman , and farmer , whose military career spanned both world wars . During the Second World War , he led the Australian and British troops at the Siege of Tobruk ( 1941 ) and at the Second Battle of El Alamein , achieving decisive victories over Erwin Rommel 's Afrika Korps . A strict and demanding officer , his soldiers nicknamed him " Ming the Merciless " , later simply " Ming " , after the villain in the Flash Gordon comics . 
 When the First World War broke out in August 1914 , Morshead resigned his teaching position and his commission in the Cadet Corps to travel to Sydney and enlist as a private in the 2nd Infantry Battalion of the First Australian Imperial Force . He was commissioned as a lieutenant in September . He landed at Anzac on 25 April 1915 , and his battalion made the farthest advance of any Australian unit that day . <unk> to Australia , he became commander of the 33rd Infantry Battalion , which he led on the Western Front at Messines , Passchendaele , Villers @-@ Bretonneux , and Amiens . 
 Between the wars Morshead made a successful business career with the Orient Steam Navigation Company , and remained active in the part @-@ time Militia , commanding battalions and brigades . In 1939 , he was appointed to command the 18th Infantry Brigade of the 6th Division in the Second Australian Imperial Force . In 1941 , he became commander of the 9th Division , which he led in the Siege of Tobruk and the Second Battle of El Alamein . He returned to Australia in 1943 , where he was appointed to command II Corps , which he led during the New Guinea campaign . In 1945 , he commanded I Corps in the Borneo campaign . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Morshead was born on 18 September 1889 in Ballarat , Victoria , the sixth of seven children of William Morshead , a gold miner who had emigrated from Cornwall via Canada , and his wife Mary Eliza Morshead , formerly Rennison , the Australian @-@ born daughter of a fellow Cornish immigrant . William died when Morshead was six years old . He was educated at Mount Pleasant High School , where he was appointed a junior teacher in 1906 . 
 In 1909 , he became a student at the Melbourne Teachers Training College to obtain formal teaching qualifications . After his graduation in December 1910 , he was awarded a scholarship to complete an education diploma at the University of Melbourne , but decided to defer for a year in order to teach at schools in country Victoria . He became a schoolteacher , teaching first at <unk> in the Swan Hill district , and then at Fine View State School in the Horsham district . In 1911 he entered Trinity College at the University of Melbourne . After failing an exam in deductive logic , he decided to quit the state school system , and in 1912 took up a position at The Armidale School in the New England district of New South Wales . In 1914 he moved to the prestigious Melbourne Grammar School . 
 Morshead had been commissioned as a lieutenant in the Australian Army Cadets in 1908 . At Armidale , he was appointed commander of the school cadet unit , and was commissioned as a lieutenant in the Militia on 10 February 1913 . He was promoted to captain in September . At Melbourne Grammar he commanded a company in that school 's much larger cadet unit . While at Melbourne Grammar , he met Myrtle Catherine Woodside , the daughter of a Happy Valley , Victoria , grazier , and the sister of one of Morshead 's pupils . 
 = = First World War = = 
 = = = Gallipoli = = = 
 Morshead 's teaching career was interrupted by the outbreak of the First World War in August 1914 . He resigned both his teaching position and his commission in the Cadet Corps and travelled up to Sydney to enlist as a private in the 2nd Infantry Battalion of the First Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) because it was commanded by Lieutenant Colonel George Braund , whom Morshead knew well from his time teaching in Armidale . Morshead 's time in the ranks was brief , as he was commissioned as a lieutenant in the AIF on 19 September . He embarked for Egypt on the transport Suffolk on 18 October 1914 . While his battalion was in training there , he was promoted to captain on 8 January 1915 . 
 The 2nd Infantry Battalion landed at Anzac Cove on 25 April 1915 . Morshead 's platoon transferred from the transport Derfflinger to the destroyer HMS Usk , which took it to within 500 yards ( 460 m ) of the shore . They then transferred to wooden boats which were towed to the shore , arriving at around 09 : 30 . The battalion made the farthest advance of any Australian unit that day , reaching the slopes of Baby 700 , but was driven back by a Turkish counter @-@ attack in the afternoon . It beat off further counter @-@ attacks over the next three days . Morshead assumed command of C Company on 28 April . The battalion defeated major Turkish attacks on its position on 18 May and 8 June . 
 Promoted to major on 8 June , Morshead distinguished himself in the Battle of Lone Pine on 6 August . So intense was the fighting that of the 22 officers in the battalion , Morshead was the only one who did not become a casualty . However , on 16 September , like many others , he succumbed to dysentery and <unk> fever . He was evacuated to the 3rd General Hospital on Lemnos , and then to England on the hospital ship Aquitania , where he was admitted to the 3rd London General Hospital in Wandsworth , England . For his services in the Gallipoli campaign , he was mentioned in despatches . 
 = = = Western Front = = = 
 Morshead returned to Australia on 22 January 1916 where he was treated at the 4th General Hospital at Randwick , New South Wales . After he recovered , he was posted to the 33rd Infantry Battalion , which was being raised in Armidale as part of the 3rd Division . He became its commander on 16 April , and was promoted to the rank of lieutenant colonel three days later . He embarked for England again with his battalion on 4 May 1916 . 
 The 33rd Infantry Battalion trained at Larkhill on the Salisbury Plain in England until November 1916 , when it embarked at Southampton for France . On 7 December it relieved a British battalion in the quiet " nursery " sector of the Western Front around Armentières . Morshead was mentioned in despatches , and awarded the Distinguished Service Order . His citation , written by his division commander , Major General John Monash , read : 
 This officer has displayed conspicuous ability in administration and organisation of his battalion , which has attained a high standard of fighting efficiency . His energetic attention to the training of his officers and men prior to embarkation was responsible for the smoothness and despatch with which his battalion relieved a British battalion in the line a few days after arriving at the front . Since the battalion has taken its place in the line it has proved itself to be an efficient fighting unit due to this officer 's personality and marked capacity for command . He organised and controlled two raids on the enemy 's trenches and carried them out successfully . His courage and strong personality has created an excellent spirit in all ranks of the battalion . This officer previously served at Gallipoli . 
 Official historian Charles Bean described Morshead as : 
 a dapper little schoolmaster , only 28 years of age , in whom the traditions of the British Army had been bottled from his childhood like tight @-@ <unk> champagne ; the nearest approach to a martinet among all the young Australian colonels , but able to distinguish the valuable from the worthless in the old army practice ; insistent on <unk> throughout the battalion as in the officers ’ mess , with the assistance of a fine adjutant , Lieutenant Jones : and an imperturbable second @-@ in @-@ command , Major White , and with his own experience of fighting as a junior captain of the 2nd Battalion upon Baby 700 in the Anzac Landing , he had turned out a battalion which anyone acquainted with the whole force recognised , even before Messines , as one of the very best . 
 Morshead subsequently led the 33rd Infantry Battalion through the Battle of Messines in June 1917 , and the disastrous Battle of Passchendaele in October , where the 3rd Division suffered heavy losses . In March 1918 , the 3rd Division was sent to the Somme sector to help halt the German Spring Offensive . The 9th Infantry Brigade , of which the 33rd Infantry battalion was a part , was detached from the 3rd Division and sent to Villers @-@ Bretonneux . On 30 March , the 9th Infantry Brigade 's commander , Brigadier General Charles Rosenthal , ordered Morshead to restore the front around <unk> . With the aid of the British 12th Lancers , the battalion was able to restore the line , although it was unable to advance as far as Rosenthal hoped . The 33rd Infantry Battalion was then relieved , and withdrawn to Villers @-@ Bretonneux to rest . However , on 4 April , Morshead was astonished to find that the line had again been broken and Villers @-@ Bretonneux threatened . In the First Battle of Villers @-@ Bretonneux , the battalion participated in halting the advance , and prevented the Germans from capturing the town . On 18 April , the 33rd Infantry Battalion was still in the town when it was heavily shelled with poison gas . Many men , including Morshead , became mustard gas casualties . He did not return to his unit until June . 
 Morshead again led the 33rd Infantry Battalion in the Battle of Amiens . For the fighting in August 1918 , he was awarded the French Légion d 'honneur in the grade of Chevalier . His citation , written by his new division commander , Major General John Gellibrand , read : 
 For gallantry , initiative and ability in action during the operations on <unk> in August 1918 . On 8 August 1918 , during the attack east of Hamel , Lieutenant Colonel Morshead was in command of the special force for the purpose of clearing <unk> Wood . He executed this task with great skill , and then fought his battalion to its objectives , capturing 500 prisoners , many guns and a large quantity of materiel at very little cost to his own force . 
 Subsequently during the advance north of Bray on 22 to 24 August 1918 , when the situation on his left flank was uncertain , Lieutenant Colonel Morshead gallantly maintained his position refusing his left flank , thus enabling the remainder of his brigade to maintain its position . 
 On 30 / 31 August , north of Cléry , he again fought his battalion with great ability and success . 
 His military ability , fine fighting spirit and cheerfulness under all circumstances had a most inspiring effect upon all ranks and contributed greatly to the success of the operation . 
 For his service on the Western Front , Morshead was made a Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George in December 1919 , and was mentioned in despatches three more times . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Morshead returned to Australia in November 1919 and his AIF appointment was terminated in March 1920 . He considered applying for a regular army commission , but found that these were reserved for graduates of the Royal Military College , Duntroon . He tried farming , accepting a soldier settlement block of 23 @,@ 000 acres ( 9 @,@ 300 ha ) near <unk> , Queensland , but this venture was a failure , and he returned to Melbourne , where he married Myrtle at Scots Church , on 17 November 1921 . They had a daughter , Elizabeth in 1923 . 
 After working in odd jobs he joined the Orient Line in Sydney on 24 October 1924 . He was appointed passenger manager of the Sydney office in 1926 . Many Orient Line appointments followed . He became publicity manager in January 1927 , acting manager of the Melbourne office in May 1928 , passenger and publicity superintendent , and then temporary business manager of the Brisbane office in April 1931 . He returned to Sydney , and then moved to the Melbourne office , where he became temporary office manager , a position which became permanent in December 1933 ; in 1937 he went back to the Sydney office . 
 All this time , he remained active in the part @-@ time Militia , commanding the 19th Infantry Battalion from 1921 to 1925 . He became commander of the 36th Infantry Battalion on 1 August 1926 . He was promoted to colonel in 1933 , and was appointed to command the 14th Infantry Brigade on 1 January 1933 . When he moved to Melbourne in 1934 , he transferred to command of the 15th Infantry Brigade , then part of the 3rd Division under Major General Sir Thomas Blamey . On returning to Sydney in 1937 he assumed command of the 5th Infantry Brigade . During a visit to England in 1937 as part of his duties with the Orient Line , he had occasion to observe the British Army on manoeuvres in East Anglia , and was impressed by the pace of modern mechanised forces . He also realised that the Australian Army was lagging a long way behind in both human and technical resources . He was promoted to brigadier in 1938 . Known for his right @-@ wing views even before the war , he was also a member of the clandestine far @-@ right wing paramilitary organisation the New Guard . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 = = = Britain = = = 
 On 6 October 1939 , Morshead was selected by Blamey to command the 18th Infantry Brigade in the new 6th Division . This brigade was composed of four battalions from the smaller states , and would have been a natural assignment for a regular officer had Prime Minister Robert Menzies not restricted commands to senior posts to Militia officers , few of whom had much experience of the Army outside their home states . Morshead met with Blamey on 13 October to select officers for the new brigade . Like the other brigadiers , he was given a regular officer as Brigade Major , in this case Major Ragnar Garrett . 
 Morshead formally enlisted in the Second Australian Imperial Force ( AIF ) on 10 October 1939 and was given the AIF serial number <unk> . He was given the rank of colonel and made temporary brigadier three days later . A delay in preparing 18th Infantry Brigade 's camp in the Hunter Region meant that it was not concentrated there until December . In the meantime its battalions trained in their home states . After the 16th Infantry Brigade departed for Palestine in January 1940 , the 18th Infantry Brigade moved into its vacated accommodation at Ingleburn , New South Wales . As a consequence , its training proceeded more slowly than that of the 16th and 17th Infantry Brigades . 
 The 18th Infantry Brigade finally embarked from Sydney on the Mauretania on 5 May 1940 but en route was diverted to the United Kingdom owing to the dangerous military situation there following the Battle of France . It moved into camps on the Salisbury Plain , where the 3rd Division had trained back in 1916 . The Australian force there under Major General Henry Wynter was poorly equipped but the 18th Infantry Brigade was nonetheless given an important role in the defence of Southern England . In September 1940 , Wynter was informed that his force would become the nucleus of a new 9th Division , which he was appointed to command . Morshead and his 18th Infantry Brigade embarked for the Middle East on 15 November , reaching Alexandria on 31 December . Morshead was made a Commander of Order of the British Empire on 1 January 1941 . Before his other two brigades could arrive from England and Australia , Wynter became seriously ill . Blamey decided to send him home and appointed Morshead to command the 9th Division on 29 January 1941 . 
 According to Official Historian Barton Maughan : 
 Morshead was every inch a general . His slight build and seemingly mild facial expression masked a strong personality , the impact of which , even on a slight acquaintance , was quickly felt . The precise , incisive speech and flint @-@ like , piercing scrutiny acutely conveyed impressions of authority , resoluteness and ruthlessness . If battles , as Montgomery was later to declare , were contests of wills , Morshead was not likely to be found wanting . 
 = = = Tobruk = = = 
 In February 1941 , the 9th Division was completely reorganised , with its 18th and 25th Infantry Brigades transferred to the 7th Division . In return , it received the 20th and 24th Infantry Brigades , the latter short one battalion which was on garrison duty in Darwin . The 9th Division , less its partly trained and equipped artillery , was ordered to move to the Tobruk – Derna area where it would relieve the 6th Division , so that formation could participate in the Battle of Greece . The half @-@ trained and half @-@ equipped 9th Division was pitched into the thick of the action almost immediately , steadying the retreat of Commonwealth forces from the newly arrived German Afrika Korps , under General Erwin Rommel , and occupying the vital port of Tobruk . Morshead was given command of the Tobruk garrison which , as the retreat ( known to the Australians as the " Benghazi handicap " ) continued , became surrounded , hundreds of miles behind enemy lines . Lieutenant General John Lavarack determined that Tobruk could be held and ordered Morshead to defend it . He also ordered the 18th Infantry Brigade to reinforce the garrison , bringing it up to four brigades , with British artillery and tank units brought up to provide support . 
 General Sir Archibald Wavell instructed Morshead to hold the fortress for two months while the rest of Wavell 's forces reorganised and mounted a relief mission . With the 9th Division , 18th Infantry Brigade and supporting forces from various Allied nations , Morshead 's force decisively defeated Rommel 's powerful initial assaults , and retained possession of the fortress . His strategy for the defence of Tobruk is still mentioned in officer training colleges around the world as an example of how to arrange and conduct in @-@ depth defences against a superior armoured force . An important part of Morshead 's tactics was conducting offensive operations when these were possible . His attitude was summed up in a reported remark , made when his attention was drawn to a British propaganda article entitled " Tobruk can take it ! " Morshead commented : " we 're not here to take it , we 're here to give it . " 
 Aggressive use of snipers , artillery and counter @-@ attacks achieved surprise at crucial junctures , and kept Rommel 's forces off balance . The Axis troops learned to fear the aggressive patrolling of the Australian infantry who dominated no @-@ man 's @-@ land and made constant raids on enemy forward positions for intelligence , to take prisoners , to disrupt attack preparations and minelaying operations , even to steal supplies that were not available in Tobruk . The troops were backed up by well @-@ sited artillery and mobile reserves . The 9th Division held Tobruk not for eight weeks , but for eight months , during which time three separate relief campaigns by the main Allied force in Egypt failed . Axis propagandists described Morshead as " Ali Baba Morshead and his 20 @,@ 000 thieves " , and branded the defenders of the port as the " Rats of Tobruk " , a sobriquet that they seized on and wore as a badge of pride . Morshead 's men referred to him humorously as " Ming the Merciless " , and later simply as " Ming " , after the villain in Flash Gordon comics . 
 By July 1941 , Morshead had become convinced that his troops were becoming tired . Their health was deteriorating and , in spite of his efforts , their morale and discipline were slipping . He informed Generals Blamey and Auchinleck that they should be relieved . Auchinleck arranged for the 18th Infantry Brigade to be relieved by the Polish Carpathian Brigade so that it could rejoin the 7th Division in August but baulked at relieving the 9th Division . At this point , political considerations came into play . The newly installed government of Prime Minister John Curtin in Australia , on Blamey 's advice , took up the matter with Prime Minister Winston Churchill , who protested that the relief would cause a postponement of Operation Crusader . As it turned out , the operation had to be postponed anyway . In October 1941 , Morshead and most of the 9th Division was replaced by the British 6th Division . The 9th Division moved to Syria to serve as an occupation force , as well as resting , re @-@ equipping and training reinforcements . 
 The Battle of Tobruk marked a rare defeat for German armoured forces at this stage of the war . For his part in the battle , Morshead was made a Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire on 6 January 1942 . He was also awarded the Virtuti Militari by the Polish government in Exile and was decorated by Generał broni Władysław Sikorski on 21 November 1941 . 
 = = = El Alamein = = = 
 The outbreak of war with Japan in December 1941 , and the imminent threat of invasion saw the 6th and 7th Divisions transferred to the Far East in early 1942 . In March , Morshead was given command of all Australian forces in the Mediterranean theatre , and was promoted to lieutenant general , while still remaining commander of the 9th Division . 
 Morshead was one of only a few Allied divisional commanders with a distinct record of success at this stage of the war and had been acting commander of the British XXX Corps , a formation largely composed of Commonwealth troops , on two occasions . He had hopes that he might be given command of a corps , as Harry Chauvel had been in the Great War . Many war correspondents , including Gavin Long , thought that Morshead would be an excellent choice , but disagreements with Auchinleck had led to the latter labelling Morshead " a difficult subordinate " , who , while an excellent division commander , was not up to the demands of commanding a corps . Moreover , while Chauvel had been an Australian , he had been a regular officer , while Morshead was not . The new commander of the British Eighth Army , Lieutenant General Bernard Montgomery felt that a reservist could not " possess the requisite training and experience " to command a corps . Morshead was passed over in favour of Oliver Leese , a British regular officer , who was junior to him and had never commanded a division in action . 
 At the Second Battle of El Alamein , the 9th Division was given responsibility for clearing a corridor through the German and Italian forces in the North and threatening to cut off those between the coastal road and the sea . In the initial assault the division hacked its way through the enemy defences but failed to clear the minefields . As the British attack faltered , the main effort switched to the 9th Division , which punched a massive dent into the German and Italian position over the next five days at great cost , " crumbling " the Afrika Korps in the process , and ultimately forcing Rommel to retreat . " I am quite certain " , Leese informed Morshead , " that this breakout was made possible by Homeric fighting over your divisional sector . " During the El Alamein Campaign , the 9th Division suffered 22 % of the British Eighth Army 's casualties ; 1 @,@ 177 Australians were killed , while 3 @,@ 629 were wounded , 795 were captured and 193 were missing . Morshead received yet another mention in despatches in June 1942 , and in November 1942 he was also created a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath . 
 = = = New Guinea Campaign = = = 
 After El Alamein , Morshead and the 9th Division were recalled to the South West Pacific Area ( SWPA ) . Morshead arrived in Fremantle on 19 February 1943 where he was welcomed home by Lieutenant General Gordon Bennett , who had been his divisional commander in Sydney between the wars . Morshead then flew to Melbourne where he was met by Lady Morshead , Sir Winston Dugan and Sir Thomas Blamey , who informed Morshead that he would take over command of a corps . In March 1943 , Morshead became commander of II Corps , handing over command of the 9th Division to Major General George Wootten . The association between Morshead and the 9th Division was not entirely broken however , as it formed part of his corps , along with the 6th and 7th Divisions , all three of which were undergoing jungle warfare training on the Atherton Tableland for upcoming battles in New Guinea . It was Blamey 's intention that Morshead would spend some time learning the art of jungle warfare before his II Corps replaced Lieutenant General Sir Edmund Herring 's I Corps in New Guinea . Morshead 's chief of staff at II Corps was Brigadier Henry Wells , who had been his chief of staff at El Alamein . 
 In late September 1943 , Morshead was summoned to New Guinea to relieve Herring by Lieutenant General Sir Iven Mackay , the commander of New Guinea Force , which he did on 7 October 1943 . Morshead found a difficult situation . The Japanese not only held the high ground overlooking the Australian beachhead at Finschhafen , they were rapidly reinforcing their position and were about to mount a major counterattack . Morshead demanded and got critical reinforcements , including Matilda tanks of the 1st Tank Battalion . The Japanese counterattack was crushed . Morshead relieved Brigadier Bernard Evans of command of the 24th Infantry Brigade , replacing him with Brigadier Selwyn Porter , who had commanded a brigade in the Kokoda Track campaign . Unlike most reliefs of senior officers in SWPA this relief , while controversial at the time , has attracted little attention since . 
 Adjusting to jungle warfare was a challenge for both Morshead and his men . Gavin Long recalled that 
 Morshead picked up the day 's Intelligence Summary and read something like : " The gun at <unk> is now identified as a light AA gun . A Jap was killed by a booby trap at <unk> " , and gestured as much as to say what kind of war is this ? He has come back from a war in which divisions fought divisions , and artillery barrages on the maximum scale were used to one in which it is news that there is one Jap gun in a certain area , and a scout is killed at a certain point . 
 On 7 November 1943 , Morshead became acting commander of New Guinea Force and Second Army on Mackay 's departure to become the Australian High Commissioner to India . This became permanent on 20 January 1944 . Major General Frank Berryman became commander of II Corps . Because of some sensitivities concerning the relative seniority of Berryman and Major General George Alan Vasey , Blamey placed Vasey 's 7th Division directly under Morshead 's command . Vasey soon chafed under Morshead 's command , feeling that " he has too many favourites both individually and collectively " , with men who had served at El Alamein receiving preferential treatment . Morshead was in overall charge of the forces in New Guinea in the battles of Sattelberg , Jivevaneng , Sio and Shaggy Ridge . His perseverance was rewarded with the capture of Madang in April 1944 . 
 = = = Borneo Campaign = = = 
 Morshead handed over command of New Guinea Force to Lieutenant General Stanley Savige on 6 May 1944 , and returned to Australia , where he remained the commander of the Second Army . Despite the fact that Morshead had been in command in an active area , some critics of the government picked up on the public announcement in November that Morshead would command Second Army , and charged that he had been " shelved " . On the contrary , Blamey had recommended to Curtin that Morshead should succeed him as Commander in Chief in the event that he became incapacitated . However , dealing with the politicians held little appeal for Morshead , and while he was pleased at the recognition , hoped that this would not occur . 
 In the event , this was not the end of Morshead 's wartime service , just a respite . In July 1944 , Morshead was appointed as commander of I Corps on the Atherton Tableland . Although nominally a lesser command , it would be the spearhead of the Australian Army in subsequent operations . The staff was that of Morshead 's former II Corps , as the I and II Corps headquarters had exchanged names . In February 1945 , Morshead received word that his objective would be Borneo . General Douglas MacArthur placed I Corps under his direct command for the operation . Morshead had to make a series of landings at Tarakan , North Borneo and Balikpapan on the east and north west coasts of the island . These were carried out with great efficiency , achieving their objectives with low casualties . 
 The British government proposed that British Lieutenant General Sir Charles Keightley be given command of a Commonwealth Corps for Operation Coronet , the proposed invasion of Honshu , the main island of Japan , but the Australian government had no intention of concurring with the appointment of an officer with no experience fighting the Japanese , and counter @-@ proposed Morshead for the command . The war ended before the issue was resolved . 
 = = Post @-@ war life = = 
 After the war Morshead returned to civilian life , becoming the Orient Steam Navigation Company 's Australian general manager on 31 December 1947 . He continued to receive honours for his military service , including a further mention in despatches in 1947 and the American Medal of Freedom with Silver Palm . He was president of the Bank of New South Wales , the chairman of David Jones , and director of several companies . From 1950 Morshead headed ' The Association ' , a secret organization similar to the New Guard movement with which he had been involved in the mid @-@ 1920s , and which was prepared to oppose communist attempts at subversion . It was quietly disbanded in 1952 . 
 In later life , Morshead turned down various offers of military and diplomatic posts , as well as the governorship of Queensland . He did serve as president of the Boy Scouts Association of New South Wales and the Big Brother Movement , a British youth emigration support scheme , and was a trustee of the Gowrie scholarship trust fund , which provided assistance to the descendants of Second World War veterans . In 1957 he was appointed chairman of a committee which reviewed the group of departments concerned with defence . The Menzies government accepted the committee 's recommendation that Supply and Defence Production be amalgamated , but dropped the key proposal that the Department of Defence absorb the Departments of Army , Navy and Air . This reform was finally carried out by the Whitlam government in 1975 . 
 Morshead died of cancer on 26 September 1959 at St Vincent 's Hospital , Sydney . He was given a military funeral at which former soldiers of the 9th Division paid their respects , after which his body was cremated . He was survived by his wife and daughter . Morshead was commemorated in several ways . The road Morshead Drive which runs past the Royal Military College , Duntroon , in Canberra is named after him . In the Canberra suburb of Lyneham is the Morshead War Veterans Home , with high @-@ dependency care and associated self @-@ care two @-@ bedroom houses . His portrait by Ivor Hele is held by the Australian War Memorial , as are his wartime papers . 
 = Jim Thome = 
 James Howard " Jim " Thome ( / <unk> / ; born August 27 , 1970 ) is a retired American baseball player who played 22 seasons in Major League Baseball ( MLB ) , from 1991 to 2012 . He played for six different teams , most notably the Cleveland Indians during the 1990s and the Philadelphia Phillies in the early 2000s . A prolific power hitter , Thome hit 612 home runs during his career — the seventh @-@ most all time — along with 2 @,@ 328 hits , 1 @,@ 699 runs batted in ( RBIs ) , and a .276 batting average . He was a member of five All @-@ Star teams and won a Silver Slugger Award in 1996 . 
 Thome grew up in Peoria , Illinois , as part of a large blue @-@ collar family of athletes , who predominantly played baseball and basketball . After attending Illinois Central College , he was drafted by the Indians in 1989 and made his major league debut in 1991 . Early in his career , he played third base before eventually becoming a first baseman . With the Indians , Thome was part of a core of players that led the franchise to two World Series appearances in three years during the mid @-@ 1990s . He spent over a decade with Cleveland before leaving via free agency after the 2002 season to join the Philadelphia Phillies , with whom he spent the following three seasons . Traded to the Chicago White Sox before the 2006 season , Thome won the American League Comeback Player of the Year Award that year and reached the 500 home run club during his three @-@ season tenure with the team . By this point in his career , back pain limited Thome to being a designated hitter . After stints with the Los Angeles Dodgers and Minnesota Twins , he made brief returns to Cleveland and Philadelphia before ending his career with the Baltimore Orioles . Upon retiring , Thome accepted an executive position with the White Sox . 
 Throughout his career , Thome 's strength was power hitting . In six different seasons , he hit more than 40 home runs , and in 2003 , he led the National League in home runs with 47 . His career on @-@ base plus slugging ( OPS ) of .956 is 19th all time . In 2011 , he became the eighth MLB player to hit 600 home runs . One of Thome 's trademarks was his unique batting stance , in which he held the bat out with his right hand and pointed it at right field before the pitcher threw , something he first saw in The Natural . Thome was known for his consistently positive attitude and " gregarious " personality . An active philanthropist during his playing career , he was honored with two Marvin Miller Man of the Year Awards and a Lou Gehrig Memorial Award for his community involvement . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Thome was born in Peoria , Illinois , on August 27 , 1970 , the youngest of five children . Everyone within the blue @-@ collar Thome family played sports : Jim 's grandmother was hired at a local Caterpillar plant solely to play for the company 's softball team ; his father built bulldozers for Caterpillar and played slow @-@ pitch softball ; his aunt is a member of the Women 's Softball Hall of Fame ; and his two older brothers , Chuck III and Randy , played baseball at Limestone High School . Thome learned to play baseball from his father on a tennis court , and also played basketball in what he described as the " ghetto " of Peoria , noting that he was the only white kid there but that he earned the respect of his fellow players . One day during his youth , Thome sneaked into the Cubs ' clubhouse at Wrigley Field in an unsuccessful attempt to obtain an autograph from his favorite player , Dave Kingman . Though Thome received signatures from several other players , this experience influenced him to be generous with signing autographs for fans during his playing career . 
 Like his older brothers , Thome attended Limestone High School where he achieved all @-@ state honors in basketball and as a baseball shortstop . Although he had hoped to draw the attention of scouts , at just 175 pounds ( 79 kg ) he was relatively underweight for his 6 @-@ foot @-@ 2 @-@ inch ( 188 cm ) height , meaning that he attracted only passing interest — the average Major League Baseball ( MLB ) player weighed 195 pounds ( 88 kg ) in 1993 . Thome graduated in 1988 and , after not being drafted , enrolled at Illinois Central College where he continued his baseball and basketball careers . After one season , he was drafted by MLB 's Cleveland Indians as an " afterthought " in the 13th round of the 1989 MLB draft . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Minor leagues ( 1989 – 1991 ) = = = 
 For the 1989 season , Thome was assigned to the Gulf Coast League Indians , a minor league affiliate of the Cleveland Indians . He finished the year with a .237 batting average , no home runs , and 22 runs batted in ( RBIs ) . After his rookie season , he met " hitting guru " Charlie Manuel , who later became his manager and mentor . Unlike most Indians staff , Manuel saw potential in Thome and worked hard with him , particularly on his hip motion while swinging the bat . Thome later said , " [ Manuel ] saw something in me I didn 't . " During this work , Manuel suggested to Thome that he point his bat out to center field before the pitch to relax himself like Roy Hobbs did when batting in the baseball film The Natural . The work paid off ; in 1990 , Thome hit .340 and totaled 16 home runs and 50 RBIs playing at both the Rookie and Class A levels of the minor leagues . Thome spent most of the 1991 season splitting time between Double @-@ A ( Minor League Baseball ) and Triple @-@ A ( Minor League Baseball ) where , in combination , he hit .319 with 7 home runs and 73 RBIs . 
 = = = Cleveland Indians ( 1991 – 2002 ) = = = 
 = = = = 1991 – 1997 = = = = 
 Thome made his MLB debut on September 4 , 1991 , as a third baseman against the Minnesota Twins . In the game , he recorded two hits in four at bats ( 2 @-@ for @-@ 4 ) . He hit his first career home run on October 4 . Injuries shortened his 1992 campaign , during which he played for both the Indians and their Triple @-@ A affiliate , the Colorado Springs Sky Sox . Across the minor and major leagues that year , he combined to hit .236 with 4 home runs and 26 RBIs in 52 games . In 1993 , playing mostly for the Charlotte Knights , the Indians ' new Triple @-@ A affiliate , he led the International League with a .332 batting average and 102 RBIs , complemented by 25 home runs . This performance earned him a late season promotion to the major league , where he hit .266 with 7 home runs and 22 RBIs in 47 games . 
 After seven consecutive seasons with a losing record , " a new ballpark and a few offseason acquisitions coupled with rising young stars have made the Indians legitimate contenders " for the division title during their 1994 season . The Indians ' core of offensive players included Carlos <unk> , Kenny Lofton , Sandy Alomar , Jr . , Thome , and Eddie Murray . A " promising youngster " , for the first time in his career , Thome spent the entire 1994 season with Cleveland , playing in 98 games while hitting .268 with 20 home runs and 52 RBIs . With help from the aforementioned core , the Indians held the wild card spot in the American League ( AL ) and were one game behind the Chicago White Sox in the standings for the AL Central Division lead before the 1994 players ' strike forced cancellation of the season 's remaining games . During the strike @-@ shortened season , Thome had his first career multi @-@ home run game , hitting two solo home runs on June 22 , 1994 , against Detroit Tigers ' pitcher John Doherty . It was not until 1995 that the Indians ' success led to a playoff berth . Thome was among the team 's leaders at the plate , hitting .314 with 25 home runs and 73 RBIs , and the Indians finished with a 100 – 44 record to win the AL Central but lost the 1995 World Series to the Atlanta Braves in six games . Thome hit .211 in the World Series with one home run and two RBIs . Preceding the Indians ' 1996 season , sportswriters predicted that Thome would be moved up in the batting order and bat in the sixth position ( he had hit anywhere from the fifth to the eighth positions during his first two seasons ) . During the 1996 season , Thome hit 38 home runs , once hitting a 511 @-@ foot ( 156 m ) homer at Cleveland 's Jacobs Field , the longest home run ever at a Cleveland ballpark . 
 Before their 1997 season , the Indians moved Thome , originally a third baseman , to first base after acquiring third baseman Matt Williams from the San Francisco Giants . That year , Thome helped the Indians set a new franchise single @-@ season record for home runs ( 220 ) , contributing 40 of them . Thome also totaled an AL @-@ high 120 walks to go along with 102 RBIs . Cleveland returned to the World Series , but they lost to the Florida Marlins in seven games ; Thome hit .286 with two home runs and four RBIs in the World Series . 
 = = = = 1998 – 2002 = = = = 
 The next three seasons were not as successful as the previous three for either Thome or the Indians . In July 1998 , Thome hit his 24th home run of that season while helping the Indians end the Yankees ' 10 @-@ game winning streak . An article in Sports Illustrated published in July 1998 commented that despite Thome 's early career success ( two All @-@ Star Games and appearances in two of the previous three World Series ) , he was only " faintly famous " nationally and was not particularly well @-@ known outside of Cleveland or his hometown , Peoria . His former teammate <unk> <unk> said , " You can 't really say he 's underrated , because everybody considers him one of the top hitters in the American League , but he 's surrounded by so many good players , it 's hard to stand out on that team . " 
 In August , Thome broke a bone in his right hand and spent several weeks on the disabled list , missing 35 games . He finished the year with 30 home runs and 85 RBIs while posting a .293 batting average . In Game 3 of the AL Championship Series against the New York Yankees , he hit two home runs off Andy Pettitte en route to a 6 – 1 Cleveland victory . Cleveland subsequently lost the series to the Yankees . 
 Headed into Cleveland 's 1999 season , there were high hopes for the Indians ; writers expected Thome to bat in the cleanup spot of the batting order . In May 1999 , Thome hit a grand slam against Yankees pitcher Orlando Hernández , which helped Cleveland to a 7 – 1 victory . In total , his batting average fell to .277 , but he increased both his home run and RBI totals to 33 and 108 , respectively . In Game 1 of the AL Division Series , Thome hit a game @-@ tying two @-@ run home run off of Derek Lowe that sprung Cleveland 's defeat of the Boston Red Sox by a score of 3 – 2 . However , after leading two @-@ games @-@ to @-@ none , Cleveland lost the five @-@ game series . 
 During the 2000 season , Thome hit .269 with 37 home runs and 106 RBIs . On June 21 , he hit his 20th home run of the year against the Chicago White Sox , marking the seventh consecutive season in which he hit 20 or more home runs . On September 29 , while in the midst of a tight race for the AL Wild Card spot , Thome led the Indians to an 8 – 4 victory against the Toronto Blue Jays by hitting a two @-@ run home run . After the game , Thome was quoted as saying , " This team has battled all year , so this was nothing new . Here we are , and we 're here tomorrow to play another day . " Despite finishing with a record of 90 – 72 , the Indians missed the playoffs . For the 2001 Indians ' season , he finished second in the AL with 49 home runs . In addition , Thome had 124 RBIs and 111 walks . However , he led the league with 185 strikeouts . He and Juan González , who totaled 140 RBIs , powered the Indians to another division title . Despite these numbers , the Indians could once again only reach the AL Division Series , where they lost in five games to the Seattle Mariners . 
 Thome had his best season with Cleveland in 2002 , leading the AL in walks ( 122 ) , slugging percentage ( .677 ) and on @-@ base plus slugging ( OPS ) ( 1 @.@ 122 ) , while batting .304 ( 16th in AL ) with a .445 on @-@ base percentage ( second in AL ) . He also hit a career @-@ high 52 home runs ( 2nd in AL ) and collected 118 RBIs ( seventh in AL ) . The 52 home runs set a new Cleveland Indians ' single @-@ season record and made Thome the 21st major league player to join the 50 home run club . 
 At the conclusion of the 2002 season , Thome , who was a free agent , rejected the Indians ' " generous , long @-@ term contract " offer ( despite their offer to build a statue of him ) to instead sign a six @-@ year , $ 85 million contract with the Philadelphia Phillies – he thought the Phillies were closer to winning a championship than the Indians . With the Phillies , Thome 's salary rose from $ 8 million per year to $ 11 million per year . Thome hit a franchise record 334 home runs in his first stint with the Indians . 
 = = = Philadelphia Phillies ( 2003 – 2005 ) = = = 
 Thome hit 47 home runs in his first season with the Phillies , finishing one behind Mike Schmidt 's single @-@ season team record of 48 in 1980 , and tied with Alex Rodriguez for the MLB lead in 2003 . On June 14 , 2004 at Citizens Bank Park , Thome hit his 400th career home run , surpassing Al Kaline for 37th on the all @-@ time home run list . He ended the 2004 Phillies season with 42 home runs . In 2004 , Thome won the Lou Gehrig Memorial Award , which is given to players who best exemplify Gehrig 's character and integrity both on and off the field . 
 Thome missed a significant portion of the first half of the Phillies ' 2005 season due to injury ; he compiled only a .207 batting average with 7 home runs and 30 RBIs going into the All @-@ Star break . He was only sporadically effective ; one result was that Phillies fans booed him and cheered for replacement Ryan Howard instead . He had season @-@ ending surgery on his right elbow in August , while Howard won the NL Rookie of the Year Award . The Phillies traded Thome and cash considerations to the Chicago White Sox on November 25 , 2005 , for outfielder Aaron Rowand and minor league pitching prospects Gio Gonzalez and Daniel <unk> . Though the emergence of Howard made Thome more expendable to the squad , another factor in his trade to the White Sox was his family situation – Thome 's mother , the " go @-@ to lady " in his family and his biggest fan , had died a year earlier , and he worried about his father . Since Philadelphia was willing to trade him , Thome waived the no @-@ trade clause in his contract for the good of the team and requested that if possible , they trade him to Chicago so he could be with his father . 
 = = = Chicago White Sox ( 2006 – 2009 ) = = = 
 Thome became Chicago 's regular designated hitter in April 2006 and flourished in his first season in Chicago . He set the team record for most home runs in the month of April ( 10 ) , overtaking Frank Thomas 's previous record by one . He also set a major league record by scoring in each of Chicago 's first 17 games . For the season , Thome hit 42 home runs , drove in 109 runs , and hit .288 , though he struck out in 30 % of his plate appearances , the highest percentage in the AL . On May 1 , 2006 , Thome returned to Cleveland to play against the Indians in his first game as a visitor at Jacobs Field , and received an unenthusiastic reception . 
 On September 16 , 2007 , Thome joined the 500 home run club by hitting a walk @-@ off home run against Los Angeles Angels pitcher Dustin Moseley . Thome became the 23rd major leaguer to reach the milestone and the third in the 2007 MLB season ( the others were Frank Thomas and Alex Rodriguez ) , as well as the first ever to do it with a walk @-@ off home run . Several family members including his father were on hand to witness the accomplishment , which occurred at a game during which the White Sox distributed free Thome bobbleheads to fans . Thome celebrated by pointing upward in homage to his late mother as he rounded the bases . 
 On June 4 , 2008 , Thome hit a 464 @-@ foot ( 141 m ) home run — which at the time was the ninth @-@ longest home run in U.S. Cellular Field history — against Kansas City Royals pitcher Luke <unk> in a 6 – 4 White Sox victory . He hit a solo home run in the AL Central <unk> game , which proved to be the difference as the White Sox defeated the Minnesota Twins , 1 – 0 . Thome 's hitting remained strong during Chicago 's 2009 season – he hit his 550th career home run . On July 17 , 2009 , he hit a grand slam and a three @-@ run home run for a single @-@ game career @-@ high seven RBIs . By the conclusion of the season , he had passed Reggie Jackson for 11th place on the all @-@ time home run list with 564 home runs . 
 = = = Los Angeles Dodgers ( 2009 ) = = = 
 On August 31 , 2009 , the White Sox traded Thome to the Los Angeles Dodgers along with financial considerations for minor league infielder Justin Fuller . Thome waived his no @-@ trade clause because he thought the Dodgers could win the World Series , something he had never done during his career , but Thome 's only appearances with the Dodgers were as a pinch hitter , due to chronic foot injuries that limited his mobility . An additional reason for Thome to come to Los Angeles was the opportunity to reunite with former Cleveland teammates Manny Ramirez and Casey Blake . He hit .235 with no home runs and three RBIs while with the Dodgers ( 4 @-@ for @-@ 17 ) . After the season , Thome filed for free agency , eventually signing with the Minnesota Twins . 
 = = = Minnesota Twins ( 2010 – 2011 ) = = = 
 Thome hit his first home run with the Twins on April 8 , during the Twins ' season @-@ opening road trip . The Twins opened Target Field , their new home stadium , on April 12 , 2010 . This was the third time in Thome 's career that his team had opened a new stadium – the 1994 Cleveland Indians when they opened Jacobs Field , and the 2004 Philadelphia Phillies when they opened Citizens Bank Park . On July 3 , Thome hit two home runs , passing fellow Twin Harmon Killebrew for tenth on the all @-@ time home run list . The game was stopped and the Twins played a pre @-@ recorded message from Killebrew congratulating Thome on the accomplishment , during which Killebrew noted he was happy Thome did it while a member of the Twins . Thome hit the first walk @-@ off hit in Target Field on August 17 , a 445 @-@ foot two @-@ run home run in the bottom of the 10th inning against the White Sox . It was the 12th walk @-@ off home run of his career , tying him for the most all time ( a record he subsequently broke ) . On September 4 , Thome again hit two home runs in a single game to tie and then pass Mark McGwire for the ninth spot on the career home run list . Thome surpassed Frank Robinson 's home run total on September 11 , when he hit his <unk> career home run in the top of the 12th inning in Cleveland . Toward the end of the season , Thome commented that playing with the Twins made him feel rejuvenated . He finished the 2010 season with a .283 average , 25 home runs and 59 RBIs . Thome posted his best slugging percentage since 2002 . 
 In January 2011 , Thome accepted a one @-@ year , $ 3 million contract with incentives to continue playing for the Twins . On July 17 , Thome hit the longest home run ever at Target Field , a 490 @-@ foot ( 150 m ) home run into the upper deck in right @-@ center field . He hit his <unk> and 600th career home runs ( in two straight at bats ) at Comerica Park in Detroit on August 15 , making him only the eighth player to achieve that home run total . 
 = = = Second stint with Cleveland ( 2011 ) = = = 
 On August 26 , 2011 , Thome waived his contractual no @-@ trade clause to return to his first team , the Cleveland Indians , in exchange for future considerations for the Twins . On September 18 , the clubs announced that Minnesota had received $ 20 @,@ 000 for him , which Aaron <unk> of NBC Sports called " silly " and " nothing " ; Paul Hoynes of The Plain Dealer wrote that ticket and jersey sales alone from re @-@ acquiring Thome covered the money they paid to acquire him . On September 23 , Cleveland held a ceremony to honor Thome , and revealed plans to erect a statue depicting him in Heritage Park . In the game , he hit a home run that landed near the proposed location for his statue . While with Cleveland in 2011 , Thome played in 22 games , predominantly hitting fifth in the batting order , and he posted a .296 batting average with 3 home runs and 10 RBIs . Through 2011 , he was second among all active major leaguers in career home runs ( 604 ; behind Alex Rodriguez ) and RBIs ( 1 @,@ 674 ; Rodriguez ) , and fifth in career slugging percentage ( .556 ; behind Albert Pujols , Rodriguez , Ryan Braun , and Howard ) . Thome was the Indians ' all @-@ time leader in home runs ( 337 ) , walks ( 1 @,@ 008 ) , and strikeouts ( 1 @,@ 400 ) . 
 = = = Second stint with Philadelphia ( 2012 ) = = = 
 After the 2011 season , Thome agreed to a one @-@ year , $ 1 @.@ 25 million deal that returned him to Philadelphia . He called coming back to Philadelphia a " no @-@ brainer " in his news conference . He also mentioned that , due to Ryan Howard 's Achilles tendon injury , he would " spend the offseason preparing himself to play first base once or twice a week " , despite not having played defensively since 2007 . Thome started his first game at first base since 2007 on April 8 , 2012 , during which he started a 3 – 6 – 3 double play . 
 Thome experienced stiffness in his lower back in the Phillies ' game against the Chicago Cubs on April 28 , and early in May , he was placed on the 15 @-@ day disabled list with a strained lower back . At the time , he was batting only .100 . Thome returned to the club in early June , and prepared for interleague play against the Baltimore Orioles as the DH . Thome finished the nine @-@ game interleague road trip with four home runs and 14 RBIs . 
 On June 17 , Thome became the fourth major league player to hit 100 home runs with three different teams , joining Reggie Jackson , Darrell Evans and Rodriguez . Six days later , Thome hit a pinch @-@ hit walk @-@ off home run in the ninth inning off of Jake McGee to beat the Tampa Bay Rays , 7 – 6 . This was Thome 's <unk> home run , tying Sammy Sosa for seventh all @-@ time in home runs while also setting the new record for most walk @-@ off home runs ( 13 ) in the modern era . Thome 's last game as a Phillie was an afternoon loss to the Miami Marlins on June 30 . After the game ( which coincided with Howard 's return from the disabled list ) , the team announced that Thome had been traded to Baltimore to serve as their designated hitter . 
 = = = Baltimore Orioles ( 2012 ) = = = 
 The Orioles cited Thome 's veteran experience on a playoff @-@ bound team as a primary factor in acquiring him . Orioles catcher Matt <unk> said of Thome , 
 " I think you look at him and say : This is a guy who loves the game more than anyone . He 's the first guy to the park , the first guy to the weight room , the first guy hitting . " 
 On July 20 , Thome hit his first home run with the Orioles , his <unk> of all time moving him past Sosa for seventh place all @-@ time , against the Indians at Progressive Field . On August 6 , Thome was placed on the 15 @-@ day disabled list with a herniated disk ; he remained on the DL until September 21 . In his first game back , he drove in the game @-@ winning RBI in extra innings against the Boston Red Sox . After beating the Indians in a game where he hit his <unk> career home run , Thome said , " There 's a lot [ of ] memories . I 've had great memories on that side and then coming in here as an opponent against them . Any time you come home , they say , it 's very special . It 's even more special to get the W 's . That 's , I think , the main thing . The bottom line is I played here a long time . " Orioles teammates remarked at Thome 's commitment to talking about the game while in the dugout . Thome remarked , " I talk the game . When I set in the dugout during games I talk baseball to these guys . They 'll ask , ' Hey , what 's this pitcher like ? ' or ' What about the game ? ' ' What about all those Indians teams you were on ? ' I did it to Eddie Murray when he was in his 40s . " The Orioles made the playoffs , but lost in five games to the Yankees during the AL Division Series . Thome hit .133 in the playoffs with no home runs or RBIs . 
 = = Post @-@ playing career = = 
 On July 2 , 2013 , Thome joined the White Sox organization as special assistant to the general manager . In the future , Thome aspires to be a manager , an aspiration that White Sox chairman Jerry Reinsdorf wholeheartedly supports ; Reinsdorf commented , " He can be a batting coach . He 'd be a great batting coach , but someday he 'll be a manager . " In March 2014 , Thome clarified that he is not officially retired ; while he " loves " his front office job with the White Sox , he would " have to take " a call about him playing again . However , on August 2 , 2014 , he signed a one @-@ day contract with the Cleveland Indians to retire officially as a member of the team . 
 = = Player profile = = 
 = = = Offense = = = 
 Thome is regarded as a great example of a " pure " power hitter , as indicated by his .278 Isolated Power ( ISO ) rating . Thome 's consistency was a draw for clubs to continue to sign him , even toward the very end of his 22 @-@ year career and after most sluggers ' productivity fades . In 2011 , he was ranked the sixth @-@ best designated hitter in MLB history by Fox Sports . During his career , he compiled a .284 batting average against fastballs but compiled just a <unk> batting average against sliders . Since Thome was a pull hitter , opposing teams often employed a defensive shift against him ; by playing three infielders on the right side of the field and the outfielders towards his pull side , teams put themselves in better position to field batted balls . In 2011 , Lindy 's Sports described him as an " extremely patient veteran slugger who launches cripple fastballs and breaking @-@ ball mistakes to all fields " , though they did note that he struck out frequently , had poor speed , and should serve only as a designated hitter . During his career , he had strong power numbers ; in 15 of his 22 seasons , he had a slugging percentage of over .500 . He is an example of a " three @-@ true @-@ outcome " player ; 47 @.@ 6 % of his career plate appearances resulted in either home runs , strikeouts , or walks , the highest of all time by nearly seven percentage points . He is a self @-@ described slow runner , but has said that he always hustled . He stole only 19 bases after 1994 . 
 = = = Defense = = = 
 Thome began his career playing third base and did so until the 1997 season , when he converted to first base to make room at third after the Indians traded for Williams . Injuries , however , took their toll and confined him almost exclusively to being a designated hitter in the latter stages of his career . Overall , he spent 10 separate stints on the disabled list , mostly for his back . By the end of Thome 's career , his back prevented him from playing the field effectively – he played first base four times with the Phillies in 2012 which marked the first time he played the field since 2007 with the White Sox . By the end of his career , writers described him as being a " huge liability in the field " . 
 = = = Playing characteristics = = = 
 Thome was known throughout the baseball world for wearing high socks and for his unique batting stance . In 1997 , the Indians wore high socks for his birthday in August , but ended up wearing them for the remainder of the season out of superstition and eventually reached the World Series . Upon his return to the Indians in 2011 , the club again sported the high socks as a tribute . His batting stance featured him pointing his bat to center field prior to the pitch . Thome adopted this stance from Charlie Manuel , who was the Indians hitting coach , and since then Ryan Howard has also adopted it . Thome credits his calm demeanor to his role model during his early playing years , Eddie Murray , once commenting , 
 " Eddie taught me to play the game exactly the same when you fail and when you succeed . Hit a home run , hey , enjoy the moment , but then let it go . If you strike out with the bases loaded , same thing , let it go . I don 't smash helmets when I strike out , because it 's not the helmet 's fault , it 's my fault . " 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 Thome 's friendly personality has been the subject of much attention . In a 2007 poll of 464 MLB players , he tied with Mike Sweeney for second @-@ friendliest player , behind Sean Casey . After Thome hit his 600th home run , Twins closer Joe Nathan said , " He is the world 's nicest man . " Teammate Michael Cuddyer added , " He is the nicest , gentlest , kindest guy you will ever meet ... to everything except the baseball , he still hits that really hard . " His kindness comes up in conversations with many MLB players . When he signed with the Phillies in the offseason before the 2012 season , Phillies general manager Rubén Amaro , Jr. cited Thome 's constant positive attitude as a main reason for his signing . As an exercise in remaining humble , he annually visited his high school prior to spring training . A Sports Illustrated article said that Thome frequently signs autographs for fans and that he is " endlessly patient with requests " . In a piece for Philadelphia magazine discussing Thome 's Baseball Hall of Fame prospects , sportswriter Stephen Silver wrote , 
 " It 's not just the numbers . Thanks to his gregarious personality , Thome is the rare athlete who played in several cities and was beloved everywhere he went . I saw the Twins and Phillies play each other in Philadelphia when Thome was with the Twins , and the same two teams in Minnesota two years later when Thome was a Phillie , and the opposing crowd cheered Thome both times , even when he hit home runs for the road team . Thome was similarly loved in his long stints in Cleveland and Chicago , as well as shorter runs in Los Angeles and Baltimore . " 
 A fan poll in The Plain Dealer in 2003 named him the most popular athlete in Cleveland sports history . 
 = = = Career legacy = = = 
 Despite his injuries throughout his later years , Thome totaled , according to Fangraphs , 71 @.@ 6 Wins Above Replacement ( WAR ) , a sabermetrics baseball statistic intended to quantify a player 's total contributions to a team . He was one of few players whose prime was during the steroid era and was not suspected of using steroids ; Thome adamantly denies ever using performance @-@ enhancing drugs . Soon after the announcement of his front office position ( which signified the end of his playing career ) , writers began to speculate as to whether or not Thome would make it to the Baseball Hall of Fame , and more specifically , whether he would gain entrance in his first year of eligibility in 2018 . Writers also questioned whether Thome 's candidacy would be hindered by his lack of self @-@ promotion and others ' tendency to overlook him . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Thome and his wife , Andrea , have two children , Lila Grace and Landon . He has also established funds to put his 10 nieces and nephews through college . During the offseason he lives in Burr Ridge , Illinois . ESPN 's SportsCenter reported that shortly after his nephew , Brandon , was paralyzed in an accident , he asked Thome to hit a home run for him ; Thome obliged , hitting two in the subsequent game . Thome is also a philanthropist and provided help to the communities surrounding the teams for which he played . In recognition of his community involvement , he was given the Marvin Miller Man of the Year Award in 2001 and 2004 , and the Lou Gehrig Memorial Award in 2004 . In 2013 , after the November 17 , 2013 tornado outbreak struck Washington , Illinois , just 15 miles from his hometown , he and his wife pledged to donate $ 100 @,@ 000 to relief efforts . Among the philanthropic endeavors Thome and his wife heavily support are Children 's Home + Aid , which strives to help underprivileged children predominantly with finding care ( e.g. , foster care , adoption , etc . ) , and an annual benefit to raise money for the Children 's Hospital of Illinois , continuing a tradition his mother started years ago . Moreover , the <unk> try " to stay connected with at least one or two organizations in each of the cities " that Thome has played . 
 = House of Rufus = 
 House of Rufus is a collection of six studio albums , two live albums ( one being a double album ) , four additional albums of previously unreleased material , and six DVDs recorded by Canadian @-@ American singer @-@ songwriter Rufus Wainwright , reissued as a 19 @-@ disc box set in the United Kingdom on July 18 , 2011 . Wainwright 's official site claimed that the collection " spans Rufus ' entire career and represents the most complete collection of Rufus Wainwright recordings to date . " 
 The box set 's title commemorates his five @-@ night residency of the same name at London 's Royal Opera House during July 18 – 23 , 2011 . Only 3 @,@ 000 copies were produced for worldwide distribution . The collection contains " hard @-@ to @-@ find " tracks and is encased in a red velvet @-@ covered book . While some reviewers questioned the need for such an extensive collection , critical reception of the box set was mostly positive . 
 = = Background = = 
 The box set 's release was confirmed on Wainwright 's official site on March 21 , 2011 . Only 3 @,@ 000 copies were produced for worldwide distribution . Box sets were sold for £ 150 in the United Kingdom , € 170 throughout Europe , and were available as imports in the United States for $ 350 . As part of the marketing strategy to promote the collection and concert series , Universal Music Catalogue developed a " treasure hunt " video for YouTube where visitors identified clues , and navigated links within a collage of Wainwright 's music videos . According to Wainwright , the rarities box set was a " little Rufus blast " before he began work on his next pop album . Wainwright also said the following of the collection : " There 's my old demos , a lot of them were recorded in Montreal ... when I had a very , very different voice , I kind of sounded like a little old man . There 's that and there 's a lot of fabulous collaborations with my mother , my father and some other great artists . " Wainwright had originally intended to call the box set The Rufus Cycle . After being told the title was " too sophisticated " , he went with House of Rufus , partly inspired by Lady Gaga 's Haus of Gaga . Wainwright claimed the box set 's release shortly after his father 's ( Loudon Wainwright III ) box set 40 Odd Years was " totally serendipitous " . 
 The box set 's title commemorates Wainwright 's five @-@ night residency at London 's Royal Opera House during July 18 – 23 , 2011 , also referred to as the " House of Rufus " ( sometimes the " Haus of Rufus " ) or billed as " Five Nights of Velvet , Glamour and Guilt " . During the first night , Wainwright performed his tribute concert to Judy Garland , recorded previously in June 2006 , and released as Rufus Does Judy at Carnegie Hall in 2007 . The production was repeated on July 22 , the fourth concert of the series . The July 19 and 21st shows included performances alongside his sister Martha Wainwright and father Loudon . The residency 's final night included a program called " Rufus Does Rufus " , and featured Wainwright performing selections from his 2009 opera Prima Donna . Stephen Oremus conducted the Britten Sinfonia for three of the performances , and soprano Janis Kelly was featured in the " concert version " of Prima Donna . Reception of the residency performances was mixed . 
 = = Contents = = 
 The box set contains six studio albums : Rufus Wainwright ( 1998 ) , Poses ( 2001 ) , Want One ( 2003 ) , Want Two ( 2004 ) , Release the Stars ( 2007 ) , and All Days Are Nights : Songs for Lulu ( 2010 ) . Each of the albums contain material that was not released previously . Also included are two live albums — the Grammy @-@ nominated 2007 double album Rufus Does Judy at Carnegie Hall , and Milwaukee at Last ! ! ! , released in 2009 — each with previously unreleased tracks , along with four additional albums of rarities and six DVDs . Musicians described as " friends and family members " who appear on one disc of collaborations include Kate & Anna McGarrigle , The Pet Shop Boys , Teddy Thompson , Martha Wainwright , and Loudon Wainwright III . Another disc contains demo tracks from the tape which earned Wainwright a recording contract . DVD recordings include : Live at the Fillmore , Rufus ! Rufus ! Rufus ! Does Judy ! Judy ! Judy ! : Live from the London Palladium , Milwaukee at Last ! ! ! , a collection of Release the Stars commentary and live performances , All I Want and Prima Donna : The Making of an Opera . House of Rufus contains approximately thirty unreleased or " hard @-@ to @-@ find " tracks . The collection is encased in a " red velvet @-@ covered 90 @-@ page hardback book " featuring lyrics , photos , hand @-@ drawn tour posters , art prints , and liner notes by Neil Tennant , Linda Thompson , Lenny Waronker , Martha Wainwright , and Rufus himself . Wainwright dedicated the box set to publicist Barbara <unk> , " without whom it wouldn 't have been possible " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical reception of the box set was mostly positive , though some reviewers questioned the necessity for such an elaborate collection , especially given Wainwright 's age , and the higher @-@ than @-@ expected price . Will Hodgkinson of The Times wrote that a box set for Wainwright , whom he described as a " not yet middle @-@ aged artist " , was unnecessary , but that the collection " shine [ s ] a spotlight on its creator 's rare , remarkable songwriting " . Hodgkinson called Wainwright and the box set " charming " overall , but thought that the " excess of material stops the great moments from really shining out " . Hive magazine contributor Luke Hannaford complimented Rufus and Loudon 's performance of Richard Thompson 's " Down Where the Drunkards Roll " , which was recorded specifically for this collection , describing it as " achingly beautiful " . Martin Aston 's review for BBC Music was positive ; in addition to other tracks , Aston complimented " Get Out of Town " ( Cole Porter , 1938 ) and " Sweet Repose " , both demos he considered to be " unreleased stunners that betray [ Wainwright 's ] show tune soul " . 
 Though she noted the higher @-@ than @-@ expected cost of the box set , Helen Brown of The Daily Telegraph wrote that it served as an " impressive array " that showcased Wainwright 's range and hard work . Evening Standard contributor David Smyth wrote that " this luxurious treasure chest will be too deep for almost anyone apart from its creator " . Smyth found the Rufus Family and Friends album to be " most charming " , specifically " What 'll I Do " which features the whole Wainwright family . Brian Boyd of The Irish Times considered the box set to be " sensory overload " , and thought that the quality of the previously unreleased material appearing on the studio albums varied , but called the collection " magnificent ... from a delightfully unorthodox and consistently engaging performer " . Boyd also noted the cost of the box set , but complimented the quality of its packaging and " extras " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Studio albums 
 Live albums 
 DVDs 
 Box set albums 
 ( * ) designates previously unreleased material 
 Track listings adapted from Allmusic , Hive magazine and Universal Music . 
 = Port Macquarie @-@ Hastings Council dismissal , 2008 = 
 The dismissal of the Port Macquarie @-@ Hastings Council on 27 February 2008 marked the end of a series of events involving a project which was initiated in 2001 in the New South Wales coastal town of Port Macquarie to build a cultural and entertainment centre , known to locals as the Glasshouse . The project , initially a joint venture with the management of the neighbouring shopping centre , Port Central , was originally expected to cost the Council A $ 7 @.@ 3 million . However , by late 2007 , despite the centre not yet having opened , the costs had blown out to over A $ 41 @.@ 7 million , with interest repayments likely to extend the Council 's liability to A $ 66 million . 
 On 27 July 2007 , a full public inquiry was announced by the Minister for Local Government , Paul Lynch . The inquiry reported its findings in February 2008 . It found that the Council had failed to provide appropriate financial and project management and had lost control of the costs , that the project costs had harmed the Council 's ability to provide services and amenities to the community , and that the Council 's communications management strategy had resulted in inadequate consultation with the public and inappropriate regard to their concerns . The Minister for Local Government dismissed the Council and its Mayor , Rob Drew , and appointed an administrator upon receiving the inquiry 's report . Drew was critical of the process throughout , maintaining that errors had been made and misinformation had been accepted as fact ; however , the New South Wales Urban Task Force , a property development lobby group , believed the sacking served as a warning to other Councils to stick to " core responsibilities " . 
 The events continued to impact upon the community and the individuals involved . At a federal by @-@ election for the normally safe National Party seat of Lyne in which Port Macquarie is located , the former mayor , who was the endorsed National candidate , failed to win against Rob Oakeshott , an independent politician , and a former state member of parliament who had been openly critical of the Council throughout the drama . During the period under administration , voluntary redundancies were offered to 27 staff in order to improve the Council 's financial position . 
 In 2012 , the community elected a representative Council and Mayor ; replacing the administrator appointed in 2008 . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 30 March 1999 , the Council met to initiate planning for a centre to house the visual and performing arts at the former Civic Centre site in the Port Macquarie central business district . It recommended a project plan be developed by 2001 . On 21 August 2000 a Cultural Facilities Taskforce was created . In December 2000 , the Council approached the management of the neighbouring shopping centre , Port Central , about a possible joint venture on the site , and the Council endorsed further negotiations on 28 May 2001 . The joint venture was expected to cost around A $ 13 @.@ 5 million , with the Council contributing A $ 7 @.@ 3 million . The joint venture collapsed in August 2002 because the Council was not prepared to accommodate the needs of their commercial partner to make the project viable , and decided to go it alone . The new centre became an icon building under the direction of the Council 's General Manager , managed by a Project Control group including the Mayor and Deputy Mayor . The costs blew out considerably by 28 June 2004 , when the Council unanimously backed the project , outlays had already reached A $ 15 – A $ 20 million , and by late 2007 they had reached A $ 41 @.@ 7 million . This was due to a range of factors including that the Council bought and demolished neighbouring shops to make the facility big enough to include meeting rooms and conference facilities , and a drain built by convicts in the 19th century and still in remarkably good condition was discovered by archaeologists and needed to be preserved . 
 = = The Payne report = = 
 In October 2006 , the NSW Department of Local Government announced it would investigate the Council 's financial management and would try to determine whether it properly considered the impact the added costs could have on its other functions . The investigation , which commenced on 6 November 2006 , was conducted under Section 430 of the Local Government Act , 1993 ( NSW ) , which allows the Director @-@ General of the Department to investigate any aspect of a Council or of its work or activities . The report , delivered in May 2007 to the Minister of Local Government , concluded that the Council did not exercise due diligence and that there had been a failure to scope the project , and recommended to the Minister that a Section 740 public inquiry , which would be independent and have some of the powers and protections of a Royal Commission , be held . A Section 740 inquiry is a necessary step before a Council can be dismissed . 
 On 21 May 2007 , Councillors Lisa Intemann and Jamie Harrison , who believed the Council had exceeded its mandate and failed to consult with the community , led a public rally in Port Macquarie . The Mayor , Rob Drew , believed the centre development should be an exciting time for Port Macquarie and was critical of opposition to the project , characterising it as " slanderous accusations " and " fomenting discontent " . He acknowledged the report raised concerns about the processes behind the project , but insisted the project itself was sound , saying in a press release , " I for one make no apologies that this is a multi @-@ purpose facility which will provide for performers , community groups , which will provide for conferences , seminars and meetings , which will provide for activities never seen before in Port Macquarie . " Harrison meanwhile told ABC News , " The report has said categorically that [ the ] Council has lied to the community about the cost of the arts centre at every opportunity it 's had and it 's put a gloss or a spin on it " . 
 By June , the mayor was looking for political support to avert a full public inquiry . The National Party , whose members were dominant on the Council , and MLC Melinda Pavey had been particularly critical of the actions of the Department of Local Government in the General Purpose Standing Committee . Local independent MP , Rob Oakeshott said , however , that the Council should instead address the findings of the report , and stop arguing about the facts or using emotional arguments in support of it . He also cautioned against getting politicians involved , stressing that this was a formal legal process . 
 = = The Willan inquiry = = 
 On 27 July 2007 , the Minister for Local Government announced a Section 740 inquiry into Port Macquarie @-@ Hastings Council and the Glasshouse project , with particular regard to aspects of financial and project management , the project 's impact on the Council to provide services and amenities to the community , and the openness and transparency of decisions made by the Council . He appointed Frank Willan , a former administrator of Glen Innes Severn Council in 2004 , as Commissioner . The mayor expressed disappointment , asserted the methodology of the earlier Section 430 investigation was faulty , and believed the Council 's management and decision @-@ making processes would be vindicated . 
 After 18 days of public hearings and a total of 765 submissions , Mr Willan released the inquiry report in February 2008 . The report contained a number of critical findings . The key finding was that the Council and its Councillors had not been rigorous in seeking accurate information about the project , had been swayed by developers and supporters and had failed to plan and manage the project and had lost control of the " uncontrollably escalating " cost . The result was an adverse impact upon works and services in other areas of the Council 's operation . The Glasshouse , in the commissioner 's view , would not have been able to generate the projected income once it opened . It further found that the community had been " consistently misled " , that the Council had improperly used its support group to campaign against critics and its " communication strategies have driven its processes " . The Council had therefore failed to meet its charter . Willan recommended to the Minister that all civic offices be declared vacant , an administrator be appointed , and that changes to the way Councils dealt with their own proposals be enacted . 
 = = Sacking and aftermath = = 
 Upon the report 's release , the Local Government Minister , Paul Lynch , concluded on 27 February 2008 that it gave him no choice but to dismiss the Council and appoint Dick Persson , who had administered Warringah Council in 2003 , to serve as administrator . He said of the development , " What seems to have happened is that a reasonable community facility has been treated by the Council as an icon which must be built come hell or high water , regardless of the cost to ratepayers . " He emphasised that in his view , incompetence rather than corruption was the reason for the cost blowout , which would reach A $ 66 million once interest repayments were accounted for . The outgoing Mayor , Rob Drew , criticised the dismissal , calling it " atrocious " . 
 The New South Wales Urban Task Force , a property development lobby group , believed the sacking served as a warning to other Councils to stick to " core responsibilities " , and in late March , the administrator adopted stricter financial measures listed in an independent review of the project . 
 In September and October 2008 , by @-@ elections in the Port Macquarie area at both federal and state level gave a new forum to some of the players in the controversy . When the member for the federal seat of Lyne , Mark <unk> , retired from politics on 30 July 2008 , Oakeshott and Drew , the latter standing as the endorsed National Party candidate , emerged as the major candidates in the resulting by @-@ election on 6 September . With the Glasshouse as a major issue , Oakeshott won 63 @.@ 80 % of the primary vote to Drew 's 22 @.@ 88 % , with a further 10 @.@ 07 % coming to Oakeshott via preferences . In Oakeshott 's old state seat of Port Macquarie , former Councillors Jamie Harrison and Lisa Intemann ran as independents , between them attracting 15 @.@ 8 % of the vote , whilst former Oakeshott staffer Peter Besseling went on to win the election against the endorsed National candidate . 
 On 17 December 2008 , the Council announced that some staff would be offered voluntary redundancies as part of a strategy to address the $ 7 @.@ 1 million deficit it faced for the 2008 – 2009 financial year without increasing Council rates . The following day , it set a deadline of 19 January 2009 and clarified that 27 positions were being made redundant , while 29 vacancies would not be filled . The redundancies proceeded as planned , although forced redundancies down the track were not ruled out . 
 On 20 January 2009 , administrator Dick Persson announced his decision to step down at the end of the month , largely due to the demands of being away from his Sydney home for several days a week . He described the Glasshouse project as a " wrong decision " by the Council , attributing it to " woolly thinking with the best of intentions from people not experienced with planning and delivering major capital works . " He was replaced in the role by Garry Payne , head of the Department of Local Government . 
 On 8 September 2012 , the community elected a Mayor and Councillors , to form a new Port Macquarie @-@ Hastings Council . Former State member for Port Macquarie , Peter Besseling , was elected Mayor and Lisa Intemann , the only member of the dismissed council to contest the 2012 election , was re @-@ elected as Councillor . 
 = White Plume Mountain = 
 White Plume Mountain is an adventure module for the Advanced Dungeons & Dragons fantasy role @-@ playing game , written by Lawrence Schick and published by TSR in 1979 . The 16 @-@ page adventure bears the code " S2 " ( " S " for " special " ) The adventure is a dungeon crawl where the players ' characters are hired to retrieve three " notorious " magical weapons : a trident , a war hammer and a sword , each possessing its own intelligence . The adventure contains art by Erol Otus , and a cover by Jeff Dee . A sequel , Return to White Plume Mountain , was published in 1999 , and an updated version conforming to v3.5 rules was released online in 2005 . 
 White Plume Mountain was well received by critics . It was ranked the 9th greatest Dungeons & Dragons adventure of all time by Dungeon magazine in 2004 . One judge , commenting on the ingenuity required to complete the adventure , described it as " the puzzle dungeon to end all puzzle dungeons . " A review for British magazine White Dwarf gave it an overall rating of 8 / 10 , noting that the adventure focuses on problem solving . It is also the favorite adventure of Wired magazine 's Ken Denmead , who described it as the " amusement park of dungeons " . Other adventures in the S series include Tomb of Horrors , Expedition to the Barrier Peaks , and Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 White Plume Mountain is set in the World of Greyhawk , a campaign setting for Dungeons & Dragons . The module is a dungeon crawl , precipitated by the theft of three magical , sentient weapons : a trident named Wave , a war hammer named Whelm , and a sword named Blackrazor ( all three were introduced in this adventure ) . The weapons ' former owners each received a copy of a taunting poem , instructing them that the weapons are located in White Plume Mountain . The poem is signed by the wizard Keraptis , who thirteen hundred years ago descended into the volcanic mountain with a company of gnomes and disappeared . The player characters goal is to follow the same path and retrieve the weapons from Keraptis ' lair . 
 The adventure is divided into 27 encounters across a 16 @-@ page module . Encounters are varied and each presents its own challenges . Encounter seven necessitates characters jumping from platform to platform above a sea of hot mud whilst evading erupting geysers ; this in turn leads to encounter eight and a room of permanent darkness where a vampire guards Whelm . Encounter 17 occurs in a giant but fragile bubble located above a boiling lake , with the players needing to defeat a giant crab and retrieve Wave without damaging the bubble . Encounter 26 involves negotiating a magical ziggurat populated by various monsters ( including sea lions , giant crayfish , giant scorpions , and <unk> ) before encounter 28 , a battle against an ogre mage who possesses Blackrazor . A final challenge on departing is an encounter with two to four <unk> if the characters have succeeded in taking two or three of the magical weapons . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 The original White Plume Mountain adventure was written by Lawrence Schick , and was published by TSR in 1979 . It features interior art by Erol Otus and David C. Sutherland III , calligraphy by Darlene <unk> , and a front cover by Sutherland . The module includes a 12 @-@ page booklet and an outer folder which featured a two @-@ color cover in the original printing ; the module was expanded to 16 pages and rereleased with a full @-@ color cover by Jeff Dee in 1981 . The adventure was included as part of the Realms of Horror abridged compilation produced in 1987 . To celebrate the 25th anniversary of the Dungeons & Dragons game in 1999 , a reprinting of the original adventure was made available in the Dungeons & Dragons Silver Anniversary Collector 's Edition boxed set , with slight modifications to make it distinguishable from the original ( for collecting purposes ) . Wizards of the Coast also released a sequel to the adventure in 1999 , Return to White Plume Mountain , as part of the TSR 25th Anniversary series of publications . The events in the sequel are assumed to take place 20 years following those in the original . It was made into a novel of the same name by Paul Kidd for the Greyhawk Classics series . 
 Schick wrote the module while applying for a job with TSR . He took what he felt were the best parts from his previously created dungeons and put them together to create White Plume Mountain . After looking at it , TSR hired him and published the module without making any changes . Looking back in an interview , Schick said that he was " a little embarrassed to this day by Blackrazor , inasmuch as it 's such a blatant rip @-@ off of Elric 's Stormbringer ; I would not have put it into the scenario if I ever thought it might be published . " Schick later admitted that it was gratifying to have his adventure published as @-@ is , " but also a little embarrassing , since the adventure was really just a sampler of clever ideas that were never fully fleshed out . Its central conceit , a ' funhouse ' dungeon full of tricky obstacles designed to challenge adventurers for the amusement of a mad wizard , was already a cliché even at that date . " 
 In 2005 , an online version of the adventure was released as a free download , updated to conform with v3.5 rules ( Wizards of the Coast periodically alters the rules of Dungeons & Dragons and releases a new version ) . The revised module is designed for characters of the seventh level of experience . Return to White Plume Mountain has also received a v3.5 update and is likewise available for free download on their website . In both of the revised modules , the classic weapons associated with them ( Blackrazor , Whelm and Wave for White Plume Mountain , <unk> for Return to White Plume Mountain ) have been converted into Legacy Weapons . 
 All four modules of the S @-@ series were included as part of the Dungeons of Dread hardcover collection , released on March 19 , 2013 . In the foreword , Schick wrote that " unlike Tomb of Horrors , the challenges in White Plume Mountain were designed to make players think , work together as a party , and ultimately win through and feel successful . Players liked that . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 White Plume Mountain was well received by critics . Dungeon Master for Dummies lists White Plume Mountain as one of the ten best classic adventures , referring to it as a " classic dungeon crawl . " It was ranked the 9th greatest Dungeons & Dragons adventure of all time by Dungeon magazine in 2004 , on the 30th anniversary of the Dungeons & Dragons game . Judge Mike Mearls commented on the ingenuity required to complete the adventure , describing it as " the puzzle dungeon to end all puzzle dungeons " . Further , when speaking to why it is one of the top adventures ever , he said that while it lacked the " sheer brutality " of Tomb of Horrors , it made up for it with " crazy , over the top , pure fun " . Another Judge , Clark Peterson , said that he liked the three magical weapons : Wave , Whelm , and Blackrazor . To Peterson , just the inclusion of Blackrazor makes White Plume Mountain a " classic " . The editors of Dungeon felt that the adventure was defined by the ziggurat and its monsters . 
 Kirby T. Griffis reviewed the adventure in The Space Gamer # 37 . Griffis found the background interesting , namely Keraptis having stolen the magical weapons from prominent dealers , and the player having been hired to get them back , with only a cryptic poem to help . He found the module well organized and its content more believable than most , and despite its shortness he stated , " This on the whole is a very good module . There are no real flaws . " 
 Jim Bambra reviewed White Plume Mountain for the British magazine White Dwarf , and rated it favorably at 8 / 10 overall . He gave playability , enjoyment , and skill ratings of 9 / 10 , and a complexity rating of 7 / 10 . He noted that the adventure focuses on problem solving , with " many interesting problems for players to overcome " . Comparing it to the challenges in the previous S series adventure Tomb of Horrors , Bambra found White Plume Mountain " quite lenient . " Where in Tomb of Horrors a wrong decision would leave the player 's character dead , in White Plume Mountain it merely leaves the player frustrated . The adventure 's tests are " designed to stretch a party to its limits , not deal death at every opportunity " . 
 Ken Denmead of Wired says that White Plume Mountain is his favorite adventure , if not necessarily the best . For him , it was the " amusement park of dungeons " . He describes the story arc , where the adventurers are hired to retrieve three magic items , as similar to the A @-@ Team or The Equalizer : " You 've been hired to help when no one else has been able . " He felt that while the sword Blackrazor was a " blatant ripoff of Elric " , it was " still way cool " . 
 Denmead commented on several of the adventure 's encounters . He felt the cavern with boiling mud , hanging disks , and geysers , was " just cruel " . Concerning the permanently dark room that houses a vampire , he commented on the ease with which one player 's character can easily hit that of another in the gloom . He describes the room where a giant crab guards the trident Wave as " basically a bubble inside a tank of boiling water " , noting the crab knows not to pierce the walls and asks , " Are you that smart ? " Also , if the players end the adventure with the magic weapons , they need to " bribe " their Dungeon Master to allow them to keep the items . 
 = Plectania nannfeldtii = 
 Plectania nannfeldtii , commonly known as Nannfeldt 's Plectania , the black felt cup , or the black snowbank cup fungus , is a species of fungus in the family Sarcosomataceae . The fruit bodies of this species resemble small , black , goblet @-@ shaped shallow cups up to 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) wide , with stems up to 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) long attached to black mycelia . Fruit bodies , which may appear alone or in groups on the ground in conifer duff , are usually attached to buried woody debris , and are commonly associated with melting snow . Plectania nannfeldtii is found in western North America and in Asia , often at higher elevations . Similar black cup fungi with which P. nannfeldtii may be confused include Pseudoplectania vogesiaca , P. nigrella , and Helvella corium . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first described by British mycologist Fred Jay Seaver in 1928 , who called it Paxina nigrella in his monograph of the cup fungi of North America . The type specimens were found in 1914 in Tolland , Colorado , by mycologist Lee Oras Overholts ; further collections were reported from Colorado and California in 1930 . The species has also been referred to as <unk> nigrella , Helvella nigrella , and Macroscyphus <unk> . 
 In 1957 Richard Korf transferred the species to its current name , changing the specific epithet in the process as Plectania nigrella was already in use ( it is a synonym of Pseudoplectania nigrella ) . The name chosen by Korf honors the Swedish mycologist John Axel Nannfeldt , responsible for some early advances in the understanding of this fungus and other cup fungi . P. nannfeldtii is classified in Korf 's section Plectania of the genus Plectania because of its ellipsoid ascospores . Vernacular names for the species include the " black felt cup " , " Nannfeldt 's Plectania " , or the " black snowbank cup fungus " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The fruit body of Plectania nannfeldtii is shallowly cup- or goblet @-@ shaped and may be up to 3 cm ( 1 @.@ 2 in ) in diameter . The edges of the cup are somewhat wavy , and remain curled inward until they flare out when they are very old . The external surface is covered with delicate blackish @-@ brown hairs , while the color of the surface underneath is also brownish @-@ black . The surface wrinkles when the fruit body is dry . The internal , convex surface of the cup contains the spore @-@ producing tissue layer known as the hymenium ; it is black . The stem is thin and may be up to 4 cm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) long with a diameter of 2 – 3 mm , tapering towards the base . Like the fruit body , it is covered in delicate brownish @-@ black hairs , and it is similar in color to the outer surface of the cup . The dense , coarse mycelium at the base of the stem is black . The flesh is thin and blackish @-@ gray . 
 Edibility has not been determined for this species . 
 = = = Microscopic features = = = 
 In mass , the spores are white . The spores are hyaline ( translucent ) , ellipsoid , with dimensions of 30 – 35 by 15 µm . Opinions are divided about the distribution of oil droplets in the spores : Miller says that the spores typically have two oil droplets at either end , <unk> and Ammirati , in their field guide to mushrooms of the Pacific Northwest , says that the spores " lack large oil drops " , while Evenson claims that there are " numerous tiny oil drops . " The walls of the spores have thin horizontal ridges that are cyanophilic , that is , they are visible with light microscopy when stained with methyl blue . The spore @-@ bearing cells , the asci , are about 500 µm long and 20 µm wide . The asci are operculate , that is , with a flap at one end that opens to discharge the spores . Interspersed between the asci are numerous sterile , filamentous dark @-@ brown cells called paraphyses that are slightly enlarged on one end , and 380 – 420 µm long by 4 – 5 µm wide . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Based on external appearance , Plectania nannfeldtii is similar to Pseudoplectania vogesiaca . Although this latter species may be difficult to distinguish by its less hairy external fruit body surface , its microscopic characters identify it more definitively : P. vogesiaca has spores that are much smaller , typically with widths of 12 – 14 µm . Helvella corium is another black cup fungus that appears in the spring ; it has smaller spores , whitish margins on the cup edges , and shorter stems than P. nannfeldtii . Pseudoplectania nigrella is smaller , with a hairier outer surface , a darker inner cup surface , and a rudimentary stem . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Plectania nannfeldtii is typically found at higher elevations in coniferous forests growing on wet twigs or other rotting woody debris , often in or near snow . It often begins its development underneath the snow , reaching maturity as the snowbank recedes to expose it ; one source suggests that its metabolic heat may help it melt a path through snow as it grows . It may grow singly , scattered or in clusters , and has been noted to have a preference for the wood of Picea engelmannii and Abies <unk> as well as other conifers . In North America , it is found in the Western United States and Canada , where it fruits from late May to early August ; it is common in the Sierra Nevada and in higher elevations of the Pacific Coast Ranges . Its distribution also includes China and Japan . 
 = 7 : 15 A.M. = 
 " 7 : 15 A.M. " is the tenth episode of the American fairy tale / drama television series Once Upon a Time . The series takes place in the fictional seaside town of Storybrooke , Maine , in which the residents are actually characters from various fairy tales that were transported to the " real world " town by a powerful curse . In this episode , Emma Swan ( Jennifer Morrison ) and Regina Mills ( Lana Parrilla ) become suspicious of the Stranger ( Eion Bailey ) and his visit to Storybrooke , while David ( Josh Dallas ) and Mary Margaret 's ( Ginnifer Goodwin ) feelings for each other grow , which parallels with Prince James ' ( Dallas ) search for Snow ( Goodwin ) after he falls for her . 
 The episode 's teleplay was written by executive story editor Daniel T. Thomsen , while co @-@ creators Edward Kitsis and Adam Horowitz wrote the story . Ralph Hemecker directed the installment . " 7 : 15 A.M. " was filmed in November 2011 in Vancouver and surrounding areas of British Columbia , where the crew endured difficult weather conditions . It featured the first full introductions of the Stranger and Red Riding Hood ( Meghan Ory ) . 
 " 7 : 15 A.M. " first aired in the United States on ABC on January 22 , 2012 to an estimated 9 @.@ 33 million viewers , placing second in its timeslot . Critical reception to the episode ranged from mixed to positive ; most critics positively focused on Snow and Charming 's storyline and praised Dallas and Goodwin for their performances and excellent chemistry . The episode was included in Reawakened : A Once Upon a Time Tale – a novelization of the first season – which was published by Hyperion Books in 2013 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = In the Opening Sequence = = = 
 Snow White is seen in her thief cloak walking through the forest . 
 = = = In the Characters ' Past = = = 
 In the Enchanted Forest , Red Riding Hood ( Meghan Ory ) brings supplies and news to her friend , Snow White ( Ginnifer Goodwin ) . Prince Charming ( Josh Dallas ) is set to marry Abigail ( Anastasia Griffith ) in two days . Snow White wishes there were a way to get Charming out of her head as she is still in love with him . Red suggests she see Rumpelstiltskin ( Robert Carlyle ) and Snow takes her advice . Rumpelstiltskin takes some water and a piece of Snow 's hair to make a potion that will make her forget Charming . He warns that love is a powerful disease and the cure must be extreme . 
 At the palace , Charming struggles with his feelings for Snow . The King ( Alan Dale ) commands him to forget her because the marriage to Abigail is worth great wealth to the kingdom . Charming sends a letter by carrier pigeon to Snow begging her to come and see him so they can be together . The letter reaches her just before she can take the potion . Snow makes it to the palace but she is seized by the guards and thrown into the dungeon . There she meets a dwarf named Grumpy ( Lee Arenberg ) , who was falsely imprisoned for stealing a diamond that he wanted to give to his girlfriend . Another dwarf , Stealthy ( Geoff Gustafson ) , shows up to rescue Grumpy , who asks Stealthy to free Snow as well . The guards kill Stealthy as they try to escape and try to recapture Grumpy . Snow threatens to burn down the palace unless they let Grumpy go and take her in his place . The King tells Snow he will not let her interfere with the wedding . She must tell Charming she does not love him , or the King will kill him . Snow obeys because she loves Charming too much to let him die , but both are left heartbroken . Snow leaves and is soon joined by Grumpy and six other dwarfs , who offer her a place to stay . She considers the potion but Grumpy warns her that those feelings however painful , are part of her . Charming calls off the wedding to look for Snow and the dwarves hear about it from Red Riding Hood . Grumpy joyfully tells Snow the good news , but she has forgotten about Charming . The pain was too great to bear and she drank the potion . 
 = = = In Storybrooke = = = 
 In Storybrooke , Henry ( Jared S. Gilmore ) leaves for school and notices the Stranger ( Eion Bailey ) fixing his motorcycle . Henry asks him about why he was in town , but the Stranger only mentions that a storm is brewing . Regina ( Lana Parrilla ) notices the interaction so she asks Emma Swan ( Jennifer Morrison ) to find out about the Stranger . Emma catches up with him at Granny 's and asks him what he is doing in town , and what 's in his box . He agrees to tell , on the condition he can buy Emma a drink sometime . She agrees so the Stranger reveals a typewriter . He is a writer in town for inspiration . Emma inquires about the drink , and he reminds her she agreed to " sometime . " 
 The same day , Mary Margaret ( Goodwin ) rushes out the door and gives Emma an excuse that she has to make a volcano . In truth she has been going to Granny 's at 7 : 15 every morning to see David ( Dallas ) getting coffee for himself and Kathryn ( Griffith ) . Emma , who can always spot a lie , follows Mary Margaret to call out her stalking behavior and suggests she stop seeing him . Mary Margaret buys some chocolate to drown her woes and runs right into Kathryn , who is picking up a pregnancy test . Regina notices this , and warns Mary Margaret to stay away from David , and it was their personal life . 
 Later on in the day , Mary Margaret finds a dove in the forest trapped in some wire mesh . The town vet ( Kwesi <unk> ) at the shelter where David works tells her the bird will be okay but only if she returns to her flock . David offers to help Mary Margaret return the dove but she declines . He follows her anyway and is able to save her from falling off a cliff . It starts to pour so the two take shelter in an empty cabin . David asks Mary Margaret what is wrong and she admits she still has feelings for him , and he is the reason she goes to Granny 's at 7 : 15 . David replies that he goes to Granny 's to see her . They nearly kiss but Mary Margaret stops it because she knows about Kathryn 's pregnancy test . David explains that his feelings for Kathryn are memories but his feelings for Mary Margaret are real . She says they have to forget each other . The next day Mary Margaret and David try to avoid seeing each other by going to Granny 's at 7 : 45 . Ultimately , they realize they cannot stay apart , and they kiss . Regina watches them from a distance . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode 's teleplay was written by executive story editor Daniel T. Thomsen , while co @-@ creators Adam Horowitz and Edward Kitsis co @-@ wrote the story . Renegade veteran Ralph Hemecker , directed the installment in November 2011 . As with the rest of the first season , all exterior shots of the town of Storybrooke were filmed in the small town of Steveston , British Columbia . Interior shots were mainly shot on sound stages in their Vancouver studio , often with green screens . Goodwin stated in the episode 's DVD audio commentary that she preferred practical sets to green screens , as she found the former easier to act with . She also mentioned her hatred of her character 's short hair throughout the episode , variously describing it as boyish , a mullet , and a Jewfro . 
 According to Dallas , it rained on days that were supposed to be sunny , while other days of production lacked rain when they were supposed to be rainy . Goodwin added that the scene of Snow and Charming releasing the birds was freezing because of the heavy rain . Their scene in the cabin took place on the first day of the episode 's production . Her near @-@ death scene involved a real cliff , though the height was exaggerated later using CGI and a green screen ; a stunt double stood in for some of the shots . 
 " 7 : 15 A.M. " featured the first full introduction of Red Riding Hood ( Meghan Ory ) – though she appears briefly in four earlier episodes – as well as the first full appearance of the Stranger ( Eion Bailey ) . Bailey 's multi @-@ episode casting was first announced in October 2011 , and he appeared briefly during the conclusion of the previous episode . The episode was included in Reawakened : A Once Upon a Time Tale – a novelization of the first season – which was published by Hyperion Books in 2013 . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Producer Damon Lindelof had an uncredited voice cameo as the Storybrooke weatherman . Apollo bars from Lindelof 's series Lost were also featured in the episode . Mary Margaret is seen reading The Mysterious Island by Jules Verne , which is a book also featured in TRON : Legacy , a film written by Horowitz and Kitsis . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " 7 : 15 A.M. " first aired on January 22 , 2012 in the United States . An estimated 9 @.@ 30 million viewers watched the episode , placing second in its timeslot behind a NFC Championship Game between the New York Giants and the San Francisco 49ers . The episode earned a ratings share of 3 @.@ 2 / 7 among adults aged 18 to 49 and a 5 @.@ 4 / 8 score overall . The episode 's ratings and viewership made the series the number one non @-@ sports program among viewers and young adults on Sunday nights . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 The episode received mixed to positive reviews from television critics . 
 Writing for IGN , Amy Ratcliffe gave " 7 : 15 A.M. " a score of 7 out of 10 , an indication of a " good " episode . She felt that Goodwin and Dallas had good chemistry , making the audience root for them despite David 's married status . Entertainment Weekly writer Hilary Busis praised Goodwin 's performance , especially when her character tells Charming she no longer loves him . Tor.com 's Teresa Jusino lauded the episode for containing a " beautifully @-@ written script that focuses on two of the most intriguing and endearing characters on the show , " effectively indicating to viewers " exactly why Mary Margaret and David ( and Snow and James ) are in love . " Jusino concluded that the episode provided " a great respite from the previous week ’ s lull , and provided not only a story that pulled viewers in , but one that provided some wonderful character detail . " 
 The Huffington Post 's Laura Prudom applauded the differences between the characters in Storybrooke and their fairytale counterparts ; she felt that this narrative device would help prevent viewers from getting frustrated if Snow and Charming grew further apart in one land but closer in the other . Prudom also enjoyed the writers ' decision to make David " indecisive and , as a result , also somewhat selfish , " while James is ready to leave his fiance for Snow . Prudom concluded that the episode " expertly combined all the elements that make Once Upon a Time one of the most addictive and heartfelt new shows of the season , blending emotion , mystery and narrative thrust while giving us a deeper understanding of our favorite characters . I hope the next batch of episodes can keep up the momentum established this week . " 
 The Wall Street Journal 's Gwen Orel wrote that " maybe it ’ s the curse wearing off , but the use of parallel worlds and stories is better and better , sometimes even gesture to gesture . It ’ s about Snow and thwarted love this week , and that ’ s always compelling . " Oliver Sava of The A.V. Club was more critical of the episode and gave it a C + . He felt that it was " the strongest episode of the series since Rumpelstiltskin ’ s first " flashback in " Desperate Souls " because it did a better job handling the fairytale storyline . However , Sava faulted it for containing predictable elements , having many of the characters acting stupidly , and for being " painfully obvious while trying to be clever , aiming for poignancy but getting laughs instead . " Sava praised Griffiths ' performance for " min [ ing ] her wooden dialogue for some real emotional weight . " 
 = Cora Cross = 
 Cora Cross is a fictional character from the BBC soap opera EastEnders , played by Ann Mitchell . Cora is the mother of Tanya Branning ( Jo Joyner ) and Rainie Cross ( Tanya Franks ) and the grandmother of Lauren ( Jacqueline Jossa ) and Abi Branning ( Lorna Fitzgerald ) . Cora initially appeared from 11 to 15 April 2011 , and returned as a regular character on 28 July . Cora is described as having " a brash , outspoken attitude and does not care who she offends " , deemed " an archetypal East End matriarch " and Inside Soap says that Cora is a " brash , loud lady who likes to tell everyone what she thinks and has absolute no shame . " 
 In May 2011 , when it was confirmed that Cora would be returning to EastEnders , executive producer Bryan Kirkwood said , " We all love Cora here — actress Ann Mitchell could be one of the Walford greats " . Kirkwood was keen to find a new matriarch for the show after the loss of Peggy Mitchell , played by Barbara Windsor and explained that Cora is a perfect fit . Kate White of Inside Soap praised Cora and added she could watch Ann Mitchell acting " her socks off " all day long . 
 Mitchell took hiatus in April 2015 , returned for a five @-@ month guest stint from July to December 2015 , and is due to make a full return in late 2016 . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Cora turns up at her daughter Tanya Branning 's ( Jo Joyner ) house unannounced , and revealing that Tanya 's fiancé Greg Jessop ( Stefan Booth ) invited her to their wedding against Tanya 's wishes . Cora 's other daughter , Rainie Cross , ( Tanya Franks ) also arrives at Tanya 's house , which Tanya is initially unhappy about , but Cora vouches for her by promising that she is now clean from drugs and explains that Rainie 's counsellor thinks she should reconnect with her family . Tanya soon softens towards her mother and sister . On Tanya 's hen night , Cora takes a dislike to Vanessa Gold ( Zöe <unk> ) after Vanessa laughs about them living on a council estate . The next day , Tanya 's ex @-@ husband , Max , goes to Tanya 's house after tearing their daughter Abi Branning 's ( Lorna Fitzgerald ) bridesmaid dress ; Tanya does not want to see him so Cora attempts to sort him out . She tells Max that although the girls have his name , they are Crosses deep down . It is later revealed that Rainie is staying at Cora 's house . Cora then attends Tanya 's wedding , and finds it amusing when Jane Beale ( Laurie Brett ) says she kissed Greg the night before . Cora departs after the wedding on 15 April , and Rainie later reveals that she has moved out of her mother 's home . 
 Cora returns months later as she can no longer handle her abusive neighbours and asks to stay with Tanya for a few days . Tanya lets her stay longer , and on her birthday , she visits The Queen Victoria public house and meets Patrick Trueman ( Rudolph Walker ) and Alfie Moon ( Shane Richie ) . She gets drunk and confronts Tanya about forgetting her birthday and how she treats Rainie . Cora also guesses that Tanya does not love Greg , but Tanya denies this . Cora reveals she has been evicted from her home because her neighbour has an <unk> , but when Cora , Tanya and Rainie return there to empty the house , the neighbour reveals that Cora is the one with the <unk> . She looks after Tanya 's young son Oscar Branning ( <unk> and Neo Hall ) but he annoys her due to the noise he makes . She leaves him to play on the stairs but he falls down them , leaving him with minor injuries . 
 Eventually Cora is forced to move out of Tanya 's and convinces Dot Branning ( June Brown ) to let her stay with her and her sister Rose Cotton ( Polly Perkins ) . She asks Anthony Moon ( Matt Lapinskas ) to help her move her things , saying he can keep one of her belongings as payment . He asks for her candlesticks , but she says they are the only decent thing she owns , so she lets him buy them for £ 200 . She later finds out they could be worth £ 1000 , so convinces Anthony 's father Eddie ( David Essex ) to give her an extra £ 300 , but he believes them to be worth £ 8000 . Dot later kicks Cora out for laughing at her and using language that Dot dislikes . Cora arrives at Tanya 's house just as Shirley Carter ( Linda Henry ) is throttling Rainie so Cora fends Shirley off and threatens her . Tanya then lets Cora stay with her . When Max returns because Abi is worried about Tanya , it leads to Lauren revealing that Tanya has cervical cancer and has stopped her treatment . Tanya explains that she did not tell anyone because of how it was for her when her father , William , was dying of cancer . She then tells Cora and Rainie that William did not die peacefully as they thought , but he was in constant pain so Tanya helped him to die . Cora is initially horrified , but after Tanya explains further the circumstances surrounding William 's death , they reconcile . 
 Cora then vows to support Tanya through her illness . Cora starts voluntary work at a cancer charity shop , where she is quickly promoted to manager . Cora also returns to live with Dot and Rose . Cora suspects Max of having an affair with Roxy Mitchell ( Rita Simons ) . Max gets Roxy to admit to Cora that she attempted to seduce him , but that he refused her . Cora then warns Roxy to stay away from Max before throwing her out . Lucy Beale ( Hetti Bywater ) confides in Cora as she is unsure if she will see her father again . Having smashed Cora 's shop window , Sasha Dixon ( Rebecca Sanneh ) is made to do shifts in the shop to pay for the damage . Cora swindles funeral director Les Coker ( Roger Sloman ) as a means of increasing shop sales . When Lola Pearce ( Danielle Harold ) goes into labour , Cora helps deliver her baby daughter , Lexi . 
 Cora pretends to be in a relationship with Patrick at a funeral of one of his old friends . Tanya assumes the relationship is real , so Cora is angry that Tanya is interfering . Cora and Patrick then decide to start a real relationship , taking it slowly . Tanya tries to make up for upsetting Cora by replacing a bracelet she lost , but discovers a birth certificate for a sister she knew nothing about , Ava Anderton ( Clare Perkins ) . Cora refuses to discuss the matter , until later , when she burns the birth certificate and tells Tanya that Ava died shortly after birth . Tanya asks Cora find Rainie so she can be a bridesmaid at Tanya 's second wedding to Max . Rainie sends her addiction sponsor to meet Cora , who reveals that Rainie has been sober for six weeks , Rainie blames Cora for her bad behaviour and does not want any further contact with her . Cora bins Rainie 's bridesmaid dress and simply tells Tanya that Rainie refused to be a bridesmaid . Cora begins behaving strangely and angrily tells Tanya the truth about Rainie . 
 When Patrick questions Cora about a cake she is baking , she tells him it is for Ava 's birthday , she is in fact alive and she was forced to give her up for adoption by her parents because she was unmarried and the baby was mixed race . Her erratic behaviour continues and she is subsequently fired from the charity shop . Patrick reveals to Tanya that Ava is alive , so Tanya tracks her down to a school in Dalston where she works as a deputy headmistress . Tanya is shocked to discover that Ava is mixed @-@ race and decides to leave things . However , she leaves her purse behind , and Ava returns it to Tanya 's home , where Cora is horrified when she introduces herself by her name . Tanya reveals the truth , and Cora leaves after slapping Tanya for meddling in her private life . She is angry at Patrick when he says he told Tanya the truth and ends the relationship . Cora then speaks to Ava , and Ava has many questions . Ava says she thought about finding Cora before but decided against it as she wanted to keep the past in the past , and says that nothing has changed now , rejecting Cora . Ava leaves and Cora cries . Cora later goes to Ava 's workplace and gives her a Christmas card , and a short while later , Ava brings one for Cora . She also reconciles with Patrick but they stay friends . 
 As Christmas nears , Cora reunites with Tanya , and is invited for Christmas with the Brannings . At Derek Branning 's ( Jamie Foreman ) funeral , Cora delivers an honest eulogy . Cora comforts Tanya after she splits with Max . She befriends her grandson , Ava 's son Dexter Hartman ( Khali Best ) , who helps to bring Cora and Ava closer . Cora is a support to Tanya and Lauren while Lauren goes through alcoholism . Tanya takes Lauren away to a clinic , but Tanya does not return when Lauren does . When Dexter 's father Sam James ( Cornell S John ) arrives , he tries to win Cora over but she sees that Ava and Dexter are upset and warns him off . Ava and Sam reunite , and Cora eventually tells Dexter , who is initially angry but comes to terms with the relationship . Cora is jealous when Patrick picks Betty Spragg ( Tessa Wyatt ) as his dance partner , making fun of her behind her back and angering Patrick , putting a strain on their friendship . Abi and Kim Fox ( Tameka Empson ) plot to get Cora and Patrick back together , locking them in a shed . Patrick ends his friendship with Betty and resumes a relationship with Cora . 
 When Tanya moves away from Walford , Cora continues to live with Lauren and Abi , and they are later joined by Dexter when Ava moves to Newcastle . Cora supports her granddaughters when Max is in prison for attempted murder , but following his release from prison and separation from his third wife Kirsty ( Kierston Wareing ) , he buys 5 Albert Square , and throws Cora and Dexter out , as they do nothing around the house . They move in with Patrick , but he ends his relationship with Cora in March 2014 due to her insensitive comments that she makes to Dot following the death of her son Nick Cotton ( John Altman ) . He later tells her that she and Dexter have one month to find somewhere else . Cora steals money from the laundrette to rent a flat , but after Dot finds her stealing money from the washing machines , Cora loses hope until Stan Carter ( Timothy West ) , who she has recently befriended agrees to give her some cash . Cora and Dexter later move into a flat together . Lauren and Abi move in with her when Max is revealed to have been sleeping with Lauren 's best friend Lucy , before her recent murder . Cora becomes suspicious that Max is withholding information from the police and calls them to clarify his statement . She later warns him not to hurt Lauren and Abi any further . 
 Cora and Stan start dating and Stan , who has terminal prostate cancer , decides he wants to commit the time he has left with her . He surprises her with a Christmas dance , but things are ruined when Stan 's ex @-@ wife Sylvie Carter ( Linda Marlowe ) walks in on them together . Cora decides to move to Newcastle with Dexter and Ava , but after Stan apologises to her and goes with her to the station , she has a change of heart and decides to stay . Stan then takes Cora to a retro dance event , but Cora walks out when Sylvie arrives there . She goes back there with Babe Smith ( Annette Badland ) but leaves again after seeing Stan and Sylvie sharing a dance and a kiss and learning that Babe has had feelings for Stan all along . 
 Several weeks later , Stan invites Cora to a horse racing match in hopes of rekindling their relationship , but she turns him down as she feels she will lose him again . The same day , Stan collapses due to his cancer spreading leaving him paralysed from the waist down . Two days later , after much hesitation , Cora visits Stan in hospital to say goodbye to him , but is unperturbed by Babe 's presence in caring for Stan . After Babe privately recalls to Cora how much she loved Stan from the minute she met him , Cora is surprised when Stan proposes to her . She rejects his proposal , not wanting to hurt Babe 's feelings , but Babe , realising that her and Stan were never meant to be , encourages Cora to accept the proposal for his last chance of happiness , but told her that he 's love Sylvie more . Two weeks later , Stan passes away from his cancer , devastating Cora . After his funeral she departs , saying she will stay with Tanya in Exeter , and is then seen calling her and waiting for her to pick her up . 
 A few months later , a dishevelled Cora attends a charity drive for the homeless at the community centre , but ensures nobody sees her . When Abi calls Tanya , she discovers Cora has not visited Tanya . Abi is distressed and attempts to find her . Cora is found by Abi , Jane and Carol Jackson ( Lindsey Coulson ) sleeping rough in a bus shelter and at first does not recognise Abi , however , she soon returns to Walford and lives in an allotment shed and in alleyways . Babe continues to make fun of her homeless state and when Cora steals food from the Vic , she <unk> Babe by exposing her past with Queenie Trott ( Judy Cornwell ) . Eventually , Cora 's friends and neighbours stage a protest , surprisingly led by Babe , at the local council 's Christmas party and they are forced to house Cora . 
 = = Character creation = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Cora and her casting were announced on 21 March 2011 . It was announced that award @-@ winning actress , Ann Mitchell would be playing the role . Mitchell said of her casting " As a lifelong fan of EastEnders , I am thrilled to join the cast . I am a great fan of June Brown 's [ who plays Dot Branning ] and am looking forward to sharing some scenes with her . " Executive producer Bryan Kirkwood opined : " I 'm very excited to have the much @-@ loved Ann Mitchell joining us . Cora Cross is a formidable woman , cut from the same cloth as many glorious Walford women of the past , and Ann Mitchell is just perfect for the role . " It is Mitchell 's second role in EastEnders , having previously played Jane Williams from 2001 to 2002 . Cora initially appeared from 11 to 15 April 2011 . On 31 May 2011 , it was confirmed that Cora would be returning to EastEnders as a regular character . Kirkwood said , " We all love Cora here — actress Ann Mitchell could be one of the Walford greats . She 'll be returning late in the summer and is here to stay . " Kirkwood added that he was keen to establish the Cross women . Mitchell was originally a guest artiste , appearing from 11 April to 15 April but was brought back as a regular character as of 28 July 2011 . 
 In an interview with Inside Soap , the executive producer of EastEnders , Bryan Kirkwood commented : " With the loss of Barbara Windsor , I was keen to find a new matriarch for the show , and Ann Mitchell is a dream booking . I 've always been a fan of her work , and with the storyline we 've got planned , we 'll wonder how we ever did without Cora " . Discussing the permanent return of Cora , Tanya Franks commented : " Ann Mitchell isn 't that scary in real life ! It 'll be nice to see these three crazy women as a family unit . There 's room for lots more skeletons to fall out of the closet . " 
 = = = Personality = = = 
 Cora was described as having " a brash , outspoken attitude and does not care who she offends . She also quickly puts Tanya under scrutiny , believing that success has turned her into a snob " . It was said that she secretly wants to heal the rift between Tanya and Rainie . Cora has also been described as a " <unk> battleaxe " . The BBC website describes Cora as " tough as old boots " and to " cross her at your peril . " It continues to read : " Outwardly , Cora ’ s tough as old boots and doesn ’ t give a stuff what people think of her . But underneath all her bling and hair dye there is a sadness to her . She ’ s lonely , and wishes she had a relationship with her daughters Tanya and Rainie . Unpredictable Cora has lived on an estate all her life . She ’ s never really had any money and finds it impossible to hold down a job . Even though she ’ s always skint , she does enjoy the finer things in life . She ’ s a fan of gold , and her big earrings may even outshine some of Pat 's . This <unk> lady won ’ t back down from an argument and holds life long grudges . Cross Cora at your peril ! " 
 Inside Soap says that Cora is a " brash , loud lady who likes to tell everyone what she thinks and has absolute no shame . " An EastEnders informant says : " She 'll be a massive embarrassment to Tanya , who likes to think she 's risen above her roots and made a better life for herself . While Cora will be pretty impressed with Tanya 's lot , she 'll be quick to accuse her daughter of becoming snobby and stuck @-@ up . That 'll lead to plenty of drama and lots of comedy . " Mitchell said that Cora has a " gutsy spirit " and " thick skin " . 
 = = Development = = 
 In an interview with Digital Spy , Jake Wood was asked what kind of a dynamic he thinks that viewers could expect from Max and Cora . He replied : " If Max does move back home , they 'd potentially have to spend a lot of time together , so I think they 'd have to put their differences aside for Tanya 's sake . Ann Mitchell is a superb actor and Cora is a great character - a great addition to the show . I 'm very happy that she 's here . " Also in an interview with Digital Spy , Jo Joyner commented on the relationship between Tanya and Cora at present . She said : " I think that now we 've explored all of the history with Tanya 's father , the two of them are in a new territory . Cora can sometimes be distant and cold , but you have to remember that they hadn 't spoken for a long time . At the moment , because of Tanya 's illness , Cora is being supportive and quite ' mummy ' - but there 's always the possibility that things could take a turn for the worse with their relationship , so I think that could change . " Joyner later added : " There 's some really great stuff to come with Max , Cora and Tanya and her past . It all comes to a bit of a head . " 
 In October 2011 , Daniel Kilkelly of Digital Spy reported that Max would be returning to EastEnders with his brother Derek ( Jamie Foreman ) and teased that Tanya will reveal a long @-@ held family secret which will shock Cora . Tanya reveals to Cora and Rainie that she helped her father to die . Joyner stated that particularly enjoyed filming the scene where Tanya reveals the truth about her father 's death . Rudolph Walker revealed in July 2012 that Cora and Patrick Trueman are to embark on a fling with each other . Upon Tanya discovering that Cora had another daughter , Mitchell said that many twists and turns will follow . She added : " The whole situation has pierced her thick skin . " 
 = = = Ava Hartman = = = 
 In September 2012 , Kilkelly reported that Tanya would discover Cora has been keeping a secret from her for years . Tanya discovers that Cora once had a daughter by the name of Ava , after coming across a birth certificate by accident . Tanya questions Cora , but she remains secretive and refuses to talk to her daughter . Cora later opens up to Tanya and tells that her daughter was called Ava , but that she died shortly after birth . It was later announced that Ava would be introduced to the show and that actress Claire Perkins had been cast in the role . Mitchell said that Cora was " forced to give up Ava " adding " The baby 's father was black and he left Cora before he knew she was pregnant . She was 18 and unmarried , and at that time , having a baby in her situation was a social stigma . She was made to feel enormous shame by her parents , who forced her to give the baby up for adoption . " On the subject of Cora keeping the secret for a significant amount of time , Mitchell also said that it 's down to guilt and wanting things to be kept safe and uncomplicated . Mitchell added " It 's going to be mayhem . The implications will be huge . The family will want answers , and I 'm sure we won 't be seeing the back of Ava . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 Speaking of Cora 's arrival , Jane Simon of the Daily Mirror said " Tanya 's mum Cora provides a stark warning about the dangers of Botox . She turns up tonight looking like Ronald McDonald in drag - no wonder Tanya 's been avoiding her . " The Daily Mail 's Jaci Stephen deemed Cora " an archetypal East End matriarch " . Stephen wrote : " brash and blunt , what she lacks in diplomacy she makes up for in style , even if that 's not the way daughter Tanya always sees it . The role is a perfect fit for actress Ann who , as gangster Dolly Rawlins in Widows , was one of the Eighties ' most iconic TV females . Daniel Kilkelly from Digital Spy said of Cora 's guest stint , " During her brief stay on Albert Square , Cora quickly became known for her brash attitude and outspoken ways . " Kate Woodward from Inside Soap said the introduction of Cora and Sylvia Goodwin ( Stephanie Cole ) from Coronation Street proved that soap operas need more " outspoken older women " . She commented that the characters cannot resist a barb and say the things many people would not ; just like " famous battleaxe " Blanche Hunt ( Maggie Jones ) . Cora and Sylvia have the " edge " that cannot be achieved by younger characters . Woodward described Cora as rough and that she owned a " gob as scary as her slap @-@ plastered mug " . Woodward later said that " outrageous Rose is the perfect foil for caustic Cora " . She named them as " the best double @-@ act ever " and added that they deserved an whole episode dedicated to them . 
 Kate White from the publication later praised the character saying " All hail the new queen of soap — fabulous Cora is everything the discerning viewer could ever want . " White added she could watch Mitchell acting " her socks off " all day long . The writer later said that Cora has the " undisputed title of The Biggest Hair In Soap " . Michael <unk> of Inside Soap said that Cora has " proved that she isn 't a woman to be messed with " . He also admitted that " it was a real surprise " to see Cora 's vulnerable side as she listened to the truth of her husband 's supposed " peaceful death " . He added that it is clear that viewers still have a lot to learn about Cora . In October 2011 , Inside Soap readers voted Cora their " favourite soap battleaxe " over Sylvia Goodwin ( Stephanie Cole ) and Edna Birch ( Shirley <unk> ) . Kevin O 'Sullivan of the Daily Mirror rated one of Cora 's lines his favourite . Cora said " I used to be able to walk down the street and stop traffic . " O 'Sullivan replied : " So she was a lollipop lady . " In Heat , Julie Emery called Cora " a <unk> harridan of a mother " . Simon of the Daily Mirror later hinted that " Cora has a real soft spot for bad boy Derek Branning . " A writer for the Daily Mirror called Rose Cotton ( Polly Perkins ) , Patrick Trueman ( Rudolph Walker ) and Cora " diamond <unk> " . Mitchell revealed in July 2012 that she was shocked to see that Cora has a young fanbase . She added that it is very interesting as people seem to believe there is great division between young and old people , and that youngsters respond to her because she is a tough mother and grandmother . A writer for Press Association called Cora a " larger @-@ than @-@ life pensioner " . Mitchell received a nomination in the " Funniest Female " category at the 2012 Inside Soap Awards for her portrayal of Cora . Upon receiving the nomination , Mitchell commented " I 'm chuffed to be nominated for this award , Cora 's sense of humour is so dry . I love her . She 's so much fun to play ! " 
 = Pipistrellus raceyi = 
 Pipistrellus raceyi , also known as Racey 's pipistrelle , is a bat from Madagascar , in the genus Pipistrellus . Although unidentified species of Pipistrellus had been previously reported from Madagascar since the 1990s , P. raceyi was not formally named until 2006 . It is apparently most closely related to the Asian species P. endoi , P. paterculus , and P. abramus , and its ancestors probably reached Madagascar from Asia . P. raceyi has been recorded at four sites , two in the eastern and two in the western lowlands . In the east , it is found in open areas and has been found roosting in a building ; in the west it occurs in dry forest . Because of uncertainties about its ecology , it is listed as " Data Deficient " on the IUCN Red List . 
 With a forearm length of 28 @.@ 0 to 31 @.@ 2 mm ( 1 @.@ 10 to 1 @.@ 23 in ) , Pipistrellus raceyi is small to medium @-@ sized for a species of Pipistrellus . The body is reddish above and yellow @-@ brown below . The wings are dark and the feet are small . Males have a long penis and baculum ( penis bone ) , which is somewhat similar to those of P. endoi , P. abramus and P. paterculus . In the skull , the rostrum ( front part ) is less flat than in related species and the supraorbital ridges ( above the eyes ) are prominent . The fourth upper premolar does not touch the upper canine and the second lower premolar is well @-@ developed . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Since they were first recorded in 1905 , when Thomas and Schwann described the species <unk> matroka ( currently Neoromicia matroka ) , the classification and status of small vespertilionid bats ( " pipistrelles " ) from Madagascar have remained unclear . Although several species were recorded , they remained little known . A species of the genus Pipistrellus with affinities to Oriental ( southeastern Asian ) species was first recorded in 1995 , and several later authors recorded one or more unidentified Pipistrellus species . 
 In 2006 , Paul Bates and colleagues reported on a collection of 44 Malagasy " pipistrelles " received by the Harrison Institute , which included several species new to Madagascar , as well as a single species new to science . This species , a member of Pipistrellus , was described as Pipistrellus raceyi . In a 2007 article , Steven Goodman mentioned it as part of a flurry of new bat species from Madagascar ; the number of species increased from 27 in 1995 to 37 in 2007 . The specific name , raceyi , honors bat researcher Paul Racey and the describers suggested the common name " Racey 's pipistrelle bat " . P. raceyi closely resembles the Asian species P. endoi , P. paterculus , and P. abramus , and Bates and colleagues hypothesized that it may be related to these species . If this is true , the ancestors of P. raceyi presumably reached Madagascar from Asia , not from Africa like most of the island 's bat fauna . P. raceyi shares this distinction with a few other Malagasy bats : the large fruit bat Pteropus rufus and both species of the small insectivorous bat <unk> recorded on Madagascar . 
 = = Description = = 
 Pipistrellus raceyi is a small to medium @-@ sized pipistrelle . It is long @-@ furred and the body is reddish above , with the head a trifle darker , and yellowish @-@ brown below . The glandular swellings on the muzzle , next to the nose , are hairless . The dark , short , round ears bear three to five ridges . The crescent @-@ shaped tragus ( a projection on the inner side of the outer ear ) is about half as long as the ear and contains a slight constriction on the back side of its base . The wings are dark . The third through fifth metacarpals ( hand bones ) are about equally long , but the first phalange ( finger bone ) on the third finger is short . P. endoi has a longer first phalange on the third metacarpal . P. raceyi has short tibiae ( lower leg bones ) and small feet and the tail is shorter than the head and body . Forearm length is 28 @.@ 0 to 31 @.@ 2 mm ( 1 @.@ 10 to 1 @.@ 23 in ) , tail length is 22 @.@ 9 to 30 @.@ 3 mm ( 0 @.@ 90 to 1 @.@ 19 in ) , hindfoot length is 5 @.@ 3 to 7 @.@ 5 mm ( 0 @.@ 21 to 0 @.@ 30 in ) , and ear length is 7 @.@ 5 to 10 @.@ 6 mm ( 0 @.@ 30 to 0 @.@ 42 in ) in 13 measured specimens . Females average slightly larger than males . 
 Males have a long , straight penis with a notch between the shaft and the narrow , egg @-@ shaped glans penis . Near the top , the penis is haired , but the base is almost naked . In the baculum ( penis bone ) , the shaft is long and narrow and slightly curved . The length of the penis and baculum distinguish P. raceyi from all comparably sized African and Malagasy <unk> . P. endoi , P. paterculus , and P. abramus have more similar bacula , but that of P. abramus is more curved , the shaft and the tip are more robust in P. paterculus , and the proximal ( near ) end is more robust in P. endoi . In males , penis length is 9 @.@ 6 to 11 @.@ 8 mm ( 0 @.@ 38 to 0 @.@ 46 in ) and baculum length is 8 @.@ 8 to 10 @.@ 0 mm ( 0 @.@ 35 to 0 @.@ 39 in ) . 
 In the skull , there is a well @-@ defined lowered area in the middle of the rostrum ( front part ) , which nearly touches the back margin of the large , V @-@ shaped nasal aperture ( opening for the nose ) . Next to the aperture are two elevated areas , above the incisors . The zygomatic arches ( cheekbones ) are slender . The supraorbital ridges ( located above the eyes ) are well @-@ developed . P. abramus , P. endoi , and P. paterculus have a flatter rostrum and less prominent supraorbital ridges . The braincase is of average size and bears a poorly developed sagittal crest on its roof . The supraoccipital , the <unk> part of the skull , is convex . The sides of the concave palate are about parallel . 
 The dental formula is 2 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 @.@ 33 @.@ 1 @.@ 2 @.@ 3 ( two incisors , one canine , two premolars , and three molars in the upper jaw , and three incisors , one canine , two premolars , and three molars in the lower jaw ) . Because the ancestors of P. raceyi lost the first upper incisor and first and third upper and lower premolars , the upper incisors are designated I2 and I3 and the premolars are designated P2 and P4 ( uppers ) and p2 and p4 ( lowers ) . I2 has a well @-@ developed second cusp in addition to the main cusp and I3 about reaches the height of the second cusp of I2 . The stout upper canine bears a single cusp . P2 is prominent and is displaced slightly towards the inner side of the toothrow . P4 does not contact the canine . The first and second upper molar ( M1 and M2 ) are about equally large , but M3 is smaller . Each of the lower incisors bears three cusps and the third ( i3 ) may touch the lower canine ( c1 ) . The latter tooth has a second cusp , which reaches higher than i3 . The p2 touches the back of c1 and attains between 59 @-@ 100 % the crown area of p4 . The first two lower molars ( m1 and m2 ) have the back group of cusps ( talonid ) larger than the front one ( trigonid ) , and m3 is again smaller . 
 = = Distribution , ecology , and behavior = = 
 Pipistrellus raceyi is known from four places on Madagascar , all below 80 m ( 260 ft ) altitude , of which two are on the west and two on the east side of the island . Among the eastern collection sites , <unk> is a rural town surrounded by farmland and secondary forests , where P. raceyi were collected while leaving a hollow in the concrete wall of a house and in a <unk> over a river , and <unk> is in a heavily disturbed agriculturally used area . Both western localities , Kirindy and Mikea , are in dry forest . In Kirindy , the pipistrelle Hypsugo anchietae has also been recorded . The true distribution of P. raceyi is probably larger than that currently known . Nothing is known about the diet , but vespertilionid bats generally eat insects . 
 There is very limited data on reproduction . Young are probably born near the start of the rainy season , in November – December , when food is plentiful . Six bats were caught at the roost site in <unk> , of which only one was a male ; this led Bates and colleagues to suggest that the species may be polygynous , with groups consisting of a male and multiple females . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The IUCN Red List has assessed Pipistrellus raceyi as " Data Deficient " because of insufficient knowledge about its abundance and habitat requirements . All four known sites are near forest , but that may be a sampling artifact . Although deforestation may pose a threat , each of the collection sites has some sort of forest protection measures in place . 
 = 58th National Hockey League All @-@ Star Game = 
 The 58th National Hockey League All @-@ Star Game , also known as the 2011 National Hockey League All @-@ Star Game presented by Discover , was the National Hockey League 's ( NHL ) annual All @-@ Star Game played on January 30 , 2011 . The game took place during the 2010 – 11 NHL season at the RBC Center in Raleigh , North Carolina , home of the Carolina Hurricanes . Originally , the Game was supposed to be hosted by the Phoenix Coyotes , but due to ownership issues , the NHL decided to move the game . After bidding for the game reopened , it was awarded to Carolina and fulfilled a nine @-@ year @-@ old promise made to the franchise by NHL Commissioner Gary Bettman . 
 The 2011 version of the All @-@ Star Game featured a break from the traditional way in which teams were organized . Instead of using conferences or player nationalities as in the past , teams were selected by captains in a fantasy draft days prior to the game . Fans still elected players to the All @-@ Star Game , but instead of the traditional 12 starters ( six for each team ) , they elected only six players , with the remaining 36 players involved in the game selected by the NHL . Sidney Crosby received the most votes of any player , but due to a concussion he was unable to participate in the game . The participating players voted for team captains , selecting Nicklas Lidstrom of the Detroit Red Wings and Eric Staal of the Hurricanes . 
 Staal won the first pick in the draft and selected longtime teammate Cam Ward , while the Toronto Maple Leafs ' Phil Kessel was the last player chosen . The annual SuperSkills Competition was held the night before the Game and featured Alexander Ovechkin winning his third consecutive Breakaway Challenge . In addition , Zdeno Chara broke his own SuperSkills Competition record for hardest shot at 105 @.@ 9 mph ( 170 @.@ 4 km / hr ) . Team Staal won the contest 33 – 22 . 
 Team Lidstrom won the game 11 – 10 , the 21 combined goals was the fourth highest total scored in an NHL All @-@ Star Game . The first Penalty shot in All @-@ Star Game history was called after Ovechkin threw his stick to break @-@ up a Matt Duchene breakaway . Registering one goal and two assists , Patrick Sharp of the losing Team Staal won the Most Valuable Player Award . Jeff Skinner was the youngest player to ever play in an NHL All @-@ Star Game . Shea Weber recorded four assists , making him only the second defenceman to accomplish the feat in one All @-@ Star Game . Fellow defenceman Lidstrom registered a + 7 rating , the highest in an All @-@ Star Game since 1991 . Winning goaltender Tim Thomas became the first goaltender in NHL history to win three consecutive All @-@ Star Games . 
 = = Background = = 
 The 58th National Hockey League All @-@ Star Game was originally scheduled to be hosted by the Phoenix Coyotes at Jobing.com Arena in Glendale , Arizona . However , due to the ongoing bankruptcy case , potential ownership changes in the Coyotes organization , and the possibility of relocation , the NHL decided to reopen bidding to host the game . In the bidding process , 14 teams made bids for All @-@ Star Games or NHL Drafts for the next three years . Out of all the bids , the NHL chose the Carolina Hurricanes to be the new host team and on April 7 , 2010 , the announcement was made by NHL Commissioner Gary Bettman and Hurricanes President and General Manager Jim Rutherford . 
 The awarding of the All @-@ Star Game fulfilled a nine @-@ year @-@ old promise Bettman made to the city of Raleigh . In 2001 , he promised the organization that they would host an All @-@ Star Game if the season ticket base reached 12 @,@ 000 . After reaching that plateau , Bettman indicated that other community assets were still required to secure a bid . Most notably , a proper convention center for ancillary events was needed , along with a four @-@ star hotel , which was completed in 2009 with the new Raleigh Convention Center and adjoining Raleigh Marriott City Center in downtown Raleigh . 
 Three months after receiving the All @-@ Star Game , the Hurricanes unveiled the logo for the 2011 game . The logo was designed with some homage to the host team and city hidden within it . The shape of the logo is similar to the Hurricanes primary logo , along with the team colors of red , black and silver . The banners at the top and bottom of the logo are inspired by the state flag of North Carolina . 
 The NHL and the city of Raleigh also presented a three @-@ day festival to coincide with All @-@ Star weekend called NHL All @-@ Star Wide Open . The festivities include a series of free concerts , headlined by the band 3 Doors Down , interactive games and attractions , special appearances , Hockey Hall of Fame trophy and memorabilia displays , pin trading and trading card zones and a street party similar to the city 's own annual festival , Raleigh Wide Open . There was also a charity 5K fun run , starting and ending at RBC Center with the Carolina Hurricanes " Kids ' N Community Foundation " being the beneficiary of the raised funds . 
 = = New format = = 
 On November 10 , 2010 , the National Hockey League Players ' Association ( NHLPA ) unveiled a new format for selecting the NHL All @-@ Star teams : the traditional conference format was replaced by a " fantasy draft . " Fans voted for six players , from either conference ( three forwards , two defencemen and one goaltender ) , and the NHL selected another 36 players , for a total of 42 players . The chosen players then appointed two captains ; the NHL and NHLPA , with input from the players , named two alternate captains for each team . Each team had two forwards and one defenceman as its captain and alternates . The captains and alternates selected their team members in a fantasy @-@ style draft held on January 28 , 2011 . The first pick was determined by a coin toss , with alternating picks after the first . Teams consisted of three goaltenders , six defencemen and 12 forwards . Although the draft rules did not dictate a strict order in which positions had to be filled , to guarantee the final picks were not constrained by having to satisfy roster composition rules , the teams ' three goaltenders had to be chosen by the end of round ten , and all defencemen had to be chosen by the end of round 15 . According to NHL Vice President of Hockey and Business Development Brendan Shanahan , the new format was introduced to add excitement and intrigue into all the events , while make it more fun for everyone involved . 
 For 2011 , the NHL eliminated the YoungStars Game which had been played in the previous five All @-@ Star weekends . However , rookies were still featured at the Super Skills Competition . A group of 12 Calder Trophy @-@ eligible players were split into two groups of six . At the conclusion of the fantasy draft 's 15th round , one rookie was selected from the 12 to choose which team his group would join for the competition . 
 This was the first time the traditional " East vs. West " format was not used since 2002 , when the World All @-@ Star Team defeated North America 8 – 5 in Los Angeles . 
 = = The Guardian Project = = 
 During the All @-@ Star weekend , the NHL announced a new " superhero franchise " , The Guardian Project . Created by comic book writer Stan Lee , the project featured 30 new superheroes representing the 30 NHL teams , all which were unveiled at the All @-@ Star Game . The goal of the project was to appeal to pre @-@ teen and teenage boys in hopes of bringing in " new audience to the NHL , while engaging the existing , established hockey fan base through a compelling tale of good vs. evil . " 
 = = Voting = = 
 One hundred players were chosen to be on the ballot for the All @-@ Star Game ( minimum of two players from each team ) , but fans were also given the option to write in any player who was not listed . Ballots were all digital for the fourth consecutive time , giving fans the ability to cast votes online at NHL.com and Facebook . Votes could also be cast via text messages from mobile devices and Smartphone users could vote by way of a mobile ballot feature . The NHL put no limitation on the number of votes an individual could cast . When fan balloting ended , 14 @.@ 3 million votes had been cast and the top six were named to the All @-@ Star Game . The six top vote recipients were from only two teams , the Pittsburgh Penguins ( 4 ) and Chicago Blackhawks ( 2 ) . Individually , Sidney Crosby led all players with 635 @,@ 509 votes , while teammate Kris Letang was elected as a write @-@ in candidate . The six players elected by the fans are listed below with their vote totals . 
 = = Draft = = 
 After naming the remaining All @-@ Stars , each player voted for team captains . The players selected the 12 @-@ time All @-@ Star , Nicklas Lidstrom , and the captain of the host Carolina Hurricanes , Eric Staal . Lidstrom was assigned the home blue uniforms while Staal received the away whites . The NHL further named their alternate captains , placing Ryan Kesler and Mike Green with Staal while Patrick Kane and Martin St. Louis joined Team Lidstrom . Prior to the draft , the NHL determined head coaches for the teams via a coin toss . Chicago 's Joel Quenneville and his assistant , Mike Haviland , were named coaches as a result of winning the Stanley Cup last year . Philadelphia Flyers Head Coach Peter Laviolette and the Vancouver Canucks ' Alain Vigneault earned the distinction by having the highest winning percentage through January 8 , 2011 . After the coin toss , Quenneville was assigned to Team Staal , while Laviolette and Vigneault were given Team Lidstrom . 
 Team Staal won the first pick in the draft , and Eric Staal chose longtime teammate Cam Ward with his first pick . With the fifth pick in the draft , Team Staal selected Daniel Sedin . His twin brother Henrik was taken with the next pick by Team Lidstrom . The All @-@ Star Game marked the first time the two have ever played against each other in an organized game . Throughout the draft , Eric Staal selected players that had a personal connection with him . He selected his brother , Rangers defenceman Marc Staal , in the seventh round , fellow Thunder Bay native Patrick Sharp in the eighth round , and teammate Jeff Skinner in the 11th round . The last player selected was Toronto 's Phil Kessel . As a reward for being the last selection , he was given a new car and $ 20 @,@ 000 was given to the charity of his choice . Kessel stated he would put the money toward a cancer charity he became involved with in 2006 when he was battling testicular cancer . When the time came for the rookies to decide which team they would participate in the skills competition , Taylor Hall , who won the right via a puck flip , chose Team Lidstrom for his group . All players were allowed to wear the numbers they use in their respective teams . For Team Lidstrom , Henrik Sedin and Dustin <unk> both wore number 33 , while Brad Richards and Steven Stamkos wore number 91 . Team Staal had three pairs having same number : Patrick Sharp and Corey Perry with number 10 , Daniel Sedin and Dan Boyle with number 22 and Paul Stastny and Patrik Elias with number 26 . The complete team rosters are listed below with players appearing in the order in which they were chosen . 
 = = = Withdrawn = = = 
 Prior to the draft several players withdrew due to injury or , in the case of Jarome Iginla , family concerns . 
 = = SuperSkills Competition = = 
 The SuperSkills competition began with the Fastest Skater competition , where the competitors skated one lap around the rink . The winner of each round earned a point for their team . The opening round was skated backwards , followed by each team 's rookie representative . Then two goaltenders skated off before returning to the traditional form . Following preliminary rounds the two fastest competitors from each team faced off in a final round , where Michael Grabner defeated Taylor Hall earning two points for Team Staal . The Breakaway Challenge featured six players ( three from each team ) taking four shoot @-@ out attempts . Fans voted for the winner via text message . The winner earned four points for his team . Second place was awarded three points and third received one point . Alexander Ovechkin won by a wide margin defeating second place P. K. Subban by over 17 percentage points , it was the third consecutive win in the competition by Ovechkin . Loui Eriksson finished third to round out the point earners from the competition . The Shooting Accuracy featured two players shooting targets in the four corners of the net . Winners were determined by the fastest player to hit all four targets . Daniel Sedin hit all four targets on four shots in his first round setting the overall fastest time hitting them all in just 7 @.@ 3 seconds . He followed that up by hitting four in five shots during the final round to defeat the Blackhawks ' Patrick Kane . 
 Following Shooting Accuracy , both teams participated in the Skills Challenge Relay . Each team broke into two groups and went through a series of drills designed to showcase players ' skills . It started with one timers , then proceeded to passing , where a single player had to complete a pass into six small nets . From there it went to the Puck Control Relay , having a participant skate through a series of cones with a puck . Another player then took on the Stick Handling drill , controlling a puck through a series of stationary pucks . The relay ended when a final player completed the Shooting Accuracy , again hitting all four targets . The two groups from Team Lidstrom finished first and third in the competition , gaining their team a total of five points . During the Hardest Shot competition reigning champion Zdeno Chara was defeated in his preliminary round match up by Shea Weber . In the final round , Chara again matched up with Weber . Chara successfully defended his title by defeating Weber with a shot registering 105 @.@ 9 mph . The speed set a new SuperSkills record surpassing his own record and marking the fourth time he has won the event . Despite being down by a large margin prior to the Elimination Shootout , Team Lidstrom still had an opportunity to win the contest . Players continued to shoot provided they scored – scoring one point per goal , until only one player remained . However , the shoot @-@ out was won by Team Staal 's Corey Perry as he was the only player to score in all three of his attempts . The full results are listed below . 
 = = Game play = = 
 The scoring started early in the game as Team Staal 's Alexander Ovechkin scored the game 's first goal in just 50 seconds into the first period . When he took his first shift Jeff Skinner officially became the youngest player to play in an All @-@ Star game ( 18 years , 259 days ) surpassing the mark set in 1984 by Steve Yzerman by eight days . By the time Claude Giroux scored , less than five minutes later , Team Staal had opened up a 4 – 0 lead . Team Lidstrom 's Marc @-@ Andre Fleury allowed the four goals on only nine shots while his counterpart Cam Ward stopped the first four shots he faced . The tide turned a little over halfway through the first period when <unk> Kopitar scored on a backhand shot . Team Lidstrom completed the first period comeback with under four minutes left in the period when Eriksson and Matt Duchene scored 23 seconds apart to tie the game at four . Team Lidstrom finished the period scoring on four of their final ten shots . 
 Team Staal recaptured the lead early in the second with goals by Patrick Sharp and Kris Letang . They were unable to hold the lead though as Team Lidstrom tied the game at six with a second goal from Kopitar and one by Steven Stamkos . They quickly took their first lead on a goal by Daniel Briere just 1 : 20 later , ending the period up 7 – 6 . 
 Early in the third period Eric Staal tied the game at seven with his first goal of the game . Minutes later Duchene got a breakaway , but before he could take a shot , Ovechkin threw his stick at the puck , resulting in the first penalty shot in All @-@ Star game history , and only the third penalty assessed during the past ten years of All @-@ Star competition . Duchene took the shot against Henrik Lundqvist , who stopped the attempt . Kris Letang scored shortly after the penalty shot to give back the lead to Team Staal . Briere scored a little over a minute later assisted by Weber and Henrik Sedin to re @-@ tie the game . Weber 's assist was his fourth of the game making him the second defenceman in history to record four assists in an All @-@ Star Game ( Ray Bourque , 1985 ) . Team Lidstrom added two more goals before Rick Nash scored to cut the deficit to one . With about a minute and a half left in the game , Team Staal pulled their goaltender for the extra attacker . The decision backfired as Eriksson scored on the empty net with 1 : 11 remaining . Eric Staal scored with 33 @.@ 6 seconds <unk> to bring his team back within one goal , but they failed to get another shot on goal before time ran out . By coming back from a four @-@ goal deficit to win the game Team Lidstrom set the record for biggest comeback victory in All @-@ Star history . Lidstrom finished the game with a + 7 rating , the highest rating since 1991 when Adam Oates was also a + 7 for the Wales Conference . Tim Thomas earned the victory becoming the first goaltender to win three straight All @-@ Star Games . Patrick Sharp was named Most Valuable Player ( MVP ) after registering one goal and two assists in a losing cause for Team Staal . The combined 21 goals was the fourth highest total in NHL All @-@ Star Game history . 
 = = = Summary = = = 
 W – Tim Thomas L – Henrik Lundqvist 
 Key 
 <unk> ( <unk> , <unk> ) 1 : 00 denotes that <unk> scored a goal after 1 : 00 , with assists from <unk> and <unk> . 
 GWG denotes the game @-@ winning goal . 
 EN denotes an empty net goal 
 W denotes the goaltender awarded the win . 
 L denotes the goaltender assigned the loss . 
 Source : NHL 
 = Ilyushin Il @-@ 30 = 
 The Ilyushin Il @-@ 30 was a Soviet turbojet @-@ powered tactical bomber designed as a higher @-@ performance , swept wing version of the Ilyushin Il @-@ 28 in the late 1940s . Its thin wing and engine nacelles necessitated the use of tandem landing gear , the first Soviet aircraft to do so . It was apparently canceled before the prototype made its first flight , although sources disagree on this . 
 = = Development = = 
 The Il @-@ 30 was a follow @-@ on to the Il @-@ 28 , although design began on 21 June 1948 , before the Il @-@ 28 had flown . It was designed to meet a requirement for a jet bomber that could carry 2 @,@ 000 kg ( 4 @,@ 400 lb ) to a range of 3 @,@ 500 km ( 2 @,@ 200 mi ) with a maximum speed no less than 1 @,@ 000 km / h ( 620 mph ) . The design took that of the Il @-@ 28 as a starting point , but had thin , mid @-@ mounted swept wings with a 35 ° sweep angle chosen to allow the aircraft to reach its required speed . It was intended to be powered by two new Lyulka TR @-@ 3 axial @-@ flow turbojet engines with 45 @.@ 1 kN ( 10 @,@ 140 lbf ) thrust each in wing @-@ mounted nacelles . Both the fuselage and the nacelles were area ruled . 
 The thin wing and the 2 ° anhedral necessary to cure the excessive lateral stability limited the amount of fuel that could be carried and tip tanks were required to meet the range requirement . The slim engine nacelles did not allow the main landing gear to be stowed there as was done in the Il @-@ 28 . The solution was to house them within the fuselage — the first bicycle landing gear on a Soviet aircraft — with small , twin @-@ wheeled , outriggers mounted underneath the nacelles to stabilize the aircraft on the ground . The aircraft had a crew of four , the pilot , a bombardier , and two gunners . The pilot , bombardier and the dorsal gunner shared one pressurized compartment that was subdivided into the cockpit and the bombardier 's position in the extensively glazed nose . The dorsal gunner was placed back @-@ to @-@ back with the pilot underneath the canopy and the tail gunner had his own separate pressurized compartment at the rear of the aircraft . Defensive armament was six 23 mm ( 0 @.@ 91 in ) Nudelman @-@ Rikhter NR @-@ 23 cannon , two fixed forward and one pair each in the Il @-@ V @-@ 12 dorsal turret immediately behind the cockpit and the Il @-@ K6 tail turret . Maximum bomb load was 4 @,@ 000 kg ( 8 @,@ 800 lb ) 
 The initial results were favorable , and a full @-@ scale mockup was formally reviewed in March 1949 . The prototype was completed by August 1949 , but an incident involving the rival swept @-@ wing Tupolev Tu @-@ 82 that broke an engine mount during a low @-@ altitude flight led to delays as additional tests were demanded to determine the strength of the wings before the first flight was made . By the following year , the Il @-@ 30 program had lost momentum as the Ilyushin OKB was ordered to concentrate its resources on facilitating the service introduction of the Il @-@ 28 . It was formally terminated by government order on 20 August 1950 , and the prototype was eventually scrapped at the beginning of the 1960s . Aviation historian Bill Gunston quotes a maiden flight date of 9 September 1949 , but Vaclav <unk> says 1951 . 
 Although the Il @-@ 30 never actually flew , it was the subject of much ( misinformed ) speculation in the West . Some of the common misconceptions were that it had a ventral gun mount and that it was the first Soviet bomber to attain the speed of 1 @,@ 000 km / h ( 620 mph ) . 
 = = Specifications ( estimated ) = = 
 Data from OKB Ilyushin : A History of the Design Bureau and its Aircraft 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 4 
 Length : 18 m ( 59 ft 1 in ) 
 Wingspan : 16 @.@ 5 m ( 54 ft 2 in ) 
 Wing area : 100 m2 ( 1 @,@ 100 sq ft ) 
 Empty weight : 22 @,@ 967 kg ( 50 @,@ 634 lb ) 
 Gross weight : 17 @,@ 033 kg ( 37 @,@ 552 lb ) 
 Powerplant : 2 × Lyulka TR @-@ 3 turbojet , 45 @.@ 1 kN ( 10 @,@ 100 lbf ) thrust each 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 1 @,@ 000 km / h ( 621 mph ; 540 kn ) 
 Cruising speed : 850 km / h ( 528 mph ; 459 kn ) 
 Range : 3 @,@ 500 km ( 2 @,@ 175 mi ; 1 @,@ 890 nmi ) 
 Service ceiling : 13 @,@ 000 m ( 42 @,@ 651 ft ) 
 Armament 
 Guns : 6 × 23 mm ( 0 @.@ 91 in ) Nudelman @-@ Rikhter NR @-@ 23 autocannon 
 Bombs : 4 @,@ 000 kilograms ( 8 @,@ 800 lb ) 
 = Lafayette Afro Rock Band = 
 Lafayette Afro Rock Band was an American funk rock band formed in Roosevelt , Long Island , New York that relocated to France in 1970 . Though almost unknown in their native United States , they are now universally celebrated as one of the standout funk bands of the 1970s and admired for their use of break beats . The band also recorded as Ice and as Krispie and Company ( or Crispy and Company ) . 
 Upon their relocation to Paris , the local music scene influenced the group 's work , and they adopted the name Lafayette Afro Rock Band after releasing their debut LP . The band 's next two LPs , Soul Makossa and Malik , respectively included the songs " Hihache " and " Darkest Light , " which would be sampled in numerous culturally significant hip @-@ hop compositions . Following collaborations with Mal Waldron and <unk> Slim , the band 's popularity waned , leading to their breakup in 1978 . 
 = = History = = 
 The Lafayette Afro Rock Band was formed as the Bobby Boyd Congress in 1970 , in homage to their original vocalist Bobby Boyd . Upon deciding that the funk scene in the United States was too saturated for them to viably compete in , they relocated to France in 1971 ; with Bobby Boyd splitting from the group to pursue a musical career in America , they renamed themselves ' Soul Congress ' , then ' Ice ' . After regular performances in Paris ' <unk> district — an area made up primarily of North African immigrants — they caught the eye of producer Pierre <unk> and became the house session band at his <unk> studio . The influence of their surroundings led Ice to increasingly weave African rhyme schemes , textures , and beat tendencies in their original funk style , and as such they changed their name to Lafayette Afro Rock Band following the 1972 release of the poorly produced Each Man Makes His Own Destiny . 
 In 1974 , Lafayette Afro Rock Band replaced guitarist Larry Jones with Michael McEwan , and released Soul Makossa ( released in the U.S. as Movin ' and Groovin ' ) . The title track was a cover version of Manu Dibango 's international hit , " Soul Makossa . " LP Though it failed to chart , it made sufficient impact that its standout song , the oft @-@ covered " Hihache " , was sampled regularly for over 20 years by artists as diverse as Janet Jackson , Biz Markie , LL Cool J , De La Soul , Digital Underground , Naughty by Nature , and the Wu @-@ Tang Clan . Lafayette Afro Rock Band 's follow @-@ up effort , the 1975 LP Malik , prominently featured the Univox Super @-@ Fuzz and liberal usage of the vocoder . It met equal enduring success , with a modified horn and saxophone sample of " Darkest Light " being featured prominently in Public Enemy 's " Show ' Em Whatcha Got " . The original sax solo on " Darkest Light " from the Malik LP was played by Leroy Gomez who later became popular as the lead singer of Santa Esmeralda group with the 1977 mega @-@ hit single " Don 't Let Me Be Misunderstood " . After Public Enemy 's usage of the song was highly praised , samples of " Darkest Light " backed numerous culturally significant songs , including " Back to the Hotel " , the multi @-@ platinum 1992 single " Rump Shaker " by new jack group <unk> @-@ n @-@ Effect and rapper Jay @-@ Z 's 2006 single " Show Me What You Got " . 
 Mal Waldron , an American jazz and world music composer who came to fame after performing as Billie Holiday 's accompanist until her death , collaborated with the Lafayette Afro Rock Band in 1975 , employing them to back him on his unreleased Candy Girl album . Shortly later , legendary blues pianist <unk> Slim sought out the band 's services , and recorded the collaboration album Depression Blues . The group subsequently reverted to the " Ice " moniker , releasing material concurrently on an " Various Artists " formatted 1975 released LP " Tonight at the Discotheque " under the art @-@ names " Captain Dax " , " Les <unk> " and " Crispy and Co . " ( spelled in French and German speaking countries as " Krispie & Company " ) . As the latter they even scored two UK charts hits , " Brazil " in 1975 made No. 26 , while " Get it together " made No. 21 in 1976 . After success faded in Europe the band found luck in Japan . 
 After scoring with the mildly successful single " Dr. <unk> , Soul Frankenstein " , they released Afro <unk> and Funky Flavored to little fanfare before returning to America and permanently disbanding . In 1978 , French record label <unk> released ten uninspiring , previously unreleased recordings , followed by a 1999 Best of compilation which was more warmly received . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Lafayette Afro Rock Band toiled in obscurity during their years of activity , but have now become of interest to Western critics and music historians due to their ubiquitous break beats . As a result of their obscurity , when compared to their contemporaries like Cameo , Funkadelic or Kool & The Gang , few copies of their studio LPs have survived ; this has led to , with the exceptions of " Hihache " and " Darkest Light " , the attention of critics and historians being drawn to the band 's three greatest hits albums : Afon : Ten Unreleased Afro Funk Recordings , Darkest Light : The Best of and The Ultimate Collection . Music historian Dave Thompson unfavorably reviewed Afon , but praised Darkest Light , singling out " Soul Frankenstein , " " The Gap , " " Conga , " " Malik , " " Soul Makossa , " " Scorpion Flower , " " Nicky " and " Darkest Light " as the " high points " of the " ultimate point of entry " for the band . British music newspaper Melody Maker and Allmusic critic Jason Ankeny have also both favorably reviewed Darkest Light , with Ankeny stating that it is " one of the great documents of classic funk . " The Ultimate Collection received particular acclaim from Allmusic writer Jason Birchmeier , who asserted that it was " a gem " that " you can 't go wrong with . " 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = Studio albums = = = 
 Each Man Makes His Own Destiny ( 1972 , as Ice ) 
 Soul Makossa ( 1973 ) 
 <unk> EP ( 1974 ) 
 Malik ( 1975 ) - America Records 
 Tonight at the Discotheque ( 1975 , various artists ) 
 Funky Flavored ( 1976 , as Crispy and Co . ) 
 Frisco Disco ( 1976 , as Ice ) 
 Afro <unk> ( 1977 , as Ice ) 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 <unk> / <unk> ( 1974 ) 
 Brazil / Love can ( 1975 , as Crispy & Co . , or Krispie & Compagny ) 
 <unk> ( A <unk> ) / Super Queen ( 1975 , as Ice ) 
 Get It Together / Down in St. Tropez ( 1975 , as Crispy & Co . , or Krispie & Compagny ) 
 <unk> / Get It Together ( 1976 , same ) 
 Dr. <unk> , Soul Frankenstein ( 1976 , as Captain Dax ) 
 = = = Compilations = = = 
 Afon : Ten Unreleased Afro Funk Recordings ( 1978 ) 
 Darkest Light : The Best of ( 1999 ) 
 The Ultimate Collection ( 2001 ) 
 = = Selected samples = = 
 = Great Dismal Swamp maroons = 
 The Great Dismal Swamp maroons were freed and escaped slaves who inhabited the marshlands of the Great Dismal Swamp in Virginia and North Carolina . Although conditions were harsh , research suggests that thousands lived there between about 1700 and the 1860s . Harriett Beecher Stowe told the maroon people 's story in her 1856 novel Dred : A Tale of the Great Dismal Swamp . The most significant research on the settlements began in 2002 with a project by Dan Sayers of American University . 
 = = Location = = 
 The Great Dismal Swamp spans an area of southeastern Virginia and northeastern North Carolina between the James River near Norfolk , Virginia , and the Albemarle Sound near Edenton , North Carolina . The swamp is estimated to have originally been over 1 million acres ( 4 @,@ 000 km2 ) , but human encroachment has destroyed up to 90 % of the swampland . Today , the Great Dismal Swamp National Wildlife Refuge is just over 112 thousand acres ( 450 km2 ) . 
 = = History = = 
 The first African slaves brought to the British colonies in Virginia in 1619 came on a Dutch ship . At the time , slaves were treated similarly to indentured servants , becoming free with the passage of a certain period of time . Others gained freedom by converting to Christianity , since the English of that time did not typically enslave Christians . Slave labor was used in many efforts to drain and log the Great Dismal Swamp during the 18th and 19th centuries . Escaped slaves living in freedom came to be known as maroons or <unk> . The origin of the term " maroon " is uncertain , with competing theories linking it to Spanish , Arawak or Taino root words . <unk> , runaway slaves in isolated or hidden settlements , existed in all the Southern states , and swamp @-@ based maroon communities existed in the Deep South , in Alabama , Florida , Georgia , Louisiana , and South Carolina . <unk> in the Upper South was largely limited to Virginia and the Great Dismal Swamp . 
 At the beginning of the 18th century , maroons came to live in the Great Dismal Swamp . Most settled on mesic islands , the high and dry parts of the swamp . Inhabitants included slaves who had purchased their freedom as well as escaped slaves . Other escaped slaves used the swamp as a route on the Underground Railroad as they made their way further north . Some slaves lived there in semi @-@ free conditions , but how much independence slaves actually enjoyed there has been a topic of much debate . Nearby whites often left enslaved maroons alone so long as they paid a quota in logs or shingles , and businesses may have ignored the fugitive nature of escaped slaves who provided work in exchange for trade goods . 
 Herbert Aptheker stated already in 1939 , in " Maroons Within the Present Limits of the United States " , that likely " about two thousand Negroes , fugitives , or the descendants of fugitives " lived in the Great Dismal Swamp , trading with white people outside the swamp . Results of a study published in 2007 , " The Political Economy of Exile in the Great Dismal Swamp " , say that thousands of people lived in the swamp between 1630 and 1865 , Native Americans , maroons and enslaved laborers on the canal . A 2011 study speculated that thousands may have lived in the swamp between the 1600s and 1860 . While the precise number of maroons who lived in the swamp at that time is unknown , it is believed to have been one of the largest maroon colonies in the United States . It is established that " several thousand " were living there by the 19th century . However , fear of slave unrest and fugitive slaves living among maroon population caused concern amongst local whites . A militia with dogs went into the swamp in 1823 in an attempt to remove the maroons and destroy their community , but most people escaped . In 1847 , North Carolina passed a law specifically aimed at apprehending the maroons in the swamp . However , unlike other maroon communities , where local militias often captured the residents and destroyed their homes , those in the Great Dismal Swamp mostly avoided capture or the discovery of their homes . 
 Little is known of Native American activity in the area prior to 1600 , though the presence of hunting bolas indicates that the area may have served as a hunting ground as far back as 5 @,@ 000 years ago . Native American communities were already in existence in the swamp when the maroons began to settle there . Because leaving the area could inevitably lead to recapture , the inhabitants often used what was readily available in the swamp , even recycling tool remnants left by Native Americans . Since the maroons had few possessions , the few small artifacts that have been recovered have given historians little insight into their day @-@ to @-@ day lives . To date , excavation has yet to find any human remains . According to Sayers , historical archaeologist at American University who has led research on the maroons of the swamp , it is possible that the acidity of the water disintegrated any bones which may have been left behind . 
 Some maroons were born to escaped slaves and lived in the swamp for their entire lives despite the hardships of swamp life : dense underbrush , insects , poisonous snakes , and bears . The difficult conditions also made the swamp an ideal hiding place , not just for escaped slaves but also for free blacks , slaves who worked on the swamp 's canals , Native Americans , and outcast whites such as criminals . Maroons are known to have often interacted with slaves and poor whites to obtain work , food , clothes , and money . Some fugitive slaves plundered nearby farms and plantations , stole from anchored boats , and robbed travelers on nearby roads ; those caught were tried for murder or theft . Some maroon communities were set up near the Dismal Swamp Canal , built between 1793 – 1805 and still in operation . These maroons interacted more with the outside world than those who lived in the swamp 's interior , and had more contact with outsiders once canal construction began . Some took jobs on the canal , and with increased contact with the outside world , some people living in the swamp eventually moved away . During the American Civil War , the United States Colored Troops entered the swamp to liberate the people there , many of whom then joined the Union Army . Most of the maroons who remained in the swamp left after the Civil War . 
 = = Research = = 
 The Great Dismal Swamp Landscape Study began in 2002 and was led by Dan Sayers , a historical archaeologist at American University 's Department of Anthropology . In 2003 , he conducted the first excavation in the swamp , and in 2009 , in partnership with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service ( which manages the Great Dismal Swamp National Wildlife Refuge ) and American University , initiated the annual research program titled the Great Dismal Swamp Archaeology Field School . This effort continues the work of the landscape study . It examines the impact of colonialism , slavery , and development on the swamp , especially on the self @-@ sustaining maroon settlements in the swamp 's interior . It also studies native lifestyles before European contact . Prior to Sayers ' efforts , no field research had been done on the Great Dismal Swamp maroons . Even today , the swamp is impenetrable in places ; a research group gave up in 2003 because it lost its way so many times . Sites deep in the swamp 's interior are still so remote that a guide is needed to find them . The National Endowment for the Humanities gave the " We The People Award " of $ 200 @,@ 000 to the project in 2010 . 
 In fall 2011 , a permanent exhibit was opened by the National Park Service to commemorate those who lived in the swamp during pre @-@ Civil War times . Sayers summarizes : " These groups are very inspirational . As details unfold , we are increasingly able to show how people have the ability , as individuals and communities , to take control of their lives , even under oppressive conditions . " 
 = Proposed redefinition of SI base units = 
 A committee of the International Committee for Weights and Measures ( CIPM ) has proposed revised formal definitions of the SI base units , which are being examined by the CIPM and which will likely be adopted at the 26th General Conference on Weights and Measures ( CGPM ) in the fall of 2018 . The metric system was originally conceived as a system of measurement that was derivable from nature . When the metric system was first introduced in France in 1799 technical problems necessitated the use of artifacts such as the prototype metre and kilogram . In 1960 the metre was redefined in terms of the wavelength of light from a specified source , making it derivable from nature , leaving the kilogram as the only unit still defined by an artifact . If the proposed redefinition is accepted , the metric system ( SI ) will , for the first time , be wholly derivable from nature . 
 The proposal can be summarised as follows : 
 There will still be the same seven base units ( second , metre , kilogram , ampere , kelvin , mole , and candela ) . Of these , the kilogram , ampere , kelvin and mole will be redefined by choosing exact numerical values for the Planck constant , the elementary electric charge , the Boltzmann constant , and the Avogadro constant , respectively . The second , metre and candela are already defined by physical constants and it is only necessary to edit their present definitions . The new definitions will improve the SI without changing the size of any units , thus ensuring continuity with present measurements . 
 Further details are found in the draft chapter of the Ninth SI Units Brochure . 
 The last major overhaul of the metric system was in 1960 when the International System of Units ( SI ) was formally published as a coherent set of units of measure . SI is structured around seven base units that have apparently " arbitrary " definitions and another twenty units that are derived from these base units . Although the units themselves form a coherent system , the definitions do not . The proposal before the CIPM seeks to remedy this by using the fundamental quantities of nature as the basis for deriving the base units . This will mean , amongst other things , that the prototype kilogram will cease to be used as the definitive replica of the kilogram . The second and the metre are already defined in such a manner . 
 A number of authors have published criticisms of the revised definitions — in particular that proposal had failed to address the impact of breaking the link between the mole and the kilogram , the dalton and the unified atomic mass unit , and the Avogadro constant and Avogadro 's number . 
 = = Background = = 
 The basic structure of SI was developed over a period of about 170 years ( 1791 to 1960 ) . Since 1960 technological advances have made it possible to address various weaknesses in SI , notably the dependence on an artifact to define the kilogram . 
 = = = Development of SI = = = 
 During the early years of the French Revolution , the leaders of the French National Constituent Assembly decided to introduce a completely new system of measurement based on the principles of logic and natural phenomena . The resulting mètre des Archives and kilogramme des Archives were defined in terms of artefacts that were a " best attempt " at fulfilling these principles . 
 In 1875 , by which time the use of the metric system had become widespread in Europe and in Latin America , twenty industrially developed nations met for the Convention of the Metre . The result was the signing of the Treaty of the Metre under which three bodies were set up to take custody of the international prototype kilogram and metre and to regulate comparisons with national prototypes . They were : 
 CGPM ( General Conference on Weights and Measures / Conférence générale des poids et mesures ) — The Conference meets every four to six years and consists of delegates of the nations who had signed the convention . It discusses and examines the arrangements required to ensure the propagation and improvement of the International System of Units and it endorses the results of new fundamental metrological determinations . 
 CIPM ( International Committee for Weights and Measures / Comité international des poids et mesures ) — The Committee consists of eighteen eminent scientists , each from a different country , nominated by the CGPM . The CIPM meets annually and is tasked to advise the CGPM . The CIPM has set up a number of sub @-@ committees , each charged with a particular area of interest . One of these , the Consultative Committee for Units ( CCU ) , amongst other things , advises the CIPM on matters concerning units of measurement . 
 BIPM ( International Bureau for Weights and Measures / Bureau international des poids et mesures ) — The Bureau provides safe keeping of the international prototype kilogram and metre , provides laboratory facilities for regular comparisons of the national prototypes with the international prototype and is the secretariat for the CIPM and the CGPM . 
 The first CGPM ( 1889 ) formally approved the use of 40 prototype metres and 40 prototype kilograms from the British firm Johnson Matthey as the standards mandated by the Convention of the Metre . One of each of these was nominated by lot as the international prototypes , other copies were retained by the CGPM as working copies and the rest were distributed to member nations for use as their national prototypes . At regular intervals the national prototypes were compared with and recalibrated against the international prototype . In 1921 the Convention of the Metre was revised and the mandate of the CGPM was extended to provide standards for all units of measure , not just mass and length . In the ensuing years the CGPM took on responsibility for providing standards of electric current ( 1946 ) , luminosity ( 1946 ) , temperature ( 1948 ) , time ( 1956 ) and molar mass ( 1971 ) . 
 The 9th CGPM ( 1948 ) instructed the CIPM " to make recommendations for a single practical system of units of measurement , suitable for adoption by all countries adhering to the Metre Convention " . The recommendations based on this mandate were presented to the 11th CGPM ( 1960 ) where they were formally accepted and given the name " Système International d 'Unités " and its abbreviation " SI " . 
 = = = Impetus for change = = = 
 Changing the underlying principles behind the definition of the SI base units is not without precedent . The 11th CGPM ( 1960 ) defined the SI metre in terms of the wavelength of krypton @-@ 86 radiation , replacing the pre @-@ SI metre bar . The 13th CGPM ( 1967 ) replaced the original definition of the second ( which was based on a back @-@ calculation of the Earth 's rotation in the year 1900 ) with a definition based on the frequency of the radiation emitted between two hyperfine levels of the ground state of the caesium 133 atom . And the 17th CGPM ( 1983 ) replaced the 1960 definition of the metre with one based on the second , by giving an exact definition of the speed of light in units of metres per second . 
 Over the years , drifts of up to 2 × 10 − 8 kilograms per annum in the national prototype kilograms relative to the international prototype kilogram have been detected . There was no way of determining whether the national prototypes were gaining mass or whether the IPK was losing mass . At the 21st meeting of the CGPM ( 1999 ) , national laboratories were urged to investigate ways of breaking the link between the kilogram and a specific artefact . Newcastle University <unk> Peter <unk> has since identified mercury vapour absorption or carbonaceous contamination as possible causes of this drift . 
 Independently of this drift having been identified , the Avogadro project and development of the Watt balance promised methods of indirectly measuring mass with a very high precision . These projects provided tools that would enable alternative means of redefining the kilogram . 
 A report published in 2007 by the Consultative Committee for <unk> ( CCT ) to the CIPM noted that their current definition of temperature has proved to be unsatisfactory for temperatures below 20 kelvins and for temperatures above 1300 kelvins . The committee was of the view that the Boltzmann constant provided a better basis for temperature measurement than did the triple point of water , as it overcame these difficulties . 
 At its 23rd meeting ( 2007 ) , the GCPM mandated the CIPM to investigate the use of natural constants as the basis for all units of measure rather than the artefacts that were then in use . The following year this was endorsed by the International Union of Pure and Applied Physics ( IUPAP ) . At a meeting of the CCU held in Reading , United Kingdom , in September 2010 , a resolution and draft changes to the SI brochure that were to be presented to the next meeting of the CIPM in October 2010 were agreed to in principle . The CIPM meeting of October 2010 found that " the conditions set by the General Conference at its 23rd meeting have not yet been fully met . For this reason the CIPM does not propose a revision of the SI at the present time " ; however , the CIPM presented a resolution for consideration at the 24th CGPM ( 17 – 21 October 2011 ) to agree the new definitions in principle , but not to implement them until the details have been finalised . This resolution was accepted by the conference , and in addition the CGPM moved the date of the 25th meeting forward from 2015 to 2014 . At the 25th meeting ( 18 – 20 November 2014 ) , it was found that " despite [ the progress in the necessary requirements ] the data do not yet appear to be sufficiently robust for the CGPM to adopt the revised SI at its 25th meeting " , thus postponing the revision to the next meeting in 2018 . 
 = = Proposal = = 
 In this section , an " X " at the end of a number means one or more final digits yet to be agreed upon . 
 In 2011 the CCU published a draft of the proposed change in the form of an amendment that should be made to the 8th edition of the SI Brochure . In it they proposed that in addition to the speed of light , four further constants of nature should be defined to have exact values : 
 The Planck constant h is exactly 6.62606X × 10 − <unk> second ( J · s ) . 
 The elementary charge e is exactly 1.60217X × 10 − <unk> ( C ) . 
 The Boltzmann constant k is exactly 1.38065X × 10 − <unk> per kelvin ( J · K − 1 ) . 
 The Avogadro constant NA is exactly 6.02214X × <unk> mole ( mol − 1 ) . 
 These constants were described in the 2006 version of the SI manual ; the latter three were defined as " constants to be obtained by experiment " . 
 The CCU also proposed that the numerical values associated with the following constants of nature be retained unchanged : 
 The speed of light c is exactly <unk> per second ( m · s − 1 ) . 
 The ground state hyperfine splitting frequency of the caesium @-@ 133 atom Δν ( 133Cs ) hfs is exactly 9192631770 hertz ( Hz ) . 
 The luminous efficacy <unk> of monochromatic radiation of frequency 540 × <unk> is exactly 683 lumen per watt ( lm · W − 1 ) . 
 The seven definitions above are rewritten below after converting the derived units ( joule , coulomb , hertz , lumen and watt ) into the seven base units ( second , metre , kilogram , ampere , kelvin , mole and candela ) . In the list that follows , the symbol sr stands for the dimensionless unit <unk> . 
 Δν ( 133Cs ) hfs 
 = <unk> − 1 
 c = 
 <unk> · s − 1 
 h 
 = 6.62606X × 10 − <unk> · m2 · s − 1 
 e = 
 1.60217X × 10 − 19A · s 
 k 
 = 1.38065X × 10 − <unk> · m2 · K − 1 · s − 2 
 NA = 
 6.02214X × <unk> − 1 
 <unk> = 683 cd · sr · s3 · kg − 1 · m − 2 
 In addition the CCU proposed that 
 the international prototype kilogram be retired and that the current definition of the kilogram be abrogated , 
 the current definition of the ampere be abrogated , 
 the current definition of the kelvin be abrogated and 
 the current definition of the mole be revised . 
 These changes will have the effect of redefining the SI base units , though the definitions of the derived SI units will remain the same . 
 = = Impact on base unit definitions = = 
 The CCU proposal recommended that the text of the definitions of all the base units be either refined or rewritten changing the emphasis from explicit @-@ unit to explicit @-@ constant type definitions . Explicit @-@ unit type definitions define a unit in terms of a specific example of that unit — for example in 1324 Edward II defined the inch as being the length of three <unk> and since 1889 the kilogram has been defined as being the mass of the International Prototype Kilogram . In explicit @-@ constant definitions , a constant of nature is given a specified value and the definition of the unit emerges as a consequence . For example , in 1983 , the speed of light was defined to be exactly 299792458 metres per second and as long as the second has already been defined , the length of the metre can be derived . 
 The current ( 2008 ) and proposed ( 2011 ) definitions are given below . In many cases the final digit of any constant is yet to be agreed , so it has been represented by an " X " . 
 = = = Second = = = 
 The proposed definition of the second is effectively the same as the current definition , the only difference being that the conditions under which the measurements are made are more rigorously defined . 
 Current definition : The second is the duration of 9192631770 periods of the radiation corresponding to the transition between the two hyperfine levels of the ground state of the caesium @-@ 133 atom . 
 Proposed definition : The second , s , is the unit of time ; its magnitude is set by fixing the numerical value of the ground state hyperfine splitting frequency of the caesium @-@ 133 atom , at rest and at a temperature of 0 K , to be equal to exactly 9192631770 when it is expressed in the unit s − 1 , which is equal to Hz . 
 = = = Metre = = = 
 The proposed definition of the metre is effectively the same as the current definition , the only difference being that the additional rigour in the definition of the second will propagate to the metre . 
 Current definition : The metre is the length of the path travelled by light in vacuum during a time interval of 1 / 299792458 of a second . 
 Proposed definition : The metre , m , is the unit of length ; its magnitude is set by fixing the numerical value of the speed of light in vacuum to be equal to exactly 299792458 when it is expressed in the unit m · s − 1 . 
 = = = Kilogram = = = 
 The definition of the kilogram is undergoing a fundamental change — the current definition defines the kilogram as being the mass of the international prototype kilogram which is an artifact , not a constant of nature while the new definition relates it to the equivalent energy of a photon via the Planck constant . 
 Current definition : The kilogram is the unit of mass ; it is equal to the mass of the international prototype of the kilogram . 
 Proposed definition : The kilogram , kg , is the unit of mass ; its magnitude is set by fixing the numerical value of the Planck constant to be equal to exactly 6.62606X × 10 − 34 when it is expressed in the unit s − 1 · m2 · kg , which is equal to J · s . 
 One consequence of this change is that the new definition makes the definition of the kilogram dependent on the definitions of the second and the metre . 
 = = = Ampere = = = 
 The definition of the ampere is undergoing a major overhaul — the current definition , which is difficult to realise with high precision in practice , is being replaced by a definition that is more intuitive and that is easier to realise . 
 Current definition : The ampere is that constant current which , if maintained in two straight parallel conductors of infinite length , of negligible circular cross @-@ section , and placed 1 m apart in vacuum , would produce between these conductors a force equal to 2 × 10 − 7 newton per metre of length . 
 Proposed definition : The ampere , A , is the unit of electric current ; its magnitude is set by fixing the numerical value of the elementary charge to be equal to exactly 1.60217X × 10 − 19 when it is expressed in the unit A · s , which is equal to C. 
 Since the current definition contains a reference to force which has the dimensions <unk> − 2 it follows that in SI the kilogram , metre and second , the base units representing these dimensions , must be defined before the ampere can be defined . Other consequences of this definition are that in SI the value of vacuum permeability ( μ0 ) is fixed at exactly 4π × 10 − 7 H · m − 1 . Since the speed of light in vacuum ( c ) is also fixed , it follows from the relationship 
 <formula> 
 that the vacuum permittivity ( ε0 ) has a fixed value and from 
 <formula> 
 that the impedance of free space ( Z0 ) likewise has a fixed value . 
 One consequence of the proposed changes to the definition of the ampere is that the definition will no longer be dependent on the definitions of the kilogram and the metre , but will still be dependent on the definition of the second . In addition the vacuum permeability , vacuum permittivity and impedance of free space , which , in the current definition have exact values will , in the future , be subject to experimental error . 
 = = = Kelvin = = = 
 The definition of the kelvin will undergo a fundamental change if the proposal is accepted . Rather than using the triple point of water to fix the temperature scale the proposal recommends that the energy equivalent as given by Boltzmann 's equation be used . 
 Current definition : The kelvin , unit of thermodynamic temperature , is 1 / 273 @.@ 16 of the thermodynamic temperature of the triple point of water . 
 Proposed definition : The kelvin , K , is the unit of thermodynamic temperature ; its magnitude is set by fixing the numerical value of the Boltzmann constant to be equal to exactly 1.38065X × 10 − 23 when it is expressed in the unit s − 2 · m2 · kg · K − 1 , which is equal to J · K − 1 . 
 For a physical interpretation of this new definition , consider an ideal gas concentrated such that the average volume per molecule is 1.38065X × 10 − 23 m3 . That is the volume of a cube with a side length of about 24 nm . The ratio of the gas 's temperature and pressure would be defined exactly equal to 1 K / Pa . 
 One consequence of this change is that the new definition makes the definition of the kelvin depend on the definitions of the second , the metre , and the kilogram . 
 = = = Mole = = = 
 The current definition of the mole links it to the kilogram . The proposed definition will break that link by making a mole a specific number of entities of the substance in question . 
 Current definition : The mole is the amount of substance of a system that contains as many elementary entities as there are atoms in 0 @.@ 012 kilogram of carbon @-@ 12 . When the mole is used , the elementary entities must be specified and may be atoms , molecules , ions , electrons , other particles , or specified groups of such particles . 
 Proposed definition : The mole , mol , is the unit of amount of substance of a specified elementary entity , which may be an atom , molecule , ion , electron , any other particle or a specified group of such particles ; its magnitude is set by fixing the numerical value of the Avogadro constant to be equal to exactly 6.02214X × 1023 when it is expressed in the unit mol − 1 . 
 One consequence of this change is that the current defined relationship between the mass of the 12C atom , the dalton , the kilogram , and Avogadro 's number will no longer be valid . One of the following must change : 
 the mass of a 12C atom is exactly 12 dalton 
 the number of dalton in a gram is exactly the numerical value of Avogadro 's constant 
 The draft SI brochure assumes the first will remain true , which would mean that the second will no longer be true . The molar mass constant , while still with great accuracy remaining equal to 1 g / mol , will no longer be exactly equal to that . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The proposed definition of the candela is effectively the same as the current definition , but has been rephrased . 
 Current definition : The candela is the luminous intensity , in a given direction , of a source that emits monochromatic radiation of frequency 540 × 1012 Hz and that has a radiant intensity in that direction of 1 / 683 watt per <unk> . 
 Proposed definition : The candela , cd , is the unit of luminous intensity in a given direction ; its magnitude is set by fixing the numerical value of the luminous efficacy of monochromatic radiation of frequency 540 × 1012 Hz to be equal to exactly 683 when it is expressed in the unit s3 · m − 2 · kg − 1 · cd · sr , or cd · sr · W − 1 , which is equal to lm · W − 1 . 
 = = Impact on reproducibility = = 
 Apart from the candela , all the base units will be defined in terms of universal physical constants , but without an explicit one @-@ to @-@ one correspondence between the constants and the base units . Thus six physical constants will be needed to define the six base units . 
 When the New SI was first designed , there were more than six suitable physical constants from which the designers could choose . For example , once length and time had been established , the universal gravitational constant G could , from a dimensional point of view , be used to define mass . It should be noted that in practice G can only be measured with a relative uncertainty of the order of 10 − 5 which would have resulted in upper limit of the kilogram 's reproducibility being around 10 − 5 whereas the current international prototype kilogram can be measured with a <unk> of 1 @.@ 2 × 10 − 8 . The choice of physical constants was made on the basis of minimal uncertainty associated with measuring the constant and the degree of independence of the constant in respect of other constants that were being used . Although the BIPM has developed a standard mise en pratique ( practical technique ) for each type of measurement , the mise en pratique used to make the measurement is not part of the measurement 's definition — it is merely an assurance that the measurement can be done without exceeding the specified maximum uncertainty . 
 = = = Uncertainty of fundamental physical constants = = = 
 Fundamental physical constants are often highly dependent upon each other . This implies that the best value of a fundamental physical constant , one with the least uncertainty , often can be determined by directly measuring other fundamental physical constants , from which the value can be calculated . The uncertainty in these constants is then determined from the uncertainty of the others by the propagation of uncertainty . Constants whose value is fixed , for determining the units in which they are expressed , don 't have an uncertainty associated with them , so they do not account for any extra uncertainty in the value of the calculated constant . One of the reasons the SI unit system will be changed is that determination of values can often be greatly improved if expressed in these new units . This is due to the dependence of these values on physicals constants . 
 The following table catalogues the notable changes in determination of fundamental physical constants . The constants are expressed in direct measurements and fixed constants to minimize and determine the uncertainty . Some constants in that expression do not contribute significantly to the uncertainty , thus the only significant factors are noted . The value of the relative uncertainty by the data of CODATA of 2014 is given , and is expressed in the relative uncertainty of the significant factors , noted with ur ( constant ) . An approximately equals sign ( ≈ ) is used if an uncertainty is only approximated by the expression . This is due to <unk> factors or rounding errors . 
 It should be noted that the relative atomic mass of the electron Ar ( e ) is measured relative to the mass of a carbon @-@ 12 atom ( divided by 12 ) . When the Avogadro constant is set in the new SI , atomic masses might be measured in dalton ( by fixing the Avogadro constant ) , instead of atomic mass units ( by fixing the mass of carbon @-@ 12 ) , thus resulting in a difference between the values of the relative atomic mass and the atomic mass in units of dalton . 
 = = = Dalton = = = 
 In 1993 , the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry ( IUPAC ) approved the use of the dalton as an alternative to the unified atomic mass unit with the qualification that the GCPM had not given its approval . This approval has since been given . Following the proposal to redefine the mole by fixing the value of the Avogadro number , Brian Leonard of the University of Akron , writing in <unk> proposed that the dalton ( Da ) be redefined as an SI derived unit exactly equal to ( 1 / <unk> ) kg ; but that the unified atomic mass unit ( mu ) retain its current definition based on the mass of 12C , ceasing to be SI . This would result in the dalton and the atomic mass unit potentially differing from each other with a relative uncertainty of the order of 10 − 10 . 
 = = Acceptance = = 
 Much of the work done by the CIPM is delegated to consultative committees . The CIPM Consultative Committee for Units ( CCU ) has made the proposed changes while other committees have examined the proposal in detail and have made recommendations regarding their acceptance by the GCPM in 2014 . The various consultative committees have laid down a number of criteria that must be met before they will support the CCU 's proposal , including : 
 At least three separate experiments be carried out yielding values having a relative expanded ( 95 % ) uncertainty of no more than 5 × 10 − 8 and at least one of these values should be better than 2 × 10 − 8 . Both the Watt balance and the Avogadro project should be included in the experiments and any differences between these be reconciled . 
 The relative uncertainty of Boltzmann constant derived from two fundamentally different methods such as acoustic gas thermometry and dielectric constant gas thermometry be better than one part in 10 − 6 and that these values be corroborated by other measurements . 
 As at March 2011 , the International Avogadro Coordination ( IAC ) group had obtained an uncertainty of 3 @.@ 0 × 10 − 8 and NIST had obtained an uncertainty of 3 @.@ 6 × 10 − 8 in their measurements . 
 On 1 September 2012 the European Association of National Metrology Institutes ( <unk> ) launched a formal project to reduce the relative difference between the watt @-@ balance and the silicon sphere approach to measuring the kilogram from 17 ± 5 × 10 − 8 to within 2 × 10 − 8 . 
 As of March 2013 the proposed redefinition is known as the " New SI " , but Mohr , in a paper following the CGPM proposal but predating the formal CCU proposal , suggested that since the proposed system makes use of atomic scale phenomena rather than macroscopic phenomena , it should be called the " Quantum SI System " . 
 = = Comment = = 
 In 2010 Marcus Foster of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation published a wide @-@ ranging critique of SI in which he raised numerous issues ranging from basic issues such as the absence of the symbol " Ω " from most Western keyboards to the abstract issues such as inadequate formalism in the metrological concepts on which SI is based . The changes proposed in the New SI only addressed issues regarding the definition of the base units including new definitions of the candela and the mole — units that Foster argued were not true base units . Other issues raised by Foster fell outside the scope of the proposal . 
 = = = Explicit @-@ unit and explicit @-@ constant definitions = = = 
 Concerns have been expressed that the use of explicit @-@ constant definitions of the unit being defined that are not related to an example of its quantity will have many adverse effects . Although this criticism applies to the proposed linking of the kilogram to the Planck constant via a route that requires a knowledge of both special relativity and quantum mechanics it does not apply to the proposed definition of the ampere which is closer to an example of its quantity than is the current definition . Some observers have welcomed the proposal to base the definition of electric current on the charge of the electron rather than the current definition of a force between two parallel current @-@ carrying wires — since the nature of the electromagnetic interaction between two bodies at the quantum electrodynamics level is somewhat different from the nature at classical electrodynamic levels , it is considered inappropriate to use classical electrodynamics to define quantities that exist at quantum electrodynamic levels . 
 = = = Mass and the Avogadro constant = = = 
 When the scale of the divergence between the IPK and national kilogram prototypes was reported in 2005 , a debate arose on how best to redefine the kilogram - should the kilogram be defined in terms of the mass of the silicon @-@ 28 atom or should it be determined using the watt balance ? The mass of a silicon atom could be determined using the Avogadro project and using the Avogadro Number be linked directly to the kilogram . 
 Concern has also been expressed that the authors of the proposal had failed to address the impact of breaking the link between the mole , kilogram , the dalton ( Da ) , the Avogadro constant ( NA ) and Avogadro 's number ( NN ) . This direct link has caused many to argue that the mole is not a true physical unit , but , in the words of the Swedish philosopher Johansson , the mole is a " scaling factor " . 
 The SI Brochure ( 8th edition ) implicitly defines the dalton as 0 @.@ 001 ÷ NN kg where the value of NN is determined by experiment . The proposal fixes NA , so if the Avogadro constant and Avogadro 's number are to be numerically identical , the dalton must be related to either the mass of a single carbon atom or to the kilogram — it cannot be related to both . 
 = = = Temperature = = = 
 Temperature is somewhat of an enigma - room temperature can be measured by means of expansion and contraction of a liquid in a thermometer , but high temperatures are often associated with a colour . Wojciech T. <unk> , approaching the structure of SI from a philosophical point of view in the Journal of the Polish Physical Society , argued that temperature is not a real base unit but is rather an average of the thermal energies of the individual particles that make up the body concerned . He noted that in many theoretical papers , temperature is represented by the quantities Θ or β where 
 <formula> 
 and kb is the Boltzmann constant . 
 <unk> acknowledged however that in the macroscopic world temperature plays the role of a base unit as much of the theory of thermodynamics is based on temperature . Foster , writing from the point of view of quality control argued that the introduction of the Boltzmann constant into the definition of temperature was an unnecessary complication . 
 The Consultative Committee for <unk> , part of the International Committee for Weights and Measures publishes a mise en pratique ( practical technique ) , last updated in 1990 , for measuring temperature which , at very low and at very high temperatures , makes great use of linking energy to temperature via the Boltzmann constant . 
 = = = Luminous intensity = = = 
 Foster argued that " luminous intensity [ the candela ] is not a physical quantity , but a <unk> quantity that exists in human perception " thereby questioning whether or not the candela should be a base unit . 
 = DW Stadium = 
 The DW Stadium is a sports stadium in Wigan , Greater Manchester , England . The ground is owned and managed by Wigan Football Company Limited , and it is used by Wigan Athletic football club and Wigan Warriors rugby league club . Built and opened in 1999 , it is named after its main sponsor , DW Sports Fitness . In UEFA matches , it is called Wigan Athletic Stadium due to UEFA regulations on sponsorship . 
 The stadium was designed by Alfred McAlpine . Wigan Athletic and Wigan Warriors moved into it from their long @-@ term homes of Springfield Park and Central Park respectively . International rugby league matches have also taken place at the venue . 
 Its current capacity is 25 @,@ 138 — seated in four single @-@ tier stands — and its record attendance was on 11 May 2008 when 25 @,@ 133 people watched Wigan Athletic play Manchester United in the title @-@ deciding match of the 2007 – 08 Premier League season . 
 = = History = = 
 The stadium was designed by Alfred McAlpine and completed in August 1999 . 
 Wigan Athletic had spent the previous 67 years playing at Springfield Park , and their first match at the stadium was a friendly against Morecambe , just before the stadium 's official opening . 
 The stadium 's inauguration was marked with a friendly between Wigan Athletic and neighbours Manchester United — who were then reigning European champions , Premier League title and FA Cup holders — with United 's manager Sir Alex Ferguson officially opening the stadium . 
 The first competitive football match there took place on 7 August 1999 , with Wigan Athletic facing Scunthorpe United in a Second Division match . Simon Haworth scored twice , including the first competitive goal at the new stadium , as Athletic triumphed 3 – 0 . 
 Wigan Warriors moved to the stadium a month after it opened , once they had played their final home game of the 1999 regular season at Central Park , which had been the club 's home since 1902 . After their former ground was sold , the possibility of ground sharing with Bolton Wanderers F.C. at the Reebok Stadium ( now Macron Stadium ) was presented , but the new stadium in Wigan was chosen instead . Their first game there was a play @-@ off match against Castleford Tigers , which they lost , on 19 September . The Warriors did not lose a competitive match at the stadium in 2001 . 
 The first away team to win a competitive football match at the stadium was Wigan Athletic . A first round FA Cup tie against non @-@ league Cambridge City was played there due to City 's ground being deemed unsuitable to host the tie . Wigan played in their changed strip and used the away dressing room since it was technically a ' home ' game for Cambridge City . A Stuart Barlow brace secured the win for Wigan . Wigan subsequently lost at home to Wolverhampton Wanderers in the third round of the FA Cup on 11 December 1999 . Oldham Athletic became the first team to beat Wigan in a league fixture at the JJB on 7 January 2000 . The game was shown live on sky sports and finished 1 – 0 thanks to an 86th @-@ minute header from Lee Duxbury . 
 Whilst Wigan Warriors and Wigan Athletic flourished in the new stadium ( Wigan Athletic in particular would achieve significant success , rising up the English football pyramid to the Premier League by 2005 ) , Orrell R.U.F.C. did not . Dave Whelan and Maurice Lindsay decided to invest heavily in the club , with the aim of having the club play in rugby union 's Guinness Premiership at the stadium . After failing to win 2004 's National Division Two , Whelan pulled a large amount of investment from the club , to a more modest GB £ 30 @,@ 000 a year . This was the beginning of Orrell 's demise , as players left during the summer of that year and the club were consequently relegated the season after . Ownership eventually passed from Lindsay back to the club 's members , but by this point , Orrell had sold their former Edge Hall Road ground to Dave Whelan 's company , <unk> Holdings , and therefore had no assets apart from their rebuilt clubhouse following a fire in 2002 . Orrell never settled at the JJB Stadium , and were eventually de @-@ professionalised at the end of the 2006 – 07 season . 
 On 7 March 2005 Greater Manchester police announced that they would stop policing Wigan Athletic matches at the stadium from 2 April . This move would almost certainly have resulted in the stadium 's safety certificate being revoked , effectively forcing the team to play behind closed doors . The move was part of an ongoing dispute between the police force and Dave Whelan surrounding GB £ 300 @,@ 000 in unpaid policing costs . The police 's decision would not have affected Wigan Warriors , whose games are <unk> instead of policed . The situation was temporarily resolved on 8 March with both sides reaching an agreement that would allow Athletic to play at the ground until the end of the season . Four months later , Wigan Athletic , facing the prospect of playing their home games in the Premier League in an empty stadium , grudgingly paid the money they owed to the police . The club successfully appealed against the payments in court and won damages from the police . 
 On 7 September 2008 , Wigan Warriors revealed plans to take their Super League Play @-@ Off against Bradford Bulls to a neutral venue . The controversial relocation was forced due to a fixture clash , with a match between football clubs Wigan Athletic and Sunderland to take place less than 24 hours after the Super League match . Whelan , who controlled Wigan Athletic , refused permission for the Warriors to stage their elimination at the stadium , citing concerns over the playing surface . The game was relocated to Widnes Vikings home ground , the Stobart Stadium . In the same season , JJB Sports announced they would not continue to sponsor Wigan Warriors , leaving them without a main shirt sponsor . 
 The stadium 's average attendance has increased significantly since its opening in 1999 . The Wigan Warriors ' average attendance has increased by 32 @.@ 5 % from its first full season at the stadium in 2000 , and Wigan Athletic 's average attendance has increased by 181 @.@ 2 % from the 2000 – 01 season . The highest recorded attendance for a rugby league match is shared between three fixtures ; the Wigan Warriors ' fixture against St Helens RLFC on 25 March 2005 ; Game 4 of the 2005 Tri @-@ Nations series between Great Britain and Australia on 6 November ; and Game 5 of the 2004 Tri @-@ Nations series between Great Britain and Australia on 13 November at 25 @,@ 004 each . The highest recorded football attendance at the stadium was Wigan Athletic 's home fixture against Manchester United on 11 May 2008 — the final day of the 2007 – 08 Premier League season — with 25 @,@ 133 fans attending . This is the stadium 's highest recorded overall attendance to date , and was the match where Manchester United were crowned Premier League champions for that season . 
 In March 2009 , Dave Whelan acquired a chain of fitness clubs from JJB Sports . In the process , Whelan used the business to set up a new venture , <unk> and announced that the stadium name would change to the DW Stadium in August . Whelan also announced that at the same time the stadium was renamed , its ownership would pass from himself to Wigan Athletic . Concerns about the future of Wigan Warriors were arrested in the same announcement , as Whelan extended the lease on the stadium by 50 years for the rugby league team . Before their match against Leeds Rhinos in July 2009 , both clubs were given the opportunity to rename one stand , with the intention of renaming them in honour to a recognised player from each club 's history . The rugby league club were granted the East Stand , which they renamed ' The Boston Stand ' in tribute to the Welsh winger Billy Boston , As Wigan Athletic had spent many years in the lower leagues it was recognised that most of their players were not known , so the West Stand was renamed ' The Springfield Stand ' after the club 's former ground . 
 = = Structure and facilities = = 
 The stadium design is based on cantilevered , prefabricated steel roof and terrace structuring . It is an all @-@ seater arena with a seating capacity of 24 @,@ 826 . The stands are rectangular and both the northern and southern stands have supporting steel girders suspended from beneath the roof . The four stands are of approximately the same height , however the stadium is not totally enclosed , leaving four exposed corners . 
 At both Wigan Athletic and Wigan Warriors matches , away supporters are situated in the North Stand behind the goal . Occasionally , during rugby games which attract low away support , the 5 @,@ 418 capacity North Stand is closed altogether , and the away fans who attend are put into an alternative stand . The eastern stand , known as ' The Boston Stand ' , and the western ' Springfield Stand ' run across the longer sides of the pitch . The Boston Stand is the largest , capable of seating up to 8 @,@ 238 fans and holding an electronic scoreboard . The Springfield Stand contains the stadium 's vital facilities ; four dressing rooms , benches , a doping control room and a treatment room for the players , as well as four executive boxes , ten radio commentary points and a designated TV studio , in addition to holding 6 @,@ 100 fans . The North Stand and South Stand have a seating capacity of 5 @,@ 418 and 5 @,@ 412 respectively . The stadium also has facilities and access for up to 278 fans with disabilities , with facilities for partially sighted fans . The seats are a mixture of both resident teams ' main colours — cherry red and blue . The stadium is fully compliant with safety guidelines for a sports ground . 
 The pitch is large enough to conform with both FIFA and the standard rugby league requirements , at 110 by 60 metres ( 120 yd × 66 yd ) . This leaves an in @-@ goal area just 5 metres ( 5 @.@ 5 yd ) deep for rugby matches . It is mostly made of natural grass , with 2 % of the pitch composed of synthetics to provide stability . The ground has irrigation , and an under @-@ heating system to resist icy weather . 
 = = Attendances = = 
 = = = Wigan Warriors = = = 
 Wigan Warriors moved from Central Park to the stadium in 1999 after the end of Super League IV 's regular season . Since moving to the new stadium , Wigan Warriors ' success in rugby league has not been as high as it was at their old Central Park ground , however the good times do seem to be back for the club after they won the Super League Grand Final and League Leaders shield in 2010 under the guidance of coach Michael Maguire and chairman Ian Lenagan . 
 Attendances have generally risen for the Wigan Warriors since the start of the 2002 season , averaging around 14 @,@ 000 over the three seasons from 2006 to 2009 . Aside from Grand Finals , the largest Super League attendance was recorded at the stadium in 2005 when Wigan Warriors played their local rivals , St Helens RLFC . 
 This match is also the highest home attendance in the Wigan Warriors ' history at the stadium . The twenty thousand mark has been broken ten times since moving to the new stadium in 1999 — eight times against St Helens RLFC , once against local rivals Warrington Wolves in the opening round of the 2008 Super League XIII season , and once in July 2009 against the Leeds Rhinos following a campaign advertising the game as the ' Big One ' . In 2010 , the Warriors were officially the biggest supported team in the Super League . 
 = = = Wigan Athletic F.C. = = = 
 Wigan Athletic 's success has improved considerably since their move to the stadium from Springfield Park in 1999 . The club subsequently climbed up two divisions to play in the Premier League from 2005 until 2013 . 
 Rising success on the pitch has been met with increased attendances . Promotion into the Premier League meant that in their first season of English top @-@ flight football , Wigan Athletic 's average home attendance almost doubled from the season before . Over three times more fans attended matches at the stadium during Wigan 's 2007 – 08 season in the Premier League than had attended in the 2001 – 02 season when Wigan Athletic were in the Football League Second Division . Wigan Athletic 's average home attendance for 2007 – 08 was the lowest out of all 20 teams in the Premier League , failing to make the top 30 English clubs in terms of attendance . The same season saw the highest ever attendance at the stadium , when 25 @,@ 133 people witnessed Wigan play Manchester United on the final day of the season . 
 Wigan Athletic 's average attendance was again the lowest in the league for the Premier League 2008 – 09 season . Premier League attendances fell on average by around 426 per club during the 2008 – 09 season . Wigan Athletic 's home attendance fell by more than this , with their average attendance for the 2008 – 09 season falling by 633 from the season before . The highest attendance at the stadium for this season was a match between Wigan Athletic and Arsenal F.C. , in which 22 @,@ 954 people were counted . This attendance was 2 @,@ 357 fans lower than the highest attendance in the season before . 
 = = Other events = = 
 The stadium 's numerous lounges provide a venue for small musical acts to perform , and the stadium plays host to minor bands and tribute acts . They are also available to book for private parties . During match days , bands may provide pre @-@ match entertainment on the pitch . 
 As well as the fixtures for the two domestic teams , the stadium is a venue for international rugby league . Since the stadium 's construction in 1999 , it has been an ever @-@ present venue whenever International series have been played in England . 
 Its first involvement came during the 2004 series , where the home Great Britain and Ireland national team defeated the Australians 24 – 12 , with Terry Newton and Andy Farrell both scoring in their home town of Wigan . The venue was again selected for the 2005 series , and again the match was between Great Britain and Australia — this time the home team lost 6 – 20 — with Greater Manchester born Adrian Morley scoring Great Britain 's solitary try . Both matches were complete sell @-@ outs , each having attendances above 25 @,@ 000 . The match in 2004 was the third highest attendance of the series , coming behind a match at the City of Manchester Stadium between Great Britain and Australia , and the series final between the same two teams at Elland Road . 
 In addition to the Tri @-@ Nations , the stadium has also played host to visiting nations during their European tours . Australia played Great Britain in front of a sell @-@ out crowd during the 2001 Kangaroo tour , with the home side losing 8 – 28 . Australia narrowly defeated Great Britain again in 2003 at the stadium , winning by a margin of four points during their 2003 European Tour . New Zealand have also played at the stadium during their tours . In 2002 , a try scored in his home town by Martin Gleeson helped Great Britain to defeat the ' Kiwis ' 16 – 10 . The visitors lost again during their 2007 tour , this time 28 – 22 in a closely fought game in which Wigan @-@ born second @-@ rower Sean O 'Loughlin featured . 
 The stadium has hosted the World Club Challenge four times , in 2000 , between St Helens and the Melbourne Storm in 2011 when Wigan took on St. George Illawarra <unk> and in 2015 and 2016 when Wigan Warriors hosted the Brisbane <unk> . 
 = = = Rugby league test matches = = = 
 Since its opening in 1999 , it hosted six Great Britain internationals . 
 Since the Great Britain national rugby league team has split into individual home nations , it has hosted three England internationals . 
 = = Surroundings = = 
 The stadium 's surroundings are mostly urban , as it is located in the north of Wigan 's Robin Park retail complex in the western suburb of Newtown , on the south bank of the Leeds and Liverpool Canal , west of the <unk> Lane industrial estate . The stadium 's car parks are situated around the canal , and can hold up to 2 @,@ 500 cars . 
 Next to the stadium 's South Stand lies the Robin Park Arena , which is operated by Wigan Sports Development Unit and is capable of seating 1 @,@ 000 spectators . The arena is mainly used for athletics , as well as functions for : North West Counties Football League side Wigan Robin Park , and Wigan Athletic Reserves . The arena was formerly used by the Wigan Warriors ' junior academy , before they moved to Edge Hall Road to join the reserve side . Robin Park Sports Centre is situated directly opposite the Stadium and Arena . 
 The main road serving the complex is the A49 , running west @-@ bound 750 metres ( 820 yd ) south of the stadium . Both of Wigan 's railway stations , Wigan Wallgate and Wigan North Western lie 1 @.@ 3 – 1 @.@ 6 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 8 – 1 @.@ 0 mi ) east of the stadium . 
 = Amazing Stories = 
 Amazing Stories is an American science fiction magazine launched in April 1926 by Hugo Gernsback 's Experimenter Publishing . It was the first magazine devoted solely to science fiction . Before Amazing , science fiction stories had made regular appearances in other magazines , including some published by Gernsback , but Amazing helped define and launch a new genre of pulp fiction . 
 Amazing was published , with some interruptions , for almost eighty years , going through a half @-@ dozen owners and many editors as it struggled to be profitable . Gernsback was forced into bankruptcy and lost control of the magazine in 1929 , and by 1938 it was purchased by Ziff @-@ Davis , who hired Raymond A. Palmer as editor . Palmer made the magazine successful though it was not regarded as a quality magazine within the science fiction community . In the late 1940s Amazing presented as fact stories about the Shaver Mystery , a lurid mythos that explained accidents and disaster as the work of robots named <unk> , which led to dramatically increased circulation but also widespread ridicule . Amazing switched to a digest size format in 1953 , shortly before the end of the pulp @-@ magazine era . It was sold to Sol Cohen 's Universal Publishing Company in 1965 , which filled it with reprinted stories but did not pay a reprint fee to the authors , creating a conflict with the newly formed Science Fiction Writers of America . Ted White took over as editor in 1969 , eliminated the reprints and made the magazine respected again : Amazing was nominated for the prestigious Hugo award three times during his tenure in the 1970s . Several other owners attempted to create a modern incarnation of the magazine in the following decades , but publication was suspended after the March 2005 issue . A new incarnation appeared in July 2012 as an online magazine . 
 Gernsback 's initial editorial approach was to blend instruction with entertainment ; he believed science fiction could educate readers . His audience rapidly showed a preference for implausible adventures , however , and the movement away from Gernsback 's idealism accelerated when the magazine changed hands in 1929 . Despite this , Gernsback had an enormous impact on the field : the creation of a specialist magazine for science fiction spawned an entire genre publishing industry . The letter columns in Amazing , where fans could make contact with each other , led to the formation of science fiction fandom , which in turn had a strong influence on the development of the field . Writers whose first story was published in the magazine include Isaac Asimov , Howard Fast , Ursula K. Le Guin , Roger Zelazny , and Thomas M. Disch . Overall , though , Amazing itself was rarely an influential magazine within the genre . Some critics have commented that by " <unk> " science fiction , Gernsback in fact did harm to its literary growth , but this viewpoint has been countered by the argument that science fiction needed an independent market to develop in to reach its potential . 
 = = Origins = = 
 By the end of the 19th century , stories centered on scientific inventions , and stories set in the future , were appearing regularly in popular fiction magazines . The market for short stories lent itself to tales of invention in the tradition of Jules Verne . Magazines such as Munsey 's Magazine and The Argosy , launched in 1889 and 1896 respectively , carried a few science fiction stories each year . Some upmarket " slick " magazines such as McClure 's , which paid well and were aimed at a more literary audience , also carried scientific stories , but by the early years of the 20th century , science fiction ( though it was not yet called that ) was appearing more often in the pulp magazines than in the slicks . 
 In 1908 , Hugo Gernsback published the first issue of Modern Electrics , a magazine aimed at the scientific hobbyist . It was an immediate success , and Gernsback began to include articles on imaginative uses of science , such as " Wireless on Saturn " ( December 1908 ) . In April 1911 , Gernsback began the serialization of his science fiction novel , Ralph 124C 41 + , but in 1913 he sold his interest in the magazine to his partner and launched a new magazine , Electrical Experimenter , which soon began to publish scientific fiction . In 1920 Gernsback retitled the magazine Science and Invention , and through the early 1920s he published much scientific fiction in its pages , along with non @-@ fiction scientific articles . 
 Gernsback had started another magazine called Practical Electrics in 1921 . In 1924 , he changed its name to The Experimenter , and sent a letter to 25 @,@ 000 people to gauge interest in the possibility of a magazine devoted to scientific fiction ; in his words , " the response was such that the idea was given up for two years . " However , in 1926 he decided to go ahead , and ceased publication of The Experimenter to make room in his publishing schedule for a new magazine . The editor of The Experimenter , T. O 'Conor Sloane , became the editor of Amazing Stories . The first issue appeared on 10 March 1926 , with a cover date of April 1926 . 
 = = Publishing history = = 
 = = = Early years = = = 
 The editorial work was largely done by Sloane , but Gernsback retained final say over the fiction content . Two consultants , Conrad A. Brandt and Wilbur C. Whitehead , were hired to help find fiction to reprint . Frank R. Paul , who had worked with Gernsback as early as 1914 , became the cover artist ; Paul had produced many illustrations for the fiction in The Electrical Experimenter . Amazing was issued in the large bedsheet format , 8 @.@ 5 × 11 @.@ 75 in ( 216 × 298 mm ) , the same size as the technical magazines . It was an immediate success and soon reached a very respectable circulation of 100 @,@ 000 . Gernsback saw there was an enthusiastic readership for " scientifiction " ( the term " science fiction " had not yet been coined ) , and in 1927 he issued Amazing Stories Annual . The annual sold out , and in January 1928 , Gernsback launched a quarterly magazine , Amazing Stories Quarterly , as a regular companion to Amazing . It continued on a fairly regular schedule for 22 issues . 
 Gernsback was slow to pay his authors and creditors ; the extent of his investments limited his liquidity . On 20 February 1929 his printer and paper supplier opened bankruptcy proceedings against him . It has been suggested that Bernarr Macfadden , another magazine publisher , maneuvered to force the bankruptcy because Gernsback would not sell his titles to Macfadden , but this is unproven . Experimenter Publishing did not file any defence and was declared bankrupt by default on 6 March 1929 ; Amazing survived with its existing staff , but Hugo and his brother , Sidney , were forced out as directors . Arthur H. Lynch took over as editor @-@ in @-@ chief , though Sloane continued to have effective control of the magazine 's contents . The receivers , Irving Trust , sold the magazine to Bergan A. Mackinnon on 3 April 1929 . 
 In August 1931 , Amazing was acquired by Teck Publications , a subsidiary of Bernarr Macfadden 's Macfadden Publications . Macfadden 's deep pockets helped insulate Amazing from the financial strain caused by the Great Depression . The schedule of Amazing Stories Quarterly began to slip , but Amazing did not miss an issue in the early 1930s . However , it became unprofitable to publish over the next few years . Circulation dropped to little more than 25 @,@ 000 in 1934 , and in October 1935 it switched to a bimonthly schedule . 
 By 1938 , with Amazing 's circulation down to only 15 @,@ 000 , Teck Publications was having financial problems . In January 1938 Ziff @-@ Davis took over the magazine ; the April issue was assembled by Sloane but published by Ziff @-@ Davis . Bernard Davis , who ran Ziff @-@ Davis 's editorial department , attempted to hire Roger Sherman Hoar as editor ; Hoar turned down the job but suggested Raymond A. Palmer , an active local science fiction fan . Palmer was hired that February , taking over editorial duties with the June 1938 issue . Ziff @-@ Davis launched Fantastic Adventures , a fantasy companion to Amazing , in May 1939 , also under Palmer 's editorship . Palmer quickly managed to improve Amazing 's circulation , and in November 1938 , the magazine went monthly again , though this did not last throughout Palmer 's tenure : between 1944 and 1946 the magazine was bimonthly and then quarterly for a while before returning to a longer @-@ lasting monthly schedule . 
 = = = 1940s = = = 
 In September 1943 Richard Shaver , an Amazing reader , began to correspond with Palmer , who soon asked him to write stories for the magazine . Shaver responded with a story called " I Remember Lemuria " , published in the March 1945 issue , which was presented by Palmer as a mixture of truth and fiction . The story , about prehistoric civilizations , dramatically boosted Amazing 's circulation , and Palmer ran a new Shaver story in every issue , culminating in a special issue in June 1947 devoted entirely to the Shaver Mystery , as it was called . Amazing soon drew ridicule for these stories . A derisive article by William S. Baring @-@ Gould in the September 1946 issue of Harper 's prompted William Ziff to tell Palmer to limit the amount of Shaver @-@ related material in the magazine ; Palmer complied , but his interest ( and possibly belief ) in this sort of material was now significant , and he soon began planning to leave Ziff @-@ Davis . In 1947 he formed Clark Publications , launching Fate the following year , and in 1949 he resigned from Ziff @-@ Davis to edit that and other magazines . 
 Howard Browne , who had been on a leave of absence from Ziff @-@ Davis to write fiction , took over as editor and began by throwing away 300 @,@ 000 words of inventory that Palmer had acquired before he left . Browne had ambitions of moving Amazing upmarket , and his argument was strengthened by Street & Smith , one of the longest established and most respected publishers , who shut down all of their pulp magazines in the summer of 1949 . The pulps were dying , largely as a result of the success of <unk> , and Street & Smith decided to concentrate on their slick magazines . Some pulps struggled on for a few more years , but Browne was able to persuade Ziff and Davis that the future was in the slicks , and they raised his fiction budget from one cent to a ceiling of five cents per word . Browne managed to get promises of new stories from many well @-@ known authors , including Isaac Asimov and Theodore Sturgeon . He produced a dummy issue in April 1950 , and planned to launch the new incarnation of Amazing in April 1951 , the 25th anniversary of the first issue . However , the economic impact of the Korean War , which broke out in June 1950 , led to budget cuts . The plans were cancelled , and Ziff @-@ Davis never revived the idea . 
 = = = 1950s = = = 
 Browne 's interest in Amazing declined when the project to turn it into a slick magazine was derailed . Although he stayed involved with Fantastic Adventures , another Ziff @-@ Davis magazine , he left the editing work on Amazing to William Hamling and Lila Shaffer . In December 1950 , when Ziff @-@ Davis moved their offices from Chicago to New York , Hamling stayed behind in Chicago , and Browne revived his involvement with the magazine . 
 In 1952 , Browne convinced Ziff @-@ Davis to try a high @-@ quality digest fantasy magazine . Fantastic , which appeared in the summer of that year , focused on fantasy rather than science fiction and was so successful that it persuaded Ziff @-@ Davis to switch Amazing from pulp format to digest in early 1953 ( while also switching to a bimonthly schedule ) . Circulation fell , however , and subsequent budget cuts limited the story quality in both Amazing and Fantastic . Fantastic began to print science fiction as well as fantasy . Circulation increased as a result , but Browne , who was not a science fiction aficionado , once again lost interest in the magazines . 
 Paul W. Fairman replaced Browne as editor in September 1956 . Early in Fairman 's tenure , Bernard Davis decided to try issuing a companion series of novels , titled Amazing Stories Science Fiction Novels . Readers ' letters in Amazing had indicated a desire for novels , which Amazing did not have room to run . The novel series did not last ; only one , Henry <unk> 's 20 Million Miles to Earth , appeared . However , in response to readers ' interest in longer fiction , Ziff @-@ Davis expanded Amazing by 16 pages , starting with the March 1958 issue , and the magazine began to run complete novels . 
 Fairman left to edit Ellery Queen 's Mystery Magazine at the end of 1958 , and his place was taken by Cele Goldsmith . Goldsmith had been hired in 1955 as a secretary and became assistant editor to help cope with the additional work created when Ziff @-@ Davis launched two short @-@ lived magazines , Dream World and Pen Pals , in 1956 . Ziff @-@ Davis were not confident of Goldsmith 's abilities as an editor , so when Fairman left , a consultant , Norman Lobsenz , was hired to work with her . She performed well , however , and Lobsenz 's involvement soon became minimal . 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 Goldsmith is well regarded by science fiction historians for her innovation , and the impact she had on the early careers of writers such as Ursula K. Le Guin and Roger Zelazny , but circulation lagged during her tenure . By 1964 Fantastic 's circulation was down to 27 @,@ 000 , with Amazing doing little better . The following March both magazines were sold . 
 March 1965 saw both Amazing and Fantastic sold to Ultimate Publishing Company , run by Sol Cohen and Arthur Bernhard . Goldsmith was given the choice of going with the magazines or staying with Ziff @-@ Davis ; she stayed , and Cohen hired Joseph Wrzos to edit the magazines , starting with the August and September 1965 issues of Amazing and Fantastic , respectively . Wrzos used the name " Joseph Ross " on the mastheads to avoid mis @-@ spellings . Both magazines immediately moved to a bi @-@ monthly schedule . 
 Cohen had acquired reprint rights to the magazines ' back issues , although Wrzos did get Cohen to agree to print one new story every issue . Cohen was also producing reprint magazines such as Great Science Fiction and Science Fiction Classics , but no payment was made to authors for any of these reprints . This brought Cohen into conflict with the Science Fiction Writers of America ( SFWA ) , a professional writers ' organization formed in 1965 . Soon SFWA called for a boycott of Ultimate 's magazines until Cohen agreed to make payments . Cohen agreed to pay a flat fee for all stories , and then in August 1967 this was changed to a graduated rate , depending on the length of the story . Harry Harrison had acted as an intermediary in Cohen 's negotiations with SFWA , and when Wrzos left in 1967 , Cohen asked Harrison to take over . SF Impulse , which Harrison had been editing , had folded in February 1967 , so Harrison was available . He secured Cohen 's agreement that the policy of printing almost nothing but reprinted stories would be phased out by the end of the year , and took over as editor with the September 1967 issue . 
 By February 1968 Harrison decided to leave , as Cohen was showing no signs of abandoning the reprints . He resigned , and suggested Barry Malzberg to Cohen as a possible successor . Cohen knew Malzberg from his work at the Scott Meredith Literary Agency , and thought that he might be more amenable than Harrison to continuing the reprint policy . Malzberg took over in April 1968 , but immediately came into conflict with Cohen over the reprints , and then threatened to resign in October 1968 over a disagreement about artwork Malzberg had commissioned for a cover . Cohen contacted Robert Silverberg , then the president of SFWA , and told him ( falsely ) that Malzberg had actually resigned . Silverberg recommended Ted White as a replacement . Cohen secured White 's agreement and then fired Malzberg ; White assumed control with the May 1969 issue . 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 When White took over as editor , Amazing 's circulation was about 38 @,@ 500 , only about 4 % of which were subscribers ( as opposed to newsstand sales ) . This was a very low ebb for subscriptions ; Analog , by comparison , sold about 35 % of its circulation through subscriptions . Cohen 's wife mailed out the subscription copies from home , and Cohen had never tried to increase the subscriber base as this would have increased the burden on his wife . White worked hard to increase the circulation despite Cohen 's lack of support , but met with limited success . One of his first changes was to reduce the typeface to increase the amount of fiction in the magazine . To pay for this he increased the price of both Fantastic and Amazing to 60 cents , but this had a strong negative effect on circulation , which fell about 10 % from 1969 to 1970 . 
 In 1972 , White changed the title to Amazing Science Fiction , distancing the magazine slightly from some of the pulp connotations of " Amazing Stories " . White worked at a low wage , and his friends often read manuscripts for free , but despite his efforts the circulation continued to fall . From near 40 @,@ 000 when White joined the magazine , the circulation fell to about 23 @,@ 000 in October 1975 . White was unwilling to continue with the very limited financial backing that Cohen provided , and he resigned in 1975 . Cohen was able to convince White to remain ; White promised to stay for one more year , but in the event remained as editor until late 1978 . 
 Amazing raised its price from 75 cents to $ 1 @.@ 00 with the November 1975 issue . The schedule switched to quarterly beginning with the March 1976 issue ; as a result , the 50th anniversary issue had a cover date of June 1976 . In 1977 , Cohen announced that Amazing and Fantastic had lost $ 15 @,@ 000 , though Amazing 's circulation ( at nearly 26 @,@ 000 ) was as good as it had been for several years . Cohen looked for a new publisher to buy the magazines , but in September of the following year sold his half @-@ share in the company to his partner , Arthur Bernhard . White had occasionally suggested to Cohen that Amazing would benefit from a redesign and investment ; he made the same suggestions to Bernhard in early October . According to White , Bernhard not only said no , but told him he would not receive a salary until the next issue was turned in . White resigned , and returned all manuscripts in his possession to their authors , even if copy @-@ edited and ready for publication . White claimed Bernhard had told him to do this , though Bernhard denied it . 
 = = = 1980s to 2000s = = = 
 Elinor Mavor took over as editor in early 1979 . She had worked for Bernhard as an illustrator and in the production department of several of his magazines , though not for Amazing . She had also been an editor at Bill of Fare , a restaurant trade magazine . Mavor had read a good deal of science fiction but knew nothing about the world of science fiction magazines when she took over . She was not confident that a woman would be accepted as the editor of a science fiction magazine , so she initially used the pseudonym " Omar Gohagen " for both Amazing and Fantastic , dropping it late in 1980 . Circulation continued to fall , and Bernhard refused to consider Mavor 's request to undertake a subscription drive , which might have helped . Instead , in late 1980 , Bernhard decided to merge the two magazines . Fantastic 's last independent issue was October 1980 ; thereafter the combined magazine returned to a bimonthly schedule . At the same time the title was changed to Amazing Science Fiction Stories . Bernhard cut Mavor 's salary after the merger , as she was editing only one magazine . Despite this , she stayed with Amazing , but was unable to prevent circulation from dropping again , down to only 11 @,@ 000 newsstand sales in 1982 . 
 Shortly after the merger , Bernhard decided to retire , and approached Edward Ferman , the editor of Fantasy and Science Fiction , and Joel Davis , at Ziff @-@ Davis , among others , about a possible sale of Amazing . Jonathan Post , of Emerald City Publishing , believed he had concluded a deal with Bernhard , and began to advertise for submissions , but the negotiations failed . Bernhard also approached George H. Scithers , who declined , but put Bernhard in touch with Gary Gygax of TSR . On 27 May 1982 TSR , Inc. acquired the trademarks and copyrights of Amazing Stories . Scithers was taken on by TSR as editor beginning with the November 1982 issue . He was replaced by Patrick Lucien Price in September 1986 , and then by Kim Mohan in May 1991 . TSR ceased publication of Amazing with the Winter 1995 issue , but in 1997 , shortly after they were acquired by Wizards of the Coast , the magazine was relaunched , again with Mohan as editor . This version only lasted for ten issues , though it did include a special celebratory 600th issue in early 2000 . The science fiction trade journal Locus commented in an early review that distribution of the magazine seemed to be weak . The title proved unable to survive : the last issue of this version was dated Summer 2000 . The title was then acquired by Paizo Publishing , who launched a new monthly version in September 2004 . The February 2005 issue was the last printed ; a March 2005 issue was released in PDF format , and in March 2006 Paizo announced that it would no longer publish Amazing . In September , 2011 , the trademark for Amazing Stories was acquired by Steve Davidson , and online publication began in 2012 with two issues in July and August . 
 = = Contents and reception = = 
 = = = Gernsback 's Amazing = = = 
 Gernsback 's editorial in the first issue asserted that " Not only do these amazing tales make tremendously interesting reading — they are also always instructive " . He had always believed that " scientifiction " , as he called these stories , had educational power , but he now understood that the fiction had to entertain as well as to instruct . His continued belief in the instructional value of science fiction was not in keeping with the general attitude of the public towards pulp magazines , which was that they were " trash . " 
 The first issue of Amazing contained only reprints , beginning with a serialization of Off on a Comet , by Jules Verne . In keeping with Gernsback 's new approach , this was one of Verne 's least scientifically plausible novels . Also included were H. G. Wells 's " The New Accelerator " , and Edgar Allan Poe 's " The Facts in the Case of M. Valdemar " ; Gernsback put the names of all three authors on the cover . He also reprinted three more recent stories . Two came from his own magazine , Science and Invention ; these were " The Man from the Atom " by G. Peyton Wertenbaker and " The Thing from — ' Outside ' " by George Allan England . The third was Austin Hall 's The Man Who Saved the Earth , which had appeared in All @-@ Story Weekly . 
 In the June 1926 issue Gernsback announced a competition to write a short story to suit a cover drawn by illustrator Frank R. Paul , with a first prize of $ 250 . The competition drew over 360 entries , seven of which were eventually printed in Amazing . The winner was Cyril G. Wates , who sold three more stories to Gernsback in the late 1920s . Two other entrants went on to become successful writers : one was Clare Winger Harris , whose story , " The Fate of the Poseidonia " , took third place in the competition , and was published in the June 1927 issue as by " Mrs. F.C. Harris " . The other notable entrant was A. Hyatt Verrill , with The Voice from the Inner World , which appeared in July 1927 . 
 A letter column , titled Discussions soon appeared , and became a regular feature with the January 1927 issue . Many science fiction readers were isolated in small communities , knowing nobody else who liked the same fiction . Gernsback 's habit of publishing the full address of all his correspondents meant that the letter column allowed fans to correspond with each other directly . Science fiction fandom traces its beginnings to the letter column in Amazing and its competitors , and one historian of the field , author Lester del Rey , has commented that the introduction of this letter column " may have been one of the most important events in the history of science fiction " . 
 For the first year , Amazing contained primarily reprinted material . It was proving difficult to attract new , high @-@ quality material , and Gernsback 's slowness at paying his authors did not help . Writers such as H.P. Lovecraft , H.G. Wells , and Murray Leinster all avoided Amazing because Gernsback took so long to pay for the stories he printed . The slow payments were probably known to many of the other active pulp writers , which would have further limited the volume of submissions . New writers did appear , but the quality of their stories was often weak . 
 Gernsback discovered that the audience he had attracted was less interested in scientific invention stories than in fantastical adventures . A. Merritt 's The Moon Pool , which began serialization in May 1927 , was an early success ; there was little or no scientific basis to the story , but it was very popular with Amazing 's readers . The covers , all of which were painted by Paul , were garish and juvenile , leading some readers to complain . Raymond Palmer , later to become an editor of the magazine , wrote that a friend of his was forced to stop buying Amazing " by reason of his parents ' dislike of the cover illustrations " . Gernsback experimented with a more sober cover for the September 1928 issue , but it sold poorly , and so the lurid covers continued . The combination of poor quality fiction with garish artwork has led some critics to comment that Gernsback created a " ghetto " for science fiction , though it has also been argued that the creation of a specialized market allowed science fiction to develop and mature as a genre . 
 Among the regular writers for Amazing by the end of the 1920s were several who were influential and popular at the time , such as David H. Keller and Stanton Coblentz , and some who would continue to be successful for much longer , most notably Edward E. Smith and Jack Williamson . Smith 's The Skylark of Space , written between 1915 and 1920 , was a seminal space opera that found no ready market when Argosy stopped printing science fiction . When Smith saw a copy of the April 1927 issue of Amazing , he submitted it to Sloane , and it appeared in the August – October 1928 issues . It was such a success that Sloane requested a sequel before the second installment had been published . It was also in the August 1928 issue that " Armageddon – 2419 AD " , by Philip Francis Nowlan , appeared ; this was the first appearance of Buck Rogers in print . 
 = = = Sloane , Palmer , Browne and Fairman = = = 
 Sloane took over full control of the content of Amazing when Gernsback left in 1929 . He was infamous for his slow response to manuscripts , and when Astounding Stories was launched in January 1930 , with better rates and faster editorial response , some of Sloane 's writers quickly defected . Nevertheless , he published first stories by luminaries such as Jack Williamson , John W. Campbell , Jr . , Clifford D. Simak , and E.E. " Doc " Smith . Little more of quality appeared in Amazing during Sloane 's tenure , though Howard Fast 's first story appeared in the October 1932 issue , and " The Lost Machine " , an early story by John Wyndham , appeared in April 1932 , under Wyndham 's real name of John Beynon Harris . 
 Raymond Palmer , who took over in 1938 , was less interested in the educational possibilities of science fiction than Sloane had been . He wanted the magazine to provide escapist entertainment , and had no interest in scientific accuracy . His terse instruction — " Gimme Bang @-@ Bang " — to one pulp writer sums up his approach . Palmer disposed of almost all of Sloane 's accumulated inventory , instead acquiring stories from local Chicago writers he knew through his connections with science fiction fandom . He also added features such as a " Correspondence Corner " and a " Collectors ' Corner " to appeal to fans , and introduced a " Meet the Authors " feature , though on at least one occasion the featured author was a pseudonym , and the biographical details were invented . An illustrated back cover was tried , and soon became standard . In 1939 Palmer acquired Isaac Asimov 's first sale , " Marooned off Vesta " . 
 In the 1940s , several writers established themselves as a stable of reliable contributors to Amazing . These included David Wright O 'Brien and William P. McGivern , both of whom wrote an immense amount for Ziff @-@ Davis , much of it under house names such as Alexander Blade . John Russell Fearn became a prolific contributor , using the pseudonyms " Thornton Ayre " and " <unk> Cross " . Palmer also encouraged long @-@ time science fiction writers to return , publishing pulp authors such as Ed Earl Repp and Eando Binder . This policy did not always meet with approval from Amazing 's readers , who , despite a clear preference for action and adventure stories , could not stomach the work of some of the early pulp writers such as Harry Bates . 
 The first Shaver Mystery story , " I Remember Lemuria " , by Richard S. Shaver , appeared in the March 1945 issue . Shaver claimed that all the world 's accidents and disasters were caused by an ancient race of " detrimental robots " who lived in underground cities . This explanation for the world 's ills , coming towards the end of World War II , struck a chord with Amazing 's readership . Palmer received over 2 @,@ 500 letters , instead of the usual 40 or 50 , and proceeded to print a Shaver story in every issue . The June 1947 issue was given over entirely to the Shaver Mystery . From March 1948 the Shaver Mystery was dropped as a regular feature of the magazine , at Ziff 's insistence . Palmer left the following year , and Browne , his successor , " was determined to make sure that the lunatics were no longer in charge of the asylum " , in the words of science fiction historian Mike Ashley . 
 Browne had acquired some good @-@ quality material in the process of planning the launch of a new slick version of Amazing , and when the plan was abandoned this material appeared in the continuing pulp version . This included " Operation RSVP " by H. Beam Piper , and " Satisfaction Guaranteed " , by Isaac Asimov . Despite the cancellation of the planned change to a slick format , news had reached the writing community of Amazing 's new approach , and Browne began to receive much better material than Palmer had been able to publish . The existing stable of Amazing writers , such as Rog Phillips and Chester S. Geier , were replaced by writers such as Fritz Leiber , Fredric Brown , and Clifford D. Simak . Browne also discovered several writers who went on to success in the field , publishing first stories by Walter M. Miller , Mack Reynolds , John Jakes , Milton Lesser and Charles Beaumont , all within the space of nine months in late 1950 and early 1951 . Browne was disappointed by the cancellation of the planned slick version , however , and to some extent reverted to Palmer 's policy of publishing sensational fiction . In 1952 , for example , he serialized the anonymous Master of the Universe , which purported to be a history of the future from 1975 to <unk> . 
 With the change to digest size in 1953 , Browne once again attempted to use higher @-@ quality fiction . The first digest issue , dated April – May 1953 , included stories by Ray Bradbury , Robert Heinlein , Richard Matheson , Theodore Sturgeon , and Murray Leinster . Further well @-@ regarded stories appeared over the course of 1953 , including Arthur C. Clarke 's " Encounter in the Dawn " , and Henry Kuttner 's " Or Else " . Subsequent budget cuts meant that Browne was unable to sustain this level . As in the 1940s , Amazing gained a stable of writers who appeared frequently , though this time the quality of the writers was rather higher — it included Harlan Ellison , Robert Silverberg , and Randall Garrett — and the regular writers were not appearing only in Ziff @-@ Davis magazines . This remained the situation after Browne 's departure in 1956 and through Paul Fairman 's tenure . 
 = = = Cele Goldsmith = = = 
 Cele Goldsmith 's tenure as editor began with the opportunity to showcase two very well @-@ established writers : E.E. Smith and Isaac Asimov . Smith 's The Galaxy Primes began serialization in March 1959 . Asimov 's first published story , " Marooned Off Vesta " , had appeared in the March 1939 issue of Amazing , and Goldsmith reprinted it in March 1959 along with a sequel and Asimov 's comments on the story . She soon began to publish some of the better new writers . Cordwainer Smith 's " Golden the Ship Was — Oh ! Oh ! Oh ! " appeared in April ; and by the middle of the following year she had managed to attract stories from Robert Sheckley , Alan E. Nourse , Fritz Leiber , Gordon R. Dickson , Robert Bloch , and James Blish . The changes she made were enough to bring Robert Heinlein back as a subscriber ; Heinlein read a copy of the June 1961 issue , which , he said , " ... caused me to think I had been missing something . " 
 In September 1960 Amazing began to carry Sam Moskowitz 's series of author profiles , which had begun in Fantastic , the sister magazine . The following month the cover and logo were redesigned . In April 1961 , the 35th anniversary of the first issue , Goldsmith ran several reprints , including stories by Ray Bradbury and Edgar Rice Burroughs . Goldsmith had little previous experience with science fiction , and bought what she liked , rather than trying to conform to a notion of what science fiction should be . The result was the debut of more significant writers in her magazines than anywhere else at that time . She published the first stories of Ursula K. Le Guin , Roger Zelazny , Piers Anthony and Thomas M. Disch , among many others . Award @-@ winning stories published during Goldsmith 's editorship include Zelazny 's " He Who Shapes " , a story about the use of dream therapy to cure phobias . It was serialized in the January and February 1965 issues , and won a Nebula Award , an annual award voted on by science fiction writers . Goldsmith often wrote long , helpful letters to her authors : Zelazny commented in a letter to her that " Most of anything I have learned was stimulated by those first sales , and then I learned , and possibly even learned more , from some of the later rejections " . Disch and Le Guin have also acknowledged the influence Goldsmith had on their early careers . 
 The cover art for Amazing had been largely supplied by Ed Valigursky during the late fifties , but during the early sixties a much wider variety of artists appeared , including Alex Schomburg , Leo Summers and Ed Emshwiller . Frank Paul , who had painted all the covers for the first few years of Amazing , contributed a wraparound cover for the April 1961 35th anniversary issue ; this was his last cover art for a science fiction magazine . 
 Goldsmith 's open @-@ minded approach meant that Amazing and Fantastic published some writers who did not fit into the other magazines . Philip K. Dick 's sales to magazines had dropped , but his work began to appear in Amazing , and Goldsmith also regularly published David R. Bunch 's stories of <unk> , a world whose inhabitants were part human and part metal . Bunch , whose stories were " bewildering , exotic word pictures " according to Mike Ashley , had been unable to sell regularly elsewhere . 
 = = = Reprint era and Ted White = = = 
 When Sol Cohen bought both Amazing and Fantastic in early 1965 , he decided to maximize profits by filling the magazines almost entirely with reprints . Cohen had acquired second serial rights from Ziff @-@ Davis to all stories that had been printed in both magazines , and also in the companion magazines such as Fantastic Adventures . Joseph Wrzos , the new editor , persuaded Cohen that at least one new story should appear in each issue ; there was sufficient inventory left over from Goldsmith 's tenure for this to be done without acquiring new material . Readers initially approved of the policy , since it made available some well @-@ loved stories from earlier decades that had not been reprinted elsewhere . Both of Wrzos 's successors , Harry Harrison and Barry Malzberg , were unable to persuade Cohen to use more new fiction . 
 When Ted White took over , it was on condition that the reprints be phased out . This took some time : for a while both Amazing and Fantastic continued to include one reprint every issue . With the May 1972 issue , however , the transformation was complete , and all stories were new . In addition to eliminating the reprints , White reintroduced several features such as a letter column and " The Clubhouse , " a fanzine review and fannish news column , and continued the book review column , as well as a series of science articles by Gregory Benford and David Book . He also redesigned the look of the magazine , making it , in science fiction historian Mike Ashley 's words , " far more modern and sophisticated " . 
 White was willing to print a variety of fiction , with traditional stories side @-@ by @-@ side with more experimental material that was influenced by the British New Wave or by 1960s psychedelia . In 1971 he serialized Ursula K. Le Guin 's The Lathe of Heaven , about a man whose dreams can modify reality . One writer who was influenced by this was James Tiptree , Jr . , who later wrote that " after first plowing into the first pulpy pages of the 1971 Amazing in which Lathe came out , my toe @-@ nails began to curl under and my spine hair stood up . " White 's willingness to experiment led to Amazing running more stories with sexual content than other magazines . One such story , White 's own " Growing Up Fast in the City " , was criticized as pornographic by some of Amazing 's readers . Other stories , such as Rich Brown 's " Two of a Kind " , about the violent rape of a black woman and the subsequent death of her rapists , also led to controversy . White also printed more conventional fiction , however , much of it of high quality . The magazine was nominated for the Hugo award ( a readers ' award , named for Hugo Gernsback ) for best editor three times during his tenure ( 1970 , 1971 and 1972 ) , finishing third each time . 
 White 's ability to attract new writers suffered because of the low rates he paid : one cent per word , as compared to three or five cents per word at the leading competitive magazines . To compensate , White cultivated new writers whose experimental work was not selling elsewhere . White made a deal in 1971 with Gordon Eklund , who was hesitating to become a full @-@ time writer because of the financial risks . White agreed to buy anything Eklund wrote , on condition that Eklund himself believed it was a good story . The result was that much of Eklund 's fiction appeared in Amazing and Fantastic over the next few years . 
 Amazing 's reputation had been for formulaic science fiction almost since it began , but White was able to bring the magazine to a higher standard than any other editor except Cele Goldsmith , and gave Amazing a respectable position in the field . His successors were not able to maintain the level of quality that he achieved . 
 = = = After Ted White = = = 
 When Elinor Mavor took over , in early 1979 , she had no experience with science fiction magazines , and was unaware of the history of bad feeling within the science fiction community about the poor payments for reprinted stories . She was given an extremely limited budget to work with , and had few stories on hand to work with initially , and as a result her first issues contained several reprints . Mavor experimented in her first year with some new ideas , such as starting a story on the back cover in order to hook readers into buying the magazine to finish the story . She also began a serial story in graphic format that used reader input to continue its plot . It was not a success and " thankfully , " according to Mike Ashley , the experiment was terminated after only three episodes . 
 Over time Mavor was to some extent able to reverse the negative perceptions of Amazing among established authors , but she was initially forced to work primarily with newer writers . Early discoveries of hers include Michael P. <unk> @-@ McDowell , John E. Stith and Richard Paul Russo . In a notice published in her first issue , she asked readers for help in assembling news , reviews and fan information , and soon added columns that covered these areas . In 1981 Robert Silverberg began a series of opinion columns . The artwork was of high quality , including work by Stephen Fabian , and later by David Mattingly . 
 After the merger with Fantastic , Mavor continued to draw well @-@ known writers to the magazine , including Orson Scott Card , George R. R. Martin , and Roger Zelazny . Brad <unk> 's Moon of Ice , which appeared in March 1982 , was nominated for a Nebula award ; Martin 's <unk> Variations , which had appeared the issue before , was nominated for both a Nebula and a Hugo award . 
 Historian James Gunn 's assessment of Amazing in the 1980s is that Mavor , Scithers and Price , who between them edited Amazing for a decade , were unable to sustain the standards established by Ted White in the 1970s . Brian Stableford , by contrast , comments that both Scithers and Price made efforts to publish good material , and that the packaging , from 1991 onwards , was perhaps the best presented of any science fiction magazine . 
 With the Wizards of the Coast relaunch in 1998 the contents , under editor Kim Mohan , became more media @-@ focused . The initial plan was to have two or three stories per issue based on films , TV , and games . The 600th issue , in early 2000 , included a Harlan Ellison story , as well as a story from the 100th issue , the 200th issue , and so on , up to the 500th issue . Pamela Sargent also contributed a story . The Paizo publishing relaunch , in 2004 , was even more focused on media content than the Wizards of the Coast version had been , with much more movie and comics @-@ related material than science fiction . Several well @-@ known authors appeared in the first issue , including Harlan Ellison , Bruce Sterling , and Gene Wolfe . Paizo also ran a blog for the magazine . The fiction received positive reviews , but Paizo soon put the magazine on temporary hold , and canceled it permanently the following year . 
 In 2012 , entrepreneur Steve Davidson announced plans to relaunch the magazine . A " relaunch prelaunch " was published in July 2012 . In 2013 , the magazine was retooled into what Davidson called a " social magazine " that employs bloggers to write about various niche topics . 
 = = = Influence on the field = = = 
 Amazing Stories was influential simply by being the first of its kind . In the words of science fiction writer and critic Damon Knight , the magazine was " a snag in the stream of history , from which a V @-@ shape spread out in dozens and then in hundreds of altered lives " . Many early fans of the field began to communicate with each other through the letter column , and to publish fanzines — amateur fan publications that helped establish connections among fans across the country . Many of these fans in turn became successful writers ; and the existence of an organized science fiction fandom , and of writers such as Ray Bradbury , Arthur C. Clarke , and Isaac Asimov , who came to writing directly from fandom , can be dated to the creation of Amazing Stories . After the first few years , when there was little or no competition , Amazing Stories never again led the field in the eyes of critics or fans . Despite its long history , the magazine rarely contributed much to science fiction beyond the initial creation of the genre , though Gernsback himself is commemorated in the name Hugo , which is the almost universally used term for the World Science Fiction Society 's annually presented Science Fiction Achievement Awards . Gernsback has also been called the " Father of Science Fiction " for his role in creating Amazing Stories . 
 = = Publication details = = 
 = = = Editors = = = 
 <unk> do not always agree who should be listed as editor of any given issue of Amazing . For example , Gernsback was in control for the first three years , but Sloane performed all the editorial duties related to fiction , and he is sometimes described as the editor . Similarly , later editors were sometimes under the supervision of editorial directors . The table below , and the charts above , generally follow the mastheads in the magazines , with short notes added . More details are given in the publishing history section , above , which focuses on when the editors involved actually obtained control of the magazine contents , instead of when their names appeared on the masthead . 
 Hugo Gernsback ( April 1926 – April 1929 ) . Sloane performed almost all the editorial duties related to fiction . 
 Arthur Lynch ( May 1929 – October 1929 ) . As under Gernsback , Sloane was essentially the editor during Lynch 's tenure . 
 T. O 'Conor Sloane ( November 1929 – May 1938 ) 
 Raymond A. Palmer ( June 1938 – December 1949 ) 
 Howard Browne ( January 1950 – August 1956 ) . Fairman actually took over editorial duties with the May or June 1956 issue . 
 Paul W. Fairman ( September 1956 – November 1958 ) 
 Cele Goldsmith Lalli ( December 1958 – June 1965 ) . Norman Lobsenz was introduced as editor , but in fact Cele Goldsmith did all the editorial work . When she married she used her married name of Cele Lalli . 
 Joseph Ross ( August 1965 – October 1967 ) . A pseudonym for Joseph Wrzos . 
 Harry Harrison ( December 1967 – September 1968 ) 
 Barry N. Malzberg ( November 1968 – January 1969 ) 
 Ted White ( March 1969 – February 1979 ) 
