 Elinor Mavor ( May 1979 – September 1982 ) . From May 1979 – August 1981 Mavor used the pseudonym Omar Gohagen ; subsequently she used her real name . 
 George H. Scithers ( November 1982 – July 1986 ) 
 Patrick Lucien Price ( September 1986 – March 1991 ) 
 Kim Mohan ( May 1991 – Winter 1995 and Summer 1998 – Summer 2000 ) 
 Dave Gross ( September 2004 – December 2004 ) 
 Jeff <unk> ( January 2005 – March 2005 ) 
 Steve Davidson ( July 2012 – Present ) 
 = = = Other bibliographic details = = = 
 Amazing began as a bedsheet format magazine and remained so until October 1933 , when it switched to pulp size . With the April – May 1953 issue Amazing became a digest . Seven issues in the early 1980s , from November 1980 to November 1981 , were a half @-@ inch taller than the regular digest size , but thereafter the magazine reverted to the standard digest format . In May 1991 the magazine returned to a large format , but this only lasted until the Winter 1994 issue , and the next three issues were digest @-@ sized again . When the magazine reappeared in 1998 , it was in bedsheet format and remained that size until the very end . The last issue , March 2005 , was only distributed as a PDF download , never as a physical magazine . The volume numbering contained some irregularities : the numbering given in the tables above appears to be in error for the period from 1979 to 1983 , but in fact it is given correctly in the table . Note also that vol . 27 no . 8 was a single issue , not two , as it seems to be from the table ; it was dated Dec 1953 / Jan 1954 . 
 The title of the magazine changed several times : 
 Two different series of reprints of Amazing appeared in the United Kingdom . First came a single undated issue from Ziff @-@ Davis , in November 1946 . In June 1950 , Thorpe & Porter began a second series that lasted until 1954 , and totalled 32 issues . The Ziff @-@ Davis issue and the first 24 issues from Thorpe & Porter were pulp @-@ sized ; the last eight were digests . The Thorpe & Porter issues were undated , but the pulp issues were numbered from 1 to 24 , and were initially bimonthly . The March 1951 issue was followed by April and November , however , and in 1952 issues appeared in February , March , April , June , July , September and November . 1953 saw nine pulp issues , omitting only March and May ; and with December came the change to digest @-@ size and a perfectly regular bimonthly schedule that lasted until February 1955 . These last eight issues were numbered volume 1 , numbers 1 to 8 . There was also a Canadian edition , which lasted for 24 issues , from September 1933 to August 1935 , from Teck Publications ; these were identical to the US editions except that the front covers were overprinted with " Printed in Canada on Canadian Paper " . A Japanese edition ran for seven issues in mid @-@ 1950 , selecting stories from Fantastic Adventures as well as from Amazing . 
 From 1940 to 1943 , and again from 1947 to 1951 , copies of Amazing Stories were rebound , three at a time , and resold as Amazing Stories Quarterly . A total of 27 of these issues appeared ; they should not be confused with the magazine of the same name which ran from 1928 to 1934 as a companion to Amazing Stories . 
 Several anthologies of stories from Amazing have been published , including : 
 = = = Media crossovers = = = 
 Director Steven Spielberg licensed the title for use on an American television show called Amazing Stories that ran from 1985 to 1987 . Between 1998 and 2000 , Amazing Stories published a series of short stories based upon the Star Trek franchise . In 2002 , these stories were reissued by Pocket Books in the collection Star Trek : The Amazing Stories . 
 = Ennis Whitehead = 
 Ennis Clement Whitehead ( 3 September 1895 – 12 October 1964 ) was an early United States Army aviator and a United States Army Air Forces general during World War II . Whitehead joined the U. S. Army after the United States entered World War I in 1917 . He trained as an aviator and served in France , where he was posted to the 3d Aviation Instruction Center and became a qualified test pilot . After the war , Whitehead returned to school at the University of Kansas . After he graduated , he was commissioned as a first lieutenant in 1920 . 
 Over the following twenty years , Whitehead participated in Billy Mitchell 's aerial bombing demonstration and served as commander of the 94th and 36th Pursuit Squadrons among other assignments . After the U.S. entered World War II , Whitehead was promoted to brigadier general and sent to the Southwest Pacific Area . In the course of the war , he earned a Distinguished Service Cross and was named an honorary Commander of the Order of the British Empire as he rose to command the Fifth Air Force . 
 After the war , he commanded the Far East Air Forces , the Continental Air Command , and the Air Defense Command . He retired in 1951 after he was passed over for Vice Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force . Both his son , Ennis Whitehead , Jr . , and his grandson , Ennis Whitehead III , became generals as well , rising to major general and brigadier general respectively . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Whitehead was born on a farm near Westphalia , Kansas , on 3 September 1895 , the eldest of three children of J. E. Whitehead , a farmer , and his wife Celia . He was educated at Glenwood District School and Burlington High School . In 1914 , he entered the University of Kansas , intending to obtain a law degree . 
 = = World War I = = 
 His plans were changed by the United States ' entry into World War I during April 1917 . Whitehead enlisted on 16 August 1917 as a private in the Aviation Section , Signal Enlisted Reserve Corps at Fort Riley , Kansas . On 10 February 1918 he became an aviation cadet , training at a wartime Army School of Military Aeronautics at the University of Illinois at Urbana @-@ Champaign and at an Air Service flight school at Chanute Field , Illinois . He qualified for a rating of " Reserve Military Aviator " on 19 October 1917 and was commissioned a first lieutenant , Signal Officer Reserve Corps . He sailed for France on 14 November 1917 . There , he was posted to the 3rd Aviation Instruction Center at Issoudun for more training . He attended gunnery school at Bordeaux and became a test pilot . He spent the rest of the war as a test pilot . 
 = = Between the wars = = 
 Whitehead was demobilized from the Army in January 1919 , and returned to the University of Kansas , earning a Bachelor of Engineering degree in 1920 . After graduation , he took a job with The Wichita Eagle as a reporter in order to earn enough money for law school . In the end though , he decided that he preferred flying . He applied for a commission in the Regular Army , and was re @-@ commissioned as a first lieutenant in the Air Service , on 11 September 1920 . On 25 September 1920 , he married Mary Nicholson , whom he had known while at the University of Kansas . They had two children : a daughter , Margaret , born in 1921 , who later became a lieutenant in the United States Air Force , and a son , Ennis C. Whitehead , Jr . , who was born in 1926 and graduated from West Point in 1948 . 
 Whitehead was initially stationed at March Field , where he served as a flying instructor . In 1921 , he was transferred to Kelly Field where he assumed command of the 94th Pursuit Squadron of the 1st Pursuit Group . On 20 July 1921 , he participated in Brigadier General Billy Mitchell 's demonstration bombing attack of the ex @-@ German dreadnought Ostfriesland . The 1st Pursuit Group moved to Selfridge Field , Michigan in July 1922 . In 1926 , Whitehead attended the Air Service Engineering School at McCook Field , graduating first in his class . 
 In December 1926 , Whitehead was assigned as the co @-@ pilot for Major Herbert A. Dargue , leading the 22 @,@ 000 @-@ mile ( 35 @,@ 000 km ) Pan American Good Will Flight touring South America . During a landing at Buenos Aires in March 1927 , their aircraft , a Loening OA @-@ 1A float plane nicknamed New York , was involved in a mid @-@ air collision with the Detroit , another OA @-@ 1A , forcing both Dargue and Whitehead to bail out . Whitehead suffered only a sprained ankle , but the pilot and co @-@ pilot of the Detroit were killed . The remaining four planes of the flight completed the tour , for which all ten airmen including Whitehead received the first awards of the Distinguished Flying Cross . 
 After three years as an engineering officer with the Air Corps Materiel Division at Wright Field , Ohio , he attended the Air Corps Tactical School at Langley Field from September 1930 to June 1931 . While there , he was promoted to captain . Returning to the 1st Pursuit Group , he took command of the 36th Pursuit Squadron . He did staff duty tours at <unk> Field , Panama Canal Zone with the 16th Pursuit Group , at Barksdale Field with the 20th Pursuit Group , and at the headquarters of the General Headquarters ( GHQ ) Air Force at Langley Field . He was promoted to temporary major in April 1935 and attended the Command and General Staff School at Fort Leavenworth in 1938 . 
 = = World War II = = 
 On graduation from the Command and General Staff School , Whitehead was posted to the G @-@ 2 ( Intelligence ) Division of the War Department . He was promoted to lieutenant colonel on 3 December 1940 . In February 1941 , he was transferred to Luke Field , a new training base , where he was promoted to colonel on 5 January 1942 . 
 In May 1942 , Lieutenant General George Brett , the Allied Air Forces commander in the South West Pacific Area ( SWPA ) , lodged a request with Lieutenant General Henry H. Arnold , the Commanding General of the U.S. Army Air Forces , for Whitehead to be sent out in the grade of brigadier general as a replacement for Brigadier General Harold Huston George , who had been killed in an air crash near Darwin , Northern Territory on 29 April 1942 . Whitehead was promoted on 16 June 1942 and ordered to the Southwest Pacific . He flew there with Kenneth Walker , a bomber expert , who had also recently been promoted to brigadier general . Arriving in Australia on 11 July 1942 , Whitehead was shocked by the confusion and lack of organization he found . The next day , he reported to General Douglas MacArthur at GHQ SWPA in Melbourne ; the two men would get along well . MacArthur later praised Whitehead for his " masterful generalship ... brilliant judgement and inexhaustible energy " . 
 At this time , the stocks of the air force in SWPA were low . At the recent Battle of Milne Bay , a Japanese invasion force had managed to sail past all but a few RAAF P @-@ 40 Kittyhawk and Lockheed Hudson aircraft , suffering only limited damage . Opinion at MacArthur 's General Headquarters ( GHQ ) was that " the failure of the Air in this situation is deplorable ; it will encourage the enemy to attempt further landings , with the assurance of impunity " . Unable to provide MacArthur with what he most needed — more and better aircraft and the crews to man them — Arnold decided to replace Brett with Major General George C. Kenney . Arnold hoped that Kenney and the two newly minted brigadier generals could make the best use of what was available . Major General George Kenney arrived in the theater on 28 July . Kenney knew Whitehead well , having served with him at Issoudun , the Air Corps Tactical School and GHQ Air Force , and had also served with Walker at the Air Corps Tactical School . " I had known them both for over twenty years , " Kenney later wrote . " They had brains , leadership , loyalty , and liked to work . If Brett had had them about three months earlier his luck might have been a lot better . " 
 Kenney assumed command of the Allied Air Forces on 4 August . Three days later , he instituted a sweeping reorganization of the Allied Air Forces . The Australian components were assigned to RAAF Command under Air Vice Marshal William Bostock , while the American components were consolidated into the reformed Fifth Air Force under Kenney 's personal command . On paper , the organization followed the orthodox pattern , consisting of V Fighter Command under Brigadier General Paul Wurtsmith , V Bomber Command under Walker , and an Air Services Command under Major General Rush B. Lincoln . But Kenney realized that he would have to maintain his headquarters near MacArthur 's GHQ , which moved to Brisbane on 20 July , while the fighting was thousands of miles away in New Guinea , with the Fifth Air Force 's principal forward bases around Port Moresby . Moreover , Walker 's headquarters was in Townsville , as heavy and medium bombers were based there and only staged through Port Moresby . Accordingly , Kenney appointed Whitehead as deputy Fifth Air Force commander , and commander of the Advanced Echelon ( ADVON ) in Port Moresby . 
 In his first months in New Guinea , Whitehead concentrated on building up the infrastructure there . He obtained additional engineer units and construction equipment . New airfields were developed , along with roads , housing , taxiways and revetments to protect his aircraft from the frequent Japanese air raids . He also attempted to build up the morale and leadership of his units . These months coincided with the Kokoda Track campaign . For a time , despite the efforts of his airmen and the ground troops , the Japanese advanced steadily on Port Moresby , but they ultimately turned back short of it . For his part in the Papuan campaign , Whitehead was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross . The Australian government made him an honorary Commander of the Order of the British Empire . 
 Building up Allied air power required ingenuity , improvisation , and innovation . Skip bombing was a new tactic adopted by the Fifth Air Force that enabled its bombers to attack ships at low level . The parachute fragmentation ( <unk> ) bomb gave the light bombers increased accuracy for close air support missions . Although the B @-@ 25 Mitchell was originally designed to bomb from medium altitudes in level flight , Major Paul " Pappy " Gunn had additional guns installed in the nose of the aircraft to enable it to perform in a low @-@ level strafing role . Whitehead consistently gave his full support to such innovations . 
 At the Battle of the Bismarck Sea in March 1943 , Whitehead was rewarded with an important victory over the Japanese . The battle caused the Japanese to abandon all further attempts to bring supplies and reinforcements in to Lae by the direct sea route from Rabaul . Whitehead was promoted to major general on 15 March 1943 . 
 Whitehead 's attitude earned him high marks with the Allied land commanders . Lieutenant General Sir Iven Mackay , commander of New Guinea Force , reported on 4 February 1943 that " I have found Brigadier General Whitehead of the USAAF extremely cooperative . In fact there is no question of asking for help — he takes the initiative . " 
 As the Allied offensive gained steam , Whitehead 's main task was to shift his aircraft forward , advancing the bomb line incrementally towards Japan . When the P @-@ 38 Lightning arrived in the theater in late 1942 , Whitehead at last received a fighter that could match the Japanese A6M Zero . To speed up the Allied advance , the Fifth Air Force developed a number of technical and tactical innovations that extended the range of its aircraft , thus increasing the distance of each Allied advance , which was dependent on the range of Whitehead 's aircraft . 
 Whitehead assumed command of the Fifth Air Force in June 1944 , although he remained subordinate to Kenney . In the Battle of Leyte , MacArthur attempted to move forward beyond the range of land @-@ based aircraft . A long battle of attrition then began on the ground and in the air , as the Fifth Air Force struggled to gain the upper hand with inadequate numbers of aircraft that could be based on Leyte . Gradually , Whitehead gained the upper hand . He was promoted to lieutenant general on 5 June 1945 . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 Whitehead continued in command of the Fifth Air Force , participating in the occupation of Japan . He succeeded Kenney as commander of the Far East Air Forces in December 1945 . He commanded it until March 1949 , when he returned to the United States to command the Continental Air Command . Whitehead was instrumental in splitting this organization into the Tactical Air Command and Air Defense Command , commanding the latter from January 1951 . He was seen by some in the Air Force hierarchy as " too attached to Kenney and MacArthur , too political , too outspoken , and too tactically focused " to be Vice Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force . Whitehead was dismayed by the appointment of Hoyt Vandenberg rather than Kenney as Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force in 1948 and lost his mentor when the new chief relieved Kenney as commander of Strategic Air Command in October 1948 . Whitehead was also disappointed at not receiving a fourth star . These feelings , combined with ill health , caused him to retire on 31 July 1951 . 
 In retirement , Whitehead testified before the United States Senate 's Preparedness Subcommittee on the State of the Nation 's Air Defenses . He pleaded for the fastest possible creation of an air force with an atomic " strike force " ready to take off on retaliatory raids within a few hours of an attack on the United States , enough transports to service the strike force at overseas bases , fighters to escort the bombers on their missions , and at least 30 wings of all @-@ weather jet fighters to intercept enemy bombers . He urged that , until this was achieved , the Army and Navy should be cut back to " token " appropriations . Whitehead pointed out that the United States mainland was defended against atomic attack by fewer than 100 all @-@ weather fighters , which could not have destroyed more than 10 to 15 percent of a force attacking in daylight . At night , or during instrument meteorological conditions , interceptors would have shot down less than 5 percent . He argued that a well @-@ executed surprise atomic air attack would likely succeed . 
 He died of emphysema in Newton , Kansas , on 12 October 1964 , and was buried in Arlington Cemetery . His son , Ennis Whitehead , Jr . , later became a major general in the U.S. Army in the late 1970s , and in March 2003 , his grandson Ennis Whitehead III was promoted to brigadier general in the Army Reserve , making three generations of general officers . 
 = Beiyue Temple = 
 Beiyue Temple ( Chinese : <unk> ) is a Daoist temple located in Quyang , Hebei Province , China . The temple was used to make sacrifices to Mount Heng by the emperors of the Song Dynasty while the mountain was occupied by the Liao Dynasty . The Dening Hall of the temple is the largest , earliest and one of the most important extant wooden buildings built in the Yuan Dynasty . The temple also contains three gates , an octagonal pavilion and many ancient stelae . 
 = = History = = 
 The Beiyue Temple was first established either during the Northern Wei Dynasty ( 386 @-@ 584 ) or the Tang Dynasty ( 618 @-@ 907 ) , but the site may have been in use as early as the 2nd century BCE of the Han Dynasty . The temple has been rebuilt twice , first in 991 after having been destroyed by the Khitan during the 950s , and then in 1270 . According to a surviving image of the temple dating from a local history of Quyang written in 1672 , the temple had by this time achieved its present layout . 
 During the Song Dynasty , Beiyue Temple was used as an alternate site to make sacrifices to the Northern Peak , Mount Heng , one of the sacred mountains of Daoism . During this time , Mount Heng was controlled by the Liao Dynasty ( 916 @-@ 1125 ) . In order to maintain political legitimacy and receive Daoist support , Beiyue Temple was chosen by the Song Emperor as the location to make sacrifices to <unk> . Even though the mountain was not controlled by the Song , they believed that a ' geomantic vein ' that would direct their sacrifices could be cut through enemy @-@ controlled territory and reach it . 
 = = Architecture = = 
 The Beiyue temple is laid out on a north @-@ south axis featuring six extant buildings . From south to north , the buildings are : a gate , an octagonal building called the Tianyi Pavilion ( <unk> ) that was built during the Ming Dynasty , two more gates , and the Dening Hall ( <unk> ) . A large platform in front of the Dening Hall now features the remains of stone sculptures , but was formerly the site of another hall . According to signs at the temple , many of the buildings were rebuilt in the late 20th century . 
 The wall surrounding the temple was formerly part of a city wall that surrounded Quyang . The south gate of the temple once served as one of the main gates for the town . Apart from the remnant that is part of the temple , nothing more survives of this wall . The temple grounds are also home to over 137 stelae , dating from the Northern Wei Dynasty to the Qing Dynasty . 
 = = = Dening Hall = = = 
 The Dening Hall is the main hall of the temple , and was built in 1270 during the Yuan Dynasty . The hall is fronted by a massive platform known as a yuetai ( 月台 , literally moon platform ) , which measures 25 by 20 meters . Built on a very high platform itself , the Dening Hall can be accessed by either a center front staircases or one of two side staircases attached to the yuetai . <unk> the perimeter of the platform is a white marble balustrade capped by lions . The hall itself measures seven by four bays and is surrounded by a covered arcade . According to the Yingzao Fashi , a Song Dynasty architectural treatise , the Dening Hall has 6th <unk> type column bracketing to support its roof . This type of bracketing has three transverse and three horizontal bracket arms . The 6th <unk> brackets are the most complex that survive from the Yuan Dynasty . Based on the complex bracketing , the marble balustrade and the height of the platform , Steinhardt identifies the Dening Hall as one of the two most eminent and important extant wooden halls that date from the Yuan period . These characteristics also closely match descriptions of the architecture at the capital , meaning that Dening Hall is representative of the architecture at the Yuan dynasty capital of Dadu ( currently Beijing ) . 
 The Dening Hall has Daoist murals painted on three of its walls . The western wall 's mural , said to have been painted in the Tang Dynasty , measures 17 by 7 meters and features a local water deity with a winged being at the top . With similar dimensions to the western mural , the eastern mural portrays the Dragon King . The hall contains nine statues , all dating from a more recent period than the hall . 
 = Spruce Production Division = 
 The Spruce Production Division was a unit of the United States Army that was established in 1917 to produce high @-@ quality Sitka spruce timber and other wood products needed to make aircraft for the United States ' efforts in World War I. The division was part of the Army Signal Corps 's Aviation Section . Its headquarters were in Portland , Oregon , and its main operations center was at Vancouver Barracks in Vancouver , Washington . Workers in the division were members of the Loyal Legion of Loggers and Lumbermen , a union specifically established to support the army 's wood production operations . 
 The division produced nearly 150 million board feet ( 350 @,@ 000 m3 ) of spruce in just 15 months , halting work almost as soon as the war ended . Col. Brice Disque was then put on trial for accusations that he had wasted millions of tax dollars . He was found not guilty of malfeasance . 
 The division had a large impact on logging in the Pacific Northwest . Logging companies adopted working conditions similar to those the division had , and they took advantage of new logging roads and rail lines that the division had built to access more timber . 
 = = Activation = = 
 From the beginning of World War I , wood products were in great demand for war production . Sitka spruce was the most important tree species because its combination of lightness , strength , and resiliency was ideal for aircraft production . In addition , its long , tough fibers did not splinter when struck by bullets . Even before the United States entered the war , the Pacific Northwest had become the main supplier of spruce for aircraft production in Great Britain , France , and Italy . Northwest lumber mills , however , were never able to meet Europe 's demand for spruce . The government wanted a monthly production of 10 million board feet ( 24 @,@ 000 m3 ) of spruce , but before the division was activated , only 2 million board feet ( 4 @,@ 700 m3 ) were produced monthly . 
 When the United States entered the war in 1917 , General John J. Pershing sent Brice P. Disque , a former army captain , to the Pacific Northwest to determine if local labor issues within the forest products industry could be quickly resolved . Disque met with mill owners and representatives of the Industrial Workers of the World , the union that was trying to organize loggers and sawmill workers in the Pacific Northwest . After studying the situation for several months , Disque determined that the long @-@ standing labor management dispute could not be resolved without direct intervention by the army . Based on Disque 's report , the United States Army Signal Corps was given the job of reorganizing the forest products industry in the Pacific Northwest to support United States war production . 
 On 29 September 1917 , Disque was brought back into the army as a lieutenant colonel and was assigned to develop plans for an army unit to produce wood products for the war effort . On 6 November , Disque was promoted to colonel and given command of the newly formed Spruce Production Division , a part of the United States Army Signal Corps . The headquarters of the new unit were in Downtown Portland , which was " the centre of the great spruce area of the Pacific Northwest , " while the division 's induction , training , and operations center was established at Vancouver Barracks across the Columbia River in Vancouver , Washington , where it employed about 19 @,@ 000 soldiers . 
 = = Production = = 
 Originally , the Spruce Production Division was authorized to induct 10 @,@ 317 troops , including both officers and enlisted men . The Spruce Production Division quickly recruited several thousand experienced loggers and mill workers , many of whom were above the military draft age of 40 . In May 1918 , the division was authorized to grow to 28 @,@ 825 personnel . 
 Initially , both the mill owners and local unions were against the army 's takeover of lumber production . The mill owners disliked having the army overseeing their businesses , and the unions saw soldiers ' labor as a form of <unk> . Disque , however , called on everyone to support war production . He was also careful not to favor either owners or unions as he increased production , helping both sides achieve their goals . For the mill owners , military manpower kept mills open and running at full capacity ; in addition , it prevented radicals from sabotaging facilities or equipment . The unions benefited because military rules stabilized wages and improved working conditions for loggers and sawmill workers throughout the Pacific Northwest . Among the improved conditions was a standard eight @-@ hour day . 
 To counter the influence of union radicals in the Industrial Workers of the World , Disque sponsored an alternative union based on patriotism and labor – management cooperation . The new union , the Loyal Legion of Loggers and Lumbermen , was established in 1917 and put under the leadership of Portland attorney Captain Maurice E. <unk> , who would later serve as a U.S. Congressman . The union was initially opposed by both labor and mill owners , but due to Disque 's strong advocacy , within six months nearly all of the mill owners had agreed to support the union ; by October 1918 , it had 125 @,@ 000 members . In fact , the union lasted 20 years longer than the Spruce Production Division . 
 The Spruce Production Division established approximately 60 military logging camps throughout the Pacific Northwest , usually near existing sawmills . While privately owned , these mills were operated under the direction of the army . On 20 December 1917 , Disque reported that the division was only meeting 40 percent of the demand for spruce . He said that the production must be increased from 3 million board feet ( 7 @,@ 100 m3 ) to 11 million board feet ( 26 @,@ 000 m3 ) to meet the demand . In early 1918 , the division opened a sawmill at Vancouver Barracks , the largest spruce sawmill in the world , " producing more than one million feet of spruce lumber each day . " The mill complex covered 50 acres ( 20 ha ) and was operated by 2 @,@ 400 soldiers from the division . The army also built sawmills in Coquille and Toledo , Oregon , and in Port Angeles , Washington . A 3 @,@ 000 @-@ worker community in Washington was designed as a company town by architect Carl F. Gould . The 0 @.@ 5 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 3 km2 ) townsite was laid out with bunkhouses , and with dining and recreation halls styled after Adirondack lodges . The division also built 13 railroads with over 130 miles ( 210 km ) of track to link logging areas to sawmills . At the peak of construction , there were 10 @,@ 000 soldiers building railroads in Oregon and Washington forests . All wire rope manufactured in the west , as well as anything shipped in , was controlled by the spruce division per Colonel Disque . As the Los Angeles Times reported in February 1918 , " There was a serious shortage of wire rope when Col. Disque took charge of the spruce production campaign . " 
 The division lasted only 15 months , during which it produced a total of 143 @,@ 008 @,@ 961 board feet ( 337 @,@ 463 @.@ 57 m3 ) of spruce . It produced nearly 54 million board feet ( 130 @,@ 000 m3 ) for aircraft construction from Oregon forests alone . Before the Pacific Northwest began logging spruce for the war , much of the lumber came from the eastern United States , where production amounted to just 15 percent of demand . Logging techniques in the east were not as advanced or as efficient with wood . 
 The network of roads and railroads that the division had built allowed for future development of the forests , which facilitated the growth of the lumber industry in the Pacific Northwest for the remainder of the 20th century . 
 = = Demobilization = = 
 The armistice that ended World War I was signed on 11 November 1918 . The next day , all Spruce Production Division logging ended , most construction projects were stopped , and sawmill operations were curtailed . Government machinery and equipment from all over the Northwest was shipped back to Vancouver Barracks , and division personnel were quickly discharged from military service . Over $ 12 million worth of logging equipment , sawmill machinery , and other property was eventually sold in a government auction . 
 While the Spruce Production Division was quickly demobilized after the war , there was some post @-@ war controversy over the cost of its operations . Disque , by then a brigadier general , spent months answering to charges that his division had wasted taxpayers ' money . Congress was particularly critical of the $ 4 million spent on an unfinished railroad located in the Olympic Peninsula of Washington . Disque responded that it was to be used for transporting spruce lumber . Eventually , the charges proved to be unfounded . 
 Disque was discharged from the army in March 1919 to be " appointed chairman of the export and import branch of the American International Corporation with headquarters at New York . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Lt. Col. Cuthbert Stearns compiled a history of the Spruce Production Division , The Spruce Production Division , United States Army and Spruce Production Corporation , that was published in 1919 . This detailed record of the division 's operations helped General Disque defend the cost of spruce production in his debate with members of Congress . The U.S. National Archives in Seattle holds approximately 187 cubic feet ( 5 @.@ 3 m3 ) of records related to the division , as well as " a complete roster of all military personnel in the Spruce Production Division as of 1 November 1918 . " 
 The effects of the Spruce Production Division continued long after the unit was demobilized . Not only did the division dramatically increase the production of forest products for the war effort , but the transportation network that it built helped open up Pacific Northwest forests to greater use in the decades that followed . In addition , the division 's work rules became the standard for logging and sawmill operations throughout the Pacific Northwest well into the 1930s . 
 = Adrian S. Fisher = 
 Adrian Sanford Fisher ( January 21 , 1914 – March 18 , 1983 ) was an American lawyer and federal public servant , who served from the late 1930s through the early 1980s . He was associated with the Department of War and Department of State throughout his professional career . He participated in the U.S. government 's decision to carry out Japanese @-@ American internment and the international ( 1945 – 46 ) Nuremberg trial , and in State Department Cold War activities during the Harry S. Truman administration . He was the State Department Legal Adviser under Secretary of State Dean Acheson . During the John F. Kennedy , Lyndon B. Johnson and Jimmy Carter administrations , Fisher was directly involved in the negotiations of international nuclear testing and non @-@ proliferation agreements . 
 = = Early life and early government career = = 
 Fisher was born in Memphis , Tennessee , to Hubert Fisher and Louise Sanford Fisher . He attended elite schools such as Saint Albans and Choate , Princeton University ( BA 1934 ) and Harvard Law School ( LLB 1937 ) . Fisher was known throughout his life by his nickname " Butch " , from his early days as a football player for Princeton , lettering in 1933 . 
 In the late 1930s Fisher lived in Arlington , Virginia , in an estate known by the name of Hockley Hall . This house was a semi @-@ famous " bachelor 's house , " with rooms rented by Fisher and various housemates such as William Bundy , William Sheldon , John Ferguson , John Oakes , Donald Hiss , Edward Prichard , Jr. and Philip Graham . Also , Hockley Hall was known as a social venue for the likes of Dean Acheson , Archibald MacLeish and Francis Biddle . 
 Fisher was admitted to the Tennessee Bar in 1938 , and had the distinction of clerking for two U.S. Supreme Court Justices , Louis Brandeis ( 1938 – 39 ) and Felix Frankfurter ( 1939 – 40 ) . Fisher began his legal career with his appointment as Law Clerk to Supreme Court Justice Louis Brandeis , who was then 82 years old . In early 1939 , Brandeis announced his retirement from the Supreme Court , and Fisher was invited to transfer to the chambers of the recently appointed Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter . Following his term as Frankfurter 's clerk in 1940 , Fisher joined the United States Department of State as the assistant chief of the Foreign Funds Control Division of the State Department , where he served until shortly after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor . 
 = = World War II government and military service = = 
 In early 1942 , Fisher and John J. McCloy were assigned to assist implementation of the United States War Department 's legal activities for the Japanese American internment programs shortly after the United States entered World War II . In late 1942 , Fisher received an officer 's commission , and trained as a bomber navigator in the United States Army Air Forces from 1942 to 1943 , with missions over France , Belgium and Germany . In 1944 , he returned to Washington , D.C. as an assistant to the Assistant Secretary of War , John J. McCloy . 
 = = = Korematsu Supreme Court Case = = = 
 In 1944 , Fisher again was required to become involved in the U.S. 1942 @-@ 43 internment of Japanese Americans on the West Coast of the United States upon his return from Europe . At that time , the case of Korematsu v. United States , challenging the U.S. government ’ s power to exclude citizens of Japanese ancestry from military zones , came before the United States Supreme Court . While the Department of Justice 's Herbert Wechsler ( an Assistant Attorney General ) was in charge of defending the government 's position before the Supreme Court , significant consultation with Fisher was required , as he was again with the legal affairs section of the War Department . During this period , Fisher was involved in critical drafting of the government 's brief submitted to the Supreme Court . 
 = = = Nuremberg international trial = = = 
 In 1945 and 1946 , Captain Fisher served , along with James Rowe , as a legal advisor to former U.S. Attorney General Francis Biddle , the United States member of the International Military Tribunal ( Nuremberg Trial ) . Fisher was principal drafter of the Tribunal 's memorandum on the Nazi leadership 's " conspiracies to engage in crimes against peace . " This document , covering the period from 1920 to November 1937 , demonstrated that the pace of re @-@ armament under Adolf Hitler showed that the Germans " were developing an economic system which was only sensible only if there should be a war . " 
 = = Return to Washington , D.C. and service with Dean Acheson = = 
 Upon his return from Europe and exit from the Army Air Force , Fisher served as Solicitor for the U.S. Department of Commerce from 1947 to 1948 . Thereafter , Fisher became general counsel of the Atomic Energy Commission from 1948 @-@ 49 . He then served as legal advisor ( with the rank of Assistant Secretary of State ) to the Department of State ( serving in the office of Secretary of State Dean Acheson ) from 1949 to 1953 . During 1952 , Mr. Fisher also served as legal advisor to the U.S. Delegation to the United Nations in Paris . 
 In 1952 , Fisher was also appointed by President Harry S. Truman as an original commissioner to the President 's Commission on Immigration and Naturalization . The Commission was established in the Executive Office of the President by Executive Order 10392 " Establishing the President 's Commission on Immigration and Naturalization " . The specific context for the 1952 commission was the enactment of the <unk> @-@ Walter Act , which was passed over President Truman 's veto . Truman 's main disagreement with the Act was its retention of the quota system that began in 1924 . After Congress passed the Act over his veto , he formed the Commission and charged it with looking into new options for immigration and naturalization policy . 
 Secretary of State Acheson 's appointment of Fisher as the State Department 's Legal Adviser was unique at the time , because of the closeness of the Acheson / Fisher professional relationship . Fisher 's role as Acheson 's legal adviser was explained by Michael H. <unk> , the State Department 's Assistant Legal Adviser for Economic Affairs , 1950 @-@ 52 : 
 ( Acheson ) insisted on having , as a legal adviser , a lawyer whose ability as a lawyer and whose judgment in politics and statesmanship could be greatly respected . He got Adrian Fisher for that , and he involved him in all of the political and other activities that he himself was involved in . The Secretary of State always is involved in a lot of controversial things , and here we had the McCarthy era , the attack on the whole concept of Foreign Service and the State Department , and a terrific controversy over what to do about China , who had " lost China . " Fisher was always at Acheson 's right hand when he was dealing with other people about these things . Wherever he went , Fisher 's office was backstopping him , getting all the necessary background information so he 'd be prepared for any kind of question that came up . Of course , Acheson 's own approach to being Secretary of State was such that when you took an agreement to him to be signed , his chief question was " By what authority do I sign this ? " And whoever brought it to him to get it signed , had to be ready with the answer that would satisfy a lawyer -- " by what legal authority " -- as well as what it provides and so forth . 
 = = = Building the H @-@ bomb = = = 
 In late 1949 , President Truman asked Dean Acheson to concentrate on the question of whether the United States should develop the hydrogen bomb . Acheson formed a working group under the United States National Security Council ( NSC ) executive secretary Sidney Souers , consisting of R. Gordon Arneson , Paul Nitze and Fisher , who served as the State Department 's legal adviser on the project . It was Arneson 's view that each member of the working group were of one mind . He said , " The four principals in the State Department were Acheson , Nitze , Fisher and myself . I don 't think it was necessary for any one of us to persuade anybody else ; we all were of a mind that there really wasn 't any choice . " 
 Fisher was part of this same working group which recommended that an internal NSC study be conducted on the overall U.S. foreign policy as it pertained to the newly developing Cold War . This classified study ( declassified in 1977 ) called NSC @-@ 68 , was the blueprint for the Truman Doctrine for containment of communism , which provided the overall policy concepts for the U.S. participation in the Cold War throughout the 1950s . 
 = = = Congressional Hearings on the firing of General Douglas MacArthur = = = 
 On April 11 , 1951 , President Truman announced the dismissal of General Douglas MacArthur from his duties as Allied Commander of United Nations forces in the Far East . Following MacArthur 's firing and the subsequent public outcry , the Joint Committee on Armed Services and Foreign Relations of the United States Senate conducted an inquiry into removal of MacArthur . Fisher was assigned the responsibility for the coordination of the State Department Congressional testimony regarding the firing of General MacArthur . 
 = = = Fisher and the Acheson Capitol Hill fist @-@ fight = = = 
 In August 1950 , Fisher was involved in an incident between Secretary of State Dean Acheson and Senator Kenneth S. Wherry , Nebraska Republican and minority whip of the United States Senate , during a hearing before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee . During the hearing , Senator Wherry began to harangue Acheson about events in Korea . Suddenly , Acheson jumped out of his chair towards Wherry , with fists raised . Fisher was required to physically hold Acheson back from striking Wherry . As the incident was told by eye @-@ witness John H. Ohly , then the Assistant Director , Office of International Security Affairs , Department of State , 
 " The next day the administration threw in its big guns -- Secretary Acheson , Louis Johnson , and , from ECA , William Foster . This time the going was really rough from the Republican side of the table and Acheson consciously lost his temper over some of Wherry 's remarks and got up and tried to slug him . Adrian Fisher , State Department Legal Adviser and a close friend of Acheson , caught his arm , fortunately , because Acheson would have missed Wherry by about three feet and probably fallen flat on his face on the floor . It was a great show . " 
 This scene was portrayed in the film " The Manchurian Candidate " , with Frank Sinatra ( as Major Marco ) taking on Fisher 's role of restraining ( in that instance ) the United States Secretary of Defense . 
 = = Nuclear arms control and disarmament activities = = 
 From 1961 to 1968 , Fisher served as the Deputy Director of the U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency in which he took a primary negotiations role during the Atomic Test Ban Treaty of 1963 between the U.S. and the Soviet Union . At that time he was Deputy to John J. McCloy , Adviser to the President on Disarmament . In 1968 , Fisher served as one of the chief U.S. negotiators of the Nuclear Non @-@ Proliferation Treaty , which was signed by the United States , the United Kingdom , the Soviet Union , and 59 other countries on July 1 , 1968 . A collection of letters from Adrian Fisher to President Johnson and Secretary of State Dean Rusk regarding his perception and activities on arms control and disarmament is maintained by the Federation of American Scientists . 
 = = Return to private law practice and academics = = 
 In 1968 , Fisher re @-@ entered private law practice , again with Covington & Burling ( during the Dwight D. Eisenhower Administration ( 1953 – 60 ) Fisher joined the Covington firm , with Dean Acheson , for the first time ) and became General Counsel to the Washington Post . Fisher 's connection with the Washington Post arose because of his close friendship with the Post 's then @-@ owner Phillip Graham since his early days in Washington , D.C. Both Fisher and Graham had clerked for Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter and had shared a rented house ( belonging to future Secretary of State Dean Acheson ) , together with Donald Hiss ( brother of Alger Hiss ) . From 1969 to 1975 , Fisher served as Dean of Georgetown University Law Center , Washington , D.C. According to a report in the Georgetown student newspaper " The Hoya " , Fisher was not solicited as a candidate for the position , but simply submitted his own name . " I heard they were looking around for a new person , so I called up and asked to be considered . " Dean Fisher was installed as the first occupant of the Francis Cabell Brown Chair in International Law of the center on January 25 , 1977 , and served as law professor from 1977 to 1980 . 
 = = U.S. Disarmament Representative = = 
 President Jimmy Carter nominated Fisher for the rank of Ambassador while serving as the U.S. Representative to the Conference of the Committee on Disarmament in 1977 , where he served through 1981 . With the United States represented by Fisher , the first Special Session on Disarmament of the United Nations General Assembly was held in 1978 and led to the established in 1979 of the U.N. Conference on Disarmament as the single multilateral disarmament negotiating forum of the international community . 
 = = Return to academics = = 
 In 1981 , Fisher joined the faculty of George Mason University School of Law in Arlington , Virginia , teaching various seminars on negotiation tactics . The George Mason Law Review named its annual award for best student article in honor of Mr. Fisher . From 1981 to 1982 , Mr. Fisher also served as an advisor to John J. McCloy during the hearings of the Commission on Wartime Relocation and Internment of Civilians ( established by Congress in 1980 ) . This commission reviewed the impact of Executive Order 9066 on Japanese @-@ Americans and determined that they were the victims of discrimination by the Federal government . Fisher died on March 18 , 1983 , aged 69 , from cancer at his home in Washington , D.C. 
 = Leave Home = 
 Leave Home is the second studio album by American punk rock band the Ramones . It was released on January 10 , 1977 , through Sire Records , with the expanded CD being released through Rhino Entertainment on June 19 , 2001 . Songs on the album were written immediately after the band 's first album 's writing process , which demonstrated the band 's progression . The album had a higher production value than their debut Ramones and featured faster tempos . The front photo was taken by Moshe Brakha and the back cover , which would become the band 's logo , was designed by Arturo Vega . The album spawned three singles , but only one succeeded in charting . It was also promoted with several tour dates in the United States and Europe . 
 The songs in Leave Home concentrate on various themes , with the musical tones being diverse as well . Some tunes were more pop @-@ oriented , while others , like " Gimme Gimme Shock Treatment " and " Pinhead " were loaded with distorted guitars and had a more punk rock sound . The song " Carbona Not Glue " was taken off the album because it potentially violated the trademark of the stain @-@ removal product Carbona . The track was replaced with " Babysitter " in the United Kingdom and " Sheena Is a Punk Rocker " in the United States ( prior to its inclusion on Rocket to Russia ) ; both " Carbona " and " Babysitter " were included on the 2001 expanded edition . 
 Critical reception for the album was generally favorable , with several reviewers pointing out the fact that it highly resembled the band 's debut album . Critics also said the album was less groundbreaking than their debut , but had humorous and enjoyable pieces . The album peaked at 148 on the Billboard 200 despite its critical acclaim as well as the band members expecting more commercial success . 
 = = Background = = 
 The writing and structure are both somewhat more sophisticated than the songs on their previous record . Guitarist Johnny Ramone relates : " We recorded them in the order they were written ; we wanted to show a slight progression in song structure . " Most of the songs were written in the band member 's homes , rather than at a studio ; " Suzy Is a Headbanger " was written in drummer Tommy Ramone 's loft apartment . 
 " I wrote most of the stuff I contributed at my apartment in Forest Hills , before I left and moved back to a place in the city . I had no amp at home , just an electric guitar . I recorded it onto a cassette and played that back at rehearsal . We had better production , we were playing a little faster , and we had a lot of songs accumulated . We were in really good shape for that album . " 
 Recorded October 1976 in New York City at <unk> Studios through Sire Records , Leave Home featured increased sound quality through more advanced output methods . Sire set their budget at about $ 10 @,@ 000 hiring Tony Bongiovi to produce the album , and Tommy Ramone to co @-@ produce . More emphasis was placed on the album 's mixing and engineering than their debut album , which received merely $ 6 @,@ 400 to record and produce . With a more fine @-@ tuned and exceptional sound , Leave Home also presented a production value superior to other punk rock bands at the time . Author Joe S. Harrington called the band 's production " brilliant , " and noted that it " put them ahead of the run @-@ of @-@ the @-@ mill garage band . " 
 The title Leave Home refers to the Ramones leaving New York City to go on tour around the world . The album cover was designed by Moshe Brakha , who had worked with the Rolling Stones to yield the Black and Blue ( 1976 ) cover art , and would later work with artists like Devo and Iron Maiden . The back cover of the album was a drawing of a bald eagle by graphic designer Arturo Vega . The image would soon become the band 's logo . 
 = = = Carbona controversy = = = 
 The original release included " Carbona Not Glue " as the fifth track . However , a month before the band released Leave Home , Ramones ' manager Danny Fields announced to the band that Carbona was a registered trademark and that their record label had to remove the song from the album 's track listing . Legs McNeil recalled : " I was shocked . It was such a great song , so radio @-@ friendly — like a song the Beatles or the Rolling Stones would have written if they were just starting out in 1976 , with great harmonies and catchy lyrics . " Although early purchasers of the Sire release got an album that included the song , " Carbona Not Glue " was later replaced by " Sheena Is a Punk Rocker " for the US release , and " Babysitter " for the UK release . In the early 90 's , after being unavailable for years , the song was bootlegged as a 45 RPM single with " I Can 't Be " as the B @-@ side . The single 's cover sported a faux Sub Pop Singles design , despite not actually being released by the label . The song was revived on the 2001 Extended Edition of the album , which also included " Babysitter " . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 There were three singles released from Leave Home : " I Remember You , " " Swallow My Pride , " and " Carbona Not Glue , " released respectively . " Swallow My Pride " was the only single from Leave Home that charted , peaking at thirty @-@ six on the United Kingdom singles chart . The album 's final single , " Carbona Not Glue " / " I Can 't Be , " was released in 1991 under Sub Pop Records . The single was given four out of five stars by Allmusic 's Matt Whalley , who said that the song " could have been one of the Ramones ' most popular tracks if it was not pulled from the album due to legal reasons . " Whalley called the B @-@ side " I Can 't Be " " simple , " describing it as " in the same vein as ' Carbona Not Glue , ' only shifting focus to relationships . " 
 After the album came out in February , the band began a four @-@ week tour of the United States starting with Los Angeles . On February 4 , the band played at the Nassau Coliseum with Blue Öyster Cult , and played with Suicide the next day at CBGB . A week after this , the band played with Blue Öyster Cult again in Poughkeepsie , to which Johnny relates : " Those arena shows were a little better for us , although we would have more bad experiences in those big places . I never really enjoyed playing them . " The band used their newly designed logo as a backdrop at concerts . They also had more advanced lighting techniques , but still only used white lights . 
 In April 1977 , the band left the United States to begin their tour of Europe . Ramones co @-@ headlined with Talking Heads , who were a new wave band formed in 1975 . During a Marseilles gig , the Ramones caused a power outage to a quarter of the city during a sound check . The gig was cancelled when police arrived and dispersed the fans . When their tour manager arranged for a stop at Stonehenge in Wiltshire , Johnny refused to leave the bus , saying he refused to see " a bunch of old rocks . " The band 's Europe tour came to an end on June 6 , 1977 . 
 = = Compositions = = 
 Leave Home has various lyrical themes throughout its track list . The opening song , " Glad to See You Go , " is rather uptempo and frenetic . The track was about Dee Dee 's then @-@ girlfriend Connie , who was well known in the punk rock scene , as had once dated New York Dolls bassist Arthur Kane and cut his finger off with a knife . Connie also harmed Dee Dee in several ways , such as slicing his buttocks with a beer bottle . At the time , every other member of the band despised Dee Dee 's girlfriend and he eventually broke up with her . Joey recalls : " Dee [ Dee ] and I came up with the song ' Glad to See You Go , ' about Connie 's leaving . " In the mid @-@ 1980s , Connie died from a drug overdose . " Gimme Gimme Shock Treatment " utilizes Joey 's singing abilities with its vocal @-@ demanding melody . Author Scott Schinder called the song a " sing @-@ along mental @-@ illness ode . " The next song , " I Remember You " was said by author Greil Marcus to be all about the moment where " Joey 's voice turns the single word " you " into pure poetry . " " Oh , Oh , I Love Her So " pays homage to the 1950s doo @-@ wop genre , and consists of a three @-@ chord barrage . The song was written solely by Joey , where in the song he humorously tells of how he met a girl at Burger King and they fell in love by a soda machine . 
 " Carbona Not Glue " was written as a follow @-@ up to " Now I Wanna Sniff Some Glue " from their debut album . The song was Legs McNeil 's favorite song from Leave Home , who relates : " [ The song ] was meant to clarify that while glue might not be good for you , the cleaning fluid Carbona was definitely a better high . " The song contemplates around Beach Boys harmonies , and it uses a " bouncy " guitar riffs . " Suzy Is a Headbanger " was inspired by the 1947 film noir Nightmare Alley , with the lyrics detailing a female involved in the punk rock scene . 
 The lines " Gabba Gabba Hey " at the end of " Pinhead " were taken from the horror film Freaks , which the band saw in Cleveland , Ohio after their gig was cancelled . Joey 's brother Mickey Leigh said that it was specifically taken from the scene where " the midget groom does a dance on the banquet table and sings ' Gobble gobble , we accept you , one of us ' to his bride . " The song is an audience participation song , and during live performances , Leigh appears on stage holding a sign that bore the text " Gabba Gabba Hey . " " Pinhead , " the album 's longest piece , leads into " Now I Wanna Be a Good Boy , " which portrays a confused adolescent wanting to be good , yet also yearning to run away from home . The next song on the album , " Swallow My Pride , " was a piece written solely by lead singer Joey Ramone , who states that the concept deals with their record company Sire Records ; Tommy used the expression " you gotta swallow your pride " when signing to their record company . " What 's Your Game " is one of the band 's most melodic songs and was called " wistful " by Marcus . It was written by Joey about how he yearns for a girl to be herself instead of something she 's not . 
 The album 's only cover song , " California Sun " , was originally written by Henry Glover and Morris Levy , and performed by The Rivieras . While the lyrics and musical structure remain the same throughout the piece , Joey 's pronunciation upon words significantly lessened the similarity to the original song . The sound output tone also differs from the original , with more distortion as well as a faster tempo . Author Steve Waksman relates : " From the opening bars , ' California Sun ' becomes subject to the Ramones ' distinctive brand of musical minimalism paired with sonic excess . The chords go by in a blur of distortion ; the drums and bass kick at seemingly twice the speed of the Rivieras . " The twelfth track " Commando " has a theme which deals with war movies and contains multiple military references . Author Avram Mednick said the song was a successor to " Blitzkrieg Bop " , released on the band 's debut album . He also noted that it has a " bouncy melody and an infectious call @-@ and @-@ response chorus . " " You 're Gonna Kill that Girl , " which was written very early in the band 's career , was also rooted in doo @-@ wop genre . Mednick commented that it appealed highly to those tuning into the Ramones in the UK , and also said it has a " lovely misogynistic tune . " The final guitar chord on the track is played by drummer Tommy since Johnny rarely played acoustic . The album 's final track , " You Should Never Have Opened That Door , " was written by Dee Dee and Johnny , and circles themes of horror film 's and hints that people in these movies tend to be naive and unintelligent . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical = = = 
 Leave Home was released on January 10 , 1977 and was well received by critics . Although the album did not receive much initial reception , Ken Tucker of Rolling Stone magazine gave the album a favorable review in 1977 , saying that it is very similar to their debut yet more experienced sounding . He sums up the album with : " The Ramones are as direct and witty as before . They 've also lost just a pinch of their studied rawness : whether this is a sign of maturity or sellout is a matter for debate . The Ramones make rousing music and damn good jokes , but they 're in a bind : the hard rock of this group is so pure it may be perceived as a freak novelty by an awful lot of people . " In the 1979 book The Rolling Stone Album Guide , the album was given 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars . 
 Stephen Thomas Erlewine , a music critic for AllMusic , gave the album 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars as well , noting that the album was very similar to their debut . Though he did consider it to be slightly more pop music oriented , Erlewine writes that despite being " weaker " than its <unk> album , Leave Home " deliver [ s ] at breakneck speed and conclude [ s ] in under a half @-@ hour . " April Long from NME praised the album , rewarding it a perfect score of 10 out of 10 . She especially favored " Sheena Is A Punk Rocker , " calling it " a punk @-@ surf @-@ pop crossover that has never been rivalled . " It was given a favorable review by PopMatters editor Adrien Begrand , who called it his favorite Ramones album , saying : " In this album , the Ramones are witty , menacing , goofy , cynical , and head @-@ over @-@ heels in love , all at the same time . " During his extensive review , he called " I Remember You " a " perfect bubblegum pop song , " while saying that " Pinhead " urges " all the freaks of the world to unite as one " with the lines " D @-@ U @-@ M @-@ B / Everyone 's accusing me . " Music critic Robert Christgau gave the album an A , noting that the lyrics contained a good amount of humor . 
 = = = Charts = = = 
 The album did not chart as well in the United States as its predecessor , peaking at number 148 on the Billboard 200 . It was , however , the band 's first album to chart on the UK Albums Chart , debuting at number 45 . Many of the songs on Leave Home were not considered by Mickey Leigh to be " radio – friendly " because " Carbona Not Glue " was about <unk> inhalant . Joey relates : " We thought we had a lotta songs that should 've been hits . If you grew up in the sixties , things would just get played and be hits right off the bat . So we thought since our music was doin ' something unique that everyone would pick up on that . What really happened was we were so alien that no one wanted to touch us . And so we wouldn 't get played " 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Writing credits are credited to Mickey Leigh 's book I Slept with Joey Ramone : A Family Memoir . 
 Original release 
 United States reissue 
 United Kingdom reissue 
 2001 Expanded Edition CD 
 Tracks 16 @-@ 31 recorded live at The Roxy in Hollywood , CA ( 8 / 12 / 76 ) . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 The following personnel can be verified with AllMusic . 
 Joey Ramone – Lead vocals 
 Johnny Ramone – Lead guitar 
 Dee Dee Ramone – Bass guitar , backing vocals 
 Tommy Ramone – drums , producer 
 Tony Bongiovi – producer 
 Ed Stasium – engineer 
 Greg Calbi – mastering 
 Moshe Brakha – front cover photography 
 Arturo Vega – back cover art 
 John Gillespie - art direction 
 Pat <unk> - design 
 = Burt Hummel = 
 Burt Hummel is a fictional character from the Fox musical comedy @-@ drama series Glee . The character is portrayed by actor Mike O 'Malley , and first appeared on Glee in the fourth episode of the first season , " Preggers " . Burt was developed by Glee creators Ryan Murphy , Brad Falchuk and Ian Brennan . He is the father of gay glee club member Kurt Hummel ( Chris Colfer ) , and works as a mechanic in Lima , Ohio where the series is set . He eventually begins a relationship with Carole Hudson ( Romy Rosemont ) , the mother of another glee club member , and the two marry in the second season episode " Furt " . In the third season , Burt runs in a special congressional election and wins . O 'Malley was a recurring cast member during the first season , and was upgraded to a series regular for the second season of the show , but returned to the recurring cast for the third season . 
 The character has been well received by critics . James Poniewozik of Time wrote , " the fact that Dad ( Mike O 'Malley , who has turned out to be a pretty good character actor ) ends up not being the boor we think he 's going to be is one of the first signs that Glee is growing up as a series , that having established a world of primary @-@ color stereotypes , it 's now willing to subvert those expectations . " IGN 's Robert Canning commented that the Hummels ' relationship is " the most affecting " of the show , and praised O 'Malley 's " outstandingly nuanced " performance as Burt . Murphy has said , " Mike 's talent is deep . I will always write for Mike O 'Malley . " O 'Malley was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor – Comedy Series in 2010 for his portrayal of Burt . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = Season 1 = = = 
 Burt first appears in " Preggers " , the show 's fourth episode . He catches his son Kurt dancing to Beyoncé Knowles 's " Single Ladies " , and Kurt claims that it is a football exercise , and that he is now a kicker on the William McKinley High football team . Fortunately for Kurt , fellow glee club member and football quarterback Finn Hudson ( Cory Monteith ) helps him get a tryout for the team , and he becomes its kicker in truth . Burt attends Kurt 's first game , and after a final @-@ second touchdown ties the game , Kurt kicks the extra point to win it . Buoyed by his success , Kurt comes out to his father . Burt tells him he knew all along Kurt was gay and loves him just as much . 
 When Kurt is upset at not being considered for the solo on " Defying Gravity " in the episode " Wheels " — the song , originally written for a female character in the musical Wicked , is initially given to Rachel ( Lea Michele ) — Burt complains to Principal Figgins ( Iqbal Theba ) that his son is being discriminated against , and Kurt is allowed to audition . Burt receives an anonymous abusive phone call about his son 's sexual orientation , and when Kurt sees how upset his father is , he deliberately sabotages his audition to spare Burt more pain . 
 Kurt sets up Burt with Finn 's widowed mother Carole ( Romy Rosemont ) in the episode " Home " , hoping it will help him become closer to Finn , who he has a crush on . The relationship has become serious before Finn finds out about it , and he is initially hostile to it , but begins to bond with Burt over sports when the two families go out to dinner . It is implied that Burt 's motivation to build a connection with Finn is more out of his knowledge that Finn never had a father to do things with , and not favoritism over his own son . However , Kurt feels left out , and later asks Finn to help him break up their parents . Finn initially agrees , but changes his mind after Burt tells him that he loves Carole and would never hurt her . In " Laryngitis " , Kurt feels increasingly jealous of how much time Burt is spending with Finn , so he attempts to emulate Burt 's personality to regain Burt 's attention . When Burt takes Finn to yet another event without including Kurt , a hurt and angry Kurt drops his emulation of his father and sings " Rose 's Turn " . Burt overhears his performance , praises Kurt 's singing and apologizes for not spending enough time with him . He assures Kurt that he still loves him and always will , no matter what his son chooses to be . 
 In the episode " Theatricality " , Burt invites Carole and Finn to move in with him and Kurt . Aware of Kurt 's attraction to him , Finn is uncomfortable with sharing a bedroom with Kurt . In the hopes of pleasing Finn , Kurt redecorates their bedroom , but Finn is appalled by its fancy appearance and lack of privacy . During the ensuing argument , when Kurt refuses to acknowledge his infatuation , Finn loses his temper and calls the new furnishings " faggy " . Burt overhears Finn 's homophobic words , delivers a stinging reprimand , and throws him out , even though doing so risks costing Burt his relationship with Carole . However , later on Burt is also disappointed with Kurt when he finds out from Carole that his ulterior motive for setting them up was so he could get closer to Finn , and that while he accepts him for being gay , doesn 't accept him going after a straight boy who he knows doesn 't feel the same way . 
 = = = Season 2 = = = 
 Burt suffers a heart attack brought on by a severe arrhythmia in the third episode of the second season , " Grilled Cheesus " , and is in a coma for several days before recovering consciousness . Kurt is at his bedside when he finally wakes , and takes charge of his father 's recovery once Burt is back home . The eighth episode , entitled " Furt " , opens with Burt and Carole telling their sons that they are engaged . Kurt insists that New Directions perform at the wedding and reception . At the wedding , New Directions perform " Marry You " by Bruno Mars as they , and then Burt and Carole , dance down the aisle . The couple marry , but use their honeymoon savings to transfer Kurt to Dalton Academy when a homophobic bully who has threatened Kurt 's life is allowed to resume attending McKinley High . 
 The Hummel and Hudson households combine subsequent to the marriage . After Kurt and his friend Blaine ( Darren Criss ) attend a party where Blaine gets drunk , Kurt drives them to his own house , and the two sleep , fully clothed , in Kurt 's bed . Burt discovers Blaine there in the morning , and later tells Kurt that this was inappropriate behavior . Kurt apologizes , but asks Burt to learn about homosexual relationships so if Kurt has questions , he can ask Burt like a boy would normally ask his father . As it turns out , Kurt is quite ignorant about sexual matters and refuses to educate himself ; this so alarms Blaine that he asks Burt to consider broaching the subject with Kurt , citing safety concerns . Burt subsequently gives Kurt " the talk " about sex . He later reluctantly agrees to Kurt 's return to McKinley High , and recommends that Kurt dress less flamboyantly for the McKinley junior prom , a suggestion endorsed by Kurt 's new boyfriend and date , Blaine . Their advice is rejected , and at the prom Kurt is appalled to discover that he has been named prom queen . 
 = = = Season 3 = = = 
 In the third season , Kurt 's senior year at McKinley , cheerleading coach Sue Sylvester ( Jane Lynch ) runs for Congress on a platform of <unk> the arts in schools . In " Pot o ' Gold " , she causes official funding for the school musical — which Kurt has been cast in — to be withdrawn , but Burt arranges for alternative funding from businesses in the community , and rescues the musical from cancellation . Burt decides to wage a write @-@ in campaign against Sue , who has built up a considerable lead against her rivals in the special congressional election , and makes clear his support for the arts . Sue wages a highly negative campaign , airing outrageous ads about Burt , but doing so ultimately backfires when another candidate in the race airs attack ads against her . Burt wins the election in " I Kissed a Girl " . After the election , he divides his time between Washington and Lima . He intervenes twice with his stepson Finn : first , to find out why Finn wants to enlist in the army , and again when Finn later becomes engaged to Rachel , in the hopes of causing the two to reconsider , or at least to delay their wedding plans . He and Kurt celebrate when the latter becomes a drama school finalist , and attends with Carole both the Regionals show choir competition and the graduation of their two sons . 
 = = = Season 4 = = = 
 In the first episode of the fourth season , Burt gives Kurt an emotional sendoff when his son leaves for New York City . Burt travels to New York to surprise Kurt at Christmas in " Glee , Actually " , bringing Blaine with him , and the three spend Christmas together . During his visit , Burt reveals that he has been diagnosed with prostate cancer , but his chances of survival are very high as the diagnosis was made early and treatment appears to have been successful . Several months later , his doctor confirms that he is cancer free . During the season finale , he is approached by Blaine who wants his permission to marry Kurt . Burt tells him that he while he does understand why he wants to get married , he believes that both Blaine and his son are too young to make that kind of step . 
 = = = Season 5 = = = 
 Burt drives Kurt to Blaine 's " secret " marriage proposal at Dalton Academy in the season premiere . Kurt , who is aware of the proposal , asks his father for advice on what he should do . He tells Kurt the story about how he met his mother when he was twenty @-@ two , and married her six months later . While married life was not easy , he says there is nothing he would change . In " The Quarterback " , Burt is shown with Kurt and Carole after the death of Finn as they attempt to clean out Finn 's room . He decides to keep the football from Kurt 's first game , and the lamp from Kurt 's basement re @-@ decoration . He expresses his grief by saying that he should have hugged Finn more , and comforts Carole when she starts to break down . When New Directions dedicates their Nationals Show Choir Competition performance to Finn , they invite Carole and Burt to accompany them to Los Angeles for the event . 
 = = = Season 6 = = = 
 Burt first appears in " A Wedding " . Rachel doesn 't want to sit next to Sam Evans ( Chord Overstreet ) at Santana Lopez ( Naya Rivera ) and Brittany Pierce 's ( Heather Morris ) wedding . She states that Burt and Carole will be there , and that she hasn ’ t been talking with them recently ( <unk> since Finn 's death ) , and doesn ’ t want to hurt them . Mercedes Jones ( Amber Riley ) reassure her that they ’ ll want her to move on , just like they did with their first spouses ’ death . They both indeed support her to find love again with Sam . He officiates the wedding , which much to his surprise , his son is also getting married . He is in the flashback episode " 2009 " , which is set during the same time period as the show 's pilot episode . Burt is contacted by McKinley High counsellor Emma Pillsbury ( Jayma Mays ) to tell him that Kurt seemed to be isolated and had shown interest in a pamphlet on suicide . Burt tells Kurt that he must join a school team within a week , or face punishment . Although Burt had meant a sports team , when Kurt enthusiastically tells Burt that he has join the glee club , he accepts this as an adequate substitute in part due to its competitive aspect . In the show 's final episode , " Dreams Come True " , Burt and Carole attend the rededication ceremony of the McKinley High auditorium in the year 2020 , when it is renamed the " Finn Hudson Memorial Auditorium " . He enjoys the final performance from the New Directions of all generations and take a bow with the other Glee Cast members . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Creation and characterization = = = 
 Murphy created Burt as " a working @-@ class dude who 's not okay with his son being gay , a guy who 's having a tough time . " The character is loosely based on his own father . He had O 'Malley in mind when casting the role , and felt confident about his capability : " It 's a real tour de force role and I knew what Mike could do . This isn 't an after @-@ school special . ... It 's heavy and Mike has the ability to cut through the sentiment . " He went on to say , " Mike 's talent is deep . I will always write for Mike O 'Malley . " The actor did not have to audition , and was invited to read for the part by Murphy personally . The two men , along with Falchuk , had previously worked together on the television movie Pretty / Handsome . While reading the first twenty pages of script , O 'Malley was not initially enthusiastic about playing the role , as the character appeared to be an intolerant stereotype . He changed his mind , however , after realizing that Burt was to be portrayed as a more accepting man , with " grace and love that comes first for his son . " 
 After appearing in five Glee episodes over the course of the first season , O 'Malley was upgraded to a series regular along with Heather Morris and Naya Rivera in the show 's second season . Murphy confirmed this fact on July 13 , 2010 , in the wake of O 'Malley 's nomination for an Emmy Award for his work in the role of Burt . He appeared in eight season two episodes , and is guaranteed at least six episodes during the third season . In early 2011 , O 'Malley was cast in the lead role in a comedy pilot entitled Family Album , which prompted media speculation that his role as Burt might need to be reduced . In actuality , the actor ensured that he would be able to meet his six @-@ episode commitment to Glee should the pilot be picked up for a full series run , and commented : " [ Burt ] is one of the best parts I 've ever had in my life . I don ’ t want to leave it behind until it 's run its course or the story has run its course . " On August 11 , 2011 , Fox announced that Family Album would not be made into a series . Although there was no announcement about a change in O 'Malley 's status on Glee , the press release for the first episode of the show 's third season omitted O 'Malley 's name from the regular cast , and the one for the second episode has him listed as part of the guest cast . 
 Burt is a mechanic , and has several times been shown working on cars . He is the majority owner of his tire business , Hummel Tires & Lube . When he was younger , he went to junior college , where he played football before injuring his knee in an accident . He is a sports enthusiast , and also likes basketball and baseball in addition to football . Arts critic Ken Tucker detailed Burt 's early development in the series with the observation : 
 " Burt Hummel is a working @-@ class guy who , we 've come to think , has overcome what must have been a lifetime of casual conversational gay @-@ bashing to fully accept his son Kurt 's sexuality . Early on in Glee , Burt was a red @-@ herring character : We thought he was there to be a boorish <unk> who 'd provide dramatic friction between father and son . But the producers went in another direction , one reflecting the idea that being a good parent means learning a lot from your child , as well as the other way around . " 
 = = = Relationships = = = 
 Burt is the father of glee club member Kurt Hummel . Colfer has credited his off @-@ screen relationship with O 'Malley with improving the quality of their scenes together , and O 'Malley has said the same about working with Colfer . Burt loves Kurt , and openly accepts his son after Kurt tells him that he is gay in the show 's fourth episode , " Preggers " . Murphy took the scene verbatim from his own experience of coming out to his father . He called the father @-@ son relationship " One of the stories that we really love on the show " , and one that is " very personal " to him , as he wishes his own father had acted more like Burt . During the first season , Kurt has cause to wonder whether his father truly accepts him . Colfer offered the insight that his character is " more concerned with being OK in his dad 's eyes than with anyone else " , and said that the bond between them would continue to strengthen as the series progressed . From O 'Malley 's point of view , " There 's a lot at stake in their relationship and [ we 're ] trying to show other people how it can be , in a positive way . I 'm not saying hey , let 's go to Greenwich Village and be in the parade . This is very very difficult , but he loves his son . " 
 Burt is shown to have deeply loved his first wife , Kurt 's mother , a strong woman who died eight years prior to the premiere of the show . He later characterizes his life after losing her as " being asleep " . Kurt introduces him to Carole Hudson , Finn 's widowed mother , and they begin dating . He falls in love with her and she with him : he tells Finn that she is an " angel who came down to wake me up after all these years " . At Carole 's behest , Burt becomes something of a father figure to Finn , taking him to ball games , though this development does not sit well with Kurt , who works to win his father 's attention back from Finn by emulating his father 's dress and interests before Burt realizes how hurt Kurt is . The relationship between Burt and Carole progresses to the point that they decide to live together , and she and Finn move in with the Hummels , since their house is the larger of the two . However , after Finn uses a homophobic slur against Kurt , Burt tells Finn that his behavior is unacceptable and he cannot live in the house any more , imperiling his romance with Carole . Following his appearance in this episode , O 'Malley spoke of future reconciliation between Burt and Finn . He stated , " One of the things I think is really important in life and for human beings is to forgive and be able to rise up from our mistakes . I 'm hoping that Finn and Burt are able to cross that chasm . " 
 The couple apparently continues to date , however — Carole visits Burt 's bedside when he is comatose in the hospital after his heart attack — and in " Furt " he proposes to Carole , she accepts , and they wed . The families combine under the same roof soon thereafter . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The character of Burt has been extremely well received by critics . James Poniewozik of Time deemed Kurt 's coming out " beautifully handled " , and wrote , " the fact that Dad ( Mike O 'Malley , who has turned out to be a pretty good character actor ) ends up not being the boor we think he 's going to be is one of the first signs that Glee is growing up as a series , that having established a world of primary @-@ color stereotypes , it 's now willing to subvert those expectations . " 
 Burt 's defense of Kurt from a slur by Finn in " Theatricality " was called " one of the heaviest scenes Glee has ever delved into " by Eric Goldman of IGN . Tim Stack of Entertainment Weekly called the scene " utterly heartbreaking and lovely " . He added , " it was an amazing moment for Glee , capped off by the simple gesture of Burt grabbing his son 's shoulder in an act of support . Mike O 'Malley is completely Emmy @-@ worthy . We 've never seen a character like this before on television or seen such a relationship between a father and son . " Poniewozik wrote , " Mike O 'Malley , as always , made me believe that Burt was not speaking out of some false enlightenment but out of a desire to protect his family and a struggle to do the right thing . " BuddyTV 's Henrik Batallones said O 'Malley was " the star of the show " . 
 While the second season episode " Grilled Cheesus " received mixed reviews from television critics , O 'Malley was praised for his contribution . Robert Canning of IGN commented that the Hummels ' relationship is " the most affecting " of the show , and praised O 'Malley 's " outstandingly nuanced " performance as Burt . Stack lauded the performances by Colfer and O 'Malley as being Emmy @-@ worthy , and observed that in the wake of a spate of suicides by gay youths , " the social importance of a show that promotes a message of tolerance and support — and of characters who drive that message home as powerfully as Kurt and Burt Hummel — cannot be underestimated . " 
 Burt and Carole 's wedding featured in an Entertainment Weekly piece on " 23 Wonderful TV Weddings " . Stack called their dance down the aisle " utterly joyous and sweet , a showcase for how music can transform everyday events . " He added that their " individual vows [ were ] really lovely , even though they did seem to be more about their kids than their significant others " . TV Guide listed it amongst " The Most Memorable TV Weddings " , and commented " If you made it through the vows without shedding a tear you have no soul . " Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club praised the " genuinely sweet chemistry " between O 'Malley and Rosemont , and found the processional dance " nicely moving " though unoriginal . He too commented on the focus on Kurt and Finn in their vows , but conceded , " if you 'd been a single parent that long , you 'd probably talk about your kids a lot too . " He expanded : 
 " What rang through this scene was always the sense that these two people had given up on having something like this for themselves again until they abruptly found it staring them in the face . O 'Malley and Rosemont emanate that sense of stunned <unk> , of finding the love of your life all over again after you 've stopped looking , and the whole act featuring the wedding is one of the show 's finest accomplishments . " 
 In the episode " Sexy " , reviewers acclaimed the scene where Burt gives Kurt " the talk " about sex . Poniewozik wrote , " O 'Malley , who really seems to exist in a different emotional dimension from most of Glee 's adults , sells both Burt 's determination and awkwardness in helping his son " , and Entertainment Weekly 's Sandra Gonzalez declared , " I 've never loved a father @-@ son pair on television more than I love these two " . She also noted , " Awkward to watch as it was , it was another really great moment between the two " . 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 On July 8 , 2010 , O 'Malley received a nomination for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor – Comedy Series for playing Burt . On August 8 , 2010 , he was named the winner in the 2010 Teen Choice Awards , Choice TV : Parental Unit category . At the 17th Screen Actors Guild Awards , O 'Malley was included in the Glee cast 's ensemble nomination for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series . 
 = Michael Walker , Baron Walker of Aldringham = 
 Field Marshal Michael John Dawson Walker , Baron Walker of Aldringham , GCB , CMG , CBE , DL ( born 7 July 1944 ) is a retired British Army officer . Commissioned in 1966 , he served in Cyprus , Northern Ireland , and in a variety of staff posts in the United Kingdom until 1984 . After being given command of a battalion , he was mentioned in despatches for his service during a second tour of duty in Northern Ireland , this time in Derry , and subsequently served a tour on Gibraltar . He was promoted to brigadier , unusually having never held the rank of colonel , and took command of 20th Armoured Brigade in Germany before becoming I Corps chief of staff . 
 As a major general , Walker was appointed General Officer Commanding , Eastern District , before becoming Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff at the Ministry of Defence . He took command of NATO 's Allied Rapid Reaction Corps ( ARRC ) , which deployed to the Balkans in 1995 , Walker becoming the first officer to command the land component of the NATO @-@ led Implementation Force . For his service with the multi @-@ national forces in the Balkans , he was awarded the American Legion of Merit . After relinquishing command of the ARRC , Walker spent three years as Commander in Chief , Land Command , before being appointed Chief of the General Staff — the professional head of the British Army — in 2000 . In 2003 , he was promoted to Chief of the Defence Staff ( CDS ) — the professional head of all the British Armed Forces . While CDS , Walker attracted controversy during the modernisation of the armed forces , over allegations of prisoner abuse during the Iraq War , and over comments that the media coverage of Iraq may have endangered British troops . 
 Walker retired in 2006 and was subsequently appointed Governor of the Royal Hospital Chelsea , a post he held until 2011 . He is married and has three children . 
 = = Early and personal life = = 
 Born in Salisbury in the British colony of Southern Rhodesia ( modern @-@ day Zimbabwe ) to William Hampden Dawson Walker and Dorothy Helena Walker ( née <unk> ) , Walker was educated both in Southern Rhodesia and in Yorkshire , first at Milton School , Bulawayo , and then at Woodhouse Grove School , West Yorkshire . He spent 18 months teaching in a Preparatory School before joining the British Army . Walker married Victoria ( " Tor " , née Holme ) , in 1973 and the couple have three children — two sons and one daughter . He lists his interests as sailing , shooting , tennis , skiing and golf . 
 = = Early military career = = 
 After attending the Royal Military Academy , Sandhurst , Walker was commissioned into the Royal Anglian Regiment as a second lieutenant on 29 July 1966 . He served as a platoon commander with the 1st Battalion and was promoted to lieutenant on 29 January 1968 . In 1969 he was posted to Cyprus for a two @-@ year tour , and served in Northern Ireland during The Troubles , before attending the Staff College , Camberley . He was promoted to captain on 29 July 1972 . 
 After serving in a staff position at the Ministry of Defence ( MoD ) , Walker was promoted to major at the end of 1976 , and rejoined 1st Battalion , to become a company commander , based in Tidworth , Wiltshire . In 1979 , he took up another staff post at the MoD , after which he was promoted to lieutenant colonel in 1982 . Until 1985 , he served as Military Assistant ( MA ) to the Chief of the General Staff . He was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire ( OBE ) in the New Year Honours List in December 1984 . 
 In command of the 1st Battalion from 1985 to 1987 , Walker served another tour in Northern Ireland , this time in Derry , and later a tour on Gibraltar . He was mentioned in despatches in 1987 " in recognition of gallant and distinguished service " in Northern Ireland . Unusually , Walker was promoted directly to brigadier at the end of 1987 , without having held the rank of colonel . He took command of 20th Armoured Brigade , based in Germany , from 1987 to 1989 , before holding the post of Chief of Staff , I Corps between 1989 and 1991 . 
 = = High command = = 
 Walker attained general officer status with promotion to acting major general in 1991 and took command of North East District and 2nd Infantry Division . Having served in the Gulf War , he was promoted to Commander of the Order of the British Empire ( CBE ) later in 1991 . He was granted the substantive rank of major general on 2 December 1991 , with seniority from 14 February 1991 , going on to serve as General Officer Commanding of the Eastern District and then as Assistant Chief of the General Staff from 11 December 1992 to 3 October 1994 . 
 On 8 December 1994 , Walker was appointed commander of NATO 's Allied Rapid Reaction Corps ( ARRC ) , which had its headquarters in <unk> , Germany , and promoted to acting lieutenant general . He was granted the substantive rank of lieutenant general on 15 March 1995 , and knighted in the 1995 Queen 's Birthday Honours when he was appointed a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath . Under Walker 's command , the ARRC deployed to the Balkans in December 1995 . There , he became the first commander of the land component of the NATO @-@ led Implementation Force ( IFOR ) , until his return to the UK in November 1996 . 
 His IFOR command in Bosnia was indirectly criticised by Richard Holbrooke for his refusal to use his authority to also perform nonmilitary implementation tasks , including arresting indicted war criminals : 
 Based on Shalikashvili 's statement at White House meetings , Christopher and I had assumed that the IFOR commander would use his authority to do substantially more than he was obligated to do . The meeting with [ Admiral Leighton ] Smith shattered that hope . Smith and his British deputy , General Michael Walker , made clear that they intended to take a minimalist approach to all aspects of implementation other than force protection . Smith signalled this in his first extensive public statement to the Bosnian people , during a live call @-@ in program on Pale Television – an odd choice for his first local media appearance . 
 He was appointed a Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George at the end of 1996 . 
 Succeeded as COMARRC by Sir Mike Jackson , Walker was promoted to acting general and appointed Commander in Chief , Land Command on 27 January 1997 . He was granted the substantive rank of general on 2 April 1997 . In recognition of his service with IFOR between 1995 and 1996 , Walker was awarded the American Legion of Merit ( Degree of Commander ) , and granted unrestricted permission to wear the decoration , in May 1997 . In September 1997 , he was appointed Aide @-@ de @-@ Camp General to Queen Elizabeth II , succeeding General Sir Michael Rose , until he in turn was succeeded by General Sir Richard Dannatt . He was promoted to Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath in the New Year Honours List at the end of 1999 . 
 Having served just over three years as Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief , Walker was appointed Chief of the General Staff ( CGS ) — the professional head of the British Army — on 17 April 2000 , taking over from General Sir Roger Wheeler . He remained CGS for three years , after which he was promoted to Chief of the Defence Staff ( CDS ) — the professional head of all the British Armed Forces — on 2 May 2003 , succeeding Admiral Sir Michael Boyce ( later Lord Boyce ) . As CDS , Walker criticised some of the media coverage of British deployments in Iraq . In particular , he claimed that attacks on the Black Watch were " enhanced " due to news reports on their location . He went on to say that " [ as a result of the media coverage ] , there could well have been a response by those who wished us ill to go and meet us with something like a bomb " . His comments were rejected by a spokesman for the National Union of Journalists , who retaliated " When generals turn around and start blaming reporters for their own mistakes , it is a sign they aren 't doing their own jobs properly " . Also in 2004 , Walker , along with General Sir Mike Jackson , then Chief of the General Staff , attracted controversy over reforms of the armed forces , which included the amalgamation of several army regiments to form larger regiments , leading to the loss of historic names . 
 In an interview with the BBC in October 2005 , Walker suggested that the army 's recruitment had been adversely affected by the Iraq War . He also commented on the war in Afghanistan , on which he said " There 's a lot of work to be done , of which the military is only a very small part . Ten years , 15 years , long @-@ term . This is not going to be solved in a short term " . In the same month , he gave an interview for The Sunday Times , in which he said that soldiers ' morale had been damaged by the unpopularity of the war among the British public . Later in 2005 , Walker was instrumental in drawing up new procedures for the treatment of British service personnel accused of abusing Iraqi prisoners , following claims that the army had abandoned those soldiers charged in connection with the prisoner abuses . In February 2006 , Walker headed up a military delegation to Bulgaria to discuss military cooperation between the British and Bulgarian governments . 
 Walker gave evidence to the Iraq Inquiry on 1 February 2010 , in which he spoke about funding for the invasion of Iraq and subsequent planning . 
 = = = Honorary roles = = = 
 Lord Walker has held a variety of honorary and ceremonial roles in different regiments . He was granted the honorary titles of Colonel Commandant and Deputy Colonel of Queen 's Division ( of which the Royal Anglian Regiment is part ) in April 1992 and Honorary Colonel , 3rd Battalion Duke of Wellington 's Regiment ( West Riding ) ( Yorkshire Volunteers ) , in October 1993 , which he relinquished on 30 June 1999 . In 1994 , he succeeded General Sir John Learmont as Colonel Commandant of the Army Air Corps and held the title until April 2004 , when he was relieved by then Lieutenant General Sir Richard Dannatt ( later General Lord Dannatt ) . In 1997 , he was appointed honorary Colonel , The Royal Anglian Regiment , in succession to Major General Patrick Stone , and was himself succeeded as Deputy Colonel by Brigadier John Sutherell . Sutherell , then a major general , went on to succeed Walker as Honorary Colonel in February 2000 . 
 = = Retirement = = 
 Walker relinquished his appointment as Chief of the Defence Staff in April 2006 and retired from the Army , succeeded as CDS by Air Chief Marshal Jock Stirrup . In September 2006 , Walker was appointed Governor of the Royal Hospital Chelsea , holding the post until February 2011 when he resigned suddenly . On 24 November 2006 , it was announced that he would receive a life peerage , and , on 19 December , he was created Baron Walker of Aldringham , of Aldringham in the county of Suffolk , sitting in the House of Lords as a crossbencher . He was given the ceremonial appointment of Deputy Lieutenant of Greater London in 2007 . Walker was appointed as an honorary field marshal in the Queen 's 2014 Birthday Honours . 
 = = Arms = = 
 = Manche Ch 'ol = 
 The Manche Ch 'ol were a former Ch 'ol @-@ speaking Maya people inhabiting the extreme south of what is now the Petén Department of modern Guatemala , the area around the Lake Izabal ( also known as the Golfo Dulce ) , and southern Belize . The Manche Ch 'ol took the name Manche from the name of their main settlement . They were the last group of eastern Cholan @-@ speakers to remain independent and ethnically distinct . It is likely that they were descended from the inhabitants of Classic period ( c . 250 @-@ 900 AD ) Maya cities in the southeastern Maya region , such as Nim Li Punit , Copán and Quiriguá . 
 The first Spanish contact with the Manche Ch 'ol was in 1525 , when an expedition led by Hernán Cortés crossed their territory . From the early 17th century onwards , Dominican friars attempted their concentration into mission towns and their conversion to Christianity . These attempts alarmed their warlike Itza neighbours to the northwest , who attacked the mission towns and fomented rebellion among the Manche . The Manche Ch 'ol in the mission towns were badly affected by disease , which also encouraged them to flee the towns . 
 In the late 17th century , Franciscan missionaries argued that further attempts at peaceful pacification of the Ch 'ol were useless and argued for armed intervention against the Manche Ch 'ol and their Lakandon Ch 'ol neighbours . The Manche were forcibly relocated in the Guatemalan Highlands , where they did not prosper . By 1770 , most of the Manche Ch 'ol were extinct . The few survivors were soon absorbed into the surrounding Q <unk> 'i Maya population . 
 = = Language = = 
 Spanish colonial documents refer to the inhabitants of a broad swathe of territory as <unk> or <unk> ; this territory extended from the Laguna de Términos through the Lacandon Jungle across the foothills of the Sierra de los Cuchumatanes eastwards to southern Belize . A number of distinct <unk> or Cholan @-@ speaking groups inhabited this area ; the Manche Ch 'ol were just one of these groups and spoke the now extinct Ch 'olti ' language . Ch 'olti ' was descended from the Classic Maya language used in hieroglyphic texts . Ch 'olti ' was very closely related to the Ch 'ol , Cholan and Ch 'orti ' languages . The Ch 'olti ' language is evidenced from a single document written in the late 17th century in the Manche Ch 'ol territory ; it has been held in the library of the American Philosophical Society since the 19th century . The document is the Arte y <unk> de la <unk> <unk> , 1695 by Spanish friar Francisco Morán , with the catalogue number <unk> It was compiled in the Manche village San Lucas Tzalac . The term <unk> , is derived from the elements men , meaning " artisan " , and che , meaning either " tribe " or " tree " ; it was the name of a large Manche Ch 'ol settlement . 
 = = Territory = = 
 The Manche Ch 'ol inhabited the southern Petén Basin , southern Belize , and the area around Lake Izabal . Their territory consisted of tropical rainforest upon a low @-@ lying limestone plain , crossed by fast @-@ flowing rivers . It also featured small areas of savannah and extensive swamps . The Manche Ch 'ol occupied a frontier region between the jurisdictions of the Spanish colonial authorities in Yucatán and Guatemala . The Manche Ch 'ol had frequent contact with the inhabitants of Cahabón , to the southwest , which continued after Cahabón was incorporated into the Spanish Empire . The Manche Ch 'ol were bordered to the north by the Mopan Maya and to the west by the Acala Maya , who were probably another Ch 'ol @-@ speaking group . Further west were the Lakandon Ch 'ol , occupying land around the tributaries of the upper Usumacinta River . To the northwest of the Manche Ch 'ol were the Itza , with their territory centered upon their island capital of Nojpetén , upon Lake Petén Itzá . To the east , the Manche Ch 'ol bordered the Caribbean Sea , and in the 17th century Dominican friar Joseph Delgado mentioned that the Manche Ch 'ol had settlements scattered along the Caribbean coast almost as far north as Bacalar , now within the borders of Quintana Roo state in southeastern Mexico . Settlements on the Caribbean coast in the early 17th century included Yaxhal , <unk> , Campin and <unk> . There were further towns in the Cancuén River drainage , including Manche ( renamed San Miguel <unk> by the Spanish ) , <unk> , Yaxha ( colonial San Pablo Yaxhá ) and Yol ( colonial Santo Domingo Yol ) . The closest Manche town to colonial Verapaz was Tzalac ( referred to as San Lucas <unk> by the Spanish ) , 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) from Cahabón . This was a large Manche settlement on the <unk> River , close to the Gracias a <unk> rapids . 
 = = Society = = 
 Men either went naked or wore cloths covering their lower regions ; women wore fine skirts woven from cotton , and some used a fine white cloth to cover their head and chest . The Manche Ch 'ol , based on their distinctive attire , in particular their turban @-@ style headdresses , were probably descended from the Classic period inhabitants of the region ; similar headdresses were illustrated in Classic Maya art from Nim Li Punit and such headdresses were restricted to the southeastern Maya lowlands and were used at cities such as Copán , Quiriguá , and their satellites . Manche Ch 'ol men grew their hair long ; they were forced to cut it short upon their evangelisation and this caused much ill @-@ feeling . 
 The Manche Ch 'ol practised polygamy ; converted Manche men were forced to give up all their wives except one . This was said to have caused such distress among some Manche men relocated to the Guatemalan Highlands that they were reported to have died . 
 The Manche Ch 'ol subsisted upon a maize @-@ based diet ; maize was mostly consumed in liquid form , such as in <unk> , and was probably eaten as tamales . The Manche diet also included beans , chilli , sweet potato and turkey . Plantain and sugar cane were introduced to the Manche after European contact . 
 The Manche Ch 'ol used a variation of the Maya calendar , using a 365 @-@ day year divided into eighteen 20 @-@ day " months " and ending with a 5 @-@ day unlucky period . They worshipped a number of nature @-@ based Maya deities , particularly gods of mountains and dangerous mountain passes , gods of rivers and whirlpools , and of crossroads . One named god was <unk> or <unk> , a mountain god that was said to inhabit a mountain top close to the Gracias a <unk> waterfall on the <unk> River . On top of the mountain was a well @-@ kept plaza with a fire that was kept permanently lit so travellers could make offerings of copal incense . Another mountain god was called <unk> , which translates as " straight god " , who inhabited a peak on the road from <unk> to Manche . The Manche Ch 'ol god of death and the underworld was called <unk> . In 1635 Martín <unk> , governor of Verapaz , related that the principal gods of the Manche were called <unk> , Man , and <unk> . He reported that Manche priests dressed in finely painted vestments fashioned from tree bark . Priests were served during rituals by young women wearing feathers , garlands and necklaces . The Manche offered sacrifices to their deities that included copal incense , turkeys and human blood , both from personal bloodletting and from human sacrifice . 
 = = Organisation and commerce = = 
 The Manche Ch 'ol lacked a complex political organisation , and possessed no large towns within their territory . Their largest settlement was Manche itself , with about one hundred multi @-@ family houses . Manche was also the name of the principal lineage at Manche and this lineage was the origin of the populations of the other Manche Ch 'ol towns . Nito was another principal settlement , and an important port for maritime trade that maintained strong links with places as far away as the province of Acalan in what is now southern Campeche in Mexico . Otherwise , the Manche Ch 'ol lived in generally small settlements governed by one or more chieftains ; they were less politically complex than their Lakandon and Itza neighbours , and were not ruled by a principal king or chieftain . They grew relatively little maize , rather concentrating their agricultural production upon the prestige crops of cacao , annatto and vanilla . All the main settlements , both on the coast and inland , were noted for their prodigious cacao and annatto plantations . 
 The Manche Ch 'ol were integrated into a regional trade network that included their Itza and Lakandon Ch 'ol neighbours , and involved the exchange of Manche produce such as cacao , annatto and vanilla for salt , the only Maya source of which was controlled by the Itza after the Spanish conquest of the province of Acalan . This trade monopoly was maintained by force on the part of the Itza , who vigorously ensured that the Manche Ch 'ol remained subservient to them . After the Manche towns on the coast of Belize fell under Spanish control in the 16th century , they continued to have close links with the independent inland Manche settlements . Trade continued and intermarriage was common . The towns in the Cancuén River drainage traded via land and riverine routes with both the independent Itza ( notably with Nojpetén ) and with colonial Verapaz ( principally with Cobán and Cahabón ) . 
 There were two main trade routes used by the Manche Ch 'ol ; the first went north along the Mopan River to <unk> , then overland to Nojpetén . The second followed the Cancuén River to Yol , and there joined the Pasión River northwards , leaving the river when it turned west and continuing overland to Nojpetén . Xocmo , on the Sacapulas River , was a trading port where the Manche and Lakandon Ch 'ols met to trade cacao and annatto . Xocmo had a major fair , still taking place as late as 1676 , where traders arrived from various colonial and independent settlements ; these included Nojpetén and the towns of Cobán , San Agustín <unk> and Sacapulas in colonial Verapaz . The <unk> traded cacao and annatto into the encomienda towns of Verapaz in exchange for metal tools ( particularly axes and machetes ) and salt . Other products traded to the Manche by the Q 'eqchi ' of colonial Verapaz included cotton textiles and quetzal feathers . The Q 'eqchi ' used this trade to supply products demanded by their Spanish overlords under the <unk> system . The Manche produced a number of products for trade , manufactured from resources in the southern Maya Mountains of Belize ; these included blowguns , bows and arrows , finely sculpted greenstone axes , hammocks , <unk> and metates , pottery , and cane , all of which were traded across the southern Maya region . 
 = = Spanish contact = = 
 Conquistador Hernán Cortés passed through Manche Ch 'ol territory in 1525 , and described it as sparsely populated . In the 16th century , the coastal towns of Campin and <unk> were given in encomienda to Hernando Sánchez de Aguilar ; they fell within the jurisdiction of colonial Bacalar , on the Yucatán coast near Chetumal . Although some Manche Ch 'ols visited the Dominican friars in Cobán , Verapaz , in 1564 , the central Manche were not contacted by the Spanish again until 1603 , when Dominican missionaries first attempted to evangelise them , and started to gather the scattered inhabitants into towns . In the second half of the 16th century , the still @-@ independent Manche Ch 'ol became a refuge for Christianised Maya living under Spanish domination in Verapaz , who wished to escape and live as apostates among them and their Lakandon Ch 'ol neighbours . In 1596 , Dominican friar Juan <unk> reported seeing eleven Manche traders in Cahabón ; he claimed that the Manche Ch 'ol were frequent visitors to the town . In 1600 the regular presence of Manche Ch 'ol traders in Cahabón was again reported , and they were said to arrive in greater numbers for the town 's festivities in honour of its patron saint . Friar <unk> complained in 1605 of the great number of Christianised Q 'eqchi ' Maya of Cahabón that were fleeing the town to live as apostates among the Manche Ch 'ol . 
 By 1606 the missionaries had concentrated many Manche Ch 'ols in nine new mission towns , and had started to penetrate the territory of the neighbouring Mopan Maya , who were on the borders of the fiercely independent Itza of central Petén . By 1628 the Dominicans were tending to 6 @,@ 000 Maya in the part of Manche Ch 'ol territory that they had gained access to . This figure included some apostate refugees from Spanish @-@ controlled Cahabón . Estimates of the total Manche Ch 'ol population in the mid @-@ 17th century vary from 10 @,@ 000 to 30 @,@ 000 , with prominent 20th @-@ century Mayanist J. Eric S. Thompson preferring the lower figure as opposed to the high @-@ end estimates by 17th @-@ century chroniclers . The Dominican penetration of Mopan territory alarmed the Itza , who started to harass the Manche Ch 'ol , driving them away from the mission towns . 
 In spite of the Dominicans ' successes among the Manche in the early 17th century , they suffered a serious setback in the early 1630s when the Itza and Mopan attacked the Manche Ch 'ol mission towns , driving out the Dominicans for decades . The Dominicans returned in the 1670s and were able to re @-@ establish several missions in the region . In the late 17th century , the Spanish friars complained of the infidelity of the Manche ; that they were quick to adopt Christianity and equally quick to abandon it . Friar Francisco Gallegos complained that trying to concentrate the Manche in mission towns was " like keeping birds in the forest without a cage " . Due to the historical links between the Manche Ch 'ol and the inhabitants of Spanish Cahabón , the Spanish colonial authorities used the Maya inhabitants of Cahabón as guides , interpreters and lay preachers in their attempts to bring the Manche within the empire . By the 1670s the Manche Ch 'ol were in a difficult position , on the one side forced to bow to Itza trade demands under the threat of armed reprisals , and on the other side forced into extortionate trade with the Spanish encomienda towns . In the late 1670s , Sebastián de Olivera , alcalde mayor ( governor ) of Verapaz , imposed compulsory trade prices upon the Manche Ch 'ol , forcing one town to buy 70 machetes at 2 @.@ 5 times the going price , paid in cacao . Refusal to trade was met with violence , and if the Manche could not afford the price demanded then Olivera 's representatives would seize goods , clothing , poultry and previously traded metal tools . In 1684 three Franciscan friars were killed during an attempt to evangelise the inhabitants of <unk> . The three missionaries had been accompanying a Spanish expedition to collect valuable cacao ; the expedition is likely to have involved considerable Spanish violence . It is likely that the friars were sacrificed by cutting out their hearts . 
 = = Extinction = = 
 In 1678 the Manche Ch 'ol population was devastated by disease ; in the area around the town of San Lucas Tzalac it killed every child under six years old and almost all of those under the age of ten . Total deaths , including adults , numbered over 400 and the epidemic prompted all the Manche Ch 'ol in the affected region to abandon the mission towns and flee into the forest . The Spanish made a number of further attempts to pacify the Manche Ch 'ol , but these were ultimately unsuccessful , and the Manche Ch 'ol rebelled in 1689 . In that year many Manche Ch 'ol were forcibly relocated to the <unk> Valley in the highlands , resulting in the abandonment of many of the Manche orchards ; this eventually led to the collapse of the regional trade network that by then had been fully linked with colonial Guatemala and supplied it with unknown quantities of cacao . 
 In 1694 , two Franciscan friars set out from Guatemala to see if they could succeed where the Dominicans had failed . Antonio Margil and Melchor López left Cobán in August 1693 to seek out the hostile Lakandon Ch 'ols in the depths of the rainforest . <unk> Margil had already spent two years among the Manche Ch 'ol . Although they found the Lakandon , the mission was a failure and the friars were forced to flee . Disappointed by their failure , in April 1694 the friars wrote a letter to the president of the Audiencia Real of Guatemala , Jacinto de Barrios Leal , stating their belief that any further peaceful attempts at converting the Ch 'ol peoples were pointless , and that the time had come for military action . 
 The conquering Spanish carried out several operations to relocate the Manche to Alta Verapaz , with their relocation being completed in 1697 , a short time after the Spanish finally defeated their Itza Maya neighbours to the northwest . Most of the surviving Manche Ch 'ol were forcibly resettled in the Guatemalan Highlands , in the villages of El Chol and Belén , in the <unk> Valley near Rabinal . The resettled Manche Ch 'ol suffered from the abrupt change of climate from tropical lowland rain forest to the cold highlands . They were often not provided with suitable clothing by their Spanish overlords , and many died . The depopulation of the Manche and Lakandon Ch 'ol lands , and the resulting collapse of long @-@ standing trade routes , resulted in the gradual impoverishment of colonial Verapaz . 
 In 1699 a Spanish expedition under the command of sergeant Martín de Montoya was sent from the Spanish garrison at Nuestra Señora de los Remedios y San Pablo , Laguna del Itza ( formerly Nojpetén ) to investigate Indian activity in the former Ch 'ol and Mopan territories . He found evidence that there were still surviving Maya in all the lands he crossed , as evidenced by the carefully tended cacao and vanilla orchards . At this time there were said to be 400 relocated Maya from the same area living in Belén . 
 By 1710 the population of Manche Ch 'ol in Belén had fallen to just four ; everyone else had died as a result of disease , hunger and melancholy . By 1770 the Manche Ch 'ol were all but extinct ; their original territory had been abandoned and had reverted to wilderness , and the few survivors relocated to the highlands numbered not more than 300 in the whole <unk> Valley , where there were almost as many Spanish and <unk> . Many Manche Ch 'ol in Verapaz were absorbed into the expanding Q 'eqchi ' Maya population , which gradually occupied the vacated Manche lands . It is possible that a few Manche Ch 'ol survived in the forested interior of Toledo District in Belize , to be later absorbed by incoming Q 'eqchi ' in the late 19th century . In the very early part of the 19th century , a handful of Maya were still recorded as speaking Ch 'ol in Cobán . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 The highly specialised Manche production methods for annatto , cacao and vanilla were adopted by the incoming Q 'eqchi ' and are still applied on a small scale . Among the modern @-@ day Q 'eqchi ' , a tradition still exists that these orchards belong to their ancestors , the ch <unk> spirits , who lack salt and swap cacao for it . 
 = British Asian Cup = 
 The British Asian Cup was a day / night Twenty20 cricket charity match played between the 2008 Indian Premier League ( IPL ) champion Rajasthan Royals and the 2008 Twenty20 Cup champion Middlesex Panthers played at the Lord 's Cricket Ground , London , England . A portion of the earnings of the match went to the British Asian Trust . It ended as the Royals defeated the Panthers by 46 runs . 
 Shaun Udal and Shane Warne were the captains for the Panthers and the Royals respectively . The Royals played a warm @-@ up game with the Middlesex Second XI before the match , and won it by 28 runs . The match attracted a crowd of 20 @,@ 000 people , but was delayed due to rain . 
 Winning the toss , the Panthers opted to bowl first . The Royals scored 162 runs for five wickets , and Swapnil Asnodkar and Mohammad Kaif top @-@ scored with 41 run each . Dawid Malan took two wickets for 23 runs . In reply , the Panthers made 116 runs for seven wickets , as the Royals won by 46 runs . Sohail Tanvir took three wickets for 20 runs , and Dimitri Mascarenhas was named the man of the match for his all @-@ round performance . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 14 May 2009 , it was announced that 2008 IPL champion Rajasthan Royals and 2008 Twenty20 Cup champion Middlesex Panthers will play a charity match on 6 July 2009 under the name of the British Asian Cup , a portion of the earnings of which will go to the British Asian Trust . The two teams would have played each other in the 2008 Champions League Twenty20 , but the tournament was cancelled due to security reasons . The then IPL chairman Lalit Modi said , " We have shown this year that the IPL truly has global appeal , and for one of our teams to be playing at the ' home of cricket [ Lords ] ' in front of the wonderfully passionate British fans is very exciting . " He also welcomed the association with the British Asian Trust . <unk> Cricket Club ( MCC ) chief executive Keith Bradshaw said , " It is a great honour to be hosting the first year of this competition , and demonstrates the MCC commitment to <unk> our brand and venue . " It was planned that the British Asian Cup will be an annual series played between the IPL and Twenty20 Cup winners , and will consist of three matches in future . 
 = = Build up = = 
 Udal and Warne captained the Panthers and the Royals respectively . Tyron Henderson , who had played for the Royals in the IPL , decided to play for the Panthers . Sohail Tanvir played for the Royals after getting the permission of the Pakistan Cricket Board . Tanvir was not able to play in the 2009 IPL due to tense relations between India and Pakistan after the 2008 Mumbai attacks . However it was later decided to move the 2009 edition to South Africa due to 2009 Indian general election , but till then the Pakistani players were either terminated or suspended by their franchisees due to their unavailability . Kamran Akmal could not play for the Royals in the match because of Sri Lanka 's tour of Pakistan . It was also the last competitive game played by Warne at the Lord 's Cricket Ground . 
 The Royals played a warm @-@ up game with the Middlesex Second XI at Denis Compton Oval on 5 July 2009 . Captained by Mohammad Kaif , the Royals won the toss elected to bat first . The scored 139 runs at a loss of seven wickets , and Faiz Fazal top scored with 47 runs . Batting second , the Middlesex Second XI got all out at 111 runs in the last over . Munaf Patel took three wickets , and the Royals won by 28 runs . 
 = = Match = = 
 The match attracted a crowd of 20 @,@ 000 people and was a day / night event . The match was scheduled to start at 4 : 21 GMT , but it started raining heavily and the play was stopped . However the rain stopped at 4 : 25 GMT and the toss took place . The Panthers won the toss and decided to bowl first . Fazal and Swapnil Asnodkar opened for the Royals and Gareth Berg bowled the first over . Murali Karthik came to the attack in the seventh over . In the first ball of the over , a shot by Ashnodkar was deflected by the wicket @-@ keeper 's helmet , and the Royals got five penalty runs . In the same over , Fazal and Asnodkar reached to a 50 runs partnership in 38 balls . However Karthik took the wicket of Fazal in the fifth ball . Fazal tried to hit play the ball towards extra cover , but it went high in the air and Billy Godleman took the catch . Fazal went out making 27 runs off 22 balls , hitting two sixes . Karthik slowed down the run rate , and no boundary was hit in the next six overs . Kaif and Ashnodkar added 50 runs in 45 balls for the second wicket , but Ashnodkar got dismissed in the very next ball . Dawid Malan bowled a full toss and Ashnodkar hit it towards deep mid @-@ wicket , however Shah took " well judged " catch . Ashnodkar made 41 runs off 40 balls . In the next over , Eoin Morgan dropped Naman Ojha on Shaun Udal . However Ojha got caught by Steven Finn on the next ball . Ojha made 10 run off 5 balls . In the next over , Malan bowled Justin Langer , who scored one run in two balls . The next over , bowled by Henderson , came out to be the most expensive over of the innings ; 15 runs were scored in the over . Mascarenhas hit a four and a six , and the Royals reached to 145 runs . The next over was bowled by Berg , who gave seven runs . In the last ball of the innings , Kaif got ran out on 41 runs . The Royals scored 162 runs at a loss of five wickets in 20 overs . Mascarenhas remained not out on 32 runs off 16 balls . Malan took two wickets for the Panthers giving 23 runs . 
 The Panthers opened with Godleman and Neil Dexter . The first wicket felt in the fourth over ; Tanvir bowled Godleman , who went on four runs . Mascarenhas took the important wicket of Owais Shah in the next over , as Shah went for one run . In the first ball of the seventh over , Ojha dropped Dexter , however Mascarenhas bowled him on 26 runs on the third ball of the same over . Mascarenhas took two wickets for 24 runs in his four over spell . Malan and Morgan scored 45 runs for the fourth wicket partnership , before Ojha caught Morgan on Tanvir . Morgan went out making 15 runs on 19 balls . Henderson got out in the same over , getting caught by Mascarenhas ; he went out scoring one run . Ojha stumped Malan on Warne in the next over , and he went for 34 runs . The Panthers required 79 runs in the last four overs . Berg , who scored 26 runs , went out in the last over as Fazal caught him on Abhishek <unk> . The Panthers could only manage to 116 runs for even wickets , and the Royals won by 46 runs . Tanvir took three wickets for 20 runs . Mascarenhas was named the man of the match for his " all @-@ round effort " . 
 = = = Scorecard = = = 
 On @-@ field umpires : Trevor <unk> ( England ) , David <unk> ( England ) 
 Third umpire : Stephen Gale ( England ) 
 Toss : Panthers elected to field first 
 Result : Royals won by 46 wickets 
 Key 
 * – Captain 
 – Wicket @-@ keeper 
 c Fielder – the batsman was dismissed by a catch by the named fielder 
 b Bowler – the bowler who gains credit for the dismissal 
 b – the batsman was dismissed by bowled 
 lbw – the batsman was dismissed leg before wicket 
 Total runs are in the format : score / wickets 
 = The Great Stagnation = 
 The Great Stagnation : How America Ate All the Low @-@ Hanging Fruit of Modern History , Got Sick , and Will ( Eventually ) Feel Better is a pamphlet by Tyler Cowen published in 2011 . It argues that the American economy has reached a historical technological plateau and the factors which drove economic growth for most of America 's history are mostly spent . These figurative " low @-@ hanging fruit " from the title include the cultivation of much free , previously unused land ; the application and spread of technological breakthroughs , particularly during the period 1880 – 1940 , including transport , refrigeration , electricity , mass communications , and sanitation ; and the education of large numbers of smart people who previously received none . 
 Cowen , a professor of Economics at George Mason University , looks to these factors to explain the stagnation in the median , or middle , American wage since 1973 . Analysis has set the " Great Stagnation " idea against the " Great Divergence " , a set of explanations which blame rising income inequality and globalization for the stall . Related debates have examined whether the internet 's effect has yet been fully realized in production , if its users enjoy a significant consumer surplus , and how it might be further integrated into the economy . The final set of questions concerns appropriate policy responses to the problem . 
 The pamphlet is 15 @,@ 000 words long and was first published in January 2011 as an electronic book , priced at USD $ 4 . A hardback version , which Cowen dubbed " the retrogression " , was published in June 2011 . While not all reviewers agreed with Cowen 's thesis and arguments , the book was largely welcomed as timely and skilled in framing the debate around the future of the American economy . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 The main thesis is that economic growth has slowed in the United States and in other advanced economies , as a result of falling rates of innovation . In Chapter 1 , Cowen describes the three major forms of " low @-@ hanging fruit " : the ease of cultivating free and unused land , rapid invention from 1880 to 1940 which capitalized on the scientific breakthroughs of the 18th and 19th centuries and the large returns from sending intelligent but uneducated children to school and university . There are potentially two further minor forms : cheap fossil fuels and the strength of the American constitution . Cowen concludes , " You could say , ' The modern United States was built at five forms of low @-@ hanging fruit , and at most only two of those are still with us . ' Fair enough . " While they produced extremely large returns , future advances will be much more incremental . He offers anecdotal and statistical illustrations for this slowdown . First , he compares the changes witnessed by his grandmother with those of his own generation . Then , he cites median income statistics : the rate of growth drastically slowed from 1973 onwards . He further argues that the failure to diagnose the trend has led to a degradation in political discourse since left and right leaning actors blame the policies of " the other side " and " what I like to call the ' honest middle ' cannot be heard above the din . " 
 Chapter 2 examines productivity in the contemporary economy . Cowen describes spurts in productivity growth , 2 @.@ 8 % between 1996 and 2000 and 3 @.@ 8 % from 2000 to 2004 , and he asks if they disprove the stagnation thesis . He concedes that there have been gains in certain areas , such as information technology , but argues that in other important areas such as finance , which is 8 % of GDP , there has been less value created . 
 Also , whilst productivity figures have improved , median incomes and stock market prices , and thus the returns to capital and labor , have not improved . Furthermore , government consumption ( government activity excluding transfer payments ) represents between 15 – 20 % of GDP , but since the sector is measured at cost it becomes less and less productive as it grows larger . Thus , the more government consumption there is , the more published GDP figures tend to overestimate growth in living standards . 
 In health care ( 17 % of GDP ) , the problems of asymmetric information and moral hazard mean that increased spending results in little or no improvement in health outcomes . A similar result is observed in education , 6 % of GDP , where outcomes have not improved in the last 40 years . 
 Chapter 3 considers whether the internet and other computing technologies disprove the argument . Cowen writes that while the internet has been fantastic for the intellectually curious , it has done little to raise material standards of living . The biggest Internet companies employ at most a few thousand people , and relatively few services are paying : " We have a collective historical memory that technological progress brings a big and predictable stream of revenue growth across most of the economy . When it comes to the web , those assumptions are turning out to be wrong or misleading . " 
 Chapter 4 examines American politics in light of the thesis . Cowen says Paul Krugman 's The Conscience of a Liberal ( 2007 ) puts the " cart before the horse " in asking for high marginal tax rates , unionization , and an egalitarian distribution of income and wealth . The policies worked in the <unk> precisely because the real income growth was there to support them . Cowen argues that the failure to recognize the stagnation has led to poor policy ideas from the right ( such as " revenue generating tax cuts " ) and the left ( redistribution of incomes ) . Cowen laments the " exaggeration " of both sides and the influence of political lobbying on economic policy . The growth in government , he says , was affordable during the period of <unk> fruit , and the advances in transportation , industrial production , electronic communications and scientific management even facilitated it . 
 Chapter 5 proposes a simple cause for the 2008 financial crisis " We thought we were richer than we were . " He argues that despite a series of regular , smaller crises since the 1980s , the crash was ultimately caused by investors taking too much risk across the economy , " housing and sub @-@ prime loans were the proverbial canary in the coalmine . " 
 Chapter 6 looks at solutions to the problem . Cowen praises the development of India and China as producers and consumers , the role of the internet in enlarging the scientific community , and a growing consensus for the reform of educational policy in the US . He further suggests for the social status of scientists to be raised to at least as strong a motivating factor as money can . 
 = = Analysis = = 
 = = = Place in the growth literature = = = 
 Matthew Yglesias described the book 's themes as a continuation and expansion of those developed by Paul Krugman in The Age of Diminished Expectations , Third Edition : U.S. Economic Policy in the 1990s ( 1997 ) . Both books treat the diminishing rate of return from basic science and the effects that it has on politics , specifically " that a growing share of innovative energy is going into rent @-@ seeking or otherwise unproductive activities " . 
 Timothy Noah compared it to Prosperity : The Coming Twenty Year Boom and What it Means to You by Bob Davis and David Wessel , an enormously popular book at the time ( 1998 ) which today <unk> for a penny . He described how both Prosperity and The Great Stagnation examine the puzzle of stagnant median wages though offer starkly different opinions about the prospects for future growth and in particular the role of information technologies in that . He concluded by calling Cowen 's appeal to " realistic expectations " about growth a " weird conservative echo " of the Club of Rome 's liberal " era of limits gospel from the 1970s " . In the summer of 2012 , Robert Gordon 's paper , " Is U.S. Economic Growth Over ? " prompted comparisons to Cowen 's thesis . Gordon also points out that the easy gains of increased labor force participation , schooling or land use have been spent , while other major innovations or industries — such as transport or sanitation — have enjoyed only gradual improvement . 
 = = = The internet , growth , and quality of life = = = 
 Annie Lowrey , writing in Slate , compares Cowen 's treatment of the internet to the " productivity paradox " first postulated by economists in the 1980s . She quoted Robert Solow , a growth theorist , who wrote in 1987 " You can see the computer age everywhere but in the productivity statistics . " To explain why growth had not picked up strongly after the boom in computing products from the 1970s onwards , they suggested that the changes advantaged some firms and disadvantaged others leaving little net gain . The problem also may be partly because of deficiencies in the measurement of income and well @-@ being . The internet promotes more free culture , the consumption of which provides utility and happiness to people but cannot be captured through GDP figures that measure revenue . 
 The Economist 's Free Exchange blog argued that Cowen " undersold " recent innovations in digital technologies and that society was still in the process of re @-@ organising itself around them . A growth spurt should be expected but this could take anything from years to decades , it warned . Furthermore , there are particularly large gains to be had in the area " cognition @-@ augmenting innovations ( as opposed to labor @-@ augmenting innovations ) " . Writing in Forbes , Steve Denning described Cowen 's " low @-@ hanging fruit theory " as " folkloric nonsense " . The world of 1953 , when Denning was young , is inconceivable to a young person today , he wrote , adding that the qualification " apart from the Internet " is equivalent to saying " apart from the wheel " when discussing transport . The Financial Times reviewer recognized that Cowen , a prominent blogger , " is no Luddite ... he thinks life is more fun and interesting with the internet around " . He argued that most economists do not look at consumer technology to find the internet 's effect on productivity but rather organizations : super @-@ efficient retailers such as Wal @-@ mart and Tesco have already incorporated it into their logistics . Furthermore , the pace of change means it could be a generation at least before we see the full implementation . Timothy Noah seizes upon Cowen 's " concession " that the internet could well increase scientific output by allowing better communication between scientists in remote places . Just as Davis and Wessel incorrectly predicted a coming boom in middle class incomes due to computers , Cowen " seems equally wrong to suggest that computer technology is not on the verge of doing so . " 
 = = = Education and employment = = = 
 Denning writes that the real challenge is keeping up with technological change , and in this sense , scientific management was the key American technological advance in the 20th century . It allowed American companies to provide large numbers of jobs to semi @-@ skilled workers through supply @-@ chain management , hierarchies , and rule @-@ based systems . Businesses must now adjust to well @-@ informed consumers who disdain profiteering and wish to be " delighted " . A related challenge is shifting from managing semi @-@ skilled to knowledge workers . The Economist contrasted the " Great Stagnation " thesis with the " Great Divergence " which traces the pay gap to an increasing demand for skilled workers . Timothy Noah , writing in Slate , did not share Cowen 's optimism about the future of American educational attainment on the basis that President Obama " is getting tough " on teachers ' unions . There have been many reforms implemented in the last thirty years that the unions initially opposed , and the United States has poorer outcomes than many OECD countries with stronger unions . Noah reminds us that the earlier authors were optimistic about increased third level enrollment and that has since fallen as have graduation rates . The United States remains significantly behind other advanced countries in educational outcomes offering a perverse hope for improvement . 
 David Brooks argued that a more fundamental shift from a materialist to a post @-@ materialist mindset has occurred in recent generations . While for generations born early in the century increased income was the same as improvements in lifestyle this is no longer true for people born into an affluent , information driven world . Younger generations live much more intellectually diverse lives and cites much user generated content , including Wikipedia , as being mostly produced outside of the monetary economy . He affirms Cowen 's acknowledgment that this has brought large increases in human happiness with correspondingly little economic activity . 
 = = = Relationship to the 2008 financial crisis and recession = = = 
 The Economist criticized Cowen for associating the economic problems resulting from the 2008 financial crisis to his broader thesis , arguing instead that this was mostly caused by a demand shock and mostly preventable . Some scholars , such as Jim Rickards , Howard Qi , <unk> Song , etc . , point out that the demand shock was only the phenomenon , a result of a more serious underlying structural problem in the American economy . Furthermore , Howard Qi argues that the education in the US is not conducive to producing high quality scientists and engineers from the American citizens . Instead , the US is becoming increasingly and vitally relying on foreign students in the US universities to support the intellectual need in the US 's science and engineering . Matthew Yglesias also disagreed with the link : " Rich countries have experienced very divergent fates over the past 36 months when the key evidence for the technological stagnation thesis is that rich countries have experienced a broadly similar fate over the past 36 years " , he writes . 
 = = = Policy responses = = = 
 Cowen writes that one way to improve innovation is to raise the social status of scientists , a suggestion described as " a bit empty " and not fully congruent with the problem of recent innovations being private goods , such as financial sector innovation , rather than public ones such as penicillin or the rail @-@ road . Noah described Cowen 's prescriptions , encouragement of free trade , more higher status for scientists , and resignation to the " new normal " as " absurdly half @-@ hearted " . 
 R.A. , writing on The Economist 's Free Exchange blog , concluded that Cowen 's analysis of education suggested that the rich world would do better by aiding mass education programs in developing countries rather than pursuing the diminishing returns in domestic education and research , in contrary to President Obama 's State of the Union speech in 2011 . Looser immigration law would also allow rich and poor countries to exploit this source of growth . Secondly , it proposed to harvest " policy low @-@ hanging fruit " i.e. reforming or abolishing foolish and costly policies . It proposed taxing " <unk> " such as traffic congestion and pollution rather than " goods " such as income , reducing spending on medical treatments with no clear benefits , and removing agricultural subsidies and mortgage interest reduction . In The Economist , two different sets of policy responses were considered depending on whether the true cause is ailing technological innovation or a decline in workers ' bargaining power in the face of emerging @-@ market industrialization . Progressive taxation and redistribution would offset labor 's position of weakness whilst a limited state would reduce commitments it cannot expect to fulfill in a stagnating economy . 
 = = Publication and reception = = 
 The book is 15 @,@ 000 words long and was first published in January 2011 as an electronic book only , priced at USD $ 4 . The Economist noted that the " publishing model is fascinating in its own right " . A hardback version , which Cowen dubbed " the retrogression " , was published in June 2011 . Yglesias described the publication as an innovation in " current affairs publishing " and " much shorter and cheaper than a conventional book in a way that actually leaves you wanting to read more once you finish it . My guess is that this is the future of books . " The book has been compared to economic and political pamphlets of the 17th century , which were frequently used to quickly get ideas about current affairs into circulation . 
 The Economist welcomed The Great Stagnation as " an important [ book ] that will have a profound impact on the way people think about the last thirty years " . It praised " the trains of thought it suggests " and said the book merited " a rigorous debate " which should encourage different policy choices across the political spectrum . Matthew Yglesias described the book as a " <unk> performance from one of the most interesting thinkers out there " . Though he said it was remarkably silent on intellectual property law and the implications for society of a world in which most of the increase in output comes from catch @-@ up growth from poor countries . The Wall Street Journal described the book as Cowen 's most impactful book due to the direction in which he leads the debate . " What is exciting is to imagine students , economists , and scientists across the country reading the book , coming to terms with the depth of our challenge and pursuing new ways of trying to ' fix ' things or generally improve our lot . " " A small book but a big , worthwhile question " , concluded The Economist . In the New York Times , David Brooks praised The Great Stagnation as " the most debated non @-@ fiction book so far this year " , which Timothy Noah described as a great favor to the book 's marketing though an exaggeration considering the discussion surrounding Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother by Amy Chua . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 In September 2013 , a sequel by Cowen , titled Average is Over : <unk> America Beyond the Age of the Great Stagnation , was published by Dutton Books . The sequel focused on Cowen 's vision for how the United States economy would recover and grow over the coming decades , and the types of jobs that would exist in the new economy . 
 = Rush ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Rush " is the fifth episode of the seventh season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files , and the 144th episode overall . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 5 , 1999 . It was written by David Amann and directed by Robert Lieberman . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Rush " earned a Nielsen household rating of 7 @.@ 9 , being watched by 12 @.@ 71 million viewers in its initial broadcast . The episode received mostly mixed @-@ to @-@ negative reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Mulder and Scully investigate a high school student who is the prime suspect in the bizarre murder of a police officer . They discover that the boy and a couple of friends have been playing with the ability to accelerate their movements to a frequency the human eye can ’ t perceive . 
 The idea for " Rush " had been proposed as far back as the sixth season of The X @-@ Files . However , the original plot of the episode — the effects of having super speed — eventually delved into " deeper " themes , such as drug abuse , boredom , and the teenage experience . Although the episode relied on special effects , many of the scenes were created by manipulating the speed of the camera during filming . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In Pittsfield , Virginia , Tony Reed and two other teenagers meet in the woods late at night , but they are interrupted by a sheriff 's deputy . Moments later the deputy is murdered , killed with his own flashlight . Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) later examine the deputy 's body : the blow that killed the man was so ferocious that his glasses were pushed through the back of his skull . They question the suspect , teenager Tony Reed , whose fingerprints were found on the flash light , but he denies any part in the murder . Mulder and Scully agree that Tony is innocent , although Mulder 's theory of spirit involvement is not shared by Scully . Scully , on the other hand , suggests they question Tony 's friends . Mulder and Scully visit Tony 's school and speak with the two teenagers who were with Tony in the woods : the sheriff 's son , Max Harden , and his girlfriend Chastity . Chastity seems concerned about Tony when Mulder and Scully tell her he may go to jail . However , Tony is later released when the murder weapon mysteriously goes missing from the evidence room . Mulder and Scully review video footage from the evidence room that shows the flashlight simply disappear . However , a blur on the video footage attracts Mulder 's attention and later analysis by an expert reveals the blurred object is solid and matches the local high school 's colors . 
 When one of the teachers at the high school who was strongly despised by Max is attacked and murdered by an unseen force in front of many witnesses , Mulder suspects Max possesses some kind of paranormal ability and is using it to kill . Mulder believes Harden 's changing teenage hormones are giving him paranormal abilities that allow him to attack people without touching them . 
 Meanwhile , Tony follows Chastity into a cave in the woods and stumbles upon a bizarre shaft of light . Once Tony steps into the light , he is possessed with the same abilities that Max and Chastity have , the ability to vibrate at high frequencies , allowing Tony to move faster than normal vision can detect . At the same time , however , Max collapses and is sent to the hospital where it is found he is suffering from exhaustion , withdrawal , a concussion , muscular tears and skeletal fractures - basically , his abilities are killing him . Mulder eventually deduces that he possesses superhuman speed . Chastity sneaks Max out of the hospital where he returns to the cave ( even though she suggested they go somewhere else for help but Max refused ) . Later , the sheriff finds the flashlight in Max 's room and confronts his son about the murders . Max confesses and then attempts to kill his father , but Tony intervenes , taking the sheriff 's gun ; the sheriff is promptly taken to the hospital . That night , Tony and Chastity head to the cave so that Max won 't use up any more of the remaining power . Once there , Chastity has been knocked unconscious by Max , who then confronts Tony , using his abilities to take back the gun before throwing it away . However , Chastity ( having come to and using her abilities ) takes the gun and shoots Max from behind , then allows herself to be shot by the same bullet ; she tells Tony that she can 't go back to the way things were before . Afterwards , Tony is seen in the hospital recuperating while numerous geological experts examined the cave , but were unable to identify anything unusual . The city then fills the cave with concrete , sealing it forever , leaving the question as to what caused the teenager @-@ related ability a mystery . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and casting = = = 
 The basic concept behind " Rush " had been coming together since the sixth season . According to series creator Chris Carter , the way in which to portray the teenagers on screen was " tricky " . He noted , " it had been a long time since we had dealt with teenage angst . [ But ] it was being done everywhere else and we wanted to take a run at it . " David Amman , who wrote the episode , later explained that the original idea for the episode was simply " [ the ] effect having the power of super speed would have on troubled teens . " However , the story quickly developed " deeper " meanings : drug abuse , boredom , and the teenage experience . 
 According to casting director Rick Millikan , choosing actors and actresses for the episode was more difficult than usual . He explained , " it was all teenagers , but this being The X @-@ Files we were looking for something other than the typical 90210 @-@ type kids . " Millikan eventually cast individuals who could play a " subtle kind of evil " , as well as display " arrogance " and " vulnerability " . Rodney Scott was cast as Tony Reed . Scott , at the time , was more notable for his roles as David Cassidy in the 1999 television movie Come On , Get Happy : The Partridge Family Story , and for his role as William " Will " <unk> on the popular show Dawson 's Creek . 
 = = = Special effects = = = 
 The episode , most notably the scenes featuring the teenagers moving at high speed , relied heavily on special effects . However , instead of creating them on a computer , director Robert Lieberman was able to create many of the necessary scenes using different camera speeds . In order to get the proper feel for the rush effects , test footage of assistant director <unk> <unk> was filmed at 24 frames per second ( FPS ) , 12 FPS , 6 FPS and 3 FPS . After filming , a digital " blur effect " was added to make the shot look unfocused . During the scene where the teenagers stumble into the light and receive the speed power , the special effects crew shot two separate shots : one of the teens ' bodies and one of the teens ' heads rapidly flailing . The special effects crew then " pull [ ed ] the head [ s ] off " of the shots featuring the teens moving rapidly , and used them to replace the heads on the shots of the teens ' still bodies . This method kept their bodies in focus but allowed their heads to rapidly move . 
 The crew used several different styles for the " bullet time " scene . In order to create the shot , a matte of the bullet emerging from Max 's chest was combined with smoke and " phony CGI bullets " , according to producer Paul Rabwin . The crew tried different tracking devices for the bullet , including a pronounced blur effect , which was later removed in favor of a more realistic " smoke " pathway . The production crew had a difficult time deciding whether or not the bullet should remain at Chastity 's speed as she walked towards it , or whether she should pass the bullet ; the group eventually went with the latter . 
 Stunt coordinator Danny <unk> helped arrange the more frantic shots , such as the scene wherein a lunch table kills a teacher . Executive producer Frank Spotnitz later called the scene , " probably one of the most horrific things we 've ever done . " Due to the violent nature of the episode — and the table scene in particular — Fox 's Standards and Practices department had an issue with the series showing " the impact between the table and the man " . In order to comply , the impact was removed , but the rest of the scene stayed intact . Spotnitz later noted that , " when you take out the impact , the audience 's imagination is ten times worse . " 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Rush " first aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 5 , 1999 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 9 , with an 11 share , meaning that roughly 7 @.@ 9 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 11 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 12 @.@ 71 million viewers . The episode aired in the United Kingdom and Ireland on Sky1 on April 16 , 2000 and received 0 @.@ 79 million viewers , making it the sixth most watched episode that week . The episode was later nominated for an Emmy for Outstanding Special Visual Effects for a Dramatic Series as well as an International Monitor Award for Best Achievement in Visual Effects . 
 The episode received mostly mixed to negative reviews from critics . Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a mixed review and awarded it two stars out of four . She noted that the episode suffered from a " bland story " filled with " bland teens " , noting that the actors playing the three main teenagers were " as generic as can be " . Vitaris ultimately concluded that " ' Rush ' is hardly the worst of The X @-@ Files ; it 's merely forgettable . " Kenneth Silber from Space.com was critical of the episode , arguing that the show was re @-@ using plot lines and that the personalities of the teenagers were wholly uninteresting . He wrote , " This episode unfolds with a bland sense of familiarity . Once again , troubled adolescents are toying with paranormal forces that can only get them into further trouble . Sadly , these adolescents lack interesting personalities , and the force in question remains wholly mysterious . " Rich Rosell from Digitally Obsessed awarded the episode 3 @.@ 5 out of 5 stars and wrote that the episode was " Not brilliant , but moderately entertaining . " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode two stars out of five . Despite praising the episode 's set pieces , they ultimately concluded that " The X @-@ Files just isn 't cool anymore <unk> . " 
 Not all reviews were so negative . Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club awarded the episode a " B – " . While enjoying the premise , he criticized the entry for featuring a guest cast that " mostly sucks " . He did , however , positively comment on the scene wherein Max kills his teacher , noting that it " is a brutal , visceral sequence " that the episode could have used more of . Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations , gave the episode a largely positive review , writing , " ' Rush ' was sufficiently creepy and had some wonderful character interaction between Mulder and Scully . " Furthermore , he noted that the characterization " helped make it a very enjoyable entry into what is quickly becoming a very enjoyable season . " 
 = Stapleton Road railway station = 
 Stapleton Road railway station is on the Severn Beach Line and Cross Country Route , serving the inner @-@ city district of Easton in Bristol , England . It is 1 @.@ 6 miles ( 2 @.@ 6 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads . Its three letter station code is SRD . As of 2015 , the station has two platforms , two running lines and minimal facilities . It is managed by Great Western Railway , the seventh company to be responsible for the station , and the third franchise since privatisation in 1997 . They provide all train services at the station , the standard service being a train every 40 minutes along the Severn Beach Line , an hourly service to Bristol Parkway , and another hourly service to Westbury . 
 The station was opened in 1863 by the Bristol and South Wales Union Railway , with a single track and platform . The line was doubled in 1874 when the Clifton Extension Railway opened , then expanded to four tracks and platforms in 1888 . There were buildings on all platforms and a goods yard to the north . Stapleton Road became one of Bristol 's busiest stations , but service levels reduced significantly in the 1960s when reversing trains at Bristol Temple Meads became common . The goods facilities were closed in 1965 , staff were withdrawn in 1967 and the line was reduced to two tracks in 1984 . 
 The line is due to be electrified as part of the 21st @-@ century modernisation of the Great Western Main Line , which will also see the addition of two new running lines to increase capacity , although no platforms will be built for these lines . Service frequency will however be improved as part of the Greater Bristol Metro scheme . 
 = = Description = = 
 Stapleton Road railway station is located in the Easton area of Bristol . The surrounding area is primarily residential , with the M32 motorway to the north of the station , and an industrial and commercial area north of that . The station is named after the A432 Stapleton Road just north of the station . The station can be accessed by Belmont Street to the west , an unnamed access road to the east , or by a set of steps from Stapleton Road . Access to the southbound platform is via a slope of gradient greater than 1 in 12 . The station is on the Cross Country Route between Bristol Temple Meads and Bristol Parkway , and on the Severn Beach Line from Bristol Temple Meads to Severn Beach . It is 1 mile 50 chains ( 2 @.@ 6 km ) from Bristol Temple Meads . Directly to the north of the station is a bridge over the A432 , then a bridge over the M32 , then Narroways Hill Junction , where the Severn Beach Line diverges from the Cross Country Route . The next station north along the Cross Country Route is Filton Abbey Wood , the next station north along the Severn Beach Line is Montpelier , and the next station south is Lawrence Hill . 
 The station is on an alignment of 150 degrees , curving towards the east . There are two active platforms : the western platform , platform 1 , serves northbound trains ; the eastern platform , platform 2 , serves southbound trains . Platform 1 is 216 metres ( 236 yd ) long ; platform 2 is 211 metres ( 231 yd ) long , however both have the southern 100 metres ( 110 yd ) fenced off . The southern end of the platforms bridge the residential street St Mark 's Road . Platform 2 is part of an " island " platform , the other face of which served the northbound " up fast " line through the station , which was removed in 1984 along with the southbound " down fast " and fourth platform which served it . The disused trackbed and fourth platform are home to the Eastside Roots community garden , part of the Bristol <unk> Group . Access between the platforms is by an open , stepped footbridge . 
 As of 2013 , facilities at the station are minimal – there is a metal and glass shelter on each of the two platforms , and a row of seats on the northbound platform . The station is completely unstaffed , and there are no facilities for buying tickets . There are customer help points , giving next train information for both platforms . There is no car park or taxi rank , and the nearest bus stop is 120 metres ( 130 yd ) away on the A432 Stapleton Road . There are eight bicycle stands on the platform . A mural depicting local life and history is painted on the wall of platform 1 . 
 The line through Stapleton Road has a speed limit of 60 miles per hour ( 97 km / h ) northbound and 75 miles per hour ( 121 km / h ) southbound . The loading gauge is W8 , and the line handles over 15 million train tonnes per year . It is not electrified , though it is planned that it will be electrified by 2017 as part of the 21st @-@ century modernisation of the Great Western Main Line . 
 = = Services = = 
 Services at Stapleton Road are all operated by Great Western Railway . As of the December 2013 timetable , Monday to Friday , three trains every two hours run along the Severn Beach Line from Bristol Temple Meads to Avonmouth via Clifton Down , with one extended to St Andrew 's Road and Severn Beach . Most services start at Bristol , but one evening service to Avonmouth begins at Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare . On Saturdays there is a similar level of service , but more trains continue to Severn Beach . Sunday sees a roughly hourly service to and from Bristol , with only two services extending to Severn Beach , except during the May – September timetable period , when all services are extended . The first and last Sunday trains towards Bristol are extended to Taunton via Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare , and there are similar workings in the other direction . Most trains call at all stations , but some services omit Lawrence Hill . In 2012 , the single fare to Clifton Down or Bristol was £ 1 @.@ 50 , and £ 3 return for the whole line . 
 Southbound services from Great Malvern and Gloucester to Westbury and Weymouth call at Stapleton road , with one train per hour . Hourly northbound services from Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare to Bristol Parkway also call , as do some peak northbound services from Taunton to Cardiff Central and two evening southbound services from Cardiff to Bristol . All trains southbound call at Bristol Temple Meads , although this requires Gloucester @-@ Westbury trains to reverse . CrossCountry trains pass Stapleton Road non @-@ stop throughout the day , operating two trains per hour each direction between the South West , Bristol , Manchester and Scotland . 
 Services from Stapleton Road are operated using a mix of Class 150 Sprinter , Class 153 Super Sprinter and Class 158 Express Sprinter diesel multiple units . Until 2012 , Class 143 Pacer units were a regular sight , but these have mostly been moved south to work in Devon and Cornwall following a cascade of Class 150 / 1 units from London Midland and London Overground . 
 The standard journey time to Bristol Temple Meads is 7 minutes , to Bristol Parkway 13 minutes , and to Avonmouth 23 minutes . 
 = = History = = 
 Stapleton Road opened on 8 September 1863 when services began on the Bristol and South Wales Union Railway ( BSWUR ) , which ran from Bristol Temple Meads to New Passage Pier , north of Bristol on the banks of the River Severn . At New Passage , passengers were transferred to a ferry to cross the Severn to continue on in to Wales . The line , engineered by Isambard Kingdom Brunel , was built as single track 7 ft 1 ⁄ 4 in ( 2 @,@ 140 mm ) broad gauge , with a platform on the west side of the track . The BSWUR was amalgamated with the Great Western Railway , which had from the beginning operated all BSWUR services , in 1868 ; and in 1873 the line was converted to 1 @,@ 435 mm ( 4 ft 8 1 ⁄ 2 in ) standard gauge . In 1874 , the Clifton Extension Railway opened , connecting the Bristol Port Railway and Pier to the Great Western Railway at Narroways Hill Junction , north of Stapleton Road . To cope with the expected increase in traffic , the line was doubled , and a second platform was added to the east of the two tracks . Two more tracks were added in 1888 , giving a layout of two sets of two tracks , with platforms on the outside and on an island in the middle . Trains to and from Clifton Down and Avonmouth used the western platforms while trains to and from South Wales used the eastern platforms . There were buildings on all the platforms , with the booking office on the eastern outer platform , at the head of the access road . The refreshment room was on the island platform , and a covered footbridge connected the platforms . There was a yard to the north of the station , on the other side of Stapleton Road , which handled goods traffic including coal and other minerals . 
 Stapleton Road became one of Bristol 's busiest stations . The opening of the Clifton Extension Railway meant that Stapleton Road became a junction station , and when the Severn Tunnel was opened in 1886 , replacing the ferry from New Passage , trains from London to Wales began to run via Bristol instead of Gloucester . Many would call at Stapleton Road instead of Bristol Temple Meads because this avoided having to run the locomotive around the train . In 1886 , the daily Great Western service along the Clifton Extension Railway was 6 trains each way between Avonmouth and Temple Meads , 24 trains from Clifton Down to Temple Meads and 26 the other direction . By 1910 there were 17 services daily from Avonmouth to Temple Meads and 15 the other way , a further 20 trains each day operating between Clifton Down and Temple Meads . For many passengers on the Clifton Extension Railway , Stapleton Road was where they would change for services to South Wales and the South Coast of England , and by 1912 the station name boards showed " Stapleton Road Junction for Clifton and Avonmouth " , although the station was never officially renamed . By this time however , the number of services to Wales had decreased due to the opening of the " Badminton Line " from Wootton Bassett to Patchway , now part of the South Wales Main Line , which allowed trains from London to avoid central Bristol entirely . From 1924 , many trains to Avonmouth were extended to Severn Beach , a growing seaside resort , and some on to Pilning , then back to Temple Meads via Patchway . Circular trips via Henbury were also common , and by 1930 a total of 350 trains would pass the station each day . The station was also used by excursion trains , and by trains of evacuees during the Second World War . By 1947 , just before the start of the British Rail era , there were 33 daily services each direction between Avonmouth and Temple Meads , and 18 on Sundays . The station also saw the arrival of Prime Minister David Lloyd George in the 1920s . 
 When the railways were nationalised in 1948 , Stapleton Road came under the aegis of the Western Region of British Railways . A gradual decline of services at Stapleton Road began . While as late as 1963 name boards at the station read " Bristol Stapleton Road " , trains between South Wales and the South Coast were eventually re @-@ routed via Bristol Temple Meads – the introduction of diesel multiple units making it easier for the trains to reverse – and no longer called at Stapleton Road . Passenger numbers along the Clifton Extension Railway , now known as the Severn Beach Line , also dropped , and in 1963 the Beeching report suggested that all services along the line be withdrawn . In the end , services continued to Severn Beach but were discontinued via Henbury and Pilning . The goods yard was closed on 29 November 1965 , and staff were withdrawn from the station from 17 July 1967 as a cost @-@ saving measure . In 1975 the M32 motorway was opened north of the station , passing through the southern end of the goods yard . The eastern tracks were removed in 1984 , although the bridge which carried the line across the A432 and M32 was left intact . The remaining station buildings were demolished at the same time , the buildings on the island platform having already been removed by 1958 . Plans to use the disused trackbed as part of a light rail scheme linking the city centre to the northern suburbs were formed in the late 1990s , with the aim of an operational scheme by 2008 , but the plans had been shelved by 2004 . It was suggested in 2008 that the trackbed could be used as a cycle path to join together communities which had been separated by the construction of the M32 motorway , however this was dropped due to Network Rail asserting that the trackbed might be necessary for future rail expansion . 
 British Rail was split into business @-@ led sectors in the 1980s , at which time operations at Stapleton Road passed to Regional Railways . All trains along the Severn Beach Line ran to Severn Beach , but the service pattern was irregular . This was changed in the mid @-@ 1990s , with a more frequent service to Avonmouth but very few on to Severn Beach and no Sunday services . Services at Stapleton Road were boosted due to the proximity of Eastville Stadium , but this use ended in 1986 when Bristol Rovers F.C. moved to Twerton Park in Bath . 
 When the railway was privatised in 1997 , local services were franchised to Wales & West , which was succeeded by Wessex Trains , an arm of National Express , in 2001 . The station was brightened in 1999 when a mural illustrating local life was painted on the wall of the western platform by Bill <unk> . Services along the Severn Beach Line were increased to 10 per day in each direction by 2005 , with Bristol City Council providing a subsidy to Wessex Trains . The Wessex franchise was amalgamated with the Great Western franchise into the Greater Western franchise from 2006 , and responsibility passed to First Great Western , a subsidiary company of FirstGroup , rebranded in 2015 as Great Western Railway . A minimum service requirement was written into the franchise agreement , ensuring an hourly service along the Severn Beach Line . Passenger traffic increased significantly , and in 2010 , Sunday services to Severn Beach were restored . 
 By 2005 , the disused eastern trackbed was filled with rubble , brambles and weeds , and the station had acquired a bad reputation due to muggings and the use of illegal drugs on the station premises . A community garden project , Eastside Roots , was set up in the disused trackbed by local permaculture enthusiast Nick Ward . It was built using sustainable materials , including bricks dug out during the construction of the Cabot Circus shopping centre . The project led to a general improvement of the station ambience , and residents were more willing to use it . The footbridge was replaced in 2013 to allow for electrification of the line , but the new , higher , bridge angered local residents who felt it infringed on their privacy . 
 = = Future = = 
 First Great Western declined a contractual option to continue the Greater Western passenger franchise beyond 2013 , citing a desire for a longer @-@ term contract due to the impending upgrade to the Great Western Main Line . The franchise was put out to tender , but the process was halted and later scrapped due to the fallout from the collapse of the InterCity West Coast franchise competition . A two @-@ year franchise extension until September 2015 was agreed in October 2013 , and subsequently extended until March 2019 . 
 The line through Stapleton Road is due to be electrified by 2017 as part of the Great Western Main Line electrification project . However , the Severn Beach Line , the Cross Country Route , the Bristol to Exeter Line and the Heart of Wessex Line will not be electrified , so services at Stapleton Road will still be provided by diesel trains , with " Sprinter " units expected to be replaced by Class 165 and 166 " Turbo " units . The group Friends of Suburban Bristol Railways supports the electrification continuing beyond the main lines , as does MP for Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare John Penrose . The electrification scheme also includes the four @-@ tracking of Filton Bank , including the reinstatement of the disused trackbed at Stapleton Road , to allow more services between Parkway and Bristol Temple Meads and separate fast inter @-@ city services from local stopping services . The two eastern platforms at Stapleton Road will be demolished to allow trains to run faster , although it has been suggested that they be kept for use in case of service disruptions . 
 Stapleton Road is on the Weston @-@ super @-@ Mare / Yate corridor , one of the main axes of the Greater Bristol Metro , a rail transport plan which aims to enhance transport capacity in the Bristol area , including half @-@ hourly services along the Severn Beach Line . The scheme could see the reopening of the Henbury Loop Line to passengers , with the possibility of services from Bristol Temple Meads to Bristol Parkway via Clifton Down and Henbury . Plans for a loop were rejected by the West of England Joint Transport Board , however Bristol City Councillors voted to send the decision back to the board for further discussion . 
 = Sebright chicken = 
 The Sebright / <unk> / is a breed of chicken named after its developer , Sir John Saunders Sebright . The Sebright is one of the oldest recorded British ' true ' bantam ( meaning it is a miniature bird with no corresponding large version of the breed ) , created in the 19th century through a selective breeding program designed to produce an ornamental breed . 
 The first poultry breed to have its own specialist club for enthusiasts , Sebrights were admitted to poultry exhibition standards not long after their establishment . Today , they are among the most popular of bantam breeds . Despite their popularity , Sebrights are often difficult to breed , and the inheritance of certain unique characteristics the breed carries has been studied scientifically . As a largely ornamental chicken , they lay tiny , white eggs and are not kept for meat production . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Sir John Saunders Sebright ( 1767 – 1846 ) was the 7th Sebright Baronet , and a Member of Parliament for Hertfordshire . In addition to breeding chickens , cattle and other animals , Sir John wrote several influential pamphlets on animal keeping and breeding : The Art of Improving the Breeds of Domestic Animals ( 1809 ) , Observations upon Hawking ( 1826 ) , and Observations upon the Instinct of Animals ( 1836 ) . 
 Charles Darwin read Sir John 's 1809 pamphlet , and was impressed with a passage that elaborated on how " the weak and the unhealthy do not live to propagate their infirmities " . These writings , along with Darwin 's correspondence via their mutual friend William Yarrell , aided Darwin in the inception of Darwin 's theory of natural selection . Darwin 's seminal work On the Origin of Species , first published in 1859 , cited Sir John 's experiments in pigeon breeding , and recalled " That most skilful breeder , Sir John Sebright , used to say , with respect to pigeons , that ' he would produce any given feather in three years , but it would take him six years to obtain head and beak . ' " Darwin also cited Sir John extensively regarding the Sebright bantam , as well as pigeon and dog breeding , in his 1868 work Variation of Plants and Animals Under Domestication , his 1871 The Descent of Man , and Selection in Relation to Sex , and his book on Natural Selection ( which was not published in his lifetime ) . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 With the breed that carries his name , John Sebright intentionally set out to create a very small bantam chicken with laced plumage similar to the laced variety of Polish chickens . Although the exact makeup of the breed is uncertain , he is thought to have crossed British , Hamburgh , Nankin and Polish birds with a base of <unk> before achieving a laced chicken that would breed true . After the breed 's establishment circa 1810 , Sebright founded The Sebright Bantam Club , which was the very first individual breed association for chickens . The breed has appeared in the American Poultry Association 's Standard of Perfection since the first edition in 1874 . Today , the breed is one of the ten most popular bantam chickens , according to the American Bantam Association . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 In accordance with the intentions of their creator , the Sebright is an ornamental bantam , and is commonly seen in competitive poultry shows . As a true bantam , all Sebrights are very small in stature ; males weigh an average of 22 ounces ( 625 grams ) and females 20 oz ( 570 g ) . Their short backs , proportionally large breasts , and downward – pointing wings combine to create an angular , jaunty look . 
 All Sebrights have plumage that is laced around the edges evenly with black , on a base of either dark gold or whitish silver . Sebrights have unfeathered legs with slate – blue skin , and their beaks are ideally a dark horn color . Sebright roosters carry a rose comb covered with fine points , and a small spike that sweeps back from the head ( called a leader ) . Combs , earlobes and wattles were originally a purple colour referred to in the fancy as mulberry , but today are often bright red though mulberry is still desired according to the standards in most countries . Some breeders consider hen feathering to have an adverse effect on the fertility of male Sebrights , and may use roosters that don 't carry the trait for breeding purposes , despite their automatic disqualification in shows . 
 Characteristically , Sebrights are only one of a few chicken breeds in which the roosters are hen feathered , meaning they have none of the long , sickle – shaped feathers common in most roosters that appear in the tail , neck and saddle . Due to the unique characteristic hen feathering , molecular biologists have found the Sebright bantam a useful model organism in the study of sex hormones . This is because they carry a mutation that causes the tissues of their skin to convert an unusually large amount of male sex hormones ( androgens ) into female sex hormones ( estrogens ) . 
 They are kind birds but the male Sebright may get protective around hens and may turn on its own owners like all roosters may do . And due to their light , flighty nature it might be best to keep them contained to a smaller , fenced off area . Sebrights often will live happily living amongst other breeds as well . Sebrights are not prolific <unk> and hens are only expected to produce 60 @-@ 80 creamy @-@ white eggs each season . 
 = = = Husbandry = = = 
 Sebrights are neither prolific egg layers , nor outstanding meat birds . They can prove to be particularly difficult to raise , especially for beginners . Hens rarely go broody and chicks usually have high mortality rates . Adults are generally hardy birds , but are especially susceptible to Marek 's disease . 
 In temperament , Sebrights are friendly and actively social birds . Males are not known to be aggressive , but Sebrights in general , like most small chickens , are somewhat skittish birds . Due to their small size and relatively large wings , they are one of a minority of chicken breeds that retains a strong flying ability . Thus , most keepers keep Sebrights in confinement rather than allowing them to free range . Due to their genetic make @-@ up , males may on occasion be born infertile , further complicating breeding . 
 = Frank Chance = 
 Frank Leroy Chance ( September 9 , 1876 – September 15 , 1924 ) was an American professional baseball player . A first baseman , Chance played in Major League Baseball for the Chicago Cubs ( initially named the " Orphans " ) and New York Yankees from 1898 through 1914 . He also served as manager of the Cubs , Yankees , and Boston Red Sox . 
 Discovered by the Cubs as he played semi @-@ professional baseball while attending college , Chance debuted with the Cubs in 1898 , serving as a part @-@ time player . In 1903 , Chance became the Cubs ' regular first baseman , and in 1905 , he succeeded Frank Selee as the team 's manager . Chance led the Cubs to four National League championships in the span of five years ( 1906 – 1910 ) and won the World Series championships in 1907 and 1908 . With Joe Tinker and Johnny Evers , Chance formed a strong double play combination , which was immortalized as " Tinker @-@ to @-@ Evers @-@ to @-@ Chance " in " Baseball 's Sad Lexicon " . 
 Let go by the Cubs after the 1912 season , Chance signed with the Yankees , serving as a player – manager for two seasons . He joined the Los Angeles Angels of the Pacific Coast League as a player – manager , returning to MLB in 1923 as manager of the Red Sox . Chance was named the manager of the Chicago White Sox in 1924 , but never took control of the team as he became ill . He died later that year . 
 Noted for his leadership abilities , Chance earned the nickname " Peerless Leader . " He is the all @-@ time leader in managerial winning percentage in Cubs history . Chance was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame in the 1946 balloting by the Veterans Committee , along with Tinker and Evers . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Chance was born in Salida , California , in Stanislaus County , on September 9 , 1876 . His family was of English and Scottish descent . He was raised in Fresno , California and attended Fresno High School . His father was president of the first national bank in Fresno . 
 Chance enrolled at the University of California , where he pursued a degree in dentistry . He transferred to Washington College in Irvington , California . While playing baseball for the school 's baseball team , he received an offer to play semi @-@ professional baseball for a team in Sullivan , Illinois , for $ 40 a month ( $ 1 @,@ 138 in current dollar terms ) , which he accepted . 
 Returning to college the next year , Chance led his team to a third @-@ place finish in an amateur tournament of 50 teams . Bill Lange of the Chicago Cubs discovered Chance and convinced the Cubs to sign him as a backup catcher and outfielder , receiving $ 1 @,@ 200 a year ( $ 34 @,@ 133 in current dollar terms ) . Chance was scouted by other teams , but chose the Cubs as Tim Donohue was the only catcher ahead of him on the Cubs ' depth chart . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Chicago Cubs = = = 
 Chance began his career in 1898 with the Chicago Cubs , serving as a reserve catcher and outfielder . He played irregularly through the 1902 season . Due in part to finger injuries suffered while catching , Chance played in no more than 75 games in a season through 1902 . In 1903 , Johnny Kling became the Cubs ' full @-@ time catcher . As Bill Hanlon , the Cubs ' first baseman , left the team , manager Frank Selee moved Chance to first base . Though Chance initially balked at the position change , he agreed when he received a pay raise . 
 In 125 games during the 1903 season , Chance recorded a .327 batting average , and 67 stolen bases ; the latter mark led the National League ( NL ) . His .439 on @-@ base percentage was third @-@ best in the league , behind Roy Thomas and Roger Bresnahan , and his 81 runs batted in ( RBIs ) tied Jake Beckley for sixth @-@ best . Chance had a .310 batting average in 1904 , good for sixth place in the NL . His .382 on @-@ base percentage was the fourth @-@ best in the league , and his .430 slugging percentage was fifth @-@ best . Chance also hit six home runs , tying him with Dan McGann , Red Dooin , and Cozy Dolan for third place , his 42 stolen bases tied McGann for fourth place , and his 89 runs scored were seventh @-@ best . 
 Selee fell ill in 1905 , and Chance was selected to succeed him as manager . That year , he also batted .316 with 92 runs scored and 70 RBIs . His batting average was sixth @-@ best in the NL , while he led the league with a .450 on @-@ base percentage , and finished seventh with a <unk> slugging percentage . His 38 stolen bases were sixth @-@ best in the league . In 1906 , Chance batted .319 and led the NL in runs scored ( 103 ) and stolen bases ( 57 ) . His batting average was fifth @-@ best in the league , while his .419 on @-@ base percentage finished in third , and his .430 slugging percentage placed him in fifth . When Chance stole home from second base in a tie game against the Cincinnati Reds , team owner Charles W. Murphy granted him a ten @-@ percent ownership stake in the club to show his gratitude . Chance later sold his share of the franchise for approximately $ 150 @,@ 000 . Meanwhile , The Cubs won 116 games during the 1906 season , taking the NL pennant . The Chicago White Sox of the American League defeated the Cubs in the 1906 World Series . 
 Chance batted .293 during the 1907 season , finishing sixth in the NL , while his .395 on @-@ base percentage was third @-@ best . He tied Ed Abbaticchio for seventh with 35 stolen bases . The Cubs returned to the World Series in 1907 . Though Chance only batted .154 in the 1907 World Series , the Cubs defeated the Tigers in four games . 
 Chance began to decline during the 1908 season . Though he finished third in the NL with 27 doubles , he did not finish among the ten best in the categories of batting average , on @-@ base percentage , or stolen bases in 1908 , 1909 , or 1910 . Chance batted .425 in the 1908 World Series , as the Cubs again defeated the Tigers , this time in five games . 
 By 1910 , Chance began to groom Fred <unk> as his successor at first base . He rebuilt the team in 1911 after Evers 's nervous breakdown and the departure of Harry Steinfeldt , replacing them with Heinie Zimmerman and Jim Doyle respectively . The Cubs returned to the World Series in 1910 , against the Philadelphia Athletics . Chance batted .353 in the 1910 World Series , though the Athletics won the series in five games . Chance was ejected in game three , becoming the first player ever ejected from a World Series game . Chance continued to transition himself out of the Cubs ' lineup in 1911 , as he played in only 31 games . 
 = = = New York Yankees = = = 
 In 1912 , Chance endured surgeries to correct blood clots in his brain that were caused by being hit by pitches in his head . Meanwhile , Chance argued with Murphy , who had been releasing expensive players from the Cubs in an effort to save the team money . The New York Yankees negotiated for Chance 's release from the Cubs after the 1912 season . The Cubs released Chance while he was hospitalized , and in January 1913 , Chance signed a three @-@ year contract with the Yankees , worth $ 120 @,@ 000 ( $ 2 @,@ 873 @,@ 131 in current dollar terms ) , to serve as the Yankees ' manager . He also played first base for the Yankees and served as field captain , though he played in no more than 12 games in a season . The Yankees sat in last place on the next @-@ to @-@ last day of the 1913 season , but won their final game to finish in seventh place . In 1914 , Chance named Roger Peckinpaugh the Yankees ' new captain . 
 After struggling during the 1914 season , Chance criticized the talent brought to him by Yankees scout Arthur Irwin . After repeatedly seeking to have Irwin fired , he offered his resignation from the team late in the season on the condition that he still was to receive his 1915 salary . After this was accepted by team owner Frank J. Farrell , Chance resigned with three weeks remaining in the season , and Peckinpaugh served as player – manager for the remainder of the season . 
 = = = Later career = = = 
 Chance returned to his native California , and was named manager of the Los Angeles Angels of the Pacific Coast League in 1916 . Chance won the league championship in 1916 . He re @-@ signed with the Angels for the 1917 season and was also granted a part ownership in the Angels from the majority owner , John F. Powers . Powers and Chance remained good friends for the rest of his life . He resigned during the 1917 season due to his declining health . He then served as president of the California Winter League , continuing to instill discipline in players : he fined Ty Cobb for " abusing an umpire " . 
 Chance managed the Boston Red Sox in 1923 . The Red Sox did not retain Chance after the season . But some sources noted that Chance had only agreed to a one @-@ year contract and was not necessarily interested in returning to the Red Sox , a team described by one sportswriter as no better than a minor league club . After his relationship with the Red Sox was severed , he was named the Chicago White Sox manager for the 1924 season but developed severe influenza before he could take the helm . He soon developed other respiratory complications , including asthma . Chance submitted his resignation to owner Charles Comiskey , but Comiskey refused to accept it , giving him the opportunity to return to the team when his health improved . He returned to Chicago briefly in April , but was unable to take charge of the team . Chance returned to Los Angeles where he underwent emergency surgery in April 1924 . Evers was named the White Sox acting manager for the 1924 season . 
 = = = Career summary = = = 
 = = = = Overview = = = = 
 Chance was part of the trio of infielders remembered for their double @-@ play ability , with Joe Tinker and Johnny Evers . The trio were immortalized as " Tinker @-@ to @-@ Evers @-@ to @-@ Chance " , also known as " Baseball 's Sad Lexicon " , written by the 28 @-@ year @-@ old New York Evening Mail newspaper columnist Franklin Pierce Adams in July 1910 . Chance helped Evers develop an underhanded throw . 
 Chance took over as Chicago 's manager in 1905 . His playing time decreased towards the end of the decade . The Cubs won the NL pennant in 1906 , 1907 , 1908 and 1910 , and won the World Series in 1907 and 1908 , to date , the Cubs ' last World Series victory . He became the highest paid player in baseball , earning as much as $ 25 @,@ 000 ( $ 634 @,@ 911 in current dollar terms ) in 1910 . 
 Chance 's lifetime record as a manager was 946 – 648 ( <unk> winning percentage ) ; his .667 winning percentage as manager of the Cubs is the highest in franchise history . As a player , Chance is the Cubs ' all @-@ time career leader in stolen bases , with 400 . He led the Cubs in batting average in 1903 , 1904 , 1905 and 1907 . In World Series play , Chance batted .310 , recording 22 hits , scoring 11 runs , and stealing 10 bases . 
 Chance was a disciplinarian . He preached moderation in socializing , including avoiding alcohol , to his players . Chance fined his players for shaking hands with members of the opposing team and forced Solly <unk> to delay his wedding until after the baseball season , lest marriage impair his abilities on the playing field . In August 1911 , Chance suspended Tinker for the remainder of the season for using profanity , though he reinstated Tinker two days later . 
 = = = = Managerial record = = = = 
 = = Personal = = 
 During the baseball offseasons , Chance worked as a prizefighter . James J. Corbett and John L. Sullivan , among the best fighters of the era , both considered Chance " the greatest amateur brawler of all time . " Chance owned a ranch in Glendora , California , which he sold prior to becoming manager of the Red Sox . 
 Chance married Edythe Pancake on October 3 , 1903 . Edythe became an advocate for baseball , imploring women to attend baseball games . 
 Chance died at age 48 . Some sources simply said that he died of a " long illness " , while others attributed it to heart disease brought on by severe spasms of bronchial asthma . He was survived by his wife , mother , sister , and three brothers . Chance was interred in the Angelus @-@ Rosedale Cemetery , Los Angeles . His death was greatly mourned , and his funeral received widespread publicity in Los Angeles and Chicago . Among his pallbearers were Powers and race car driver Barney Oldfield . His estate was valued at $ 170 @,@ 000 . 
 = = Honors = = 
 After falling short of induction in the Hall of Fame by seven votes in 1945 , Chance was elected to the Hall of Fame in 1946 . Tinker and Evers were elected the same year . Chance was also elected to the Fresno Athletic Hall of Fame . 
 A baseball field in Fresno named after Chance operated from 1935 to 1941 . Joe DiMaggio played in the first @-@ ever game at Frank Chance Field . Retired players participated in an exhibition game in Chance 's honor in 1937 . John McGraw , a contemporary and rival of Chance , considered Chance one of the greatest players he ever saw . 
 The City of Hope National Medical Center created the Frank L. Chance Research Fellowship Foundation in his memory . 
 = Musings of a Cigarette Smoking Man = 
 " Musings of a Cigarette Smoking Man " is the seventh episode of the fourth season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network in the United States on November 17 , 1996 . It was written by Glen Morgan , directed by James Wong , and featured the first guest appearance by Chris Owens , appearing as a younger Smoking Man . " Musings of a Cigarette Smoking Man " earned a Nielsen household rating of 10 @.@ 7 , being watched by 17 @.@ 09 million people in its initial broadcast . The episode received mostly positive reviews from television critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work . In this episode , Lone Gunman Melvin Frohike ( Tom Braidwood ) finds a tell @-@ tale magazine story supposedly revealing the history of The Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) . The episode illustrates his possible involvement in several historical events and assassinations , although the reliability of the source is unresolved at the end of the episode . 
 Executive producer Frank Spotnitz later noted that , while parts of " Musings of a Cigarette Smoking Man " may indeed be factual , the majority is not actual canon . The production of the episode did not require extensive use of Duchovny and Anderson on screen . The former 's voice is only heard and the latter appears only in archival footage . Davis , who portrayed the title character , was pleased with the episode , although confused with some of the contradictions in the script . Although not directly furthering the series ' overarching mythology , the episode involves several of its events and characters . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Smoking Man , armed with a sniper rifle and surveillance equipment , spies on a meeting between Fox Mulder , Dana Scully , and the Lone Gunmen . Frohike claims to have discovered information about the Smoking Man 's mysterious past , stating that his father was an executed communist spy and that his mother died of lung cancer , causing him to be raised in various Midwest orphanages . 
 The narrative changes to 1962 . The Smoking Man is an Army captain stationed at Fort Bragg in North Carolina . He talks to a friend and fellow soldier , Bill Mulder , who shows him a photo of his infant son , Fox . The Smoking Man is summoned to attend a meeting with a general and several strange men in suits . They assign him to assassinate President John F. Kennedy . In 1963 , posing as a " Mr. Hunt , " the Smoking Man shoots Kennedy and frames Lee Harvey Oswald . Afterwards , he smokes his first cigarette from a pack previously given to him by Oswald . 
 Five years later , the Smoking Man writes a novel entitled Take a Chance : A Jack Colquitt Adventure , using the pen name " Raul Bloodworth " . After hearing Martin Luther King , Jr. give a speech criticizing America 's attitude towards the distribution of wealth at home and social revolutions abroad , the Smoking Man meets with a group of men , including J. Edgar Hoover . The Smoking Man convinces the group to have King assassinated and volunteers to perform the task . Shortly thereafter , a publishing company rejects his novel . 
 In 1991 , the Smoking Man meets with subordinates , discussing his orchestration of the Anita Hill controversy and the Rodney King trial . He orders that the Buffalo Bills not win the Super Bowl . He further reveals his drugging of a Soviet goaltender to ensure the outcome of the " Miracle on Ice " hockey match . One of the Smoking Man 's subordinates invites him for a family dinner . Although flattered , the Smoking Man declines the invitation and states that he is scheduled to visit family . On his way out of the meeting , he distributes his Christmas presents to each of the <unk> all receive the same gift . The gift is a striped tie . He is next seen walking past Fox Mulder 's office . 
 Later , while at home , the Smoking Man receives an urgent phone call from Deep Throat , who meets him near the site of a UFO wreck . An alien from the UFO is alive . Deep Throat and Smoking Man reminisce about the multiple times they changed the course of history . They flip a coin over who is tasked to kill the alien survivor . Deep Throat loses , and thus reluctantly shoots the alien . 
 A few months later , in March 1992 , the Smoking Man attends the meeting where Scully is assigned to the X @-@ Files and eavesdrops on the agents ' first meeting . In 1996 , he receives a letter telling him that his novel will be serialized in the magazine Roman a Clef . He types up a resignation letter , and excitedly finds the magazine at a newsstand . However , he finds that the ending has been changed . Bitter , the Smoking Man sits on a bench with a homeless man , giving a monologue on how " life is like a box of chocolates " . He tears up his resignation letter and leaves the magazine at the bench . 
 Back in the present , Frohike tells Mulder and Scully that what he 's told them is based on a story he found in a magazine he subscribes to . He leaves to verify the story . As he leaves , the Smoking Man has a clear shot . However , he decides not to kill him and quotes the last line from his unpublished novel : " I can kill you whenever I please , but not today " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 The episode was inspired by the DC Graphic Novel Lex Luthor : The Unauthorized Biography . Glen Morgan stated that he wanted the episode to show that The Smoking Man was the most dangerous human being alive . The episode was originally intended to end with The Smoking Man killing Melvin Frohike , but the show 's executive staff vetoed the idea . 
 The episode contains several references to Morgan and Wong 's former series Space : Above and Beyond including the name of The Smoking Man 's novel , Take a Chance , the reference to " classified compartmentalized " , and the name Jack Colquitt . In addition , Morgan Weisser , who played Lee Harvey Oswald , was an actor who appeared on that show . U.N. Resolution 1013 , quoted by Deep Throat , is a reference to Carter 's birthday and production company . Walden Roth , the editor who buys The Smoking Man 's novel , is a reference to 20th Century Fox executives Dana Walden and Peter Roth . The Smoking Man 's ambition to be a novelist was based on E. Howard Hunt . 
 Davis was happy to have an episode of his own , but was puzzled at some of the contradictions in the script , such as having him assassinate John F. Kennedy and Martin Luther King , Jr . , but being concerned with something as minor as keeping the Buffalo Bills from winning the Super Bowl . Chris Carter said " I had to speak with Bill several times ; I spent hours with him on the telephone talking about the character , because the actor felt that the episode really made the character something that it wasn 't . I tried to explain to him , as I think Jim and Glen were trying to express , that even if your mission in life is a destroyer , that you still have some hope in the back of your mind that you can be a creator — and that this all of a sudden , this vanity , is his vanity . And we see that so clearly here and it makes him sort of a silly person " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Davis later said " Jim Wong [ ... ] was a big help , too . A lot of the stage directions point toward farce , but Jim told me to play against that and just let the situation play out . The Forrest Gump scene was difficult , too . When I prepared it and did it the first time , I was almost Shakespearean in my approach . Jim made me toss it off more , and it worked fine " . Chris Owens who portrayed the Young Smoking Man spent time watching how Davis smokes to ensure that he did it just like him . Owens later appeared as a young version of The Smoking Man again in the episode " Demons " , and as his son Jeffrey Spender . 
 The episode was the first in the series that did not feature Mulder , and featured Scully only in archival footage from " Pilot " . The episode was not intended to give the actors a week off , but ended up that way , which Duchovny was very pleased with . Producer J.P. Finn coordinated the sequence where The Smoking Man assassinates John F. Kennedy . It was filmed in a downtown Vancouver location doubling for Dealey Plaza . The show 's costume designer contacted the costume designer for the film JFK and borrowed a reproduction of Jackie Kennedy 's pink suit used in the film . The presidential limousine ridden by Kennedy was created by picture vehicle coordinator Nigel Habgood . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Musings of a Cigarette Smoking Man " premiered on the Fox network on November 17 , 1996 . This episode earned a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 7 , with a 15 share , meaning that roughly 10 @.@ 7 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 15 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 17 @.@ 09 million viewers . James Wong earned the show 's first ever Emmy nomination for Outstanding Directing for a Drama Series for this episode , although he later lost to NYPD Blue 's Mark Tinker . 
 Few viewers picked up on the notion that the events of this episode were not necessarily factual . Story editor Frank Spotnitz said " In the closing scene Frohike tells Mulder and Scully that the whole story was something he read in a crummy magazine . A lot of people didn 't pick up on that subtlety . They thought that this was indeed the factual history of the CSM . As far as I 'm concerned , it 's not . Some of it may indeed be true , and some of it may — well , never mind " . 
 " Musings of a Cigarette Smoking Man " received mostly positive praise from critics . Entertainment Weekly gave the episode an " A – " , noting that " one has to wonder to what extent this episode is intended as information , and to what extent sheer entertainment " . Reviewer Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club spoke positively of the episode , saying " I love this ... and watching it now , I still do " . He ultimately gave the episode an " A " and wrote , " ' Musings ' is great because it transforms CSM from a living ghost into the walking dead — still horrifying , still dangerous , but pitiable just the same " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , named the episode " one of The X @-@ Files ' true masterpieces " and awarded it five stars out of five . The two praised Morgan and Wong 's combination of mythological story elements with more dry and dark humor . Furthermore , Shearman and Pearson wrote positively of the <unk> of the episode 's authenticity , noting that " the answers that the viewers are craving are handed out here on such a large plate , you can only take them as a delicious parody . " Paula Vitaris from Cinefantastique gave the episode a glowing review and awarded it four stars out of four . She praised the way that the viewer is able to see the " barren emotional landscape in which the Cigarette Smoking Man dwells " via the " tone of the script " . Furthermore , Vitaris applauded the Forrest Gump @-@ esque rant , calling it " a comic high point of verbal venom " . 
 Not all reviews were so positive . Author Phil Farrand was critical of the episode , rating it his fifth least favorite episode of the first four seasons . He criticized the entry for having an uninteresting first half , and relying on the " cliche " of the John F. Kennedy assassination . Furthermore , he was unhappy with the fact that viewers did not have any way of knowing whether the content of the episode really happened . Alan Kurtz criticized the episode for being inconsistent with the timetable of The X @-@ Files , pointing to the fact that the episode contradicts canon that was established in the third season episode " Apocrypha " . Furthermore , he derided the show for too closely mirroring the plots of the 1979 movie Apocalypse Now as well as Forrest Gump . 
 = Tiverton Preedy = 
 Tiverton Preedy ( 22 January 1863 – 26 April 1928 ) was an English clergyman who worked in Yorkshire and London from 1887 until his death , where he was noted for his work with the poor . He was particularly interested in the use of sport within ministry , and founded a church football team in the town of Barnsley which became the modern Barnsley F.C. 
 In 1883 he moved to London to become curate of a church in Islington , and later opened a nearby mission . He opened a boxing club at the mission and organised dances for local flower sellers . In recognition of his work , he was appointed a prebendary of St. Pauls Cathedral in 1926 . He died two years later and is buried in Islington Cemetery . In the 1990s , supporters of Barnsley F.C. located and restored his grave . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Preedy was born in Hunstanton in the county of Norfolk in 1863 , the second son of a local estate agent . He attended Bloxham School near Sleaford , Lincolnshire before entering Lincoln Theological College in 1885 , where he trained to become a minister in the Church of England . In 1887 he was ordained as a deacon , and in the same year was appointed to the position of Assistant Stipendiary Curate at St Peter 's church in the centre of Barnsley . The church had originally been set up as a mission to tend to the people of the poverty @-@ stricken area , but was licensed as a parish in its own right in 1887 . Preedy was engaged to assist the vicar , John Lloyd Brereton . 
 During his time at Theological College , Preedy had become keen on the concept of using sport to engender moral values , an idea much in vogue at the time and known as muscular Christianity . To this end , he decided to join a local sporting club , through which he hoped to come into closer contact with the local people . He initially joined a rugby football club , but resigned in protest at the team 's decision to play a match on Good Friday . 
 = = Formation of Barnsley Football Club = = 
 Shortly after his split from the rugby club , Preedy encountered by chance a group of young men discussing the idea of forming an association football club . Preedy was taken with the idea , not least because football was seen in the area as the " poor man 's sport " and his involvement would therefore bring him into greater contact with the poor people he wished to help through his ministry . To this end he formed a football club in September 1887 . Preedy acted as principal fundraiser and organiser of the club , dubbed Barnsley St Peter 's F.C. , and even played in its first match . A keen supporter of the Temperance movement , Preedy demanded high standards of behaviour from his players , and once refused to allow St Peter 's to play a match against local rivals Ardsley Old due to the conduct of the latter 's supporters . 
 Preedy was also responsible for securing the use of the land on which the Oakwell stadium still stands . After being refused permission to hire a field belonging to the owners of the Barnsley Brewery , Preedy 's appeal to the wife of one of the owners ultimately led to the club being granted permission to play at Oakwell . In 1891 Preedy was instrumental in the formation of the Barnsley Charity Football Association and the creation of the Barnsley Charity Cup . St. Peter 's reached the inaugural final but were surprisingly defeated by underdogs Ecclesfield . 
 = = Departure from Barnsley = = 
 In 1893 Preedy moved to London to become curate of St. Clement 's Church in Islington . Such was the regard in which the clergyman was held in the town that a civic reception was held to mark his departure , and tributes were printed in the Barnsley Chronicle . The St. Peter 's players presented him with a walking stick , a pipe and a tobacco pouch . Four years after his departure , the club severed its links to the church and became known simply as Barnsley F.C. 
 Preedy spent four years at St. Clement 's before being appointed to run a nearby mission in what was then an extremely deprived area of the city . At the time of his appointment the mission operated out of converted <unk> and the house with which Preedy was provided had no furniture . Preedy once again endeavoured to use sport as part of his ministry and opened a boxing club at the mission . Future world champion Terry Allen boxed at the club as a youngster , and among the wrestlers who trained there was future British champion and Olympic Games competitor George MacKenzie . Preedy also organised dances for the girls who sold flowers on local streets . 
 Preedy remained in contact with the football club he had founded in Barnsley and was a guest of honour at the 1912 FA Cup Final , in which Barnsley defeated West Bromwich Albion to lift the trophy . The victorious team presented him with the match ball , which he displayed in his study until his death . 
 = = Later years = = 
 In 1926 Preedy was appointed a prebendary at St. Pauls Cathedral , in recognition of his work in Islington . At around the same time he began to suffer from heart problems , and died in his sleep in April 1928 . His funeral was attended by several thousand mourners , and he was buried at Islington Cemetery in Finchley . His obituary in the Islington Gazette described him as " a generous friend to the poor " and the Bishop of Stepney in his eulogy called him " a wonderful parish priest and a splendid friend " , and made particular reference to his use of sport in his ministry . 
 In 1997 representatives of the club he founded located his grave in London and laid wreaths in the club 's colours . Full restoration of the grave was later carried out by the Barnsley F.C. Supporters ' Trust . 
 = James II of England = 
 James II and VII ( 14 October <unk> – 16 September 1701 ) was King of England and Ireland as James II and King of Scotland as James VII , from 6 February 1685 until he was deposed in the Glorious Revolution of 1688 . He was the last Roman Catholic monarch to reign over the Kingdoms of England , Scotland and Ireland . 
 The second surviving son of Charles I , he ascended the throne upon the death of his brother , Charles II . Members of Britain 's Protestant political elite increasingly suspected him of being pro @-@ French and pro @-@ Catholic and of having designs on becoming an absolute monarch . When he produced a Catholic heir , leading nobles called on his Protestant son @-@ in @-@ law and nephew William of Orange to land an invasion army from the Netherlands , which he did in the Glorious Revolution of 1688 . James fled England ( and thus was held to have abdicated ) . He was replaced by his eldest , Protestant daughter Mary and her husband William of Orange . James made one serious attempt to recover his crowns from William and Mary when he landed in Ireland in 1689 . After the defeat of the Jacobite forces by the Williamites at the Battle of the Boyne in July 1690 , James returned to France . He lived out the rest of his life as a pretender at a court sponsored by his cousin and ally , King Louis XIV . 
 James is best known for his struggles with the English Parliament and his attempts to create religious liberty for English Roman Catholics and Protestant nonconformists , against the wishes of the Anglican establishment . However , he also continued the persecution of the Presbyterian Covenanters in Scotland . Parliament , opposed to the growth of absolutism that was occurring in other European countries , as well as to the loss of legal supremacy of the Church of England , saw their opposition as a way to preserve what they regarded as traditional English liberties . This tension made James 's four @-@ year reign a struggle for supremacy between the English Parliament and the Crown , resulting in his deposition , the passage of the Bill of Rights , and the accession of his daughter and her husband as king and queen . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Birth = = = 
 James , the second surviving son of King Charles I and his wife , Henrietta Maria of France , was born at St. James 's Palace in London on 14 October 1633 . Later that same year , he was baptised by William Laud , the Anglican Archbishop of Canterbury . He was educated by private tutors , along with his brother , the future King Charles II , and the two sons of the Duke of Buckingham , George and Francis Villiers . At the age of three , James was appointed Lord High Admiral ; the position was initially honorary , but would become a substantive office after the Restoration , when James was an adult . 
 He was designated Duke of York at birth , invested with the Order of the Garter in 1642 , and formally created Duke of York in January 1644 . 
 = = = Civil War = = = 
 As the King 's disputes with the English Parliament grew into the English Civil War , James stayed in Oxford , a Royalist stronghold . When the city surrendered after the siege of Oxford in 1646 , Parliamentary leaders ordered the Duke of York to be confined in St. James 's Palace . In 1648 , he escaped from the Palace , aided by Joseph <unk> , and from there he went to The Hague in disguise . When Charles I was executed by the rebels in 1649 , monarchists proclaimed James 's older brother as Charles II of England . Charles II was recognised as king by the Parliament of Scotland and the Parliament of Ireland , and was crowned King of Scotland at Scone in 1651 . Although he was proclaimed King in Jersey , Charles was unable to secure the crown of England and consequently fled to France and exile . 
 = = = Exile in France = = = 
 Like his brother , James sought refuge in France , serving in the French army under Turenne against the Fronde , and later against their Spanish allies . In the French army James had his first true experience of battle where , according to one observer , he " ventures himself and <unk> gallantly where anything is to be done " . 
 In the meantime , Charles was attempting to reclaim his throne , but France , although hosting the exiles , had allied itself with Oliver Cromwell . In 1656 , Charles turned instead to Spain – an enemy of France – for support , and an alliance was made . In consequence , James was expelled from France and forced to leave Turenne 's army . James quarrelled with his brother over the diplomatic choice of Spain over France . Exiled and poor , there was little that either Charles or James could do about the wider political situation , and James ultimately travelled to Bruges and ( along with his younger brother , Henry ) joined the Spanish army under Louis , Prince of Condé , fighting against his former French comrades at the Battle of the Dunes . 
 During his service in the Spanish army , James became friendly with two Irish Catholic brothers in the Royalist entourage , Peter and Richard Talbot , and became somewhat estranged from his brother 's Anglican advisers . In 1659 , the French and Spanish made peace . James , doubtful of his brother 's chances of regaining the throne , considered taking a Spanish offer to be an admiral in their navy . Ultimately , he declined the position ; by the next year the situation in England had changed , and Charles II was proclaimed King . 
 = = Restoration = = 
 = = = First marriage = = = 
 After Richard Cromwell 's resignation as Lord Protector in 1659 and the subsequent collapse of the Commonwealth in 1660 , Charles II was restored to the English throne . Although James was the heir presumptive , it seemed unlikely that he would inherit the Crown , as Charles was still a young man capable of fathering children . On 31 December 1660 , following his brother 's restoration , James was created Duke of Albany in Scotland , to go along with his English title , Duke of York . Upon his return to England , James prompted an immediate controversy by announcing his engagement to Anne Hyde , the daughter of Charles 's chief minister , Edward Hyde . In 1659 , while trying to seduce her , James promised he would marry Anne . Anne became pregnant in 1660 , but following the Restoration and James 's return to power , no one at the royal court expected a prince to marry a commoner , no matter what he had pledged beforehand . Although nearly everyone , including Anne 's father , urged the two not to marry , the couple married secretly , then went through an official marriage ceremony on 3 September 1660 in London . Their first child , Charles , was born less than two months later , but died in infancy , as did five further sons and daughters . Only two daughters survived : Mary ( born 30 April 1662 ) and Anne ( born 6 February 1665 ) . Samuel Pepys wrote that James was fond of his children and his role as a father , and played with them " like an ordinary private father of a child " , a contrast to the distant parenting common with royalty at the time . James 's wife was devoted to him and influenced many of his decisions . Even so , he kept mistresses , including Arabella Churchill and Catherine Sedley , and was reputed to be " the most unguarded <unk> of his time . " Anne Hyde died in 1671 . 
 = = = Military and political offices = = = 
 After the Restoration , James was confirmed as Lord High Admiral , an office that carried with it the subsidiary appointments of Governor of Portsmouth and Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports . James commanded the Royal Navy during the Second ( 1665 – 1667 ) and Third Anglo @-@ Dutch Wars ( 1672 – 1674 ) . Following the raid on the Medway in 1667 , James oversaw the survey and re @-@ fortification of the southern coast . The office of Lord High Admiral , combined with his revenue from post office and wine tariffs ( granted him by Charles upon his restoration ) gave James enough money to keep a sizeable court household . 
 In 1664 , Charles granted American territory between the Delaware and Connecticut rivers to James . Following its capture by the English the former Dutch territory of New Netherland and its principal port , New Amsterdam , were named the Province and City of New York in James 's honour . After the founding , the duke gave part of the colony to proprietors George Carteret and John Berkeley . Fort Orange , 240 kilometres ( 150 mi ) north on the Hudson River , was renamed Albany after James 's Scottish title . In 1683 , he became the governor of the Hudson 's Bay Company , but did not take an active role in its governance . James also headed the Royal African Company , a slave trading company . 
 In September 1666 , his brother Charles put him in charge of firefighting operations in the Great Fire of London , in the absence of action by Lord Mayor Thomas Bloodworth . This was not a political office , but his actions and leadership were noteworthy . " The Duke of York hath won the hearts of the people with his continual and indefatigable pains day and night in helping to quench the Fire " , wrote a witness in a letter on 8 September . 
 = = = Conversion to Roman Catholicism and second marriage = = = 
 James 's time in France had exposed him to the beliefs and ceremonies of Catholicism ; he and his wife , Anne , became drawn to that faith . James took Eucharist in the Roman Catholic Church in 1668 or 1669 , although his conversion was kept secret for some time and he continued to attend Anglican services until 1676 . In spite of his conversion , James continued to associate primarily with Anglicans , including John Churchill and George Legge , as well as French Protestants , such as Louis de Duras , the Earl of Feversham . 
 Growing fears of Catholic influence at court led the English Parliament to introduce a new Test Act in 1673 . Under this Act , all civil and military officials were required to take an oath ( in which they were required to disavow the doctrine of transubstantiation and denounce certain practices of the Catholic Church as superstitious and idolatrous ) and to receive the Eucharist under the auspices of the Church of England . James refused to perform either action , instead choosing to relinquish the post of Lord High Admiral . His conversion to Catholicism was thereby made public . 
 Charles II opposed the conversion , ordering that James 's daughters , Mary and Anne , be raised as Protestants . Nevertheless , he allowed James to marry the Catholic Mary of Modena , a fifteen @-@ year @-@ old Italian princess . James and Mary were married by proxy in a Catholic ceremony on 20 September 1673 . On 21 November , Mary arrived in England and Nathaniel Crew , Bishop of Oxford , performed a brief Anglican service that did little more than recognise the Catholic marriage . Many British people , distrustful of Catholicism , regarded the new Duchess of York as an agent of the Pope . James was noted for his devotion . He once said , " If occasion were , I hope God would give me his grace to suffer death for the true Catholic religion as well as banishment . " 
 = = = Exclusion Crisis = = = 
 In 1677 , James reluctantly consented to his daughter Mary 's marriage to the Protestant William of Orange ( who was also James 's nephew , the son of his sister Mary , Princess Royal ) , acquiescing after his brother Charles and William had agreed upon the marriage . Despite the Protestant marriage , fears of a potential Catholic monarch persisted , intensified by the failure of Charles II and his wife , Catherine of Braganza , to produce any children . A defrocked Anglican clergyman , Titus Oates , spoke of a " Popish Plot " to kill Charles and to put the Duke of York on the throne . The fabricated plot caused a wave of anti @-@ Catholic hysteria to sweep across the nation . 
 In England , the Earl of Shaftesbury , a former government minister and now a leading opponent of Catholicism , attempted to have James excluded from the line of succession . Some members of Parliament even proposed that the crown go to Charles 's illegitimate son , James Scott , 1st Duke of Monmouth . In 1679 , with the Exclusion Bill in danger of passing , Charles II dissolved Parliament . Two further Parliaments were elected in 1680 and 1681 , but were dissolved for the same reason . The Exclusion Crisis contributed to the development of the English two @-@ party system : the Whigs were those who supported the Bill , while the Tories were those who opposed it . Ultimately , the succession was not altered , but James was convinced to withdraw from all policy @-@ making bodies and to accept a lesser role in his brother 's government . 
 On the orders of the King , James left England for Brussels . In 1680 , he was appointed Lord High Commissioner of Scotland and took up residence at the Palace of Holyroodhouse in Edinburgh to suppress an uprising and oversee royal government . James returned to England for a time when Charles was stricken ill and appeared to be near death . The hysteria of the accusations eventually faded , but James 's relations with many in the English Parliament , including the Earl of Danby , a former ally , were forever strained and a solid segment turned against him . 
 = = = Return to favour = = = 
 In 1683 , a plot was uncovered to assassinate Charles and James and spark a republican revolution to re @-@ establish a government of the Cromwellian style . The conspiracy , known as the Rye House Plot , backfired upon its conspirators and provoked a wave of sympathy for the King and James . Several notable Whigs , including the Earl of Essex and the King 's illegitimate son , the Duke of Monmouth , were implicated . Monmouth initially confessed to complicity in the plot , implicating fellow @-@ plotters , but later recanted . Essex committed suicide and Monmouth , along with several others , was obliged to flee into Continental exile . Charles reacted to the plot by increasing repression of Whigs and dissenters . Taking advantage of James 's rebounding popularity , Charles invited him back onto the privy council in 1684 . While some in the English Parliament remained wary of the possibility of a Catholic king , the threat of excluding James from the throne had passed . 
 = = Reign = = 
 = = = Accession to the throne = = = 
 Charles died in 1685 from apoplexy after converting to Catholicism on his deathbed . Having no legitimate children , Charles was succeeded by his brother James , who reigned in England and Ireland as James II , and in Scotland as James VII . There was little initial opposition to his accession , and there were widespread reports of public rejoicing at the orderly succession . James wanted to proceed quickly to the coronation , and was crowned with his wife at Westminster Abbey on 23 April 1685 . The new Parliament that assembled in May 1685 , which gained the name of " Loyal Parliament " , was initially favourable to James , and the new King sent word that even most of the former exclusionists would be forgiven if they acquiesced to his rule . Most of Charles 's officers continued in office , the exceptions being the promotion of James 's brothers @-@ in @-@ law , the Earls of Clarendon and Rochester , and the demotion of Halifax . Parliament granted James a generous life income , including all of the proceeds of tonnage and poundage and the customs duties . James worked harder as king than his brother had , but was less willing to compromise when his advisers disagreed . 
 = = = Two rebellions = = = 
 Soon after becoming king , James faced a rebellion in southern England led by his nephew , the Duke of Monmouth , and another rebellion in Scotland led by Archibald Campbell , the Earl of Argyll . Argyll and Monmouth both began their expeditions from Holland , where James 's nephew and son @-@ in @-@ law , William of Orange , had neglected to detain them or put a stop to their recruitment efforts . 
 Argyll sailed to Scotland and , on arriving there , raised recruits mainly from his own clan , the Campbells . The rebellion was quickly crushed , and Argyll was captured at Inchinnan on 18 June 1685 . Having arrived with fewer than 300 men and unable to convince many more to flock to his standard , he never posed a credible threat to James . Argyll was taken as a prisoner to Edinburgh . A new trial was not commenced because Argyll had previously been tried and sentenced to death . The King confirmed the earlier death sentence and ordered that it be carried out within three days of receiving the confirmation . 
 Monmouth 's rebellion was coordinated with Argyll 's , but the former was more dangerous to James . Monmouth had proclaimed himself King at Lyme Regis on 11 June . He attempted to raise recruits but was unable to gather enough rebels to defeat even James 's small standing army . Monmouth 's rebellion attacked the King 's forces at night , in an attempt at surprise , but was defeated at the Battle of Sedgemoor . The King 's forces , led by Feversham and Churchill , quickly dispersed the ill @-@ prepared rebels . Monmouth was captured and later executed at the Tower of London on 15 July . The King 's judges — most notably , George Jeffreys — condemned many of the rebels to transportation and indentured servitude in the West Indies in a series of trials that came to be known as the Bloody Assizes . Some 250 of the rebels were executed . While both rebellions were defeated easily , they hardened James 's resolve against his enemies and increased his suspicion of the Dutch . 
 = = = Religious liberty and the dispensing power = = = 
 To protect himself from further rebellions , James sought safety by enlarging his standing army . This alarmed his subjects , not only because of the trouble soldiers caused in the towns , but because it was against the English tradition to keep a professional army in peacetime . Even more alarming to Parliament was James 's use of his dispensing power to allow Roman Catholics to command several regiments without having to take the oath mandated by the Test Act . When even the previously supportive Parliament objected to these measures , James ordered Parliament prorogued in November 1685 , never to meet again in his reign . In the beginning of 1686 two papers were found in Charles II 's strong box and his closet , in his own hand , stating the arguments for Catholicism over Protestantism . James published these papers with a declaration signed by his sign manual and challenged the Archbishop of Canterbury and the whole Anglican episcopal bench to refute Charles 's arguments : " Let me have a solid answer , and in a <unk> style ; and it may have the effect which you so much desire of bringing me over to your church . " The Archbishop refused on the grounds of respect for the late king . 
 James advocated repeal of the penal laws in all three of his kingdoms , but in the early years of his reign he refused to allow those dissenters who did not petition for relief to receive it . James sent a letter to the Scottish Parliament at its opening in 1685 , declaring his wish for new penal laws against refractory Presbyterians and lamented that he was not there in person to promote such a law . In response , the Parliament passed an Act that stated , " whoever should preach in a conventicle under a roof , or should attend , either as preacher or as a hearer , a conventicle in the open air , should be punished with death and confiscation of property " . In March 1686 , James sent a letter to the Scottish Privy Council advocating toleration for Catholics but that the persecution of the Presbyterian Covenanters should continue , calling them to London when they refused to acquiesce his wishes . The Privy Councillors explained that they would grant relief to Catholics only if a similar relief was provided for the Covenanters and if James promised not to attempt anything that would harm the Protestant religion . James agreed to a degree of relief to Presbyterians , but not to the full toleration he wanted for Catholics , declaring that the Protestant religion was false and he would not promise not to prejudice a false religion . 
 James allowed Catholics to occupy the highest offices of the Kingdoms , and received at his court the papal nuncio , Ferdinando d <unk> , the first representative from Rome to London since the reign of Mary I. James 's Jesuit confessor , Edward Petre , was a particular object of Protestant ire . When the King 's Secretary of State , the Earl of Sunderland , began replacing office @-@ holders at court with Catholic favourites , James began to lose the confidence of many of his Anglican supporters . Sunderland 's purge of office @-@ holders even extended to the King 's Anglican brothers @-@ in @-@ law and their supporters . Catholics made up no more than one @-@ fiftieth of the English population . In May 1686 , James sought to obtain a ruling from the English common @-@ law courts that showed his power to dispense with Acts of Parliament was legal . He dismissed judges who disagreed with him on this matter , as well as the Solicitor General Heneage Finch . The case , Godden v. Hales , affirmed his dispensing power , with eleven out of the twelve judges in Godden ruling in favour of the dispensing power . 
 In 1687 , James issued the Declaration of Indulgence , also known as the Declaration for Liberty of Conscience , in which he used his dispensing power to negate the effect of laws punishing Catholics and Protestant Dissenters . He attempted to garner support for his <unk> policy by giving a speaking tour in the West of England in the summer of 1687 . As part of this tour , he gave a speech at Chester where he said , " suppose ... there should be a law made that all black men should be imprisoned , it would be unreasonable and we had as little reason to quarrel with other men for being of different [ religious ] opinions as for being of different complexions . " At the same time , James provided partial toleration in Scotland , using his dispensing power to grant relief to Catholics and partial relief to Presbyterians . 
 In 1688 , James ordered the Declaration read from the pulpits of every Anglican church , further alienating the Anglican bishops against the Catholic governor of their church . While the Declaration elicited some thanks from Catholics and dissenters , it left the Established Church , the traditional ally of the monarchy , in the difficult position of being forced to erode its own privileges . James provoked further opposition by attempting to reduce the Anglican monopoly on education . At the University of Oxford , James offended Anglicans by allowing Catholics to hold important positions in Christ Church and University College , two of Oxford 's largest colleges . He also attempted to force the Protestant Fellows of Magdalen College to elect Anthony Farmer , a man of generally ill repute who was believed to be secretly Catholic , as their president when the Protestant incumbent died , a violation of the Fellows ' right to elect a candidate of their own choosing . 
 In 1687 James prepared to pack Parliament with his supporters so that it would repeal the Test Act and the penal laws . James was convinced by addresses from Dissenters that he had their support and so could dispense with relying on Tories and Anglicans . James instituted a wholesale purge of those in offices under the crown opposed to James 's plan , appointing new lords @-@ lieutenant and remodelling the corporations governing towns and livery companies . In October James gave orders for the lords @-@ lieutenant in the provinces to provide three standard questions to all members of the Commission of the Peace : 1 . Would they consent to the repeal of the Test Act and the penal laws ? 2 . Would they assist candidates who would do so ? 3 . Would they accept the Declaration of Indulgence ? During the first three months of 1688 , hundreds of those asked the three questions who gave hostile replies were dismissed . Corporations were purged by agents , known as the regulators , who were given wide discretionary powers in an attempt to create a permanent royal electoral machine . Most of the regulators were Baptists and the new town officials that they recommended included Quakers , Baptists , Congregationalists , Presbyterians and Catholics , as well as Anglicans . Finally , on 24 August 1688 , James ordered the issue of writs for a general election . However , upon realising in September that William of Orange was going to land in England , James withdrew the writs and subsequently wrote to the lords @-@ lieutenant to inquire over allegations of abuses committed during the regulations and election preparations as part of the concessions James made to win support . 
 = = Glorious Revolution = = 
 In April 1688 , James re @-@ issued the Declaration of Indulgence , subsequently ordering Anglican clergy to read it in their churches . When seven Bishops , including the Archbishop of Canterbury , submitted a petition requesting the reconsideration of the King 's religious policies , they were arrested and tried for seditious libel . Public alarm increased when Queen Mary gave birth to a Roman Catholic son and heir , James Francis Edward on 10 June of that year . When James 's only possible successors were his two Protestant daughters , Anglicans could see his pro @-@ Catholic policies as a temporary phenomenon , but when the Prince 's birth opened the possibility of a permanent Catholic dynasty , such men had to reconsider their position . Threatened by a Catholic dynasty , several influential Protestants claimed the child was " supposititious " and had been smuggled into the Queen 's bedchamber in a warming pan . They had already entered into negotiations with William , Prince of Orange , when it became known the Queen was pregnant , and the birth of James 's son reinforced their convictions . 
 On 30 June 1688 , a group of seven Protestant nobles invited the Prince of Orange to come to England with an army . By September , it had become clear that William sought to invade . Believing that his own army would be adequate , James refused the assistance of Louis XIV , fearing that the English would oppose French intervention . When William arrived on 5 November 1688 , many Protestant officers , including Churchill , defected and joined William , as did James 's own daughter , Princess Anne . James lost his nerve and declined to attack the invading army , despite his army 's numerical superiority . On 11 December , James tried to flee to France , allegedly first throwing the Great Seal of the Realm into the River Thames . He was captured in Kent ; later , he was released and placed under Dutch protective guard . Having no desire to make James a martyr , the Prince of Orange let him escape on 23 December . James was received by his cousin and ally , Louis XIV , who offered him a palace and a pension . 
 William convened a Convention Parliament to decide how to handle James 's flight . While the Parliament refused to depose him , they declared that James , having fled to France and dropped the Great Seal into the Thames , had effectively abdicated the throne , and that the throne had thereby become vacant . To fill this vacancy , James 's daughter Mary was declared Queen ; she was to rule jointly with her husband William , who would be king . The Parliament of Scotland on 11 April 1689 , declared James to have forfeited the throne . The English Parliament passed a Bill of Rights that denounced James for abusing his power . The abuses charged to James included the suspension of the Test Acts , the prosecution of the Seven Bishops for merely petitioning the crown , the establishment of a standing army , and the imposition of cruel punishments . The Bill also declared that henceforth , no Roman Catholic was permitted to ascend the English throne , nor could any English monarch marry a Roman Catholic . 
 = = Later years = = 
 = = = War in Ireland = = = 
 With the assistance of French troops , James landed in Ireland in March 1689 . The Irish Parliament did not follow the example of the English Parliament ; it declared that James remained King and passed a massive bill of attainder against those who had rebelled against him . At James 's urging , the Irish Parliament passed an Act for Liberty of Conscience that granted religious freedom to all Roman Catholics and Protestants in Ireland . James worked to build an army in Ireland , but was ultimately defeated at the Battle of the Boyne on 1 July 1690 when William arrived , personally leading an army to defeat James and reassert English control . James fled to France once more , departing from Kinsale , never to return to any of his former kingdoms . Because he deserted his Irish supporters , James became known in Ireland as Séamus an <unk> or " James the Shit " . In contrast to this popular perception , <unk> Ó <unk> argued that " Irish political poetry for most of the eighteenth century is essentially Jacobite poetry " , and both Ó <unk> and Éamonn Ó <unk> argued that James and his successors played a central role as messianic figures throughout the eighteenth century for all classes in Ireland . 
 = = = Return to exile and death = = = 
 In France , James was allowed to live in the royal château of Saint @-@ Germain @-@ en @-@ Laye . James 's wife and some of his supporters fled with him , including the Earl of Melfort ; most , but not all , were Roman Catholic . In 1692 , James 's last child , Louisa Maria Teresa , was born . Some supporters in England attempted to assassinate William III to restore James to the throne in 1696 , but the plot failed and the backlash made James 's cause less popular . Louis XIV 's offer to have James elected King of Poland in the same year was rejected , for James feared that acceptance of the Polish crown might ( in the minds of the English people ) render him incapable of being King of England . After Louis concluded peace with William in 1697 , he ceased to offer much in the way of assistance to James . 
 During his last years , James lived as an austere penitent . He wrote a memorandum for his son advising him on how to govern England , specifying that Catholics should possess one Secretary of State , one Commissioner of the Treasury , the Secretary at War , with the majority of the officers in the army . 
 He died of a brain haemorrhage on 16 September 1701 at Saint @-@ Germain @-@ en @-@ Laye . James 's heart was placed in a silver @-@ gilt locket and given to the convent at Chaillot , and his brain was placed in a lead casket and given to the Scots College in Paris . His entrails were placed in two gilt urns and sent to the parish church of Saint @-@ Germain @-@ en @-@ Laye and the English Jesuit college at Saint @-@ Omer , while the flesh from his right arm was given to the English Augustinian nuns of Paris . 
 James 's body was laid to rest in a triple sarcophagus ( consisting of two wooden coffins and one of lead ) at the Chapel of Saint Edmund in the Church of the English Benedictines in the Rue St. Jacques in Paris , with a funeral oration by Henri @-@ Emmanuel de <unk> . James was not buried , but put in one of the side chapels . Lights were kept burning round his coffin until the French Revolution . In 1734 , the Archbishop of Paris heard evidence to support James 's canonisation , but nothing came of it . During the French Revolution , James 's tomb was raided . 
 = = Succession = = 
 James 's younger daughter Anne succeeded to the throne when William III died in 1702 . The Act of Settlement provided that , if the line of succession established in the Bill of Rights were extinguished , the crown would go to a German cousin , Sophia , Electress of Hanover , and to her Protestant heirs . Sophia was a granddaughter of James VI and I through his eldest daughter , Elizabeth Stuart , the sister of King Charles I. Thus , when Anne died in 1714 ( less than two months after the death of Sophia ) , the crown was inherited by George I , Sophia 's son , the Elector of Hanover and Anne 's second cousin . 
 James 's son James Francis Edward was recognised as King at his father 's death by Louis XIV of France and James 's remaining supporters ( later known as Jacobites ) as " James III and VIII . " He led a rising in Scotland in 1715 shortly after George I 's accession , but was defeated . Jacobites rose again in 1745 led by Charles Edward Stuart , James II 's grandson , and were again defeated . Since then , no serious attempt to restore the Stuart heir has been made . Charles 's claims passed to his younger brother Henry Benedict Stuart , the Dean of the College of Cardinals of the Catholic Church . Henry was the last of James II 's legitimate descendants , and no relative has publicly acknowledged the Jacobite claim since his death in 1807 . 
 = = Historiography = = 
 Historical analysis of James II has been somewhat revised since Whig historians , led by Lord Macaulay , cast James as a cruel absolutist and his reign as " tyranny which approached to insanity " . Subsequent scholars , such as G. M. Trevelyan ( Macaulay 's great @-@ nephew ) and David Ogg , while more balanced than Macaulay , still characterised James as a tyrant , his attempts at religious tolerance as a fraud , and his reign as an aberration in the course of British history . In 1892 , A. W. Ward wrote for the Dictionary of National Biography that James was " obviously a political and religious bigot " , although never devoid of " a vein of patriotic sentiment " ; " his conversion to the church of Rome made the emancipation of his fellow @-@ <unk> in the first instance , and the recovery of England for <unk> in the second , the governing objects of his policy . " 
 Hilaire Belloc , a writer and Catholic apologist , broke with this tradition in 1928 , casting James as an honourable man and a true advocate for freedom of conscience , and his enemies " men in the small clique of great fortunes ... which destroyed the ancient monarchy of the English . " However , he observed that James " concluded the Catholic church to be the sole authoritative voice on earth , and thenceforward ... he not only stood firm against surrender but on no single occasion contemplated the least compromise or by a word would modify the impression made . " By the 1960s and 1970s , Maurice Ashley and Stuart <unk> began to reconsider James 's motives in granting religious toleration , while still taking note of James 's autocratic rule . Modern historians have moved away from the school of thought that preached the continuous march of progress and democracy , Ashley contending that " history is , after all , the story of human beings and individuals , as well as of the classes and the masses . " He cast James II and William III as " men of ideals as well as human weaknesses . " John Miller , writing in 2000 , accepted the claims of James 's absolutism , but argued that " his main concern was to secure religious liberty and civil equality for Catholics . Any ' absolutist ' methods ... were essentially means to that end . " In 2004 , W. A. Speck wrote in the new Oxford Dictionary of National Biography that " James was genuinely committed to religious toleration , but also sought to increase the power of the crown . " He added that , unlike the government of the Netherlands , " James was too autocratic to combine freedom of conscience with popular government . He resisted any check on the monarch 's power . That is why his heart was not in the concessions he had to make in 1688 . He would rather live in exile with his principles intact than continue to reign as a limited monarch . " 
 Tim Harris 's conclusions from his 2006 book summarised the ambivalence of modern scholarship towards James II : 
 The jury will doubtless remain out on James for a long time ... Was he an egotistical bigot ... a tyrant who rode roughshod over the will of the vast majority of his subjects ( at least in England and Scotland ) ... simply naïve , or even perhaps plain stupid , unable to appreciate the realities of political power ... Or was he a well @-@ intentioned and even enlightened ruler — an enlightened despot well ahead of his time , perhaps — who was merely trying to do what he thought was best for his subjects ? 
 In 2009 , Steven Pincus confronted that scholarly ambivalence in 1688 : The First Modern Revolution . Pincus claims that James 's reign must be understood within a context of economic change and European politics , and makes two major assertions about James II . The first of these is that James purposefully " followed the French Sun King , Louis XIV , in trying to create a modern Catholic polity . This involved not only trying to Catholicize England ... but also creating a modern , centralizing , and extremely bureaucratic state apparatus . " The second is that James was undone in 1688 far less by Protestant reaction against <unk> than by nationwide hostile reaction against his intrusive bureaucratic state and taxation apparatus , expressed in massive popular support for William of Orange 's armed invasion of England . Pincus presents James as neither naïve nor stupid nor egotistical . Instead , readers are shown an intelligent , clear @-@ thinking strategically motivated monarch whose vision for a French authoritarian political model and alliance clashed with , and lost out to , alternative views that favoured an entrepreneurial Dutch economic model , feared French power , and were outraged by James 's authoritarianism . 
 Scott Sowerby countered Pincus 's thesis in 2013 in Making Toleration : The <unk> and the Glorious Revolution . He noted that English taxes remained low during James II 's reign , at about 4 % of the English national income , and thus it was unlikely that James could have built a bureaucratic state on the model of Louis XIV 's France , where taxes were at least twice as high as a proportion of GDP . Sowerby also contends that James 's policies of religious toleration attracted substantial support from religious nonconformists , including Quakers , Baptists , Congregationalists and Presbyterians , who were attracted by the king 's push for a new " Magna Carta for liberty of conscience " . The king was overthrown , in Sowerby 's view , largely because of fears among the Dutch and English elites that James might be aligning himself with Louis XIV in a supposed " holy league " to destroy Protestantism across northern Europe . Sowerby presents James 's reign as a struggle between those who believed that the king was sincerely devoted to liberty of conscience and those who were sceptical of the king 's <unk> of toleration and believed that he had a hidden agenda to overthrow English Protestantism . 
 = = Titles , styles , honours , and arms = = 
 = = = Titles and styles = = = 
 14 October 1633 – 6 February 1685 : The Duke of York 
 10 May 1659 – 6 February 1685 : The Earl of Ulster 
 31 December 1660 – 6 February 1685 : The Duke of Albany 
 6 February 1685 – 11 December 1688 ( by Jacobites until 16 September 1701 ) : His Majesty The King 
 The official style of James in England was " James the Second , by the Grace of God , King of England , Scotland , France and Ireland , Defender of the Faith , etc . " The claim to France was only nominal , and was asserted by every English King from Edward III to George III , regardless of the amount of French territory actually controlled . In Scotland , he was " James the Seventh , by the Grace of God , King of Scotland , England , France and Ireland , Defender of the Faith , etc . " 
 James was created " Duke of Normandy " by King Louis XIV of France on 31 December 1660 . 
 = = = Honours = = = 
 KG : Knight of the Garter , 20 April 1642 
 = = = Arms = = = 
 Prior to his accession , James 's coat of arms was the royal arms ( which he later inherited ) , differenced by a label of three points Ermine . His arms as king were : Quarterly , I and IV Grandquarterly , Azure three fleurs @-@ de @-@ lis Or ( for France ) and Gules three lions passant guardant in pale Or ( for England ) ; II Or a lion rampant within a double tressure flory @-@ counter @-@ flory Gules ( for Scotland ) ; III Azure a harp Or stringed Argent ( for Ireland ) . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 James is a character in the novel The Man Who Laughs by Victor Hugo . He was portrayed by Josef Moser in the 1921 Austrian silent film The Grinning Face and by Sam De Grasse in the 1928 silent film The Man Who Laughs . 
 He has also been portrayed by Gibb McLaughlin in the 1926 silent film Nell Gwynne , based on a novel by Joseph Shearing , Lawrence Anderson in the 1934 film Nell Gwyn , Vernon Steele in the 1935 film Captain Blood , based on the novel by Rafael Sabatini , Douglas Matthews in the 1938 BBC TV drama Thank You , Mr. Pepys , Henry Oscar in the 1948 film Bonnie Prince Charlie , John Westbrook in the 1969 BBC TV series The First Churchills , Guy Henry in the 1995 film England , My England , the story of the composer Henry Purcell , and Charlie Creed @-@ Miles in the 2003 BBC TV miniseries Charles II : The Power & the Passion . 
 The squabbling surrounding James 's kingship , the Monmouth Rebellion , the Glorious Revolution , James 's abdication , and William of Orange 's subsequent accession to the throne are themes in Neal Stephenson 's 2003 novel Quicksilver . 
 = = Issue = = 
 = = Ancestors = = 
 = Battle of Krasos = 
 The Battle of Krasos was a battle in the Arab – Byzantine Wars that took place in August 804 , between the Byzantines under Emperor Nikephoros I ( r . 802 – 811 ) and an Abbasid army under Ibrahim ibn Jibril . Nikephoros ' accession in 802 resulted in a resumption of warfare between Byzantium and the Abbasid Caliphate . In late summer 804 , the Abbasids had invaded Byzantine Asia Minor for one of their customary raids , and Nikephoros set out to meet them . He was surprised , however , at Krasos and heavily defeated , barely escaping with his own life . A truce and prisoner exchange were afterwards arranged . Despite his defeat , and a massive Abbasid invasion the next year , Nikephoros persevered until troubles in the eastern provinces of the Caliphate forced the Abbasids to conclude a peace . 
 = = Background = = 
 The deposition of Empress Irene of Athens ( r . 797 – 802 ) , in October 802 , and subsequent accession of Nikephoros I signalled a more violent phase in the long history of the Arab – Byzantine Wars . Following a series of destructive annual raids across Asia Minor by the Caliphate , Irene seems to have secured a truce with Harun al @-@ Rashid in 798 in exchange for the annual payment of tribute , repeating the terms agreed for a three @-@ year truce following Harun 's first large @-@ scale campaign in 782 . Nikephoros , on the other hand , was more warlike and determined to refill the imperial treasury by , among other measures , ceasing the tribute . Harun retaliated at once , launching a raid under his son al @-@ Qasim . Nikephoros could not respond to this , as he faced an ultimately unsuccessful revolt of the Asian army under its commander @-@ in @-@ chief , Bardanes Tourkos . After disposing of Bardanes , Nikephoros assembled his army and marched out himself to meet a second , larger invasion under the Caliph himself . After Harun raided the frontier region , the two armies confronted each other for two months in central Asia Minor , but it did not come to a battle ; Nikephoros and Harun exchanged letters , until the Emperor arranged for a withdrawal and a truce for the remainder of the year in exchange for a one @-@ off payment of tribute . 
 = = Battle = = 
 In August 804 , Harun dispatched another raid under his general Ibrahim ibn Jibril . The Arabs crossed into Asia Minor through the Cilician Gates and raided freely . Nikephoros set out to meet them , but was forced to return before he could do so , due to some unspecified event at his back ( Warren Treadgold surmises news of a possible conspiracy ) . On his march home , however , the Arabs launched a surprise attack at Krasos in Phrygia and defeated his army . According to al @-@ Tabari , the Byzantines lost 40 @,@ 700 men and 4 @,@ 000 pack animals , while the Emperor himself was wounded three times . The Byzantine chronicler Theophanes the Confessor confirms that the imperial army lost many men and that Nikephoros was almost killed himself ; saved only by the bravery of his officers . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Preoccupied with trouble in Khurasan , Harun now accepted tribute and made peace . An exchange of prisoners was also arranged and took place during the winter at the two empires ' border , on the Lamos river in Cilicia ; some 3 @,@ 700 Muslims were exchanged for the Byzantines taken captive in the previous years . During Harun 's absence in Khurasan , however , Nikephoros used the opportunity to rebuild the destroyed walls of the towns of Safsaf , Thebasa , and Ancyra . The following summer he launched the first Byzantine raid for two decades ; into the Arab frontier district ( thughur ) in Cilicia . The Byzantine army raided and took prisoners as it went , even capturing the major Abbasid stronghold of Tarsus . At the same time , another Byzantine force raided the Upper Mesopotamian thughur and unsuccessfully besieged the fortress of Melitene , while a Byzantine @-@ instigated rebellion against the local Arab garrison began in Cyprus . Harun retaliated with a massive invasion in 806 , which forced Nikephoros to come to terms , but the Byzantine ruler soon violated them and prevailed over the Abbasid expeditions sent against him in 807 . Following renewed trouble in Khurasan , a peace treaty was signed in 808 which left the Byzantine frontier zone intact and ended the payment of tribute to the Caliphate . 
 = Cyclone Hudah = 
 Cyclone Hudah was a strong and destructive tropical cyclone that affected Southeast Africa in April 2000 . It was the last in a series of three cyclones that impacted Madagascar during the year . Hudah first developed as a disturbance embedded within the monsoon trough on March 22 , within the Australian region cyclone basin . Moving westward as the result of a strong subtropical ridge to its south , the storm quickly intensified , and reached Category 2 cyclone intensity on March 25 before entering the Southwest Indian cyclone basin . For various reasons that remain unknown , the cyclone was only designated a name by the time it had crossed into the area of responsibility of the Regional Specialized Meteorological Center in Réunion . Nonetheless , Météo @-@ France ( MFR ) assigned the name Hudah to the cyclone . An eye formed , and the storm intensified into a tropical cyclone on March 27 well to the southeast of Diego Garcia . On April 1 , the MFR upgraded it to a very intense tropical cyclone , estimating peak 10 minute winds of 225 km / h ( 140 mph ) . By contrast , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) estimated 1 minute winds of 235 km / h ( 145 mph ) . Cyclone Hudah maintained peak winds until making landfall just southeast of Antalaha , Madagascar on April 2 . It weakened greatly over land , but re @-@ attained tropical cyclone status on April 5 after moving over the Mozambique Channel . Hudah reached 10 minute winds of 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) by the time it made landfall on Mozambique near Pebane , Mozambique , on April 8 , and dissipated by the next day . 
 While in the vicinity , Hudah brought moderate winds to Rodrigues , St. Brandon , and Tromelin Island . The cyclone affected the same parts of Madagascar that were previously impacted by cyclones Eline and Gloria . Waves reached at least 8 m ( 26 ft ) in height along the coast . The storm was considered the worst to affect the Antalaha region in 20 years , where 90 % of homes were destroyed . It was estimated that the storm left at least 100 @,@ 000 people homeless in Madagascar , and there were 111 deaths . In Mozambique , damage was much less than expected , and the storm affected areas farther north in the country than where Eline struck . Heavy rainfall occurred along the coast , but was insufficient to cause river flooding . Strong winds damaged roofs and downed trees , mostly around Pebane , and the storm killed three people . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 At 1800 UTC on March 22 , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) began monitoring an area of disturbed weather in the central Indian Ocean , approximately 685 km ( 425 mi ) southeast of Christmas Island . The system was embedded mostly in the monsoon trough , surrounded by favorable environmental conditions , which prompted the JTWC to issue a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert at 0030 UTC on March 24 . Convection increased as vertical wind shear decreased , and the system developed a curved band pattern . Throughout the day , the storm showed signs of potential rapid intensification , due to its quick organization . The Bureau of Meteorology 's Perth Tropical Cyclone Warning Center ( Perth TCWC ) noted the system as a tropical low at 1000 UTC on March 24 , and the JTWC issued its first warning two hours later . However , for reasons which remain unclear , the Bureau of Meteorology did not extensively monitor the system . 
 Initially , the storm moved westward under the influence of a strong subtropical ridge to the south . Despite having reached tropical cyclone intensity according to Perth TCWC , it was not assigned a name . Once the storm crossed 90 ° E on March 25 , the Météo @-@ France 's La Réunion Regional Specialized Meteorological Center ( MFR ) began tracking the system as a moderate tropical storm , giving it the name Hudah . Gradually intensifying , Hudah developed an eye with an eyewall primarily in the northern semicircle , indicated by a Tropical Rainfall Measuring Mission ( TRMM ) pass over the system . On March 26 , Hudah ceased strengthening as cloud tops warmed and the eye became no longer evident . Atmospheric divergence remained favorable , and Hudah eventually restrengthened , attaining tropical cyclone intensity at 0000 UTC on March 27 , while located approximately 1 @,@ 200 km ( 750 mi ) southeast of Diego Garcia . This period of strengthening was short @-@ lived , likely due to dry air . The cloud structure fluctuated as well , with a poorly @-@ defined eye appearing at times on satellite imagery . Hudah was able to attain an initial peak intensity of 155 km / h ( 95 mph ) at 0600 UTC on March 29 according to the MFR , shortly after passing 1010 km ( 630 mi ) south of Diego Garcia . An anticyclone that had been over Hudah showed signs of weakening later that day , spurring an increase in wind shear and causing weakening . This period of weakening was short @-@ lived , and Hudah resumed its former strengthening trend by the night of March 30 as shear decreased and convective organization and areal extent increased . After passing 275 km ( 170 mi ) north of Rodrigues Island , Hudah attained intense tropical cyclone status by 1200 UTC on March 31 . Satellite imagery indicated a large , cloud @-@ free eye , indicative of a strong tropical cyclone . 
 On April 1 , Hudah continued intensifying while approaching eastern Madagascar , and by 0600 UTC that day , the MFR upgraded the storm to very intense tropical cyclone intensity – the highest rating on the agency 's cyclone classification scale . Shortly after , at 1200 UTC , the storm was analyzed to have reached its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 225 km / h ( 140 mph ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 905 mbar ( hPa ; 26 @.@ 73 inHg ) , ranking Hudah among some of the strongest tropical cyclones ever recorded in the Southwest Indian Ocean . The JTWC listed a similar intensity for the storm , with winds of 235 km / h ( 145 mph ) , though these winds were for 1 @-@ minute sustained winds instead of 10 @-@ minute sustained winds . This intensity was later analyzed to have been very near the theoretical maximum for tropical cyclones in the environmental conditions Hudah was in . At the time , TRMM imagery indicated that the storm featured two concentric eyewalls . Cyclone Hudah maintained peak intensity up until it made its first landfall approximately 28 km ( 17 mi ) southeast of Antalaha , Madagascar at 1730 UTC on April 2 . Hudah substantially weakened as it traversed the mountainous terrain of northern Madagascar , and was downgraded to tropical depression status by the time it entered the Mozambique Channel at 1200 UTC on March 3 . 
 Despite losing much of its convection over land , Hudah maintained a well @-@ organized cloud structure once in the Mozambique Channel on April 3 . As a result of moving back over warm waters , the system began to re @-@ intensify , and attained moderate tropical storm intensity at 0000 UTC on April 4 . Meanwhile , a large central dense overcast developed , and Hudah began to track west @-@ southwestward as opposed to its previous westward trajectory . Despite computer forecast models suggesting that Hudah would continue westward , the storm instead turn to a southward drift , giving it time to strengthen in the Mozambique Channel . This was the result of a mid @-@ latitude trough weakening the nearby subtropical ridge . By 1800 UTC on April 5 , Hudah was upgraded back to tropical cyclone intensity . A banding eye began to appear on satellite imagery , though it remained generally unstable , and a large banding feature formed over the western half of Hudah . The nearby trough later weakened in intensity , causing the tropical cyclone to move north @-@ northwestward towards the Mozambique coast on April 7 . It was at this time that Hudah reached a tertiary peak intensity with winds of 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) . The tropical cyclone accelerated northwards throughout the day , eventually making its final landfall near Pebane , Mozambique at 0600 UTC on April 8 as a slightly weaker storm . Once inland , Hudah rapidly weakened , and was no longer tracked by the MFR by 0000 UTC on April 9 . The JTWC issued its final warning on the system six hours later , as the remnants of Hudah moved through northeastern Mozambique , producing spotty convection . 
 = = Preparations , impact , and aftermath = = 
 = = = Rodrigues Island , Saint Brandon , and Tromelin Island = = = 
 Passing north of Rodrigues Island on March 30 , Hudah produced moderate winds , though effects to infrastructure and crops on the island were minimal . During the night of the following day , Hudah passed near the Saint Brandon archipelago . A weather station on the island maintained by the <unk> Meteorological Services reported a minimum pressure of roughly 996 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 42 inHg ) and a maximum sustained wind measurement of 70 km / h ( 45 mph ) . During the night of April 1 , the cyclone passed approximately 35 km ( 20 mi ) south of Tromelin Island , producing strong winds . A Météo @-@ France station on the isle recorded sustained winds of 125 km / h ( 80 mph ) and a gust of 180 km / h ( 110 mph ) . A minimum pressure of 972 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 71 inHg ) was also recorded . Due to a lack of sustainable infrastructure on the latter two islands , damage was minimal . 
 = = = Madagascar = = = 
 As the cyclone moved closer to Madagascar on April 2 , Radio Madagascar called for residents of Toamasina to take precautionary measures . At the time , forecasts predicted that Hudah would make landfall in northern Madagascar later that day . 
 Upon making landfall , Hudah impacted the same regions that were affected earlier in the year by Cyclone Leon – Eline and Severe Tropical Storm Gloria . The cyclone produced waves at least 8 m ( 26 ft ) in height , which impacted the coast . Across affected areas , coffee plantations , fruit trees , and rice crops in low @-@ lying areas were damaged . Food warehouses in the northeastern areas of Madagascar were destroyed . In the small town of Antalaha , up to 90 percent of all homes were destroyed , and two people were killed . The city 's water and electrical systems were cut off . Only eight homes remained intact along a stretch of road leading from the town to the local airstrip . As a result , only concrete structures remained standing , while those made of iron sheeting or wood materials were destroyed . Thus , the road was covered in debris , slightly delaying airlift operations to the region in the storm 's aftermath . Nearby vanilla fields were also severely damaged . 
 Due to the effects of Hudah , the cyclone was considered the worst to strike the Antalaha region in 20 years . The towns of Maroantsetra and Andapa were also hit hard , with 60 – 70 percent of homes in the latter destroyed . Maroantsetra , a coastal town , was flooded by the storm surge , and as a result seven people died . The commune of Mananara Nord was completely flooded by the storm . Other isolated villages could not be reached via road or telecommunications due to the storm . One of these cities was Sambava , which suffered from a lack of available telephone links since late on April 2 . One person died in Sambava . A resort in the town of Cap Est was flattened . Initial estimates indicated that Hudah caused at least 100 @,@ 000 people to become homeless . 
 = = = Mozambique = = = 
 While Hudah was located in the Mozambique Channel , the cyclone was expected to cause flood conditions in the Mozambican provinces of Nampula , Cabo Delgado , and potentially Zambezia . Even prior to Hudah , Mozambique was already facing a widespread flood and resultant humanitarian crisis ; conditions which were further exacerbated by three tropical cyclones which impacted the country within the previous four months . The Instituto Nacional de <unk> de <unk> ( <unk> ) warned residents in potentially affected areas to take precautionary measures and secure fishing boats . The South African National Defense Force ( <unk> ) maintained 50 soldiers and other military personnel and a number of aircraft to monitor the ongoing floods in Mozambique and potential impacts from Hudah . An Australian contingency held operations for a hospital and water purification plant in <unk> to assist potentially affected populations . Multiple other relief organizations began to supply Mozambique with relief supplies due to the threat of the impending storm . The UN World Food Programme ( WFP ) sent 1 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 1 @,@ 100 short tons ) of food to Nampula Province and 500 tonnes ( 550 short tons ) of food to Quelimane Province . The WFP also placed relief aircraft on standby . The Mozambican Ministry of Health sent 30 tents and 10 rolls of plastic to Cabo Delgado , Nampula , and Zambezia provinces . The United States Agency for International Development ( USAID ) dispatched a group of 12 @-@ member search and rescue team to Maputo in order to train local relief crews . 
 Just 46 days after Cyclone Eline 's devastating landfall in Mozambique , Hudah brought further flooding to the nation , although farther north than Eline . Before the storm moved ashore , Hudah dropped 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) of rainfall over 24 hours in Quelimane along the coast . Despite the heavy rainfall from Hudah , there was not a repeat of the deadly river flooding that followed Eline . The <unk> River rose due to the rains , but the water levels did not rise above the banks . Some roads near Pebane were flooded , although not deep enough to disrupt travel . The storm 's strong winds knocked over many trees in its path , mostly in a 10 km ( 6 mi ) radius around Pebane , blocking the main road into the city . The winds also damaged about 10 % of the roofs in Pebane , as well as four schools ; about 160 boarding school children had to be sheltered elsewhere due to damage . A damaged wall fell and injured four people . Outside of the city , the winds damaged the manioc crop , and about 60 ha ( 150 acres ) of crop fields were destroyed . The cyclone destroyed around 100 huts in Pebane and nearby <unk> , leaving 300 people homeless . There were three deaths in Mozambique related to Hudah ; strong winds knocked a coconut off a tree , killing a child . Overall damage was less than anticipated . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the storm , the United Nations Disaster Management Team ( <unk> ) assisted the Conseil National de Secours ( CNS ) in Madagascar with surveying areas affected by Hudah . The <unk> also appealed for relief materials for at least 50 @,@ 000 – 100 @,@ 000 people . Two light helicopters in Mahajanga and Sambava were dispatched to support two planes in providing assistance to affected populations . Médecins Sans Frontières ( MSF ) also provided food and medical aid . The United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs ( OCHA ) served as a channel for donations to relief efforts , and also made available US $ 50 @,@ 000 from the United Kingdom 's Department for International Development ( <unk> ) for immediate relief purposes . Although the Red Cross had appealed for relief materials for Madagascar before Hudah had hit , these materials would arrive in April , assisting residents affected by Hudah and serving as a backbone for a long @-@ term rehabilitation plan . Due to inclement weather , surveys by humanitarian organizations on the island were not conducted until April 4 , a full two days after Hudah first struck the island . A Malagasy aircraft <unk> 6 tonnes ( 6 @.@ 6 metric tons ) of rice along with packages of other various supplies to affected regions . The CNS planned to deliver 10 tonnes ( 11 short tons ) of rice to Antalaha . Although initial reports indicated that 24 people were killed due to Hudah , later reports raised the death toll in Madagascar to 111 . 
 In Mozambique , the country 's National Institute of Disaster Management distributed 10 tons of food products and plastic housing tents to Pebane , where damage was worst . Officials determined that the storm damage could be repaired by local governments . 
 = Adolf Galland = 
 Adolf " <unk> " Joseph Ferdinand Galland ( 19 March 1912 – 9 February 1996 ) was a German Luftwaffe general and flying ace who served throughout the Second World War in Europe . He flew 705 combat missions , and fought on the Western and the Defence of the Reich fronts . On four occasions , he survived being shot down , and he was credited with 104 aerial victories , all of them against the Western Allies . 
 Galland , who was born in Westerholt , Westphalia , became a glider pilot in 1929 before he joined Lufthansa . In 1932 , he graduated as a pilot at the Deutsche Verkehrsfliegerschule ( German Commercial Flyers ' School ) in Braunschweig before applying to join the Reichswehr of the Weimar Republic later in the year . Galland 's application was accepted , but he never took up the offer . In February 1934 , he was transferred to the Luftwaffe . In 1937 , during the Spanish Civil War , he volunteered for the Condor Legion and flew ground attack missions in support of the Nationalists under Francisco Franco . After finishing his tour in 1938 Galland was employed in the Air Ministry writing doctrinal and technical manuals about his experiences as a ground @-@ attack pilot . During this period Galland served as an instructor for ground @-@ attack units . During the German invasion of Poland in September 1939 , he again flew ground attack missions . In early 1940 Galland managed to persuade his superiors to allow him to become a fighter pilot . 
 Galland flew Messerschmitt Bf 109s during the Battle of France and the Battle of Britain . By the end of 1940 , his tally of victories had reached 57 . In 1941 , Galland stayed in France and fought the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) over the English Channel and Northern France . By November 1941 , his tally had increased to 96 , by which time he had earned the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords . In November 1941 , Werner Mölders , who commanded the German Fighter Force as the General der Jagdflieger , was killed in a flying accident and Galland succeeded him , staying in the position until January 1945 . As General der Jagdflieger , Galland was forbidden to fly combat missions . 
 In late January and early February 1942 , Galland first planned then commanded the Luftwaffe 's air cover for the Kriegsmarine Operation Cerberus which was a major success . It earned him the coveted Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves , Swords and Diamonds . Over the ensuing years , Galland ’ s disagreements with Reichsmarschall Hermann Göring about how best to combat the Allied Air Forces bombing Germany caused their relationship to deteriorate . The Luftwaffe fighter force was under severe pressure by 1944 , and Galland was blamed by Göring for the failure to prevent the Allied strategic bombing of Germany in daylight . The relationship collapsed altogether in early January 1945 , when Galland was relieved of his command because of his constant criticism of the Luftwaffe leadership . Galland was then put under house arrest following the so @-@ called Revolt of the <unk> , during which senior Jagdwaffe pilots tried to " save " Galland 's position , while having Göring dismissed as Reichsmarschall . 
 In March 1945 , Galland returned to operational flying and was permitted to form a jet fighter unit which he called Jagdverband 44 . He flew missions over Germany until the end of the war in May . After the war , Galland was employed by Argentina 's Government and acted as a consultant to the Argentine Air Force . Later , he returned to Germany and managed his own business . Galland also became friends with many former enemies , such as RAF aces Robert Stanford Tuck and Douglas Bader . Adolf Galland died in February 1996 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Galland was born in Westerholt ( now <unk> ) , Westphalia on 19 March 1912 to a family with French Huguenot ancestry . The first Galland in Westerholt was a refugee from France in 1792 . He became a bailiff to the count von Westerholt , beginning a tradition that was handed down from father to son . Adolf Galland ( junior ) was the second of four sons of Adolf Galland ( senior ) and his French wife Anna , née Schipper . Upholding the family tradition , Galland ( senior ) worked as the land manager or bailiff to the Count von Westerholt . Galland 's older brother was Fritz and his two younger brothers were Wilhelm @-@ Ferdinand and Paul . Their father had pet names for all his family members . His wife Anna was called " Anita " . Fritz , his older brother , was called " Toby " , Adolf was " Keffer " , Wilhelm @-@ Ferdinand was nicknamed " <unk> " and Paul was called " <unk> " or since they were expecting a girl , occasionally " Paula " . 
 His two younger brothers also became fighter pilots and aces . Paul claimed 17 victories , he was shot down and killed on 31 October 1942 . Wilhelm @-@ Ferdinand , credited with 54 victories , was shot down and killed on 17 August 1943 . 
 = = = Youth = = = 
 In 1927 , Galland 's lifelong interest in flying started when a group of aviation enthusiasts brought a glider club to <unk> , a heath east of the Haltern @-@ Münster railway and part of the Westerholt estate . It was here that the Gelsenkirchen <unk> ( Air Sports Club of Gelsenkirchen ) created an interest in flying among young Germans . Galland travelled by foot or horse @-@ drawn wagon 30 kilometres ( 19 mi ) until his father bought him a motorcycle to help prepare the gliders for flight . Under the Treaty of Versailles , Germany was denied an air force . They were however allowed gliders and it became the way for fledgling pilots to begin their flying career . The sport became so popular that the Reichswehr set up ten schools , at least one in each of the seven military districts of Germany . The military also published a magazine , <unk> ( Flight Sport ) , to encourage an interest in aviation and began a series of glider competitions around the country . Galland had learned the basic laws of flight and how everything worked on paper but he found they did not always work in reality and his inexperience caused a few accidents . One of his tutors , Georg <unk> , taught him various techniques and in 1929 the 17 @-@ year @-@ old Galland passed his A certificate . This was one of three certificates he needed for his professional license . When he eventually attained his B and C certificates , his father promised to buy him his own glider if he also passed his <unk> examinations , which he succeeded in doing . Galland became an outstanding glider pilot ; he became an instructor before he had passed his Abitur . 
 In February 1932 , Galland graduated from Hindenburg Gymnasium ( high school ) in Buer and was among 20 personnel who were accepted to the aviation school of Germany 's national airline , Luft Hansa . 
 = = Early military career = = 
 = = = Pilot training = = = 
 During the final years of the Weimar Republic , jobs were scarce and life was hard for the Galland family economically . Adolf had some experience of flying gliders so he applied to the Deutsche Verkehrsfliegerschule or DVS ( German Commercial Flying School ) which was heavily subsidised by Luft Hansa . He was one of 100 successful applicants out of 4 @,@ 000 . After ten days of evaluations , he was among just 18 selected for flight training . Adolf was then assessed on performance . Those that did not reach the standard were sent home . Galland 's first flight was in an Albatros L 101 . His early career went badly . On one flight , he made a heavy landing and damaged the undercarriage of his aircraft . Later , while leading three aircraft in formation , two of them collided . No one was killed , but Galland was judged to have employed poor formation tactics . These incidents affected him so badly he was convinced he would soon be sent home , and he applied to join the German Army . In the meantime , he carried on with his flight training . Galland did not receive a reply from the Army and settled down to continue his training . Flights in an Albatros L 75 and the award of a B1 certificate allowing him to fly large aircraft over 2 @,@ 500 kilograms ( 5 @,@ 500 lb ) in weight helped him regain his confidence . Around the same time , the Army accepted his application , but owing to his successful training and improved flying , the flying school refused to release him . By Christmas 1932 , he had logged 150 hours flying and had obtained a B2 certificate . 
 Early in 1933 , Galland was sent to the Baltic Sea training base at <unk> to train on flying boats . Galland disliked learning what he perceived to be " seamanship " , but logged 25 hours in these aircraft . Soon afterward , along with several other pilots , he was ordered to attend an interview at the <unk> der <unk> Schule ( ZVS — Central Airline Pilot School ) . Here the group were interviewed by military personnel in civilian clothing . After being informed of a secret military training program being built that involved piloting high performance aircraft , all the pilots accepted an invitation to join the organisation . 
 = = = Into the Luftwaffe = = = 
 In May 1933 , Galland was ordered to a meeting in Berlin as one of 12 civilian pilots among 70 airmen who came from clandestine programmes , meeting Hermann Göring for the first time . Galland was impressed by and believed Göring to be a competent leader . In July 1933 , Galland travelled to Italy to train with the Regia Aeronautica ( Italian Air Force ) . Initially the Germans were treated as inferior by the Italians , but after Galland had flown some daring and impressive low @-@ level manoeuvres , the German contingent won their hosts ' respect . 
 In September 1933 , Galland returned to Germany and flew in some minor competitions as a glider pilot , winning some prizes . Soon afterwards he returned to the ZVS to learn instrument flying and receive training in piloting heavy transport aircraft logging another 50 hours . As a part of his training , beginning in October 1933 , Galland flew Lufthansa airliners . Flying the Junkers G24 from Stuttgart to Barcelona in Spain , via Geneva and Marseilles . In December 1933 , Galland was recalled to the ZVS headquarters and offered the chance to join the new Luftwaffe . Galland found the choice hard as he wanted the adventure of a military flying career , but as an airline pilot , Galland had enjoyed the life style of flying and visiting exotic places and was reluctant to give it up . Nevertheless , he decided to officially join the Luftwaffe . 
 After basic training in the Army , he was discharged from his barracks in Dresden in October 1934 . In February 1935 Galland was now part of 900 airmen waiting to be inducted to the new <unk> . In March Galland was ordered to report to Jagdgeschwader 2 ( Fighter Wing 2 ) , arriving at its headquarters in Jüterbog @-@ Damm on 1 April 1935 . Galland 's performance had not yet been impressive enough for a position as an instructor , so he was evaluated and deemed good enough for an operational posting . 
 In October 1935 , during aerobatic manoeuvre training , he crashed a Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 44 biplane and was in a coma for three days , other injuries were a damaged eye , fractured skull and broken nose . When Galland recovered , he was declared unfit for flying by the doctors . A friend , Major <unk> , kept the doctors report secret to allow Adolf to continue flying . The expansion of the Luftwaffe and his own Geschwader ( wing ) flooded the administration officers and Galland 's medical report was overlooked . Within a year , Galland showed no signs of injury from his crash . In October 1936 he crashed an Arado Ar 68 and was hospitalised again , aggravating his injured eye . It was at this point his previous medical report came to light again and Galland 's unfit certificate was discovered . Major <unk> was rumoured to have undergone a court @-@ martial , but the investigators dropped the charges . Galland , however , was grounded . He admitted having fragments of glass in his eye , but convinced the doctors he was fit for flying duty . Galland was ordered to undergo eye tests to validate his claims . Before the testing could begin , one of his brothers managed to acquire the charts . Adolf memorised the charts passing the test and was permitted to fly again . 
 = = = Condor Legion = = = 
 During the Spanish Civil War , Galland was appointed Staffelkapitän of a Condor Legion unit , 3 . Staffel Jagdgruppe 88 ( J / 88 — 88th Fighter Group ) , which was sent to support the Nationalist side under Franco at Ferrol from mid @-@ 1937 . Galland flew ground attack missions in Heinkel He 51s . In Spain , Galland first displayed his unique style : flying in swimming trunks with a cigar between his teeth in an aircraft decorated with a Mickey Mouse figure . When asked why he developed this style , he gave a simple answer : 
 I like Mickey Mouse . I always have . And I like cigars , but I had to give them up after the war . 
 Galland flew his first of 300 combat mission in Spain with the J / 88 commander Gotthard Handrick , on 24 July 1937 , near Brunete . During his time in Spain , Galland analysed the engagements , evaluated techniques and devised new ground @-@ attack tactics which were passed on to the Luftwaffe . His experiences in pin @-@ point ground assaults were used by Ernst Udet , a proponent of the dive bomber and leading supporter of the Junkers Ju 87 to push for Stuka wings . Wolfram von Richthofen , an opponent of Udet 's , used them to push for the opposite : Schlachtflieger dual combination fighter @-@ bombers . After trials with Henschel Hs <unk> , Bf 109s and Ju 87s , the Junkers was selected to undergo trials for the dive bomber role . 
 During his time in Spain , he developed early gasoline and oil bombs , suggested the quartering of personnel on trains to aid in relocation , and following the Nationalist victory was awarded the ‘ Spanish Cross in Gold with Swords and Diamonds ’ for his contributions . On 24 May 1938 Galland left Spain and was replaced by Werner Mölders . Before leaving he made ten flights in the Bf 109 ; deeply impressed with the performance of the aircraft , it persuaded him to change from a strike pilot to a fighter pilot . Galland 's fellow student and friend at the Kriegsschule in Dresden , Johannes Janke , later said of him " a very good pilot and excellent shot , but ambitious and he wanted to get noticed . A parvenu . He was crazy about hunting anything , from a sparrow to a man . " 
 = = = Staff post in the RLM = = = 
 From May to August 1938 , Galland took leave and visited Spanish Morocco . On his return to Germany , he was ordered to the headquarters of the Reichsluftfahrtministerium ( RLM — Ministry of Aviation ) where he was tasked with preparing recommendations on the subject of close air support . Galland favoured the virtually simultaneous attack of the air force before the Army advance , leaving their opponents no time to recover . While this reasserted the lessons of World War I , some of the Officer Corps were still pessimistic as to whether that kind of coordination was possible . Galland also adopted the Italian suggestion of heavy armament and criticised the light machine guns in early German fighter aircraft and pointed to the advantages of multi @-@ gun configurations ( combining machine guns with cannon ) . These proved successful in the Bf 109 and Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190 . He also recognised the innovation of drop tanks to extend the range of aircraft as well as the need for specialised tactics for escorting bomber fleets ; Galland did not subscribe to the prevailing idea in the Luftwaffe ( and RAF ) that the bomber " would always get through " ( alone ) . All of Galland 's suggestions were adopted and proved successful in the early campaigns , 1939 – 41 . During his time in the RLM , he instructed , trained and equipped ground @-@ support wings for Fall Grün ( Case Green ) , the invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1938 . However , the invasion did not take place . 
 Unluckily for Galland , his excellence at evaluation earned him a place at Tutow training facility where he was asked to test fly prototype reconnaissance and strike aircraft . This was not what he wanted , and he hoped to be returned to a fighter unit to fly the Bf 109 . During his time there , he gave positive evaluations on types such as the Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 189 and Henschel Hs 129 . During his test piloting career at Tutow , Galland received unwelcome news ; he was to become Gruppenkommandeur of II . ( Schlacht ) / Lehrgeschwader 2 ( II . ( S ) / LG 2 — 2nd battle group of the 2nd Demonstration Wing ) . It was not a fighter unit , but a special mixed Geschwader of ground attack aircraft . 
 = = Combat career ( 1939 – 41 ) = = 
 = = = Polish Campaign = = = 
 Just before the outbreak of war , Galland was promoted to Hauptmann . During the Invasion of Poland from 1 September 1939 onward , he flew with 4 Staffel , II . / Lehrgeschwader 2 . Equipped with the Henschel Hs 123 , nicknamed the " biplane Stuka , " supporting the German Tenth Army . On 1 September , Galland flew alone in a <unk> Fi 156 ' Storch ' on a reconnaissance mission and was nearly shot down . The next day he flew ground attack missions in support of the 1st Panzer Division advancing to the Warta River . Galland 's Geschwader flew intensive sorties in support of the division and XVI Army Corps at Kraków , Radom , <unk> and L <unk> . The German Army had reached the Vistula river near Warsaw by 7 <unk> and the Luftwaffe had been executing the kind of close air support operations Galland had been advocating . Galland participated in the maximum effort by the Luftwaffe during the Battle of Bzura . On 11 September , during one of his visits to the front , Adolf Hitler arrived at LG 2 headquarters for lunch with the staff . Such was the state of the Polish Air Force and Polish Army , that by 19 September 1939 some German air units were withdrawn from the campaign . Galland ceased combat operations on this date , having flown 87 missions . After flying nearly 360 missions in two wars and averaging two missions per day , on 13 September 1939 , Galland was awarded the Iron Cross Second Class . 
 After the Polish Campaign , Galland claimed to be suffering from rheumatism and therefore unfit for flying in open @-@ cockpit aircraft , such as the Hs 123 . He tactfully suggested a transfer to a single @-@ engine aircraft type with a closed cockpit would improve his condition . His request was accepted on medical grounds . Galland was removed from his post as a direct ground support pilot . Galland never explained whether open cockpits had caused the complaint or some other cause ; given his performance with eye specialists , a certain amount of suspicion is reasonable . He was transferred to Jagdgeschwader 27 ( JG 27 — Fighter Wing 27 ) on 10 February 1940 as the adjutant , restricting him from flying . 
 = = = Western Europe = = = 
 After his transfer to JG 27 , Galland met Mölders again . Due to his injuries , Galland could never match <unk> ' sharp eyesight ; the shards of glass in his eyes denied him that capacity . However , Mölders , by that time a recognised ace ( a pilot with five or more aerial victories ) , shared what experiences he could with Galland ; leadership in the air , tactics and organisation . Mölders was Geschwaderkommodore of Jagdgeschwader 53 at the time of their meeting . In order for Galland to gain experience on the Bf 109E , which Galland lacked , he offered Galland the chance to join his unit which was flying patrols along the French border . During these sorties , Galland learned Mölders ' tactics , such as using spotter aircraft to indicate the position of enemy formation , as an early warning system . Galland learned to allow the Staffel to operate freely in order to seize the initiative and surprise . Taking his findings back to JG 27 , its commander Max Ibel , agreed to their implementation . Galland gained further experience as a combat leader acting as the Gruppenkommandeur , when the ' Gruppenkommandeur went on leave . 
 On 10 May 1940 , the Wehrmacht invaded the Low Countries and France under the codename Fall Gelb . JG 27 supported German forces in the Battle for Belgium . On the third day of the offensive , 12 May 1940 , 7 kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) west of Liege , Belgium , at a height of about 4 @,@ 000 metres ( 13 @,@ 000 ft ) , flying a Messerschmitt Bf 109 , Galland , with Gustav <unk> as his wingman , claimed his first aerial victories , over two Royal Air Force ( RAF ) Hawker Hurricanes . Both aircraft were from No. 87 Squadron . The Hurricanes had been escorting Bristol Blenheim bombers to bomb bridges in the Netherlands . Galland remembered ; " My first kill was child 's play . An excellent weapon and luck had been on my side . To be successful , the best fighter pilot needs both " — Galland pursued one of the " scattering " Hurricanes and shot down another at low level . The pilot , a Canadian , Flying Officer Jack Campbell was killed . 
 Galland claimed his third Hurricane later that same day over Tienen . He had long believed that his opponents had been Belgian , not knowing that all of the Belgian Air Force 's Hurricanes had been destroyed on the ground in the first two days , without seeing combat . On 19 May , Galland shot down a French Potez aircraft . During this flight he ran out of fuel short of the runway and landed nearby , at the base of a hill . With the help of soldiers from a German Flak battery , he pushed the Bf 109 up the hill and then half @-@ flew , half @-@ glided down to the Charleville @-@ Mézières airfield in the valley below . He sent back a can of fuel for his wingman , who had also landed short of the runway . He continued flying and the next day , claimed another three more aircraft , making a total of seven . For this he was awarded the Iron Cross First Class from Erhard Milch on 22 May . 
 With the effective defeat of Belgium JG 27 was moved into forward airfields to support the invasion of France . During the Battle of Dunkirk , after encountering the Supermarine Spitfire for the first time , Galland was impressed with these aircraft and their pilots . On 29 May , Galland claimed he had shot down a Bristol Blenheim over the sea . On 3 June during Operation Paula , he claimed another French aircraft , a Morane @-@ Saulnier M.S.406 for his 12th victory . 
 On 6 June 1940 , Galland took over the command of III . / Jagdgeschwader 26 " Schlageter " ( III . / JG 26 — 3rd group of the 26th Fighter Wing ) with the position of Gruppenkommandeur . Under his command were the 7 , 8 and 9 <unk> with an establishment of 39 Bf 109Es . His <unk> included Joachim Müncheberg and Wilhelm Balthasar . Balthasar , Staffelkapitän of 7 Staffel had mistakenly attacked Galland during Fall Rot ( Case Red ) . Being on the same radio frequency , Galland was able to warn Balthasar before he opened fire . The remainder of the campaign passed without incident and on 26 June , Major Gotthard Handrick took over command of JG 26 . Galland was pleased , having served under him during his Condor Legion days . 
 = = = Battle of Britain = = = 
 From June 1940 on , Galland flew as the Gruppenkommandeur of III . / JG 26 ( JG 26 ) , fighting in the Battle of Britain with Messerschmitt Bf 109Es . On 19 July 1940 , he was promoted to Major and JG 26 moved to the Pas de Calais , where they were to remain for the next 18 months with III . / JG 26 based at <unk> . 
 On 24 July 1940 , almost 40 Bf 109s of III . / JG 26 took off for operations over the English Channel — a phase of the battle known as the Kanalkampf . They were met by 12 54 Squadron Spitfires . The Spitfires forced the larger number of Bf 109s into a turning battle that ran down the Germans ' fuel . Galland recalled being impressed by the Spitfire 's ability to outmanoeuvre Bf 109s at low speed and to turn into the Bf 109s within little airspace . Only by executing a " Split S " ( a half @-@ roll onto his back , followed by pulling into a long , curving dive ) that the Spitfire could not follow without exceeding its maximum safe speed and risking structural failure , could his aircraft escape back to France at low altitude . The II . / Jagdgeschwader 52 covered their retreat , losing two Bf 109s to Spitfires from No. 610 Squadron . During the action , two Spitfires were shot down for the loss of four Bf 109s . Galland was shocked by the aggression shown by pilots he believed to be relatively inexperienced . Galland later said he realised there would be no quick and easy victory . 
 As the battles over the Channel continued , Galland shot down Spitfires on 25 and 28 July . On 1 August 1940 , Galland was awarded the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes ) for his 17 victories . Galland continued to make fighter sweeps over southern England before the main assault opened . On 11 August , Galland 's unit engaged 74 Squadron . In a brief dogfight , one Spitfire was shot down . During these battles the RAF seemed to know just where and when to send their aircraft . This made Galland suspect a high level of organisation was at work controlling RAF fighters . The cloudy skies of Britain were a dangerous environment to confront an enemy that had an effective ground control system . Galland resolved to fly higher , where he could see most things and where the Bf 109 performed at its best . 
 By 15 August , in two weeks ' fighting over Britain , Galland had increased his own score to 22 . On this day he claimed three Spitfires . This put him to within three victories of Mölders , who had claimed the highest number of enemy aircraft destroyed and who was wounded and grounded with a damaged knee . One of Galland 's claims was against 54 Squadron RAF that had surprised him with their aggressive attacks three weeks before . JG 26 claimed nine Spitfires in the air battle — Galland himself filing a claim for a Spitfire at 12 : 55 off Folkestone . Only two 54 Squadron Spitfires were lost in the late @-@ morning early afternoon battle . Galland 's claim matches the loss of a Spitfire piloted by Sergeant N. A Lawrence who was rescued with severe shock . In the afternoon of that same day , Galland claimed two more Spitfires from 64 Squadron . JG 26 claimed eight of the unit 's Spitfires which were all officially " confirmed " by the Germans . However , only two of the RAF fighters were hit and both were destroyed . Pilot Officer C. J. D Andreae was killed in <unk> and R. Roberts bailed out of <unk> . 
 Galland was summoned to Karinhall on 18 August 1940 , and missed the intense air battle that day , known as The Hardest Day . During the meeting , Göring insisted that , in combat , Bf 109 fighters escort Bf 110s , which could not survive against single @-@ engine fighters . As high @-@ scoring aces , both Galland and Mölders shared their concerns that close escort of Bf 110s and bombers robbed fighter pilots of their freedom to roam and engage the enemy on their own terms . They also pointed to the fact that German bombers flew at medium altitudes and low speed , the best height area and speed for the manoeuvrability of the Spitfire . Galland resented his pilots having to carry out a task unsuited to their equipment but Göring would not move from his position . 
 Galland returned to action on 22 August replacing Gotthard Handrick as Geschwaderkommodore of JG 26 . Galland 's appointment made no impact on his successes . From 25 August — 14 September 1940 , Galland filed claims for victories 23 – 32 . This included three claims on 31 August 1940 for two Spitfires and a Hurricane to take his tally to 27 . His 25th victim may have been from 19 Squadron which was claimed 20 kilometers south of Cambridge at 09 : 42 . Klaus <unk> also accounted for one for his 7th victory . Three 19 Squadron Spitfires were shot down in the morning near North Weald . Pilot Officer <unk> <unk> was killed in a crash @-@ landing in Spitfire <unk> while Flying Officer <unk> Coward was wounded in the foot and <unk> <unk> was unhurt . He bailed out of <unk> . On 6 September , Galland claimed his 30th victory over a 610 Squadron Hurricane . JG 26 claimed two more of them shot down that morning . 610 lost four Hurricanes ; Flying Officer <unk> Rhodes @-@ Moorehouse and <unk> Davis were killed while Flying Officer J. <unk> and Pilot Officer <unk> Gilbert were wounded . 
 During the battle , the fighter pilots were criticised by Göring for the growing bomber losses . In a front line General Officer briefing on Luftwaffe tactics , Göring asked what his fighter pilots needed to win the battle . Werner Mölders replied that he would like the Bf 109 to be fitted with more powerful engines . Galland replied : " I should like an outfit of Spitfires for my squadron . " which left Göring speechless with rage . Galland still preferred the Bf 109 for offensive sweeps , but he regarded the Spitfire as a better defensive fighter , owing to its manoeuvrability . Galland said : 
 The Bf 109 was superior in the attack and not so suitable for purely defensive purposes as the Spitfire , which , although a little slower , was much more manoeuvrable . 
 During the Battle of Britain , the question of killing enemy pilots while in their parachutes was raised . In another conversation with Göring , Galland recalled : 
 Göring wanted to know if we had ever thought about this . " <unk> , Herr Reichsmarschall ! " He looked me straight in the eyes and said , " What would you think of an order to shoot down pilots who were bailing out ? " I should regard it as murder , Herr Reichsmarschall " , I told him , " I should do everything in my power to disobey such an order " . " That is just the reply I had expected from you , Galland " . 
 Galland later stated that he thought Göring may have been asking him this question so as to have an answer if the question was ever posed to him , as opposed to the implication that Göring would be in favour of such an action . 
 Galland passed another serious test on 15 September , the date known as Battle of Britain Day . In large scale @-@ clashes Galland claimed his 33rd air victory over a Hurricane while leading JG 26 . On 23 September , Galland became the third member of the Wehrmacht to receive the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub ) for achieving his 39th and 40th aerial victories . On 25 September , he was summoned to Berlin to receive the award from Adolf Hitler . The Battle of Britain continued with large @-@ scale dogfights well past 31 October 1940 , considered by some historians as the end of the campaign . A further eight victories — six Spitfires and two Hurricanes — were claimed in October 1940 including three on 30 October which took his tally to 50 — the last two victims were claimed at 16 : 00 CET and were likely from 41 Squadron . Pilot Officer G. G. F. Draper was wounded and Sergeant L. A Garvey was killed . In November , a further six victories including four Hurricanes were accounted for to record victories 51 – 56 putting him level with the late Helmut Wick who had been shot down and killed on 28 November . On 5 December 1940 , Galland recorded his 57th victory . This made him the most successful fighter pilot of the war at that point , putting him ahead of his colleague , friend and rival Werner Mölders . 
 = = = Channel Front = = = 
 Now , promoted to Oberstleutnant , he continued to lead JG 26 in 1941 against the RAF fighter sweeps across northern Europe . In early 1941 , most of the Luftwaffe 's fighter units were sent to the Eastern Front , or south to the Mediterranean Theater of Operations ( MTO ) , only leaving JG 26 and Jagdgeschwader 2 ( JG 2 ) as the sole single @-@ engine fighter Geschwader in France . By this time , JG 26 were being re @-@ equipped with the new Bf 109F , normally equipped with a 15 mm ( or later a 20 mm ) cannon firing through the propeller hub and two cowl @-@ mounted 7 @.@ 9 mm MG 17 . Galland felt the model was grossly under @-@ armed and so tested a series of 109 " specials " – one with a unique armament of an MG 151 / 20 cannon and two cowl @-@ mounted 13 mm MG 131 machine guns , and another with integral wing @-@ mounted 20 mm MG FF cannons . 
 On 15 April 1941 , Galland took off with lobster and champagne to celebrate General Theo Osterkamp 's birthday at Le Touquet , France . He made a detour with his wingman towards England , looking for RAF aircraft . Off the cliffs of Dover , he spotted a group of Spitfires . Galland attacked and claimed two confirmed and one unconfirmed shot down . The actual result was the destruction of one Spitfire ; the other two were damaged in force landings with both pilots wounded . During the combat , Galland 's undercarriage had dropped causing one of the RAF pilots ( Flight Lieutenant Paddy Finucane ) to claim Galland 's aircraft as destroyed , but Galland landed without incident at Le Touquet and presented Osterkamp with his gifts . Galland 's success that day represented his 60th and 61st aerial victory . 
 Galland received a telephone from Göring on 10 May 1941 , requesting Galland to intercept a Messerschmitt Bf 110 flown by Rudolf Hess heading for Scotland . Galland was unable to launch a full fighter sweep . However , Hess ' flight was far to the north and he reached Scotland crashing his aircraft . Galland sent out fighters to conduct some sweeps so he could honestly claim to have carried out his orders but it was nearly dark and Galland ordered his pilots unused to night flying to stand down . 
 Galland continued his successes in the summer . On 13 June , he led a small number of Bf 109s on a patrol off the English coast and attacked a pair of No. 258 Squadron RAF Hurricanes claiming both shot down . One can be confirmed through British records as crash landing at RAF Hawkinge . It took his tally to 63 . From this point on , the RAF would mount a non @-@ stop offensive with Fighter Command over France . The Germans did not see the point in these operations and soon labeled it the " nonsense offensive . " Galland intended to engage the British and inflict maximum damage while incurring small losses . To do this he only engaged JG 26 in staffel or <unk> strength . The fighters were to scramble quickly gain height and make use of the sun and cloud to attack the enemy formation that was most vulnerable . Under these tactics many JG 26 pilots began to emerge as aces and effective commanders . On 16 June 1941 , for example , JG 26 accounted for 15 enemy aircraft . Josef <unk> was among those to score bringing his tally to 22 . <unk> would later rise to command JG 26 . Galland claimed a Hurricane this day for victory number 64 — though the loss cannot be confirmed in British records . On 17 June , he accounted for two Hurricanes , one from 56 and another from 242 Squadron . The following day he accounted for a No. 145 Squadron Spitfire which inflated his tally to 67 — then the highest recorded tally against the Western Allies . 
 On the morning of 21 June , he accounted for two Bristol Blenheims but was shot down by the Spitfire escorts , crash @-@ landing near Calais . At 16 : 00 that same afternoon , Galland shot down a No. 611 Squadron Spitfire , but watching his victim for too long , he was himself shot down in Werknummer ( Factory number ) <unk> , code " < - + - " , by a 145 Squadron Spitfire flown by Sergeant <unk> Grant . Galland bailed out and tugged at what he thought was his parachute ripcord , but was actually pulling at his parachute release harness . With a " sickening " feeling , he composed himself and pulled the ripcord which opened . Theo Osterkamp drove over to the hospital where Galland was being treated for his wounds and informed him his 69 victories had now earned him the Knight 's Cross of the Iron Cross with Oak Leaves and Swords ( Ritterkreuz des Eisernen Kreuzes mit Eichenlaub und Schwertern ) . 
 On 2 July 1941 , Galland led JG 26 into combat against a formation of No. 226 Squadron Blenheim bombers . Galland 's fighter was hit by a 20 mm round from one of the bombers escort fighters . The armour plate fitted to the Bf 109 just days earlier saved Galland 's life . Wounded in the head he managed to land and was again hospitalised for the second time in a few days . Just earlier that week , when the armour plate was installed , he severely berated his mechanic , Gerhard Meyer , who welded it in , when he hit his head on the canopy upon entering his aircraft . That same mechanic received " a grateful slap on the back " . Galland had been shot up and shot down twice in the space of four days . The Blenheim brought his tally to 70 . 
 On 9 August 1941 , RAF ace Douglas Bader bailed out over St Omer , France . Bader was well known to the Luftwaffe and at the time of his capture had been credited with 22 aerial victories . Galland himself claimed two Spitfires on that date . Galland and JG 26 entertained Bader over the next few days . Owing to the significant stature of the prisoner , Galland permitted Bader , under escort , to sit in the cockpit of a Bf 109 . Apparently , despite losing one of his tin legs in the aircraft , Bader , in a semi @-@ serious way , asked if they wouldn 't mind if he took it on a test flight around the airfield . Galland replied that he feared Douglas would attempt to escape and they would have to give chase and shoot at each other again , and declined the request . 
 Throughout the summer , Galland claimed another 14 Spitfires in battles against Fighter Command over France . On 23 July 1941 , he accounted for three Spitfires ( Nos. 71 – 73 ) — one in the afternoon and two in the evening . JG 26 claimed 13 enemies for three losses under Galland 's command this day . Two on 7 August was sufficient to reach 75 aerial victories . On 19 August , he claimed two Spitfire and one Hurricane to surpass the World War I ace Manfred von Richthofen 's tally of 80 . His 80th and 81st victims were from 111 and 71 Squadrons . Galland also flew the Focke @-@ Wulf Fw 190 in the autumn 1941 when the Geschwader converted to the type though he retained and flew Bf 109s himself . On 21 October he repeated his successes with a trio of Spitfires to reach 92 . His 96th victim — yet another Spitfire — was claimed on 18 November 1941 . It proved to be his last official victory for three years as he was about to be forbidden to fly combat missions . The RAF fighter probably came from 611 Squadron . 
 = = High command ( 1941 – 45 ) = = 
