 The mantled guereza has many alternative common names including the guereza , the eastern black @-@ and @-@ white colobus , the magistrate colobus , or the Abyssinian black @-@ and @-@ white colobus . The name " mantled " refers to its mantle , the long silky white fringes of hair that run along its body and " guereza " is the native name of the monkey in Ethiopia . The scientific name Colobus derives from Greek <unk> meaning " mutilated " which refers to its lack of thumbs . 
 = = Discovery and taxonomic classification = = 
 The mantled guereza was discovered by Eduard Rüppell , a German naturalist and explorer , during his trip to Abyssinia between 1830 and 1834 . He wrote about the species in Neue <unk> con <unk> , <unk> in 1835 . It was first seen in Europe in 1890 in Berlin Zoological Garden when three individuals were purchased from a dealer from Massawa , Eritrea . 
 The mantled guereza is in the Colobinae subfamily , also known as the leaf @-@ eating monkeys , a group of Old World monkeys from Asia and Africa . This subfamily is split into three groups , the colobus monkeys of Africa , of which the mantled guereza is a part , the langurs , or leaf monkeys , of Asia , and an " odd @-@ nosed " group . The African colobus monkeys are divided again by distinctions in color , behavior , and ecology . The three genera are the black @-@ and @-@ white colobi , the red colobi , and the olive colobi . There are three black @-@ and @-@ white colobi : the mantled guereza , Colobus guereza , the king colobus , C. <unk> , and the Angola colobus , C. angolensis . Groves lists seven subspecies of mantled guereza in Mammal Species of the World ( MSW ) ( 2005 ) . The validity of the Djaffa Mountain guereza , C. g. gallarum , is uncertain , although not listed by Groves in MSW , it is recognised in his 2007 Colobinae review paper , and by International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) assessors <unk> and <unk> in 2008 . 
 Western guereza , Colobus guereza occidentalis , occurs from eastern Nigeria , Cameroon , and Gabon at the edge of its western range to South Sudan and Uganda , west of the Nile . 
 Omo River guereza , C. g. guereza , found in Ethiopia , in the highlands west of the Rift Valley down to the reaches of the Awash River , the Omo River , and in the Blue Nile gorge . 
 Djaffa Mountains guereza or Neumann 's black @-@ and @-@ white colobus , C. g. gallarum , found in the Ethiopian Highlands east of the Rift Valley . 
 Dodinga Hills guereza , C. g. <unk> , found in the <unk> Hills in South Sudan . 
 Mau Forest guereza , C. g. matschiei , occurs from western Kenya and Uganda south into northern Tanzania . 
 Mt <unk> guereza or Percival 's black @-@ and @-@ white colobus , C. g. <unk> , found in the Matthews Range in Kenya . 
 Eastern black @-@ and @-@ white colobus , C. g. <unk> , occurs in Kenya on the Ngong Escarpment of Mount Kenya and in the Aberdare Range . 
 Kilimanjaro guereza , C. g. caudatus , found in Tanzania and Kenya in the forests surrounding Mount Kilimanjaro and Mount Meru . 
 The morphological difference between subspecies is most pronounced between the southeastern Kilimanjaro guereza , C. g. caudatus , and the northwestern western guereza , C. g. occidentalis . The intermediate subspecies show a gradual change between the two . 
 = = Physical description = = 
 The mantled guereza has a distinctive pelage , it is mostly black , with long white fringes of silky hair — known as a mantle or ornamentation — along the sides of its body and tail . The bands that make up the mantle start at the shoulders and extend along the back until they connect at the lower torso . The tail is long and ends in a white tuft which varies in how much it covers the tail . These features vary in color among subspecies , for example the tail of C. g. guereza is gray until the white tail tuft which covers half of its length , while the tail tuft of C. g. caudatus makes up 80 % of the tail . The mantle color ranges from white to cream or yellow . Its face is framed by white hair and it has bushy cheek hairs . The thigh has a white stripe . 
 Infants are born with pink skin and white hair . The hair and skin darken as they age and by three to four months they attain adult coloration . Male usually gain their coloration before females . The male typically weighs 9 @.@ 3 and 13 @.@ 5 kilograms ( 21 and 30 lb ) and the female weighs between 7 @.@ 8 and 9 @.@ 2 kilograms ( 17 and 20 lb ) . The head and body length averages 61 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 24 @.@ 2 in ) for males and 57 @.@ 6 centimetres ( 22 @.@ 7 in ) for females . Like most colobi , the mantled guereza has a small thumb that is vestigial . There is dentition sexual dimorphism among the subspecies . In some , the males have larger teeth than females , in others the reverse is true , and some have no significant difference . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The mantled guereza is distributed throughout Equatorial Africa . It ranges from Nigeria and Cameroon in the west to Ethiopia , Kenya , Uganda , and northern Tanzania in the east . The mantled guereza lives in both deciduous and evergreen forests . It mainly inhabits forest and savannah woodlands and often extend into highland and montane forests . It can be found in other forest habitats , both primary and secondary , such as riparian ( near fresh or brackish water ) , gallery , and upland forests . It is particularly common in forests close to rivers and lakes and at high elevations . It can be found in elevations as high as 3 @,@ 300 metres ( 10 @,@ 800 ft ) . This species prefers secondary forests and selects them over old @-@ growth forests if given the choice . It is likely that the mantled guereza prefers these forests due to the increased number of food trees and the weaker chemical defenses of the species within . The mantled guereza is sometimes found in swamps as well as human @-@ made habitats such as Eucalyptus plantations , which may be frequented when the monkey has nutritional deficiencies . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 The mantled guereza is primarily arboreal , but does sometimes descend on the ground to forage and travel , perhaps more so than most other colobines . It is diurnal and rests for up to half the day . Foraging or travelling are the next most common activity . Sometime after dawn , mantled guereza groups leave their sleeping trees and will return to them at dusk . During the day , the mantled guereza has long rest periods in between periods of moving and feeding . Other activities , including grooming , greeting , playing and being vigilant , are performed to a lesser extent . 
 Despite its reputation as an exclusive leaf @-@ eater , the mantled guereza is not an obligate folivore . While it mainly eats leaves and fruit , its diet is quite variable . It may eat bark , wood , seeds , flowers , petioles , lianas , aquatic @-@ plants , arthropods , soil , and even concrete from buildings . The amount of each food item in its diet varies by area and time of year . Nutritional factors like protein , tannins , and sodium levels in leaves influence its food choices . It may even intermittently travel longer distances to access plants with higher levels of nutrition . Leaves usually make up over half of its diet , although fruits are occasionally eaten more depending on the season . When foraging for leaves , the mantled guereza prefers young ones over old . With fleshy fruits , the mantled guereza prefers to eat them unripe , which may serve to reduce competition with primates that eat ripe fruits . It consumes a number of plant species but only some make up most of its diet at a specific site . 
 Like all colobi , the mantled guereza is able to digest leaves and other plant fibers with a large , multi @-@ chambered stomach that contains bacteria in certain areas . Like most colobines , it prefers foods with high fiber content that can be easily extracted with its specialized stomach . The mantled guereza is mostly preyed on by the crowned hawk @-@ eagle , but it is also eaten by other birds of prey such as Verreaux 's eagle . The common chimpanzee is known to hunt the guereza . The leopard is another possible predator . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Social structure = = = 
 The mantled guereza lives in stable social groups usually containing three to fifteen members . The groups usually contain one male , several females and juveniles . In some populations , groups containing several males are common . In multi @-@ male groups , males tend to be aggressive with one another with one being dominant . Some males may be expelled from these groups . Multi @-@ male groups may contain father @-@ son pairs or unrelated males . Males that are not part of groups either live solitarily or with other outside males in bachelor groups . The females keep the groups cohesive and they are matrilineally related . They rarely disperse from their natal groups , except possibly when they break apart . Males on the other hand , usually leave when they become subadults or adults . They may start out being solitary and or in bachelor groups . They gain entry into a social group either by being on the periphery or displacing a group male . 
 Because of its low quality diet and the dispersed distribution of its food , the mantled guereza has a resident @-@ egalitarian social structure . Female <unk> living in a group often have an egalitarian dominance style with no formalized rank relations . Relationships are relaxed and friendly with rare signals of dominance or subordinance . Physical aggression within the group is usually not harmful and rarely escalates into a conflict . Allogrooming is an important part of mantled guereza interactions and mostly occurs between females . The adult males rarely groom in the groups . While not strictly territorial , mantled guereza groups can be aggressive towards each other . In some populations , groups may defend core areas ( which exist as a small part of the home range ) , resources , and mates . During intergroup encounters , males can engage in direct or indirect mate defense , like defending a female 's resources . It is the males that participate in agonistic inter @-@ group encounters but female may do so as well . Aggressive encounters between groups usually involve chases , displays and vocalizations rather than physical contact . 
 = = = Reproduction and parenting = = = 
 The mantled guereza has a polygynous harem @-@ based mating system . Mating solicitations are made by both males and females , half of the time for each . To solicit mating , the mantled guereza will walk near its potential partner and make low @-@ intensity mouth clicks or tough @-@ smacks . During copulation , the males hold on the female 's ankles and body . Most matings take place between individuals of the same group but copulations outside of the group have been recorded . In multi @-@ male groups , more than one male may mate with the females . The gestation period lasts 158 days with a 16 @-@ 22 month interbirth interval . The newborn guereza relies on its mother for support and must cling to her . As they grow older , infants can move on their own but keep returning to their mothers . The infants take up most of the attention in the groups . The other females in a group may handle an infant although the latter are only comfortable with their mothers . The males normally don 't pay much attention to infants until they are four to five weeks old . Infants can eat solid food at about eight to nine weeks and by fifty weeks they are fully weaned and no longer need to hold on to their mothers . 
 = = = Communication = = = 
 The most notable vocalization of the mantled guereza is the " roar " , which is made mainly at night or dawn by males . The sound of a roar can be carried for up to a mile . It is normally the dominant male who roars when there are multiple males in the group . Roars are used for long distance communication and can regulate inter @-@ group spacing without direct , physical contact while foraging . When one male starts roaring , neighboring males will start to roar as well . Often , the mantled guereza will respond to calls regardless of " caller identity , " focusing more on the collective vocal displays and not the familiarity of the caller . There is variation in the roars of males which could signal the status of their group and fighting ability . With a roar , a male can advertise his body size ; both actual and exaggerated . Other vocalizations are made as well . Males may snort , possibly as an alarm call . " <unk> " are made before group movements . Females and infants may " <unk> " when under mild distress . When in more serious distress , like if an infant is in danger , females and sub @-@ adults will squeak or scream . " Tongue @-@ clicking " is made during mild aggression . In addition to vocalizations , the mantled guereza communicates with several different body postures and movements , displaying of fringe fur , facial expressions , and touches . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 Because it can live in both dry and gallery forests and move on the ground , the mantled guereza is less threatened than many other colobine species . The IUCN lists it as Least Concern because " although locally threatened in parts of its range , this widespread species is not thought to be declining fast enough to place it in a higher category of threat . " However , some of the subspecies are classified under different categories . The Mt <unk> guereza , C. g. <unk> , is listed as Endangered due to its small range and its risk from hunting , while the Dodinga Hills guereza , C. g. <unk> , the Djaffa Mountains guereza , C. g. gallarum , and the Mau Forest guereza , C. g. matschiei are all listed as Data Deficient . 
 The Dodinga Hills guereza hasn 't been recorded since the 1960s . Unlike most other primate species , the mantled guereza can survive habitat degradation and can even thrive in degraded forests . Sometimes , logging may increase the number of preferred food trees for the mantled guereza and it is more abundant in logged areas than unlogged ones . However , complete forest clearance causes dramatic declines in numbers . In Uganda complete forest clearings caused a decline of 50 % over eight years . The mantled guereza is also threatened by hunting for meat and its skin . Mantled guereza meat sells as bushmeat for $ 4 – 9 US . The skins have been sold for fashion or in the tourist trade . 
 = Homerpalooza = 
 " Homerpalooza " is the 24th episode of The Simpsons ' seventh season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on May 19 , 1996 . The plot focuses around Homer 's depression about aging and no longer being cool , and his quest to become cool again by joining the " Hullabalooza " music festival as a carnival freak . The episode title is a play on the Lollapalooza music festival . It was the last Simpsons episode written by Brent Forrester and the last episode directed by Wes Archer . Peter Frampton and musical groups The Smashing Pumpkins , Cypress Hill and Sonic Youth guest star as themselves . 
 = = Plot = = 
 After the school bus is destroyed at the auto wrecking yard , Homer is forced to drive his ( and other ) kids to school . Along the way , he listens to a classic rock radio station that plays " Shinin ' On " by Grand Funk Railroad and is shocked to discover that all of the kids hate it , and have never heard of them . After several more days of the kids hating his music ( which Bart calls " dinosaur bands " ) , Homer visits a music store and realizes that what he likes is no longer considered cool . As a result , Homer decides to take Bart and Lisa to the Hullabalooza music festival . At the festival , Homer tries to act cool by wearing a Rastafarian hat , but all he does is humiliate himself and is confronted by an angry crowd of Generation <unk> who mistake him for a narc . After being tossed out by the crowd , Homer angrily kicks a cannon , which shoots one of Peter Frampton 's inflatable pigs ( purchased at " Pink Floyd 's yard sale " ) at his stomach . The festival head is impressed and Homer is hired as a part of the festival 's freak show . 
 As a result , Homer gets to go on tour with the festival and hangs out with The Smashing Pumpkins , Cypress Hill and Sonic Youth . Homer suddenly finds himself living the high life : partying with big name rock stars and becoming respected among American youth , including Bart. As the tour approaches a stop in Springfield , Homer 's stomach begins to hurt and he is sent to a veterinarian . The veterinarian advises Homer that if he performs his act one more time , his stomach will burst and he will die . Homer shrugs this news off , not wanting to lose his popularity . At first he decides to do his job , but at the last second he loses his nerve and dodges the cannonball . Consequently , he is released from the festival and , despite a warm sendoff from the rock stars , goes back to not being respected by his children . 
 = = Production = = 
 The entire story of this episode was developed by David Cohen , although it was written by Brent Forrester , who felt that Cohen at least deserved a " story by " credit . To do research for this episode , Forrester went to one of the Lollapalooza concerts , which he thought would be a fun little perk , but ended up being a horrible experience . Several of the jokes in this episode are based on his experiences : cameras ( including his own ) were being seized and thrown in the garbage , there were numerous advertisements , several " sour faced teens " , a real freak show ( Jim Rose Circus ) , and at one point a stranger approached Forrester and asked " how 's it going , narc ? " 
 During Homer 's confrontation with the Hullabalooza crowd , there is a brief shot of Homer with the members of the musical group No Doubt behind him . Gwen Stefani 's brother Eric Stefani , who himself had been a member of the band , was working as an animator at The Simpsons at the time and added them in . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The writers were aiming to have artists that represented several genres : hip hop ( Cypress Hill ) , alternative rock ( Sonic Youth , Smashing Pumpkins ) and a classic rock singer . Originally , Bob Dylan was sought for this role , but he was replaced by Peter Frampton . Neil Young and Pearl Jam were also sought for the episode but turned down the offer . 
 Originally , Courtney Love and Hole were wanted for this episode , but they declined . According to the DVD commentary an unnamed group had said that if Courtney Love were in the episode , they would not be . An Entertainment Weekly article revealed that the group was Sonic Youth . It was thought that Love would appear in the episode because she had recently done a movie with James L. Brooks , but she never responded to the request . Love was wanted specifically for one joke which would be in an exchange between her and Homer : 
 Courtney Love : Hi Homer ! I 'm a big fan , Courtney <unk> : Homer Grateful ! 
 However , she did not appear and the joke was reworded for Billy Corgan of the Smashing Pumpkins : 
 Billy Corgan : Billy Corgan , Smashing <unk> : Homer Simpson , smiling politely . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The flashback where Homer meets the guys in the van is based on Dazed and Confused . Several of the scenes where Homer is hit with a cannonball are based on famous stock footage of Frank " Cannonball " Richards being hit with a cannonball . Otto 's drug @-@ induced hallucination of his " talking shoes " are based on the opening of the album version of the song " 1999 " by Prince . Homer 's walk in one scene parodies the walk in the Keep on Truckin ' comic that was drawn by Robert Crumb . 
 = = = Soundtrack = = = 
 Music in this episode : 
 " Shinin ' On " by Grand Funk Railroad 
 " Mississippi Queen " by Mountain 
 " Zero " by The Smashing Pumpkins 
 " You Make Me Feel Like Dancing " by Leo Sayer ( sung by Homer & Barney ) 
 " Do You Feel Like We Do " by Peter Frampton 
 " Insane in the Brain " by Cypress Hill 
 " Throw Your Set In The Air " by Cypress Hill 
 " Frankenstein " by the Edgar Winter Group 
 Sonic Youth plays their version of the theme over the end credits 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Homerpalooza " finished 57th in ratings for the week of May 13 – 19 , 1996 , with a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 8 , equivalent to approximately 7 @.@ 5 million viewing households . It was the third highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files and Married ... with Children . 
 The BBC website called the episode " One of the most memorable episodes , if not one of the greatest – the satire on youth counterculture is well handled , and Homer 's flashback to his youth is fabulous . " and IGN said the episode was one of the best of Season 7 . In a list of the 25 greatest guest voices on the show , released September 5 , 2006 , IGN.com ranked the Hullabalooza performers 23rd . The noise rock version of the end credits performed by Sonic Youth has been ranked among the best versions of the theme by Matt Groening and also by Chris Turner in his book Planet Simpson . Bill Oakley has said that Peter Frampton is one of his favorite guest stars and he wished he could have done a TV show with him . Alternatively , the Rover Hendrix act break joke has been called one of the worst jokes in Simpsons history by the writers and producers . In 2007 , Simon Crerar of The Times listed the Smashing Pumpkins ' and Cypress Hill 's performances among the 33 funniest cameos in the history of the show . Andrew Martin of Prefix Mag named Cypress Hill his sixth @-@ favorite musical guests on The Simpsons out of a list of ten . 
 = <unk> = 
 The sublingua ( " under @-@ tongue " ) is a muscular secondary tongue found below the primary tongue in tarsiers and living strepsirrhine primates , which includes lemurs and lorisoids ( collectively called " lemuriforms " ) . Although it is most fully developed in these primates , similar structures can be found in some other mammals , such as marsupials , treeshrews , and colugos . This " second tongue " lacks taste buds , and in lemuriforms , it is thought to be used to remove hair and other debris from the toothcomb , a specialized dental structure used to comb the fur during oral grooming . 
 A rigid structure called the plica mediana or lytta runs from the front to the back , down the center of the sublingua to give it support . The plica mediana is usually made of cartilage and attaches the sublingua to the underside of the tongue . In lemuriforms , the sublingua mostly consists of two plicae fimbriatae ( singular : plica fimbriata ) , which run along the sides of the plica mediana and end in comb @-@ like serrated edges that are hardened with keratin . The plicae fimbriatae move freely over a limited range . The plica sublingualis , which is found in all primates , but is particularly small in lemuriforms , attaches the tongue and sublingua to the floor of the mouth . Tarsiers have a large but highly generalized sublingua , but their closest living relatives , monkeys and apes , lack one . 
 The sublingua is thought to have evolved from specialized folds of tissue below the tongue , which can be seen in some marsupials and other mammals . Simians do not have a sublingua , but the fimbria linguae found on the underside of ape tongues may be a vestigial version of the sublingua . Because of widely variable appearance of sublingual tissue in primates , the term " sublingua " is often confused with the frenal lamella , lingual frenulum , and other sublingual tissues . 
 = = Anatomical structure = = 
 The sublingua , or " under @-@ tongue " , is a secondary tongue located below the primary tongue in tarsiers , lemuriform primates , and some other mammals . This structure does not have taste buds or salivary glands . In lemuriforms , the sublingua is relatively large and its front edge is usually lined with keratinized serrations ( sometimes called " denticles " ) . 
 Down the middle of the sublingua is a thick strengthening rod called the plica mediana or lytta , which connects the sublingua to the underside of the tongue , and is part of the lingual septum ( septum of the tongue ) . The thickness and size of the plica mediana can vary between species , and except in treeshrews , it is cartilaginous and provides support for the sublingua . 
 Only the serrated and often keratinized tip of the sublingua is free to move small distances along the underside of the tongue , while the majority of its length adheres to the underside of the tongue . These free @-@ moving folds or filaments are called the plica fimbriata and attach to the base of the sublingua and are supported at the midline by the plica mediana . The plica fimbriata is highly developed and specialized in lemurs , and makes up the majority of the sublingua . 
 The fold that connects the back of the sublingua and tongue to the rear floor of the mouth is called the plica sublingualis . In lemurs , this is an underdeveloped structure consisting of only a tiny outgrowth on the floor of the mouth . The point where the plica sublingualis attaches to the rear floor of the mouth marks the location of the submandibular salivary glands . 
 = = = Differences between species = = = 
 In the aye @-@ aye , the sublingua is not shaped like a brush like it is in most lemurs . Instead , there is a thickened area along the plica mediana or lytta which has a hook @-@ shaped structure on the end . Within cheirogaleids , the sublingua lacks cartilage , and the sublingua of the gray mouse lemur has a distinct plica mediana and ends in two lobe @-@ like projections that lack keratinized serrations , but have three keratinized ridges which make the sublingua rigid . 
 In tarsiers , the sublingua does not have serrations along its tip and is much simpler and generalized in structure , making it clearly distinguishable from that of the lemuriform primates . The tarsier has a distinct plica mediana and its plicae fimbriatae are large and stick to the entire underside of the tongue . The plica sublingualis is also prominent . 
 Marsupials such as opossums and the common brushtail possum have also developed noticeable sublingua with a plica mediana and a less specialized , but conspicuous , plica fimbriata . 
 = = Function = = 
 Originally , the sublingua in lemurs was thought to be a vestigial organ inherited from their mammalian ancestors . In lemuriform primates , the sublingua is used to remove hair and debris from the highly specialized toothcomb , an arrangement of four or six long , forward @-@ facing teeth in the lower jaw used in oral grooming . The toothcomb of lemuriforms consists of both incisors and canine teeth ( which reinforce the incisors ) , and together , these finely spaced teeth act like teeth on a comb . Although the cleaning function has been suspected for nearly a century , there has been no clear confirmation of this . However , a study from 1941 presented evidence that the toothcomb accumulated a mat of hair during oral grooming , and the author did observe that lemurs extend and retract their tongue rapidly , possibly to use the sublingua to clean the toothcomb . 
 In the aye @-@ aye , which has replaced the toothcomb by evolving continually growing , rodent @-@ like incisors , the hook @-@ shaped tip of the sublingua fits precisely within the gap between the two lower incisors and keeps the area clean . Tarsiers lack a toothcomb , which may explain why their sublingua lacks the serrations typically found on the sublingua of lemuriforms . Although colugos also have a toothcomb , consisting of serrated edges on the tips of their incisors instead of finely spaced , elongated teeth , they do not have a sublingua . Instead , their toothcomb is cleaned by the tongue , which has serrated edges at the front that match the serrations on the incisors . 
 = = Evolution and development = = 
 The sublingua in lemuriform primates and tarsiers may have evolved from the specialized folds of tissue below that tongue , as seen in some marsupials , such as sugar gliders , as well as some embryonic eutherian mammals , such as whales and dogs . It is also found in some adult eutherian mammals , such as treeshrews , colugos , and rodents . The sublingua of treeshrews , close relatives of primates , is less developed than in lemuriforms and tarsiers , but suggests a phylogenetic relationship . 
 The sublingua in lemuriform primates is fully developed and particularly unique . Tarsiers , which are most closely related to monkeys and apes ( collectively called simians ) , also have a well @-@ developed but non @-@ specialized sublingua . Simians , however , do not have a sublingua , although some , such as titis have a highly specialized frenal lamella ( plica sublingualis ) . All primates have a plica sublingualis , and the fimbria linguae ( plica fimbriata ) found under the tongue of apes may be a vestigial version , although that is still disputed . The structure and appearance of the sublingua , frenal lamella , lingual frenulum , and other sublingual tissue vary greatly between primates , and as a result , their terminology is often confused . 
 In the species that have cartilage in the sublingua or lytta , that cartilage is not derived from the hyoid bone or hyoid arch ( the bone and cartilage that supports the tongue ) . Instead , the cartilage of the sublingua is a separately developed structure specifically adapted to support the sublingua . 
 = Nimrod ( album ) = 
 Nimrod ( stylized as <unk> . ) is the fifth studio album by the American punk rock band Green Day , released on October 14 , 1997 through Reprise Records . The group began work on the album in the wake of their cancellation of a European tour after the release of Insomniac ( 1995 ) . Recorded at Conway Studios in Los Angeles , the album was written with the intent of creating a set of stand @-@ alone songs as opposed to a cohesive album . 
 The album peaked at number ten on the Billboard U.S. charts and was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) . The record was also certified triple platinum in Australia and double platinum in Canada . Upon release , Nimrod received generally positive reviews from critics , who praised Armstrong 's songwriting . The album yielded the acoustic hit " Good Riddance ( Time of Your Life ) " , which appeared in numerous pop culture events , including the series finale of the sitcom Seinfeld in 1998 . To promote the album , Green Day embarked on an extensive touring schedule . 
 Retrospectively , Nimrod is noted for its musical diversity and experimentation . It contains elements of folk , surf rock , and ska ; the lyrical themes discussed on the record include maturity , personal reflection , and fatherhood . 
 = = Background = = 
 In 1995 , Green Day released Insomniac , which did not perform as well commercially , as the band 's breakthrough major @-@ label debut Dookie ( 1994 ) . Speaking of Insomniac , vocalist / guitarist Billie Joe Armstrong noted , " It did a lot better than I thought it was going to do ... From the sound of it , we knew it wasn 't going to sell as much as Dookie . " The group embarked on an extensive world tour to promote Insomniac in early 1996 , which saw the band performing in sports arenas that contrasted with the small clubs the group was accustomed to playing . The members became increasingly uncomfortable with the level of stardom they had attained ; Armstrong recalled , " We were becoming the things we hated , playing those big arenas . It was beginning to be not fun anymore . " 
 Green Day also became homesick as touring forced the members to leave behind their families . The band eventually decided to cancel the late 1996 European leg of the Insomniac tour to take time off to spend at home . During this time , the band continued to write , and eventually completed over three dozen new songs by the beginning of 1997 . Although the group 's last effort with producer Rob Cavallo was considered a disappointment , the band did not contemplate choosing anyone else to work with on Nimrod , as the members viewed Cavallo as a " mentor " . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 The album was recorded at Conway Studios in Los Angeles , and the band stayed at the Sunset Marquis Hotel during the sessions . Nimrod took four months to record and , Armstrong partially attributed the lengthy recording time to spending " a little too much time " playing pool and foosball during the sessions . The recording schedule , which lasted from noon to two in the morning every day , became frustrating for the group members , who began drinking heavily . Bassist Mike Dirnt recalled , " One night one of us was walking down the halls knocking on people 's doors while naked . " Another incident involved drummer Tre Cool throwing his hotel room television set out of his window . Armstrong noted , " There was a lot of glass . You have to live that arrogant lifestyle every now and then . " To keep the band focused , Cavallo enlisted his father and manager Pat Magnarella to supervise the group . 
 While working on Nimrod , Green Day explained to Cavallo their desire to create a more experimental album as the band had grown tired of its traditional three chord song structure . Armstrong drew inspiration from The Clash 's landmark record London Calling , and referred to Nimrod as " the record I 've wanted to make since the band started . " The album was intended to break the constraints of typical punk rock music . To preserve the quality of his songwriting , Armstrong began writing each song on acoustic guitar , to which the rest of the band would later add heavier instrumentation and faster tempos . Green Day recorded around 30 songs for Nimrod and picked 18 of them for the record . Dirnt explained that the recording was much more loosely structured than previous albums , and that creating songs was the focus as opposed to making a cohesive record . He observed , " We 've always screwed around with different types of music during our jams , but we 'd say , ' OK let 's stop and get back to the album . ' This time we just let them come up . " 
 Reprise Records president Howie Klein spent a lot of time in the studio with the band during recording , and recalled that , " What I realized immediately is that they had seemed to mature in their musical direction . It wasn 't just more of the same . There was so much growth in the band . " The musical maturation displayed on Nimrod was partially inspired by Bikini Kill 's Reject All American ( 1996 ) , which encouraged Armstrong to balance " rough punk rock songs " and " delicate pretty songs " . Armstrong wrote " Good Riddance ( Time of Your Life ) " in 1990 and did not show the song to his bandmates until the Dookie recording sessions in 1993 . During the sessions , the song was determined to be too different from the rest of the songs on Dookie , and producer Rob Cavallo was unsure of how to structure the recording . When the time came to record Nimrod , Armstrong decided to use the song , and Cavallo suggested they add strings to the track . He sent the band to play foosball in another room while he recorded the strings , which took " like fifteen , twenty minutes , maybe a half an hour at the most . " Cavallo reflected on his decision to add the strings " I knew we had done the right thing . I knew it was a hit the second I heard it . " 
 In addition to the strings on " Good Riddance ( Time of Your Life ) " , the music of Nimrod contains a variety of other instruments that were not featured on previous Green Day albums . " Walking Alone " features Armstrong playing the harmonica , despite the fact that he did not " know how to play it at all " . " Hitchin ' a Ride " opens with a Middle Eastern @-@ inspired violin performed by Petra Haden of That Dog . The band invited Gabrial McNair and Stephen Bradley of No Doubt 's horn section to play on the ska @-@ influenced " King for a Day " . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Nimrod is more musically varied than previous Green Day albums . Armstrong noted that with the album , Green Day went down " different avenues , " adding : " Each song has its own character and identity so we wanted to be able to bring that out as much as possible . " " Nice Guys Finish Last " has been considered a song that " eases the transition " from Insomniac to Nimrod . Sandy Masuo of the Los Angeles Times likened " Worry Rock " to the music of Elvis Costello . " Good Riddance ( Time of Your Life ) " has been referred to as a " pop @-@ punk campfire singalong ballad " . After opening with Haden 's violin solo , " Hitchin ' a Ride " evolves into a bass @-@ driven rock song with a " Stray Cats vibe " . Cool referred to " Take Back " ( which features a more upfront hardcore @-@ style , both musically and vocally ) and " Platypus ( I Hate You ) " as " some of the most punk songs we 've ever done " . " Last Ride In " is a surf rock @-@ influenced instrumental , and " King for a Day " is a ska punk song featuring a horn section . Armstrong compared the song to the Oi ! genre , and noted " It would be funny for a bunch of macho fraternity guys to be singing along and , little do they know , the song 's about being in drag . " The " chiming " guitar riffs of " Redundant " have been compared to those of The Byrds . 
 Lyrically , Nimrod touches upon more reflective themes not present on earlier Green Day albums . Much of the album illustrates Armstrong 's sentiments on growing up and his role as a husband and father . " The Grouch " centers on Armstrong 's fears of " wasting away , getting fat , becoming impotent , and losing his ideals . " On " Walking Alone " , he reflects on old friends from his childhood , and notes that he is " too drunk to figure out they 're fading away . " Armstrong discusses the struggle to stay sober on " Hitchin ' a Ride " . " Good Riddance ( Time of Your Life ) " was inspired by Armstrong 's failed relationship with a woman that ended when she joined the Peace Corps in 1990 . The same woman is also the subject of " She " from Dookie , " Whatsername " from American Idiot ( 2004 ) and " Amanda " from ¡ Tré ! . 
 However , other songs contain subject matter and themes more typical of Green Day 's previous work . Armstrong wrote " Nice Guys Finish Last " about the band 's interactions with the band 's lawyers and managers and how " everybody thinks they know what 's best for you . " " Jinx " contains self @-@ deprecating lyrics characteristic of many of the band 's songs , while " Prosthetic Head " has been referred to as a " typical ticked @-@ off kiss @-@ off " . " King for a Day " tells the story of a cross @-@ dresser . " Uptight " contains repeated mentions of suicide ; Armstrong explained , " I think the word ' suicide ' just sounded really good . And the line , ' I 'm a son of a gun ' . It made sense , but I can 't really explain why it made sense . It just sort of does . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The album received generally positive reviews from critics . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic gave Nimrod three and a half stars out of five , calling it an " invigorating , if occasionally frustrating listen " , and although he praised Armstrong 's " gift for hooky , instantly memorable melodies " , he noted that " the 18 tracks whip by at such a breakneck speed that it leaves you somewhat dazed . " Greg Kot of Rolling Stone enjoyed the album 's melodic nature as well as the " measure of sincerity " present in Armstrong 's vocals . Kot appreciated the return of the band 's " juvenile sense of humor " that he felt was lacking on Insomniac , and praised the musical diversity on the record , remarking , " This music is a long way from Green Day 's apprenticeship at the Gilman Street punk clubs , in Berkeley , Calif . But now that the band has seen the world , it 's only fitting that Green Day should finally make an album that sounds as if it has . " 
 A group of editors writing for People also praised the record 's " fresh and original " melodies and " quick @-@ <unk> cool " , adding , " Kudos to Green Day , young punk 's reigning purists , for sticking with what they know best . " Sandy Masuo of the Los Angeles Times enjoyed the " mature songwriting that really makes this album tick " , noting that " Naturally , a couple of thrash ' n ' bash hard @-@ core paeans are included , but they 're surrounded by songs that are surprisingly varied in character and grounded in a pop aesthetic that evokes a gaggle of great <unk> . " Stephen Thompson of The A.V. Club wrote , " If Green Day still has a loyal following , its fans are bound to find something to like on Nimrod ; for all the attempts at diversity , the record is packed with mile @-@ wide hooks and sing @-@ along anthems . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Nimrod debuted at number ten on the Billboard 200 , selling 81 @,@ 000 copies in its first week of release , and remained on the chart for 70 weeks . On March 16 , 2000 , Nimrod was certified double platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipments of over two million copies . In Canada , the album peaked at number four , remaining on the chart for four weeks . On July 6 , 1998 , the record was certified double platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association for shipments of over 200 @,@ 000 copies . In Australia , the album debuted at number twelve and later peaked at number three on the country 's chart . The record was later certified triple platinum in Australia . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 The Nimrod promotional tour began in the fall of 1997 , and began with an in @-@ store record signing at a Tower Records in Manhattan . The band was upset upon reading reviews that suggested the band had lost its punk edge , and started a riot during its scheduled eight @-@ song set at the store . Armstrong then wrote the words " fuck " and " <unk> " in black spray paint on the storefront windows , and proceeded to moon the audience of 1 @,@ 400 people . After the riot settled down , Cool threw his bass drum into the crowd while Armstrong attempted the same with a 200 @-@ pound monitor , which was wrestled away from him by a store manager . No charges were filed and no injuries were reported , but the store was closed for the day to repair damages caused . 
 On the tour in promotion of the album , Green Day aimed for simplicity and decided not to bring new instrumentalists to play for the new songs . Armstrong commented , " Right now we 're refraining from pulling out a lot of that ' Nimrod ' stuff . We want to make things small . We don 't want to bring a horn section or a violin player out with us . A lot of people want to hear the old stuff , and that stuff is still just as significant to us . " The Nimrod tour marked the first time the band performed its now @-@ routine ritual of inviting audience members onstage to play instruments . During the tour , Armstrong felt that he became a better performer , noting , " I think some people walk away from a Green Day concert with the emotions you would get from some kind of theater performance where the crowd feels involved — where it 's not just about the singer . It 's not just about the band . " 
 While performing at the 1998 KROQ Weenie Roast in Irvine , California , Third Eye Blind bassist Arion Salazar ran onstage and " bear @-@ hugged " Dirnt , who was caught off @-@ guard . The incident escalated into an on @-@ stage scuffle before Salazar was taken away by security . After the performance , Dirnt confronted Salazar backstage , and as the two were arguing , a beer bottle struck Dirnt in the head , causing a small fracture in his skull . Eyewitnesses later attributed the bottle throwing to a fan of Third Eye Blind . Salazar and the band 's management soon released a statement : " I am sorry that my attempt at doing something I thought would be funny escalated into Mike getting hurt . That was never my intention . I simply had too much to drink and made a very bad decision . If I had been in Mike 's place , I am sure I would have acted similarly . My heart goes out to him and I hope he recovers quickly . " 
 " Good Riddance ( Time of Your Life ) " appeared in numerous events of popular culture , including a scene involving the death of a cancer patient on the medical drama ER and the series finale of the sitcom Seinfeld in 1998 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All lyrics written by Billie Joe Armstrong , all music composed by Green Day . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Adapted from Nimrod liner notes . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = The Nemesis of Faith = 
 The Nemesis of Faith is an epistolary philosophical novel by James Anthony Froude published in 1849 . Partly autobiographical , the novel depicts the causes and consequences of a young priest 's crisis of faith . Like many of his contemporaries , Froude came to question his Christian faith in light of early nineteenth century developments in history , theology , and science . Froude was particularly influenced by the Catholic teachings of the Oxford Movement and by the new approach to religious scholarship developed by the German Higher Critics . 
 The novel consists primarily of protagonist Markham Sutherland 's account of the development of his religious ideas and doubts , followed by a brief narrative in which Sutherland 's lack of faith leads him and his lover to tragic ends . The novel was condemned by English religious figures and publicly burned by William Sewell ; this led to Froude 's resignation of his fellowship at Oxford University . The novel 's reception amongst literary reviewers was mixed ; while writers such as George Eliot professed profound admiration , others such as Thomas Carlyle were harshly critical . Although no longer widely read as a literary work , it remains significant in intellectual history for its accounts of Victorian scepticism and the Oxford Movement . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The story of Markham Sutherland is presented through various letters , journals , and the third @-@ person account of the novel 's supposed editor , Arthur . Sutherland , under pressure from his father to become a clergyman , confesses to Arthur his reservations about accepting the Thirty @-@ Nine Articles and contemporary English Christianity in general . In particular , Sutherland is concerned about the depiction of God in the Old Testament , God 's patronage of the Israelites on non @-@ moral grounds , the doctrine of Eternal Punishment , and the supposed inerrancy of the Bible . Sutherland was profoundly influenced by John Henry Newman in his early years , but was ultimately unable to accept Newman 's doctrines . Sutherland also seeks guidance in the writings of Victorian historian and sage Thomas Carlyle ( who was Froude 's chief intellectual influence in later years ) , but finds no solutions . Tormented by his doubts and subsequent alienation from his family , Sutherland becomes morbidly depressed . 
 On Arthur 's advice , Sutherland takes orders , hoping that his doubts will eventually pass when he enters a more active life . Because of the selectivity of his sermons , however , his parishioners begin to suspect him of Socinianism . When Sutherland is tricked into making a harsh criticism of the British and Foreign Bible Society , claiming that the text of the Bible without clerical guidance is more likely to lead to wickedness than to Christian faith and virtue , his doubts are revealed , and he is forced to resign his position . 
 Sutherland travels to Como to rest and recover from illness , indulging in free religious speculation while there . He befriends Helen Leonard , who sympathises with his troubles and listens to his doubts . Helen 's dull , unloving husband prefers to spend time away from his wife , and leaves her in Sutherland 's company for the season . Helen and Sutherland fall in love , causing both great anxiety , although the relationship never becomes physical . The two consider eloping , but Helen decides she cannot leave her daughter , Annie . During this conversation , however , the unsupervised Annie dips her arm into the lake , causing her to fall ill and die soon after . Sutherland again becomes depressed , believing that his religious speculations have brought himself and Helen into sin . He plans suicide , but is stopped at the last moment by an old friend , representative of John Henry Newman . Sutherland retires to a monastery , although his repentance is short lived , and he dies still in doubt . Helen , meanwhile , separates from her husband and retires to a convent , although she is unreconciled with the Church because she maintains that her love for Sutherland is holier than her marriage . 
 = = Major themes = = 
 The novel 's primary interest comes from its depiction of Sutherland 's religious doubts , which arise from the weakness of a faith based on empirically false historical claims , " old @-@ wives ' tales " taken for truth . Instead , Sutherland aims to follow " not the Christian religion , but the religion of Christ , " spirituality without dogma . However , Froude was not fully satisfied with this formulation , and the Sutherland @-@ Helen plot illustrates the idea that religious speculation and infidelity inevitably lead to immorality . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Nemesis of Faith raised a scandal at its first release , being referred to as " a manual of infidelity " in the Morning Herald . It was publicly burned by William Sewell in his class at Exeter College . Soon after , Froude resigned his fellowship at Oxford . 
 The Nemesis of Faith also drew criticism on literary grounds as being melodramatic and sentimental . Froude himself wrote to his friend Charles Kingsley that " I cut a hole in my heart and wrote with the blood " . Thomas Carlyle complained of the novel " Froude ought to consume his own smoke and not trouble other people 's nostrils . " Although recent critics tend to be more positive about the novel 's depiction of Sutherland 's speculative crisis , they have maintained the weakness of the ending , attributing it to Froude 's inability to come to terms with his own doubts . 
 By contrast , the novel was positively reviewed by such literary figures as George Eliot and Mrs. Humphrey Ward , whose 1888 novel Robert Elsmere was significantly influenced by the novel and by Froude 's life . In a review in the Coventry Herald Eliot wrote that in reading The Nemesis of Faith " we seem to be in companionship with a spirit who is <unk> himself into our souls , and so <unk> them by his superior energy , that life , both outward and inward , presents itself to us in higher relief , in colours brightened and deepened . " 
 In an effort to reconcile with Oxford , Froude refused to allow republication of The Nemesis of Faith following its second edition , and in 1858 he formally repudiated the novel . 
 = = Historical context and allusions = = 
 The 1840s were a turbulent decade in the Church of England . Following the earlier German Higher Critics , who argued for a historical approach to religious texts , David Strauss published Leben Jesu or The Life of Jesus , Critically Examined which argued that the events of the New Testament were not historical but rather mythical . In 1846 George Eliot published an English translation of Leben Jesu which became a source of religious doubts for Froude and many of his contemporaries . Critics have also identified Thomas Carlyle 's novel Sartor Resartus and Spinoza as sources of Sutherland 's doubts , and those of many of his contemporaries . 
 Meanwhile , the Oxford Movement , headed by John Henry Newman as well as Froude 's brother Richard Hurrell Froude , was attacking the Church 's move towards liberalism and secularism , advocating instead a greater emphasis on Catholic doctrine . The Movement provided a serious challenge to Protestant beliefs , with Newman later converting to Roman Catholicism . Although Froude was devoted to Newman for several years , and maintained a sentimental affection for the man ( which he expressed in his essays on Newman and the Oxford Movement ) , he ultimately repudiated his beliefs . 
 The novel was influenced by Goethe 's Elective Affinities , which Froude later translated and published anonymously . Froude borrowed much of his novel 's ending from Goethe , and also used the scientific metaphor underlying Goethe 's novel to illustrate the relation of an individual to the church . 
 = New Jersey Route 41 = 
 Route 41 is a state highway in the U.S. state of New Jersey . It runs 14 @.@ 08 mi ( 22 @.@ 66 km ) from the five @-@ way intersection of Route 47 ( Delsea Drive ) , County Route 603 ( Fairview @-@ Sewell Road / <unk> @-@ <unk> Road ) , and County Route 630 ( Egg Harbor Road ) , also known as Five Points , in Deptford Township , Gloucester County to the southern terminus of County Route 611 in Maple Shade , Burlington County , just north of the Route 41 's interchanges with Route 38 and Route 73 . The route is a two- to four @-@ lane suburban road that passes through several communities , including Runnemede , Haddonfield , and Cherry Hill Township . Between the intersection with Route 168 in Runnemede and Route 154 in Cherry Hill Township , Route 41 is maintained by Camden County and is also signed as County Route 573 . 
 Route 41 was legislated in 1927 to run from Route 47 in Fairview , Deptford Township to Route 38 in Moorestown . Originally , the route was intended to bypass Haddonfield , however this bypass was never fully completed and Route 41 was signed along a temporary county @-@ maintained alignment that also became County Route 573 . The northern part of this bypass was completed and became Route 154 in 1953 . The road has seen many changes including the replacement of the traffic circle with Routes 38 and 73 with an interchange that involved realigning Route 41 around the original circle in 1960 and the replacement of the Ellisburg Circle at Routes 70 and 154 with a signalized intersection in the early 1990s . The temporary alignment of Route 41 along County Route 573 was made permanent in the early 2000s . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Route 41 heads north from the Five Points intersection with Route 47 , County Route 603 , and County Route 630 in Deptford Township , Gloucester County on a two @-@ lane , undivided road called <unk> Road . The route intersects County Route 621 ( County House Road ) and then intersects County Route 534 ( Good Intent Road ) . The route continues north and meets Deptford Center Road , which provides access to the Deptford Mall and Route 55 , and a ramp to southbound Route 42 . Route 41 comes to an interchange with Route 42 , with access provided to and from northbound Route 42 . Past Route 42 , Route 41 intersects County Route 544 ( Clements Bridge Road ) , with which it forms a concurrency . 
 The route crosses the Big Timber Creek into Camden County , running along the border of Runnemede and Gloucester Township . County Route 544 veers to the right onto Evesham Road , and Route 41 continues northeast on Clements Bridge Road into Runnemede . At the intersection with Route 168 , Route 41 becomes county @-@ maintained and runs concurrent with County Route 573 . The two routes cross into Barrington , where they pass over the New Jersey Turnpike . Upon crossing a Conrail railroad line , Route 41 and County Route 573 run along the border of Barrington and Haddon Heights , with Barrington to the southeast and Haddon Heights to the northwest . The two routes pass under Interstate 295 before meeting U.S. Route 30 at a modified traffic circle . 
 Route 41 and County Route 573 continue north on Highland Avenue and cross into Haddonfield , where the road becomes <unk> Landing Road . The two routes meet County Route 551 Spur ( Kings Highway ) , and they bear to the right onto Kings Highway , heading northeast . They pass over New Jersey Transit ’ s Atlantic City Line and the PATCO Speedline and then intersect County Route 561 ( Haddon Avenue ) Past CR 561 , the road crosses the Cooper River into Cherry Hill Township . Route 41 and County Route 573 make a right turn onto a four @-@ lane divided highway and intersect Route 154 ( Brace Road ) . At this point , County Route 573 ends and Route 41 makes a left turn onto a six @-@ lane divided highway , becoming state @-@ maintained again and forming a concurrency with Route 154 . 
 At the point Route 41 crosses Route 70 , Route 154 ends and Route 41 continues to the northeast on Kings Highway , a five @-@ lane road with a center left @-@ turn lane . Route 41 becomes a four @-@ lane divided highway at the crossing of the Pennsauken Creek and enters Maple Shade Township , Burlington County . The route interchanges with Route 38 and with Route 73 a short distance later . It continues to the northeast , where Route 41 ends at the end of state maintenance and Kings Highway continues northeast as County Route 611 . 
 = = History = = 
 Route 41 was legislated in 1927 to run from Route 47 in Fairview in Deptford Township to Route 38 in Moorestown along its current alignment , except through Haddonfield , which it was to bypass to the east . Also legislated in 1927 was a spur of Route 41 , Route S41 , which was to run from the Tacony @-@ Palmyra Bridge to Berlin . Later spurs of Route 41 included Route S41A , which was a southern extension of Route S41 from Berlin to Route 42 ( now U.S. Route 322 ) in Folsom proposed in 1938 . In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Routes S41 and S41A became Route 73 and Route 41 was legislated along a county @-@ maintained temporary route between Route 168 in Runnemede and Route 70 in Cherry Hill Township , signed Route 41 Temporary , when it became apparent the bypass around Haddonfield would not be fully completed . Only the northernmost section of the bypass between County Route 561 and Route 70 had been built and this eventually became Route 154 . The county @-@ maintained section of Route 41 also became known as County Route 573 . 
 Since 1953 , many changes have occurred along Route 41 . During reconstruction of the traffic circle between Routes 38 , 41 , and 73 into an interchange by the 1970s , Route 41 was relocated to a new alignment that bypassed the original traffic circle and extended north a short distance on Kings Highway to just south of the County Route 608 ( <unk> Road ) intersection in Maple Shade Township . The Ellisburg Circle at the intersection of Routes 41 , 70 , and 154 was reconstructed into an intersection with jughandles and traffic lights by the 1990s . This reconstruction involved realigning Route 41 to form a brief concurrency with Route 154 just south of Route 70 . In the early 2000s , the Route 41 interchange with Route 42 in Deptford Township was , along with the County Route 544 interchange with Route 42 , reconstructed to ease traffic movements in the area . Signs for Route 41 Temporary and County Route 573 still remain along this stretch of Route 41 , which today is officially considered to be a part of mainline Route 41 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = M @-@ 139 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 139 is a state trunkline highway entirely within Berrien County in the US state of Michigan . The highway starts at US Highway 12 ( US 12 ) southwest of Niles and runs through rural areas of the county to terminate at an intersection with Business Loop Interstate 94 ( BL I @-@ 94 ) in Benton Harbor . The highway run parallel to , and crosses over , the St. Joseph River several times as it follows a set of roads previously used for US 31 in the area . The highway was first designated in the 1930s as a bypass of the Benton Harbor and St. Joseph area . Its termini have been moved over the years since , extending and contracting the length of the highway between Niles and Benton Harbor . M @-@ 139 now serves to provide access through the area from a set of bypasses consisting of I @-@ 94 and US 31 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 139 begins at a junction with US 12 southwest of Niles in Bertrand Township . The highway travels northeasterly along Chicago Road through farm fields and residential neighborhoods . The trunkline turns north along Lincoln Avenue and then east on Main Street to run into downtown Niles . Main Street crosses the St. Joseph River , and at the intersection with Front Street , M @-@ 139 turns north along that street which is also called " OLD US 31 " on some maps . The highway runs parallel to the river as both exit the downtown area . M @-@ 139 turns toward the northwest on the outskirts of town , running through farm fields . The trunkline passes Webster and Long lakes as it crosses mixed forest and residential areas between Niles and Berrien Springs . 
 Entering Berrien Springs , M @-@ 139 curves around part of Lake Chapin . North of the dam that forms Lake Chapin from the St. Joseph River , the highway follows Ferry Street to the southwest to cross the river . In downtown Berrien Springs , the trunkline then turns northwesterly along St. Joseph Avenue to pass Andrews University . Northwest of the college , M @-@ 139 crosses US 31 ( St. Joseph Valley Parkway ) . From there the highway travels northwesterly through Royalton Township through farm fields parallel to the St. Joseph River . M @-@ 139 follows Niles Road to the community of Scottdale where it turns northward along Scottdale Road at an intersection with M @-@ 63 . M @-@ 139 crosses the St. Joseph River one last time south of the interchange with I @-@ 94 at its exit 28 ; M @-@ 139 then passes through the community of Fair Plain and enters the eastern edge of Benton Harbor . Before terminating at BL I @-@ 94 ( Main Street ) in Benton Harbor , the highway splits into a one @-@ way pair just north of Empire Avenue . Northbound traffic is routed along Martin Luther King Drive while southbound traffic flows on Fair Avenue . 
 M @-@ 139 is maintained by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) like other state highways in Michigan . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic that uses the roadways under its jurisdiction . These volumes are expressed using a metric called annual average daily traffic , which is a statistical calculation of the average daily number of vehicles on a segment of roadway . MDOT 's surveys in 2011 showed that the highest traffic levels along M @-@ 139 were the 12 @,@ 248 vehicles daily between the intersections with Fairland and Deans Hill / Pokagon roads south of Berrien Springs ; the lowest counts were the 1 @,@ 576 vehicles per day in downtown Niles . The only section of M @-@ 139 that have been listed on the National Highway System ( NHS ) is from the interchange with US 31 northward . The NHS is a network of roads important to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 M @-@ 139 was designated as a state trunkline by 1931 from US 31 at Scottdale to US 12 in Benton Harbor . In late 1953 or early 1954 M @-@ 139 was extended westward along US 12 and then northward along Paw Paw Avenue to meet a new bypass routing of US 31 north of Benton Harbor . US 31 was rerouted to follow what is now the I @-@ 196 freeway in 1963 . At that time , US 31 was then routed along I @-@ 94 and M @-@ 139 to Scottdale . The following year , the concurrency was removed when M @-@ 139 was truncated to end at I @-@ 94 / US 31 . The northern extension on Paw Paw Avenue was turned back to local control , truncating the northern end of M @-@ 139 to the intersection with BL I @-@ 94 ( previously US 12 ) . 
 On August 27 , 2003 , the St. Joseph Valley Parkway freeway carrying US 31 was completed from northwest of Berrien Springs ( exit 15 ) to Napier Avenue near Benton Harbor ( exit 24 ) . The former section of M @-@ 139 replaced by US 31 was once again designated M @-@ 139 , with M @-@ 139 extending further along the former US 31 to the freeway 's exit 15 . In 2008 , M @-@ 139 was planned to extend southerly to end at Main Street ( Business US 12 , Bus . US 12 ) in Niles along the unsigned state trunkline OLD US 31 and Bus . US 31 , but after the City of Niles announced its plan to take over maintenance of the section of East Main Street between Front Street / Bus . US 31 and Fifth Street / M @-@ 51 in order to ban trucks , the plan was revised to extend M @-@ 139 further south , replacing the Bus . US 12 designation southwesterly to US 12 . The extension was executed on March 5 , 2010 , prior to route marker installation . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway is in Berrien County . 
 = September Morn = 
 Matinée de Septembre ( English : September Morn ) is a controversial oil painting on canvas completed in 1911 by the French artist Paul Émile Chabas . Painted over several summers , it depicts a nude girl or young woman standing in the shallow water of a lake , prominently lit by the morning sun . She is leaning slightly forward in an ambiguous posture , which has been read variously as a straightforward portrayal of protecting her modesty , huddling against the cold , or sponge bathing . It has also been considered a disingenuous pose permitting the " fetishisation of innocence " . 
 September Morn was first exhibited at the Paris Salon of 1912 , and although the identity of its first owner is unclear , it is certain that Leon Mantashev acquired the painting by the end of 1913 . It was taken to Russia , and in the aftermath of the October Revolution of 1917 was feared lost . It resurfaced in 1935 in the collection of Calouste Gulbenkian , and after his death in 1955 was sold to a Philadelphia broker , who donated it anonymously to the Metropolitan Museum of Art ( the Met ) in 1957 . As of 2014 it is not on display . 
 From 1913 on , reproductions of the painting caused controversy in the United States . An art dealer in Chicago was charged with indecency and another in New York was targeted by anti @-@ vice crusader Anthony Comstock , both after displaying September Morn . Over the next few years the work was reproduced in a variety of forms , including on pins and calendars , while censorship and art were debated in newspapers . Chabas ' painting inspired songs , stage shows and films ; eventually some 7 million reproductions were sold , though Chabas – who had not copyrighted September Morn – did not receive any royalties . 
 Although several women claimed to be the model for September Morn , Chabas never revealed her identity . He described the work as " all I know of painting " , and responded positively to statements that it was his masterpiece . Later writers , however , have described the painting as kitsch , valuable only as a historic artifact . 
 = = Description = = 
 September Morn depicts , from an oblique point of view , a naked blonde girl or young woman standing ankle @-@ deep in the water near the shoreline of a tranquil lake surrounded by hills . The figure is backlit by the morning sun , but fully visible , if a little darker than her surroundings . Her arms are folded about her body , her right arm passing below her breasts as she grasps her left elbow , while her left arm conceals her pubic area . This pose has been variously interpreted as the subject protecting herself from the cold , covering her modesty , or sponge bathing , or as the artist 's " fetishisation of innocence " . 
 Reviews in 1912 noted that the painting was dominated by grays : those of her shaded body , the blue @-@ grays of the September water , the green @-@ grays of the sky , and the pink @-@ grays of the hills behind her . The art critic François Thiébault @-@ Sisson described this as evoking the morning , the young subject preparing to bathe while " light grey vapours are still floating over the lake " . This oil painting on canvas measures 163 @.@ 8 by 216 @.@ 5 centimetres ( 64 @.@ 5 by 85 @.@ 2 in ) , and Chabas 's signature is located in the lower left . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Chabas = = = 
 By the time he painted September Morn , Paul Émile Chabas ( 1869 – 1937 ) already had an established reputation as an academic artist . He regularly submitted to the Paris Salon , first participating in 1886 . He won a third class medal in the Salon of 1895 , and four years later won the Prix National for his painting Joyeux <unk> , which earned him a gold medal at the 1900 Exposition Universelle and was acquired by the Musée des Beaux @-@ Arts de Nantes . In subsequent years Chabas spent the winters working in Paris , while he passed his summers painting young women along the shores of rivers , lakes , and seas . In 1902 he was made a Chevalier in the Legion of Honour . 
 Chabas studied under artists such as Tony Robert @-@ Fleury , William @-@ Adolphe Bouguereau , and Albert <unk> . Although his earlier works were generally portraits , most of the painter 's later production consisted of nude girls and young women . The lakes and rivers of France were common settings for his paintings , which gave prominence to the interaction of light with the models and their surroundings . September Morn is typical of his style . 
 J. Valmy @-@ <unk> , in a 1910 overview of the artist , attributes Chabas 's style to the painter 's time at the family summer home along the <unk> ; he identifies the " grace of adolescence , its undefinable charm , [ and ] its chaste nudity " of the models with Chabas 's reminiscences of his youth . The art historian Bram Dijkstra has argued otherwise , stating that " no artist was more assiduous in exploiting the prurient possibilities of the woman @-@ child " than Chabas , whom he considers to have " emphasized analogies of nude little girls and the familiar poses of vanity or physical arousal given to adult women " . 
 = = = Nudity and art = = = 
 Female nudes were the dominant subject of painting in French Salons at the end of the 19th century . Female models had become more common than male ones beginning in the early 19th century , first serving allegorical roles or as muses , but eventually becoming individuals " who could be classified and whose history could be written " . In academic art – such as that of Chabas – the models were not portrayed as they were , but as idealized nudes , based on classical ideals ; the body hair of women models , for instance , would not be shown , and the pubic area was rendered smoothly . The hostess Suzanne Delve , who later claimed to have stood for September Morn , said that models were willing to provide " service to art " by posing nude for such works . 
 Not all forms of nude imagery were acceptable in France . The end of the 19th century had seen the introduction of various laws against pornography , images of adults and children meant to " provoke , incite , or stimulate debauchery " . Works targeted were initially those meant for wide distribution ( and thus , the lower class ) . However , the Australian art historian Fae Brauer writes that the line between art and pornography was blurred by the early 1910s ; even tighter laws , introduced in 1908 , had resulted in censorship of modernist works . For instance , three paintings by Kees van Dongen ( including two of his daughter ) were rejected from the Salon d 'Automne between 1911 and 1913 on grounds of indecency . 
 The United States had , since colonial times , generally been more puritan in terms of art than Europe . In the mid- and late @-@ 19th century the country 's government implemented laws against obscenity , such as the Tariff of 1842 which banned the importing of foreign works of art deemed obscene . By the end of the 19th century , an uneasy understanding had been reached : museums could hold works depicting nudity , but commercial works ( including photographs of artwork ) could be – and were – confiscated . Tensions remained over the issue of whether nudes represented European @-@ style sophistication ( a trait important to the upper @-@ class ) or encouraged behaviors which threatened families and encouraged " impure imaginations " . 
 = = Creation ; identity of model = = 
 Chabas began work on September Morn in mid @-@ 1910 at Talloires on the shores of Lake Annecy in Haute @-@ Savoie , some 500 kilometres ( 310 mi ) south @-@ east of Paris . The model , whom he never identified but referred to as " Marthe " , was well known to his family . Owing to the financial situation of the sixteen @-@ year @-@ old 's family , " Marthe " had to work to support her mother . On the first day of painting , " Marthe " entered the morning water and instinctively recoiled at its chilliness . Chabas approved of this pose , saying that it was " perfect " . Over the course of two summers he worked on the painting , half an hour every morning . The work was completed on a September morning in 1911 , giving the painting its name . In 1935 , responding to claims that " Marthe " was living in poverty , Chabas explained that she had continued posing for him until she was 28 , when she married a rich industrialist , and that she was now aged 41 , plump , and had three children . 
 Numerous women have claimed or been claimed to be the model , some presenting different versions of events . In 1913 , a Miss Louise Buckley , performing in Eugene , Oregon , said that she had been paid $ 1 @,@ 000 and posed in the artist 's studio . The Paris @-@ based artist Jules Pages , meanwhile , stated that the woman depicted in September Morn had been a 25 @-@ year @-@ old of good character who earned her living as an artist 's model , but had gone into hiding after the controversy over the painting . Other claimants included a Swedish model named Gloria and a variety actress named Irene Shannon ; the latter made the claim in the lead @-@ up to a vaudeville skit called " November Mourning " . 
 In 1937 , twenty @-@ four years after September Morn caused controversy in the United States , the Parisian hostess Suzanne Delve declared that she had been the model . In her account , Chabas – who had known her since she was an infant – had her pose nude in his studio and later painted Lake Annecy in her absence . Delve described her nervousness at the first session , her mother chatting to her to distract her mind while Chabas 's wife played soothing music on the piano . She said she took her pose " instinctively " and that the controversy over the painting had ruined her life , as no Frenchman would want to marry a woman marred by scandal . 
 Yet another version is presented by the Metropolitan Museum of Art ( the Met ) in their 1966 catalogue of French holdings , including September Morn . According to this telling , Chabas completed the painting over three summers at Lake Annecy , though his peasant model served only as the basis for the figure 's body . The head was based on a sketch of a young American , Julie Phillips , which Chabas had completed upon observing her and her mother dining in Paris ; finding her profile to his liking , he silently drew her , then introduced himself and " apologized for his presumption " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Paris Salon and first sale = = = 
 Chabas first exhibited September Morn in the Paris Salon of April 14 to June 30 , 1912 . Because he did not plan to sell it , he gave a price of 50 @,@ 000 francs ( $ 10 @,@ 000 ) – more than he expected anybody to pay . For the painting , and his Portrait of Mme. Aston Knight , Chabas won a Medal of Honor , receiving 220 of 359 possible votes . At the Salon , the painting was uncontroversial , and it was soon reprinted in American publications such as Town & Country and The International Studio . 
 Sources are unclear as to the painting 's provenance after the Salon . According to the Met , the New York @-@ based Philip ( or Philippe ) Ortiz , manager of the New York Branch of Braun and Company , purchased it in late 1912 . According to a 1933 report in the Middletown Times Herald , he paid 12 @,@ 000 francs ( $ 2 @,@ 400 ) for the work , but never brought the painting back to the United States . However , Brauer suggests that Ortiz sent it to his gallery in New York , where it caused a controversy . According to Time , the painting was acquired by Leon Mantashev c . 1913 , after the painting was returned to Chabas . 
 A 1935 article in the Montreal Gazette , meanwhile , stated that the original September Morn had yet to go to the United States , and that Chabas had sold it directly to Mantashev . According to Chabas , this was after an American approached him to purchase the painting , but was unwilling to pay the asking price . In her memoirs , Vogue editor Edna Woolman Chase recounted how Ortiz had arranged for numerous reproductions to be made and sent to New York , and that – although he had been interested in acquiring the original – he had been unable to do so . Although it is possible that the original did not cross the Atlantic by 1913 , it is clear that reproductions did . 
 = = = Controversy and popularity = = = 
 = = = = Chicago = = = = 
 A full @-@ size reproduction of September Morn was displayed in a window of Jackson and <unk> , a photography shop in Chicago , Illinois , in March 1913 . A passing police officer noticed the print and on grounds that it was indecent , insisted it be taken down . The mayor of the city , Carter Harrison , Jr . , agreed with the policeman 's decision , and deemed that the image could be sold , but should not be displayed in public as children could see it . Fred Jackson , the owner , was charged with indecency , and at his request the case was brought to trial on March 18 . 
 In front of a jury , the city 's art censor Jeremiah O 'Connor testified that September Morn was lewd and should not be displayed in public , but rather only in a museum exhibition . W. W. Hallam of the Chicago Vice Committee agreed , arguing that , as the woman was committing the illegal act of bathing in public , September Morn had to be banned . Other witnesses for the prosecution included censors , educators , and clergy , such as the superintendent Ella Flagg Young and the head of the Juvenile Protective Association Gertrude Howe Britton . 
 Jackson , acting as his own lawyer , highlighted the hypocrisy of censoring the painting while a nude statue of Diana stood in front of the Montgomery Ward Building . He called upon painters , poets , and sculptors as his witnesses , including the artist Oliver Grover and the art critic Walter Smith . In his testimony , Grover stated " A nude woman is no more indecent than a bare tree . Men and women weren 't born with overcoats on . Anyhow , indecency may be decidedly apart from nudity . " 
 After less than an hour of deliberations , the jury found for Jackson , allowing him to reinstate the image in his display ; Jackson was so pleased that he promised a free copy of September Morn to each juror . Ten days after the trial Mayor Harrison went to the city council and proposed stricter obscenity laws . The city government agreed , and imposed a $ 25 – 100 fine for displaying nude art along public roads and in places frequented by children . By September Jackson ( together with fellow art dealers Samuel Meyer and William Kuhl ) had been found in violation of this law . Mayor Harrison later stated that he was " through " with the painting , saying " Chicago has been made the laughing stock of the whole country because of this bathing girl picture " . 
 = = = = New York = = = = 
 Further controversy arose in New York in May 1913 , two months after the conclusion of the Chicago trial . Anthony Comstock , head of the New York Society for the Suppression of Vice and nationally recognized for his campaigns against " smut " , saw September Morn – sources differ as to whether it was the original or a print – on display in the window of Braun and Company , an art dealership on West 46th Street . Rushing inside , he raged " There 's too little morn and too much maid ! Take it out ! " . A clerk , James Kelly , removed the work , but Ortiz , the gallery 's manager , reinstated it in the window after returning from his lunch break . 
 Comstock threatened Ortiz with legal action , and the manager – unaware that Comstock could not arrest him , and fearful that he could cause trouble for the gallery – was initially frightened . He consulted with Arthur Brisbane of the New York Evening Journal , who told him he had nothing to fear , and sent some reporters to cover the story . The following day , the controversy was highly covered in the press , who hailed Ortiz as " one art expert with the courage to stand up against Comstock and his dictatorship " . Following Comstock 's visit large crowds blocked the street outside Braun and Company , ogling September Morn . The gallery owner refused to sell his large print of September Morn , so that it could remain in his window . 
 After two weeks , when the dealership had sold every print it had , Ortiz removed the display . In a letter to the editor of The New York Times , he accused Comstock of causing the controversy to earn greater publicity for himself , and stated that he wearied of crowds outside his shop , who blocked paying customers from entering it . Ultimately , Comstock did not pursue legal action . The historian Walter M. Kendrick attributes this apparent leniency to September Morn 's status as a work of art , whereas Gerald Carson , writing in American Heritage , attributes it to a knowledge that no action could be taken against the work . 
 The controversy promoted polemics regarding September Morn and censorship , and multiple editorial cartoons ; one depicted a young woman bathing , only her head showing , with a caption attributed to Comstock reading " Don 't you suppose I can imagine what is UNDER the water ? " . Comstock called the work " demoralizing in the extreme and especially calculated to excite immodesty in the young " , arguing that it must be suppressed in the interest of the children . He emphasized that " the law is the law ... the picture will have to come out of the window " . Reverend Sydney Ussher of St. Bartholomew 's Episcopal Church took a more moderate approach , explaining that " so vivid a display of nudity as September Morn " would best not be displayed in the United States , owing to the people 's relative lack of appreciation for art . 
 Other , more positive , views were also expressed . The suffragist Inez Milholland defended September Morn , stating that it was " exquisite and delicate , depicting perfect youth and innocence " , and found it " funny , if it weren 't so sad " that such a work would be censored while more titillating film posters were left untouched . The social activist Rose Pastor Stokes wrote that this " glorious work of art " was a " rare " depiction of " the loveliest dream that nature ever made real — the human Body Beautiful " and that shame over one 's body should not be blamed on September Morn , but on a failed education system . The artist James Montgomery Flagg proclaimed " only a diseased mind can find anything immoral in September Morn " . 
 In his 1931 autobiography , the public relations pioneer Harry Reichenbach claimed responsibility for the controversy surrounding September Morn – and the work 's resulting popularity . He stated that Braun and Company had acquired some 2 @,@ 000 reproductions of the painting which they could not sell , and then hired him for $ 45 so that he could unload the stock . They then paid for a large lithograph reproduction to be made and put on display . Reichenbach , he stated , then contacted public figures to protest against the display . When there was no response , he accosted Comstock in his office and dragged him to the dealership , where some young children , whom Reichenbach had hired for fifty cents each , lusted over the display . The public relations man then worked towards maintaining interest in the work , prints of which had already increased in price – from 10 cents to a dollar . 
 = = = = Widespread reproduction and imitation = = = = 
 A 1937 Salt Lake Tribune article stated that , after the 1913 controversies , reproductions of September Morn were shown " on the front page of every newspaper in the land " . Ortiz required these newspapers to pay a charge and mention his copyright , otherwise face a penalty of $ 500 to $ 1000 ; Chase recalled that Vogue had been one of those charged . These newspaper reproductions , however , were sometimes censored . Fred L. Boalt of The Seattle Star , covering a local exhibit of a reproduction , explained his newspaper 's rationale for such censorship : " For humane as well as other reasons , [ ... ] the Star artist has painted in a short petticoat . He didn 't want to do it . He suffered . But we made him do it . " 
 Lithograph copies of September Morn were mass @-@ produced for popular sale , extending the success that followed the scandal , and were widely hung in private homes . Reproductions were featured on a variety of products , including cigar bands , postcards , bottle openers , statuettes , watch fobs , and candy boxes ; the model was also popular as a tattoo . September Morn was the first nude used for calendars , and by the late 1950s it had featured on millions . A couplet referring to Chabas 's work , " Please don 't think I 'm bad or bold , but where its deep it 's awful cold " , was widely circulated . 
 Media and merchandise 
 Allusions to the painting were common in vaudeville acts , becoming stock gags in the Orpheum Circuit . Stage imitations of the painting were also created . In 1913 , for instance , Florenz Ziegfeld , Jr. cast Ann Pennington as the model as part of his Follies . In this successful version of September Morn , the subject bore a sheer cape , with leaves placed strategically over her body , and stood on a stage made @-@ up as water . A burlesque act , deeming itself the " September Morning Glories " , was also created , as was a three @-@ act musical based on the painting . The latter – featuring a fifty @-@ strong chorus line – was put on by Arthur Gillespie and Frank Tannehill , Jr. and debuted at the La Salle Theater in Chicago . In Milwaukee , a man wearing " little or no clothing " passed himself off as " September Morn " at the 1915 Wisconsin State Fair ; he was brought to trial and fined $ 25 . Theatrical references to the painting continued into the 1950s . For instance , in Tennessee Williams 's 1957 play Orpheus Descending , the character Val sees it hanging in his room and mentions he " might keep turning the light on to take another look at it " . 
 September Morn also inspired several films . A two @-@ reel production by Pathé , titled September Morn , was released in February 1914 and followed the misadventures of a sailor who gets a tattoo of the model . After his girlfriend disapproves , he tries clothing the naked woman with a ripped skirt , but this fails to gain his lover 's approval ; ultimately , he ends up with a fully clothed nude and the text " Votes for Women " inked on his arm . Meanwhile , September Mourning , a November 1915 release produced by L @-@ KO , portrayed a pair of artists first vying for the attentions of a young woman in the park , then invading a school for girls . Robert <unk> , reviewing for Moving Picture World , found the film funny , but considered it to lack plot . A third film , Lois Weber 's Hypocrites , portrayed " The Naked Truth " ( an uncredited Margaret Edwards ) in a manner similar to Chabas 's model . 
 Several songs inspired by September Morn were likewise released . Musicians Frank Black and Bobby Heath penned a song , " September Morn " , based on the painting , and Aubrey Stauffer of Chicago published sheet music ( for voice and piano ) of " Oh , You September Morn " , from Gillespie and Tannehill 's musical . At Tin Pan Alley , Henry I. Marshall composed two works , a waltz for piano titled " Matin de Septembre ( September Morn ) " , and a piece for voice and piano titled " September Morn ( I 'd Like to Meet Her ) " , the latter featuring lyrics by Stanley Murphy . Both were published through Jerome H. Remick & Co. in 1913 . 
 As interest grew , purity societies attempted to ban reproductions of September Morn , and people in possession of them ran the risk of confiscation and fines . Postcards bearing the painting were banned from the postal system . Harold Marx , a New Orleans art dealer who displayed a reproduction , was arrested a month after being told to take the painting down ; displays of reproductions were also forcibly removed in Miami and Atlanta . In Chicago , a man was charged with disorderly conduct after bringing home a reproduction . Irene Deal , who dressed in a union suit and posed as " Miss September Morn " in Harrisburg , Pennsylvania , as a publicity stunt , was controversially fined $ 50 for disorderly conduct . In 1914 , students at the College of Wooster in Wooster , Ohio , burned a copy of the painting for being against their religious beliefs . 
 Ultimately some 7 million reproductions of September Morn , prints of which remained popular as late as the 1960s , were sold . Reichenbach characterized this popularity as a " laugh on the overzealous guardians of virtue " in which the entire American populace participated . Inspired by the commercial success of September Morn , displays of images of nude women became more common ; a New York Times reader wrote in 1915 that they had become " increasingly vulgar and suggestive " . 
 In 1937 Life deemed September Morn " one of the most familiar paintings in the world " , and a retrospective Toledo Blade article characterized the model as having become America 's number one pin @-@ up girl . Writing in 1957 , Considine declared September Morn to be " the most controversial painting in the history of [ the United States ] " , and the New York Post declared it " the most famous nude till the Marilyn Monroe calendar " . Carson wrote in 1961 that September Morn had caused " the most heated controversy over nudity , art , and morals " in the United States since Hiram Powers ' statue The Greek Slave in the 1840s . 
 = = = Russia and Paris = = = 
 The oil baron Leon Mantashev acquired the original September Morn in c . 1913 , for a price of $ 10 @,@ 000 and brought it with him to Russia . After the outbreak of the October Revolution the painting was feared destroyed . Following Mantashev 's escape from Russia , pieces of his sizeable collection that were considered to have artistic value were sent to museums , but there was no information regarding works such as September Morn . By 1933 Chabas was seeking information regarding his work 's fate , which The Milwaukee Journal suggested was " hanging in some crowded Russian room , its owner perhaps completely ignorant of its world fame " . At the time several American galleries had copies purported to be the original . 
 The painting , however , was safe ; Mantashev had smuggled it out of the country , reportedly " rip [ ping ] it out of its frame " when the revolution broke out . In the early 1930s , in desperate need of funds , he sold September Morn to the Armenian art collector and philanthropist Calouste Gulbenkian for $ 30 @,@ 000 ; it was the last painting he owned . A United Press reporter discovered the painting , which was framed as a tondo , in Gulbenkian 's Paris home in 1935 . There it hung with works by artists such as Claude Monet and Paul Cézanne . By 1937 September Morn was on display in the Musée du Luxembourg , hung between works by Jean @-@ François <unk> and Eugène Carrière . After Gulbenkian 's death in 1955 , the painting was acquired by <unk> and Company of New York . 
 = = = Acquisition by the Metropolitan Museum of Art = = = 
 September Morn was purchased by the Philadelphia broker and sportsman William Coxe Wright for $ 22 @,@ 000 in 1957 . In April of that year he offered it to the Philadelphia Museum of Art , but the painting was rejected for having " no relation to the stream of 20th century art " . Eventually he anonymously donated the work – valued at an estimated $ 30 @,@ 000 – to the Met in New York City . Speaking for the museum , Dudley T. Easby explained that , although the painting could not be classified as a masterpiece , it was nevertheless " a part of art history in view of the controversy that raged around the picture in earlier years " . 
 After acquisition , in September 1957 the painting was displayed near the Met 's front entrance , taking a place previously occupied by the <unk> Altarpiece . This position of honor was held for several weeks . Hughes reported a " veritable pilgrimage " of visitors came to see the painting , which she considered to add a " fresh , popular appeal " to the Met which drew museum @-@ goers who would never have come otherwise . By then , the earlier scandal of the model 's nudity had lessened ; discussing an exhibit of the painting in Toledo , Ohio , Alan <unk> of the Toledo Blade quoted a viewer as saying that 1950s America was so inundated with racy calendar art that the painting " couldn 't stand the competition " . 
 After September Morn was acquired by the Met , it was displayed at several venues , including the Palace of the Legion of Honor in San Francisco in 1958 , the Toledo Museum of Art in Toledo , Ohio ( also 1958 ) , and by the Municipal Art Commission of Los Angeles in 1959 . Six years later it was again exhibited at Palace of the Legion of Honor , as part of an exhibition of works collected by the Wrights . In 1971 , the Met removed September Morn from display and placed it in storage ; Walter <unk> of The Milwaukee Journal wrote that the once @-@ racy painting was now considered " too tame and banal " . As of September 2014 , the Met 's website lists the painting as not on display , though it had been hung in the museum around 2011 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In 1913 , Chabas stated that he was " pained and humiliated " by the controversy over September Morn , though he later expressed more positive views . He described the work as " all I know of painting " , and responded positively to statements that it was his masterpiece . In a 1914 interview , he explained that he had not meant to sell the painting , as it " was [ his ] wife 's favorite picture " . At the time of his death in 1937 , Chabas had only a single picture in his room : a reproduction of the painting , completed from memory ; he had boasted " If I had never seen it from the day I put down my brushes after painting it , I could make a perfect copy . " However , not having copyrighted the work , he did not receive any royalties from the marketing frenzy in the United States ; he recalled , " Nobody was thoughtful enough even to send me a box of cigars . " 
 Reviewing the painting after the Salon , <unk> in the Larousse <unk> illustré praised Chabas 's technique as drawing " of a rare purity " , and modeling " of a remarkable delicacy " . Henri Frantz , reviewing the Paris Salon for The International Studio , described September Morn as " one of the [ Salon ] ' s most remarkable figure subjects " , highlighting the nude 's " graceful form " . In Le Temps , François Thiébault @-@ Sisson found that , despite an " excessively translucent technique " , the painting had " indisputable charm " and included " superior , very artistic , and delicately composed " imagery . A 1913 article in the Oregon Daily Journal described the model as " beautifully drawn " , and suggested that " it requires a powerful imagination to find anything suggestive in the work " . 
 Later reviews were less positive . The director of the Met , James <unk> , wrote in 1957 that September Morn stood at " different ends of a wide spectrum " than the works of Old Masters and " modern giants " , but was important in helping viewers " realize the full benefit of our heritage " in their explorations of past and present art . That year , the Montreal Gazette 's art critic opined that the painting was banal and unacceptable for display in the Met 's main hall . The reviewer suggested that September Morn , with its " delicate , pearly tonality and simple , sparse , airy composition " , would be best served by being displayed among works considered better by early 20th @-@ century collectors but since reviewed poorly , to " <unk> [ e ] for the public the danger of too @-@ hasty judgments " . 
 In 1958 , Blake @-@ More Godwin of the Toledo Museum of Art stated that , although September Morn was certainly art , it was not " great art " and was overshadowed by the controversy it had created ; the painting , he said , " bears the same relationship to art as a minor poem does to the classic and the imperishable " . Three years later , in an article in The Kenyon Review , Alfred Werner described September Morn as a " classic of kitsch " and " the ' idealized ' nude at its worst " : " without a wrinkle of the skin , without any breathing of the flesh ... pink , soft , spineless " . This classification of kitsch has been applied by several further writers , including Kendrick and the film scholar Norman Taylor . 
 Several writers have included September Morn in lists of works depicting children with erotic or pornographic subtexts . Brauer argues that although the nude " seems to embody the moral purity at puberty " , this innocence is actually a fetishistic mechanism which both allowed the work to pass the censors and be eroticised . She concludes that the painting is " <unk> provocative " , and that Chabas was protected from censure by his status as an established artist and father . Such views have not been universally held . For instance , the historian Paul S. Boyer describes September Morn as " charmingly innocent " , and the art writer Elizabeth <unk> finds the painting to be " offensive only on the grounds of blandness " . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = M @-@ 25 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 25 is a state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan . The route follows an arc @-@ like shape closely along the Lake Huron shore of the Thumb in the eastern Lower Peninsula between Port Huron and Bay City . It serves the lakeshore resorts along Lake Huron and Saginaw Bay and generally lies within sight of the lake and the bay . All is surface road and generally scenic , except for the freeway segment near the junction with I @-@ 75 and connection into the US 10 freeway . 
 Between Port Huron and Port Austin it is the north – south highway that used to be US 25 before the designation was removed from Michigan . Between Port Austin and Bay City it is an east – west route that appeared on some maps as US 25 and on some maps as M @-@ 25 . Since the 1970s , when all of US 25 was deleted north of Cincinnati , Ohio , it is now entirely M @-@ 25 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = North to Port Austin = = = 
 The starting point of M @-@ 25 at a junction with Business Loop I @-@ 69 / Business Loop I @-@ 94 ( BL I @-@ 69 / BL I @-@ 94 ) in Port Huron . M @-@ 25 is part of the Lake Huron Circle Tour for its entire length . From here M @-@ 25 heads north on Pine Grove Avenue until meeting M @-@ 136 . At this intersection , M @-@ 25 turns north on 24th Avenue to Lakeshore Road then runs parallel to the Lake Huron shoreline . 
 In the community of Lakeport , M @-@ 25 passes through Lakeport State Park . Past the park , M @-@ 25 changes names from Lakeshore Road to Kimball Road temporarily . M @-@ 25 intersects the east end of M @-@ 90 blocks from Lake Huron in Lexington . There are public beaches in Lexington and in Port Sanilac . M @-@ 25 's street name changes after the M @-@ 46 intersection to that of North Lakeshore Road . The Huron Shores Golf Club is located off the highway north of Port Sanilac at the intersection of <unk> Road . Sanilac County has established the Sanilac County Park at the intersection of <unk> Road and M @-@ 25 south of Richmondville . North of Forestville M @-@ 25 is once again called South Lakeshore Road as the highway crosses into Huron County . 
 Wagener County Park is located off M @-@ 25 in the community of Helena . M @-@ 25 begins to curve to the northwest in Sand Beach near the Rock Falls Cemetery . In the city of Harbor Beach , M @-@ 25 is called Huron Avenue and meets M @-@ 142 for the first of two occasions . Here is the Harbor Beach Golf Course on the south side of town as M @-@ 25 moves inland through town . North of town , the trunkline parallels an old routing of the Chesapeake & Ohio Railway as it is once again renamed Lakeshore Road . The highway moves farther inland north of Rubicon and Port Hope as it begins to round the tip of the Thumb . In Grindstone City , M @-@ 25 loses the Lakeshore Road name in favor of Grindstone Road all the way to Port Austin . 
 = = = West to Bay City = = = 
 Port Austin is the location of the historical northern terminus of US 25 . Through town , M @-@ 25 turns north along Lake Street and runs concurrently with the northern end of M @-@ 53 . The highway turns westward on Port Austin Road along the lake where M @-@ 53 terminates ; this is also the point where the M @-@ 25 signage changes from northbound to westbound . West of town , M @-@ 25 turns south along the Saginaw Bay and meets Port Crescent State Park . From here south west , M @-@ 25 hugs the bay and its miles of beaches . North of <unk> is the Albert E. Sleeper State Park . Through <unk> , M @-@ 25 uses Main Street and passes the city beach off State Street . McKinley is home to the Scenic Golf & Country Club and Wild Fowl Bay . M @-@ 25 follows the shore of Wild Fowl Bay , a smaller bay off Saginaw Bay , to the city of Bay Port and the western terminus of M @-@ 142 on Fairhaven a smaller community south of Bay Port . From here south , the road is called Unionville Road and turns inland to <unk> . 
 At Unionville , M @-@ 25 turns more westerly to round the bottom of Saginaw Bay into Bay City along Bay City @-@ Forestville Road in Tuscola County . In the community of <unk> , it transitions to Center Road and crosses into Bay County . M @-@ 25 is routed the one @-@ way street pair of 7th Street and McKinley Street before crossing the Veterans Memorial Bridge over the Saginaw River . West of the bridge , the one @-@ way pairing of Jenny Street and Thomas Street are used before the two merge into Thomas Street west of the M @-@ 13 intersections . 
 The western terminus is at the junction of I @-@ 75 / US 23 and US 10 . As the roadway crosses the I @-@ 75 / US 23 freeway it feeds into the eastern end of US 10 freeway . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Previous designation = = = 
 The M @-@ 25 designation was first used by July 1 , 1919 @.@ in the Upper Peninsula . The highway ran from Skandia along what is today M @-@ 94 to Munising . From there it used today 's routing of M @-@ 28 eastward to Newberry and Sault Ste . Marie . This designation was replaced by M @-@ 28 in 1927 . 
 = = = Current designation = = = 
 In 1933 , US 25 was extended north from Port Huron to Port <unk> along M @-@ 29 . M @-@ 25 was designated along the portion of M @-@ 29 disconnected by the US 25 extension , from Bay City to Port Austin . M @-@ 25 was extended along US 25 to Port Huron when the latter was removed from Michigan in 1973 . The southern terminus was placed at I @-@ 94 in Marysville , Michigan until it was moved northward to end at BL I @-@ 94 ( now BL I @-@ 69 / BL I @-@ 94 ) in 1987 . 
 The section of M @-@ 25 in the City of Bay City was named what is now called a Pure Michigan Historic Byway by the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) . This designation was created on October 23 , 1997 , for the section of M @-@ 25 along Center Avenue between Madison Avenue and the eastern city limits . Originally called the Bay City Historic Heritage Route " , it has been called the Center Avenue Heritage Route by its local stewardship committee . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Johanna Welin = 
 Johanna Welin ( born 24 June 1984 ) is a Swedish @-@ born German 2 @.@ 0 point wheelchair basketball player . She played for USC Munich in the German wheelchair basketball league , and for the national team that won the gold medal at the 2012 Summer Paralympics in London , after which President Joachim Gauck awarded the team with the Silbernes Lorbeerblatt ( Silver Laurel Leaf ) . 
 = = Biography = = 
 Johanna Welin was born on 24 June 1984 in <unk> , Sweden , a small town near the border between Sweden and Finland about 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) north of the Arctic Circle . She has played football for <unk> IK in the Swedish league . In the winter , her passion was snowboarding , until a bad fall in a snowboarding competition at Gothenburg in January 2004 left her paralysed from the waist down . She then took up wheelchair basketball , playing for <unk> Gothenburg in the Swedish league , but Sweden had no national women 's team . She spent two semesters studying German in <unk> , but there was no wheelchair basketball team there , and she began playing for USC Munich , initially for their second team . There , she caught the attention of Holger Glinicki , the coach of the German national team , who asked her if she would like to play for the German national team . She took German citizenship , a relatively painless procedure for an athlete , and made the German national team , which went on to win gold at the 2011 European Championships in Nazareth , Israel , defeating the Netherlands in the final , 48 @-@ 42 . 
 In June 2012 she was named as part of the team that competed at the 2012 Summer Paralympic Games in London , where they faced the Australia women 's national wheelchair basketball team , a team that had defeated them 48 @-@ 46 in Sydney just a few months before . They defeated the Australians 44 @-@ 58 in front of a capacity crowd of over 12 @,@ 000 at the North Greenwich Arena to win the gold medal , the first that Germany had won in women 's wheelchair basketball at the Paralympics since 1984 . They were awarded another Silver Laurel Leaf by President Joachim Gauck in November 2012 and were again named Team of the Year for 2012 . In February 2013 , Welin 's name was entered in the Golden Book of Munich . 
 She has modelled for the advertising campaigns of team sponsors ING <unk> and <unk> , and is currently studying medicine in Munich . 
 = = Achievements = = 
 2011 : Gold European Championships ( Nazareth , Israel ) 
 2012 : Gold Paralympic Games ( London , England ) 
 2013 : Silver European Championships ( Frankfurt , Germany ) 
 2014 : Silver at the World Championships ( Toronto , Canada ) 
 2015 : Gold at the European Championships ( Worcester , England ) 
 = = Awards = = 
 2012 : Team of the Year 
 2012 : Silver Laurel Leaf 
 2013 : Entry in the Golden Book of Munich 
 = Kansas Turnpike = 
 The Kansas Turnpike is a 236 @-@ mile @-@ long ( 380 km ) , freeway @-@ standard toll road that lies entirely within the U.S. state of Kansas . It runs in a general southwest @-@ northeast direction from the Oklahoma border to Kansas City . It passes through several major Kansas cities , including Wichita , Topeka , and Lawrence . The turnpike is owned and maintained by the Kansas Turnpike Authority ( KTA ) , which is headquartered in Wichita . 
 The Kansas Turnpike was built from 1954 to 1956 , predating the Interstate Highway System . While not part of the system 's early plans , the turnpike was eventually incorporated into the Interstate system in late 1956 , and is designated today as four different Interstate Highway routes : I @-@ 35 , I @-@ 335 , I @-@ 470 , and I @-@ 70 . The turnpike also carries a piece of U.S. Routes 24 and 40 in Kansas City . 
 Because it predates the Interstate Highway System , the road is not engineered to current Interstate Highway standards , and notably lacks a regulation @-@ width median . To reduce the risk of head @-@ on collisions , the Kansas Turnpike now has a continuous , permanent Jersey barrier in the median over its entire length . On opening , there was no fixed speed limit on the highway ; drivers were merely asked to keep to a " reasonable and proper " limit , although shortly afterward signs were erected in certain stretches indicating a maximum speed of 80 miles per hour ( 130 km / h ) . From 1970 to 1974 and again since 2011 , the turnpike 's speed limit has been set at 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) ; that limit during the earlier period applied only during daytime hours . 
 Around 120 @,@ 000 drivers use the turnpike daily . The road features numerous services , including a travel radio station and six service areas . One of these service areas is notable for the presence of a memorial to University of Notre Dame football coach Knute Rockne , who died near the current highway 's route . The turnpike is self @-@ sustaining ; it derives its entire revenue from the tolls collected and requires no tax money for maintenance or administration . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 Early federal plans for a nationwide system of interregional highways did not include a route along or near the present turnpike , instead connecting Oklahoma City and Kansas City via southeastern Kansas and U.S. Route 69 . By the mid @-@ 1940s , this route had shifted to roughly the present Interstate 35 alignment , serving Wichita . The only major difference from the present route was between Wichita and Emporia , where the highway ran north to Newton before turning northeast along U.S. Route 50 . 
 In the early 1950s , toll roads were gaining in popularity as a mechanism for funding new <unk> . This trend started with the Pennsylvania Turnpike in 1940 , which was mimicked by other toll roads in New York , New Jersey , several New England states , Ohio , and Colorado . In October 1951 , the Highway Council of the Kansas Chamber of Commerce researched the possibility of integrating the state into a potential cross @-@ country turnpike system . Eastern Kansas was also included in an interstate turnpike system stretching from Galveston , Texas to Saint Louis , Missouri , via Kansas City , that was proposed by Oklahoma governor Johnston Murray . Many firms from construction industries , as well as those concerned about the state 's economic development , worked to have legislation passed to allow the turnpike to be constructed . Governor Ed Arn and Gale Moss , the State Highway Director , were two major proponents of the turnpike concept . 
 The turnpike idea was an attractive one because initial construction was to be financed by the private sector via sales of revenue bonds , allowing state highway funds to be used for other important projects . The new toll road would also reduce traffic , and thus maintenance costs , on existing roads . There was also a concern that if Kansas lagged behind in turnpike construction , it might be bypassed by toll roads in other states , leaving it at an economic disadvantage . The toll concept also had the benefit of ultimately putting the financial burden on the drivers who actually used the road , instead of using tax revenue that had been collected from residents statewide . There was a some opposition to the plan , from both government officials and citizens , due to concerns that the toll revenue might not cover the repayments to investors , bankrupting the turnpike authority and burdening the state government with the remaining debt . There were also worries about the possibility of the turnpike requiring maintenance before the bonds had been repaid . Some critics also felt that the high speeds typical of turnpike driving were unsafe . As right @-@ of @-@ way for the project was obtained , the turnpike drew opposition from farmers and ranchers , who objected to the turnpike bisecting their property , making it difficult to access disjointed parcels of land . 
 The Kansas Chamber of Commerce held " turnpike clinics " in several locations across Kansas in 1952 , reporting an overwhelmingly positive reception from the public . The Kansas Turnpike Act , defining a turnpike from Oklahoma to Kansas City , became effective April 7 , 1953 . It created the Kansas Turnpike Authority , with Gale Moss selected as its first chairman . With a budget of only $ 25 @,@ 000 ( about $ 570 @,@ 000 in 2015 ) , KTA 's first office was a former barbershop in the Kansas State Capitol . 
 Given Oklahoma 's plans to build a turnpike north from Oklahoma City to the Kansas state line , and taking into account traffic flow maps prepared by the highway department , a preliminary route was chosen connecting the proposed Oklahoma turnpike to Kansas City via Wichita and Topeka . A second route extending from Topeka to Salina , and further west to the Colorado state line ( the modern @-@ day I @-@ 70 corridor ) was also studied . Over 173 @,@ 000 drivers were surveyed to determine how many of them would be willing to use the two proposed routes in order to establish their profitability . While the western Kansas route was determined not to be feasible , the Oklahoma – Kansas City route was projected to generate a total revenue of $ 9 million in 1957 ( about $ 181 million in 2015 dollars ) . After considering a number of different alignments , including one bypassing Topeka via the present route of I @-@ 35 , the state decided on an " airline " route between Wichita and Topeka . From Wichita south , the turnpike was to parallel U.S. Route 81 , continuing into Oklahoma ; the interchange with U.S. Route 166 at South Haven was included to provide an outlet if Oklahoma lagged in its construction . The turnpike was to parallel U.S. Route 40 from Topeka to Kansas City . The Kansas City end was set at 18th Street and Muncie Boulevard , which was to be extended and upgraded to a freeway ( the Muncie Expressway ) to the Intercity Viaduct by the state . 
 After a ruling from the Kansas Supreme Court that found that the KTA could issue bonds and oversee the construction and administration of the turnpike , the turnpike authority sold $ 160 million ( around $ 3 @.@ 22 billion in 2015 dollars ) in revenue bonds in September 1954 . KTA bonds were quickly bought by investors , who were attracted by the Kansas Turnpike 's low construction costs — only one @-@ third of that of turnpikes in other states — and projections showing that enough tolls would be collected to pay off investors after nineteen years . 
 Ground was broken on December 31 , 1954 at the Kansas River bridge near Lawrence . Construction of the entire length of the turnpike was scheduled to take place all at once , with the turnpike partitioned into 14 parts , and the overall length also divided into 43 smaller portions . The Turnpike Authority sent out letters en masse to the affected landowners , offering a price and referring appeals to the local district court , which typically valued the land at a lesser amount ; this methodology was not without criticism . During the construction period , the state highway department suffered a " brain drain " as many staffers resigned to take up KTA jobs , which paid better salaries ( Chairman Moss 's KTA salary was three times that of his salary as director of highways ) and offered more exciting challenges . 
 After almost 22 months of construction , the road was opened for a day of free travel on October 20 , 1956 between 6 a.m. and 2 p.m. An estimated 12 @,@ 000 to 15 @,@ 000 cars traveled on the turnpike . Many of those motorists traveled to Lawrence for a football game between the University of Kansas and University of Oklahoma . Official opening ceremonies were held at interchanges in each of the three major cities on October 25 . The Kansas City celebration included Gene Autry jumping his horse through a large paper map of the turnpike . John Masefield , the British Poet Laureate , wrote a tribute to commemorate the occasion . On the first day after the official opening , 7 @,@ 197 vehicles traveled the turnpike , with 81 toll collectors and 50 maintenance workers on duty . The turnpike originally had 14 interchanges ; by 2012 , there were 22 . 
 = = = The southern terminus = = = 
 Despite Oklahoma 's role in instigating the construction of the Kansas Turnpike , its plans for a connecting turnpike fell through . The Oklahoma Turnpike Authority ( OTA ) had not performed a traffic study , as KTA had , to prove that the proposed Oklahoma turnpike would be profitable . Oklahoma also suffered from a poorer credit rating than did Kansas . Additionally , by this time many states ' turnpike authorities were competing in the bond markets for investor dollars . All of these issues combined made it difficult for OTA to issue bonds for its toll road . When funding had been obtained , political issues stalled the proposed toll road further . 
 With no counterpart to the south , the Kansas Turnpike ended at the state line , at an at @-@ grade intersection with <unk> Road . Just across the state line was an oat field , into which many inattentive motorists crashed . This abrupt end became nationally famous after Wyoming governor Milward L. Simpson and his wife crashed in mid @-@ 1957 . The oat farmer plowed the field to provide a safer landing , and the KTA was persuaded to install a huge wooden barrier at the end of the highway . However , within a day , three more drivers had crashed and destroyed the barrier , so the KTA closed the turnpike south of the South Haven interchange . KTA provided the state of Oklahoma with financial aid to construct its portion of a temporary road leading to the interchange . The lack of continuity in the highway was one of the primary reasons that the road did not generate much revenue in the years following the opening ; another reason was a lack of education on the part of motorists as to the concept of a toll road . 
 Although Oklahoma 's plans to construct a toll road from the southern end of the Kansas Turnpike at the state line to Oklahoma City did not materialize , a year and a half after the opening of the turnpike , a 5 @-@ mile ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) connection to US 177 was put into service . Eventually I @-@ 35 was completed south to Oklahoma City . 
 = = = Recent history = = = 
 While the initial turnpike was still being built , the KTA authorized four feasibility studies in October 1954 . Three of them — a spur to Leavenworth and Saint Joseph , Missouri , a spur from Wichita to Hutchinson , Great Bend and Hays , and a new Intercity Viaduct to Kansas City , Missouri — did not go anywhere . But the fourth proposal , a toll bridge on 18th Street in Kansas City , was pushed through , and the KTA agreed to build the turnpike in early 1956 . The 18th Street Expressway , running south from the turnpike 's east end over the Kansas River , opened in 1959 , improving access to northeast Johnson County . 
 As the turnpike did not use any state tax revenue for maintenance , the pavement began to deteriorate rapidly , and crews faced difficulty keeping up with the snow in winter conditions in a winter storm during 1960 . In the early 1960s , many senior positions in the Kansas Turnpike Authority were cut , and thanks to this and other austerity measures such as targeting maintenance to save costs in the future , the turnpike slowly became profitable . By 1966 , it was clear that the turnpike had not been built to the higher standards of the Interstate Highway system ; the roadway had developed ruts and other issues due to deferred maintenance . To temporarily fix the problem , a layer of asphalt oil and a layer of sand and asphalt was used to fill in the ruts , and graded rock coated with asphalt was used to seal the road . Since the road had been originally constructed at the same time , and not built in segments over a period of time , similar maintenance issues appeared along the whole length of the road at the same time . Bridges and pavement were repaired on a rotating basis , to stagger the cost of needed repairs . The bridge over the Kansas River was widened and replaced after 1973 . As economic conditions improved for the Authority , equipment was slowly replaced , and workers were given pay increases , both of which were badly needed . 
 In June 1956 , the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 was signed into law , granting funding to the nationwide Interstate Highway System . Without its Oklahoma link , the Kansas Turnpike was in danger of being bypassed by the Interstate System entirely . However , at the end of 1956 , the Bureau of Public Roads and the state of Kansas agreed to route I @-@ 35 along the turnpike south of Emporia and I @-@ 70 along the piece east of Topeka . The state insisted on a separate Emporia – Kansas City alignment , and the mileage that would have been used to build I @-@ 35 from Wichita to Emporia via Newton was instead used for Interstate 35W ( now Interstate 135 ) from Wichita via Newton to Salina . Oklahoma 's first piece of Interstate 35 , from the state line to U.S. Highway 177 at Braman , opened April 22 , 1958 . 
 The East Topeka interchange was completely rebuilt in the late 1990s , with a goal of rerouting I @-@ 70 and improving access to the turnpike . The design was completed in 1997 , and the project was finished in 2001 at a cost of $ 98 @.@ 6 million in 1999 dollars . 
 On the evening of April 6 , 2002 , a grease fire broke out in the Hardee 's restaurant at the Belle Plaine service plaza . <unk> by heavy winds , the fire destroyed the building , which also contained a travel information center . Four fire departments responded to the scene . The assistant fire chief and fire chief of the Wellington Fire Department gave conflicting statements on whether the unavailability of the Wellington water tower , which had been emptied while it was being repainted , had hampered efforts to extinguish the blaze . The fire burned for three hours , with hot spots still smoldering the following day . No injuries were reported . The fire caused $ 2 million in damages . The service plaza was rebuilt , with a reopening celebration occurring on July 24 , 2003 . 
 A 390 @-@ year flood event took place on the night of August 30 , 2003 , at the Kansas Turnpike 's crossing of Jacobs Creek , a tributary of the Cottonwood River 11 miles ( 18 km ) southwest of Emporia ( turnpike milepost 116 ) . A thunderstorm that evening dropped large amounts of rain in the area , with a gauge at Plymouth reporting 7 @.@ 1 inches ( 18 cm ) of rainfall in a 24 @-@ hour period . The culvert carrying Jacobs Creek under the turnpike quickly exceeded its capacity , and water rose onto the turnpike . A pool of water four feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) deep formed on the northbound lanes ; the concrete median barrier initially prevented most of the water from crossing to the southbound lanes . Seven cars , all headed northbound , stalled in the floodwater . The median barrier then gave way , sweeping the stalled cars across the southbound lanes and down the creek as far as 1 1 ⁄ 2 miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) from the highway . Six people died in the flood . 
 = = Tolls = = 
 As of 2014 , the passenger or passengers of two @-@ axle vehicles ( such as cars and motorcycles ) pay a total of $ 12 @.@ 00 to travel the entire length of the turnpike . Tolls are calculated based on the length of the route traveled , and the toll is as little as 30 ¢ for motorists driving only a short distance ( 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) , for example ) on the turnpike . Drivers in vehicles with more than two axles , such as truckers , pay higher tolls . 
 The turnpike runs on a ticket @-@ based collection system . When entering the turnpike , either at one of the termini or at an interchange , a driver is issued a ticket which indicates the toll plaza at which they entered . When leaving the turnpike , this ticket is used to determine the amount of the toll . If a motorist presents a ticket at the same toll plaza it was issued from , the KTA charges a " per @-@ minute " fare if the trip was more than fifteen minutes . Should the ticket be lost , or should the trip take over eighteen hours to complete , the driver must pay the highest possible toll for that exit . 
 As an alternative to using tickets , motorists can order a transponder , known as a K @-@ TAG . K @-@ TAG customers can proceed slowly through the toll plaza without stopping to collect a ticket or pay toll . The toll is instead paid through one of two payment plans . K @-@ TAG Classic , intended for frequent turnpike users , requires the customer to maintain a prepaid account , from which funds are drawn as needed . The plan intended for intermittent users , My K @-@ TAG , requires an active credit card . My K @-@ TAG keeps track of the tolls accrued by the customer , and automatically charges the user 's credit card monthly . K @-@ TAG Classic accounts are subject to a $ 1 monthly fee per tag , while My K @-@ TAG account holders can get up to five tags for free . Tolls for K @-@ TAG users are lower than for cash customers , so a two @-@ axle vehicle with a K @-@ TAG is charged only $ 10 @.@ 20 to travel the entire length of the turnpike . K @-@ TAG Classic users also receive an additional 10 @-@ percent discount on tolls . K @-@ <unk> are available for purchase at select Walgreens , Dillons , and AAA locations . K @-@ TAG is compatible with <unk> in neighboring Oklahoma . However , K @-@ TAG is not compatible with any other systems , including the E @-@ ZPass system in the Eastern United States . 
 K @-@ TAG was introduced in 1995 ; the system was internally designed and is internally run , instead of being contracted to another company , saving additional overhead costs . The Kansas Turnpike is completely self @-@ sustaining . All costs are paid for by the tolls collected ; no tax money is used for construction , maintenance , or administration . KTA estimates that 120 @,@ 000 drivers use the turnpike each day . 
 = = Route description = = 
 The Kansas Turnpike is 236 miles ( 380 km ) long . As of 2014 the Kansas Turnpike has 22 interchanges and two barrier toll plazas . Many of the interchanges are designed as trumpet interchanges with a connector road to the crossroad , for easy placement of a single toll plaza on the connector . 
 Exit numbers were originally sequential but are assigned today by mileage from south to east , the same numbering system used by the majority of U.S. states for their Interstate Highways as well . After passing the Bonner Springs interchange , exit numbers change to match the mileage of Interstate 70 ( I @-@ 70 ) east from the Colorado border , which is also used on I @-@ 70 west of the turnpike . This results in discontinuous exit numbers on I @-@ 70 . 
 = = = Oklahoma state line to Emporia = = = 
 The first 127 miles ( 204 km ) of the highway , between its southern terminus at the Oklahoma border and Emporia , Kansas , are designated as Interstate 35 ( I @-@ 35 ) . The Kansas Turnpike is the only tolled section on this Interstate . The turnpike runs due north and south between its southern terminus and Wichita . This stretch of the highway runs parallel to U.S. Route 81 ( US @-@ 81 ) , which lies to the west of the turnpike . 
 The Kansas Turnpike begins at the Oklahoma state line north of Braman , Oklahoma . This is also the point at which I @-@ 35 crosses from Kay County to Sumner County . The turnpike proceeds due north from the state line , with no interchanges for its first four miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) in Kansas . The southernmost interchange on the turnpike is Exit 4 ( South Haven ) , which serves US @-@ 166 . US @-@ 166 heads east to Arkansas City and west to US @-@ 81 at South Haven . This interchange is a four @-@ ramp folded diamond with ramps in the southeast and northwest quadrants . It has no toll plazas , as it lies south of the southern barrier toll . Northbound traffic must exit at US @-@ 166 to avoid paying a toll . Initially , the interchange provided only a southbound exit and northbound entrance , forcing drivers who did not wish to pay a toll to leave I @-@ 35 in Oklahoma . By 1976 the other two ramps had been added . 
 From Exit 4 , the turnpike continues on a due north course , crossing Slate Creek , before coming to the Southern Terminal barrier toll plaza , where tickets are issued for all northbound traffic and fares are collected from southbound traffic . The next interchange north of the toll plaza is Exit 19 ( Wellington ) , serving US @-@ 160 , which heads west to Wellington , the county seat of Sumner County , and east to Winfield , the seat of adjoining Cowley County . It is the first of many trumpet interchanges , serving the surface road via a connector road with a toll plaza . When the turnpike first opened , the US @-@ 160 interchange was a reversed diamond with four loop ramps , so that all traffic using the interchange had to pass under the bridge and thus through the toll plaza . The new configuration was built c . 1988 . 
 The freeway takes a brief jog to the northeast before crossing over a Burlington Northern Santa Fe rail line southeast of Riverdale . In the median at mile 26 is the Belle Plaine Service Area . North of the service plaza , the highway bridges the <unk> River and then K @-@ 55 . No interchange is present to allow turnpike travelers to connect to the K @-@ 55 . 
 The turnpike 's next interchange is Exit 33 ( Mulvane ) , which connects to K @-@ 53 via a trumpet ramp , just east of the west end of K @-@ 53 at US @-@ 81 . The interchange was built c . 1985 . It was reconstructed in 2011 to serve the Kansas Star Casino with roundabouts on each side of the flyover . The east roundabout directs traffic to K @-@ 53 . The west roundabout directs traffic to the casino . There is now a toll booth on the casino side of the intersection as well as the one on the entrance to K @-@ 53 . This interchange straddles the Sumner – Sedgwick county line . 
 In southern Sedgwick County , the Kansas Turnpike enters the Wichita metropolitan area . Exit 39 ( <unk> ) serves two of Wichita 's southern suburbs . This exit is a diamond interchange with a connector road to Grand Avenue , which runs west to U.S. Route 81 and <unk> and east to Derby . It was built c . 1989 . Now in Wichita proper , the highway reaches exit 42 ( South Wichita ) , which is the south end of Interstate 135 . I @-@ 135 heads north through Wichita , the largest city in Kansas , toward Salina ; US @-@ 81 joins at the first interchange and I @-@ 235 begins at the second . The interchange is a simple trumpet with I @-@ 135 , and opened in 1956 with the turnpike , but the connector ended at 47th Street ( now US @-@ 81 ) until c . 1961 . 
 After passing exit 42 , the turnpike curves away from US @-@ 81 , turning northeast toward El Dorado and Emporia . It crosses the Arkansas River between Exits 42 and 45 . Exit 45 ( Wichita , K @-@ 15 ) ) is a trumpet connection to K @-@ 15 in southern Wichita . It opened in 1956 as one of the original interchanges . As the highway continues northeast through Wichita , it comes to Exit 50 ( East Wichita ) , a double @-@ trumpet connection to the parallel Kellogg Avenue , which carries US @-@ 54 and US @-@ 400 . It is one of the original 1956 interchanges . Exit 53 , the final Wichita exit , is a trumpet connection to the K @-@ 96 freeway . The connector road junctions K @-@ 96 at a four @-@ ramp partial cloverleaf interchange and ends at 127th Street East . The interchange opened c . 1994 along with the nearby piece of K @-@ 96 . 
 East of Exit 53 , the turnpike passes into Butler County . Exit 57 ( Andover ) connects to 21st Street northeast of downtown Andover , an eastern suburb of Wichita . ( This is the same " 21st Street " that runs through Wichita . ) The turnpike uses a diamond interchange with the connector road to 70th Street . This interchange opened c . 1985 . It crosses the Whitewater River southwest of the Towanda Service Area , located in the median at mile 65 . From the service area , the highway proceeds north east to Exit 71 ( El Dorado ) , a trumpet connection to K @-@ 254 just east of its junction with K @-@ 196 . The connector originally directly intersected K @-@ 254 , but it now ends between K @-@ 254 and West 6th Avenue , just north of K @-@ 254 . Exit 71 opened with the original turnpike in 1956 . North of El Dorado , Exit 76 ( El Dorado ) connects the Kansas Turnpike to U.S. Route 77 via a trumpet ramp . It opened c . 1986 . 
 After passing through El Dorado , the Kansas Turnpike crosses the northernmost arms of El Dorado Lake . This marks the turnpike 's entry into the Flint Hills , a band of hills in eastern Kansas . The turnpike does not leave this region completely until it reaches Topeka . As the highway continues northeast past El Dorado Lake , it runs roughly parallel to the Walnut River to the west , which feeds the reservoir , and K @-@ 177 to the east . Northwest of the town of Cassoday , K @-@ 177 finally crosses the turnpike , with Exit 92 ( Cassoday ) , a diamond interchange , providing a connector to the state highway . The interchange was not present when the turnpike opened in 1956 , but was built soon after as an east @-@ facing folded diamond with two separate toll plazas . The present configuration was built c . 1995 . Near this interchange , the turnpike crosses the Walnut River . 
 Northeast of the Cassoday interchange , the Kansas Turnpike enters Chase County . In the median at mile 97 , just north of the county line , is the Matfield Green Service Area . Approximately 13 @.@ 7 miles ( 22 @.@ 0 km ) northeast of the service area , an interchange provides access to a set of cattle pens southeast of Bazaar . Other than these two service exits , there are no interchanges within Chase County ; upon leaving it , the turnpike passes into Lyon County . 
 The next interchange along the turnpike is Exit 127 ( Emporia ) . At this trumpet interchange , Interstate 35 leaves the turnpike to head east through Emporia , the county seat of Lyon County , on its way northeast to Kansas City via Ottawa . Interstate 35 and U.S. Route 50 . The interchange , as opened in 1956 with the original turnpike , connected directly to US @-@ 50 at Overlander Street ; a different configuration opened c . 1966 along with the connecting piece of I @-@ 35 . In 2005 , KTA approved reconstruction of the Emporia interchange to improve connections to US @-@ 50 , I @-@ 35 , and the city of Emporia , resulting in the present configuration . This project , funded by the Turnpike Authority , the Kansas Department of Transportation , and the city of Emporia , was completed in 2008 . 
 = = = Emporia to Topeka = = = 
 After the split with I @-@ 35 , the Kansas Turnpike continues northeast as I @-@ 335 . However , its exits are numbered as if I @-@ 35 had continued along it . This highway exists entirely as a part of the Kansas Turnpike . In fact , until 1987 , this stretch of the turnpike was designated solely as the Kansas Turnpike without an Interstate number . It was only after a change in the National Maximum Speed Law , when state legislators were given the authority to raise the speed limits on rural Interstate Highways to 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) , that this segment of the Kansas Turnpike was given the I @-@ 335 designation so that it could fall under the new law . 
 Northeast of Emporia , the Emporia service area is located in the median at mile 132 . The turnpike continues northeast through the northern reaches of the Flint Hills , coming to an interchange with US @-@ 56 near Admire . This interchange , Exit 147 , is the only interchange along the I @-@ 335 section of the turnpike other than the two end junctions . It is a trumpet connection to US @-@ 56 , which heads west to Council Grove and east to Osage City , and was one of the original 1956 interchanges . 
 From the Admire exit , the Kansas Turnpike continues northeast , passing through the southeast corner of <unk> County and the northwestern part of Osage County . The turnpike enters Shawnee County and continues through rural land before it heads into the Topeka area . Here , the roadway has an interchange that serves I @-@ 470 and US @-@ 75 . At this point , I @-@ 335 ends and I @-@ 470 joins the turnpike as it passes through suburban development in the southeastern part of Topeka . In the eastern portion of the city , the highway reaches an interchange with I @-@ 70 , US @-@ 40 , and K @-@ 4 . 
 = = = Topeka to Kansas City = = = 
 The remainder of the turnpike runs on I @-@ 70 from Topeka to the turnpike 's eastern terminus in Kansas City . This is one of only two tolled sections of I @-@ 70 ; the other is on the Pennsylvania Turnpike with I @-@ 76 . 
 The turnpike continues east along I @-@ 70 and crosses Tecumseh Creek . The Topeka Service Area is located on the north side of the road east of here at mile 188 . It is accessed by ramps on the right side of the highway in both directions . Just east of the service area , the turnpike enters Douglas County while passing over US @-@ 40 without an interchange . The route then curves to the southeast and runs roughly parallel to US @-@ 40 . A series of curves takes the turnpike farther east as it reaches Exit 197 ( Lecompton ) , a folded diamond interchange with the western terminus of K @-@ 10 . After this , the highway continues farther east and enters the city of Lawrence , where it shares a diamond interchange with McDonald Drive at Exit 202 ( West Lawrence ) . McDonald Drive leads to US @-@ 59 south of the turnpike . East of here , the highway bends east @-@ northeasterly , crosses the Kansas River , and then intersects US @-@ 40 and US @-@ 59 , which run concurrently , at Exit 204 ( East Lawrence ) . 
 The Kansas Turnpike then leaves Lawrence and bends to the northeast before leaving Douglas County and entering Leavenworth . It overpasses Mud Creek before passing under K @-@ 32 . Northeast of here at mile 209 , the Lawrence Service Area is located in the median . Afterward , the turnpike has a diamond interchange with 222nd Street , which is signed as Leavenworth County Road 1 , at Exit 212 ( <unk> / Eudora ) . The highway then travels northeast and passes through it eastern terminal toll booth . This is the final toll booth on the route travelling east and all vehicles must pay their final toll before continuing . The turnpike then enters Bonner Springs . It crosses Wolf Creek before leaving Leavenworth County and entering Wyandotte County . In Bonner Springs , the turnpike intersects K @-@ 7 , westbound US @-@ 24 , westbound US @-@ 40 , and the southern terminus of US @-@ 73 at Exit 224 ( Bonner Springs , formerly Exit 223 ) with a trumpet interchange . The mileposts on the route switch to match those of I @-@ 70 after this interchange . 
 US @-@ 24 and US @-@ 40 run concurrently with I @-@ 70 and the Kansas Turnpike as it heads east toward Kansas City . The first free exit on the turnpike is a diamond interchange with 110th Street at Exit 410 . This interchange is located just south of the Kansas Speedway . Just east of here , the route intersects I @-@ 435 at Exit 411 . This exit uses a cloverleaf interchange with one directional ramp and collector – distributor roads to avoid issues with traffic exiting immediately north of the turnpike . After this interchange , the highway enters Kansas City . 
 The turnpike 's first exit in the city is Exit 414 , a diamond interchange with 78th Street . Next , the highway curves slightly to the northeast and intersects the Turner Diagonal at Exit 415 , an interchange consisting of a half @-@ cloverleaf for the western ramps and a Y @-@ connection for the eastern ramps that intersects the Turner Diagonal at a trumpet interchange north of the turnpike . East of here , the route has a diamond interchange with 57th Street at Exit 417 . Directly east of 57th Street , the turnpike crosses Brenner Heights Creek . After this , the turnpike continues due east to a fully directional interchange with I @-@ 635 at Exit 418 . 
 After this interchange , the freeway bends in a southeastern direction and reaches its final exit , Exit 420 . This exit is a cloverleaf interchange with US @-@ 69 , which is also known as the 18th Street Expressway . At this interchange , US @-@ 69 turns east to overlap I @-@ 70 , US @-@ 40 , and US @-@ 24 , and the highways continue east of Exit 420 toward Kansas City , Missouri . 
 = = Design = = 
 Because the Kansas Turnpike was built before the Interstate Highway System , it is not engineered to current Interstate Highway standards . The turnpike was originally constructed with lanes only 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) wide . Notably , the turnpike was built without a 36 @-@ foot ( 11 m ) median . When it opened , the central reservation was a 20 @-@ foot ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) depressed median . Starting in 1985 , Jersey barriers were installed along its entire length . As with all other toll roads that predated the Interstate Highway System , the highway is grandfathered from Interstate standards . 
 Kansas Turnpike mileposts are continuous along the entire length of the turnpike . Mile markers begin at the point where I @-@ 35 enters Kansas at the southern border . These numbers are continued along the other three Interstates that make up the turnpike , rather than numbering each Interstate individually , leading to discontinuous numbering on I @-@ 70 — the exit numbers on tolled I @-@ 70 are much lower than those on free I @-@ 70 . 
 The majority of the Kansas Turnpike , from the Oklahoma state line to Topeka , was constructed with four @-@ inch ( 100 mm ) asphalt . The 55 miles ( 89 km ) from Topeka to Kansas City was built with Portland cement concrete . Curves along the turnpike are limited to 3 ° and grades limited to 3 % . Early reports said that curves were designed to accommodate speeds of 70 to 75 mph ( 115 to 120 km / h ) . When built , the turnpike was designed to allow 18 @,@ 000 @-@ pound ( 8 @,@ 200 kg ) axle loads . Minimum sight distances were kept at 725 feet ( 221 m ) . The 300 @-@ foot ( 91 m ) right of way featured fenced edges to prevent cattle from entering the roadway and to discourage toll evasion . 
 = = = Speed limits = = = 
 When the turnpike was originally opened , it had no posted speed limit , however " drivers [ would ] be ' hailed down ' if they exceed 80 miles an hour [ 130 km / h ] . " In 1970 , the speed limit was reduced to 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) during the day and 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) at night ; authorities cited accidents caused by excess speed . Nationwide , the speed limit was reduced to 55 mph ( 90 km / h ) on January 2 , 1974 ; Kansas delayed implementing the reduction until the deadline on March 2 , 1974 . 
 When Congress allowed states to increase their speed limits to 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) , Kansas increased the speed limit on most of the turnpike ; the Emporia – Topeka segment did not have an Interstate designation to allow for an increase there . Other sections through urban areas remained at the lower limits as well . The Kansas Department of Transportation requested an Interstate designation for the Emporia – Topeka segment of the turnpike by May 1987 , which they received on October 23 , 1987 , when that section was given the I @-@ 335 designation to allow for a 65 mph ( 105 km / h ) speed limit . Later in November 1995 , Congress repealed the National Maximum Speed Limit ; Kansas initially left their limits alone after the repeal . Legislation that raised the speed limits to 70 mph ( 115 km / h ) took effect on March 22 , 1996 . 
 On July 1 , 2011 , the speed limit on most of the Kansas Turnpike was raised once again to 75 mph ( 120 km / h ) as part of a set of speed limit increases affecting several rural Interstates and U.S. routes throughout Kansas . The minimum speed is 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . 
 = = Services = = 
 The Kansas Turnpike Authority provides a number of services to help motorists and provide incentives for using the turnpike . KTA broadcasts a travel radio station at 1610 AM from Wellington , Wichita , El Dorado , Cassoday , Emporia , Admire , East Topeka , and West Lawrence . Law enforcement is provided by a separate Turnpike Division of the Kansas Highway Patrol . Motorists needing assistance can use a roadside assistance hotline by dialing * KTA ( * 582 ) on a mobile phone . Statewide weather and traffic conditions can be accessed by dialing 511 . KTA also provides weather and traffic information on their website . The original service areas were spaced 45 miles ( 72 km ) apart . 
 There are six service areas located along the highway : 
 The Belle Plaine service area ( mile 26 ) opened on July 24 , 2003 , replacing a previous structure at the site that had been destroyed by a grease fire . It contains a 24 @-@ hour gas station and convenience store , a fast food restaurant , a weather kiosk , a Kansas Travel Information Center , and a gift shop . 
 The Towanda service area ( mile 65 ) provides a 24 @-@ hour gas station and convenience store , a fast food restaurant , and a weather kiosk . 
 The Matfield Green service area ( mile 97 ) shares the design of the Towanda service area , and also provides a 24 @-@ hour gas station and convenience store , a fast food restaurant , and a weather kiosk . The service area at Matfield Green also contains a 175 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 16 @.@ 3 m2 ) memorial to Notre Dame football coach Knute Rockne , who died in a 1931 plane crash near Bazaar , Kansas , a few miles north of the service area . 
 The Emporia service area ( mile 132 ) , like the two service areas to the south , includes a 24 @-@ hour gas station and convenience store and a fast food restaurant . Additionally , the facility provides an outdoor exercise area and playground for children . 
 The Topeka service area ( mile 188 ) opened in May 2002 . This service plaza features a choice of five restaurants ( one of which is open 24 hours ) , as well as a gift shop and a 24 @-@ hour gas station and convenience store . Prior to this plaza 's opening , a service area was located in the median between exits 182 and 183 . It closed in May 2002 when the present Topeka Service Area opened . 
 The Lawrence service area ( mile 209 ) consists of a 24 @-@ hour gas station and convenience store , in addition to a 24 @-@ hour fast food restaurant . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 = Myōjin Yahiko = 
 Myōjin Yahiko ( <unk> <unk> ) , known as Yahiko Myojin in the Media Blasters English @-@ language dub and Yoshi Myojin in the English Sony Samurai X dub , is a fictional character from the Rurouni Kenshin manga and anime series authored by Nobuhiro Watsuki . The character of Yahiko is based on the author 's childhood experiences practicing kendo ; since Watsuki 's experienced frustration during kendo classes , the author wrote Yahiko as experiencing frustration with his kendo skills . Watsuki liked Yahiko , and while writing the manga , he began to develop the character so that readers would enjoy him . 
 The fictional setting takes place during the pre @-@ Meiji period of Japan . Yahiko is an orphan from a samurai family who was forced to work as a thief to repay the debt he had presumably owed , as his parents died before they could repay it . When he is rescued by the main character of the story Himura Kenshin , he decides that he will grow up to be just like Kenshin . But because of his strong beliefs , Kenshin is no longer teaching the sword style he had learned . Therefore , Kenshin arranges for Yahiko to be trained by Kamiya Kaoru , the teacher of the Kamiya Kasshin @-@ ryū ( 神谷活心流 , lit . " Gods ' Valley Alive Heart Style " ) . As the series progresses , Yahiko becomes skilled at swordsmanship and faces many opponents . 
 Yahiko appears in the featured movie of the series , as well as other media relating to the franchise , including a wide range of electronic games and an original video animations ( OVAs ) series . His character has been very popular with readers from Rurouni Kenshin , ranking near the top of the series ' popularity polls . His character is featured in various types of merchandising developed for the series , such as figurines and key @-@ chains . Several publications have commented on his character . While he was initially criticized for his lack of action in the plot , his further development in the series has been praised . 
 = = Creation and conception = = 
 Nobuhiro Watsuki , creator of Rurouni Kenshin , says that he used no particular logic when drawing Yahiko except for the " defiant " eyes and " <unk> " hair . ( Watsuki describes these traits as " a must " in a shōnen comic . ) Watsuki enjoyed practicing kendo " almost as much as drawing manga " . To create Yahiko , Watsuki drew on his emotions from junior high school . He has described himself then as " weak " and " an embarrassment to my 183 centimeters of height " ( 183 centimeters is equivalent to 6 feet ) . He says he was a member of the kendo starting squad only because the school suspended another student originally intended to be a starter . However , he failed to win in a league tournament , experienced frustration and felt he was " awful " despite his desire to succeed ; he yearned to improve his kendo skills . As an " outlet " for Watsuki 's kendo emotions , Yahiko " knows a pain that hero @-@ types like Himura Kenshin and Sagara Sanosuke can never know " . As Watsuki further developed the story , Yahiko becomes a comedic character . Watsuki wanted to draw Yahiko in a way that readers could envision him as being a " great " swordsman five to ten years later . 
 During the last story arc from the manga , the story takes a darker tone than those from other shōnen series published by Shueisha . As the series was aimed at teenagers , Watsuki made Yahiko the main character during the time when Kenshin thought that Kamiya Kaoru was dead ; his role was to serve as the identifying character for readers . However , the author found this hard to do , as the more time Kenshin was unwilling to continue to live , the worse Yahiko felt , leaving Watsuki a more negative feeling concerning the story . By the end of the series as Yahiko becomes a teenager , Watsuki had redesigned his appearance . He wanted Yahiko to impress manga readers so that he could be a protagonist for a possible series sequel . He said this goal influenced his design of Yahiko , with Kenshin 's physical appearance as well as Sanosuke 's personality . He added Sanosuke 's kanji of " evil " ( <unk> , aku ) to the back of his clothes , and was pleased that various readers recognized it . Although he suggested he was not going to make a sequel , he said the main characters would be Yahiko , Sanjō Tsubame and Tsukayama <unk> . Watsuki thought about writing a story in which Yahiko and Tsubame would have a son , Myōjin Shinya , who would become a skilled swordsman . 
 In the 20th volume from the Rurouni Kenshin kanzenban edition , Watsuki again redesigned Yahiko 's appearance to show how he would appear at that time . His hair was not as spiky as it was originally , and he had new clothes . He wore a dark jacket , a white short @-@ sleeved T @-@ shirt and short trousers . He did not have socks under his sandals and he had bandages on his hands in order hold a swords . He had two swords — a shinai and a katana — with the latter tied on his back . 
 In the anime adaptation of Rurouni Kenshin , Watsuki 's designs were combined with the voice talents of <unk> Tominaga , a voice actress . In producing the English dub version of the series , Media Blasters chose Wendee Lee to voice Yahiko , but she was credited as Elyse Floyd . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In Rurouni Kenshin = = = 
 Born January 1869 in Tokyo , Yahiko is arrogant , cheeky , bad @-@ mannered and a user of profanity ; he has already bestowed upon himself the title " Tokyo Samurai " , as his father was a samurai who died during the Battle of Ueno in the Boshin War , slain at the <unk> Temple . Because Yahiko respected his parents , he becomes a thief before the start of the series , to pay back their debt . Yahiko first appears trying to rob Kenshin , who stops him but lets him go . As his yakuza bosses are about to beat him to death for his desire to quit , Kenshin arrives to save him and take him to Kaoru 's dojo to learn swordsmanship . Yahiko 's dream is to be as strong as Kenshin so he will be able to protect himself and the people he loves . Despite his young age and his short time of training , as the series continues Kenshin allows Yahiko to fight with him , noting that he is too mature for his age . He becomes a witness to many of Kenshin 's later battles to the point which Yahiko becomes adept at imitating some of Kenshin 's Hiten Mitsurugi @-@ ryū ( <unk> , lit . " Flying Heaven Honorable Sword Style " ) techniques , combining them to perform many other powerful sword techniques . Yahiko also learns the principles of Kamiya Kasshin @-@ ryū ( 神谷活心流 , lit . " Gods ' Valley Alive Heart Style " ) , which matches Kenshin 's ideal of saving lives . When Kenshin goes to Kyoto to fight Shishio Makoto who wanted to conquer Japan , Yahiko accompanies Kaoru to find and aid Kenshin . While Kenshin goes to have his final fight against Shishio , he stays in Kyoto to defend their base , a hotel named Aoi @-@ ya , from Shishio 's forces along with Kaoru and the <unk> . They are successful in doing it , and Yahiko manages to defeat one of Shishio 's strongest soldiers , <unk> . 
 Back in Tokyo after Shishio 's defeat , Yahiko notices Yukishiro Enishi 's revenge plot against Kenshin . Sensing his own inability to help , he trains much harder to learn the two succession techniques in Kamiya Kasshin @-@ ryū . Such moves allow him to block an opponent 's attack and then hit him with his weapon . He successfully learns both of this techniques and becomes so adept at using them , that Yahiko starts performing several variations . He uses these moves against one of Enishi 's partners Otowa <unk> and defeats him . While Yahiko rests from to his injuries , Kaoru is kidnapped by Enishi , and Yahiko and his friends start searching for her . When another of Enishi 's comrades , <unk> Hyōgo escapes from jail and goes on a rampage , Yahiko stands up against him . However , he is not strong enough on his own to defeat him and Kenshin saves him at the last moment . After he and Kenshin recover from their fight injuries , they go to rescue Kaoru from Enishi . While on his island fortress , Yahiko defeats one of the four bodyguards from Enishi 's partner , <unk> , and witnesses Kenshin 's fight against Enishi , which Kenshin wins . Five years later , he is the acting instructor at the Kamiya Kasshin @-@ ryū dojo . One day Kenshin calls him to test his skills ; when he lands a hit on Kenshin , he gives Yahiko his own reverse @-@ blade sword as a sign that he has become a true samurai . 
 = = = In other media = = = 
 In Rurouni , Meiji Swordsman Romantic Story , he is known as Kamiya Yahiko ( <unk> <unk> ) and is the brother of <unk> Megumi and Kaoru . Yahiko also appears in all of the Rurouni Kenshin video games , including the crossover game Jump Ultimate Stars . After the manga serialization ended , Watsuki authored one @-@ shot chapter from the series in which Yahiko goes to take care from the people of dojo , but ends confronting a former soldier from Shishio who takes as hostages the students from the dojo . In Samurai X The Motion Picture , Yahiko joins the samurai Takimi Shigure 's group in their attempt to overthrow the Meiji Government , but Shigure later knocks Yahiko out to make him stay out of danger . In Samurai X : Reflection , set various years after the manga 's end , a now adult Yahiko lives with Sanjō Tsubame , a childhood friend he met works at a restaurant where both worked together . He starts taking care of Kaoru when she suffers from an illness while Kenshin went to assist people injured in wars . Due to Kaoru 's suffering , Yahiko goes to Kyoto to request Kenshin and Kaoru 's son , Himura Kenji , to accompany his mother . In order to make him accept , both have a duel , and Yahiko wins . 
 In the reboot Rurouni Kenshin : Restoration , he works for Takeda Kanryu . As Kanryu plans to kill Kaoru who is fighting for her dojo , Yahiko requests Kenshin 's help to save her . After Kanryu 's defeat , Yahiko stays in Kaoru 's dojo alongside her and Kenshin . 
 Yahiko was featured in the live action film portrayed by <unk> Tanaka and in the sequel portrayed by Kaito <unk> . He appears as the only student in Kaoru 's dojo , instead of starting as a thief from the streets in the original series . Also , in the film , he doesn 't join Kenshin and Sanosuke in rescuing Megumi from <unk> 's mansion as he does in the manga . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The character from Yahiko has been well received by manga readers , having consistently placed highly in the Weekly Shōnen Jump popularity polls of the series , usually in the top ten characters and once taking third place . A plethora of merchandise have been released in Yahiko 's image , including key @-@ chains wall scrolls , and action figures in both his child and teenager appearances . In an interview with <unk> Tominaga , the voice actress for the character , has said that she was a bit afraid when performing the voice of Yahiko in the OVAs since the character was now an adult , but she ended up happy with her performance . Watsuki described Minami Takayama , the CD voice actor , as having " a lot of energy " and as being a " great fit " for Yahiko . 
 Various publications for manga , anime and other media have provided acclaim and criticism of Yahiko 's character . While reviewing the volume 8 from the manga , Mania Entertainment writer Megan Lavey applauded the way Yahiko starts acting much stronger after Kenshin 's departure to Kyoto and noted that , along with the other characters starring in the volume , he is seen more in @-@ depth . While reviewing volume 15 , Lavey praised Yahiko 's development during the series as he becomes a good fighter and his courage shows a remarkable potential to become a powerful swordsman . However , Carlos Ross from T.H.E.M. Anime Reviews criticized Yahiko for being " a bit annoying " during the start of the series but noted that he has his enjoyable moments . His design in the OVA series has drawn acclaim as one of the few to be well translated from his original manga design by Mike Crandol from Anime News Network . In the second review from the OVA , Crandol liked that Yahiko appeared several times in contrast to the previous OVA in which he was " written out " so that the story would focus more in Kamiya Kaoru and Kenshin 's relationship . He also noted his battle against Himura Kenji to be very entertaining , but not as much as the previous fight which was between Kenshin and Yukishiro Enishi . 
 = Francis Birch ( geophysicist ) = 
 Francis Birch ( August 22 , 1903 – January 30 , 1992 ) was an American geophysicist . He is considered one of the founders of solid Earth geophysics . He is also known for his part in the atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki . 
 During World War II , Birch participated in the Manhattan Project , working on the design and development of the gun @-@ type nuclear weapon known as Little Boy . He oversaw its manufacture , and went to Tinian to supervise its assembly and loading into Enola Gay , the Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress tasked with dropping the bomb . 
 A graduate of Harvard University , Birch began working on geophysics as a research assistant . He subsequently spent his entire career at Harvard working in the field , becoming an Associate Professor of Geology in 1943 , a professor in 1946 , and Sturgis Hooper Professor of Geology in 1949 , and professor emeritus in 1974 . 
 Birch published over 100 papers . He developed what is now known as the Birch @-@ Murnaghan equation of state in 1947 . In 1952 he demonstrated that Earth 's mantle is chiefly composed of silicate minerals , with an inner and outer core of molten iron . In two 1961 papers on compressional wave velocities , he established what is now called Birch 's law . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Albert Francis Birch was born in Washington , D.C. , on August 22 , 1903 , the son of George Albert Birch , who was involved in banking and real estate , and Mary <unk> Birch , a church choir singer and soloist at St. Matthew 's Cathedral in Washington , D.C. He had three younger brothers : David , who became a banker ; John , who became a diplomat ; and Robert , who became a songwriter . He was educated at Washington , D.C. , schools , and Western High School , where he joined the High School Cadets in 1916 . 
 In 1920 Birch entered Harvard University on a scholarship . While there he served in Harvard 's Reserve Officers ' Training Corps Field Artillery Battalion . He graduated magna cum laude in 1924 , and received his bachelor of science ( S.B. ) degree in electrical engineering . 
 Birch went to work in the Engineering Department of the New York Telephone Company . He applied for and received an American Field Service Fellowship in 1926 , which he used to travel to Strasbourg , and study at the University of Strasbourg 's Institut de Physique under the tutelage of Pierre Weiss . There , he wrote or co @-@ wrote four papers , in French , on topics such as the paramagnetic properties of potassium cyanide , and the magnetic moment of Cu + + ions . 
 On returning to the United States in 1928 , Birch went back to Harvard to pursue physics . He was awarded his master of arts ( A.M. ) degree in 1929 , and then commenced work on his 1932 doctor of philosophy ( Ph.D. ) degree under the supervision of Percy Bridgman , who would receive the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1946 . For his thesis , Birch measured the vapor @-@ liquid critical point of mercury . He determined this as 1460 ± 20 ° C and 1640 ± 50 kg / cm2 , results he published in 1932 in the Physical Review . 
 Around this time , there was an increased interest in geophysics at Harvard University , and Reginald Aldworth Daly established a Committee for Experimental Geology and Geophysics that included Bridgman , astronomer Harlow Shapley , geologists Louis Caryl Graton and D. H. McLaughlin and chemist G. P. Baxter . William Zisman , another one of Bridgman 's Ph.D. students , was hired as the committee 's research associate , but , having little interest in the study of rocks , he resigned in 1932 . The position was then offered to Birch , who had little interest or experience in geology either , but with the advent of the Great Depression , jobs were hard to find , and he accepted . 
 On July 15 , 1933 , Birch married Barbara Channing , a Bryn Mawr College alumna , and a collateral descendant of the theologian William Ellery Channing . They had three children : Anne <unk> , Francis ( Frank ) Sylvanus and Mary Narcissa . Frank later became a professor of geophysics at the University of New Hampshire . 
 = = World War II = = 
 In 1942 , during World War II , Birch took a leave of absence from Harvard , in order to work at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Radiation Laboratory , which was developing radar . He worked on the proximity fuze , a radar @-@ triggered fuze that would explode a shell in the proximity of a target . The following year he accepted a commission in the United States Navy as a lieutenant commander , and was posted to the Bureau of Ships in Washington , D.C. 
 Later that year he was assigned to the Manhattan Project , and moved with his family to Los Alamos , New Mexico . There he joined the Los Alamos Laboratory 's Ordnance ( O ) Division , which was under the command of another Naval officer , Captain William S. Parsons . Initially the goal of the O Division was to design a gun @-@ type nuclear weapon known as Thin Man . This proved to be impractical due to contamination of the reactor @-@ bred plutonium with plutonium @-@ 240 , and in February 1944 , the Division switched its attention to the development of the Little Boy , a smaller device using uranium @-@ 235 . Birch used unenriched uranium to create scale models and later full @-@ scale mock @-@ ups of the device . 
 Birch supervised the manufacture of the Little Boy , and went to Tinian to supervise its assembly and loading it onto Enola Gay , the Boeing B @-@ 29 Superfortress tasked with dropping the bomb . He devised the ' double plug ' system that allowed for actually arming the bomb after Enola Gay took off so that if it crashed , there would not be a nuclear explosion . He was awarded the Legion of Merit . His citation read : 
 for exceptionally meritorious conduct in the performance of outstanding services to the Government of the United States in connection with the development of the greatest military weapon of all time , the atomic bomb . His initial assignment was the instrumentation of laboratory and field tests . He carried out this assignment in such outstanding fashion that he was placed in charge of the engineering and development of the first atomic bomb . He carried out this assignment with outstanding judgment and skill , and finally , went with the bomb to the advanced base where he insured , by his care and leadership , that the bomb was adequately prepared in every respect . Commander Birch 's engineering ability , understanding of all principles involved , professional skill and devotion to duty throughout the development and delivery of the atomic bomb were outstanding and were in keeping with the highest traditions of the United States Naval Service . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 Birch returned to Harvard after the war ended , having been promoted to Associate Professor of Geology in 1943 while he was away . He would remain at Harvard for the rest of his career , becoming a professor in 1946 , and Sturgis Hooper Professor of Geology in 1949 , and professor emeritus in 1974 . Professor Birch published over 100 papers . 
 In 1947 , he adapted the isothermal Murnaghan equation of state , which had been developed for infinitesimal strain , for <unk> finite strain , developing what is now known as the Birch @-@ Murnaghan equation of state . 
 Albert Francis Birch is known for his experimental work on the properties of Earth @-@ forming minerals at high pressure and temperature , in 1952 he published a well @-@ known paper in the Journal of Geophysical Research , where he demonstrated that the mantle is chiefly composed of silicate minerals , the upper and lower mantle are separated by a thin transition zone associated with silicate phase transitions , and the inner and outer core are alloys of crystalline and molten iron . His conclusions are still accepted as correct today . The most famous portion of the paper , however , is a humorous footnote he included in the introduction : 
 <unk> readers should take warning that ordinary language undergoes modification to a high @-@ pressure form when applied to the interior of the Earth . A few examples of equivalents follow : 
 In 1961 , Birch published two papers on compressional wave velocities establishing a linear relation of the compressional wave velocity Vp of rocks and minerals of a constant average atomic weight <formula> with density <formula> as : 
 <formula> . 
 This relationship became known as Birch 's law . Birch was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 1950 , and served as the president of the Geological Society of America in 1963 and 1964 . He received numerous honors in his career , including the Geological Society of America 's Arthur L. Day Medal on 1950 and Penrose Medal in 1969 , the American Geophysical Union 's William Bowie Medal in 1960 , the National Medal of Science from President Lyndon Johnson in 1967 , the <unk> Prize ( shared with Sir Edward Bullard ) in 1968 , the Gold Medal of the Royal Astronomical Society in 1973 , and the International Association for the Advancement of High Pressure Research 's Bridgman Medal in 1983 . Since 1992 , the American Geophysical Union 's <unk> section has sponsored a Francis Birch Lecture , given at its annual meeting by a noted researcher in this field . 
 Birch died of prostate cancer at his home in Cambridge , Massachusetts , on January 30 , 1992 . He was survived by wife Barbara , his three children and his three brothers . His papers are in the Harvard University Archives . 
 = Ir Ovot = 
 Ir Ovot ( Hebrew : <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , Ir <unk> ; lit . City of Oboth ) , was an agricultural cooperative ( kibbutz ) in Israel 1967 – 1980s , located in the northeastern Negev 's Arava region , and still refers to a small , group of homes near New Ein Hatzeva . 
 It is the site of an extensive archaeological complex known as Tamar Fortress or <unk> Fortress ( Hebrew : <unk> <unk> ) which dates to the 10th century BCE ( United Monarchy / First Temple period ) . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Ir Ovot is located south of the Dead Sea and southeast of Dimona in the Arabah valley , an arid plain located below the Negev plateau and south of the Jordan Rift Valley within the larger Great Rift Valley . The settlement abuts the Ein Hatzeva bloc of agricultural villages on the opposite side of Highway 90 near the Jordanian border , and is within the boundaries of the Arava Regional Council . 
 = = = History of the kibbutz and modern village = = = 
 Originally the site of the Ein <unk> police station during the British Mandate of Palestine , the location was captured by the Israel Defense Forces in 1948 . The village of Ir Ovot was founded in 1967 , in an area deserted apart from a small military base and roadside cafe on the way to Eilat . It was founded by a group of American Jews led by former law student and court clerk Simcha <unk> , a Jew from Miami , Florida 
 = = History of the Hatzeva Fortress = = 
 First observed and documented by Alois Musil in 1902 , the Roman fortress was identified on Fritz Frank 's 1932 travels in the region . In 1934 , Nelson <unk> identified the location as a Nabatæan caravanserai coopted by the Romans , but the site 's true significance was noted by Benjamin Mazar and Michael Avi @-@ Yonah 's 1950 discovery of sherds from the First Temple period . In the 1960s , it was first suggested by <unk> Aharoni that the site might be the same as Tamar of the Book of Ezekiel 47 : 19 and 48 : 28 , and Eusebius of Caesarea 's Tamara . 
 The first salvage excavation took place in 1972 under Aharoni and Rudolph Cohen 's direction , but much of the work was carried out by Cohen , Yigal Yisrael , and recently Tali Erickson @-@ Gini , following the 1986 involvement of " <unk> Rose " in partnership with the Israel Antiquities Authority , Jewish National Fund and Tamar Regional Council . Known in addition to Tamar as the Hatzeva Fortress , or alternatively identified with Solomon 's Tadmor , the site has six strata which indicate Early Israelite , Nabatæan , Edomite , Roman , and Early Arab occupations . It includes a 1 @,@ 000 @-@ year @-@ old shade tree , and the largest <unk> spina @-@ <unk> in Israel . 
 The area was used for training crews in site conservation before their work on the Masada site . 
 = = = 10th century BCE = = = 
 The earliest remains , dating to the Solomonic period of the 10th century BCE , resembles other contemporary Negev plateau fortresses and included period <unk> pottery . Ranging from tenth to sixth centuries BCE , <unk> was also uncovered at Tel Kadesh <unk> and Tel el @-@ <unk> ; it is probable that this level was destroyed by Pharaoh <unk> like other sites of that period . 
 = = = 9th – 8th century BCE = = = 
 The second layer consists of a very large Iron Age fortification surrounded by a casemate wall . This First Temple period building of the Kingdom of Judah is almost as large as contemporary cities such as Tel Be 'er Sheva , and is four times larger than other fortified Negev cities at 10 @,@ 000 square metres . 
 Excavation revealed a four @-@ chambered , north @-@ facing gate complex near the northeastern corner and three storerooms , a pair of granaries , a moat and a defensive wall . The city was possibly constructed by King <unk> of Judah , an 8th @-@ century BCE ruler who fortified the Judean kingdom and went to war with neighbouring Edom in the northern Arabah , or his son Uzziah whose construction of towers in the desert is mentioned by the second Book of Chronicles . 
 = = = 7th – 6th century BCE = = = 
 A third fortress from the Late First Temple period from the 7th – 6th centuries BCE was found , though because only the walls ' foundations remain , reconstructing the floor plan has been difficult . However , an eastern wall with two towers set 14 metres ( 46 ft ) apart was reconstructed . 
 A pit full of smashed clay and stone , which were reassembled into 74 cultic vessels , was also found , indicating a probable Edomite shrine . <unk> , chalices , altars and human figurines were unearthed outside the fortress wall on the site 's northern edge in 1993 , near the foundations of a small building that seems to have been a shrine . Some of the sherds resemble vessels found in an Edomite shrine at Horvat <unk> , about 45 kilometres ( 28 mi ) to the northwest . A circular stone stamp seal discovered inside the fortress , picturing two men in long robes on either side of an altar , provides another indicator of Edomite origin . The pit recoveries dating to the end of the seventh century could possibly have been destroyed in the campaign of religious reforms spearheaded by King Josiah mentioned in Book of Kings II . 
 = = = 1st – 4th century CE = = = 
 Evidence of Roman administrative and military presence is plentiful , and the junction of the east – west Incense Road to Gaza and the north – south route to the Red Sea probably made it an economically valuable frontier outpost . 
 The Roman fortress ' layout is similar to other imperial outposts in the region . An official Latin inscription that dates several area strongholds to the 3rd century CE was discovered on a large limestone slab at nearby <unk> bears . This site was the largest in the area at 46 square metres ( 495 sq ft ) , and included four projecting towers on the fortress ' corners . Artefacts tell of probably destruction in the middle of the fourth century CE , perhaps by a 344 earthquake , though it was promptly rebuilt with improved , stone flooring and again destroyed two decades later , probably from an earthquake in 363 . 
 A thermæ and caravanserai of the same period were also found , and is similar to the thermæ at Ashkelon and others in the nearby country . A row of rooms from an earlier , 1st century BCE to 1st century CE fortress revealed artefacts pointing to a Nabatæan occupation predating Roman annexation . Coins bearing the likeness of Nabatæan kings were found , along with storage jars and other vessels . 
 = = = 7th – 8th century CE = = = 
 A building fragment stratum from the Early Arab period was uncovered immediately beneath the ground surface , along with evidence of a farm located above the Roman thermæ 's remains and below the modern structures . 
 = Jos Buttler = 
 Joseph Charles " Jos " Buttler ( born 8 September 1990 ) is an English cricketer who plays for Lancashire County Cricket Club and England . He is a right @-@ handed batsman who also plays as a wicket @-@ keeper and is the current Vice @-@ Captain of the England ODI team . He also captained single T20I on 27 November 2015 against Pakistan , where England won the match by 3 runs . 
 Buttler enjoyed a prolific cricket record while at school , sharing a record @-@ breaking opening partnership while at King 's College , Taunton in 2008 , and the following season his school lost only one of seventeen matches under his captaincy , and he was named 2010 Young Wisden Schools Cricketer of the Year . He made his Somerset first @-@ team debut in 2009 . His performances led him to be selected to play for England at Under @-@ 19 level , touring Bangladesh , and then travelling to New Zealand for the 2010 Under @-@ 19 Cricket World Cup . 
 = = Domestic career = = 
 = = = Early life and career = = = 
 Buttler played extensively for Somerset 's youth teams , appearing at Under @-@ 13 , Under @-@ 15 and Under @-@ 17 level . He made his senior club cricket debut for Cheddar before moving to Glastonbury in the 2006 season , aged just 15 , taking three catches and fifteen runs as wicket @-@ keeper . Later in the same season , he made his first appearance for Somerset Second XI , scoring 71 in the second @-@ innings , and taking six catches in the three @-@ day match against Nottinghamshire Second XI . Playing for King 's College , Taunton , he finished the 2006 season with the school 's leading batting average , scoring 447 runs at an average of 49 @.@ 66 . The following season he played regularly for Glastonbury in the West of England Premier League , and for Somerset Under @-@ 17s , for whom he scored two centuries ; an unbeaten 119 during a two @-@ day match against Surrey Under @-@ 17s , and 110 against Sussex Under @-@ 17s . He once again led the batting averages for King 's College , with his 358 runs coming at 51 @.@ 14 . 
 The highlight of his school career came in April 2008 , when he scored 227 not out during a record @-@ breaking opening stand in a 50 @-@ over national schools game , adding 340 with Alex Barrow . He captained King 's during the 2008 season , and improved on his batting totals from the previous two years , scoring 851 runs , over 250 more than any other member of the team . His batting average of 94 @.@ 55 was the sixth highest amongst all school 's batsmen reported in Wisden , while his high @-@ score of 227 * was the highest score they recorded . During that 2008 season , Buttler also played for Somerset Second XI . With captain Carl Gazzard keeping wicket in the majority of these matches , Buttler played purely as a batsman , although in his final match of the season for the team , he kept wicket and took six catches in the first @-@ innings against Worcestershire Second XI . In the previous match , against Hampshire Second XI , Buttler had made 140 batting from number four . 
 He made his first @-@ class debut for Somerset in September 2009 , replacing the injured Justin Langer for the County Championship match against Lancashire , scoring 30 in his only innings . He retained his place in the team for the following Pro40 match against Hampshire , making his List A debut , although he was not required to bat . Selected as part of the Somerset squad for the 2009 Champions League Twenty20 , Buttler made his debut in the 20 @-@ over format of the game in Somerset 's final match of the league stage , remaining six not out at the close of the innings . Buttler again captained King 's in 2009 , and in the seventeen matches under his leadership they lost only once , and also won the Western School Twenty20 competition . Coupled with his 554 runs for the school at an average of 61 @.@ 55 , and his performances for Somerset , he was named 2010 Young Wisden Schools Cricketer of the Year . 
 = = = First @-@ team opportunity = = = 
 When Craig Kieswetter was called up into the England one @-@ day side in 2010 , Buttler was given the chance of a prolonged run in Somerset 's first team . Brian Rose , Somerset 's Director of Cricket , chose not to bring in an experienced keeper to deputise , explaining that Kieswetter had been in a similar position three years earlier , and that he had good reports of Buttler 's ability . In his first match of the 2010 season , Buttler remained 22 not out at the close of Somerset 's innings , posting his first runs in List A cricket , and he followed this up with two catches to help Somerset beat Glamorgan in their opening Clydesdale Bank 40 fixture . He made his maiden first @-@ class century in his fourth County Championship match , scoring 144 runs in an innings characterised by " dogged determination and [ a ] decent range of shots " . In his next match , he scored his debut List A half @-@ century against Sussex . Buttler joined James Hildreth at the crease with Somerset at 109 / 4 , requiring 183 more runs to win off 129 balls . The pair put on a partnership of 158 runs " to turn the game on its head " , with Buttler making 69 in 53 balls . In doing so , they set a new record partnership for the fifth @-@ wicket against Sussex . His continued batting form , which also saw him make scores of 52 and 31 * in a County Championship match against Yorkshire , saw him retain his place in the Somerset team upon Kieswetter 's return . 
 Buttler was named man of the match in Somerset 's Friends Provident T20 semi @-@ final victory over Nottinghamshire at the Rose Bowl , hitting an unbeaten 55 off 23 balls in a partnership of 75 with Kieron Pollard . 
 At the end of the 2013 English cricket season , Somerset announced that Buttler would be leaving the county at the end of his contract . On 30 September 2013 , Lancashire County Cricket Club announced they had signed Buttler after he left Somerset . He extended his stay with Lancashire County Cricket Club announcing a new three year contract on the 27th May 2016 
 = = International career = = 
 Buttler 's first taste of international cricket came in July 2008 , when he represented England Under @-@ 17s in two warm @-@ up matches against New Zealand Under @-@ 19s . Batting at number five , he scored a rapid 77 not out in the 50 @-@ over contest , hitting 11 fours and 2 sixes during the 49 deliveries he faced . He also played in the two @-@ day match between the two teams , scoring 45 in the first @-@ innings as the match was drawn . In 2009 , Buttler played four matches for England Under @-@ 18s , two each against Scotland A and Scotland Development XI . He scored 103 not out in the first of these matches , and made starts in each of the following matches , reaching double figures on each occasion , but not scoring higher than 28 . Two months later , Buttler made his England Under @-@ 19 debut , appearing in the first Twenty20 against Bangladesh Under @-@ 19s . Playing as a specialist batsman , he scored 33 runs off 17 balls as England won by five wickets . 
 During the 2009 – 10 English winter , Buttler toured with the England Under @-@ 19 team . He joined up with the squad in Bangladesh following Somerset 's elimination from the Champions League Twenty20 for the seven @-@ match youth ODI series . As with his previous appearance for the Under @-@ 19s , Buttler played as a specialist batsman , but failed to make a significant impact until the final match when he scored 42 runs , though Bangladesh still won the match to claim the series 5 – 2 . He remained with the team for the Under @-@ 19 World Cup , where he played all but one of England 's six matches , keeping wicket in three of them . He scored 91 runs in three innings , with a top @-@ score of 78 against India in the fifth @-@ place play @-@ off semi @-@ final . His batting average of 30 @.@ 33 ranked him fifth on the England team . 
 = = = 2011 India , West Indies and Pakistan = = = 
 In 2011 , he was called up to the England Twenty20 International squad for the match against India , but was not required to bat in a six wicket England victory . 
 Buttler was again called up to the Twenty20 International squad for the two matches against the West Indies in September 2011 , Buttler again was not required to bat in the first match . The second match of the series saw Buttler score just 13 runs as England lost by 25 runs . 
 In September 2011 , Buttler was called up to the Twenty20 International squad for the match against India in the return series. he was not required to bat as England won by six wickets . He was included in the squad to play Pakistan and played in all three games , although he only scored 17 runs in the entire series , which England won 2 @-@ 1 . He played in the 7 wicket win over the West Indies . 
 During the winter of 2011 , Buttler was called into the England winter performance programme for a batting and wicket @-@ keeping focussed programme in India , he was also called up for the England Lions tour of Bangladesh . The Lions lost the ODI series 3 – 2 with Buttler topping the Lions runs and averages charts with 161 runs at and average of 53 @.@ 66 and also taking the most catches 6 and most stumpings 3 . Following his impressive individual performances in Bangladesh Buttler was called up for the Lions tour of Sri Lanka . 
 He was included in the squad to play Pakistan and played in all three games , although he only scored 17 runs in the entire series , which England won 2 @-@ 1 . He played in the 7 wicket win over the West Indies . 
 = = = 2012 South Africa , T20 World Cup and India = = = 
 Buttler was called up to the England Twenty20 squad for the series against South Africa . In the final Edgbaston game , Buttler joined Somerset team mate Craig Kieswetter with England on 64 – 3 with only 16 balls remaining . The pair gave a brutal display of power hitting , raising the final score to 118 – 5 , with Buttler hitting 32 off one over from bowler Wayne Parnell ( including two no @-@ balls ) , the second most expensive over in International Twenty20 behind the 36 of Yuvraj Singh off of Stuart Broad in Durban in 2007 . 
 Buttler was selected in the England squad for the ICC T20 World Cup . After making 15 against Afghanistan , he made 11 against India . Although England lost to India they qualified for the Super Eights . He scored 5 not out against New Zealand as England won by six wickets . However , defeat in the next game against Sri Lanka , in which Buttler made 8 , meant that England was knocked out of the competition . 
 He was selected for the two T20 internationals against India , and was also given the responsibility of <unk> . He made 33 in the first match , although England lost by 5 wickets . He made an unbeaten 15 in the second match to guide England to a 6 wicket victory . Buttler made his ODI debut in 2012 against Pakistan , but was dismissed for a duck . 
 = = = 2013 New Zealand , Champions Trophy and Australia = = = 
 He played in two further games against India but again failed to make an impression , scoring 14 runs in his only innings . He was selected as wicket keeper for the ODI series against New Zealand , but again disappointed , scoring just 24 runs in the series . He did significantly better in the T20 series , making scores of 54 and an unbeaten 32 . His place looked in doubt when he only managed scores of 14 and 2 in the return series against New Zealand . However , on 5 June 2013 , Buttler scored 47 runs in just 16 balls in the 50 over match against New Zealand , coming at the end of the innings , the contribution proved vital in securing a 34 run victory for England . He made a quickfire 17 in the T20 series against New Zealand . 
 Buttler was involved in the 2013 IC Champions Trophy after being called up to the squad . However , in the first two group games he made just 1 run . In the final group game against New Zealand he made 14 as England qualified for the semifinals . Buttler did not bat in the semifinal against Sri Lanka which England won , and was out for a duck in the final against India . 
 Buttler showed good form in the first T20 International against Australia , making 27 , although he was out for a duck in the second match . Buttler was selected in the England ODI squad to face Australia in 2013 . In the second match of the series , Buttler made 75 , his highest ODI score and his first international fifty . In the fourth match , Butter hit an unbeaten 65 to guide England to victory and level the series 1 @-@ 1 . In the final match of the series . Buttler made 42 , making him one of England 's most consistent performers of the series . In the return series in Australia , Buttler made 34 in the first ODI and followed this up with 49 from 36 balls in the second . He helped England win the first match of the tour in the fourth ODI , hitting 71 from 43 balls . England lost all three of their T20 games , with Buttler making scores of 20 and 22 in the first two games . In the final match of the series , England were bowled out for just 84 , with Buttler scoring 8 . 
 = = = 2014 West Indies , T20 World Cup and Sri Lanka = = = 
 Buttler was selected on the One Day tour of the West Indies . After making scores of 12 and 0 , Buttler hit a magnificent 99 off just 64 balls to guide England to victory and hand them a 2 @-@ 1 series win . In the T20 series , Buttler could only manage 3 in the first game , but then hit 67 in the second match , although it was not enough to win the game . England won the final match before the World Cup , although Buttler could only manage 3 runs . 
 In the 2013 ICC T20 World Cup , Buttler made 32 in an opening defeat to New Zealand . England managed to chase down 190 against Sri Lanka to keep their hopes of qualification alive , although Buttler managed just 2 runs . In the must @-@ win match against South Africa , Buttler hit 34 but England fell three runs short of their target . England suffered further humiliation when they lost to the Netherlands , with Buttler making just 6 runs . 
 Buttler managed just 30 runs in the first two ODIs against Sri Lanka . Butler scored his maiden One Day International century against Sri Lanka at Lord 's on 31 May 2014 , in the fourth ODI . He scored it in 61 balls with nine fours and four sixes scoring the fastest century by any England batsman . He was controversially run out by <unk> Senanayake in the final match of the series after he backed up at the bowlers end . The incident proved controversial , with many England players saying the Sri Lankans did not play within the spirit of the game . 
 = = = 2014 India and Sri Lanka = = = 
 After Matt Prior stood down after injury on the 22 July 2014 , Buttler was called up for the England squad for the third Test against India . He made 85 from 83 balls on debut to help England win the match and level the series . In the next match he again batted well , making 70 to help set up an innings victory for England as they took a 2 @-@ 1 lead in the series . He made 45 in the final match of the series to help England win their third consecutive match and win the series 3 @-@ 1 . He also took 11 catches in the series following doubts about his wicket keeping capabilities . 
 In the opening match of the ODI series against India , Buttler could only make 2 . However , he performed better in the next match , making 42 . Despite this , England lost the match to go 2 @-@ 0 down in the series . After making 11 in the third match , which England again lost to go 3 @-@ 0 down in the series , Buttler performed better in the final match of the series , hitting 49 to help England win their first match of the series . In the only T20 match between the two sides , Buttler could only make 10 but England went on to win the match . 
 Buttler was selected for the ODI tour of Sri Lanka and played in the first two games , making scores of 21 and 7 as England lost the first two games . In the third ODI he guided England over the line with an unbeaten 55 . He made 15 in the next match , before hitting the winning runs in the fifth ODI to keep England in the series . In the game , Buttler got off to a decent start but was unable to make a big score , being dismissed for 22 . It was a similar story in the final game of the tour , with Buttler being dismissed for 23 as England lost the match and the series 5 @-@ 2 . 
 = = = 2015 Tri @-@ series = = = 
 In the opening game of the tri- series against Australia , Buttler made 28 but England lost the game . In the following match against India he was not needed to bat as England secured a comfortable win . In the match Buttler made four catches and also made a stumping . After making 25 in another defeat against Australia , Buttler made his first half century of the tournament against India , making 67 to help England win and qualify for the final . In the final Buttler made 17 but England lost to Australia yet again . 
 = = = 2015 World Cup = = = 
 Butler made just ten as England lost their opening match of the World Cup against Australia . In the following match he was dismissed for three as England were bowled out for just 123 against New Zealand , to lose their second consecutive match . He made 24 against Scotland as England won their first match of the tournament , but pundits argued he should have been moved up the order . This sentiment was repeated after he scored a brisk unbeaten 39 against Sri Lanka . However , England were unable to defend their score and Sri Lanka won the match by nine wickets . In their must win game against Bangladesh , Buttler scored 65 but was not able to get England over the line and they were eliminated from the competition . In the final game against Afghanistan Buttler was not need to bat as England secured a nine wicket win . 
 = = = 2015 West Indies and New Zealand = = = 
 Buttler was included in the squad that toured the West Indies , cementing his place as England 's first choice Test wicket @-@ keeper . In the first innings of the first Test he was dismissed for a duck , but then hit an unbeaten 59 in the second innings to help put England in a strong position . However , the West Indies batted out the match to secure a draw . In the second match Buttler made 13 in the first innings , and was not required to bat again as England secured a comprehensive nine wicket victory . In the third Test Buttler remained not out on three in the first innings as England 's tail collapsed . He was again left stranded in the second innings on 35 not out . England went on to lose the match as the West Indies chased down their target to win the match by five wickets and level the series at 1 @-@ 1 . 
 In the two @-@ Test series at home against New Zealand , Buttler made 67 in England 's first innings to help them recover to post 389 . He made 14 in the second innings as England went on to win the game to take a 1 @-@ 0 series lead . In the second Test he could only manage ten in the first innings , but did top score in England 's second innings with 73 . England went on to lose the game and the series was tied at 1 @-@ 1 . 
 Buttler continued in his role as wicket @-@ keeper in the five @-@ game ODI series against New Zealand . He started the series strongly , scoring 129 off only 77 balls and taking one catch as England won by 210 runs . Buttler made 41 and took one catch in England 's subsequent defeat by 13 runs ( D / L method ) in a very close match . He then had an unsuccessful third match , scoring only 13 and taking no catches as England lost again . In the fourth game he was not needed to bat as England secured a convincing seven wicket <unk> to level the series . Injury ruled Buttler out of the deciding match , which England won , and the only T20 match between the sides , which England also won . 
 = = = 2015 Ashes = = = 
 Buttler had a generally poor Ashes series with the bat . In the first Test he scored 27 in the first innings but was dismissed for just seven in England 's second innings . Despite this , England recorded a comfortable win . In the next Test England lost by 405 runs and Buttler failed to make an impression with the bat , scoring just 24 runs in the match . He scored nine in the first innings of the third Test and was not need to bat in the second innings as England secured an eight wicket win . In the fourth Test Buttler made 12 in the first innings as England won by an innings and 78 runs . Buttler only made one in England 's first innings of the final Test , but scored 42 in the his final innings of the series , which also proved to be his highest score of the series . England went on to lose the game but won the series 3 @-@ 2 . Buttler 's batting during the Ashes series was criticised by Boycott , saying " Jos Buttler is like a rabbit caught in the headlights of Ashes cricket . A seven @-@ year @-@ old schoolboy would have played better . He hasn 't made a run all series . He hasn 't shown any application whatsoever . It looks to me like his mind and confidence is shot for Test cricket - it 's pathetic . " 
 Buttler played in the only T20 between the two sides , scoring 11 as England won by 5 runs . Buttler appeared in the first two ODI games against Australia , before injury ruled him out of the rest of the series . England lost both games , with Buttler failing to make a significant score in either match , being dismissed for 0 and 4 . 
 = = = 2015 Pakistan = = = 
 Buttler played in the first Test against Pakistan , but struggled in both innings as the match ended in a draw . Buttler was promoted to opener in the second innings as England tried to chase down a score with little time left in the match , but Buttler was dismissed for 4 . In the second test Buttler was out for a duck in the first innings before making seven in the second innings , as England <unk> a defeat by 78 runs . After a poor run of from , Buttler was dropped for the third Test . 
 Buttler played in all four ODI matches against Pakistan . He struggled in the first game , scoring just one as England lost the opening match . However , after scoring eleven in the second match , Buttler hit an unbeaten 49 in the third ODI to send England on their way to a 6 wicket victory . He scored a fantastic unbeaten 116 in the final match of the series , helping England to score 355 @-@ 5 . Pakistan could not get near the victory target and lost by 95 runs , meaning England won the series 3 @-@ 1 . He played in two of the three T20Is , making scores of 33 and 2 as England won both games . 
 = = = 2015 / 16 South Africa = = = 
 Buttler played in the ODI series against South Africa , and he scored his second consecutive ODI hundred as he hit 105 in England ’ s score of 399 against the hosts , and England went on to win the match comfortably . He hit an unbeaten 48 in the second match as England went 2 @-@ 0 up in the series . However , Buttler then suffered a loss of form , scoring just one run in his final three innings of the series , and England went on to lose all three games to hand the series to South Africa 3 @-@ 2 . 
 = = = 2016 T20 World Cup = = = 
 In the T20 World Cup , Buttler made a score of 30 in the opening game defeat against the West Indies . He followed this up with 21 against South Africa as England chased down 230 to secure a historic win . He was out for just six against Afghanistan , although England won the match to keep their qualification hopes alive , and he then hit 66 against Sri Lanka to help England reach 171 @-@ 4 and qualify for the semi @-@ finals . In the semi @-@ final he hit an unbeaten 32 to help guide England to a seven wicket victory . England lost the final against the West Indies , with Buttler making 36 . 
 = = = 2016 Sri Lanka = = = 
 Buttler scored 93 in England 's first match against Sri Lanka , helping them tie the match . He did not bat in the second match as England won by ten wickets , and was also not able to bat in the third ODI , as rain ended England 's innings early and the match ended in a draw . He scored an unbeaten 17 in the fourth match of the series to help England over the line to record a six wicket victory , and he made 70 in the final match of the series to help England reach 324 and win the match by 122 runs . In the only T20I between the two sides , Buttler opened the batting and scored an unbeaten 73 to help England to an eight wicket victory . 
 = = Personality and style = = 
 A tall and strongly built cricketer , Buttler has an upright stance in the crease . During his century against Hampshire in 2010 , he " hit the ball hard and straight " , " moving his feet decisively , playing with his bat close to his body and selecting the right balls to attack " . After that innings , his Somerset captain Marcus Trescothick suggested that Buttler could challenge team @-@ mate Craig Kieswetter 's place in the England team . 
 With Kieswetter 's and Matt Prior 's retirements in 2015 , Buttler became the no.1 wicketkeeper for all forms of the game . However , due to Alec Stewart 's precedence of poor test averages as a wicketkeeper , and many other former <unk> having better test averages after being relieved of their <unk> duties ( Sangakkara , McCullum ) , there has been suggestions for Buttler to give up keeping for tests , with Sam Billings ( who has yet to make his test debut as of 10 June 2016 ) or Jonny Bairstow replacing him . Ironically , despite Buttler 's improved glove @-@ work , Bairstow replaced him for the third ODI for Australia 's English and Irish Tour due to his poor form with the bat throughout the Australian series . Bairstow eventually became the outright wicketkeeper for Tests in December 2015 for the series against South Africa . He was dropped from tests altogether in 2016 during Sri Lanka 's tour of England and Ireland , while Bairstow 's test centuries started piling up for county ( Yorkshire ) and country in 2016 , despite Bairstow 's problems with worse glove work and dropped catches . 
 = = Statistics = = 
 = = = Career Best Performances = = = 
 = = International centuries = = 
 = = = One Day International centuries = = = 
 = = International Recognition = = 
 2010 
 NBC Denis Compton Award 
 Young Wisden Schools Cricketer of the Year 
 2011 
 NBC Denis Compton Award 
 = = International Awards = = 
 = = = ODI awards = = = 
 = = = = Man of the Match award = = = = 
 = = = = Player of the series awards = = = = 
 = = = T20I awards = = = 
 = = = = Man of the Match award = = = = 
 = Unicorn ( spider ) = 
 Unicorn ( " one horn " , in Latin ) is a genus of goblin spiders ( family Oonopidae ) from South America , containing seven species that occur predominantly in high elevation , semi @-@ desert regions of Bolivia , Chile , and Argentina . Individuals are relatively large for goblin spiders , measuring up to 3 @.@ 0 mm ( 0 @.@ 12 in ) in body length . The genus name refers to a characteristic pointed projection between the eyes and jaws of males . In at least one species , broken @-@ off tips of the male pedipalps have been found within the genitalia of females , postulated as a means of sperm competition . Unicorn possesses several traits that suggest it is a relatively " primitive " member of the Oonopidae , and is classified with other similar , soft @-@ bodied goblin spiders in the subfamily <unk> . 
 = = Description = = 
 Species of Unicorn range from 2 @.@ 2 to 3 @.@ 0 mm in body length ( from tip of the cephalothorax to end of abdomen , excluding legs ) . The cephalothorax , yellow in color , ranges from 1 to 1 @.@ 2 mm long ( around 40 – 49 % of body length depending on species ) and often possesses a central grey patch with four lines radiating towards the eyes . The abdomen is white with dark chevron patterns on the dorsal surface , and in some species a pair of dark lines on the underside . The body is covered with a dense covering of long stiff hairs ( setae ) . The legs are long , slender , and yellow . There are six eyes , roughly equal in size , arranged in roughly triangular groups of three , with two eyes meeting in the middle , forming a wide " H " or bow @-@ tie pattern . Species of Unicorn are considered " soft @-@ bodied " , as the abdomen lacks the hardened plates that occur in many other goblin spiders . The abdomen possesses six spinnerets . 
 Males and females show some differences in morphology : male jaws ( chelicerae ) are longer and more slender than those of females ; the male palpal tibiae — the penultimate segment of the pedipalps — are enlarged compared to females ; and males alone possess a " clypeal horn " , a forward @-@ pointing projection of the clypeus surrounded by long stiff hairs , from which the genus name Unicorn ( " one horn " in Latin ) derives . 
 The copulatory bulb of males ( the sperm @-@ transferring organ at the tip of the pedipalps ) , terminates in a narrow , curving tip called an embolus , which in Unicorn bears a hook at its base and is accompanied by a similar curved extension called a translucent sclerite . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 Like most spiders , the pedipalps of mature males end in a bulb terminating in a thin , curved projection called an embolus , through which sperm is released during mating . Female U. catleyi have been observed with broken @-@ off embolus tips lodged in their genitalia . This has been hypothesized as a type of " sperm @-@ plug " or copulatory plug , where , by breaking off a piece of his anatomy ( a process known as genital mutilation or genital breakage ) , a male physically precludes other males from successfully mating with the female , one of many types of sperm competition in animals . An alternative to the sperm competition function is that genital mutilation might allow males to more rapidly escape and avoid being cannibalized after mating , although this function is thought to be unlikely in Unicorn since there are no significant size differences between sexes , and cannibalism is more common when females are much larger than males . Sperm plugs of various types , including gelatinous or waxy substances , have been observed in at least 41 spider families , and are generally thought to ensure paternity . U. <unk> is one of only few goblin spiders known or suspected to utilize sperm plugs . 
 = = Habitat = = 
 Species of Unicorn have mostly been found at elevations between 1 @,@ 000 to 4 @,@ 000 m ( 3 @,@ 300 to 13 @,@ 100 ft ) above sea level , many from semi @-@ desert regions . U. <unk> has been collected at 360 m ( 1 @,@ 180 ft ) in central Chile . The spiders are hard to detect in the field , and most species have been collected by pitfall trapping . They are uncommon in museum collections , and almost nothing is known about their natural history . 
 = = Species and distribution = = 
 The genus Unicorn was established in 1995 by Norman Platnick and Antônio Brescovit , to encompass five newly described species and one species , U. argentina , that had previously been described as a species of <unk> . A seventh species was described in 2010 . The type species of Unicorn is U. catleyi . Unicorn species occur in central and northern Chile , western Argentina , and Bolivia . 
 Unicorn argentina ( Mello @-@ Leitão , 1940 ) — Western Argentina 
 Unicorn catleyi Platnick & Brescovit , 1995 — Northern Chile and northwestern Argentina 
 Unicorn <unk> Platnick & Brescovit , 1995 — Chacabuco Province , central Chile 
 Unicorn <unk> Platnick & Brescovit , 1995 — La Paz Department , Bolivia 
 Unicorn <unk> González , <unk> & Cava , 2010 — Salta Province , northwestern Argentina 
 Unicorn <unk> Platnick & Brescovit , 1995 — <unk> Province , central Chile 
 Unicorn <unk> Platnick & Brescovit , 1995 — Antofagasta Province , northern Chile 
 = = Classification = = 
 Unicorn is a member of the family Oonopidae ( oonopids , or goblin spiders ) , which contains over 1 @,@ 500 species worldwide . Within oonopids , Unicorn is classified in the subfamily <unk> , which contains other soft @-@ bodied genera such as <unk> and <unk> . Due to certain features of the eyes and jaws that resemble those found in other families , and which are differently modified in many other oonopids , Platnick and Brescovit suggested Unicorn was among the most primitive or basal members of the Oonopidae , which was corroborated by a 2014 study that examined DNA similarities among the Oonopidae , finding that Unicorn and other <unk> diverged before almost all other oonopids . 
 = Common firecrest = 
 The common firecrest ( Regulus ignicapilla ) also known as the firecrest , is a very small passerine bird in the kinglet family . It breeds in most of temperate Europe and northwestern Africa , and is partially migratory , with birds from central Europe wintering to the south and west of their breeding range . Firecrests in the Balearic Islands and north Africa are widely recognised as a separate subspecies , but the population on Madeira , previously also treated as a subspecies , is now treated as a distinct species , the Madeira firecrest , Regulus madeirensis . A fossil ancestor of the firecrest has been identified from a single wing bone . 
 This kinglet is greenish above and has whitish underparts . It has two white wingbars , a black eye stripe and a white supercilium . The head crest , orange in the male and yellow in the female , is displayed during breeding , and gives rise to the English and scientific names for the species . This bird superficially resembles the goldcrest , which largely shares its European range , but the firecrest 's bronze shoulders and strong face pattern are distinctive . The song is a repetition of high thin notes , slightly lower @-@ pitched than those of its relative . 
 The common firecrest breeds in broadleaved or coniferous woodland and gardens , building its compact , three @-@ layered nest on a tree branch . Seven to twelve eggs are incubated by the female alone . Both parents feed the chicks , which fledge 22 – 24 days after hatching . This kinglet is constantly on the move and frequently hovers as it searches for insects to eat , and in winter it is often found with flocks of tits . Despite some possible local declines , the species is not the subject of significant conservation concerns owing to its large European population and an expansion of its range over the last century . It may be hunted and killed by birds of prey , and can carry parasites . It is possible that this species was the original " king of the birds " in European folklore . 
 = = Description = = 
 The common firecrest is a small plump bird , 9 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) in length with a wingspan of 13 – 16 cm ( 5 @.@ 1 – 6 @.@ 3 in ) , and weighs 4 – 7 grams ( 0 @.@ 14 – 0 @.@ 25 oz ) . It has bright olive @-@ green upperparts with a bronze @-@ coloured patch on each shoulder , and whitish underparts washed with brownish @-@ grey on the breast and flanks . It has two white wingbars , a tiny black pointed bill , and brownish @-@ black legs . The head pattern is striking , with a black eye stripe , long white supercilium , and a crest which is bright yellow in the female and mainly orange in the male . The sexes are very similar , apart from the crest colour , although the female is a little duller in plumage and on average slightly smaller . Juveniles have a grey tinge to the duller upperparts , and lack the coloured crown ; the other head markings are present , but duller than in the adult . By their first winter , only the flight and tail feathers remain <unk> , and the young birds are virtually indistinguishable from the adults in the field . This kinglet usually hops with its body held horizontally , and its flight is weak and whirring , with occasional quick evasive turns . 
 Adult firecrests are unlikely to be confused with any other species ; Pallas 's warbler has a similar head and wing pattern , but its crown stripe is pale lemon , not bright yellow or orange , and its supercilium is also pale yellow , not bright white . The juvenile common firecrest might be confused with the goldcrest , but usually shows enough face pattern to distinguish it from its relative , which has a very plain face at all ages . The firecrest can also be separated from Pallas 's warbler by the warbler 's pale crown stripe and yellow rump . There is more likelihood of confusing the juvenile firecrest with the yellow @-@ browed warbler , which has a similar head pattern ; the warbler ( an Asiatic species ) has pale fringes to the feathers of the closed wing , a whitish belly and darker brown legs . The yellow @-@ browed warbler also lacks the pale half circle present below the young firecrest 's eye . 
 = = Taxonomy and systematics = = 
 The kinglets are a small group of birds sometimes included in the Old World warblers , but frequently given family status , especially as recent research shows that , despite superficial similarities , the crests are phylogenetically remote from the warblers . The names of the family , Regulidae , and its only genus , Regulus , are derived from the Latin regulus , a diminutive of rex , " a king " , and refer to the characteristic orange or yellow crests of adult kinglets . The common firecrest was first formally described by Dutch zoologist Coenraad Jacob Temminck in 1820 as Sylvia ignicapilla ; the relatively late identification of this common European bird arose from a perception that it was just a variety of the goldcrest . The species name is derived from Latin ignis " fire " and <unk> " hair " . The binomial is frequently given as R. ignicapillus due to a misunderstanding of Latin grammar . 
 There are two widely recognised subspecies of common firecrest , nominate R. i. ignicapilla and Mediterranean R. i. balearicus ( Jordans , 1923 ) . The latter form is found on the Balearic Islands and in north Africa , and is slightly paler below and greyer above than the nominate subspecies . Other subspecies have been claimed , including southeastern R. i. caucasicus , North African R. i. <unk> , and Crimean R. i. tauricus . The Madeira firecrest , R. madeirensis , was formerly also considered to be a subspecies of the common firecrest , but phylogenetic analysis based on the cytochrome b gene showed that the Madeiran form is distinct at the species level . Cytochrome b gene divergence between the Madeira firecrest and the European bird is 8 @.@ 5 % , comparable with the divergence level between other recognised Regulus species , such as the 9 % between the goldcrest and the golden @-@ crowned kinglet . The island form also differs in morphology and vocalisations . The proposed split was accepted by the Association of European Rarities Committees ( AERC ) in 2003 , although some authorities , like The Clements checklist , have not yet recognised the new species . 
 The flamecrest or Taiwan firecrest ( Regulus <unk> ) of Taiwan has sometimes been viewed as a race of the common firecrest ; however , the flamecrest 's territorial song , which resembles those of the Himalayan races of the goldcrest , and genetic data indicate that the flamecrest is closely related to the Himalayan goldcrest and only distantly to the two firecrest species . The kinglets on the Canary Islands , which were also considered to be close to firecrests , have now been shown to comprise two subspecies of goldcrest . 
 = = = Fossils = = = 
 There are a few Pleistocene ( 2 @.@ 6 million to 12 @,@ 000 years ago ) records from Europe and Israel of extant Regulus species , mostly goldcrests or unidentifiable to species , but also a Spanish specimen of firecrest . A left ulna from Bulgaria was identified as belonging to a fossil species , Regulus bulgaricus , from 2 @.@ 6 – 1 @.@ 95 mya . This appears to be ancestral to the common firecrest , with the goldcrest diverging from this lineage in the Middle Pleistocene . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The common firecrest breeds in lowland broadleaf forest , preferring cork oak and alder where available , otherwise beech and holly . It also uses mixed broadleaf and conifer woodland , and stands of spruce , European silver fir , cedar and pines , often with undergrowth of juniper , ivy and wild rose . In drier Mediterranean habitats it is found in conifers , evergreen oak , and mixed woodlands up to 2 @,@ 800 m ( 9 @,@ 200 ft ) . Unlike more specialised birds such as Eurasian nuthatch and common treecreeper , both of which forage on trunks , the crests do not need large woodlands , and their population density is independent of forest size . In winter it is less reliant on conifers than the goldcrest , moving from forest to fringes and scrub . It occurs singly or in pairs , spending much time in the tree canopy , although frequently venturing into bushes and other lower vegetation . This species can thrive in fairly urban areas , provided that suitable habitat is available in parks or large gardens ; population densities in gardens can be comparable with the maximum levels found in natural habitats . 
 The nominate subspecies breeds in Europe from southern England , France , Spain and Portugal east to Belarus , northwestern Ukraine , and Greece , and north to the Baltic and southern Latvia . There are isolated populations east of the main range in Abkhazia , the Crimea and Turkey . Its range lies between the 16 and 24 ° C ( 61 and 75 ° F ) July isotherms . Southern birds are largely resident , unlike northern and eastern populations which are migratory , wintering mainly in Mediterranean areas and the far west of Europe from Portugal north to Britain . R. i. balearicus is resident in the Balearic Islands and the northern parts of Morocco , Algeria and Tunisia . This species has been recorded as a vagrant from Norway , Finland , Estonia , Cyprus , Egypt and Lebanon . 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 The common firecrest is monogamous . The male sings during the breeding season , often with its crest raised , and has a display which involves pointing its bill at another bird , showing the crest and strong face pattern . This differs from the display of the plainer @-@ faced goldcrest , which bows its head to emphasise the crest . The breeding territory is about 0 @.@ 5 hectares ( 1 @.@ 2 acres ) , and may overlap with neighbouring goldcrest territories . Firecrests will sometimes defend their territories against goldcrests with the crest raised and a great deal of wing @-@ fluttering , but the amount of actual competition between the species may not be very great . A Spanish study suggested that territorial conflicts between the species , and other phenomena like males singing mixed or alternating songs , were most frequent when one species locally far outnumbered the other ; in other circumstances , the two kinglets learned to ignore each other 's songs . In his courtship display the male firecrest raises his crest , points it towards his mate and hovers over her before mating takes place . 
 The nest is often suspended from a hanging branch usually at no great altitude , although Eric Simms reported nests at heights from 2 @.@ 5 to 20 m ( 8 @.@ 2 to 65 @.@ 6 ft ) . Firecrests may favour breeding close to northern goshawk nests . That large bird will prey on potential predators of the firecrest such as Eurasian sparrowhawks , and nest robbers like grey squirrels , Eurasian jays and great spotted woodpeckers . As is typical for the family , the nest is a closed cup built in three layers with a small entrance hole near its top . The nest 's outer layer is made from moss , small twigs , cobwebs and lichen , the spider webs also being used to attach the nest to the thin branches that support it . The middle layer is moss , and this is lined with feathers ( up to 3 @,@ 000 ) and hair . The nest is smaller , deeper and more compact than that of the goldcrest , about 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) across and 5 – 7 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 2 @.@ 8 in ) deep , with a wall thickness of about 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) . The nest is constructed by the female alone , although the male will accompany the female while she builds the nest over a period of a few days to three weeks . 
 Laying starts in western Europe at the end of April , and in the east of the range in late May ; second clutches , which are common , commence in June to July . The eggs are pink with very indistinct reddish markings at the broad end , unlike those of Madeira firecrest which are described as like those of a Phylloscopus warbler ( white with some brown speckles ) . The eggs are 14 mm × 10 mm ( 0 @.@ 55 in × 0 @.@ 39 in ) and weigh 0 @.@ 7 g ( 0 @.@ 025 oz ) , of which 5 % is shell . The clutch size in Europe is 7 – 12 eggs , but probably smaller in northwest Africa . The female incubates the eggs for 14 @.@ 5 to 16 @.@ 5 days to hatching , and broods the chicks , which fledge eight to ten days later . Both parents feed the chicks and fledged young . This species becomes sexually mature after one year , and has a life expectancy of less than two years . 
 Although their ranges overlap substantially , hybridisation between goldcrests and firecrests seems to be prevented by differences in courtship rituals and different facial patterns . Even in aviary studies in which a female goldcrest was given an artificial eyestripe to facilitate mating with a male firecrest , the chicks were never raised by the mixed pair , and appeared to be poorly adapted compared to the parent species . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 All species of kinglet are almost exclusively insectivorous , preying on small arthropods with soft cuticles , such as springtails , aphids and spiders . They also feed on the cocoons and eggs of spiders and insects , and occasionally take pollen . All species will hover to catch flying insects . Although the similarly sized firecrest and goldcrest are often found together , there are a number of factors that reduce direct competition for food . Common firecrests prefer larger prey than goldcrests . Although both will take trapped insects from spider webs on autumn migration , firecrests will also eat the large orb @-@ web spiders ( on rare occasions kinglets have been found stuck in a spider web , either unable to move or dead ) . 
 The common firecrest feeds in trees , exploiting mainly the upper surface of branches in coniferous habitat and of leaves in deciduous trees . This is in contrast to the goldcrest , which frequently feeds on the undersides of branches and leaves . In winter , flocks of common firecrests cover a given distance about three times faster than do goldcrests , and ignore the smallest prey items preferred by their relative ; large invertebrates are killed by beating them repeatedly against a branch . The differences in behaviour are facilitated by subtle morphological differences ; firecrests have broader bills with longer rictal bristles ( which protect a bird 's eye from food items it is trying to capture ) , and these features reflect the larger prey taken by the species . The firecrest 's less forked tail may reflect its longer episodes of hovering while hunting . Firecrests forage more often while standing , and have a foot better adapted for perching , whereas the goldcrest 's longer hind toe reflects its habit of moving vertically along branches while feeding . It also has a deep grooves in the soles of its feet capable of gripping individual needles , while firecrests have a smoother underside to the foot . 
 Young common firecrests are fed almost exclusively with springtails ; larger food items are not accepted , and spiders are occasionally regurgitated . From the fifth day onwards , the nestling diet includes aphids and a high amount of snail shells , the latter being needed for bone growth . After the second week , the food includes larger moths and caterpillars , as well as various arthropods typically avoided by adults , such as harvestmen , earwigs , and centipedes . 
 In winter , the firecrest joins loose flocks of other wanderers such as tits and warblers . This kinglet , like other species that prefer mixed @-@ species foraging flocks in winter , hunts over a greater range of heights and vegetation types than when feeding alone . For species that tend to feed in flocks , foraging success while in a flock was about twice that for solitary birds . In some areas , wintering birds have developed the habit of coming to feeding stations and bird tables for fatty food , sometimes with goldcrests or warblers such as the common chiffchaff and blackcap . The kinglet 's digestive system is adapted to an entirely insectivorous diet , whereas Sylvia warblers include fruit in their autumn diet . A Spanish study compared that genus with the insectivorous firecrest and Phylloscopus warblers . The results showed that , relative to body weight , the insect @-@ eaters had shorter intestines , but longer gut passage times than the Sylvia species . The insect @-@ eaters are also generally slightly smaller than the omnivores . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 The contact call is three or four thin high notes , similar to that of goldcrest , but slightly lower in pitch , zit @-@ zit @-@ zit rather than see @-@ see @-@ see . The song is a succession of call notes in a longer and slightly more varied sequence . Typically there are 11 – 14 notes per song , becoming louder and faster , with the final three notes slightly different from the preceding ones : zit @-@ zit @-@ zit @-@ zit @-@ zit @-@ zit @-@ zit @-@ zit @-@ zit @-@ zit @-@ <unk> The song usually lasts 0 @.@ 5 – 2 @.@ 5 seconds , shorter than the 3 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 0 seconds for the goldcrest , and may be repeated up to eight times a minute . In May and June , singing is most frequent after dawn , but continues less often throughout the day . Later in the breeding season , song becomes largely confined to the morning . 
 The song of the Mediterranean subspecies of common firecrest , R. i. balearicus , is very similar to that of the nominate form , but one factor in separating the Madeiran firecrest from common firecrest is that the island bird 's song is divided into three phrases , two of them consisting of modified display and anger calls . Its display calls also use a larger frequency range and more harmonics than those of the continental subspecies . Male goldcrests and Madeiran firecrests sometimes show a territorial response to recordings of the songs or calls of the common firecrest , but the reverse is apparently not true , because the songs of the common firecrest are simpler in construction than those of its relatives . 
 = = = Predators and parasites = = = 
 Throughout the firecrest 's range , the main predator of small woodland birds is the Eurasian sparrowhawk , which takes avian prey as up to 98 % of its diet . The tawny owl relies more on mammalian catches , but about one @-@ third of its food is forest birds . Eggs and young may be taken by grey squirrels , Eurasian jays and great spotted woodpeckers . The firecrest appears to be virtually unknown as a host of the common cuckoo , a widespread European brood parasite . 
 The invasive Argentine ant ( Linepithema humile ) is common in the Mediterranean area , and reduces arthropod numbers by removing most native ant species . The reduction in prey items is greatest in the tree canopy , and has a greater effect on species like the firecrest that feed high in the foliage . Less food is available for chicks , and parents have to spend more time foraging . 
 Data on specific parasites of the firecrest is lacking , but the widespread moorhen flea , Dasypsyllus gallinulae has been recorded in a related Regulus species . A number of feather mites have been recorded in the genus , including Proctophyllodes <unk> on firecrest . These mites live on fungi growing on the feathers . The fungi found on the plumage may feed on the keratin of the outer feathers or on feather oil . 
 = = Status = = 
 The common firecrest expanded its range in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries , colonising northern France , followed by first breeding in the Netherlands in 1928 and Denmark in 1961 . In Britain , it had only been recorded a handful of times by 1839 , but first bred in 1962 , and is now widespread as a breeding bird in much of southern England . Milder winters have meant that more birds can winter further north , and therefore the breeding range can expand without incurring the risks involved in lengthy migrations . A population was found in northern Morocco in 1986 . 
 Population growth may be limited by lack of suitable habitat , and there may be local declines due to loss of conifers through storms or replacement by plantations of native deciduous trees . There may also be localised losses in areas of high heavy metal pollution , which particularly affects ground feeders like thrushes and conifer foliage gleaners , including both European Regulus species . Conifer specialists suffer from the loss and poor quality of needles , and the consequent decrease in abundance of their invertebrate food . The common firecrest has a large range and a population estimated at 10 – 30 million individuals , most in Europe . The population is believed to be stable in the absence of evidence for any declines or serious threats , and it is therefore classed as least concern on the IUCN Red List . 
 = = In culture = = 
 Aristotle and Pliny relate the legend of a contest amongst the birds to see who should be their king , the title to be awarded to the one that could fly highest . Initially , it looked as though the eagle would win easily , but as he began to tire , a small bird which had hidden under the eagle 's tail feathers emerged to fly even higher and claimed the title . Following from this legend , in much European folklore the wren has been described as the " king of the birds " or as a flame bearer . However , these terms were also applied to the Regulus species , the fiery crowns of the goldcrest and firecrest making them more likely to be the original bearers of these titles , and , because of the legend 's reference to the " smallest of birds " becoming king , the title was probably transferred to the equally tiny wren . The confusion was assisted by the similarity and consequent interchangeability of the Ancient Greek words for the wren ( βασιλεύς basileus , " king " ) and the crests ( <unk> <unk> , " kinglet " ) . In English , the association between the firecrest and Eurasian wren was reinforced by the kinglet 's old name of " fire @-@ crested wren " . 
 = Knock Madness = 
 Knock Madness is the third studio album by American rapper Hopsin . It was released on November 24 , 2013 , by Funk Volume and distributed by Empire Distribution . Hopsin has said that the overall vibe of the album is different from his previous album Raw and that he has said all he needs to about leaving Ruthless Records . The album contains guest appearances from rappers SwizZz , Dizzy Wright , <unk> Benton , and Tech N9ne , among others . Like its predecessors , the album 's production was entirely handled by Hopsin himself . 
 Knock Madness was supported by three singles , " Old Friend " , " Hop Is Back " , and " Rip Your Heart Out " , the last of which features Tech N9ne . Hopsin also supported the album with the Fuck It Tour with Yelawolf , and the Knock Madness Tour . Knock Madness was met with generally positive reviews from music critics . The album also peaked at number 76 on the US Billboard 200 and , as of December 2013 , has sold 16 @,@ 000 copies according to Nielsen SoundScan . 
 = = Background = = 
 Hopsin spoke about the album in an interview with HipHopDX on August 12 , 2011 , where he said that he was aiming to make the production quality of Knock Madness sound just as good , if not better , than his perception of Dr. Dre 's upcoming album , Detox . He also stated that the album would have a " positive message " and that when people listen to the album he wants them to feel " inspired to be better in life " . On January 20 , 2012 , he stated via his Twitter account that Knock Madness was his main priority in life . 
 He later spoke on the background of the album 's sound , saying , 
 I 'm 28 years old , and I see that I 'm kind of in this weird position . I don 't have many friends in my personal life , but I have so many fans . So when I go outside and people recognize me , it 's kind of a bittersweet feeling , like I don 't recognize the fans . I don 't really have it like they probably think I have it . I 'm really still a loser guy , but I 'm just really popular now . I don 't have a girlfriend no more , and I have this money , but I 'm not satisfied with my life . It 's this weird feeling of being incomplete , and I need to find myself . So that 's kind of what it did to me , and the album just came out with me just fucking rapping some dark shit . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 Following the RAW Tour in mid @-@ 2011 , Hopsin begun working on Knock Madness , though not very heavily . On January 17 , 2012 , fellow Funk Volume rappers SwizZz and Dizzy Wright were confirmed to make appearances on the album . In a March 2012 interview , Hopsin said that he talked to Tech N9ne about appearing on the album , which Tech N9ne agreed to . He also stated in 2012 that he wanted Yelawolf on the album . 
 In September 2012 , Hopsin confirmed that he would self @-@ produce the majority of the album , with drummer Travis Barker producing one or two tracks . Later that month , Hopsin would indicate interest in working with Childish Gambino . In addition , Hopsin approached Macklemore in January 2013 to get him featured in the album . 
 In February 2013 , Hopsin stated in an interview that he was currently recording the album , having recorded 18 songs , and that he hoped to have the album completed by June . <unk> begun heavily recording Knock Madness in March 2013 following the end of a long @-@ term relationship , which gave him more time to record and focus on his music . He also indicated the album would be released with a bonus CD that will have all the ' Ill Mind of Hopsin ' songs remastered , however this ultimately did not take place . In October 2013 , <unk> confirmed that he had finished recording the album and had turned it in to Funk Volume , stating he had personally re @-@ mastered the album 20 @-@ 30 times to get the sound just right . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 Hopsin detailed the album to The Source saying , 
 There 's a variety of music on there . There 's crazy , wild lyrics . There 's sad , emotional lyrics and even funny lyrics . I got serious songs and sad songs . Just a big variety of everything . I wanted to show the full me . I have a lot of people who love me , but I have a lot of haters as well . There are at least one or two songs for someone that doesn 't really like me or what I put out . I think they 'll stumble across a couple songs that will make them go , oh ok , I fucks with him now . I kinda wanted to make an album to show my wide range of music that I can do . I just wanted to show the full me . 
 In the lead single " Hop Is Back " , Hopsin pokes fun at Kendrick Lamar and disses Kanye West 's newer music . Hopsin clarified his statements in an interview with HipHopDX saying he had no ill feelings towards Kendrick Lamar , and that he dissed West because he disliked his new music . " Tears to Snow " is an emotional song about him and his ex @-@ girlfriend having relationship issues and breaking up . In the song he explains how she would assume he would cheat on her . The second verse is also partly about how Hopsin 's former colleagues have changed and turned against him . For " Rip Your Heart Out " featuring Tech N9ne , Hopsin created what he called a " weird , funky , dope beat that you can just bop your head to . " 
 Hopsin spoke on " Hip Hop Sinister " saying , " That 's probably the most intense rap song on the album . It 's not a song that 's going to slowly change anybody 's life . It 's just a rap song just have bars and sound dope . The energy on that , you 'll probably hear it and want to cut somebody 's throat . The song just amps you up so much . It 's so hyped to where you want to punch a hole in somebody 's head or punch a hole through the wall . " " Good Guys Get Left Behind " is a love song , that features multiple twists and turns . " Old Friend " is based around a friend of his that became addicted to methamphetamine and the personal issues which he suffered from it . Hopsin has said the meaning of the song was " to show what early wrong decisions can do to youngsters in the long run " , as well as " what they can possibly miss out on . " 
 " Lunch Time Cypher " was meant to give the feeling of a high school cypher , complete with beatboxing , random , crazy lyrics from Hopsin , and featured artists Passionate MC and G @-@ Mo Skee . The song " What 's My Purpose " is , according to Hopsin , " about a human born into this current dark society . How everybody is doing the same thing . Nobody is really different . And the government has us here to just make money . " He also touches on his race @-@ related arrest after a concert in Orlando , Florida . The album 's outro " Caught In the Rain " discusses about how Hopsin is soul @-@ searching and needing to find himself . 
 = = Release and promotion = = 
 In July 2012 , Hopsin released the fifth installment of his " Ill Mind of Hopsin " video series . It received over one million views in less than 24 hours and currently has over 58 million views . In " Ill Mind of Hopsin 5 " , Hopsin expresses his frustration with jaded youth and disenchantment towards other rappers who are unrelatable . The song itself charted at number 17 on Billboard 's Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Digital songs chart . 
 In December 2012 , Hopsin hinted on his Facebook and Twitter pages that him and Travis Barker were working on a project together , though further details were withheld at the time . Then , in late December , Travis Barker revealed that a collaboration EP would be released in 2013 . Then , on February 5 , 2013 , Hopsin announced that production for the EP had been finished . 
 In February 2013 , Hopsin said the album would be released around September 2013 . The album cover for Knock Madness , as well as the album 's release date of November 26 , 2013 , was revealed at the end of the music video for " Ill Mind Six : Old Friend " . The cover artwork depicts Marcus Hopson burying his rap alter ego Hopsin . 
 On September 11 , 2013 , Hopsin debuted a new vlog series about the making of the album . The series focused on how he got inspired , came up with lyrics , and mixed the songs for Knock Madness . On November 7 , 2013 , Hopsin released the album 's track listing . 
 = = = Touring = = = 
 Hopsin , with the rest of the Funk Volume artists , went on a two @-@ month worldwide tour in late 2012 , which included 58 shows in 60 days throughout the United States , Europe and Australia . From November 14 to November 23 , 2013 , Hopsin toured with Shady Records artist Yelawolf in promotion of Knock Madness on The Fuck It Tour . They toured the West Coast of the United States and Hopsin performed material from the album for the first time . The Knock Madness World Tour began on December 12 , 2013 in Australia . On January 18 , 2014 , the tour moved to North America , starting in Santa Cruz , California . The leg of the tour ran through March 22 , 2014 . Dizzy Wright and DJ <unk> joined Hopsin on select dates during the North American run of the tour . 
 = = Singles = = 
 In an interview with <unk> , Hopsin released information on the album , stating that the first single would be named " Hop Madness " . Hopsin confirmed via his Facebook and Twitter on January 5 , 2012 that he would be shooting the " Hop Madness " video that month . On February 16 , 2012 , Hopsin stated that the music video would be released within the next month . The video was officially released on March 15 , 2012 . The song was ultimately excluded from the album . 
 On July 17 , 2013 , Hopsin released the music video for " Old Friend " on both his YouTube channel , and the single to iTunes . He later confirmed that the song is not the sixth in the " Ill Mind of Hopsin " series but rather the first single from Knock Madness . On August 18 , 2013 , Hopsin confirmed in a Facebook status that the lead single from Knock Madness , titled " Hop Is Back " , would be released in a couple of weeks . However , the single 's release , with its accompanying music video , was delayed until October 22 , 2013 . " Rip Your Heart Out " , featuring Tech N9ne , was released as the album 's third single on November 12 , 2013 . The same day , Hopsin and Tech N9ne filmed the music video for " Rip Your Heart Out " . The music video for " I Need Help " was released on April 6 , 2014 . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Knock Madness received generally positive reviews from music critics . On Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics , the album received an average score of 77 , based on 5 reviews , which indicates " generally favorable reviews " . Omar Burgess of HipHopDX classified the album as " Pop @-@ tinged <unk> of the highest order " , praising its " catchy hooks , accessible production and subject matter " as well as " Hopsin 's raw technical ability " with regards to lyricism and wordplay . In the end Burgess said , " When he [ Hopsin ] strikes the perfect balance between shock value , raw emotion and his immense skill set , that moment may yield a classic album . " Sheldon Pierce of XXL called Knock Madness " a stepping stone album , one that can only produce even better music in the future " , and noted that the album did well to " serve as a peek into the wildly entertaining thought process of one of hip @-@ hop 's most misunderstood characters . " 
 Jordan <unk> of Exclaim ! stated that the album excels when Hopsin " focuses on external obsessions : ode to amateur skating ' <unk> Tre Flip ' has the most enticingly offbeat rapping on the album , as well as a dizzying internal rhyme scheme , while ' Turn on the Lights ' analogue ' Dream Forever ' is heartfelt and raw . " David Jeffries of AllMusic praised the album 's consistency for providing " shocking lyrics and infectious hooks " , highlighting ' Rip Your Heart Out ' featuring Tech N9ne as a standout track . Dominick Grillo of DJBooth noted that Hopsin 's " technical passionate wordplays offer constant comparisons to Eminem " , concluding that the album is " a dark , often violent creative response to the pressure now resting on Hopsin 's shoulders " , conceding that there are moments when Hopsin " weighs himself ( and the audience ) down with layers upon layers of negativity " , though admitting that the album " works best when Hopsin is either angrily fighting or humorously poking fun at some sort of <unk> . " 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 After only being released for three days , Knock Madness debuted at number 132 on the US Billboard 200 , selling 4 @,@ 000 copies in the United States . In its first full week the album rose to number 76 on the Billboard 200 , selling 12 @,@ 000 more copies , bringing its total album sales to 16 @,@ 000 according to Nielsen SoundScan . The album has sold 58 @,@ 000 copies in the US as of April 2015 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 All songs produced by Hopsin . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Album credits adapted from AllMusic . 
 Hopsin - executive producer , mixing , primary artist 
 <unk> Benton - featured artist 
 Passionate MC - featured artist 
 G @-@ Mo Skee - featured artist 
 SwizZz - featured artist 
 Tech N9ne - featured artist 
 Dizzy Wright - featured artist 
 Connor Tingley - art direction 
 = = Chart positions = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 Though the album 's release date was originally scheduled for November 26 , 2013 , Funk Volume announced on their Facebook page on November 18 that it would be very hard to find Knock Madness in stores the first week of its release , due to a delay and few stores placing orders for the album . However , instead of pushing back the release date as announced , Funk Volume decided to release the album on its initial date of November 26 , for digital download and compact disc format through their website . The album was then released in compact disc format in retail stores on December 3 , 2013 . 
 = Diffuse panbronchiolitis = 
 Diffuse panbronchiolitis ( DPB ) is an inflammatory lung disease of unknown cause . It is a severe , progressive form of bronchiolitis , an inflammatory condition of the bronchioles ( small air passages in the lungs ) . The term diffuse signifies that lesions appear throughout both lungs , while panbronchiolitis refers to inflammation found in all layers of the respiratory bronchioles ( those involved in gas exchange ) . DPB causes severe inflammation and nodule @-@ like lesions of terminal bronchioles , chronic sinusitis , and intense coughing with large amounts of sputum production . 
 The disease is believed to occur when there is susceptibility , or a lack of immune system resistance , to DPB @-@ causing bacteria or viruses , caused by several genes that are found predominantly in individuals of East Asian descent . The highest incidence occurs among Japanese people , followed by Koreans . DPB occurs more often in males , and usually begins around age 40 . It was recognized as a distinct new disease in the early 1960s , and was formally named diffuse panbronchiolitis in 1969 . 
 If left untreated , DPB progresses to bronchiectasis , an irreversible lung condition that involves enlargement of the bronchioles , and pooling of mucus in the bronchiolar passages . Daily treatment of DPB with macrolide antibiotics such as erythromycin eases symptoms and increases survival time , but the disease currently has no known cure . The eventual result of DPB can be respiratory failure and heart problems . 
 = = Classification = = 
 The term " bronchiolitis " generally refers to inflammation of the bronchioles . DPB is classified as a form of " primary bronchiolitis " , which means that the underlying cause of bronchiolitis is originating from or is confined to the bronchioles . Along with DPB , additional forms of primary bronchiolitis include bronchiolitis obliterans , follicular bronchiolitis , respiratory bronchiolitis , mineral dust airway disease , and a number of others . Unlike DPB , bronchiolitis that is not considered " primary " would be associated with diseases of the larger airways , such as chronic bronchitis . 
 = = Signs and symptoms = = 
 Symptoms of DPB include chronic sinusitis ( inflamed paranasal sinuses ) , wheezing , crackles ( respiratory sounds made by obstructions such as phlegm and secretions in the lungs ) , dyspnea ( shortness of breath ) , and a severe cough that yields large amounts of sputum ( coughed @-@ up phlegm ) . There may be pus in the sputum , and affected individuals may have fever . Typical signs of DPB progression include dilation ( enlargement ) of the bronchiolar passages and hypoxemia ( low levels of oxygen in the blood ) . If DPB is left untreated , bronchiectasis will occur ; it is characterized by dilation and thickening of the walls of the bronchioles , inflammatory damage to respiratory and terminal bronchioles , and pooling of mucus in the lungs . DPB is associated with progressive respiratory failure , hypercapnia ( increased levels of carbon dioxide in the blood ) , and can eventually lead to pulmonary hypertension ( high blood pressure in the pulmonary vein and artery ) and cor pulmonale ( dilation of the right ventricle of the heart , or " right heart failure " ) . 
 = = Cause = = 
 DPB is idiopathic , which means an exact physiological , environmental , or pathogenic cause of the disease is unknown . However , several factors are suspected to be involved with its pathogenesis ( the way in which the disease works ) . 
 The major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) is a large genomic region found in most vertebrates that is associated with the immune system . It is located on chromosome 6 in humans . A subset of MHC in humans is human leukocyte antigen ( HLA ) , which controls the antigen @-@ presenting system , as part of adaptive immunity against pathogens such as bacteria and viruses . When human cells are infected by a pathogen , some of them can present parts of the pathogen 's proteins on their surfaces ; this is called " antigen presentation " . The infected cells then become targets for types of cytotoxic T @-@ cells , which kill the infected cells so they can be removed from the body . 
 Genetic predisposition for DPB susceptibility has been localized to two HLA haplotypes ( a nucleotide or gene sequence difference between paired chromosomes , that is more likely to occur among a common ethnicity or trait ) common to people of East Asian descent . HLA @-@ B54 is associated with DPB in the Japanese , while HLA @-@ A11 is associated with the disease in Koreans . Several genes within this region of class I HLA are believed to be responsible for DPB , by allowing increased susceptibility to the disease . The common genetic background and similarities in the HLA profile of affected Japanese and Korean individuals were considered in the search for a DPB gene . It was suggested that a mutation of a suspected disease @-@ susceptibility gene located somewhere between HLA @-@ B and HLA @-@ A had occurred on an ancestral chromosome carrying both HLA @-@ B54 and HLA @-@ A11 . Further , it is possible that a number of genetic recombination events around the disease locus ( location on a chromosome ) could have resulted in the disease being associated with HLA @-@ B54 in the Japanese and HLA @-@ A11 in Koreans . After further study , it was concluded that a DPB susceptibility gene is located near the HLA @-@ B locus at chromosome <unk> Within this area , the search for a genetic cause of the disease has continued . 
 Because many genes belonging to HLA remain unidentified , positional cloning ( a method used to identify a specific gene , when only its location on a chromosome is known ) has been used to determine that a mucin @-@ like gene is associated with DPB . In addition , diseases caused by identified HLA genes in the DPB @-@ susceptibility region have been investigated . One of these , bare lymphocyte syndrome I ( BLS I ) , exhibits a number of similarities with DPB in those affected , including chronic sinusitis , bronchiolar inflammation and nodules , and the presence of H. influenzae . Also like DPB , BLS I responds favorably to erythromycin therapy by showing a resolution of symptoms . The similarities between these two diseases , the corresponding success with the same mode of treatment , and the fact that the gene responsible for BLS I is located within the DPB @-@ causing area of HLA narrows the establishment of a gene responsible for DPB . Environmental factors such as inhaling toxic fumes and cigarette smoking are not believed to play a role in DPB , and unknown environmental and other non @-@ genetic causes — such as unidentified bacteria or viruses — have not been ruled out . 
 Cystic fibrosis ( CF ) , a progressive multi @-@ system lung disease , has been considered in the search for a genetic cause of DPB . This is for a number of reasons . CF , like DPB , causes severe lung inflammation , abundant mucus production , infection , and shows a genetic predominance among Caucasians of one geographic group to the rarity of others ; whereas DPB dominates among East Asians , CF mainly affects individuals of European descent . While no gene has been implicated as the cause of DPB , mutation in a specific gene — much more likely to occur in Europeans — causes CF . This mutation in the CF @-@ causing gene is not a factor in DPB , but a unique polymorphism ( variation ) in this gene is known to occur in many Asians not necessarily affected by either disease . It is being investigated whether this gene in any state of mutation could contribute to DPB . 
 = = Pathophysiology = = 
 Inflammation is a normal part of the human immune response , whereby leukocytes ( white blood cells ) , including neutrophils ( white blood cells that specialize in causing inflammation ) , gather , and chemokines ( proteins released from certain cells , which activate or elicit a response from other cells ) accumulate at any location in the body where bacterial or viral infections occur . Inflammation interferes with the activity of bacteria and viruses , and serves to clear them from the body . In DPB , bacteria such as Haemophilus influenzae and Pseudomonas aeruginosa can cause the proliferation of inflammatory cells into the bronchiolar tissues . However , when neither bacteria are present with DPB , the inflammation continues for an as yet unknown reason . In either circumstance , inflammation in DPB can be so severe that nodules containing inflammatory cells form in the walls of the bronchioles . The presence of inflammation and infection in the airways also results in the production of excess mucus , which must be coughed up as sputum . The combination of inflammation , nodule development , infection , mucus , and frequent cough contributes to the breathing difficulties in DPB . 
 The fact that inflammation in DPB persists with or without the presence of P. aeruginosa and H. influenzae provides a means to determine several mechanisms of DPB pathogenesis . <unk> are eicosanoids , signaling molecules made from essential fatty acids , which play a role in many lung diseases by causing the proliferation of inflammatory cells and excess mucus production in the airways . In DPB and other lung diseases , the predominant mediator of neutrophil @-@ related inflammation is leukotriene B4 , which specializes in neutrophil proliferation via chemotaxis ( the movement of some types of cells toward or away from certain molecules ) . 
 Inflammation in DPB is also caused by the chemokine <unk> @-@ <unk> and its involvement with CD8 + T cells . Beta defensins , a family of antimicrobial peptides found in the respiratory tract , are responsible for further inflammation in DPB when a pathogen such as P. aeruginosa is present . If present with DPB , the human T @-@ lymphotropic virus , type I , a retrovirus , modifies DPB pathogenesis by infecting T helper cells and altering their effectiveness in recognizing the presence of known or unknown pathogens involved with DPB . 
 = = Diagnosis = = 
 The diagnosis of DPB requires analysis of the lungs and bronchiolar tissues , which can require a lung biopsy , or the more preferred high resolution computed tomography ( <unk> ) scan of the lungs . The diagnostic criteria include severe inflammation in all layers of the respiratory bronchioles and lung tissue lesions that appear as nodules within the terminal and respiratory bronchioles in both lungs . The nodules in DPB appear as opaque lumps when viewed on X @-@ rays of the lung , and can cause airway obstruction , which is evaluated by a pulmonary function test , or PFT . Lung X @-@ rays can also reveal dilation of the bronchiolar passages , another sign of <unk> . <unk> scans often show blockages of some bronchiolar passages with mucus , which is referred to as the " tree @-@ in @-@ bud " pattern . Hypoxemia , another sign of breathing difficulty , is revealed by measuring the oxygen and carbon dioxide content of the blood , using a blood test called arterial blood gas . Other findings observed with DPB include the proliferation of lymphocytes ( white blood cells that fight infection ) , neutrophils , and foamy histiocytes ( tissue macrophages ) in the lung lining . Bacteria such as H. influenzae and P. aeruginosa are also detectable , with the latter becoming more prominent as the disease progresses . The white blood , bacterial and other cellular content of the blood can be measured by taking a complete blood count ( CBC ) . Elevated levels of IgG and IgA ( classes of immunoglobulins ) may be seen , as well as the presence of rheumatoid factor ( an indicator of autoimmunity ) . <unk> , a clumping of red blood cells in response to the presence of antibodies in the blood , may also occur . Neutrophils , beta @-@ defensins , leukotrienes , and chemokines can also be detected in <unk> lavage fluid injected then removed from the bronchiolar airways of individuals with DPB , for evaluation . 
 = = = Differential diagnosis = = = 
 In the differential diagnosis ( finding the correct diagnosis between diseases that have overlapping features ) of some obstructive lung diseases , DPB is often considered . A number of DPB symptoms resemble those found with other obstructive lung diseases such as asthma , chronic bronchitis , and emphysema . <unk> , coughing with sputum production , and shortness of breath are common symptoms in such diseases , and obstructive respiratory functional impairment is found on pulmonary function testing . Cystic fibrosis , like DPB , causes severe lung inflammation , excess mucus production , and infection ; but DPB does not cause disturbances of the pancreas nor the electrolytes , as does CF , so the two diseases are different and probably unrelated . DPB is distinguished by the presence of lesions that appear on X @-@ rays as nodules in the bronchioles of both lungs ; inflammation in all tissue layers of the respiratory bronchioles ; and its higher prevalence among individuals with East Asian lineage . 
 DPB and bronchiolitis obliterans are two forms of primary bronchiolitis . Specific overlapping features of both diseases include strong cough with large amounts of often pus @-@ filled sputum ; nodules viewable on lung X @-@ rays in the lower bronchi and bronchiolar area ; and chronic sinusitis . In DPB , the nodules are more restricted to the respiratory bronchioles , while in OB they are often found in the membranous bronchioles ( the initial non @-@ cartilaginous section of the bronchiole , that divides from the tertiary bronchus ) up to the secondary bronchus . OB is a bronchiolar disease with worldwide prevalence , while DPB has more localized prevalence , predominantly in Japan . Prior to clinical recognition of DPB in recent years , it was often misdiagnosed as <unk> , COPD , IPF , <unk> miliaris , sarcoidosis or alveolar cell carcinoma . 
 = = Treatment = = 
 <unk> antibiotics , such as erythromycin , are an effective treatment for DPB when taken regularly over an extended period of time . <unk> or <unk> are also commonly used . The successful results of macrolides in DPB and similar lung diseases stems from managing certain symptoms through <unk> ( adjusting the immune response ) , which can be achieved by taking the antibiotics in low doses . Treatment consists of daily oral administration of erythromycin for two to three years , an extended period that has been shown to dramatically improve the effects of DPB . This is apparent when an individual undergoing treatment for DPB , among a number of disease @-@ related remission criteria , has a normal neutrophil count detected in BAL fluid , and blood gas ( an arterial blood test that measures the amount of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood ) readings show that free oxygen in the blood is within the normal range . Allowing a temporary break from erythromycin therapy in these instances has been suggested , to reduce the formation of macrolide @-@ resistant P. aeruginosa . However , DPB symptoms usually return , and treatment would need to be resumed . Although highly effective , erythromycin may not prove successful in all individuals with the disease , particularly if macrolide @-@ resistant P. aeruginosa is present or previously untreated DPB has progressed to the point where respiratory failure is occurring . 
 With erythromycin therapy in DPB , great reduction in bronchiolar inflammation and damage is achieved through suppression of not only neutrophil proliferation , but also lymphocyte activity and obstructive mucus and water secretions in airways . The antibiotic effects of macrolides are not involved in their beneficial effects toward reducing inflammation in DPB . This is evident because the treatment dosage is much too low to fight infection , and in DPB cases with the occurrence of macrolide @-@ resistant P. aeruginosa , erythromycin therapy still reduces inflammation . 
 A number of factors are involved in suppression of inflammation by erythromycin and other macrolides . They are especially effective at inhibiting the proliferation of neutrophils , by diminishing the ability of interleukin 8 and leukotriene B4 to attract them . <unk> also reduce the efficiency of adhesion molecules that allow neutrophils to stick to bronchiolar tissue linings . <unk> production in the airways is a major culprit in the morbidity and mortality of DPB and other respiratory diseases . The significant reduction of inflammation in DPB attributed to erythromycin therapy also helps to inhibit the production of excess mucus . 
 = = Prognosis = = 
 Untreated DPB leads to bronchiectasis , respiratory failure , and death . A journal report from 1983 indicated that untreated DPB had a five @-@ year survival rate of 62 @.@ 1 % , while the 10 @-@ year survival rate was 33 @.@ 2 % . With erythromycin treatment , individuals with DPB now have a much longer life expectancy due to better management of symptoms , delay of progression , and prevention of associated infections like P. aeruginosa . The 10 @-@ year survival rate for treated DPB is about 90 % . In DPB cases where treatment has resulted in significant improvement , which sometimes happens after about two years , treatment has been allowed to end for a while . However , individuals allowed to stop treatment during this time are closely monitored . As DPB has been proven to recur , erythromycin therapy must be promptly resumed once disease symptoms begin to reappear . In spite of the improved prognosis when treated , DPB currently has no known cure . 
 = = Epidemiology = = 
 DPB has its highest prevalence among the Japanese , at 11 per 100 @,@ 000 population . Korean , Chinese , and Thai individuals with the disease have been reported as well . A genetic predisposition among East Asians is suggested . The disease is more common in males , with the male to female ratio at 1 @.@ 4 – 2 : 1 ( or about 5 men to 3 women ) . The average onset of the disease is around age 40 , and two @-@ thirds of those affected are non @-@ smokers , although smoking is not believed to be a cause . The presence of HLA @-@ <unk> increases the risk of diffuse panbronchiolitis 13 @.@ 3 @-@ fold . 
 In Europe and the Americas , a relatively small number of DPB cases have been reported in Asian immigrants and residents , as well as in individuals of non @-@ Asian ancestry . <unk> has occurred in the West owing to less recognition of the disease than in Asian countries . Relative to the large number of Asians living in the west , the small number of them thought to be affected by DPB suggests non @-@ genetic factors may play some role in its cause . This rarity seen in Western Asians may also be partly associated with misdiagnosis . 
 = = History = = 
 In the early 1960s , a relatively new chronic lung disease was being observed and described by physicians in Japan . In 1969 , the name " diffuse panbronchiolitis " was introduced to distinguish it from chronic bronchitis , emphysema , <unk> , and other obstructive lung disease with inflammation . Between 1978 and 1980 , results of a nationwide survey initiated by the Ministry of Health and Welfare of Japan revealed more than 1 @,@ 000 probable cases of DPB , with 82 histologically confirmed . By the 1980s , it was internationally recognized as a distinct disease of the lungs . 
 Before the 1980s , the prognosis or expected outcome of DPB was poor , especially in cases with <unk> ( the emergence of a new viral or bacterial infection , in addition to the currently occurring infection ) by P. aeruginosa . DPB continued to have a very high mortality rate before generalized antibiotic treatment and oxygen therapy were beginning to be used routinely in the effort to manage symptoms . Around 1985 , when long @-@ term treatment with the antibiotic erythromycin became the standard for managing DPB , the prognosis significantly improved . In 1990 , the association of DPB with HLA was initially asserted . 
 = <unk> Leon = 
 <unk> Leon ( born 1971 ) is an Indian @-@ American computer graphics technician who won the Academy Award for scientific and technical achievement jointly with Sam Richards and J. Robert Ray in 2016 . 
 Leon won the Academy Award for " the design , engineering and continuous development " of Sony Pictures Imageworks itView technology , a digital 3D film review software . Leon worked on the itView technology for eight years as the chief contributor . 
 Schooled in India , Leon is an Arizona State University alumnus . He has worked at Sony Pictures Imageworks since 1996 , and has contributed to the making of several commercially successful films , including the Spider @-@ Man film series and the Men In Black film series . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
