 In 1921 , Keynes wrote that he had fallen " very much in love " with Lydia Lopokova , a well @-@ known Russian ballerina and one of the stars of Sergei Diaghilev 's Ballets Russes . In the early years of his courtship , he maintained an affair with a younger man , Sebastian Sprott , in tandem with Lopokova , but eventually chose Lopokova exclusively . They married in 1925 , with Keynes 's former lover Duncan Grant as best man . " What a marriage of beauty and brains , the fair Lopokova and John Maynard Keynes " was said at the time . Keynes later commented to Strachey that beauty and intelligence were rarely found in the same person , and that only in Duncan Grant had he found the combination . The union was happy , with biographer Peter Clarke writing that the marriage gave Keynes " a new focus , a new emotional stability and a sheer delight of which he never wearied " . Lydia became pregnant in 1927 but miscarried . Among Keynes 's Bloomsbury friends , Lopokova was , at least initially , subjected to criticism for her manners , mode of conversation and supposedly humble social origins – the last of the ostensible causes being particularly noted in the letters of Vanessa and Clive Bell , and Virginia Woolf . In her novel Mrs Dalloway ( 1925 ) , Woolf bases the character of <unk> Warren Smith on Lopokova . E. M. Forster would later write in contrition : " How we all used to underestimate her " . 
 = = = Support for the arts = = = 
 Keynes thought that the pursuit of money for its own sake was a pathological condition , and that the proper aim of work is to provide leisure . He wanted shorter working hours and longer holidays for all . 
 Keynes was interested in literature in general and drama in particular and supported the Cambridge Arts Theatre financially , which allowed the institution , at least for a while , to become a major British stage outside London . 
 Keynes 's personal interest in classical opera and dance led him to support the Royal Opera House at Covent Garden and the Ballet Company at Sadler 's Wells . During the war , as a member of CEMA ( Council for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts ) , Keynes helped secure government funds to maintain both companies while their venues were shut . Following the war , Keynes was instrumental in establishing the Arts Council of Great Britain and was its founding chairman in 1946 . Unsurprisingly , from the start the two organisations that received the largest grants from the new body were the Royal Opera House and Sadler 's Wells . 
 Like several other notable British authors of his time , Keynes was a member of the Bloomsbury Group . Virginia Woolf 's biographer tells an anecdote on how Virginia Woolf , Keynes and T. S. Eliot discussed religion at a dinner party , in the context of their struggle against Victorian era morality . Keynes may have been confirmed , but according to Cambridge University he was clearly an agnostic , which he remained until his death . According to one biographer , " he was never able to take religion seriously , regarding it as a strange aberration of the human mind . " 
 = = = Investments = = = 
 Keynes was ultimately a successful investor , building up a private fortune . His assets were nearly wiped out following the Wall Street Crash of 1929 , which he did not foresee , but he soon recouped . At Keynes 's death , in 1946 , his net worth stood just short of £ 500 @,@ 000 – equivalent to about £ 11 million ( $ 16 @.@ 5 million ) in 2009 . The sum had been amassed despite lavish support for various good causes and his personal ethic which made him reluctant to sell on a falling market , in cases where he saw such behaviour as likely to deepen a slump . 
 Keynes built up a substantial collection of fine art , including works by Paul Cézanne , Edgar Degas , Amedeo Modigliani , Georges Braque , Pablo Picasso , and Georges Seurat ( some of which can now be seen at the Fitzwilliam Museum ) . He enjoyed collecting books ; he collected and protected many of Isaac Newton 's papers . In part on the basis of these papers , Keynes wrote of Newton as " the last of the magicians . " 
 Keynes successfully managed the endowment of King 's College , Cambridge , with the active component of his portfolio outperforming a British equity index by an average of 8 % a year over a quarter century , earning him favourable mention by later investors such as Warren Buffett and George Soros . 
 = = = Political causes = = = 
 Keynes was a lifelong member of the Liberal Party , which until the 1920s had been one of the two main political parties in the United Kingdom , and as late as 1916 had often been the dominant power in government . Keynes had helped campaign for the Liberals at elections from about 1906 , yet he always refused to run for office himself , despite being asked to do so on three separate occasions in 1920 . From 1926 , when Lloyd George became leader of the Liberals , Keynes took a major role in defining the party 's economics policy , but by then the Liberals had been displaced into third party status by the Labour Party . 
 In 1939 Keynes had the option to enter Parliament as an independent MP with the University of Cambridge seat . A by @-@ election for the seat was to be held due to the illness of an elderly Tory , and the master of Magdalene College had obtained agreement that none of the major parties would field a candidate if Keynes chose to stand . Keynes declined the invitation as he felt he would wield greater influence on events if he remained a free agent . 
 Keynes was a proponent of eugenics . He served as director of the British Eugenics Society from 1937 to 1944 . As late as 1946 , shortly before his death , Keynes declared eugenics to be " the most important , significant and , I would add , genuine branch of sociology which exists . " 
 Keynes once remarked that " the youth had no religion save communism and this was worse than nothing . " Marxism " was founded upon nothing better than a misunderstanding of Ricardo " , and , given time , he ( Keynes ) " would deal thoroughly with the Marxists " and other economists to solve the economic problems their theories " threaten to cause " . 
 In 1931 Keynes had the following to say on Marxism : 
 How can I accept the Communist doctrine , which sets up as its bible , above and beyond criticism , an obsolete textbook which I know not only to be scientifically erroneous but without interest or application to the modern world ? How can I adopt a creed which , preferring the mud to the fish , exalts the boorish proletariat above the bourgeoisie and the intelligentsia , who with all their faults , are the quality of life and surely carry the seeds of all human achievement ? Even if we need a religion , how can we find it in the turbid rubbish of the red bookshop ? It is hard for an educated , decent , intelligent son of Western Europe to find his ideals here , unless he has first suffered some strange and horrid process of conversion which has changed all his values . 
 Keynes was a firm supporter of women 's rights and in 1932 became vice @-@ chairman of the Marie Stopes Society which provided birth control education . He also campaigned against job discrimination against women and unequal pay . He was an outspoken campaigner for reform of the law on homosexuality . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 Throughout his life , Keynes worked energetically for the benefit both of the public and his friends ; even when his health was poor , he laboured to sort out the finances of his old college . Helping to set up the Bretton Woods system , he worked to institute an international monetary system that would be beneficial for the world economy . Keynes suffered a series of heart attacks , which ultimately proved fatal . They began during negotiations for the Anglo @-@ American loan in Savannah , Georgia , where he was trying to secure favourable terms for the United Kingdom from the United States , a process he described as " absolute hell " . A few weeks after returning from the United States , Keynes died of a heart attack at Tilton , his farmhouse home near Firle , East Sussex , England , on 21 April 1946 , at the age of 62 . 
 Both of Keynes 's parents outlived him : his father John Neville Keynes ( 1852 – 1949 ) by three years , and his mother Florence Ada Keynes ( 1861 – 1958 ) by twelve . Keynes 's brother Sir Geoffrey Keynes ( 1887 – 1982 ) was a distinguished surgeon , scholar , and bibliophile . His nephews include Richard Keynes ( 1919 – 2010 ) , a physiologist , and Quentin Keynes ( 1921 – 2003 ) , an adventurer and bibliophile . Keynes 's widow , Lydia Lopokova , died in 1981 . Keynes had no children . 
 = = Publications = = 
 = Mega Man X ( video game ) = 
 Mega Man X , known in Japan as Rockman X ( <unk> ) , is a video game developed and published by Capcom for the Super Nintendo Entertainment System ( SNES ) . It was the first Mega Man game for the 16 @-@ bit console and the first game in the Mega Man X series , a spin @-@ off of the original Mega Man series that began on the SNES 's predecessor , the Nintendo Entertainment System ( NES ) . Mega Man X was first published in Japan on December 17 , 1993 and was released in both North America and Europe the following year . Taking place a century after the original Mega Man series , Mega Man X is set in a futuristic world populated by both humans and " Reploids " , robots capable of thinking , feeling , and growing like their human creators . Because of these complex attributes , many Reploids are prone to destructive , criminal activity and are thereafter referred to as " Mavericks " . The plot of the game follows the protagonist Mega Man X , an android member of a military task force called the " Maverick Hunters " . With the help of his partner Zero , X must thwart the plans of Sigma , a powerful Maverick leader wishing to bring about human extinction . 
 With the transition to more advanced gaming hardware , series artist Keiji Inafune explained that the development of Mega Man X involved reinventing Mega Man through gameplay expansion and a more mature storyline while still maintaining the basic concepts on which the franchise was built . Much like the NES Mega Man games that came before it , Mega Man X is a standard action @-@ platform game where the player takes control of the eponymous character and must complete a set of eight , initial stages in any order desired . Defeating the boss character at the end of each stage grants the player one new weapon that can then be toggled and used at will for the remainder of the game . However , Mega Man X adds a number of new features and makes radical changes to the original gameplay mechanics of previous releases in the series . These include allowing the player to dash along the ground , scale walls , and obtain armor attachments which grant special abilities . 
 Mega Man X has met with positive reviews for its gameplay , sound , and graphics , as well as its attempt to augment the aging Mega Man franchise . A longterm commercial success on the SNES , Mega Man X has since been ported to personal computers ( PCs ) and mobile devices , included in the North American Mega Man X Collection for the Nintendo GameCube and PlayStation 2 ( PS2 ) , and released on the Virtual Console download service for the Wii and the Wii U. The game also received an enhanced remake on the PlayStation Portable ( PSP ) titled Mega Man Maverick Hunter X , or Irregular Hunter X ( <unk> ) in Japan . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mega Man X takes place in an unspecified time during the 22nd century ( 2120 ) and approximately 100 years after the original Mega Man series . A human archaeologist named Dr. Cain discovers the ruins of a robotics research facility that had once been operated by the legendary robot designer Dr. Thomas Light . Among the ruins , Cain finds a large capsule which contains a highly advanced robot with human @-@ level intelligence and emotions , and even free will , the likes of which the world has never seen before . Light had wished to instill within his creation reasonable sanity , good nature , and an understanding of the more controversial aspects of human morality . The robot was buried while running a 30 @-@ year diagnostic program to ensure these features . Cain spends the next several months studying the robot , who is named Mega Man X , or simply " X " . Cain decides to duplicate X and , within several months , completes the first " replicate android " or " Reploid " , a robot who can think , feel , learn , and grow exactly like a human . Within the year , the design is standardized and Reploids are mass @-@ produced . However , with the free will given to a Reploid comes the possibility of criminal activity ; such rogue Reploids are branded as " Mavericks " by law @-@ abiding citizens . 
 As the public outcry against the few Maverick incidents becomes too great to deny , the government steps in , and under the advice of Dr. Cain , forms an elite military police organization called the " Maverick Hunters " . The Hunters are to capture or disable any Reploids that pose a threat to humans , provide damage control at Maverick uprisings , help with disaster recovery , and perform other tasks as needed . To lead this group , Cain designs a very advanced Reploid , thought to be immune to whatever defect causes Mavericks . This robot , named Sigma , heads the Hunters for some time before ultimately becoming a Maverick himself , alongside the vast majority of the other Hunters . Sigma seizes control of a small island , driving out all human occupants . Claiming that the humans are inferior and that they are limiting the growth and potential of Reploids , he calls for his followers to begin a massive extinction effort . X , guilt @-@ ridden at having helped design such a dangerous race , joins forces with the only other remaining Hunter , Zero , in order to stop Sigma at any cost . 
 While on a mission involving a Maverick attack on a highway , X encounters Vile , a mercenary Maverick working for Sigma who pilots a mechanized tank called " Ride Armor " . Unable to defeat Vile , X is saved at a critical moment by Zero , forcing Vile to retreat . Zero then offers encouragement to the less combat @-@ savvy X after the battle . X proceeds to track down and exterminate eight of Sigma 's most powerful Mavericks , then rendezvous with Zero outside Sigma 's stronghold . Inside the compound , X finds that Zero has been captured by Vile . Another battle ensues , ending similar to their first meeting with X at Vile 's mercy . Zero suddenly breaks free of his restraints , latches onto Vile , and self @-@ detonates , destroying his own body and the Maverick 's Ride Armor . Shocked over Zero 's sacrifice , X regains his strength and finishes off Vile . Zero encourages his comrade once again , and succumbs to his damage . Now more determined than ever , X fights his way to Sigma , destroys the Maverick leader , and escapes the island fortress as it explodes and sinks . As he returns to base , X reflects on the events that have unfolded , questioning Zero 's sacrifice , his own decision to fight , and the ongoing war with the Mavericks . After the credits , a message from Sigma reveals that X merely destroyed a temporary body , and that Sigma 's spirit lives on . Sigma then says that he would gather new , stronger bodies to do his bidding , and he would see X soon . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The original Mega Man series on the NES has generally consisted of 2D platform games that focus on run @-@ and @-@ gun gameplay . Mega Man X uses the same basic principles as its precursors but with many added options . The player takes control of the protagonist X , and , after completing an introductory stage , is presented with a stage selection screen that depicts eight boss characters . Each stage is littered with various enemies and hazards and ends with a boss battle against its respective Maverick . Completing a stage rewards the player with a new weapon . The player may attempt these eight levels in any order , using weapons gained in one level to overcome challenges in the others . The player can return to the game at a later point using a password system ; the password will retain any number of the eight stages cleared and most power @-@ ups . Completing some stages will subtly affect the landscape of others . For example , clearing Storm Eagle 's aircraft carrier stage will cause electrical outages in Spark Mandrill 's power plant stage . In certain stages , X can hop inside Ride Armors to fight enemies . Ride Armors are bipedal tanks capable of powerful punches . 
 X 's abilities are similar to those in previous Mega Man games , such as running , jumping , and a chargeable arm cannon named the " X @-@ Buster " . However , Mega Man X introduces a number of elements not present in the original Mega Man titles . One prominent feature is the ability to scale , slide down , or jump off nearly any wall . Armor part capsules can be found in several stages which display a holographic message from Dr. Light when approached . Each capsule upgrades one of X 's body parts — his legs , armor , helmet , or X @-@ Buster — granting the player improved firepower and defense , as well as new abilities , like a dash upgrade . The player can also collect hidden " Heart Tanks " that extend X 's maximum life energy and " Sub @-@ Tanks " that can store extra energy for later use . When certain conditions are met , a secret capsule can be unlocked which gives X the ability to perform the " Hadouken " , an attack used by characters from Capcom 's Street Fighter series . 
 = = Development = = 
 Mega Man X was developed by a team at Capcom which had worked on the long @-@ running Mega Man series for the NES . Lead artist Keiji Inafune ( credited as a planner as <unk> ) recounted that the development of Mega Man X required a lot of brainstorming for its storyline and content where the team 's goal was to branch out from original Mega Man games while still maintaining their fundamentals . In the original Mega Man series , Inafune typically designed the protagonist while his protégé Hayato Kaji handled the supporting characters . However , their roles were reversed for Mega Man X. Kaji ( credited as Rippa <unk> ) illustrated the protagonist X , but had a difficult time with the initial design . He was presented with much more freedom than he was accustomed with the SNES 's larger palette of colors when compared to the NES . Inafune and Kaji worked simultaneously on the various designs for X with different pieces of armor attached . The idea for the armor parts came about because the game was planned during a time when role @-@ playing video games were becoming extremely popular . Inafune felt that Mega Man had always represented a classic action game formula in which the hero earns his defeated enemies ' abilities ; the armor parts were added to supplement this concept . 
 Inafune created the character Zero , whom he originally intended to be the game 's main , playable protagonist . " When the X series came out , I really wanted to redesign Mega Man , " Inafune explained . " I wanted a totally different Mega Man . I ’ m a designer , a creator ; I wanted something new . I didn ’ t want to use the same old Mega Man . " Fearing a negative reaction from fans , Zero was ultimately reduced to a role secondary to Mega Man X. The development team additionally wanted the world of Mega Man X to be much more sophisticated than in the first Mega Man series . They wanted to accomplish this with Zero 's " hardcore " personality and the game 's antagonist Sigma . As stated by Inafune , the original series ' villain Dr. Wily had " a side to him you couldn 't really hate " . Sigma , however , was written as a once @-@ good character suffering an " unforeseen error " that leads him to be completely evil . The game 's story went through several changes during development . Two allies of Mega Man X , named RX and RY , appeared in previews for the game , but were later taken out . Mega Man X altered the franchise tradition of having themed boss characters with a " Man " moniker by replacing them with anthropomorphic animal @-@ like androids . The art and <unk> for these eight bosses were divided among three illustrators : Inafune did Storm Eagle and Chill Penguin ; Kaji did Spark Mandrill , Launch Octopus , and Sting Chameleon ; and Kazunori <unk> ( credited as Ikki ) did Flame Mammoth , Armored Armadillo , and Boomer <unk> . The team was careful in making the bosses distinct from one another in both stature and coloring . Tatsuya Yoshikawa ( credited as Tatsunoko ) , a fourth artist who had recently been hired by Capcom , was given the task of assisting the rest of the team by designing , illustrating , and creating the sprites for the game 's minor enemies . The musical score for Mega Man X was composed by Capcom 's Alph Lyla group . Setsuo Yamamoto ( credited as Setsuo ) was initially the sole composer assigned to the game , and contributed the vast majority of the soundtrack , but four other composers , Yuki Iwai ( credited as Sato ) , Toshihiko Horiyama ( credited as <unk> ) , Yuko Takehara ( credited as Yuko ) and Makoto <unk> ( credited as <unk> ) , were brought in late in production to help finish the soundtrack . Iwai and Horiyama would later compose the soundtracks for Mega Man X2 and X4 respectively . The Japanese division of Sony Records published an arranged album featuring ten songs on March 9 , 1994 . Music using the SNES instrumentals was included as part of the Capcom Music Generation : Rockman X1 ~ X6 soundtrack released by Suleputer in 2003 . 
 The success of the Mega Man series allowed Capcom to continue releasing NES titles well into the 16 @-@ bit era . A teaser for an SNES incarnation of the Mega Man series first made its way into a preview of Mega Man 6 in the spring 1993 issue of the Japanese Club Capcom fan magazine . Mega Man X was announced in North America in a March 1993 Game Players magazine interview with Capcom 's Senior Vice President Joseph <unk> . The tentatively titled " Super Mega Man " was originally to have a " fairly large memory configuration and a battery backup " . The autumn 1993 issue of Club Capcom announced Rockman X for a December 1993 release in Japan , divulged several plot and gameplay details , and showed Zero as a silhouetted " Blues @-@ like character " . Leading up to its release , the game was covered by the North American press surrounding the summer 1993 and winter 1994 Consumer Electronics Shows . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Mega Man X has been widely acclaimed by critics since its release . Gaming magazines in the United States and Europe including Electronic Gaming Monthly ( EGM ) , GamePro , Game Players , Nintendo Power , Super Play , and the German version of Total ! consistently lauded the game 's visuals , audio , control , and overall gameplay . Game Players summarized Mega Man X as " a near @-@ perfect cart with classic gameplay , excellent graphics and sound and tons of hidden items and power @-@ ups " . Nintendo Power stated that the game had " great control and fun " along with " challenging play " . 
 Websites such as IGN , GameSpot , GamesRadar , and 1UP.com retrospectively held Mega Man X as a successful milestone in transitioning the Mega Man series from its increasingly stale existence on the NES to the SNES . Brett Elston of GamesRadar stated , " X was a total reinvention of the series , a perfectly executed update that had fans anticipating its release with a fervor the franchise hadn 't seen since the Mega Man 2 and 3 days . " 
 Mega Man X received criticism from some publications as well . Ed Semrad , Danyon Carpenter , and Al Manuel of the EGM review panel all noted that the game may have too low a difficulty level ; Semrad disliked the introductory stage and felt that the game was too short as well . Super Play editor Zy Nicholson lowered his review score of the game because he found the levels were neither large nor challenging . " A few elementary tricks like repeating easy sections to recoup energy and weapon power will see you through the harder bits , " Nicholson explained . " Within the level you 'll also find restart points , extra lives , and no harsh time limit to put pressure on your performance . Couple this with a password system that records your level completion , status and weapon accumulation and you 'll see we 're not looking at a lasting challenge for the experienced player . " Nintendo Power criticized how little the game had changed stating that " the theme remains the same as the Game Boy and NES Mega Man titles . " 
 The game 's title initially proved a source of some confusion ; the gaming media reported that many gamers mistook the " X " for the roman numeral 10 . 
 Mega Man X was ranked number 58 in Nintendo Power 's " 100 Best Nintendo Games of All Time " in its 100th issue in September 1997 , number 103 in the publication 's " Top 200 Games " list for its 200th issue in February 2006 , and the 11th best SNES game of all time in its August 2008 issue . Both GamesRadar and ScrewAttack listed Mega Man X as the eighth best game in the SNES library . GamePro similarly listed it as the eighth greatest 16 @-@ bit video game . Game Informer considered it the 120th best game of all time in its own 200th issue in December 2009 . IGN named it the twelfth @-@ best on its own top 100 SNES games list in 2011 . 
 Mega Man X was a commercial success . The SNES version has sold 1 @.@ 16 million copies worldwide to date , making it the 41st best @-@ selling Capcom game of all time . IGN 's Jeremy Dunham speculated that the game 's more mature storyline and its inclusion of numerous gameplay extensions over the original Mega Man series helped create a " unique cadre of fans " . The game was followed by seven direct sequels and three related titles : Mega Man Xtreme , Mega Man Xtreme 2 , and Mega Man X Command Mission . Another video game spin @-@ off series , Mega Man Zero , began in 2002 on the Game Boy Advance handheld as a result of the immense popularity of the character Zero . 
 In episodes # 178 and # 179 of the 18th season of the Japanese video game show Game Center CX , Shinya <unk> played the game on the Super Famicom and successfully clears it . 
 = = Re @-@ releases and remakes = = 
 After the SNES version debuted , Mega Man X was ported by <unk> Labs to the IBM PC in 1995 and was packaged with a six @-@ button game controller . Mega Man X received a separate PC release in Japan in 1996 . Majesco republished the SNES version of the game in 1997 . Nintendo also republished the game in Japan on its Nintendo Power cartridge service in 1998 . Mega Man X , alongside its next five direct sequels and Mega Man Battle & Chase , was compiled and made available on the Mega Man X Collection in North America for the Nintendo GameCube and PS2 in 2006 . 
 An enhanced remake titled Mega Man Maverick Hunter X , or Irregular Hunter X ( <unk> ) in Japan , was released worldwide for the PSP between 2005 and 2008 . With the launch of the PSP , Keiji Inafune and his team debated on whether or not to create a Mega Man X9 . " So , we decided that instead of going the X9 route , let 's go back to the series ' roots and rediscover what makes the X series so classic , " Inafune concluded . " We felt that the best way to do that would be to make an X remake . " Although the remake stays true to the original game in both gameplay and basic storyline , Maverick Hunter X features a total graphical overhaul with 3D character models and backgrounds , a remixed soundtrack , voice acting , and anime cutscenes . According to Yoshikawa , the character illustrations were updated to resemble both toys and the designs of Mega Man X8 . 
 In addition to these changes , many power @-@ ups in Maverick Hunter X , such as the armor capsules , are relocated to different levels . The remake also has a few extras including an original video animation titled " The Day of Σ " ( which serves as a storyline prequel ) and an unlockable mode to play through the game as the character Vile . Inafune implemented this mode to offer players a new perspective on the game through the eyes of a villain , feeling it would be " too obvious and boring " given an option to play as Zero . 
 Like the original game , Maverick Hunter X has received very positive reviews from critics , accumulating aggregate scores of 82 % on Game Rankings and 79 out of 100 on Metacritic . Although the game did not meet sales expectations , it was later made available as a download from the PlayStation Network . The Japanese and North American versions were also bundled in a special compilation with Mega Man Powered Up , a remake of the original Mega Man . 
 Capcom released a port of Mega Man X onto FOMA and i @-@ mode compatible mobile phones in Japan in 2007 . Mega Man X has also been made available for purchase on the Virtual Console service in Japan and North America in 2011 for the Wii , and later in Europe in 2012 , as well as for the Wii U in 2013 . The game was ported to the Android operating system in Japan as a free download on November 18 , 2011 . Another remake of Mega Man X was released on the Apple iOS ( iPhone and iPod Touch ) on December 21 , 2011 . This version is based on the mobile phone version of the game and features touch controls , Game Center support , and a challenge mode with 80 levels . Weapon and armor upgrades can be purchased to ease the game 's difficulty . 
 = The Lightning Thief = 
 The Lightning Thief is a 2005 fantasy @-@ adventure novel based on Greek mythology , the first young adult novel written by Rick Riordan . It is the first novel in the Percy Jackson & the Olympians series , which charts the adventures of modern @-@ day twelve @-@ year @-@ old Percy Jackson as he discovers he is a demigod , the son of a mortal woman and the Greek god Poseidon . Percy and his friends Annabeth Chase and Grover Underwood go on a quest to prevent a war between the gods Zeus , Poseidon , and Hades . 
 The Lightning Thief was published in June 2005 by Miramax Books , an imprint of Hyperion Books for Children and thus Disney Publishing ( succeeded by the Disney Hyperion imprint ) . The book has sold over 1 @.@ 2 million copies in the subsequent four years , appearing on The New York Times children 's Best Seller list and being listed as one of the Young Adult Library Services Association 's Best Books for Young Adults , among other awards . It was adapted into a film named Percy Jackson & the Olympians : The Lightning Thief released in the United States on February 12 , 2010 . The sequel to this novel is The Sea of Monsters . 
 = = Development and publication = = 
 Development for The Lightning Thief began when author Rick Riordan made up stories for his son Haley , who had been diagnosed with ADHD and dyslexia . His son had been studying Greek mythology in second grade and asked that his father come up with bedtime stories based on Greek myths . Riordan had been a Greek mythology teacher in middle school for many years and was able to remember enough stories to please his son . Soon Riordan ran out of myths and his son requested that Riordan make new ones using the characters from Greek myths with a new twist . Riordan created the fictional character Percy Jackson and his travels across the United States to recover Zeus 's lightning bolt . After Riordan finished telling the story his son asked that his dad write a book based on Percy 's adventures , and he did . 
 While he gave his manuscript to his agent and editor to review , Riordan took his book to a group of middle schoolers to critique . With their help , he came up with the name of the book and invented Percy 's magic sword . In 2004 the book was sold to Miramax Books for enough money that Riordan could quit his job to focus on writing . The book has since been released in multiple versions ( including hardcover , paperback , and audio editions ) and has been translated and published all over the world . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Lightning Thief is narrated in the first person by Percy Jackson , a 12 @-@ year @-@ old boy with dyslexia and ADHD living in New York City . During a class field trip to the Metropolitan Museum of Art to see a Greco @-@ Roman exhibit , he stands up to a bully picking on his friend Grover Underwood and " pushes " her into a nearby fountain . One of the chaperoning teachers , an algebra teacher named Mrs. Dodds , takes him away from the other students , presumably to give him his punishment . Instead , Percy is shocked when she transforms into one of the three Furies of Greek myth and attacks him . The other chaperone , a Latin teacher named Mr. Brunner , suddenly appears and throws Percy a pen that changes into a strange sword . Percy instinctively swings at the monster in front of him , and she turns to dust and disappears . When Percy returns to the rest of the students , he discovers that not only do they have no idea what happened inside the museum , they also do not remember having a teacher named Mrs. Dodds . Over the course of the school year , Percy almost convinces himself that it was all a hallucination , except that his friend Grover seems to be hiding something whenever the subject is brought up . A few days before the end of school he overhears Grover and Mr. Brunner talking about him , Mrs. Dodds , and a stolen item of great importance — which only serves to confirm his suspicions . 
 Percy and his mother , Sally , go on a summer trip to the beach . During a terrible storm , the two are awakened by a surprise visit from Grover — who Percy suddenly learns is actually not a human teenager , but instead a young satyr . Grover tells them they are in danger , and the three drive to a mysterious summer camp . Upon arrival , they are attacked by the Minotaur . In the ensuing fight , the Minotaur knocks out Grover and grabs Mrs. Jackson , who inexplicably dissolves into a blinding flash of gold light . Believing he has just lost his mother forever , Percy manages to break off one of the Minotaur 's horns and kills the beast , then forces himself to drag the unconscious Grover over the property line and up to a farmhouse . He wakes up three days later and learns he is at a place called Camp Half @-@ Blood . Percy then learns that he is a demigod : the son of a human and a Greek god . 
 Percy settles into camp life and meets several other demigods , including : Luke Castellan , a son of Hermes ; Annabeth Chase , a daughter of Athena ; and Clarisse La Rue , a daughter of Ares . Several strange incidents begin to reveal his powers as a demigod . After Percy is attacked by a monster which shouldn 't have gotten through the camp 's borders , Percy is publicly claimed by his father , the god Poseidon . 
 A few days later , Mr. Brunner ( who is really Chiron the centaur ) summons Percy to the Big House and tells him how the three eldest male gods ( Poseidon , Zeus , and Hades ) swore an oath not to have children more than 70 years ago ; Percy represents a violation of that oath merely by being alive . This , coupled with the fact that King Zeus 's master lightning bolt has recently been stolen , has bred much suspicion between the gods , and Percy is tasked with locating that bolt before an all @-@ out war may break out . Percy chooses Annabeth and Grover to accompany him on a quest to the realm of Hades , the most likely culprit . 
 After traveling across the country to Los Angeles and defeating several mythological monsters ( including Medusa and the Chimera ) the three find Hades , who reveals that his Helm of Darkness ( his symbol of power ) has been stolen too . Hades accuses Percy of stealing his helm and threatens to kill Percy and his mother ( who has actually been a hostage in his realm the whole time ) and release all the dead back into the real world unless it is returned . Percy and his friends manage to escape back to L.A. and there discover that the god Ares has been manipulating them and possesses all the missing items . Percy challenges Ares to a duel , wins , and gives Hade 's Helm to the reformed Fury he knows as Mrs. Dodds ; Hades then realizes that Percy was not the thief and returns Mrs. Jackson to their apartment in New York . 
 Percy takes the master bolt back to Zeus , who rewards the young hero by not killing him as he should because of Poseidon 's broken oath . Percy returns to camp a hero and enjoys the rest of his summer there . On the last day of camp , however , he goes into the woods to hang out with Luke Castellan , who then turns on him . Luke reveals himself to be the real thief of the Helm and master bolt , working on the orders of Kronos , the Lord of the Titans . Kronos also manipulated power @-@ hungry Ares into taking part in the scheme . Percy can not believe that Luke , an all @-@ around nice guy , would do such a thing , and so Luke explains his belief that the gods are irresponsible and poor leaders who must be usurped . He offers Percy the chance to join him , and when the other demigod does not , Luke tries to kill Percy with a poisonous scorpion . Percy manages to kill it , but is badly poisoned and nearly dies . When he has recovered , Percy is given the choice of whether to return home for the school year or stay at camp year round . After much thought Percy decides to spend the school year with his mother , as it is the first time he won 't have to go to boarding school , even though it will be more dangerous for him . 
 = = = Prophecy = = = 
 The prophecy given by the Oracle before Percy 's quest reads : 
 You shall go west , and face the god who has turned . 
 You shall find what was stolen , and see it safely returned . 
 You shall be betrayed by one who calls you a friend . 
 And you shall fail to save what matters most , in the end . 
 = = = = Meaning = = = = 
 At first , it is assumed that Percy had to travel west from New York to L.A. to confront Hades , though it is later revealed that he really had to meet Ares , in Denver . 
 Percy locates both Zeus 's master bolt , which was always known to be missing , and also Hades 's Helm . 
 Luke betrays Percy immediately after treating him like a friend . 
 Percy is forced to leave behind his mother in the Underworld knows his quest is not complete , and also does not help his mother to rid herself of her abusive husband Gabe <unk> . Mrs. Jackson is saved in the first case by Hades 's choice to free her after he receives his Helm , and in the second , by her own choice to stand up to " Smelly Gabe " . 
 = = Critical Reception = = 
 The Lightning Thief received mostly positive reviews . Common Sense Media said , " There are two levels of fun in The Lightning Thief . One is the fast @-@ paced quest of a young hero and his friends to save the world ... " and added , " Another level of fun here – laughing at the wicked ways the author has updated the gods and monsters for the 21st century " . However , it did criticize some aspects of the book describing the prose as " choppy and attitude @-@ filled " and complaining that " [ t ] he characters aren 't emotionally involving " . Its overall rating was 4 stars out of 5 . Numerous other reviews were more positive . The New York Times praised The Lightning Thief as " perfectly paced , with electrifying moments chasing each other like heartbeats " . School Library Journal said in its starred review that the book was " [ a ] n adventure @-@ quest with a hip edge " and that " [ r ] <unk> will be eager to follow the young protagonist 's next move " . Kirkus reviews said , " The sardonic tone of the narrator 's voice lends a refreshing air of realism to this riotously paced quest tale of heroism that questions the realities of our world , family , friendship and loyalty . " Eoin Colfer , author of Artemis Fowl called it " A fantastic blend of myth and modern " . Finally , Publishers Weekly also praised the book , regarding it as " swift and humorous " and added that the book would " leave many readers eager for the next installment . " 
 On April 8 , 2007 , The Lightning Thief was ranked ninth on The New York Times Best Seller list for children 's books . The Lightning Thief was the winner of the School Library Journal Best Book of 2005 as well one of the books in the Chicago Public Library Best of the Best Books List , 2005 . It was also in the VOYA Top Shelf Fiction List and was the winner of the Red House Children 's Book Award Winner ( UK ) , 2006 ; <unk> Torchlight Award ( UK ) , 2006 ; and the Mark Twain Award ( Missouri Association of School Librarians ) , 2008 . It was an American Library Association Notable Book , 2006 and a New York Times Notable Book ( 2005 ) . It received the Young Reader 's Choice Award in 2008 and the Rebecca Caudill Young Reader 's Book Award in 2009 . Scholastic Parent & Child magazine also included the novel within its 100 " Greatest Books for Kids . " When asked about the various awards , Rick Riordan said : " The ultimate compliment for a children 's writer is when the kids like it . " 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 = = = Film adaptation = = = 
 In June 2004 , 20th Century Fox acquired the feature film rights to the book . In April 2007 director Chris Columbus was hired to helm the project . Logan Lerman is Percy Jackson and Brandon T. Jackson is Grover Underwood , the satyr . Alexandra Daddario plays Annabeth while Jake Abel was cast as Luke Castellan . Pierce Brosnan plays Chiron . The film is titled Percy Jackson & the Olympians : The Lightning Thief and was released in the United States on February 12 , 2010 . The film received mixed reviews from critics upon release but was a commercial success by grossing $ 226 million at the worldwide box office . A sequel , Percy Jackson : Sea of Monsters was released in 2013 , directed by Thor Freudenthal . 
 = = = Audiobook = = = 
 On June 28 , 2005 , a 10 @-@ hour and 25 minute audio book version , read by actor Jesse Bernstein , was published worldwide by Listening Library . 
 Kirkus magazine said , " the narrator ’ s voice lends a refreshing air of realism to this riotously paced quest tale of heroism that questions the realities of our world , family , friendship and loyalty " . AudioFile Magazine praised the audiobook , " adults and children alike will be spellbound as they listen to this deeply imaginative tale unfold . " School Library Journal both praised and criticized the audio book saying " Although some of Jesse Bernstein 's accents fail ( the monster from Georgia , for instance , has no Southern trace in her voice ) , he does a fine job of keeping the main character 's tones and accents distinguishable " . 
 = = = Musical = = = 
 A one @-@ hour musical aimed at young audiences was planned to hit the road on a nationwide tour in September 2014 following a stint in New York City in 2014 . 
 = = Sequels = = 
 The Lightning Thief is followed by The Sea of Monsters in which Percy and Annabeth rescue Grover who has been imprisoned by Polyphemus , the Cyclopes , and recover the Golden Fleece to save the camp . They are accompanied by Percy 's half brother , Tyson and Clarisse in this mission . 
 Like The Lightning Thief , it won several prizes and received generally positive reviews as well . It sold over 100 @,@ 000 copies in paperback . It was followed by The Titan 's Curse , The Battle of the Labyrinth , and The Last Olympian as well as an entire new sequel @-@ series , The Heroes of Olympus . 
 = = Foreign language editions = = 
 The Lightning Thief was published in Chinese , Italian , Turkish , Danish , Croatian , Czech , Finnish , French , Dutch , German , Hebrew , Portuguese , Brazilian Portuguese , Indonesian , Serbian , Norwegian , Spanish and Catalan . The French , German , and Spanish editions were published in 2006 . The other translations of the book were published in 2008 . The Icelandic publisher <unk> released another edition in 2012 . The novel is also on sale in Taiwan , published by Yuan <unk> Publishing . In Czech it is called ' Percy Jackson <unk> <unk> ' . 
 = Tropical Storm Tammy ( 2005 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Tammy was a short lived tropical storm during October in the 2005 Atlantic hurricane season which caused minor damage to the southeastern United States . More significant , however were its remnants which contributed to the Northeast U.S. flooding of October 2005 . 
 Tropical Storm Tammy formed from a non @-@ tropical system off the Florida coast on October 5 . It moved north just offshore before making landfall later that day . The tropical storm rapidly weakened as it moved overland and dissipated the next day . Its remnant circulation moved south towards the Gulf of Mexico , while the moisture was absorbed by a northeasterly moving cold front . There were no fatalities directly related to Tammy ; however , ten people were killed by the remnants of the storm in combination with the remnants of Subtropical Depression Twenty @-@ Two . Total damages from the storm were $ 30 million . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave left the western coast of Africa on September 24 and crossed the Atlantic without any development . The wave began to develop on October 2 north of the Lesser Antilles when it encountered an upper level trough . It strengthened as it passed through the Bahamas and early on October 5 a vigorous tropical disturbance formed . As the system already had tropical @-@ storm force winds , it was immediately named Tropical Storm Tammy . Upon being classified , the system was poorly organized , with deep convection only persisting to the northeast of the center of circulation . Tropical storm @-@ force winds were presumed to be located underneath the convection as ship reports nearby the system only reported winds up to 35 mph ( 55 km / h ) . Tammy quickly tracked towards the northwest in a southerly flow between a mid to upper @-@ level low over the Gulf of Mexico and a ridge located over the western Atlantic Ocean . Later that day , a reconnaissance flight into the storm recorded flight level winds of 61 mph ( 98 km / h ) , which corresponds to surface winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) . However , small areas of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) to 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) were reported by the crew members of the aircraft . At 6 : 30 pm EST ( 2300 UTC ) , the storm made landfall with winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) near Atlantic Beach , Florida . The tropical storm then moved inland over Georgia and into southeastern Alabama near Ozark , where it lost its circulation on October 6 . 
 The remnant low drifted south towards the Gulf of Mexico before being absorbed by a cold front ( which also picked remnants of Subtropical Depression Twenty @-@ two ) , and moving northeast . This cold front , of which Tammy 's remnants were a part , affected much of the Northeastern United States over the next few days . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Tropical Storm Tammy surprised forecasters when it formed on October 5 . Because they had not expected the disturbance to develop , warnings were not issued until about 12 hours before the storm made landfall . Despite the short warning , tourists and business travelers cancelled flights as the storm neared landfall . Upon the storm developing , a tropical storm warning was immediately issued for the coast from Cocoa Beach , Florida to the Santee River , South Carolina . 
 The U.S. Department of Homeland Security 's U.S. Coast Guard , 7th District issued an advisory to mariners , warning them to prepare for the storm and avoid the ocean if possible . In Georgia , the National Park Service evacuated the residents of Cumberland Island and closed the ferry which services it . The Glynn County Emergency Operations Agency monitored and prepared for Tropical Storm Tammy 's landfall , however the poor warning hampered their efforts . Residents all over the state expressed frustration at the lack of time they had to prepare . When Tammy moved inland 12 hours later the southern end of the warning zone moved north to Altamaha Sound , Georgia before all warnings were discontinued on October 6 . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Tropical Storm Tammy caused minor damage . Its highest sustained winds were 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) and its strongest recorded wind gust was 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) . The winds produced no significant damage , but did disrupt power to 16 @,@ 500 utility customers and delayed the <unk> College Regatta . Lightning produced by a thunderstorm in Broward County , Florida struck three teenagers during a football game in Coconut Creek , killing one and injuring the other two . 
 To most areas in north Florida and southern Georgia , Tammy brought 3 to 5 in ( 76 to 127 mm ) of rain , though some isolated areas received 10 inches ( 250 mm ) . In Georgia , flooding damaged over 30 homes in Brunswick . Several dirt and coastal roads were washed out , and sewers overflowed as far north as Baltimore County , Maryland . Two small pond dams burst , including a 173 @-@ year @-@ old wooden dam , but new stone dams were constructed in place before the old ones failed . Conversely , Tammy 's rains were beneficial in South Carolina , where they helped alleviate dry conditions after a rainless September . 
 Tammy 's storm surge was approximately 2 to 4 ft ( 0 @.@ 61 to 1 @.@ 22 m ) and caused salt @-@ water flooding along the coast of northeastern Florida , Georgia , and South Carolina . The surge damages boardwalks along the coast , and wave action causes over 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) of beach erosion . In addition to the flooding , Tropical Storm Tammy spawned one tornado . Rated an F0 tornado , it touched down near Brunswick , Georgia were it snapped trees and caused moderate roof damage along its 2 mi ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) path . The storm 's total damage was estimated at around $ 30 million ( 2005 USD ) . The outer bands of Tammy brought heavy rains , peaking around 7 in ( 180 mm ) in places , and caused significant beach erosion . Winds along the coastline gusted up to 59 mph ( 95 km / h ) , downing numerous trees . The worst damage occurred in Beaufort County where 30 trees were downed , one of which fell on a home . Rough seas undermined several beach homes and caused one to be condemned . 
 = = Aftermath , naming and records = = 
 A Red Cross shelter at Seldon Park , Brunswick , Georgia , opened for two days following the storm to temporarily house those whose houses were flooded . Tammy 's remnant low was absorbed a larger extratropical low which tracked north and contributed to the Northeast U.S. flooding of October 2005 , which killed ten people and caused significant damage . As a result of the flooding , the Federal Emergency Management Agency paid $ 44 million in losses . 
 <unk> in the Carolinas blamed high fuel prices and the disruption of Tropical Storm Tammy for some of the troubles facing the shrimping industry in 2005 . Rising fuel prices and dwindling demand has already created tough conditions that year , but the disruption of several days ' fishing due to Tammy escalated the situation . 
 When Tropical Storm Tammy formed on October 5 , it was the earliest ever in the season that the twentieth storm formed , beating the previous record held by Storm 20 of the 1933 season by 21 days . 
 = Peter Jennings = 
 Peter Charles Archibald Ewart Jennings , CM ( July 29 , 1938 – August 7 , 2005 ) was a Canadian @-@ American journalist and news anchor . He was the sole anchor of ABC 's World News Tonight from 1983 until his death in 2005 of complications from lung cancer . A high @-@ school dropout , he transformed himself into one of American television 's most prominent journalists . 
 Jennings started his career early , hosting a Canadian radio show at the age of nine . He began his professional career with <unk> @-@ TV in Ottawa during its early years , anchoring the local newscasts and hosting a teen dance show , Saturday Date , on Saturdays . In 1965 , ABC News tapped him to anchor its flagship evening news program . His inexperience was attacked by critics and others in television news , making for a difficult first stint in the anchor chair . Jennings became a foreign correspondent in 1968 , reporting from the Middle East . 
 He returned as one of World News Tonight 's three anchors in 1978 , and was promoted to the role of sole anchor in 1983 . Jennings was also known for his marathon coverage of breaking news stories , staying on the air for 15 or more hours straight to anchor the live broadcast of events such as the outbreak of the Gulf War in 1991 , the Millennium celebrations in 2000 , and the September 11 attacks in 2001 . In addition to anchoring , he was the host of many ABC News special reports and moderated several American presidential debates . Having always been fascinated with the United States , Jennings became a naturalized United States citizen in 2003 . 
 Along with Tom Brokaw at NBC and Dan Rather at CBS , Jennings formed part of the " Big Three " news anchors who dominated American evening network news from the early 1980s until his death in 2005 , which closely followed the retirements of Brokaw and Rather . 
 = = Life and career = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Jennings was born on July 29 , 1938 , in Toronto , Ontario , Canada ; he and his younger sister Sarah were children of Elizabeth ( Osborne ) and Charles Jennings , a prominent radio broadcaster for the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation ( CBC ) . Peter Jennings started his broadcasting career at the age of nine , hosting Peter 's People , a half @-@ hour , Saturday morning , CBC Radio show for kids . His father was on a business trip to the Middle East when the show debuted ; upon returning , Charles Jennings , who harbored a deep dislike of nepotism , was outraged to learn that the network had put his son on the air . 
 When Jennings was 11 , he started attending Trinity College School in Port Hope , Ontario , where he excelled in sports . After the CBC moved his father to its Ottawa headquarters in the early 1950s , Jennings transferred to Lisgar Collegiate Institute . He struggled academically , and Jennings later surmised that it was out of " pure boredom " that he failed 10th grade and dropped out . " I loved girls , " he said . " I loved comic books . And for reasons I don 't understand , I was pretty lazy . " Jennings then briefly attended Carleton University , where he says he " lasted about 10 minutes " before dropping out . He also attended the University of Ottawa . 
 Although Jennings dreamed of following in his father 's footsteps in broadcasting , his first job was as a bank teller for the Royal Bank of Canada . He had hoped that the company would assign him to its Havana branch ; instead , it located him to the small town of Prescott , Ontario , before transferring him to its nearby Brockville branch . During this time , he explored acting by appearing in several amateur musical productions with the Orpheus Musical Theatre Society , including Damn Yankees and South Pacific . 
 It was in Brockville that the 21 @-@ year @-@ old Jennings started his rise in broadcasting . In 1959 , <unk> , a local radio station , hired him as a member of its news department ; many of his stories , including his coverage of a local train wreck , were picked up by the CBC . By 1961 , Jennings had joined the staff of <unk> @-@ TV , then a new television station in Ottawa . When the station launched in March 1961 , Jennings was initially an interviewer and co @-@ producer for Vue , a late @-@ night news program . His producers saw a youthful attractiveness in him that resembled that of Dick Clark , and Jennings soon found himself hosting Club Thirteen , a dance show similar to American Bandstand . 
 The next year , CTV , Canada 's first private TV network and a fledgling competitor of his father 's network , hired the 24 @-@ year @-@ old Jennings as co @-@ anchor of its late @-@ night national newscast . While reporting for CTV , he was the first Canadian journalist to arrive in Dallas after the assassination of President John F. Kennedy . In 1964 , CTV sent Jennings to cover the Democratic National Convention in Atlantic City , New Jersey . There , he ran into Elmer Lower , then president of ABC News , who offered him a job as a correspondent for the American network , an opportunity Jennings initially rejected . " The job was pretty intimidating for a guy like me in a tiny city in Canada , " Jennings later recalled . " I thought , What if I screw up ? What if I fail ? " Three months later though , he changed his mind and moved to the United States . 
 = = = United States ' youngest anchor = = = 
 Jennings started reporting for ABC at its New York news bureau . At the time , ABC lagged behind the more established news divisions of NBC and CBS , and the network was trying to attract younger viewers . On February 1 , 1965 , ABC plucked the fresh @-@ faced Canadian from the field and placed him at the anchor desk of Peter Jennings With the News , then a 15 @-@ minute nightly newscast . He replaced Ron Cochran , a fellow Canadian . At 26 , Jennings was , and remains , the youngest @-@ ever U.S. network news anchor . " ABC was in bad shape at the time , " Jennings said . " They were willing to try anything , and , to demonstrate the point , they tried me . " 
 An inexperienced Jennings had a hard time keeping up with his rivals at the other networks , and he – and the upstart ABC News - could not compete with the venerable newscasts of Walter Cronkite at CBS and Chet Huntley and David Brinkley at NBC . Some in the American audience disliked Jennings ' Canadian accent . He pronounced lieutenant as " <unk> " , mangled the pronunciation of " Appomattox , " and misidentified the " Marines ' Hymn " as " Anchors Aweigh " at Lyndon Johnson 's presidential inauguration ; his lack of in @-@ depth knowledge of American affairs and culture led critics to deride Jennings as a " <unk> " . " It was a little ridiculous when you think about it , " he later reflected . " A 26 @-@ year @-@ old trying to compete with Cronkite , Huntley and Brinkley . I was simply unqualified . After three rocky years at the anchor desk , Jennings quit to become a foreign correspondent . 
 = = = Foreign correspondent = = = 
 Jennings was determined to build his journalism credentials abroad . In 1968 , he established ABC 's Middle East bureau in Beirut , Lebanon , the first American television news bureau in the Arab world . The next year , he demonstrated his growing expertise in Middle Eastern affairs with Palestine : New State of Mind , a well @-@ received half @-@ hour documentary for ABC 's Now news program . As ABC 's Beirut bureau chief , Jennings soon became familiar with the intricacies of the Arab @-@ Israeli conflict , including the rise of the Palestinian Black September Organization during the early 1970s . He conducted the first American television interview with Palestine Liberation Organization chairman Yasser Arafat . While stationed in the Lebanese capital , Jennings dated Palestinian activist Hanan Ashrawi , who was then a graduate student in literature at the American University in Beirut . 
 In 1972 , Jennings covered his first major breaking news story , the Munich Olympics massacre of Israeli athletes by Black September . His live reporting , which drew on the expertise he had acquired in the Middle East , provided context for Americans who were unfamiliar with the Palestinian group . By hiding with his camera crew close to the athletic compound where the Israeli athletes were being held hostage , Jennings was able to provide ABC with clear video of the masked hostage @-@ takers . He would later be criticized for insisting on using the terms " guerillas " and " commandos " instead of " terrorists " to describe the members of Black September . 
 After the events of Munich , Jennings continued to report on Middle East issues . In 1973 , he covered the Yom Kippur War , and the following year , he served as chief correspondent and co @-@ producer of Sadat : Action Biography , a profile of Egyptian president Anwar Sadat that would win him his first of two George Foster Peabody Awards . The documentary established Jennings as Sadat 's favorite correspondent . That summer , Jennings married for the second time , to <unk> Malouf , a Lebanese photographer . His first wife had been childhood sweetheart Valerie <unk> . 
 Jennings returned to the U.S. at the end of 1974 to become Washington correspondent and news anchor for ABC 's new morning program AM America , a predecessor to Good Morning America . ABC was hoping that the show , in which it had invested $ 8 million , would challenge NBC 's highly popular Today . AM America debuted on January 6 , 1975 , with Jennings delivering regular newscasts from Washington . The show never gained ground against Today , and was canceled in just ten months . In November 1975 , Jennings moved abroad , this time as ABC 's chief foreign correspondent . He continued to cover the Middle East , and in 1978 he was the first American reporter to interview the Ayatollah Khomeini of Iran , then in exile in Paris . 
 Meanwhile , ABC News and its newly installed president , Roone Arledge , were preparing an overhaul of its nightly news program , which was then known as ABC Evening News and whose ratings had languished in third place behind CBS and NBC since its inception . In the late 1970s , a disastrous pairing of Harry Reasoner and Barbara Walters at the anchor desk left the network searching for new ideas . Arledge decided to implement a three @-@ anchor format for the program . On July 10 , 1978 , World News Tonight debuted with Frank Reynolds in Washington , Max Robinson in Chicago , and Jennings in London . Jennings ' official title was " Foreign Desk Anchor , " although he continued to serve as the network 's chief foreign correspondent . By the summer of 1979 , the innovative broadcast , which featured some of the same glitzy presentation as Arledge 's previous television coup , Wide World of Sports , had climbed in the ratings . The newscast had gained 1 @.@ 9 million households from its debut , and was now in a dead heat with NBC 's evening newscast . 
 Jennings also found renewed success in his personal life . In 1979 , he married for the third time to fellow ABC correspondent Kati Marton . That same year , he became a father when Marton gave birth to their daughter , Elizabeth . In 1982 , Jennings ' and Marton 's second child , Christopher , was born . 
 As part of ABC 's triumvirate , Jennings continued to cover major international news , especially Middle East issues . His nightly appearance at an anchor desk in London gave the impression that ABC News was more dedicated to foreign news than the other networks . Jennings reported on the Iranian Revolution and subsequent hostage crisis , the assassination of Sadat , the Falklands war , Israel 's 1982 invasion of Lebanon , and Pope John Paul II 's 1983 visit to Poland . His insistence on covering the major international stories himself irked some of his fellow ABC foreign correspondents , who came to resent being scooped by what they deemed as " Jennings ' Flying Circus . " Jennings , too , was not completely satisfied with his job in London . When his contract expired with ABC in the early 1980s , Jennings flirted with the possibility of moving back to Canada and working with the CBC on its new nightly newscast , The Journal . The CBC could not meet Jennings ' renegotiation deadlines , though , and the deal fell through . 
 = = = Sole anchor = = = 
 In 1983 , Reynolds fell ill with multiple myeloma , a type of blood cancer that often attacks the bones , and was forced to stop anchoring in April . His absence caused a dip in the ratings for ABC 's nightly newscast . ABC originally expected a full recovery , and relocated Jennings to its Washington bureau to fill in for Reynolds while he was sick ; the move helped buoy the newscast 's ratings , although it remained in third place . On July 20 , 1983 , Reynolds died unexpectedly after developing acute hepatitis . 
 On August 9 , 1983 , ABC announced that Jennings had signed a four @-@ year contract with the network and would become the sole anchor and senior editor for World News Tonight on September 5 . Jennings would anchor the program from New York City , the program 's new base of operations . The announcement signaled a generational shift in the evening news broadcasts , and the beginning of what the media would deem the " Big Three " era of Jennings , Dan Rather of CBS , and Tom Brokaw of NBC . Rather had already been elevated to anchor in 1981 after the retirement of Walter Cronkite , and Brokaw of NBC Nightly News was set to become sole anchor the same day as Jennings . At the time , Jennings expressed apprehension that the impending competition among the three newsmen was at risk of becoming superficial . " With me , Brokaw and Rather , I recognize that there will be the factor of three pretty faces , " he said . " That 's an inevitable byproduct of television . But if that is what it comes down to in terms of the approach we take , if our approach is that singular , then we will all have made a mistake . " 
 Jennings ' debut on September 5 , 1983 , marked the beginning of a steady climb in the ratings for ABC News . He spent his first year at the anchor desk educating himself on American domestic affairs in preparation for the 1984 presidential campaign season . In June 1984 , Jennings , who later admitted that his political knowledge was limited at the time , co @-@ anchored ABC 's coverage of the Democratic National Convention with David Brinkley . " I had not covered an election campaign in 16 years , " Jennings said , " so here was I going to co @-@ anchor with David Brinkley in 1984 , and he wasn 't even sure I knew who the faces belonged to , and he was right . " Jennings and ABC were criticized for suddenly halting coverage of the convention for 30 minutes and airing a rerun of Hart to Hart instead . 
 Despite a shaky start at the anchor desk , Jennings ' broadcast began to climb in the ratings . Jennings was praised for his performance during the 1986 Space Shuttle Challenger disaster , when he anchored ABC 's coverage of the event for 11 straight hours . By 1989 , competition among the three nightly newscasts had risen to fever pitch . When the Loma Prieta earthquake struck the San Francisco Bay area , media pundits praised Jennings and ABC News for their prompt on @-@ air response , while criticizing the delayed reaction of Tom Brokaw and NBC News . The next month , Brokaw redeemed himself by scooping the other networks with news of the fall of the Berlin Wall . It was World News Tonight , however , that ended the year at the top ; ABC 's evening newscast spent the last 13 weeks of the year in first place , and its average ratings for the entire year beat CBS for the first time . 
 Jennings ' on @-@ air success continued in 1990 , and World News Tonight consistently led the ratings race . In January , he anchored the first installment of Peter Jennings Reporting — hour @-@ long , prime @-@ time ABC News specials dedicated to exploring a single topic . His inaugural program on gun violence in America drew praise . His second installment of Peter Jennings Reporting in April , " From the Killing Fields " , focused on U.S. policy towards Cambodia . The program alleged that the federal government was covertly supporting the Khmer Rouge 's return to power in the Asian nation , a charge that the Bush administration initially denied . On July 18 , though , the White House announced that it was ending recognition of the Khmer Rouge . 
 When the Gulf War started on January 16 , 1991 , Jennings began a marathon anchoring stint to cover the story , spending 20 of the first 48 hours of the war on @-@ air , and leading ABC News to its highest @-@ ever ratings . After interrupting regular Saturday morning cartoons on January 19 to broadcast a military briefing from Saudi Arabia , Jennings and ABC became concerned about the emotional impact of the war coverage on children . Out of that concern , Jennings hosted a 90 @-@ minute special , War in the Gulf : Answering Children 's Questions the next Saturday morning ; the program featured Jennings , ABC correspondents , and American military personnel answering phoned @-@ in questions and explaining the war to young viewers . 
 On October 13 , 1991 , breaking news forced ABC News to interrupt regular Saturday morning programming again . Jennings was once again mindful of his audience , prefacing the coverage of the Senate confirmation hearings for Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas with remarks for children . " You may hear some not very nice language , " said Jennings . He noted that Thomas and his accuser , Anita Hill , " have a very painful disagreement about some things the woman says the man did to her when they were working together ... You can ask your parents to tell you more . " Jennings continued to produce special programs aimed at young viewers , anchoring Growing Up in the Age of AIDS , a frank , 90 @-@ minute @-@ long discussion on AIDS in February 1992 ; and Prejudice : Answering Children 's Questions , a forum on racism in April 1992 . 
 Politics dominated network news in 1992 . Jennings moderated the final debate among the Democratic presidential candidates in March , and anchored Peter Jennings Reporting : Who Is Ross Perot ? and a subsequent 90 @-@ minute town forum with Perot and a studio audience in June . On September 9 , 1992 , ABC announced that it would be switching the format of its political coverage to give less recognition to staged sound bites . " We 're aware that a lot of you are turned off by the political process and that many of you put at least some of the blame on us , " Jennings told viewers on World News Tonight . " We 'll only devote time to a candidate 's daily routine if it is more than routine . There will be less attention to staged appearances and sound bites designed exclusively for television . " After Bill Clinton was elected as president in November 1992 , Jennings featured the new administration in two of his specials for children ; he anchored President Clinton : Answering Children 's Questions in February 1993 ; and Kids in the Crossfire : Violence in America in November 1993 , a live special from a Washington , D.C. junior high school which featured Attorney General Janet Reno and rapper MC Lyte . 
 The early 1990s also served up a series of difficult experiences and public embarrassment for Jennings . On August 13 , 1993 , Jennings and Kati Marton publicly announced their separation in Newsday . The couple had previously split in 1987 for four months after Jennings found out that Marton was having an affair with Washington Post columnist Richard Cohen . In January 1994 , he locked horns with his executive producer on World News Tonight , Emily Rooney . The public firing of Rooney made national headlines , and put Jennings on the defensive . 
 With the rise of media watchdog groups , such as the conservative Media Research Center ( MRC ) , Jennings came under increasing scrutiny for what some observers deemed a liberal bias . The anchor drew fire from conservatives , such as the MRC and Cal Thomas , for his November 14 , 1994 , remarks on ABC Radio , in which he analyzed the results of the 1994 U.S. midterm elections . " Some thoughts on those angry voters . Ask parents of any two @-@ year @-@ old and they can tell you about those temper tantrums : the stomping feet , the rolling eyes , the screaming , " said Jennings . " Imagine a nation full of uncontrolled two @-@ year @-@ old rage . The voters had a temper tantrum last week .... Parenting and governing don 't have to be dirty words : the nation can 't be run by an angry two @-@ year @-@ old . " A July 1995 documentary , Peter Jennings Reporting : Hiroshima : Why the Bomb Was Dropped , which aired a week before the 50th anniversary of the atomic bombing of Hiroshima , also drew scorn from conservatives and some television critics , who called the program a revisionist look at the decision to drop the bomb . Some viewers of the documentary mailed bus fares to Jennings , telling him to return to Canada . 
 Jennings pleased some conservatives though , after his three @-@ year lobbying effort to create a full @-@ time religion correspondent at ABC News succeeded in the hiring of Peggy <unk> in January 1994 , making her the first such network reporter . ABC increased its coverage of religious topics , and in March 1995 , Jennings anchored Peter Jennings Reporting : In the Name of God , a well @-@ received documentary on the changing nature of American churches . At a taping of a " town meeting " segment for KOMO @-@ TV of Seattle in February 1995 , Jennings expressed regret for his ABC radio remarks on the 1994 midterm elections . " People thought I had insulted their sacred mandate and some thought I should go back to Canada , " he said . " I hope I don 't make that mistake again . " 
 During the mid @-@ 1990s , television critics praised Jennings for his insistence on not letting the O.J. Simpson murder case swamp the newscast . Instead , Jennings devoted his energies to covering the War in Bosnia and Herzegovina , anchoring three hour @-@ long prime time specials on the subject and one Saturday @-@ morning special aimed at children . ABC dedicated more time to covering the conflict than any other network from 1992 to 1996 . Jennings received the Goldsmith Career Award for Excellence in Journalism from the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University , in large part for his passion for the story . Jennings was also credited for raising the profile in the U.S. of another international story , the 1995 Quebec referendum . The Canadian press in particular raved about his in @-@ depth coverage of the issue , and he was the only anchor to broadcast from Canada on the eve of the referendum . 
 Despite these critical successes , in 1996 , World News Tonight started gradually slipping in the ratings race . Bolstered by strong viewership of its coverage of the 1996 Summer Olympic Games , NBC 's Nightly News overtook the ABC newscast for two weeks in late July and early September . This short bump provided momentum for NBC , which started making steady gains in the ratings . Worried , Jennings and ABC decided to cut back on international reporting and give more air time to " soft stories " , in an effort to emulate the success of Nightly News . The changes provoked a backlash from regular viewers , and ratings plummeted . " We did very badly with it , " Jennings said . " The audience kicked us in the teeth . " Although changes were made to World News Tonight to restore its luster and stop the hemorrhaging , Nightly News ended 1997 as the number @-@ one evening newscast . 
 The slide in the ratings coincided with some <unk> at ABC News . The company scrapped plans to develop a cable news channel . On May 29 , 1998 , David Westin succeeded Roone Arledge as president of ABC News . Both denied that the disappointing ratings performance of World News Tonight contributed to the decision . A 24 @-@ hour strike by the National Association of Broadcast Employees and Technicians disrupted ABC 's coverage of 1998 's November elections after talks between the union and ABC broke down . Several Democratic candidates denied interviews to support the union . 
 None of the shake @-@ ups helped Jennings retake the nightly ratings crown , but World News Tonight still offered stiff competition at second place . As the millennium approached , Jennings and the network started preparing for extensive retrospectives of the 20th century . The anchor teamed with former Life magazine journalist Todd Brewster to pen The Century , a 606 @-@ page book on 20th @-@ century America . Designed as a companion book for ABC 's upcoming documentary series of the same name , the book topped the New York Times Best Seller List in December 1998 , a month after it debuted . On March 29 , 1999 , Jennings anchored the first installment of ABC 's 12 @-@ hour miniseries , The Century ; production on the monumental project started in 1990 , and by the time it aired , it had cost the network $ 25 million . Jennings also anchored a longer , 15 @-@ hour version , The Century : America 's Time , on the History Channel in April 1999 . 
 On December 31 , 1999 , Jennings was on the air for 23 straight hours to anchor ABC 2000 Today , ABC 's massive millennium eve special . An estimated 175 million people tuned into at least a portion of the program . Jennings ' American prime @-@ time audience , an estimated 18 @.@ 6 million viewers , easily outpaced the millennium coverage of rival networks . Television critics praised the program , and described the anchor as " superhuman " . Although production costs totaled a hefty $ 11 million ( compared with $ 2 million each for NBC 's and CBS 's millennium projects ) , ABC managed to make a profit of $ 5 million . The success of the program , though , failed to transfer into any lasting change in the viewership of World News Tonight ; ABC 's evening newscast spent the first week of January as ratings leader , before dropping back to second place . 
 With another presidential election taking place in 2000 , Jennings had some more political reporting duties that year . On January 5 , Jennings moderated the Democratic primary debate , held at the University of New Hampshire . He hosted the primetime news special The Dark Horizon : India , Pakistan , and the Bomb , which ABC broadcast on March 22 , as then @-@ President Clinton began his trip to the region . Jennings was the only American news anchor to travel to India for Clinton 's trip . Paul A. Slavin became the new executive producer for World News Tonight in April . 
 = = = = September 11 = = = = 
 Jennings anchored ABC 's coverage of the September 11 attacks for seventeen straight hours , an effort described as " Herculean " by television critics . Like other network news anchors , he was widely praised for guiding Americans through the tragedy . At one point , Jennings broke his composure after receiving phone calls from his children . " We do not very often make recommendations for people 's behavior from this chair , " he said , " but ... if you 're a parent , you 've got a kid in some other part of the country , call them up . Exchange observations . " 
 His coverage was not without controversy though . After conservative radio host Rush Limbaugh criticized Jennings for supposedly denigrating President George W. Bush on @-@ air during September 11 , ABC was flooded with more than 10 @,@ 000 angry phone calls and e @-@ mails . Jennings , however , never made the remarks , and Limbaugh later apologized and made a retraction . On September 13 , Jennings received more criticism from conservatives — this time for hosting a forum for Middle East experts that included Palestinian Authority negotiator Hanan Ashrawi . In the summer of 2002 , Jennings and ABC refused to allow Toby Keith to open their coverage of July 4 celebrations with " Courtesy of the Red , White , & Blue " , prompting criticism from Keith and country music fans , who highlighted the anchor 's Canadian citizenship . 
 The events of September 11 added new meaning to In Search of America , the project Jennings and Brewster started after the success of their previous collaboration . The two began writing the book in early 2001 ; after the terrorist attacks , they revisited many of the people they had interviewed to see how the events had affected them . To promote the book , the anchor and World News Tonight started a 50 @-@ state tour of the United States in April 2002 as part of a yearlong project , 50 States / One Nation / One Year . Jennings also anchored a six @-@ part television series in September 2002 , which featured the same name as the book . Despite the success of the TV series and heavy promotion by the book 's publisher , In Search of America failed to generate much interest or sales . 
 Jennings ' work on In Search of America and the September 11 attacks contributed to his decision in 2003 to become a dual citizen of Canada and the United States . " I think that 9 / 11 and the subsequent travel I did in the country afterwards made me feel connected in new ways , " he said . " And when we were working on the America project I spent a lot of time on the road , which meant away from my editor 's desk , and I just got much more connected to the Founding Fathers ' dreams and ideas for the future . " His work had prepared him well for the citizenship test , which he passed easily . " Can you imagine I , who just finished a whole series on America and had been an <unk> for an American broadcast ... could you imagine if I had failed ? " he asked . " It would have been horrendous . " The anchor 's formal pledge of allegiance took place at a regular citizenship ceremony on May 30 in Lower Manhattan . The occasion overwhelmed him . " I went in the front door and came out the front door . They were regular people . They were very touching . And I cried a little bit — my kids didn 't cry , but I cried a bit — but I 'm a fairly emotional character anyway . " 
 = = = Leaving the chair = = = 
 As he did in 2000 , Jennings moderated the 2004 Democratic presidential primary debate , which was held that year at Saint Anselm College in New Hampshire . He was noted for questioning General Wesley Clark over Clark 's silence over controversial comments made by filmmaker Michael Moore , a supporter of Clark . Moore called then @-@ President George W. Bush a " deserter " . 
 By late 2004 , Brokaw had retired from his anchoring duties at NBC , ceding the reins to Brian Williams ; Rather planned to step down in March 2005 . Jennings and ABC saw an opportunity to gain viewers , and initiated a publicity blitz touting the anchor 's foreign reporting experience . However , despite having almost always reported from the scene of any major news story , Jennings was sidelined by an upper respiratory infection in late December 2004 ; he was forced to anchor from New York during the aftermath of the Asian tsunami , while his competitors traveled to the region . For Jennings , the situation was agonizing . 
 In late March , viewers started noticing that Jennings ' voice sounded uncharacteristically gravelly and unhealthy during evening newscasts . On April 1 , 2005 , he anchored World News Tonight for the last time ; his poor health also prevented him from covering the death and funeral of Pope John Paul II . On April 5 , 2005 , Jennings informed viewers through a taped message on World News Tonight that he had been diagnosed with lung cancer , and was starting chemotherapy treatment the following week . " As some of you now know , I have learned in the last couple of days that I have lung cancer , " he said . " Yes , I was a smoker until about 20 years ago , and I was weak and I smoked over 9 / 11 . But whatever the reason , the news does slow you down a bit . " Although he stated his intention to continue anchoring whenever possible , the message was to be his last appearance on television . 
 Throughout the summer , Charles Gibson , co @-@ host of Good Morning America , and Elizabeth Vargas , co @-@ host of 20 / 20 , served as temporary anchors . On April 29 , 2005 , Jennings posted a letter on <unk> with an update of his status and expressing thanks to those who had offered him their good wishes and prayers . In June , Jennings visited the ABC News headquarters , and addressed staff members in an emotional speech ; he thanked Gibson for closing each broadcast with the phrase , " for Peter Jennings and all of us at ABC News . " During his visit , however , his colleagues noticed he was ill to the point where he could barely speak at times . He posted another short letter of thanks on July 29 , 2005 , his 67th birthday . 
 = = = Death = = = 
 On August 7 , 2005 , just after 11 : 30 p.m. EDT , Charles Gibson broke into local news in the Eastern U.S. and regular programming on ABC 's western affiliates to announce Jennings 's death from lung cancer . He read a short statement from the family , and disclosed that Jennings had died in his New York apartment with his fourth wife , two children by his marriage to Kati Marton , and sister at his side . The anchor 's ABC colleagues , including Barbara Walters , Diane Sawyer , and Ted Koppel , shared their thoughts on Jennings 's death . The next morning , Brokaw and Rather fondly remembered their former rival on the morning news shows . " Peter , of the three of us , was our prince , " said Brokaw on Today . " He seemed so timeless . He had such élan and style . " Canada 's television networks led off their morning news shows with the news of Jennings ' death and had remembrances from their " big three " anchors , Peter Mansbridge at the CBC , Lloyd Robertson at CTV , and Kevin Newman at Global . 
 American President George W. Bush and Canadian Prime Minister Paul Martin offered statements of condolence to the press . 
 On August 10 , 2005 , ABC aired a two @-@ hour special , Peter Jennings : Reporter , with archival clips of his reports and interviews with colleagues and friends . The special drew over 9 million viewers , and was the most watched television program of the night . For the week of his death , World News Tonight placed number one in the ratings race for the first time since June 2004 . 
 Jennings 's widow , <unk> Freed , and family held a private service in New York . Jennings was cremated and his ashes split in half . Half of his ashes remained in his home in Long Island and the other half was placed in his summer home in the Gatineau Hills , near Ottawa . The 57th Primetime Emmy Awards on September 18 , 2005 , included a tribute to Jennings by Brokaw and Rather . A public memorial service for Jennings was held two days later at Carnegie Hall . Notable journalists , political leaders , and other friends of Jennings attended . Jennings left a $ 50m estate : half went to Freed , and most of the rest to his son and daughter . On December 5 , 2005 , after much speculation , and nearly eight months after Jennings stopped anchoring , ABC named Vargas and Bob Woodruff co @-@ anchors for World News Tonight . 
 = = Honors = = 
 Jennings won numerous honors throughout his career , including 16 Emmys and two George Foster Peabody Awards . His work on World News Tonight and Peter Jennings Reporting consistently won Overseas Press Club and duPont @-@ Columbia awards . At the peak of his popularity , Jennings was named " Best Anchor " by the Washington Journalism Review in 1988 , 1989 , 1990 , and 1992 . The Radio and Television News Directors Association awarded Jennings its highest honor , the Paul White Award in 1995 , in recognition of his lifetime contributions to journalism . In 2004 , he was awarded with the Edward R. Murrow Award for Lifetime Achievement in Broadcasting from Washington State University . 
 Just eight days before his death , Jennings was informed that he would be inducted into the Order of Canada , the nation 's highest civilian honor . His daughter , Elizabeth , accepted the insignia on his behalf in October 2005 . On February 21 , 2006 , New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg designated the block on West 66th Street between Columbus Avenue and Central Park West as Peter Jennings Way in honor of the late anchor ; the block is home to the ABC News headquarters . In October 2006 , The Walt Disney Company , which bought ABC in 1996 , posthumously named Jennings a Disney Legend , the company 's highest honor . He was the first ABC News employee so honored . In January 2011 , Jennings was posthumously inducted into the Academy of Television Arts and Sciences ' Television Hall of Fame . 
 = = Publications = = 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 " Moose Jaw , U.S.A. ? Never ! Jamais ! " Maclean 's , p . 86 . June 25 , 1990 . Available at <unk> Business 
 " TV 's opportunity for service at Geneva . " Christian Science Monitor , p . 28 . November 12 , 1985 . 
 with Todd Brewster . " Variations for Four Hands On a Theme by Tocqueville . " The New York Times , p . E1 . January 27 , 2003 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 with Todd Brewster . The Century . London : Doubleday ( 1999 ) . ISBN 0 @-@ 385 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 . 
 with Todd Brewster . The Century for Young People . New York : Random House ( 1999 ) . ISBN 0 @-@ 385 @-@ <unk> @-@ 0 . 
 with Todd Brewster . In Search of America . New York : Hyperion ( 2002 ) . ISBN 0 @-@ 7868 @-@ <unk> @-@ 6 . 
 = = TV / video narration = = 
 In 1969 @-@ 1970 , Jennings narrated The Fabulous Sixties , a 10 @-@ part Canadian television documentary miniseries that first aired on CTV on October 12 , 1969 , with the following episodes broadcast as occasional specials into 1970 . Each episode covered one year of the 1960s . The series was released on DVD on April 24 , 2007 , by MPI Home Video . [ 1 ] 
 = = = Books = = = 
 = = = Online = = = 
 = New Jersey Route 27 = 
 Route 27 is a state highway in New Jersey , United States . It runs 38 @.@ 53 mi ( 62 @.@ 01 km ) from U.S. Route 206 in Princeton , Mercer County northeast to an interchange with Route 21 ( McCarter Highway ) and Broad Street in Newark , Essex County . The route passes through many communities along the way , including New Brunswick , Metuchen , Rahway , and Elizabeth . Route 27 is a two- to four @-@ lane undivided highway for most of its length , passing through a variety of urban and suburban environments . It intersects many roads along the way , including Route 18 in New Brunswick , Interstate 287 in Edison , the Garden State Parkway in Woodbridge Township , Route 35 in Rahway , Route 28 in Elizabeth , and U.S. Route 22 in Newark . Route 27 crosses the Raritan River on the Albany Street Bridge , which connects Highland Park on the east with New Brunswick on the west . 
 Route 27 was part of the alignment through New Jersey of the Lincoln Highway , the United States ' first transcontinental highway that was established in 1913 . Route 27 is still referred to as the Lincoln Highway in many municipalities , such as Edison Township . The Lincoln Highway became part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 1 between New Brunswick and Elizabeth in 1916 and pre @-@ 1927 Route 13 between Trenton and New Brunswick in 1917 . In 1927 , the Lincoln Highway was renumbered as Route 27 between Trenton and Newark . U.S. Route 1 was designated on this portion of the road until it was relocated by the 1940s . U.S. Route 206 followed the route from Trenton to Princeton until 1953 , when the southern terminus of Route 27 was cut back to Princeton to avoid the concurrency with U.S. Route 206 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Mercer County = = = 
 Route 27 begins at a traffic light with U.S. Route 206 and County Route 533 in downtown Princeton , Mercer County . The route heads northeast along Nassau Street , the main street of Princeton that runs along the northern edge of Princeton University and is lined with numerous shops and restaurants . This portion of Route 27 sees between 10 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 cars a day . Just past the beginning of Route 27 , County Route 583 heads to the southwest on Mercer Street . Route 27 moves through downtown Princeton , passing by the main gates to Princeton University near Nassau Hall , and intersecting County Route 571 ( Washington Road , also signed as County Route 526 ) . After leaving the downtown area , Route 27 continues through residential areas and the route becomes Princeton @-@ Kingston Road . Route 27 runs parallel to Carnegie Lake , then crosses over the Millstone River just north of the historic Kingston Bridge . The portion of the road from Princeton to Kingston is part of the <unk> 's Highway Historic District . 
 = = = Middlesex / Somerset County border = = = 
 Upon crossing the Millstone River , Route 27 runs along the border of Franklin Township , Somerset County to the west and South Brunswick Township , Middlesex County to the east , passing through the historic community of Kingston . It continues northeast through a mix of woodland and residences , intersecting Promenade Boulevard , which heads east and becomes County Route 522 after crossing U.S. Route 1 . Route 27 briefly runs entirely into Somerset County before resuming along the Middlesex / Somerset County border . The route continues north to an intersection with County Route 518 ( Gateway Boulevard ) , where it resumes its northeast direction and heads into Kendall Park as a variable two- to four @-@ lane road , entering denser suburban development . Route 27 then passes through Franklin Park , intersecting County Route 610 ( Henderson Road ) . Past that intersection , Route 27 forms the border of Franklin Township to the west and North Brunswick Township to the east , passing through suburban development with some areas of farmland , seeing about 38 @,@ 487 cars a day . The road forms the border of Franklin Township and New Brunswick upon intersecting County Route 680 ( How Lane ) becoming four @-@ lane Somerset Street . Route 27 follows Somerset Street northeast through residential and commercial areas , passing by the community of Somerset on the west side of the road . 
 = = = Middlesex County = = = 
 The route splits from Somerset Street and heads entirely into New Brunswick , Middlesex County along French Street . At the Sandford Street intersection , Route 27 becomes a county @-@ maintained road that is also signed as County Route 644 . It then intersects County Route 693 ( Jersey Avenue ) , which heads to the southwest to become Route 91 . Past this intersection , the route becomes a two @-@ lane road that heads into downtown New Brunswick , south of the main campus of Rutgers University . Here , the route has a daily traffic count of approximately 11 @,@ 559 vehicles . It crosses under the Northeast Corridor rail line adjacent to the New Brunswick train station . The route turns into a four @-@ lane divided highway and intersects County Route 514 and County Route 527 ( Easton Avenue ) . At this point , County Route 644 ends , with Route 27 forming a concurrency with both county routes 514 and 527 , heading east along Albany Street . About 200 yards ( 180 m ) later , the road crosses George Street , which heads to the north as County Route 672 and to the south as Route 171 . County Route 527 splits from Albany Street by heading south on Route 171 while Route 27 and County Route 514 continue east , interchanging with Route 18 ( Memorial Parkway ) a quarter of a mile later . At the Route 18 interchange , Route 27 becomes state @-@ maintained again , crossing the Raritan River on the Albany Street Bridge into Highland Park . 
 Upon entering Highland Park , Route 27 becomes two @-@ lane Raritan Avenue , intersecting County Route 622 ( River Road ) and continuing through the downtown area of Highland Park . County Route 514 splits from Route 27 by heading east on Woodbridge Avenue 0 @.@ 75 mi ( 1 @.@ 21 km ) later . Route 27 resumes heading northeast past this intersection as a four @-@ lane road that passes by homes , entering Edison Township , where the name changes to Lincoln Highway . The route continues northeast , intersecting County Route 676 ( Suttons Lane / Duclos Lane ) and County Route 529 ( Plainfield Avenue ) , then travels through a mix of residences and businesses , briefly becoming a divided highway before intersecting Interstate 287 at a partial interchange with access to southbound Interstate 287 and from northbound Interstate 287 . At this interchange , Route 27 sees approximately 14 @,@ 386 cars a day . Beyond this interchange , Route 27 crosses into Metuchen and becomes two @-@ lane Essex Avenue , which turns to the east and heads through residential areas . The route turns north onto Lake Street and intersects County Route 501 ( Amboy Avenue ) , forming a concurrency with that route . It passes under the Northeast Corridor and comes to Middlesex Avenue , where County Route 501 turns to the left and Route 27 turns to the right to resume its northeast direction . 
 Route 27 intersects County Route 531 ( Main Street ) after 0 @.@ 2 mi ( 0 @.@ 32 km ) and continues northeast on Middlesex Avenue , passing through a residential environment where the route carries about 22 @,@ 414 vehicles daily . The route crosses back into Edison Township and becomes the Lincoln Highway again , passing over the Rahway River . It heads through business areas and passes near the Thomas Alva Edison Memorial Tower and Museum , which is located on the site of Thomas Edison 's Menlo Park laboratory . The route closely parallels the Northeast Corridor rail line and crosses into Woodbridge Township , widening to four lanes at this point . Route 27 passes by the Metropark train station and interchanges with the Garden State Parkway near Iselin , where approximately 19 @,@ 780 vehicles travel on Route 27 on a daily basis . Past the Garden State Parkway , Route 27 narrows back to two lanes and continues northeast alongside the Northeast Corridor , passing through a mix of residential and commercial development as a three @-@ lane road with two northbound lanes and one southbound lane . 
 = = = Union and Essex counties = = = 
 Route 27 crosses into Rahway , Union County and intersects the northern terminus of Route 35 . Route 27 continues north using four @-@ lane St. Georges Avenue . The route passes through Rahway , passing by residences and businesses . In Rahway , the route sees about 25 @,@ 022 cars a day . It continues northeast and crosses into Linden , where the route heads through a more commercial setting with businesses lining both sides of the road . At the intersection with County Route 617 ( Wood Avenue ) , Route 27 forms the border of Roselle to the west and Linden to the east , with about 23 @,@ 081 vehicles using the road on a daily basis . It passes by <unk> Park and forms the border between Elizabeth to the west and Linden to the east before entirely entering Elizabeth at the Richford Terrace intersection . 
 In Elizabeth , Route 27 narrows to two lanes and becomes Rahway Avenue , crossing Route 439 and continuing to the northeast through residential and commercial areas . Route 27 splits into a one @-@ way pair with northbound Route 27 following Rahway Avenue east and turning north onto Cherry Street and southbound Route 27 following Westfield Avenue west and turning south onto Chilton Avenue . The southbound direction of Route 27 intersects the eastern terminus of Route 28 , where that route continues west on Westfield Avenue . Past the one @-@ way pair , Route 27 resumes east on four @-@ lane Westfield Avenue , turning north onto Broad Street . The route heads into a more urbanized setting and continues northeast onto Newark Avenue , intersecting the northern terminus of Route 439 . Through Elizabeth , about 10 @,@ 000 to 20 @,@ 000 vehicles travel on Route 27 every day . 
 Route 27 crosses into Newark , Essex County at the Virginia Street intersection , where it becomes Frelinghuysen Avenue , a road that heads north through the Dayton neighborhood of Newark , passing through urban areas and by Weequahic Park . Route 27 interchanges with U.S. Route 22 and immediately passes under Interstate 78 . Route 27 continues north to an intersection with <unk> Street , where the route heads east along that road to its northern terminus at an interchange with Route 21 and Broad Street . 
 = = History = = 
 The southern part of Route 27 follows the Lenape Assunpink Trail that during the colonial era was known as the Old Dutch Trail , and later became the Kings Highway . Route 27 follows portions of several 19th @-@ century turnpikes , including the Essex and Middlesex Turnpike , which was chartered on March 3 , 1806 to run from New Brunswick to Newark along what is today Route 27 , the Northeast Corridor rail line , and Broad Street in Newark , the Georgetown and Franklin Turnpike , chartered on February 15 , 1816 to run from Lambertville to New Brunswick along the present @-@ day alignments of County Route 518 and Route 27 , the Newark and Elizabeth Plank Road , chartered on March 14 , 1856 , and the Princeton and Kingston Branch Turnpike , chartered on December 3 , 1807 to run from Trenton to Kingston along current County Route 583 and Route 27 . The route became a portion of the Lincoln Highway , the United States ' first transcontinental highway that was established in 1913 to run from New York City to San Francisco . It is still known by that name in a few places along the route , particularly in Edison Township . 
 In 1916 , the Lincoln Highway was legislated as part of pre @-@ 1927 Route 1 between New Brunswick and Elizabeth and as pre @-@ 1927 Route 13 between Trenton and New Brunswick in 1917 . In the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering , Route 27 was designated to run from Trenton to the intersection of Frelinghuysen Avenue and Astor Street in Newark , replacing the portions of Routes 1 and 13 that ran along the Lincoln Highway . With the creation of the U.S. Highway System , U.S. Route 1 was designated along the length of Route 27 from 1927 until sometime before the 1940s , when the U.S. Route 1 designation was moved to Route 26 , Route S26 , and Route 25 between Trenton and Newark . U.S. Route 206 was designated along the portion of route between Trenton and Princeton by the 1940s . In the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering , the southern terminus of Route 27 was cut back to Princeton to avoid the U.S. Route 206 concurrency . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Little Moreton Hall = 
 Little Moreton Hall , also known as Old Moreton Hall , is a moated half @-@ timbered manor house 4 miles ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) southwest of Congleton in Cheshire , England . The earliest parts of the house were built for the prosperous Cheshire landowner William Moreton in about 1504 – 08 , and the remainder was constructed in stages by successive generations of the family until about 1610 . The building is highly irregular , with three asymmetrical ranges forming a small , rectangular cobbled courtyard . A National Trust guidebook describes Little Moreton Hall as being " lifted straight from a fairy story , a gingerbread house " . The house 's top @-@ heavy appearance , " like a stranded Noah 's Ark " , is due to the Long Gallery that runs the length of the south range 's upper floor . 
 The house remained in the possession of the Moreton family for almost 450 years , until ownership was transferred to the National Trust in 1938 . Little Moreton Hall and its sandstone bridge across the moat are recorded in the National Heritage List for England as a designated Grade I listed building , and the ground on which Little Moreton Hall stands is protected as a Scheduled Monument . The house has been fully restored and is open to the public from April to December each year . 
 At its greatest extent , in the mid @-@ 16th century , the Little Moreton Hall estate occupied an area of 1 @,@ 360 acres ( 550 ha ) and contained a cornmill , orchards , gardens , and an iron bloomery with water @-@ powered hammers . The gardens lay abandoned until their 20th @-@ century re @-@ creation . As there were no surviving records of the layout of the original knot garden it was replanted according to a pattern published in the 17th century . 
 = = History = = 
 The name Moreton probably derives from the Old English mor meaning " marshland " and tune , meaning " farm " , thus literally " a farm at a marsh " . The area where Little Moreton Hall stands today was named Little Moreton to distinguish it from the nearby township of Moreton @-@ cum @-@ <unk> , or Greater Moreton . The Moreton family 's roots in Little Moreton can be traced to the marriage in 1216 of Lettice de Moreton to Sir Gralam de Lostock , who inherited land there ; succeeding generations of the de <unk> adopted the name of de Moreton . Gralam de Lostock 's grandson , Gralam de Moreton , acquired valuable land from his marriages to Alice de <unk> and then Margery de Kingsley . Another grandson , John de Moreton , married heiress Margaret de Macclesfield in 1329 , adding further to the estate . The family also purchased land cheaply after the Black Death epidemic of 1348 . Four generations after John de Moreton , the family owned sixteen <unk> , a mill and 700 acres ( 280 ha ) of land , comprising 560 acres of ploughland , 80 acres of pasture , 20 acres of meadow , 20 acres of wood and 20 acres of moss . The Dissolution of the Monasteries in the mid @-@ 16th century provided further opportunities for the <unk> to add to their estate , and by the early years of Elizabeth I 's reign , William Moreton II owned two water mills and 1 @,@ 360 acres ( 550 ha ) of land valued at £ 24 7s 4d , including 500 acres of ploughland , 500 acres of pasture and 100 acres of <unk> . 
 Little Moreton Hall first appears in the historical record in 1271 , but the present building dates from the early 16th century . The north range is the earliest part of the house . Built between 1504 and 1508 for William Moreton ( died 1526 ) , it comprises the Great Hall and the northern part of the east wing . A service wing to the west , built at the same time but subsequently replaced , gave the early house an H @-@ shaped floor plan . The east range was extended to the south in about 1508 to provide additional living quarters , as well as housing the Chapel and the Withdrawing Room . In 1546 William Moreton 's son , also called William ( c . 1510 – 63 ) , replaced the original west wing with a new range housing service rooms on the ground floor as well as a porch , gallery , and three interconnected rooms on the first floor , one of which had access to a garderobe . In 1559 William had a new floor inserted at gallery level in the Great Hall , and added the two large bay windows looking onto the courtyard , built so close to each other that their roofs abut one another . The south wing was added in about 1560 – 62 by William Moreton II 's son John ( 1541 – 98 ) . It includes the Gatehouse and a third storey containing a 68 @-@ foot ( 21 m ) Long Gallery , which appears to have been an afterthought added on after construction work had begun . A small kitchen and Brew @-@ house block was added to the south wing in about 1610 , the last major extension to the house . 
 The fortunes of the Moreton family declined during the English Civil War . As supporters of the Royalist cause , they found themselves isolated in a community of Parliamentarians . Little Moreton Hall was requisitioned by the Parliamentarians in 1643 and used to billet Parliamentary soldiers . The family successfully petitioned for its restitution , and survived the Civil War with their ownership of Little Moreton Hall intact , but financially they were crippled . They tried to sell the entire estate , but could only dispose of several parcels of land . William Moreton died in 1654 leaving debts of £ 3 @,@ 000 – £ 4 @,@ 000 ( equivalent to about £ 12 – 16 million as of 2010 ) , which forced his heirs to <unk> what remained of the estate . The family 's fortunes never fully recovered , and by the late 1670s they no longer lived in Little Moreton Hall , renting it out instead to a series of tenant farmers . The Dale family took over the tenancy in 1841 , and were still in residence more than 100 years later . By 1847 most of the house was unoccupied , and the deconsecrated Chapel was being used as a coal cellar and storeroom . Little Moreton Hall was in a ruinous condition ; its windows were boarded up and its roof was rotten . 
 During the 19th century Little Moreton Hall became " an object of romantic interest " among artists ; Amelia Edwards used the house as a setting for her 1880 novel Lord Brackenbury . Elizabeth Moreton , an Anglican nun , inherited the almost derelict house following the death of her sister Annabella in 1892 . She restored and refurnished the Chapel , and may have been responsible for the insertion of steel rods to stabilise the structure of the Long Gallery . In 1912 she bequeathed the house to a cousin , Charles Abraham , Bishop of Derby , stipulating that it must never be sold . Abraham opened up Little Moreton Hall to visitors , charging an entrance fee of 6d ( equivalent to about £ 8 as of 2010 ) collected by the Dales , who conducted guided tours of the house in return . 
 Abraham carried on the preservation effort begun by Elizabeth Moreton until he and his son transferred ownership to the National Trust in 1938 . The Dale family continued to farm the estate until 1945 , and acted as caretakers for the National Trust until 1955 . The Trust has carried out extensive repair and restoration work , including re @-@ roofing ; restoration of elements of the hall 's original appearance , and removal of some painted patterning added during earlier restoration work . The familiar black @-@ and @-@ white colour scheme is a fashion introduced by the Victorians ; originally the oak beams would have been untreated and left to age naturally to a silver colour , and the rendered infill painted ochre . In 1977 it was discovered that the stone slabs on the roof of the south range had become insecure , and work began on a six @-@ phase programme of structural repairs , the final phase of which was completed in 1992 . Replacement timbers have been left in their natural state . 
 = = House = = 
 The 100 @-@ year construction of Little Moreton Hall coincided with the English Renaissance , but the house is resolutely medieval in design , apart from some Renaissance decoration such as the motifs on the Gatehouse , Elizabethan fireplaces , and its " extravagant " use of glass . It is timber @-@ framed throughout except for three brick <unk> and some brick buttressing added at a later date . 
 Simon Jenkins has described Little Moreton Hall as " a feast of medieval carpentry " , but the building technique is unremarkable for Cheshire houses of the period – an oak framework set on stone footings . Diagonal oak braces that create chevron and lozenge patterns adorn the façades . The herringbone pattern with quatrefoils present at the rear , which can also be seen at Haslington and Gawsworth Halls , is a typical feature of 15th @-@ century work , while the lozenge patterns , continuous middle rail and lack of quatrefoils in the front façade are typical of 16th @-@ century early Elizabethan work . The south range containing the gatehouse , the last to be completed , has lighter timbers with a greater variety of patterns . The timber frame is completed by rendered infill and Flemish bond brick , or windows . The windows contain 30 @,@ 000 leaded panes known as quarries , set in patterns of squares , rectangles , lozenges , circles and triangles , complementing the decoration on the timber framing . Much of the original 16th @-@ century glazing has survived and shows the colour variations typical of old glass . Old scratched graffiti is visible in places . The older parts of the roof frame are decorated , and the brickwork of some of the chimneys has diapering in blue brick . 
 The house stands on an island surrounded by a 33 @-@ foot ( 10 m ) wide moat , which was probably dug in the 13th or 14th century to enclose an earlier building on the site . There is no evidence that the moat served any defensive purpose , and as with many other moated sites it was probably intended as a status symbol . A sandstone bridge leads to a gatehouse in the three @-@ storey south range , which has each of its two upper floors jettied out over the floor beneath . As is typical of Cheshire 's timber @-@ framed buildings the overhanging jetties are hidden by coving , which has a recurring quatrefoil decoration . The Gatehouse leads to a rectangular courtyard , with the Great Hall at the northern end . The two @-@ storey tower to the left of the Gatehouse contains garderobes , which empty directly into the moat . Architectural historian Lydia Greeves has described the interior of Little Moreton Hall as a " corridor @-@ less warren , with one room leading into another , and four staircases linking different levels " . Some of the grander rooms have fine chimneypieces and wood panelling , but others are " little more than cupboards " . The original purpose of some of the rooms in the house is unknown . 
 = = = Ground floor = = = 
 The Great Hall at the centre of the north range is entered through a porch and screens passage , a feature common in houses of the period , designed to protect the occupants from draughts . As the screens are now missing , they may have been free @-@ standing like those at Rufford Old Hall . The porch is decorated with elaborate carvings . The Great Hall 's roof is supported by arch @-@ braced trusses , which are decorated with carved motifs including dragons . The floor , now flagged , would probably originally have been rush @-@ covered earth , with a central hearth . The gabled bay window overlooking the courtyard was added in 1559 . The original service wing to the west of the Great Hall , behind the screens passage , was rebuilt in 1546 , and housed a kitchen , buttery and pantry . A hidden shaft was discovered during a 19th @-@ century investigation of two secret rooms above the kitchen , connecting them to a tunnel leading to the moat , the entrance to which has since been filled in . The west range now houses the gift shop and restaurant . 
 A doorway behind where the family would have sat at the far end of the hall leads to the Parlour , known as the Little Parlour in surviving 17th @-@ century documents . Together with the adjoining Withdrawing Room and the Great Hall , the Parlour is structurally part of the original building . The wooden panelling is a Georgian addition , behind which the original painted panelling was discovered in 1976 . The decoration consists of painted imitations of marble and inlay , and Biblical scenes , some of which were painted directly onto the plaster and others on paper that was then pasted to the wall . " <unk> drawn " but nevertheless " elaborate " , the paintings tell the story of Susanna and the Elders from the Apocrypha , a " favourite Protestant theme " . The Moreton family 's wolf head crest and the initials " J.M. " suggest a date before John Moreton 's death in 1598 . Similar painted decoration is found in other Cheshire houses of the late 16th and early 17th centuries . 
 A private staircase between the Parlour and the Withdrawing Room leads to the first floor . The Withdrawing Room has 16th @-@ century carved wooden panelling , and a wooden ceiling with moulded coffering , which probably dates from 1559 when the Great Hall ceiling was added . The bay window in this room was also added in 1559 , at the same time as the one in the Great Hall . The pair of windows bear the following inscription underneath their gables : 
 God is Al in Al Thing : This <unk> <unk> made by William Moreton in the <unk> of <unk> Lorde <unk> . Richard Dale <unk> made <unk> <unk> by the <unk> of God . 
 The wolf head crest also appears in the late 16th @-@ century stained glass of the Withdrawing Room . The chimneypiece in this room is decorated with female caryatids and bears the arms of Elizabeth I ; its plaster would originally have been painted and gilded , and traces of this still remain . 
 William Moreton III used what is today known as the Exhibition Room as a bedroom in the mid @-@ 17th century ; it is entered through a doorway from the adjoining Withdrawing Room . Following William 's death in 1654 his children Ann , Jane and Philip divided the house into three separate living areas . Ann , whose accommodation was in the Prayer Room above , then used the Exhibition Room as a kitchen . The adjoining Chapel , begun in 1508 , is accessible by a doorway from the courtyard . The Chapel contains Renaissance @-@ style tempera painting , thought to date from the late 16th century . Subjects include passages from the Bible . The chancel was probably a later addition dating from the mid @-@ 16th century . It is separated from the nave by an oak screen and projects eastwards from the main plan of the house , with a much higher ceiling . The stained glass in the east wall of the chancel is a 20th @-@ century addition installed by Charles Abraham , the last private owner of Little Moreton Hall , as a parting gift on his transfer of ownership to the National Trust . 
 The Corn Store adjacent to the Chapel may originally have been used as accommodation for a gatekeeper or steward . By the late 17th century it had been converted into a grain store by raising the floor to protect its contents from damp . Five oak @-@ framed bins inside may have held barley for the Brew @-@ house , which is now used as a toilet block . 
 = = = First floor = = = 
 The Guests ' Hall and its adjoining Porch Room occupy the space above the entrance to the courtyard and the Gatehouse . They can be accessed either through a doorway from the adjacent Prayer Room or via a staircase at the south end of the courtyard leading to the Long Gallery on the floor above . The first @-@ floor landing leads to a passageway between the Guests ' Hall and the Guests ' Parlour , and to the garderobe tower visible from the front of the house . A doorway near the entrance to the Guests ' Parlour allows access to the Brew @-@ house Chamber , which is above the Brew @-@ house . The Brew @-@ house Chamber was probably built as servants ' quarters , and originally accessed via a hatch in the ceiling of the Brew @-@ house below . 
 In the mid @-@ 17th century the Guests ' Hall was referred to as Mr Booth 's Chamber , after the genealogist Jack Booth of <unk> , a cousin and family friend of the Moreton 's and a regular occupant . Its substantial carved consoles , inserted not just for decorative effect but to support the weight of the Long Gallery above , have been dated to 1660 . What is today known as the Prayer Room , above the Chapel , was originally the chamber of the first William Moreton 's daughter Ann , whose maid occupied the adjoining room . 
 The floors of the rooms on this level are made from lime @-@ ash plaster pressed into a bedding of straw and oak laths , which would have offered some protection against the ever @-@ present risk of fire . All the first @-@ floor rooms in the east range and all except the Prayer Room in the west range are closed to the public , some having been converted into accommodation for the National Trust staff who live on site . The Education Room in the east range , above what is today the restaurant , was in the mid @-@ 16th century a solar , and is now reserved for use by school groups . 
 = = = Upper floor = = = 
 Running the entire length of the south range the Long Gallery is roofed with heavy gritstone slabs , the weight of which has caused the supporting floors below to bow and buckle . Architectural historians Peter de Figueiredo and Julian Treuherz describe it as " a gloriously long and crooked space , the wide floorboards rising up and down like waves and the walls leaning outwards at different angles . " The crossbeams between the arch @-@ braced roof trusses were probably added in the 17th century to prevent the structure from " bursting apart " under the load . 
 The Long Gallery has almost continuous bands of windows along its longer sides to the north and south , and a window to the west ; a corresponding window at the east end of the gallery is now blocked . The end tympana have plaster depictions of Destiny and Fortune , copied from Robert Recorde 's Castle of Knowledge of 1556 . The inscriptions read " The wheel of fortune , whose rule is ignorance " and " The speare of destiny , whose rule is knowledge " . The Long Gallery was always sparsely furnished , and would have been used for exercising when the weather was inclement and as a games room – four early 17th @-@ century tennis balls have been discovered behind the wood panelling . 
 The Upper Porch Room leading off the Long Gallery , perhaps originally intended as a " sanctuary from the fun and games " , was furnished as a bedroom by the mid @-@ 17th century . The fireplace incorporates figures of Justice and Mercy , and its central panel contains the Moreton coat of arms quartered with that of the Macclesfield family , celebrating the marriage of John de Moreton to Margaret de Macclesfield in 1329 . 
 = = = Contents = = = 
 Only three pieces of the house 's original furniture have survived : a large refectory table , a large cupboard described as a " <unk> of boxes " in an inventory of 1599 , possibly used for storing spices , and a " great <unk> table " listed in the same inventory . The refectory table and cupboard are on display in the Great Hall , and the round table in the Parlour , where its octagonal framework suggests that it was designed to sit in the bay window . Except for those pieces , and a collection of 17th @-@ century pewter tableware in a showcase in the west wall of the Great Hall , the house is displayed with bare rooms . 
 = = Gardens and estate = = 
 By the mid @-@ 16th century the Little Moreton Hall estate was at its greatest extent , occupying an area of 1 @,@ 360 acres ( 550 ha ) and including three watermills , one of which was used to grind corn . The contours of the pool used to provide power for the cornmill are still visible , although the mill was demolished in the 19th century . The Moreton family had owned an iron bloomery in the east of the estate since the late 15th century , and the other two mills were used to drive its water @-@ powered hammers . The dam of the artificial pool that provided water for the bloomery 's mills , known as Smithy Pool , has survived , although the pool has not . The bloomery was closed in the early 18th century , and the pool and moat were subsequently used for breeding carp and tench . By the mid @-@ 18th century the estate 's main sources of income came from agriculture , timber production , fish farming , and property rentals . 
 The earliest reference to a garden at Little Moreton Hall comes from an early 17th @-@ century set of household accounts referring to a gardener and the purchase of some seeds . Philip Moreton , who ran the estate for his older brother Edward in the mid @-@ 17th century , left a considerable amount of information on the layout and planting of the area of garden within the moat , to the west of the house . He writes of a herb garden , vegetable garden , and a nursery for maturing fruit trees until they were ready to be transferred to the orchard at the south and east of the house , probably where the orchard is today . 
 During the 20th century the long @-@ abandoned gardens were replanted in a style sympathetic to the Tudor period . The knot garden was planted in 1972 , to a design taken from Leonard Meager 's Complete English Gardener , published in 1670 . The intricate design of the knot can be seen from one of the two original viewing mounds , common in 16th @-@ century formal gardening , one inside the moat and the other to the southwest . 
 Other features of the grounds include a yew tunnel and an orchard growing fruits that would have been familiar to the house 's Tudor occupants – apples , pears , quinces and <unk> . 
 = = Superstition and haunting = = 
 During the last major restoration work , 18 " assorted boots and shoes " were found hidden in the structure of the building , all dating from the 19th century . Concealed shoes were placed either to ward off demons , ghosts or witches , or to encourage the fertility of the female occupants . Like many old buildings , Little Moreton Hall has stories of ghosts ; a grey lady is said to haunt the Long Gallery , and a child has reportedly been heard sobbing in and around the Chapel . 
 = = Present day = = 
 Little Moreton Hall is open to the public from April to December each year . The ground floor of the west range has been remodelled to include a restaurant , tearoom and a gift shop . Services are held in the Chapel every Sunday from April until October . The National Trust offers evening ghost tours around the house each Halloween . In common with many other National Trust properties , Little Moreton Hall is available for hire as a film location ; in 1996 it was one of the settings for Granada Television 's adaptation of Daniel Defoe 's Moll Flanders . 
 = Japan Echo = 
 Japan Echo was an English @-@ language periodical on Japanese issues which was initially published in print form by Japan Echo Inc. between 1974 and 2010 . Consisting mainly of translations into English of magazine and news articles originally published in Japanese , Japan Echo was launched with the support of Japan 's Foreign Affairs Ministry " to enable people abroad to learn what the Japanese themselves are thinking and writing about the issues of the day . " Though independently published , the Japanese government provided most of Japan Echo 's funding for the duration of its existence . 
 In 2010 budget cuts compelled the magazine to rebrand itself as Japan Echo Web , a purely online magazine published on a website operated by the Foreign Affairs Ministry . However , two years later the Japanese government shut it down and replaced it with a similar project called the Japan Foreign Policy Forum . 
 = = Origin and content = = 
 Japan Echo was the brainchild of <unk> Hasegawa , an employee at the Overseas Public Relations Division of the Japanese Foreign Affairs Ministry , who was disturbed by what he perceived to be misinformation and misunderstandings about Japan printed in the foreign press . Hasegawa recruited Yoshihiko Seki , a social scientist teaching at Tokyo Metropolitan University , to be the first editor of the new journal , which was to be published independently by a new company called Japan Echo Inc. founded in June 1974 by Jiji Press reporter Takeshi <unk> . 
 Most of Japan Echo 's contents were translations , sometimes abridged , of Japanese language essays . For each issue the journal 's editors selected what they considered the best articles published in major Japanese magazines on topics which were of Japanese or international significance at that time . For instance the first issue of November 1974 included eighteen articles from periodicals including <unk> , Shokun ! , Jiyū , Shūkan Gendai , <unk> , and <unk> grouped into topics like the oil crisis , the Solzhenitsyn case , Japanese relations with southeast Asia where Prime Minister Kakuei Tanaka 's state visits had been greeted by mass protests , and the case of Lieutenant Hiroo <unk> . The editors of Japan Echo said that they desired to " faithfully reflect a spectrum of responsible and informed Japanese opinion " , though most of its editors were considered to be politically right @-@ of @-@ center . 
 Japan Echo was at first released on a quarterly basis , but switched to a bimonthly format from 1997 and onward . It also had a French language edition which existed from 1979 and 2009 and a Spanish language edition from 1988 to 2009 . 
 = = Praise and criticism = = 
 The reference book , Magazines for Libraries described Japan Echo as an " excellent quarterly " which was " particularly valuable because it presents the Japanese in their own terms , unmediated by foreign ' experts ' . " " Controversial topics " , the book noted , " are not avoided . " 
 Japan Echo was also praised by Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau for its quality and readability . Its 1987 special edition on Tokyo was described by a The Japan Times columnist as " one of the best pieces ever done " on the subject and its coverage of the controversy over the Nanking Massacre was endorsed by the newspaper Yomiuri Shimbun for its " focus on facts , rather than getting caught up in emotional bluster . " 
 Many scholars supported the magazine including Hugh Cortazzi , although he also condemned one issue from 2006 which reprinted an interview between Shōichi Watanabe and Tarō Asō in which Watanabe denied the Nanking Massacre and advocated Japanese exceptionalism . In the same vein The Globe and Mail was highly critical of a 1984 issue in which a series of authors seemed to be watering down Japan 's responsibility for World War II by arguing that " Japan , simply to assure its own survival , was given little choice but to wage war with the United States . " 
 Roy Andrew Miller 's book Japan 's Modern Myth includes an extended criticism of Japan Echo , which he accuses of being a " public @-@ relations organ " promoting the same discredited ideas of Japanese linguistic and cultural uniqueness found in the <unk> no <unk> . 
 = = End of the print magazine = = 
 To deal with Japan 's mounting fiscal deficits , the newly elected government of Yukio Hatoyama formed the Government Revitalization Unit in 2009 to look for areas where the budget could be trimmed . The Unit recommended that the government cease purchasing and distributing foreign language periodicals like Japan Echo . 
 The government initially followed through with this recommendation but the move was widely disapproved of by scholars of Japanese affairs including Cortazzi and thanks in part to their protests the Foreign Affairs Ministry eventually agreed to revive Japan Echo as an online magazine , which would be produced on an annual basis by whichever company put forward the best bid . 
 = = Japan Echo Web = = 
 Japan Echo Inc. won the first competitive bid to publish Japan Echo Web in 2010 . The new online magazine would be released bimonthly in English and Chinese on a website owned by the Japanese Foreign Affairs Ministry , though as before the editors of Japan Echo Inc. had the final say over its contents " in order to keep the publication from being government propaganda . " The launch of the new magazine was praised in the journal Asian Politics & Policy for eschewing propaganda and providing " up @-@ to @-@ date , reliable information on current events " . 
 In 2011 Japan Echo Inc. concluded that annual bidding for its status as publisher of Japan Echo Web was " not a sustainable business model " and broke with the Japanese government after 37 years of cooperation . Japan Echo Inc. became the Nippon Communications Foundation which today has its own online magazine <unk> " driven by the same spirit that inspired the journal Japan Echo " . 
 A new group called The Japan Journal took over the magazine for the next fiscal year , after which the government terminated the Japan Echo brand for good and replaced it on November 26 , 2012 with an official successor called Japan Foreign Policy Forum . 
 = Oklahoma State Highway 34 = 
 State Highway 34 ( abbreviated SH @-@ 34 ) is a state highway in the U.S. state of Oklahoma . It runs for 188 @.@ 3 miles ( 303 @.@ 0 km ) south @-@ to @-@ north in the western part of the state . The highway begins northeast of Eldorado , in the southwest corner of the state , and extends north to the Kansas state line between Woodward and Coldwater , Kansas . 
 SH @-@ 34 has always been a lengthy highway , starting with its commissioning in June 1931 , when it was a border @-@ to @-@ border highway stretching from Texas to Kansas . Most of SH @-@ 34 has followed the same basic corridor since its inception , with the exception of the portion of highway north of Woodward . The southernmost portion of highway , connecting it to Texas , became solely SH @-@ 6 in 1987 . 
 There are three letter @-@ suffixed spur highways branching from SH @-@ 34 . SH @-@ 34A and SH @-@ 34B serve small towns in Greer County off the mainline of SH @-@ 34 , while SH @-@ 34C serves Boiling Springs State Park . 
 = = Route description = = 
 For much of its extent , State Highway 34 passes through rural areas , running through the plains of western Oklahoma . The highway begins at SH @-@ 6 six miles ( 10 km ) northeast of Eldorado . Heading north from there , it intersects U.S. Route 62 ( US @-@ 62 ) just east of Duke . The highway continues north into Greer County to its county seat of Mangum , where SH @-@ 34 joins US @-@ 283 . Two miles ( 3 km ) north of Mangum , SH @-@ 9 joins for a four @-@ mile ( 6 km ) concurrency with SH @-@ 34 and US @-@ 283 . Thereafter , SH @-@ 9 splits off to the east . 
 Nine miles ( 14 km ) north of Mangum , SH @-@ 34B branches off to the west , connecting to the town of Brinkman , and four miles ( 6 km ) later , SH @-@ 34A branches off to the west to the town of Willow . US @-@ 283 splits off to the northwest two miles ( 3 km ) after that , and SH @-@ 34 continues north , crossing into Beckham County . SH @-@ 34 then bridges over the North Fork of the Red River . In Carter , the highway serves as the western terminus of SH @-@ 55 . Five miles ( 8 km ) north of Carter , SH @-@ 34 crosses SH @-@ 152 . 
 SH @-@ 34 continues on to an interchange with Interstate 40 ( I @-@ 40 ) west of Elk City . Here , the highway begins a concurrency with eastbound I @-@ 40 . SH @-@ 34 accesses I @-@ 40 from exit 32 , a partial diamond interchange , with no access to or from I @-@ 40 eastbound ; the missing movements must be completed via another partial interchange further to the east , also numbered as exit 32 , which serves Business I @-@ 40 ( I @-@ 40 BUS ) . SH @-@ 34 follows I @-@ 40 to the east for 6 miles ( 9 @.@ 7 km ) . While concurrent with I @-@ 40 , SH @-@ 34 has an interchange with SH @-@ 6 , its northernmost junction with the latter highway . SH @-@ 34 exits the interstate from the left at exit 41 on the east side of Elk City , turning back to the north and intersecting I @-@ 40 BUS . The highway continues north out of Elk City , exiting Beckham County . 
 After leaving Beckham County , SH @-@ 34 enters Roger Mills County . SH @-@ 73 's western terminus is at SH @-@ 34 at nine miles ( 14 km ) north of Elk City . North of this junction , SH @-@ 34 lies along the Roger Mills – Custer county line , which it continues to follow as it passes through the east side of Hammon , where it meets State Highway 33 . North of town , the route crosses over the Washita River , and shortly thereafter turns northeast to fully enter Custer County . Northwest of Moorewood , the highway crosses into Dewey County . 
 In Dewey County , SH @-@ 34 crosses SH @-@ 47 , two miles ( 3 km ) south of <unk> , and crosses the Canadian River near the unincorporated settlement of Trail . The highway then passes through Camargo . Just east of Vici , SH @-@ 34 joins US @-@ 60 and SH @-@ 51 for a one @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) concurrency , then SH @-@ 34 heads north again at Vici . The highway passes through Sharon north of Vici , then joins US @-@ 183 / US @-@ 270 / SH @-@ 3 four miles ( 6 km ) southeast of Woodward . At Woodward , SH @-@ 34 again sets off to the north alone , and right after crossing the North Canadian River , SH @-@ 34C branches to the east about two miles ( 3 km ) north of Woodward , connecting to Boiling Springs State Park . 
 SH @-@ 34 joins US @-@ 64 in far eastern Harper County for a four @-@ mile ( 6 km ) concurrency to the east , crossing the Cimarron River 17 miles ( 27 km ) east of Buffalo . The highway then turns back to the north , where it is 10 miles ( 20 km ) to its terminus at the Kansas state line . 
 = = History = = 
 State Highway 34 was first designated on June 15 , 1931 . At that time , the highway began at the free bridge over the Red River north of Quanah , Texas , and followed what is today SH @-@ 6 to the point that is now SH @-@ 34 's southern terminus . There , it turned north , following its current alignment . Its 1931 alignment did not differ significantly from that of the present day ( although it followed US @-@ 66 through Elk City prior to the establishment of I @-@ 40 ) until it got to Woodward . Rather than continue north out of town , the SH @-@ 34 of that day instead turned west , then north , passing through Fort Supply and crossing into Harper County just north of that town . It then began a concurrency with US @-@ 60 in Buffalo , turning east and connecting with its final segment , bringing it to the Kansas state line . Thus , SH @-@ 34 started life as a border @-@ to @-@ border highway . 
 SH @-@ 34 was rerouted north of Buffalo on January 30 , 1934 . The new alignment continued due north out of Buffalo to the Kansas state line along a new road . The old portion of SH @-@ 34 between US @-@ 64 and the Kansas state line became part of SH @-@ 50 . 
 The next major change to SH @-@ 34 occurred in 1954 . On November 1 of that year , the highway was realigned to follow a new road extending north of Woodward , intersecting US @-@ 64 east of Buffalo , and following existing highways north to the state line . This would put SH @-@ 34 on its present @-@ day route north of Woodward . SH @-@ 50 would remain concurrent with SH @-@ 34 north of US @-@ 64 until November 9 , 1964 . 
 The next major change to SH @-@ 34 would be brought about by the establishment of the southern part of State Highway 6 . The new highway was introduced on July 7 , 1975 . SH @-@ 34 remained in place ; the two highways were concurrent from northwest of Eldorado to the Red River bridge , where they both ended . On January 5 , 1987 , the redundant section of SH @-@ 34 was removed , truncating it to its current southern terminus . 
 The final modification to SH @-@ 34 occurred just under a month later , on February 2 , 1987 , when SH @-@ 34 was realigned in Elk City to follow I @-@ 40 instead of the old alignment of the now @-@ dead US @-@ 66 , which had become a business loop of I @-@ 40 . No further changes have taken place since then . 
 = = Junction list = = 
 = = Spurs = = 
 = = = SH @-@ 34A = = = 
 SH @-@ 34A is a 1 @.@ 00 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 61 km ) spur connecting SH @-@ 34 with Willow , north of Mangum . The highway begins at the west edge of Willow and follows Main Street east as it bisects the town . East of the town limits , the highway intersects US @-@ 283 / SH @-@ 34 and ends . 
 SH @-@ 34A first appeared on the 1944 state highway map . 
 = = = SH @-@ 34B = = = 
 SH @-@ 34B is a 1 @.@ 03 @-@ mile ( 1 @.@ 66 km ) spur connecting SH @-@ 34 with Brinkman , north of Mangum . The highway follows Main Street from unincorporated Brinkman to US @-@ 283 / SH @-@ 34 . 
 SH @-@ 34B first appeared on the 1944 state highway map . 
 = = = SH @-@ 34C = = = 
 SH @-@ 34C is a 4 @.@ 52 @-@ mile ( 7 @.@ 27 km ) spur connecting SH @-@ 34 with Boiling Springs State Park north of Woodward . The highway heads east from SH @-@ 34 , curving northeast near the park 's golf course , before making a sharp turn toward the northeast . The highway ends on the west side of the park , with an access road continuing through it ; on the east side of the park , the access road intersects SH @-@ 50B at its western terminus . 
 The road that is currently SH @-@ 34C first appeared on the 1948 state highway map as SH @-@ 15A . At this time , the highway began at US @-@ 183 / US @-@ 270 / SH @-@ 15 / SH @-@ 34 in Woodward and headed north , then turned east north of the city and headed to Boiling Springs State Park . When SH @-@ 34 was realigned north of Woodward on November 1 , 1954 , it took over the portion of SH @-@ 15A in Woodward , severing the highway 's link to its parent . SH @-@ 15A had been renumbered as SH @-@ 34C by 1956 . By 1957 , the highway was extended east , passing through the park and continuing onward to SH @-@ 50 . However , by 1959 , the road through the park had been removed from the state highway system ; the segment of highway east of the park was renumbered to SH @-@ 50B . 
 = X ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 X , sometimes referred to as Mr. X , is a fictional character on the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . He serves as an informant , leaking information to FBI Special Agents Fox Mulder and Dana Scully to aid their investigation of paranormal cases , dubbed X @-@ Files . The character serves as a replacement for Deep Throat , who had been killed off in the first season finale , " The Erlenmeyer Flask " . X himself would be killed off after appearing in several seasons , eventually being replaced by Marita Covarrubias . 
 X is portrayed in the series by Steven Williams , and made his début in the second season episode " The Host " , although the character would not appear on @-@ screen until " Sleepless " , two episodes later . The role had originally been conceived as female , with Natalija Nogulich cast in the role ; however , her initial scenes were deemed unsatisfactory by the producers , leading to her replacement . Williams ' portrayal of X was intended to introduce a personality completely different to the character 's predecessor , Deep Throat , and has been positively received by critics and fans . 
 = = Conceptual history = = 
 The character of X was originally intended to be a woman , and Natalija Nogulich had been cast in the role . However , Nogulich was replaced by Steven Williams after shooting her first scene , as the writing staff felt Nogulich was not able to create the " right chemistry " with her co @-@ stars . Williams had previous experience with writers Glen Morgan and James Wong , although it was series creator Chris Carter who suggested him for the part . 
 Williams ' portrayal of the role was intended to act as a counterpoint to Jerry Hardin 's portrayal of X 's predecessor , Deep Throat . Whereas Deep Throat had been a selfless character , X was written and performed as a scared , selfish character . Prior to the episode " One Breath " , Glen Morgan had felt that the character of X was not " going over too well " with fans of the series , as he seemed to simply be a copy of Deep Throat . Believing Williams to be an actor worth having as a series regular , he included in the episode a scene in which X murders witnesses who have seen him speaking to Fox Mulder . Morgan felt that such a scene reflected X 's paranoia and the difference between him and his predecessor , noting that " Deep Throat was a guy willing to lose his life for letting out the secret , whereas X is a guy who 's still scared " . Williams has stated that he has never attempted to rationalize the character 's motives or imagine a backstory for him , preferring to play the role with as little background as possible ; he once stated " the less I know about him , the more interesting he becomes . " 
 Williams ' background in fight choreography , stemming from his role in Missing in Action 2 : The Beginning ( 1985 ) , allowed him to prepare for , and to help create , the character 's actions scenes , including choreographing the character 's brawl with Mitch Pileggi 's character Walter Skinner in the episode " End Game " . Williams has also stated that his portrayal of the role is based in part on Avery Brooks ' character Hawk on the series Spenser : For Hire . 
 = = Character arc = = 
 X was introduced on the series via a phone call made to Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) in the second season episode " The Host " , telling Mulder that he had " a friend in the FBI " . However , the character did not appear on @-@ screen until " Sleepless " , two episodes later , aiding Mulder in an investigation by leaking information on a secret military project from the Vietnam War . While X 's loyalties and his own agenda were often unclear , he proved more than once that he at least does not want Mulder dead . In the episode " End Game " , he is approached by Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , who pleads that she needs to know where Mulder is , believing his life to be in danger . Initially X refuses , and is subsequently confronted by Walter Skinner ( Mitch Pileggi ) , who seemed to recognize X. He relinquishes Mulder 's location , though not until after a brief but intense scuffle with Skinner . In the episode " 731 " , X 's loyalty to Mulder is further confirmed . Trapped on a train car equipped with a time bomb , Mulder , about to escape , is attacked brutally by the Red Haired Man , a Men in Black assassin . X fatally shoots the Red Haired Man as he is about to step off the car , then boards the car with only enough time left to save either Mulder or the alien @-@ human hybrid the car was transporting . He opts to save Mulder , and carries him off to safety just as the car explodes . 
 In the season 4 opener " Herrenvolk " , X 's position as an informant is discovered by the Syndicate . When suspicion arises after the finding of photographs that were taken of The Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) by X , false information is planted at the First Elder 's behest , in order to root out the leak . Attempting to relay the information to Mulder , X goes to his apartment and is surprised by fellow Men in Black operative , the Gray Haired Man , who fatally shoots him . With his last strength , X crawls to Mulder 's doorstep and writes in his own blood " SRSG " , meaning " Special Representative to the Secretary General " of the United Nations , and thus , this clue leads Mulder to Marita Covarrubias ( Laurie Holden ) . After his death , X appears two more times — in The Lone Gunmen origin story " Unusual Suspects , " set before his death , and as a ghost in the series finale , " The Truth " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The character of X has been well @-@ received by critics . Entertainment Weekly included the character in the list of the top 20 Black Sci @-@ Fi Icons in 2009 , at number 17 . Todd <unk> , writing for The A.V. Club , has praised the " gravitas " of Williams ' acting , adding that he wished that the writers " had figured out a way to have him around more often than they did " . VanDerWerff 's fellow writer Zack Handlen felt that the character 's assassination in " Herrenvolk " was " appropriately shocking " , calling the scene " one of the most memorable death 's [ sic ] in the series " ; although he felt that the immediate introduction of the character 's successor , Marita Covarrubias , " deflates the importance of X 's loss " in the episode . Handlen has also called X " the best of Mulder 's informants " , explaining that this is " because he 's always pissed off , he 's always reluctant to provide information , and you can 't ever be sure what play he 's really running " . Series writer Frank Spotnitz has called X " the meanest , nastiest , most lethal killer on the planet " . 
 Steven Williams has noted that he feels the episodes " Nisei " and " 731 " were chiefly responsible for the character 's popularity with fans . In 1997 , Williams was nominated for a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series for his work as X , alongside Gillian Anderson , William B. Davis , David Duchovny and Mitch Pileggi . 
 = John Doukas ( megas doux ) = 
 John Doukas ( Greek : Ἰωάννης Δούκας , ca . 1064 – before 1137 ) was a member of the Doukas family , a relative of Byzantine emperor Alexios I Komnenos ( r . 1081 – 1118 ) and a senior military figure of his reign . As governor of Dyrrhachium , he secured the imperial possessions in the western Balkans against the Serbs . Appointed megas doux , he scoured the Aegean of the fleets of the Turkish emir Tzachas , suppressed rebellions in Crete and Cyprus , and then recovered much of the western coast of Anatolia for Byzantium . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 John Doukas was born circa 1064 , the second son of the domestikos ton <unk> Andronikos Doukas , son of the Caesar John Doukas , and his wife , Maria of Bulgaria , the granddaughter of Tsar Ivan Vladislav of Bulgaria ( r . 1015 – 1018 ) . John was thus the brother @-@ in @-@ law of Alexios I Komnenos , who had married his sister Irene Doukaina . In 1074 , during the rebellion of the Norman mercenary Roussel de Bailleul , John , along with his elder brother Michael , was at his grandfather the Caesar 's estates in Bithynia . Roussel demanded that the Caesar give up the two as hostages in return for releasing their wounded father , whom he held captive . The elder John Doukas agreed , and the two were imprisoned by Roussel ; Michael managed to escape , but the younger John remained with Roussel until the latter 's defeat and capture by the Turks of <unk> later in the year . 
 After his father died in 1077 , John remained in his grandfather 's estates in Thrace , and was raised by him . It was there that he learned of the rebellion of Alexios Komnenos against Nikephoros III Botaneiates ( r . 1078 – 1081 ) in 1081 , and it was he who informed the Caesar of it . Together , they departed and joined Alexios 's forces at <unk> , where the latter was officially proclaimed emperor . 
 = = = Governor of Dyrrhachium = = = 
 In 1085 , when Alexios recovered the strategically important Adriatic port city of Dyrrhachium from the Normans who had occupied it , John Doukas was installed as the military governor ( doux ) of the local province . John remained there until 1092 , when he was replaced by John Komnenos , the son of the emperor 's brother , the sebastokrator Isaac . His tenure was apparently very successful . John repelled the Serbian incursions from Duklja and Raška , and even , according to Anna Komnene , captured the Dukljan king Constantine Bodin ( r . 1081 – 1101 ) , before restoring him to power as a client of the Byzantine Empire . Thus John managed to restore order in the region of Albania and Dalmatia , which had suffered greatly during the Byzantine – Norman wars of the previous years . Surviving correspondence from the archbishop Theophylact of Ohrid is a testimony to his success ; after John 's departure from the post , Theophylact expressed nostalgia for the time of his governorship and asked for his advice . 
 = = = Appointment as megas doux and campaigns against the Turks = = = 
 After being recalled to Constantinople in 1092 , John was appointed to the post of megas doux , i.e. commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Byzantine navy . Although he is the first known megas doux and hence usually credited as the first to hold the post , there is evidence of its existence already in late 1085 , although its holder is not named . As megas doux , John was tasked with countering the naval threat posed by the Turkish emir Tzachas of Smyrna . Tzachas , formerly a Byzantine vassal , had built a fleet of his own and had seized several Aegean islands , raided others , and even had himself proclaimed basileus ( emperor ) . After participating in a synod that condemned Leo of Chalcedon , John set forth to take back the island of Mytilene . His troops marched along the Anatolian coast to the point opposite the island , whence they crossed over . The fleet , which under Constantine Dalassenos had already recovered Chios , was to meet him there . The combined Byzantine force laid siege to Mytilene for three months , when Tzachas offered to cede the island in exchange for safe passage back to Smyrna . John agreed , but as the Turks set sail , Dalassenos , who with his ships had just arrived , attacked them . Tzachas managed to escape , but most of his fleet was captured or sunk . After this victory , John Doukas reinforced the defences of Mytilene and then led his fleet to recover the islands Tzachas had conquered , before returning to Constantinople . 
 Upon his return to Constantinople , he was tasked ( late 1092 / early 1093 ) , along with Manuel <unk> , with the suppression of the revolts in Crete by Karykes and in Cyprus by Rhapsomates . The rebellion of Karykes was subdued easily , as the news of the imperial fleet 's approach caused a counter @-@ coup that overthrew him . At Cyprus , Rhapsomates 's initial resistance was overcome , and he himself was captured soon after . <unk> <unk> was installed as the island 's new governor , and the fleet returned to Constantinople . 
 In 1097 , after the surrender of Nicaea to the Byzantines , Alexios named John as commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Byzantine army in Anatolia , and tasked with recovering the Aegean littoral from the Turks . To avoid conflict and facilitate negotiations , he was given custody of the wife of the sultan of the Seljuk Sultanate of Rum Kilij Arslan I ( r . 1092 – 1107 ) and the daughter of Tzachas , who had been captured at Nicaea . John gave command of the fleet to Kaspax , and marched against Smyrna . After a short siege , Tzachas agreed to surrender the city in exchange for his safe departure and guarantees of the inhabitants ' safety . The megas doux readily accepted and took possession of the city , naming Kaspax as its governor . Even before Kaspax could assume his duties however , he was murdered by a Muslim , and the enraged sailors of the fleet massacred the people of the city . John Doukas was unable to restrain them , and restored order only after the massacre had run its course . He then left the experienced general <unk> behind as doux of the city along with the entire fleet to secure the city , and continued his campaign . From Smyrna , John marched south to Ephesus . There , he defeated the Turkish garrison after a long battle , and took 2 @,@ 000 captives , who were resettled in the Aegean islands . <unk> was installed as doux of Ephesus , and John with his army turned inland . He took the cities of <unk> and Philadelphia , which he entrusted to Michael Kekaumenos , and reached Laodicea , which opened its gates to him . From there , he marched to the fortresses of <unk> and Lampe , installing Eustathios Kamytzes as governor , and reached <unk> , where most of the Turks who had survived at Ephesus had fled . Having caught them by surprise , Doukas 's army defeated them and took much booty . 
 = = = Later life = = = 
 John Doukas is no longer mentioned in the Alexiad after his 1097 campaign . It is , however , known from monastic documents that at some point he retired to a monastery and assumed the monastic name Antony . The date of his death is also not known , but in a <unk> dated to 1110 – 1116 he is mentioned as being alive , while in another <unk> of 1136 , he is explicitly mentioned as having died . 
 = Bone Sharps , Cowboys , and Thunder Lizards = 
 Bone Sharps , Cowboys , and Thunder Lizards : A Tale of Edward Drinker Cope , Othniel Charles Marsh , and the Gilded Age of Paleontology ( 2005 ) is a graphic novel written by Jim Ottaviani and illustrated by the company Big Time Attic . The book tells a slightly fictionalized account of the Bone Wars , a period of intense excavation , speculation , and rivalry which led to a greater understanding of dinosaurs in the western United States . This novel is the first semi @-@ fictional work written by Ottaviani ; previously , he had taken no creative license with the characters he depicted , portraying them strictly according to historical sources . 
 Bone Sharps follows the two scientists Edward Drinker Cope and Othniel Marsh as they engage in an intense rivalry for prestige . Ottaviani has Cope and Marsh interact and meet many important figures of the Gilded Age , from P. T. Barnum to U.S. Grant , as the two scientists pursue their hotheaded and sometimes illegal acquisitions of fossils . Unlike in his previous books , " the scientists are the bad guys this time " . Upon release , the novel received praise from critics for its exceptional historical content , although some reviewers wished more fiction had been woven into the story . 
 = = Background = = 
 Author Jim Ottaviani was drawn to the subject of paleontologists Edward Drinker Cope and Othniel Charles Marsh after reading a book about the Bone Wars while working at the University of Michigan Library in Ann Arbor . Ottaviani had previously written books and comics on scientific figures , but had never written a work of historical fiction . While Ottaviani was putting his ideas together , he met Zander Cannon at the 2004 San Diego Comic Convention . Cannon and associates were forming a new production studio , " Big Time Attic " ; Ottaviani mentioned he had a proposal he wanted to show them . Referring to Big Time Attic , Ottaviani stated in an interview that " A newly formed studio taking on a 160 @-@ page graphic novel is ambitious " and that he was lucky to have had the book published . Even the format — the book is wider than it is tall — was a departure for Ottaviani , but he explained that since the story was talking about " wide expanses of territory " and the American West , the artists at Big Time Attic wanted a more non @-@ traditional landscape page design . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 The novel is broken into three sections , with each titled after a portion of the novel 's title : " Bone Sharps " , " Cowboys " , and " Thunder Lizards . " The narrative is not continuous ; there are significant gaps of time between each section , roughly spanning the years 1869 to . 
 The novel begins with Othniel Charles Marsh on a steam train between New York City and New Haven , where he first meets the showman Phineas T. Barnum . While showing Marsh the Cardiff Giant ( or rather a copy of it ) , which he cheerfully admits is a fraud when Marsh points this out , he refers with irritation about a " little cuss " of a professor who outbid him for some Mexican antiquities . An angry Marsh reveals he is that " little cuss " and he fully intends to write an article exposing the Giant as a fraud before Barnum can advertise it . 
 In Philadelphia , Henry Fairfield Osborn is introducing artist Charles R. Knight to Edward Drinker Cope , a paleontologist whose entire house is filled with bones and specimens . Cope is commissioning a painting , something to " catch the spirit " of the sea creature Elasmosaurus ( but has unwittingly mistaken its neck for a tail ) . Cope then leaves for the West , as the official scientist for the U.S. Geological Survey ( USGS ) . On the way , he meets Othniel Charles Marsh , a fellow paleontologist , and shows him his dig site at a marl pit in New Jersey ; after Cope leaves , Marsh talks to the owner of the land and pays him off to gain exclusive digging rights . At Fort Bridger , Wyoming , Cope meets Sam Smith , a helper to the USGS . During excavations , Cope finds some of the richest bone veins ever . Sending back carloads of dinosaur bones east by train , Cope encounters Marsh , who is heading out west as well . Marsh travels in style , lounging in coach while the rest of his team travels third class — Marsh even berates them for playing cards , saying it is " low class " and that Yale graduates should look more presentable . At Fort McPherson , Nebraska , Marsh meets " Buffalo " Bill Cody , who serves as their guide , along with the Native American Indian tribe . Marsh discovers many new fossils , and promises to Chief Red Cloud that he will talk to the President of the United States about the situation of the Native Americans — they have been given spoiled food in exchange for their land . Back East , Knight has finished his reconstruction of Elasmosaurus . He and Knight return to the marl pits of New Jersey , but are forced away . Cope becomes furious and storms away when he learns Marsh has bought the digging rights and published a paper revealing his interpretation of Elasmosaurus flawed . 
 Some time later , John Bell Hatcher is backing out of paying his share of a card game by drawing his revolver . He has taken to gambling , as Marsh , who employs him as a bone hunter , is not providing him with enough funds . Marsh lobbies the Bureau of Indian Affairs on behalf of Red Cloud , but also visits with the Geological Survey , insinuating that he would be a better leader of the USGS than Cope . After learning about Sam Smith 's attempted sabotage of Cope and once again receiving no payment from Marsh , Hatcher leaves his employ . Marsh , now representing the survey , heads west with wealthy businessmen , scoffing at the financial misfortunes of Cope , whose investments have failed . 
 Cope travels with Knight to Europe ; Knight with the intention of visiting Paris zoos , Cope with the intent of selling off much of his bone collection . Cope has also spent much of his money buying The American Naturalist , a paper in which he plans to attack Marsh 's dealings . Hatcher arrives in New York to talk about the find Laelaps ; in his speech , he subtly hints at the folly of Marsh 's elitism and backstabbing , as well as Cope 's collecting obsession . 
 Later , Marsh is attending a conference on telephony hosted by Alexander Graham Bell ; it is here he learns that his USGS expense tab ( to which he had been charging drinks ) has been withdrawn , his publication has been suspended , and the fossils he found as part of the USGS are to be returned to the Survey . His colleagues now shun him , the Bone War feud having alienated them , and he is forced to go to Barnum to try to obtain a loan , with the very Mexican antiquities he 'd outbid Barnum on before as collateral . 
 Osborn and Knight arrive at Cope 's residence to find the paleontologist has died of illness . The funeral is markedly pitiful , with only a few Quakers and the two friends in attendance . Cope has bequeathed his remains to science , and requested to have his bones considered for the Homo sapiens lectotype . Back at Marsh 's " wigwam " , Marsh 's , Chief Red Cloud , examines Marsh 's luxuries . Red Cloud 's interest is piqued by a long tusk from a Mastodon , which the Shawnee call <unk> 'ak . The Shawnee have an ancient legend , which Marsh relates . At one time there were giant men proportionate to the mastodons . However , when the great men grew few , the Great Spirit decided to destroy the <unk> 'ak himself . All but one bull was killed ; this last mastodon fled north , where he remains to modern times . In exchange for the loss of the Mastodon , the Great Spirit created the cranberry , a bitter reminder of the blood spilled . Chief Red Cloud remarks that it is a true story , but Marsh rebukes him , saying that science tells modern man that his ancestors were smaller , not larger , than him . Red Cloud , on his way out , responds , " It is not a story about science . It is about men . " 
 Knight and his wife , many years later , are taking their granddaughter Rhoda to the American Museum of Natural History . Knight , well @-@ known to the staff , is visiting the closed @-@ off areas to have a look at the new mammoth specimens : the girl , however , is eager to see more of her grandfather 's paintings . During this , the staff are finally getting round to sorting out Marsh 's long @-@ neglected collection of fossils . Two of the workers discover Knight 's Leaping Laelaps has been accidentally left in the storeroom yesterday . The painting is taken back downstairs while the workmen unknowingly leave Cope 's skeleton and Marsh 's parts behind : " The rest of this stuff is <unk> ' put for who knows how long , but we don 't want that to get buried . " 
 = = Characters = = 
 Edward Drinker Cope – An American paleontologist , Cope spent nearly all his money in attacking Marsh and financing further digs for bones out west ; he dies destitute . 
 Othniel Charles Marsh – Rival to Cope , Marsh was a Yale @-@ educated scholar who disdained what he called " the <unk> of science " . His sizable fortune granted him favor and status in politics and society . By the end of Bone Sharps , Marsh is seen to have lost face with the science world at large for his excessive means to acquire fossils ; nonetheless , he " defeated " Cope by discovering more new species of dinosaur such as Apatosaurus , Stegosaurus , Allosaurus and Triceratops . 
 Charles R. Knight – A famous painter of the twentieth century who created numerous paleontological pieces ( the dinosaurs on the cover are based on Knight 's painting Leaping Laelaps ) . Ottaviani introduces Knight to Cope earlier than historically recorded . 
 P.T. Barnum – American showman , famous for his hoaxes and for founding the Ringling Brothers and Barnum and Bailey Circus later in life . Barnum 's Cardiff Giant is exposed as a fraud by Marsh , who later comes to the entertainer begging for money . 
 Henry Fairfield Osborn – paleontologist and geologist , Osborn joined the US Geological Survey in 1890 , and on one fossil @-@ hunting trip to the West met Cope . He described numerous well @-@ known dinosaur genera , including Ornitholestes , Tyrannosaurus , and Velociraptor . 
 Bill Cody – Commonly known as " Buffalo Bill " , this western showman makes a brief appearance in Part II . 
 Ulysses S Grant – 18th President of the United States , Marsh uses his connections to lobby directly to Grant . 
 = = Factual accuracy = = 
 While the majority of Bone Sharps is true and all of it is based on history , the author acknowledged several differences between real events and certain artistic license taken . One instance of Ottaviani using creative license was to transport artist Charles R. Knight into the story earlier than was originally intended in early drafts . In real life , Knight did not meet Cope until only a few years before Cope 's death ; In addition , Knight 's autobiography states that it was reporter William Hosea Ballou who introduced the two , not Osborn . There is also no evidence Marsh and Knight ever met . On Knight 's role in the story , Ottaviani wrote : 
 As I was reading about Cope and Marsh , I ran across Knight as something of a bit player in their lives . As I got further into the Cope and Marsh story , and I liked the two less and less as people — which is different from liking them as characters , of course — I wanted to have a character in the book for the readers to root for , and neither of the scientists could fill that role . When I found out that Knight had met Cope just before Cope died , I became convinced that he was the character I needed . 
 After Knight 's granddaughter forwarded him a copy of Knight 's autobiographical manuscript , Ottaviani made Knight 's role more prominent . Ottaviani 's interest in Knight eventually led to his company G.T. Labs publishing Knight 's autobiography , with notes by Ottaviani and forewords by Ray Bradbury and Ray Harryhausen . Other character relationships were fictionalized as well ; editor James Gordon Bennet , Jr. never lobbied with Cope , and never exposed Marsh 's will . Cope 's bones also never made it to New York . 
 Some conversations , due to their private nature , were fictionalized ; Ottaviani makes up Marsh 's lobby to Congress and what happened during his meeting with President Grant , and P.T. Barnum never told off Marsh the way he did in the novel . Ottaviani also wove the story Marsh tells about the Mastodon from several different versions of the legend . 
 A key plot point is fabricated for the purposes of dramatic irony : in the book , Marsh has his agent Sam Smith leave a Camarasaurus skull for Cope to find and mistakenly put on the wrong dinosaur . Instead , Hatcher finds it ; Smith tries to keep an unwitting Marsh from getting it , but due to Marsh 's obnoxious manner he lets him after all . As a result , Marsh mistakenly classifies the ( non @-@ existent ) Brontosaurus . Ottaviani admits in the book he invented this , as " the literary tradition of hoisting someone up by his own petard was too good to pass up " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The book was generally well @-@ received upon release . Comic book letterer Todd Klein recommended the book to his readers , stating that the novel was able to convey the depths of Cope and Marsh 's rivalry and " we can only wonder how much more could have been accomplished if [ Cope and Marsh ] had only been willing to team up instead " . Klein 's complaints focused on the somewhat stiff art and the difficulty in telling some characters apart , but said these shortcomings did not affect the flow and reading . Johanna Carlson of <unk> found Bone Sharps 's central message , " the question of whether promotion is a necessary evil ( to gather funds through attention ) or a base desire of those with the wrong motivations " , still relevant to today 's society ; Carlson also lauded the flow of the novel and some of the intricate details in the story and setting . Other reviewers praised Ottaviani 's inclusion of notable historical figures , and the educational yet entertaining feel of the work . 
 In addition to minor issues with the art , some reviewers , including Entertainment Weekly 's Tom Russo , felt that more fiction could have been used in the mostly non @-@ fiction writing . Due to the historical background of the book , Bone Sharps has been used in schools , as part of a study testing the effects of using comic books to educate young children . Since the release of the graphic novel , Ottaviani has published other slightly fictionalized historical stories , including Levitation : Physics and Psychology in the Service of Deception and Wire Mothers : Harry Harlow and the Science of Love . 
 = North Carolina Highway 2A = 
 North Carolina Highway 2A ( NC 2A ) was a state highway located in southern Moore County , in the U.S. state of North Carolina . The highway traveled from an intersection with U.S. Route 1 ( US 1 ) , now May Street , northward through portions of Manly and Southern Pines to an intersection with NC 22 ( now US 1 ) . The highway was first listed as part of the Moore County road system by at least 1930 . The route was improved to a paved surface by 1936 . NC 2A was numbered sometime between 1945 and 1949 . By 1952 , it was cancelled and Highway 2 was designated over the route . It has since been numbered Secondary Road 2029 ( SR 2029 ) . 
 = = Route description = = 
 In 1951 , NC 2A started at an at @-@ grade intersection with US 1 ( North May Street ) in the southern portion of the community of Manly . From there , the highway ran northwesterly across the Seaboard Air Line Railroad to an intersection with a primitive trail ( now Clark Street ) in Southern Pines . The roadway continued northwestward to a bridge over a small , unnamed creek ( now nonexistent ) . Turning slightly westward , the road proceeded to its northern terminus , an intersection with NC 2 ( now an interchange with US 1 ) . 
 = = History = = 
 By 1930 , a highway in the location of NC 2A was added to the Moore County Highway System as a class C road , a county highway of the lowest importance . The entire length of the route was graded with an earthen surface , as was much of the highway system . During the mid @-@ 1930s , the route was designated as a primary county highway . The route was shifted slightly northerly and had been extended to approximately 0 @.@ 9 miles ( 1 @.@ 4 km ) in length , as well as being improved to an asphalt surface . Between then and 1938 , the route 's southern terminus was shifted southward and the entire length of the highway was resurfaced as bituminous . Between 1945 and 1949 , NC 2A was designated along Yadkin Road as a connector route between NC 2 and US 1 . During that same period the route was also slightly straightened near its southern terminus . By 1952 , NC 2A was decommissioned and replaced by NC 2 . The road was shortened to 0 @.@ 74 miles ( 1 @.@ 19 km ) in length , and its entire length was paved . NC 2 's route was replaced by NC 22 . By the next year , Yadkin Road has been shifted to its current location . Before 1972 , NC 2 was rerouted away from Yadkin Road and the route had been designated as SR 2029 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire highway was in Moore County . 
 = Kepler @-@ 9b = 
 Kepler @-@ 9b is one of the first planets discovered outside the solar system ( exoplanets ) by NASA 's Kepler Mission . It revolves around the star Kepler @-@ 9 within the constellation Lyra . Kepler @-@ 9b is the largest of three planets detected in the Kepler system by transit method ; its mass is slightly smaller than the planet Saturn , and it is the largest planet in its system . Kepler @-@ 9b and Kepler @-@ 9c display a phenomenon called orbital resonance , in which gravitational pull from each planet alters and stabilizes the orbit of the other . The planet 's discovery was announced on August 26 , 2010 . 
 = = Nomenclature and history = = 
 Kepler @-@ 9b 's name denotes that it is the first exoplanet discovered in orbit around the star Kepler @-@ 9 . The star , in turn , was named for the Kepler Mission , a NASA project designed to search for Earth @-@ like planets . Kepler @-@ 9 's planets were among 700 planetary candidates collected during Kepler 's first 43 days online . The system in particular was flagged as one of five systems that appeared to have held more than one transiting exoplanet . Kepler @-@ 9b 's discovery was announced on August 26 , 2010 . It was the part of the first confirmed star system in which multiple planets transited the same star . 
 The planet was confirmed by the Kepler satellite by the transit method , in which the planet passes across the face of its star in relation to Earth , dimming that star 's light by a small amount ; this light difference is then used to determine the planet and several of its characteristics , including size and distance from its home star . 
 Initial estimates for Kepler @-@ 9b 's mass were refined by the W. M. Keck Observatory at Mauna Kea , Hawaii . In doing so , scientists found that Kepler @-@ 9b is the larger of the two gas planets discovered in the Kepler @-@ 9 system , although in mass it is smaller than planet Saturn . 
 = = Characteristics = = 
 Kepler @-@ 9b is a gas planet that has an approximate mass of 0 @.@ 252 MJ ; thus , it is about one @-@ fourth the mass of planet Jupiter . It has a radius of approximately 0 @.@ 842 RJ , or about 80 % the radius of Jupiter . The planet orbits Kepler @-@ 9 every 19 @.@ 243 days , and it lies some .14 AU from the star . To compare , planet Mercury 's average distance from the Sun is .387 AU and takes 87 @.@ 969 days to complete an orbit . Kepler @-@ 9b is the second closest planet to its star in the Kepler @-@ 9 system . 
 The first known case of orbital resonance in exoplanets has been noted between Kepler @-@ 9b and Kepler @-@ 9c . The two planets , whose orbits correspond in a roughly 1 : 2 ratio , maintain the orbit of the other by gravitational tug . Kepler @-@ 9b 's orbit grows , on average , four minutes longer every orbital period . Eventually , this trend will reverse and increase . Over time , it can be seen that the planets ' orbits oscillate slightly above and below the 1 : 2 ratio . <unk> Weinberger of the Carnegie Institution has stated that the Kepler @-@ 9 gas giants probably formed further away from the star than they are , and the appearance of the orbital resonance phenomenon may help explain the history of their inward migration . 
 = Love a Woman = 
 " Love a Woman " is a song recorded by American R & B singer Mary J. Blige featuring Beyoncé from the former 's tenth studio album My Life II ... The Journey Continues ( Act 1 ) ( 2011 ) . It was written by Mary J. Blige , Beyoncé , Sean Garrett and <unk> Timothee while production was handled by Garrett , Team S. Dot and <unk> . Originally written for Beyoncé 's fourth studio album 4 ( 2011 ) , the singer felt that it did not fit with the sound she had created for her album , and she thought that it would be better if she recorded it as a duet with Blige instead . 
 " Love a Woman " is a down @-@ tempo R & B ballad with live @-@ instrumentation in which Beyoncé and Blige are teaching men about how to love their female partners . It received positive reviews from music critics who mostly praised the chemistry between Beyoncé and Blige on the duet as well as their vocals . Following the release of My Life II ... The Journey Continues ( Act 1 ) , the song peaked at number eighty nine on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart based on digital sales . 
 = = Background and development = = 
 " Love a Woman " was written by Mary J. Blige , Beyoncé , Sean Garrett and <unk> Timothee while production was handled by Garrett . Team S. Dot served as the co @-@ producer of the song while <unk> served as the additional producer for it . On November 9 , 2011 , a snippet of " Love a Woman " appeared online . It was officially premiered on November 17 , prior to the release of the album . The song was initially recorded by Beyoncé for her fourth studio album 4 ( 2011 ) , but she thought that it would be a better fit as a duet with Blige . Blige further revealed in an interview that the song was sent to her after Beyoncé thought that it didn 't fit her album and it was sent through her A & R people . She further added , " When the song came , her voice was on it completely and it was just amazing and I wasn 't sure that they wanted to give me this record because it was so amazing . " Blige further spoke about how she started the collaboration with Beyoncé on the song : 
 " The song was so amazing I had to be sure , as an artist , that she really was trying to give it to me . I was like ' is she really trying to give me this song , because it 's pretty amazing . ' They were like ' yes , but she wants to stay on it with you . ' And I was like , ' Wow ! Beyoncé ? Thanks ! ' And you know I love and respect her to death so I wouldn 't pass that chance up . " 
 Blige further revealed that the song would be released as a single but was delayed due to Beyoncé 's pregnancy at that time adding that , " whenever she 's ready , if she 's ever ready , I 'm ready and it 'll be great . " During an interview with Rap @-@ Up magazine , Garrett further spoke about the collaboration , saying , " I initially did the record for Beyoncé and then we just felt it would be an even bigger record with Beyoncé and Mary J. Blige ... Both these women are two iconic female figures in the world , and what would be better than putting those two on a record ? We felt it would be a really iconic move . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Love a Woman " is a down @-@ tempo soulful R & B ballad with a female empowerment theme and live @-@ sounding instruments . The soothing track starts off with Blige singing with a dark voice , " So you think you know how to love a woman / But I think it 's still some things you need to know . " As the flowery instrumental builds with a serene piano melody and accentuating horns , Blige goes on to warn that a woman needs more than material things . A writer of Billboard magazine further noted that the song was schooling men on just how good to love a woman . During her lines , Beyoncé sings with a vibrato voice , " A woman / Needs you to make love to her / She needs more than sex / Oh , a real woman needs a real man / They don ’ t talk about it , be about it / Put that work in , still shows his woman real romance " . According to Rob Markman of MTV News , " From there , the song plays as a lyrical how @-@ to . Communication is a must , as is respect , but coming home late and being a one @-@ minute man is a no @-@ no . " Writers further noted that the duet was inspired by the music from the 1990s including a New jack swing @-@ era R & B production . Beyoncé and Blige further sing the lines " She doesn ’ t want makeup sex , she wants your respect . " The song also has an extended bridge section during the 2 : 30 mark where Blige sings the lines " Pick up your phone … just to say you 're still in love from time to time … " with a vocal styling which was compared to Michael Jackson 's " Off the Wall " era . It ends with the sound of <unk> <unk> Gomez @-@ Lacayo of <unk> compared the song with Aaron Hall 's material . <unk> <unk> of Yahoo ! Music compared the first minute of the song with Busta Rhymes ' songs due to the speedy wordplay . She further noted that it was similar to the songs by Keith Sweat from the 1990s . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Rob Markman of MTV News wrote that the singers " display good chemistry on the song " . The Washington Post 's Sarah Godfrey classified " Love a Woman " as one of the best tracks on the album adding that " The ballad , with its cheesy , delightful ... R & B production , blasts the notion that <unk> is all raw power and Beyoncé is all chilly technique — the women are both bold and great here , with a slight advantage going to Blige . " Becky Bain of the website Idolator commented that Garrett who served as a writer for the song " clearly knows how to love a woman right " . A writer of Rap @-@ Up magazine noted that Blige and Beyoncé " showcase their powerful pipes " as they tell their men what they want from a relationship . <unk> Gipson of Black Entertainment Television wrote that the song was one of the most appealing on the album , further describing it as a " breathtaking duet " . Martyn Young of the website musicOMH described the song as " a classy duet between two of contemporary RnB ’ s most striking voices " . Siobhan Kane of the website Consequence of Sound noted that Blige and Beyoncé obviously enjoyed " the soaring nature of the song " , while Alex Young of the same publication described it as a " lesson in love " . Nathan S. of DJBooth described the song as an " inter @-@ generational diva duet that sounds so ‘ 90s I half expected Keith Sweat to jump in " . Trent Fitzgerald of PopCrush graded the song with four out of five stars and commented , " ' Love a Woman ' is a melodic song with a ’ 90s @-@ sounding feel that will surely get spins on urban radio and quiet storm formats . Forget Dr. Phil , <unk> and Ms. B is all you need to help you maintain a loving relationship with your partner . " 
 <unk> <unk> of Yahoo ! Music commented that Blige and Beyoncé combined their " superpowers " in the studio to make the " forceful ballad " . She further commented , " The breakdown is where the listener really gets to hear the symmetry of these two powerhouse vocals . Neither diva overpowers the other . Right where [ Beyoncé ] leaves off , Mary J. picks up . And vice versa ... Although either of these R & B divas could carry ' Love a Woman ' with no problem , some might say that the song makes more of an impact with their deliveries combined . Blige 's seasoned soul coupled with Bey 's creamy delivery is a mood to behold . " Andy Gill of The Independent wrote that Beyoncé " act [ s ] as a Greek chorus " to the song . Joey Guerra of the Houston Chronicle noted that " Love a Woman " is a soulful , old @-@ school ballad " that brings out the best in both singers " . Writing that Blige is " particularly heavy " on the R & B vibes of the song , Andrew Martin of Prefix Magazine further commented that " without a doubt , it 's sure to gain some stream whenever radio DJs catch wind of it . Why ? Because ' Love a Woman ' features silky production , strong harmonies , and guest vocals from Beyoncé . Yeah , there 's no stopping this one . " Katie Hasty of HitFix commented that " It 's actually a pretty standard list of grievances and explanations , but the real guts of the thing is when the two light up , to bring out the best vocal performances in each other , shooting you straight back to the 1990s . " Kevin Ritchie of Now gave a mixed review for the song saying that it aims " for posterity rather than chemistry " . Similarly , Adam Markovitz of Entertainment Weekly described the duet as " <unk> " . 
 = = Charts = = 
 The song peaked at number eighty nine on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart and spent three weeks in total on that ranking . It also peaked at number 50 on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Digital Songs chart . 
 = Mount Hope Bay raids = 
 The Mount Hope Bay raids were a series of military raids conducted by British troops during the American Revolutionary War against communities on the shores of Mount Hope Bay on May 25 and 30 , 1778 . The towns of Bristol and Warren , Rhode Island were significantly damaged , and Freetown , Massachusetts ( present @-@ day Fall River ) was also attacked , although its militia resisted British activities . The British destroyed military defenses in the area , including supplies that had been cached by the Continental Army in anticipation of an assault on British @-@ occupied Newport , Rhode Island . Homes as well as municipal and religious buildings were also destroyed in the raids . 
 On May 25 , 500 British and Hessian soldiers , under orders from General Sir Robert Pigot , the commander of the British garrison at Newport , Rhode Island , landed between Bristol and Warren , destroyed boats and other supplies , and plundered Bristol . Local resistance was minimal and ineffective in stopping the British activities . Five days later 100 soldiers descended on Freetown , where less damage was done because local defenders prevented the British from crossing a bridge . 
 = = Background = = 
 In December 1776 , after completing the conquest of New York City , British Lieutenant General William Howe detached a body of troops from his army which occupied Newport , Rhode Island without significant opposition . The Newport garrison came under the command of Brigadier General Sir Robert Pigot when the original commander , Brigadier General Richard Prescott , was captured in the summer of 1777 in a daring commando operation led by Continental Army Major and Warren , Rhode Island , native William Barton . 
 Since the British occupation began American and British forces had been in a standoff . Major General Joseph Spencer had been ordered by Major General George Washington to launch an assault on Newport in 1777 , but he had not done so , and was removed from command of the Rhode Island defenses . In March 1778 Congress approved the appointment of Major General John Sullivan to Rhode Island . By early May , Sullivan had arrived in the state and produced a detailed report on the situation there . He also began logistical preparations for an attack on Newport , caching equipment and supplies on the eastern shore of Narragansett Bay and the Taunton River . General Pigot was alerted to Sullivan 's preparations by a local Loyalist , and organized an expedition to raid Bristol and Warren . On the evening of May 24 he ordered a force of 500 British and Hessian soldiers under the command of the 22nd Regiment 's Lieutenant Colonel James Campbell to march to the northern end of Aquidneck Island , from where they took whaleboats across to the mainland . 
 = = Warren and Bristol raid = = 
 Arriving early on May 25 , Campbell 's forces landed on Bristol Neck , between Bristol and Warren . Campbell divided his force in two , sending one detachment into Warren , and the other to areas along the <unk> River where boats and other supplies were cached . The latter force destroyed 58 of 70 small boats that General Spencer had originally stored there , along with other military supplies and a corn mill . They burned down a bridge that crossed the river , and set fire to a sloop . After the British left , locals put out the fire on the sloop , which only suffered minor damage . 
 The Warren detachment had expected some resistance upon reaching the town , but Continental Army forces , numbering about 300 under the command of Colonel Archibald Clary , had fled the town upon rumors that the British force was much larger than it actually was . The British destroyed military supplies , and set fire to the local powder magazine . The ensuing explosion destroyed six homes and the town 's meeting house . The troops also burned a sloop and destroyed five cannon . As they marched from the town , the first signs of organized resistance began to appear . The two British detachments rejoined and headed for Bristol . 
 Word of the British landing had reached Providence , and Colonel Barton immediately sprang into action . Recruiting about 200 volunteers , he rushed south , turned Clary 's retreating force around , and caught up with the British shortly after they left Warren , heading for Bristol . The two forces skirmished as the British marched southward , with both sides incurring minor casualties . The notable exception was Colonel Barton , who took a musket ball that did him sufficient damage that it effectively ended his military career , although he continued to fight on that day . Campbell 's men reached Bristol in good order despite the ongoing skirmishes , and engaged in a destructive rampage . In addition to military supplies and cannon , they destroyed 22 homes and a church , and looted everywhere , making , according to one account , " no distinction between their Friends and Foes " . 
 Their work completed around noon , the British returned to their boats . They embarked , covered by the guns of the frigate HMS Flora and HM galley Pigot , and returned to Aquidneck Island and Newport . The raid prompted General Sullivan to renew calls to area governors for increased militia assistance . This recruiting did not have material effect before the next raid occurred . 
 = = Freetown raid = = 
 Pigot next organized a smaller raiding force to go to lower Freetown ( a portion that was later separated to form Fall River ) . On May 30 , a force of 100 men led by Major Edmund Eyre ( who had served under Campbell in the previous raid ) sailed up the Taunton River into lower Freetown , where they landed near the mouth of the <unk> River . The local militia was under the command of Colonel Joseph Durfee , a Continental Army veteran , and had established a watch . The British landing was spotted by a sentinel and the alarm was raised . Forty men , including militia from Freetown and nearby Tiverton , mustered to give resistance . Eyre 's men fired grapeshot from a small cannon and slowly pushed the militiamen uphill . As this took place , some of his men proceeded to burn a house , grist mill and sawmill , nine boats , and 15 @,@ 000 feet of planking . The militia eventually reached a bridge across a stream , where about 25 men established a defensive line behind a stone wall on the far side . In a battle lasting about 90 minutes , Durfee 's men repulsed repeated attempts by Eyre 's men to gain control of the bridge . The British soldiers then took one local resident prisoner , set fire to his property , and retreated to their boats . The militia followed , harassing the soldiers with musket fire . The prisoner was eventually released several days later . The British suffered two killed and five wounded in the battle , while the Americans suffered no casualties beyond the one captive . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 The destruction of the boats and supplies was a minor setback to American plans . In mid @-@ July , General Washington informed Sullivan that a French fleet was available to assist in operations against Newport . This had a galvanizing effect on recruiting , and local shipbuilders embarked on a crash boatbuilding program to replace the boats destroyed in the raid . By early August , the French fleet of the Comte d 'Estaing had arrived off Newport , and Sullivan commanded a force of 10 @,@ 000 militia and regular army troops . Bad weather and the timely arrival of a British fleet to oppose d 'Estaing frustrated allied plans . Sullivan , who had occupied the northern part of Aquidneck Island , was forced to retreat by the mass desertion of militia after the French withdrew their fleet and troops . General Pigot then broke out of his lines in pursuit , but Sullivan successfully fought off his attack in the Battle of Rhode Island on August 29 before retreating off Aquidneck Island . 
 The British occupied Newport until October 1779 , when the garrison was withdrawn for operations elsewhere . The raided communities continued to contribute to the American war effort despite the damage and difficulties caused by the raids . 
 Major Edmund Eyre , leader of the Freetown raid , was by 1781 promoted to lieutenant colonel , when he again led British forces during a raid on New London and Groton , Connecticut . He was wounded early in the Battle of Groton Heights , and his troops were accused of engaging in atrocities in the aftermath of the battle . 
 = Goblin shark = 
 The goblin shark ( Mitsukurina <unk> ) is a rare species of deep @-@ sea shark . Sometimes called a " living fossil " , it is the only extant representative of the family <unk> , a lineage some 125 million years old . This pink @-@ skinned animal has a distinctive profile with an elongated , flattened snout , and highly protrusible jaws containing prominent nail @-@ like teeth . It is usually between 3 and 4 m ( 10 and 13 ft ) long when mature , though it can grow considerably larger . Goblin sharks inhabit upper continental slopes , submarine canyons , and seamounts throughout the world at depths greater than 100 m ( 330 ft ) , with adults found deeper than juveniles . 
 Various anatomical features of the goblin shark , such as its flabby body and small fins , suggest that it is sluggish in nature . This species hunts for teleost fishes , cephalopods , and crustaceans both near the sea floor and in the middle of the water column . Its long snout is covered with ampullae of Lorenzini that enable it to sense minute electric fields produced by nearby prey , which it can snatch up by rapidly extending its jaws . Small numbers of goblin sharks are unintentionally caught by deepwater fisheries . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has assessed it as Least Concern , despite of its rarity , citing its wide distribution and low incidence of capture . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 American ichthyologist David Starr Jordan described the goblin shark in an 1898 issue of Proceedings of the California Academy of Sciences , recognizing the peculiar fish not only as a new species , but also a new genus and family . He based his account on an immature male 107 cm ( 42 in ) long caught in Sagami Bay near Yokohama , Japan . The specimen had been acquired by shipmaster and naturalist Alan Owston , who had given it to Professor <unk> <unk> at the University of Tokyo , who in turn had brought it to Jordan . Thus , Jordan named the shark Mitsukurina <unk> in honor of these two men . The common name " goblin shark " is a translation of its old Japanese name <unk> , a tengu being a Japanese mythical creature often depicted with a long nose and red face . Another name for this species is elfin shark . 
 Shortly after Jordan 's description was published , several scientists noted the similarity between Mitsukurina and the extinct Mesozoic shark Scapanorhynchus . For a time , the prevailing view was to treat Mitsukurina as a junior synonym of Scapanorhynchus . Eventually , more complete fossils revealed many anatomical differences between Scapanorhynchus and Mitsukurina , leading modern authors to again regard them as distinct genera . Several goblin shark specimens were described as separate species from 1904 to 1937 , none of which are now considered valid . This taxonomic confusion arose because the specimens ' jaws were fixed at varying degrees of protrusion during preservation , giving the appearance of proportional differences in the head . 
 = = Phylogeny and evolution = = 
 Phylogenetic studies based on morphology have generally placed the goblin shark as the most basal member of the order Lamniformes , known as mackerel sharks . Studies using genetic data have also supported a basal position for this species . The family <unk> , represented by Mitsukurina , Scapanorhynchus , and <unk> , dates back to the Aptian age of the Cretaceous period ( c . 125 – 113 Ma ) . Mitsukurina itself first appears in the fossil record during the Middle Eocene ( c . 49 – 37 Ma ) ; extinct species include M. <unk> and M. <unk> . <unk> <unk> , which lived in warm shallow waters during the Paleogene ( c . 66 – 23 Ma ) , may also be a Mitsukurina species . As the last member of an ancient lineage , and one that retains several " primitive " traits , the goblin shark has been described as a " living fossil " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The goblin shark has a distinctively long and flat snout , resembling a sword blade . The proportional length of the snout decreases with age . The eyes are small and lack protective nictitating membranes ; behind the eyes are spiracles . The large mouth is parabolic in shape . The jaws are highly protrusible and can be extended almost to the end of the snout , though normally they are held flush against the underside of the head . It has 35 – 53 upper and 31 – 62 lower tooth rows . The teeth in the main part of the jaws are long and narrow , particularly those near the symphysis ( jaw midpoint ) , and are finely grooved lengthwise . The rear teeth near the corners of the jaw are small and have a flattened shape for crushing . Much individual variation in tooth length and width occurs , in whether the teeth have a smaller cusplet on each side of the main cusp , and in the presence of toothless gaps at the symphysis or between the main and rear teeth . The five pairs of gill slits are short , with the gill filaments inside partly exposed ; the fifth pair is above the origin of the pectoral fins . 
 The body is fairly slender and flabby . The two dorsal fins are similar in size and shape , both being small and rounded . The pectoral fins are also rather small and rounded . The pelvic and anal fins have long bases and are larger than the dorsal fins . The caudal peduncle is flattened from side @-@ to @-@ side and lacks keels or notches . The asymmetric caudal fin has a long upper lobe with a shallow ventral notch near the tip , and an indistinct lower lobe . The soft , semitranslucent skin has a rough texture from a covering of dermal denticles , each shaped like a short upright spine with lengthwise ridges . In life , this species is pink or tan due to visible blood vessels beneath the skin ; the color deepens with age , and young sharks may be almost white . The fins ' margins are translucent gray or blue , and the eyes are black with bluish streaks in the iris . After death , the coloration quickly fades to dull gray or brown . Adult sharks usually measure between 3 and 4 m ( 9 @.@ 8 and 13 @.@ 1 ft ) long . However , the capture of an enormous female estimated at 5 @.@ 4 – 6 @.@ 2 m ( 18 – 20 ft ) long in 2000 showed this species can grow far larger than previously suspected . The maximum weight on record is 210 kg ( 460 lb ) for a 3 @.@ 8 @-@ m @-@ long shark . 
 = = = Etymology = = = 
 The generic name honors Keigo <unk> , a Japanese zoologist who studied at University College London during the 1860s . The specific name honors Alan Owston , an English collector of Asian wildlife . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The goblin shark has been caught in all three major oceans , indicating a wide global distribution . In the Atlantic Ocean , it has been recorded from the northern Gulf of Mexico , Suriname , French Guiana , and southern Brazil in the west , and France , Portugal , Madeira , and Senegal in the east . It has also been collected from seamounts along the Mid @-@ Atlantic Ridge . In the Indo @-@ Pacific and Oceania , it has been found off South Africa , Mozambique , Japan , Taiwan , Australia and New Zealand . A single eastern Pacific specimen is known , collected off southern California . This species is most often found over the upper continental slope at depths of 270 – 960 m ( 890 – 3 @,@ 150 ft ) . It has been caught as deep as 1 @,@ 300 m ( 4 @,@ 300 ft ) , and a tooth has been found lodged in an undersea cable at a depth of 1 @,@ 370 m ( 4 @,@ 490 ft ) . Adults inhabit greater depths than juveniles . Immature goblin sharks frequent the submarine canyons off southern Japan at depths of 100 – 350 m ( 330 – 1 @,@ 150 ft ) , with individuals occasionally wandering into inshore waters as shallow as 40 m ( 130 ft ) . In April 2014 , fishermen in Key West , Florida , while fishing in the Gulf of Mexico caught a goblin shark in their fishing net , only the second one ever to be caught in the Gulf . The shark was photographed and released back into the water . 
 In July 2014 , a goblin shark was found in a fishery net in Sri Lanka , reported in <unk> eastern coastal line in Sri Lanka . The shark was about 4 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) long and weighed about 7 @.@ 5 kg ( 17 lb ) The shark was given to the NARA ( National Aquatic Resource Research & Development Agency ) for further research . 
 = = Biology and ecology = = 
 Although observations of living goblin sharks are scant , its anatomy suggests its lifestyle is inactive and sluggish . Its skeleton is reduced and poorly calcified , the muscle blocks along its sides ( <unk> ) are weakly developed , and its fins are soft and small . Its long caudal fin , held at a low angle , is also typical of a slow @-@ swimming shark . The long snout appears to have a sensory function , as it bears numerous ampullae of Lorenzini that can detect the weak electric fields produced by other animals . Due to the snout 's lack of rigidity , it is unlikely to be used for stirring up prey from the bottom as has been proposed . Vision seems to be less important than other senses , considering the relatively small optic tectum in the shark 's brain . Yet unlike most deep @-@ sea sharks , it can change the size of its pupils , thus probably does use its sight in some situations . Goblin sharks may fall prey to the blue shark ( Prionace glauca ) . Parasites documented from this species include the copepod Echthrogaleus <unk> , and the tapeworms Litobothrium <unk> and <unk> <unk> . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 The goblin shark feeds mainly on teleost fishes such as rattails and dragonfishes . It also consumes cephalopods and crustaceans , including decapods and isopods . Garbage has been recorded from the stomachs of some specimens . Its known prey includes bottom @-@ dwelling species such as the blackbelly <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) , and midwater species such as the squid <unk> pellucida and the ostracod <unk> castanea rotunda . Thus , the goblin shark appears to forage for food both near the sea floor and far above it . 
 Since it is not a fast swimmer , the goblin shark may be an ambush predator . Its low @-@ density flesh and large oily liver make it neutrally buoyant , allowing it to drift towards its prey with minimal motions so as to avoid detection . Once prey comes into range , the shark 's specialized jaws can snap forward to capture it . The protrusion of the jaw is assisted by two pairs of elastic ligaments associated with the mandibular joint , which are pulled taut when the jaws are in their normal retracted position ; when the shark bites , the ligaments release their tension and essentially " catapult " the jaws forward . At the same time , the well @-@ developed <unk> ( analogous to a tongue ) on the floor of the mouth drops , expanding the oral cavity and sucking in water and prey . 
 = = = Life history = = = 
 Little is known about goblin shark reproduction because a pregnant female has yet to be found and studied . It likely shares the reproductive characteristics of other mackerel sharks , which are viviparous with small litter sizes and embryos that grow during gestation by eating undeveloped eggs ( oophagy ) . The birth size is probably close to 82 cm ( 32 in ) , the length of the smallest known specimen . Males mature sexually at about 2 @.@ 6 m ( 8 @.@ 5 ft ) long , while female maturation size is unknown . No data is available on growth and aging . 
 = = Human interactions = = 
 Given the depths at which it lives , the goblin shark poses no danger to humans . A few specimens have been collected alive and brought to public aquariums , though they survived only a short time . One was kept at Tokai University and lived for a week , while another was kept at Tokyo Sea Life Park and lived for two days . Its economic significance is minimal ; the meat may be dried and salted , while the jaws fetch high prices from collectors . At one time , the Japanese also used it for liver oil and fertilizer . This shark is not targeted by any fisheries , but is occasionally found as bycatch in bottom gillnets and trawls , hooked on longlines , or entangled in fishing gear . Most captures are isolated incidents ; one of the few areas where it is caught regularly is off southern Japan , where around 30 individuals ( mostly juveniles ) are taken each year . A black scabbardfish ( <unk> carbo ) fishery off Madeira also takes two or three goblin sharks annually . In April 2003 , over a hundred goblin sharks were caught off northwestern Taiwan ; the cause of the event was unknown , though observers noted it was preceded by a major earthquake . The species had never been recorded in the area before , nor has it been found in such numbers since . The International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) has listed the goblin shark under Least Concern . In addition to its wide range , most of its population is thought to reside in unfished environments because few adults are caught . Therefore , it is not believed to be threatened by human activity . 
 = Facundo = 
 Facundo : Civilization and Barbarism ( original Spanish title : Facundo : <unk> y Barbarie ) is a book written in 1845 by Domingo Faustino Sarmiento , a writer and journalist who became the seventh president of Argentina . It is a cornerstone of Latin American literature : a work of creative non @-@ fiction that helped to define the parameters for thinking about the region 's development , modernization , power , and culture . Subtitled Civilization and Barbarism , Facundo contrasts civilization and barbarism as seen in early 19th @-@ century Argentina . Literary critic Roberto González Echevarría calls the work " the most important book written by a Latin American in any discipline or genre " . 
 Facundo describes the life of Juan Facundo Quiroga , a gaucho who had terrorized provincial Argentina in the 1820s and 1830s . Kathleen Ross , one of Facundo 's English translators , points out that the author also published Facundo to " denounce the tyranny of the Argentine dictator Juan Manuel de Rosas " . Juan Manuel de Rosas ruled Argentina from 1829 to 1832 and again from 1835 to 1852 ; it was because of Rosas that Sarmiento was in exile in Chile , where he wrote the book . Sarmiento sees Rosas as heir to Facundo : both are caudillos and representatives of a barbarism that derives from the nature of the Argentine countryside . As Ross explains , Sarmiento 's book is therefore engaged in describing the " Argentine national character , explaining the effects of Argentina 's geographical conditions on personality , the ' barbaric ' nature of the countryside versus the ' civilizing ' influence of the city , and the great future awaiting Argentina when it opened its doors wide to European immigration " . 
 Throughout the text , Sarmiento explores the dichotomy between civilization and barbarism . As Kimberly Ball observes , " civilization is identified with northern Europe , North America , cities , Unitarians , Paz , and Rivadavia " , while " barbarism is identified with Latin America , Spain , Asia , the Middle East , the countryside , Federalists , Facundo , and Rosas " . It is in the way that Facundo articulates this opposition that Sarmiento 's book has had such a profound influence . In the words of González Echevarría : " in proposing the dialectic between civilization and barbarism as the central conflict in Latin American culture Facundo gave shape to a polemic that began in the colonial period and continues to the present day " . 
 The first edition of Facundo was published in instalments in 1845 . Sarmiento removed the last two chapters of the second edition ( 1851 ) , but restored them in the 1874 edition , deciding that they were important to the book 's development . 
 The first translation into English , by Mary Mann , was published in 1868 . A modern and complete translation by Kathleen Ross appeared in 2003 from the University of California Press . 
 = = Background = = 
 While exiled in Chile , Sarmiento wrote Facundo in 1845 as an attack on Juan Manuel de Rosas , the Argentine dictator at the time . The book was a critical analysis of Argentine culture as he saw it , represented in men such as Rosas and the regional leader Juan Facundo Quiroga , a warlord from La Rioja . For Sarmiento , Rosas and Quiroga were caudillos — strongmen who did not submit to the law . However , if Facundo 's portrait is linked to the wild nature of the countryside , Rosas is depicted as an opportunist who exploits the situation to perpetuate himself in power . 
 Sarmiento 's book is a critique and also a symptom of Argentina 's cultural conflicts . In 1810 , the country had gained independence from the Spanish Empire , but Sarmiento complains that Argentina had yet to cohere as a unified entity . The country 's chief political division saw the Unitarists ( or Unitarians , with whom Sarmiento sided ) , who favored centralization , counterposed against the Federalists , who believed that the regions should maintain a good measure of autonomy . This division was in part a split between the city and the countryside . Then as now , Buenos Aires was the country ’ s largest and wealthiest city as a result of its access to river trade routes and the South Atlantic . Buenos Aires was exposed not only to trade but to fresh ideas and European culture . These economic and cultural differences caused tension between Buenos Aires and the land @-@ locked regions of the country . Despite his Unitarian sympathies , Sarmiento himself came from the provinces , a native of the Western town of San Juan . 
 = = = Argentine civil war = = = 
 Argentina 's divisions led to a civil war that began in 1814 . A frail agreement was reached in the early 1820s , which led to the unification of the Republic just in time to wage the Cisplatine War against the Empire of Brazil , but the relations between the Provinces reached again the point of breaking @-@ off in 1826 , when Unitarist Bernardino Rivadavia was elected president and tried to enforce a newly enacted centralist Constitution . Supporters of decentralized government challenged the Unitarist Party , leading to the outbreak of violence . Federalists Juan Facundo Quiroga and Manuel Dorrego wanted more autonomy for the provinces and were inclined to reject European culture . The Unitarists defended Rivadavia ’ s presidency , as it created educational opportunities for rural inhabitants through a European @-@ staffed university program . However , under Rivadavia 's rule , the salaries of common laborers were subjected to government wage ceilings , and the gauchos ( " cattle @-@ wrangling horsemen of the pampas " ) were either imprisoned or forced to work without pay . 
 A series of governors were installed and replaced beginning in 1828 with the appointment of Federalist Manuel Dorrego as the governor of Buenos Aires . However , Dorrego 's government was very soon overthrown and replaced by that of Unitarist Juan Lavalle . Lavalle 's rule ended when he was defeated by a militia of gauchos led by Rosas . By the end of 1829 , the legislature had appointed Rosas as governor of Buenos Aires . Under Rosas 's rule , many intellectuals fled either to Chile , as did Sarmiento , or to Uruguay , as Sarmiento himself notes . 
 = = = Juan Manuel de Rosas = = = 
 According to Latin American historian John Lynch , Juan Manuel de Rosas was " a landowner , a rural caudillo , and the dictator of Buenos Aires from 1829 to 1852 " . He was born into a wealthy family of high social status , but Rosas 's strict upbringing had a deep psychological influence on him . Sarmiento asserts that because of Rosas 's mother , " the spectacle of authority and servitude must have left lasting impressions on him " . Shortly after reaching puberty , Rosas was sent to an estancia and stayed there for about thirty years . In time , he learned how to manage the ranch and he established an authoritarian government in the area . While in power , Rosas incarcerated residents for unspecified reasons , acts which Sarmiento argues were similar to Rosas 's treatment of cattle . Sarmiento argues that this was one method of making his citizens like the " <unk> , most orderly cattle known " . 
 Juan Manuel de Rosas 's first term as governor lasted only three years . His rule , assisted by Juan Facundo Quiroga and Estanislao López , was respected and he was praised for his ability to maintain harmony between Buenos Aires and the rural areas . The country fell into disorder after Rosas 's resignation in 1832 , and in 1835 he was once again called to lead the country . He ruled the country not as he did during his first term as governor , but as a dictator , forcing all citizens to support his Federalist regime . According to Nicolas Shumway , Rosas " forced the citizens to wear the red Federalist insignia , and his picture appeared in all public places ... Rosas 's enemies , real and imagined , were increasingly imprisoned , tortured , murdered , or driven into exile by the <unk> , a band of spies and thugs supervised personally by Rosas . Publications were censored , and porteño newspapers became tedious <unk> for the regime " . 
 = = = Domingo Faustino Sarmiento = = = 
 In Facundo , Sarmiento is both the narrator and a main character . The book contains autobiographical elements from Sarmiento ’ s life , and he comments on the entire Argentine circumstance . He also expresses and analyzes his own opinion and chronicles some historic events . Within the book 's dichotomy between civilization and barbarism , Sarmiento 's character represents civilization , steeped as he is in European and North American ideas ; he stands for education and development , as opposed to Rosas and Facundo , who symbolize barbarism . 
 Sarmiento was an educator , a civilized man who was a militant adherent to the Unitarist movement . During the Argentine civil war he fought against Facundo several times , and while in Spain he became a member of the Literary Society of Professors . Exiled to Chile by Rosas when he started to write Facundo , Sarmiento would later return as a politician . He was a member of the Senate after Rosas 's fall and president of Argentina for six years ( 1868 – 1874 ) . During his presidency , Sarmiento concentrated on migration , sciences , and culture . His ideas were based on European civilization ; for him , the development of a country was rooted in education . To this end , he founded Argentina 's military and naval colleges . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 After a lengthy introduction , Facundo 's fifteen chapters divide broadly into three sections : chapters one to four outline Argentine geography , anthropology , and history ; chapters five to fourteen recount the life of Juan Facundo Quiroga ; and the concluding chapter expounds Sarmiento 's vision of a future for Argentina under a Unitarist government . In Sarmiento 's words , the reason why he chose to provide Argentine context and use Facundo Quiroga to condemn Rosas 's dictatorship is that " in Facundo Quiroga I do not only see simply a caudillo , but rather a manifestation of Argentine life as it has been made by colonization and the peculiarities of the land " . 
 = = = Argentine context = = = 
 Facundo begins with a geographical description of Argentina , from the Andes in the west to the eastern Atlantic coast , where two main river systems converge at the boundary between Argentina and Uruguay . This river estuary , called the Rio de Plata , is the location of Buenos Aires , the capital . Through his discussion of Argentina 's geography , Sarmiento demonstrates Buenos Aires ' advantages ; the river systems were communications arteries which , by enabling trade , helped the city to achieve civilization . Buenos Aires failed to spread civilization to the rural areas and as a result , much of the rest of Argentina was doomed to barbarism . Sarmiento also argues that the pampas , Argentina ’ s wide and empty plains , provided " no place for people to escape and hide for defense and this prohibits civilization in most parts of Argentina " . Despite the barriers to civilization caused by Argentina ’ s geography , Sarmiento argues that many of the country 's problems were caused by gauchos like Juan Manuel de Rosas , who were barbaric , uneducated , ignorant , and arrogant ; their character prevented Argentine society 's progress toward civilization . Sarmiento then describes the four main types of gaucho and these characterizations aid in understanding Argentine leaders , such as Juan Manuel de Rosas . Sarmiento argues that without an understanding of these Argentine character types , " it is impossible to understand our political personages , or the primordial , American character of the bloody struggle that tears apart the Argentine Republic " . 
 Sarmiento then moves on to the Argentine peasants , who are " independent of all need , free of all subjection , with no idea of government " . The peasants gather at taverns , where they spend their time drinking and gambling . They display their eagerness to prove their physical strength with horsemanship and knife fights . Rarely these displays led to deaths , and Sarmiento notes that Rosas 's residence was sometimes used as a refuge on such occasions , before he became politically powerful . 
 According to Sarmiento , these elements are crucial to an understanding of the Argentine Revolution , in which Argentina gained independence from Spain . Although Argentina ’ s war of independence was prompted by the influence of European ideas , Buenos Aires was the only city that could achieve civilization . Rural people participated in the war to demonstrate their physical strengths rather than because they wanted to civilize the country . In the end , the revolution was a failure because the barbaric instincts of the rural population led to the loss and dishonor of the civilized city — Buenos Aires . 
 = = = Life of Juan Facundo Quiroga = = = 
 The second section of Facundo explores the life of its titular character , Juan Facundo Quiroga — the " Tiger of the Plains " . Despite being born into a wealthy family , Facundo received only a basic education in reading and writing . He loved gambling , being called el <unk> ( the player ) — in fact , Sarmiento describes his gambling as " an ardent passion burning in his belly " . As a youth Facundo was antisocial and rebellious , refusing to mix with other children , and these traits became more pronounced as he matured . Sarmiento describes an incident in which Facundo killed a man , writing that this type of behaviour " marked his passage through the world " . Sarmiento gives a physical description of the man he considers to personify the caudillo : " [ he had a ] short and well built stature ; his broad shoulders supported , on a short neck , a well @-@ formed head covered with very thick , black and curly hair " , with " eyes ... full of fire " . 
 Facundo 's relations with his family eventually broke down , and , taking on the life of a gaucho , he joined the caudillos in the province of Entre Ríos . His killing of two Spaniards after a jailbreak saw him acclaimed as a hero among the gauchos , and on relocating to La Rioja , Facundo was appointed to a leadership position in the Llanos Militia . He built his reputation and won his comrades ' respect through his fierce battlefield performances , but hated and tried to destroy those who differed from him by being civilized and well @-@ educated . 
 In 1825 , when Unitarist Bernardino Rivadavia became the governor of the Buenos Aires province , he held a meeting with representatives from all provinces in Argentina . Facundo was present as the governor of La Rioja . Rivadavia was soon overthrown , and Manuel Dorrego became the new governor . Sarmiento contends that Dorrego , a Federalist , was interested neither in social progress nor in ending barbaric behaviour in Argentina by improving the level of civilization and education of its rural inhabitants . In the turmoil that characterized Argentine politics at the time , Dorrego was assassinated by Unitarists and Facundo was defeated by Unitarist General José María Paz . Facundo escaped to Buenos Aires and joined the Federalist government of Juan Manuel de Rosas . During the ensuing civil war between the two ideologies , Facundo conquered the provinces of San Luis , Cordoba and Mendoza . 
 On return to his San Juan home , which Sarmiento says Facundo governed " solely with his terrifying name " , he realized that his government lacked support from Rosas . He went to Buenos Aires to confront Rosas , who sent him on another political mission . On his way back , Facundo was shot and killed at Barranca Yaco , Córdoba . According to Sarmiento , the murder was plotted by Rosas : " An impartial history still awaits facts and revelations , in order to point its finger at the instigator of the assassins " . 
 = = = Consequences of Facundo 's death = = = 
 In the book 's final chapters , Sarmiento explores the consequences of Facundo 's death for the history and politics of the Argentine Republic . He further analyzes Rosas 's government and personality , commenting on dictatorship , tyranny , the role of popular support , and the use of force to maintain order . Sarmiento criticizes Rosas by using the words of the dictator , making sarcastic remarks about Rosas 's actions , and describing the " terror " established during the dictatorship , the contradictions of the government , and the situation in the provinces that were ruled by Facundo . Sarmiento writes , " The red ribbon is a materialization of the terror that accompanies you everywhere , in the streets , in the bosom of the family ; it must be thought about when dressing , when undressing , and ideas are always engraved upon us by association " . 
 Finally , Sarmiento examines the legacy of Rosas 's government by attacking the dictator and widening the civilization – barbarism dichotomy . By setting France against Argentina — representing civilization and barbarism respectively — Sarmiento contrasts culture and savagery : 
 France 's blockade had lasted for two years , and the ' American ' government , inspired by ' American ' spirit , was facing off with France , European principles , European pretensions . The social results of the French blockade , however , had been fruitful for the Argentine Republic , and served to demonstrate in all their nakedness the current state of mind and the new elements of struggle , which were to ignite a fierce war that can end only with the fall of that monstrous government . 
 = = Genre and style = = 
 Spanish critic and philosopher Miguel de <unk> comments of the book , " I never took Facundo by Sarmiento as a historical work , nor do I think it can be very valued in that regard . I always thought of it as a literary work , as a historical novel " . However , Facundo cannot be classified as a novel or a specific genre of literature . According to González Echevarría , the book is at once an " essay , biography , autobiography , novel , epic , memoir , confession , political pamphlet , diatribe , scientific treatise , [ and ] travelogue " . Sarmiento 's style and his exploration of the life of Facundo unify the three distinct parts of his work . Even the first section , describing Argentina 's geography , follows this pattern , since Sarmiento contends that Facundo is a natural product of this environment . 
 The book is partly fictional , as well : Sarmiento draws on his imagination in addition to historical fact in describing Rosas . In Facundo , Sarmiento outlines his argument that Rosas 's dictatorship is the main cause of Argentina 's problems . The themes of barbarism and savagery that run through the book are , to Sarmiento , consequences of Rosas 's dictatorial government . To make his case , Sarmiento often has recourse to strategies drawn from literature . 
 = = Themes = = 
 = = = Civilization and barbarism = = = 
 Facundo is not only a critique of Rosas 's dictatorship , but a broader investigation into Argentine history and culture , which Sarmiento charts through the rise , controversial rule , and downfall of Juan Facundo Quiroga , an archetypical Argentine caudillo . Sarmiento summarizes the book 's message in the phrase " That is the point : to be or not to be savages " . The dichotomy between civilization and barbarism is the book 's central idea ; Facundo Quiroga is portrayed as wild , untamed , and standing opposed to true progress through his rejection of European cultural ideals — found at that time in the metropolitan society of Buenos Aires . 
 The conflict between civilization and barbarism mirrors Latin America 's difficulties in the post @-@ Independence era . Literary critic Sorensen Goodrich argues that although Sarmiento was not the first to articulate this dichotomy , he forged it into a powerful and prominent theme that would impact Latin American literature . He explores the issue of civilization versus the cruder aspects of a caudillo culture of brutality and absolute power . Facundo set forth an oppositional message that promoted a more beneficial alternative for society at large . Although Sarmiento advocated various changes , such as honest officials who understood enlightenment ideas of European and Classical origin , for him education was the key . <unk> like Facundo Quiroga are seen , at the beginning of the book , as the antithesis of education , high culture , and civil stability ; barbarism was like a never ending litany of social ills . They are the agents of instability and chaos , destroying societies through their blatant disregard for humanity and social progress . 
 If Sarmiento viewed himself as civilized , Rosas was barbaric . Historian David Rock argues that " contemporary opponents reviled Rosas as a bloody tyrant and a symbol of barbarism " . Sarmiento attacked Rosas through his book by promoting education and " civilized " status , whereas Rosas used political power and brute force to dispose of any kind of hindrance . In linking Europe with civilization , and civilization with education , Sarmiento conveyed an admiration of European culture and civilization which at the same time gave him a sense of dissatisfaction with his own culture , motivating him to drive it towards civilization . Using the wilderness of the pampas to reinforce his social analysis , he characterizes those who were isolated and opposed to political dialogue as ignorant and anarchic — symbolized by Argentina 's desolate physical geography . Conversely , Latin America was connected to barbarism , which Sarmiento used mainly to illustrate the way in which Argentina was disconnected from the numerous resources surrounding it , limiting the growth of the country . 
 American critic Doris Sommer sees a connection between Facundo 's ideology and Sarmiento 's readings of Fenimore Cooper . She links Sarmiento 's remarks on modernization and culture to the American discourse of expansion and progress of the 19th century . 
 = = = Writing and power = = = 
 In the history of post @-@ independence Latin America , dictatorships have been relatively common — examples range from Paraguay 's José Gaspar Rodríguez de Francia in the 19th century to Chile 's Augusto Pinochet in the 20th . In this context , Latin American literature has been distinguished by the protest novel , or dictator novel ; the main story is based around the dictator figure , his behaviour , characteristics and the situation of the people under his regime . Writers such as Sarmiento used the power of the written word in order to criticize government , using literature as a tool , an instance of resistance and as a weapon against repression . 
 Making use of the connection between writing and power was one of Sarmiento 's strategies . For him , writing was intended to be a catalyst for action . While the gauchos fought with physical weapons , Sarmiento used his voice and language . Sorensen states that Sarmiento used " text as [ a ] weapon " . Sarmiento was writing not only for Argentina but for a wider audience too , especially the United States and Europe ; in his view , these regions were close to civilization ; his purpose was to seduce his readers toward his own political viewpoint . In the numerous translations of Facundo , Sarmiento 's association of writing with power and conquest is apparent . 
 Since his books often serve as vehicles for his political manifesto , Sarmiento 's writings commonly mock governments , with Facundo being the most prominent example . He elevates his own status at the expense of the ruling elite , almost portraying himself as invincible due to the power of writing . Toward the end of 1840 , Sarmiento was exiled for his political views . Covered with bruises received the day before from unruly soldiers , he wrote in French , " On ne <unk> point les idees " ( misquoted from " on ne tire pas des coups de <unk> aux idees " , which means " ideas cannot be killed by guns " ) . The government decided to decipher the message , and on learning the translation , said , " So ! What does this mean ? " . With the failure of his oppressors to understand his meaning , Sarmiento is able to illustrate their ineptitude . His words are presented as a " code " that needs to be " deciphered " , and unlike Sarmiento those in power are barbaric and uneducated . Their bafflement not only demonstrates their general ignorance , but also , according to Sorensen , illustrates " the fundamental displacement which any cultural transplantation brings about " , since Argentine rural inhabitants and Rosas 's associates were unable to accept the civilized culture which Sarmiento believed would lead to progress in Argentina . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 For translator Kathleen Ross , Facundo is " one of the foundational works of Spanish American literary history " . It has been enormously influential in setting out a " blueprint for modernization " , with its practical message enhanced by a " tremendous beauty and passion " . However , according to literary critic González Echevarría it is not only a powerful founding text but " the first Latin American classic , and the most important book written about Latin America by a Latin American in any discipline or genre " . The book 's political influence can be seen in Sarmiento ’ s eventual rise to power . He became president of Argentina in 1868 and was finally able to apply his theories to ensure that his nation achieved civilization . Although Sarmiento wrote several books , he viewed Facundo as authorizing his political views . 
 According to Sorensen , " early readers of Facundo were deeply influenced by the struggles that preceded and followed Rosas 's dictatorship , and their views sprang from their relationship to the strife for interpretive and political hegemony " . González Echevarría notes that Facundo provided the impetus for other writers to examine dictatorship in Latin America , and contends that it is still read today because Sarmiento created " a voice for modern Latin American authors " . The reason for this , according to González Echevarría , is that " Latin American authors struggle with its legacy , rewriting Facundo in their works even as they try to untangle themselves from its discourse " . Subsequent dictator novels , such as El Señor Presidente by Miguel Ángel Asturias and The Feast of the Goat by Mario Vargas Llosa , drew upon its ideas , and a knowledge of Facundo enhances the reader ’ s understanding of these later books . 
 One irony of the impact of Sarmiento 's essay genre and fictional literature is that , according to González Echevarría , the gaucho has become " an object of nostalgia , a lost origin around which to build a national mythology " . While Sarmiento was trying to eliminate the gaucho , he also transformed him into a " national symbol " . González Echevarría further argues that Juan Facundo Quiroga also continues to exist , since he represents " our unresolved struggle between good and evil and our lives ' inexorable drive toward death " . According to translator Kathleen Ross , " Facundo continues to inspire controversy and debate because it contributes to national myths of modernization , anti @-@ populism , and racist ideology " . 
 = = Publication and translation history = = 
 The first edition of Facundo was published in instalments in 1845 , in the literary supplement of the Chilean newspaper El Progreso . The second edition , also published in Chile ( in 1851 ) , contained significant alterations — Sarmiento removed the last two chapters on the advice of Valentín Alsina , an exiled Argentinian lawyer and politician . However the missing sections reappeared in 1874 in a later edition , because Sarmiento saw them as crucial to the book 's development . 
 Facundo was first translated in 1868 , by Mary Mann , with the title Life in the Argentine Republic in the Days of the Tyrants ; or , Civilization and Barbarism . More recently , Kathleen Ross has undertaken a modern and complete translation , published in 2003 by the University of California Press . In Ross 's " Translator 's Introduction , " she notes that Mann 's 19th @-@ century version of the text was influenced by Mann 's friendship with Sarmiento and by the fact that he was at the time a candidate in the Argentine presidential election : " Mann wished to further her friend 's cause abroad by presenting Sarmiento as an admirer and emulator of United States political and cultural institutions " . Hence this translation cut much of what made Sarmiento 's work distinctively part of the Hispanic tradition . Ross continues : " Mann 's elimination of metaphor , the stylistic device perhaps most characteristic of Sarmiento 's prose , is especially striking " . 
 = 1981 Pacific typhoon season = 
 The 1981 Pacific typhoon season has no official bounds ; it ran year @-@ round in 1981 , but most tropical cyclones tend to form in the northwestern Pacific Ocean between May and November . These dates conventionally delimit the period of each year when most tropical cyclones form in the northwestern Pacific Ocean . Tropical Storms formed in the entire west pacific basin were assigned a name by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center . Tropical depressions that enter or form in the Philippine area of responsibility are assigned a name by the Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration or PAGASA . This can often result in the same storm having two names . 
 A total of 35 tropical depressions formed this year in the Western Pacific , of which 29 became tropical storms . Of the 29 , 13 storms reached typhoon intensity , of which 2 reached super typhoon strength . Seven tropical cyclones moved through the Philippines this season . The first tropical cyclone formed on March 11 , with the final tropical cyclone dissipating December 28 . Tropical cyclones only accounted for 12 percent of the rainfall in Hong Kong this season , the lowest percentage for the protectorate since 1972 . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The season started with Freda , which became the fourth March typhoon for the basin since 1959 . The system passed west of Wake Island before dissipating on March 17 . Gerald formed in mid @-@ April near an upper level low , and recurved just east of Guam bringing the island heavy rainfall . Holly formed in the middle of the tropical Pacific ocean in late April , and dissipated far from land on May 7 . Ike was the first system to form in the South China Sea , living during the second week of June before recurving across Taiwan and becoming an extratropical cyclone . June formed during the third week of June , and moved just east of Taiwan before approaching Japan as a nontropical cyclone . Kelly crossed the Philippines on July 1 , moving into Vietnam on July 4 . Lynn moved nearby the northern Philippines before making landfall in mainland China on July 7 . Maury tracked near Taiwan , China , and eventually Vietnam as a remnant low during the third and fourth weeks of July . Nina formed on the northeast fringe of Maury , also moving into mainland China on July 23 , three days after Maury . Ogden moved into Japan at the end of July , approaching Korea early in August . 
 Tropical Depression 11 formed in the tropical west Pacific , dissipating well east of Asia on August 2 . Phyllis formed and remained southeast of Japan on August 3 and August 4 . Roy meandered around the South China Sea between August 3 and August 9 . Susan moved northwest through the open western Pacific during the second week of August . Thad moved north @-@ northeast through its life cycle , moving through Japan on August 23 . Vanessa moved northeast through the open western Pacific in mid @-@ August . Warren moved west @-@ northwest through Hainan Island and northern Vietnam during the third week of August . Agnes moved extremely close to eastern China before dissipating on September 1 . Bill recurved southeast of Japan during the first week of September . Clara moved west @-@ northwest near Luzon and into mainland China during the third week of September . 
 Doyle moved through the central Pacific during the third week of September . Elsie recurved south of Japan during the beginning of October . Fabian moved westward through the Philippines into Vietnam during the second week of October . Gay recurved near the Japanese coast on October 21 and 22 . A tropical depression moved west @-@ northwest into Vietnam on November 11 . Hazen moved across the Central Philippines into mainland China by November 23 . Irma moved across the northern Philippines and then south of Taiwan during late November . Jeff recurved east of mainland Asia during late November . Kit moved erratically westward towards the Philippines during mid @-@ December . Lee moved across the central Philippines , dissipating across the South China Sea on December 28 . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Depression <unk> = = = 
 = = = Typhoon Freda = = = 
 Freda was the first tropical cyclone in the western Pacific in 1981 and the fourth typhoon to occur in March since 1959 . The incipient disturbance was nearly stationary near the Gilbert Islands for a few days , before drifting northwest and slowly intensifying . During the morning of the March 11 it was upgraded to a tropical depression . It tracked along the periphery of the subtropical ridge with slow development for the next few days . On March 14 intensification became more rapid and Freda became a typhoon . Passing 120 kilometres ( 75 mi ) west of Wake Island with maximum sustained winds of 100 knots ( 190 km / h ) intensity , the island sustained wind gusts to typhoon force and waves to 6 metres ( 20 ft ) . As the typhoon moved more northeast , the cyclone weakened , and Freda was absorbed by March 17 into another extratropical cyclone . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Gerald = = = 
 This cyclone initially formed in response to a mid to upper level cyclone southeast of Ponape on April 12 . Thunderstorms developed near the upper level system , and an outflow pattern was present on satellite imagery , but a surface circulation did not materialize until April 15 . The system became a tropical depression by that night . Steady intensification was seen until around midday on April 17 when a new upper level high formed to its east , inducing southerly vertical wind shear . Weakening began while the storm was located about 130 kilometres ( 81 mi ) east of Guam late on April 18 . Moderate to heavy rainfall did occur on the island , with 76 @.@ 2 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 00 in ) to 127 millimetres ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) being measured . After passing Guam , the remaining thunderstorm activity sheared away , leaving a low @-@ level swirl which moved northwest . The cyclone was absorbed by a system approaching in the main belt in the Westerlies on April 19 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Holly = = = 
 A broad area of thunderstorm straddled the equator around the International Date Line beginning on April 21 . A tropical system in the southern hemisphere was interacting with a strong system in the main belt of the Westerlies . Around this time , convective increased north of the equator , with a low level circulation forming near 4 ° N 169 ° E late on April 25 . By midday on April 29 it had become a tropical depression as it continued to move westward . Holly became a tropical storm on April 30 and almost became a typhoon late on May 1 . Southwesterly vertical wind shear began to weaken the cyclone thereafter , causing Holly to dissipate over the open Pacific ocean . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Ike ( <unk> ) = = = 
 This cyclone formed in the South China Sea at the end of the monsoon transition season . Around noon on June 8 a broad area of lowered pressures was seen west of the Philippines . Moderate northeast wind shear displaced its mid @-@ level center as far as 110 kilometres ( 68 mi ) from the surface center , which retarded development . By midday on June 9 , Ike strengthened into a tropical storm . On its closest approach to Hong Kong , winds gusted to 42 knots ( 78 km / h ) at Tate 's Cairn . 
 An upper trough in the main belt of the Westerlies moved across Asia , which turned Ike to the northeast . Intensification continued as it accelerated , and Ike became a typhoon late on June 12 . The cyclone reached its peak intensity as it made landfall on the island of Taiwan . Weakening substantially over the mountainous island , Ike attempted slight tropical redevelopment before it became an extratropical cyclone late on the morning of June 14 . Eight perished due to Ike , four from Taiwan and four from the Philippines . 
 = = = Typhoon June ( Kuring ) = = = 
 A tropical upper tropospheric trough ( TUTT ) was located over the Philippine Sea early in June . In response , a tropical disturbance formed in Palau . An upper cyclone to the disturbance 's northeast led to development of the disturbance . As the TUTT cell moved to the disturbance 's northwest , intensification sped up and a low level circulation center formed on June 15 about 320 kilometres ( 200 mi ) north of Palau . By the afternoon of June 17 , the cyclone had become a tropical storm . June tracked northwest towards Taiwan , and by late on June 19 , had reached its maximum intensity as a typhoon . About 75 kilometres ( 47 mi ) southeast of Taipei , June recurved to the north , and gradually weakened . While approaching Japan , the cyclone linked up with a frontal boundary and became an extratropical cyclone late on June 22 . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Kelly ( <unk> ) = = = 
 A tropical disturbance organized into a tropical depression east of the Philippines on June 28 . It tracked westward , reaching tropical storm on June 30 before hitting the central Philippines . Kelly weakened over the islands , but restrengthened in the South China Sea , attaining typhoon status on July 2 . The typhoon hit southern Hainan Island on July 3 , bringing wind gusts to 54 knots ( 100 km / h ) at Tate 's Cairn in Hong Kong . The cyclone then crossed the Gulf of Tonkin as a weakening tropical storm , and made landfall on northern Vietnam on July 4 as a tropical storm with maximum sustained winds of 35 knots ( 65 km / h ) . Kelly dissipated the next day , after causing torrential flooding and mudslides , resulting in 200 casualties and leaving thousands homeless . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Lynn ( Elang ) = = = 
 On the morning of June 27 , an area of enhanced thunderstorm activity was spotted just south of Ponape along a weak portion of the monsoon trough . As Tropical Storm Kelly led to some vertical wind shear over the system , the disturbance was slow to organize . A low pressure area formed late on June 29 . By late on July 2 , Kelly 's negative influence on the disturbance abated , allowing for further development . Early on July 3 , the system developed into a tropical depression , and by afternoon Lynn was a tropical storm . Previously moving at a fast pace to the west , the cyclone slowed as it passed by the northern fringe of the Philippines . Inflow from the South China Sea led to convection focusing in the terrain of the Philippines , which distorted Lynn 's convective pattern . Lynn was the second tropical cyclone is three days to impact the Philippines . The cyclone took 30 hours to track across the northern portion of the archipelago . 
 It took until late on July 4 for the storm to recover from its Philippine interaction and redevelop a central dense overcast and quicken its pace to the west across Luzon . Turning northwest across the South China Sea , light to moderate easterly wind shear prevented Lynn 's development into a typhoon . The cyclone struck Chuan @-@ Tao , China early on July 7 . Very heavy rainfall led to mudslides which took 22 lives and left tens of thousands homeless . In Hong Kong , winds gusted to 78 knots ( 144 km / h ) at Tai O , and a total of 118 @.@ 0 millimetres ( 4 @.@ 65 in ) of rainfall was recorded at Cheung Chau . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Goring = = = 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Maury ( Huling ) = = = 
 On the morning of July 14 , satellite imagery revealed an area of convection about 205 kilometres ( 127 mi ) north @-@ northwest of Yap . By late on July 16 , a mid @-@ level center has formed in association with the thunderstorm complex , which was moving northwest . Ship reports indicated the system had become a tropical storm by the morning of July 18 . Southwesterly vertical wind shear impacted Maury , which led to its tilting to the northeast with height . By early on July 19 the wind shear lessened , and the cyclone 's structure improved . While approaching China , a strong ridge to its northwest deflected the storm on a more westerly heading , sending the center toward Taiwan . This ridge also led to weak east @-@ northeasterly vertical wind shear , which halted development . By late on July 19 , the cyclone 's center moved ashore northern Taiwan . Heavy rains led to significant flooding and the loss of 38 lives . Moving through the Formosa Strait as a weak tropical storm , Maury made a second landfall near Fu @-@ Chou , China on the morning of July 20 . Its remains were dragged southwest by an upper cyclone to its southeast back into the Gulf of Tonkin . By late on July 23 , the circulation center moved back to the north near Yin @-@ Chou , China and dissipated inland late on July 24 . Its former thunderstorm activity decoupled from the surface center while still offshore and moved inland near Nam Dinh , Vietnam before dissipating over Laos late on July 24 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Nina ( Ibiang ) = = = 
 The eastern portion of the large convective mass from Maury led to Nina 's formation . It was first noted late on July 20 to the east of Taiwan . As it moved northwest around northern Taiwan late on the morning of July 22 . By late afternoon a surface low formed with enough convective activity to be designated a tropical depression . Moving northwest at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ) , the cyclone briefly became a tropical storm before nearly land and weakening back into a tropical depression . Early on the morning of July 23 , its center made landfall northwest of Hsia @-@ p 'u , China before quickly dissipating in mountainous terrain inland . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Ogden = = = 
 An area of convection active for the previous 48 hours led to the formation of a low level circulation near 23 ° N 151 ° E early on July 27 . Gradual intensification ensued , and the system developed into a tropical depression that evening , a tropical storm on July 28 , and a typhoon by July 31 as it moved west @-@ northwest . The cyclone struck southern Kyūshū , in Japan , early on July 31 which weakened the cyclone . The tropical storm then moved into the East China Sea which continuing to spin down . Upper level wind shear took its toll , leading to its weakening into a tropical depression and its ultimate dissipation in the Yellow Sea along the west coast of Korea . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Luming = = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm 11W = = = 
 Both Tropical Depression 11W and Tropical Storm Phyllis were associated with the same synoptic scale feature , similar to Maury and Nina . On July 30 the monsoon trough extended from the Northern Marianas islands southeast toward Palau . Two circulations were at opposite ends of the trough . Tropical Depression 11W formed north of Guam late on July 31 . Moving northeast , the tropical depression experienced vertical wind shear as the upper anticyclone fostering development accelerated faster than the tropical depression . This led to dissipation by late morning on August 2 . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Phyllis = = = 
 A second circulation along the monsoon trough which spawned Tropical Depression 11W was noted north of Palau . By late on August 3 it had developed into Tropical Storm Phyllis . Tracking northward at 11 knots ( 20 km / h ) , the cyclone intensified slowly due to westerly vertical wind shear . Increased vertical wind shear from the southeast and cooler sea surface temperatures led to the decline of Phyllis late on August 4 , and it dissipated as a tropical cyclone early on August 5 . Its remains tracked northeast , merging with an extratropical cyclone offshore Japan . Eleven perished during Phyllis , with 22 @,@ 500 people being left homeless across Japan . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Roy ( Miling ) = = = 
 The initial disturbance formed east of Vietnam during the first few days of August . By August 2 , a low level circulation was present . Moving slowly to the north , the low pressure area developed central convection . By late on August 4 , the disturbance strengthened into a tropical depression before reaching tropical storm strength on August 5 . Easterly shear began soon afterwards , and Roy 's circulation center became exposed well to the east of the main convection . This caused its subsequent weakening and dissipation before reaching Hainan Island . Winds gusted to 41 knots ( 76 km / h ) on the northwest side of Hong Kong 's airport . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Susan = = = 
 The monsoon trough became well @-@ established along 20 degrees north latitude . To the east of Phyllis , part of the monsoon trough shifted east towards Wake Island while the western portion moved north with Phyllis . Early on August 7 , a tropical disturbance was noted about 110 kilometres ( 68 mi ) north of Wake Island . During this time , Wake experienced gale @-@ force winds and heavy rainfall . The low level center became exposed for a time , though gales continued . By late on August 8 , convection at the edge of the surface low strengthened as the vertical wind shear weakened . At this point , the gale center was deemed to be a tropical cyclone , and was named Susan . The storm tracked north until reaching 30 degrees north latitude , before turning northwest towards a weak cold front . Early on August 11 , Susan entrained cooler and drier air from behind the frontal zone which led to a significant reduction in thunderstorm activity . A warm core ridge building to its northeast forced the storm on a more west @-@ northwest course , and as a second cold front approached , Susan recurved into the boundary , becoming an extratropical cyclone during the late morning of August 13 . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Narsing = = = 
 = = = Typhoon Thad ( Openg ) = = = 
 An active monsoon trough spawned three tropical cyclones within 48 hours beginning on August 16 . Thad was the first of the trio , initially noted on August 10 near 18 ° N 130 ° E. On August 15 , limited outflow was witnessed over its low level circulation . The system developed into a tropical depression late on August 16 . Thad moved north and northeast , maturing into a typhoon by late morning on August 18 . On August 22 Thad accelerated northward between a subtropical ridge to its east and a deepening shortwave to its west , striking eastern Japan with a forward motion near 45 knots ( 83 km / h ) . Thereafter , the cyclone rapidly transitioned into an extratropical cyclone by late on August 23 . Twenty died during Thad 's passage of Japan . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Vanessa = = = 
 This system developed about 110 kilometres ( 68 mi ) south of Marcus Island near the merger of the monsoon trough and a sharp surface trough brought into the region by Susan . Thunderstorm activity increased in the area on August 12 , the next system up the monsoon trough from Thad . Once Vanessa freed itself from nearby troughs of low pressure , it lost one of its primary outflow channels and its northeastward movement subsequently exposed the system to the main belt of the westerlies . Within two days of formation as a tropical cyclone , Vanessa was already devoid of convection and transitioning to an extratropical cyclone on the morning of August 19 . The exposed surface circulation was tracked an additional couple days , merging with a mid @-@ latitude system near 40 ° N 165 ° E on the morning of August 21 . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Warren = = = 
 The initial disturbance which led to Warren 's formation formed within the monsoon trough on August 14 . Strong northeasterly wind shear halted further development for the next few days . By August 17 the vertical wind shear relaxed , and thunderstorms increased south of the center . Moving slowly westward , the system became a tropical storm on the afternoon of August 18 . Warren tracked over Hainan Island , and into the Gulf of Tonkin . Intensification renewed , but maximum sustained winds leveled off at 45 knots ( 83 km / h ) . The cyclone made its final landfall near Nam Dinh , Vietnam on August 20 and dissipated rapidly that evening . 
 = = = Typhoon Agnes ( Pining ) = = = 
 On August 23 , a well @-@ defined Tropical Upper Tropospheric Trough moved westward from the International Date Line . On August 24 , a surface cyclone developed in its vicinity near Wake Island . An extensive area of disorganized thunderstorm activity developed on its southwest side initially . As the convection moved westward , upper level outflow improved northeast of Guam . A well @-@ defined mid @-@ level cyclone passed just north of the island on the morning of August 26 . A low level center began to form as the area moved northwest of Guam . By the early morning of August 27 , a tropical depression had formed about 600 kilometres ( 370 mi ) west @-@ northwest of Guam . Development continued , and the system became a tropical storm that evening . Moving west @-@ northwestward , Agnes became a typhoon on the morning of August 29 . The following day , the intensifying typhoon passed 165 kilometres ( 103 mi ) southwest of Okinawa . Entering a region of hostile northerly vertical wind shear , Agnes began to weaken . Its central convection was almost completely gone by the morning of September 2 . Agnes remained well south of Korea until September 3 , when it unleashed a torrent of rainfall , the heaviest of the 20th century up to that time , when 711 @.@ 2 millimetres ( 28 @.@ 00 in ) fell upon the peninsula . Agnes ' remains passed through the Korea Strait into the Sea of Japan by September 4 . A total of 139 lives were taken by Agnes . 
 = = = Typhoon Bill = = = 
 The initial disturbance formed about 550 kilometres ( 340 mi ) east @-@ southeast of Marcus Island on September 1 . A compact system , with an area of central convection 280 kilometres ( 170 mi ) wide , Bill rapidly spun up into a tropical storm on September 3 , and typhoon on September 4 . Its central pressure was quite high for winds of that intensity due to the pressure gradient between the cyclone and the subtropical ridge to its northeast . The typhoon followed a classic parabolic track around the periphery of the subtropical ridge east of Japan , weakening back into a tropical storm on September 7 . Rapid extratropical transition occurred as Bill interacted with the main belt of the Westerlies , and by midnight , Bill became an extratropical cyclone . 
 = = = Typhoon Clara ( Rubing ) = = = 
 The monsoon trough spawned a tropical depression on September 13 well east of the Philippines . The depression moved to the west @-@ northwest , strengthening into a tropical storm on September 16 and a typhoon on September 18 . Clara rapidly intensified to peak winds of 120 knots ( 220 km / h ) on September 19 before brushing northern Luzon . Its circulation disrupted , Clara steadily weakened as it continued to the northwest , hitting southeast China on the 21st as a typhoon with winds of 70 knots ( 130 km / h ) . In Hong Kong , winds gusted to 51 knots ( 94 km / h ) at Cheung Chau . Clara caused extensive damage and 141 deaths , leaving thousands homeless from the heavy rains . 
 = = = Typhoon Doyle = = = 
 Like Bill , Doyle was a midget typhoon that spent its life out over the open Pacific ocean . Its initial disturbance was first detected near 25 ° N 178 ° E on September 18 . The cyclone built down to the surface while moving westward , and Doyle became a tropical storm on the afternoon of September 20 and a typhoon the following day . Recurving around the subtropical ridge , Doyle accelerated rapidly northeastward , weakening over cool waters as it was merging with a frontal zone and becoming an extratropical cyclone during the early morning of September 24 near 39 ° N 172 ° E. 
 = = = Super Typhoon Elsie ( Tasing ) = = = 
 The monsoon trough became diffuse on September 19 and September 20 in the wake of Typhoons Clara and Doyle . A small thunderstorm area formed near 8 ° N 150 ° E late on the morning of September 22 , which slowly developed into a tropical depression early on September 25 . Development was steady into a tropical storm later that day , a typhoon on the morning of September 26 , and a super typhoon during the afternoon of September 27 , maintaining that intensity into September 30 . Elsie moved on a parabolic curve around the subtropical ridge to its northeast and east , moving offshore Japan as a typhoon on October 1 and October 2 . By October 2 , interaction with the upper trough which led to its recurvature also transitioned the typhoon into an extratropical cyclone . 
 = = = Tropical Depression Saling = = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm Fabian ( <unk> ) = = = 
 An area of active yet disorganized thunderstorm activity was located northeast of Palau on October 6 . Moving westward over the next several days , there was little change in organization until is approached Samar Island . Passing over the Philippines , it lost what convection it did have near the center , yet let to very heavy rainfall and flooding though a surface circulation was not apparent . Once the disturbance entered the South China Sea , it redeveloped and reached tropical depression strength on the afternoon of October 13 . It crossed the sea and struck Cam Ranh Bay , Vietnam . By October 15 , the cyclone had dissipated inland . 
 = = = Typhoon Gay ( <unk> ) = = = 
 The system formed within a very large area of thunderstorm activity . The system originally had a large circulation center , which led to problems in fixing its center via satellite imagery . The development of a large eye on October 20 finally led to the tracking of a more definitive , well @-@ defined , circulation center . The typhoon brought relief to drought conditions in Okinawa , when 150 millimetres ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) of rainfall fell there are the circulation center of Gay moved by about 175 kilometres ( 109 mi ) to their southeast . As it continued moving towards Japan , the center passed only 50 kilometres ( 31 mi ) from Tokyo , bringing significant rainfall to central portions of the island archipelago . The typhoon ultimately merged with a second low pressure system moving eastward to the north of Japan . 
 = = = Tropical Depression = = = 
 This system was recognized by the Hong Kong Royal Observatory . A tropical depression formed in the South China Sea on November 7 , and moved inland into Vietnam on the 10th . 
 = = = Typhoon Hazen ( <unk> ) = = = 
 A tropical disturbance developed along a trough east of Guam . Its circulation improved , and a low pressure center formed on November 13 . It became a tropical depression by the morning of November 14 , and a tropical storm that evening . Moving on a general westward track across the western Pacific , it moved over northern Saipan on the afternoon of November 15 , bringing gusts approaching typhoon force . Hazen moved about 110 kilometres ( 68 mi ) north of Guam before reaching typhoon strength on early on November 16 . Its intensity fluctuated on November 17 and November 18 as Hazen interacted with a nearby frontal zone . Weakening as it neared the Philippines , Hazen moved just south of Catanduanes Island , entering the South China Sea . Never recovering from the mountainous archipelago , Hazen struck Vietnam about 280 kilometres ( 170 mi ) east @-@ northeast of Hanoi , and dissipated as it entered southeast China . 
 = = = Super Typhoon Irma ( Anding ) = = = 
 Super Typhoon Irma developed from the near @-@ equatorial trough on November 17 . As a tropical depression , it headed westward , and steadily intensified , first to a tropical storm on November 19 , later to a typhoon on November 20 . Irma quickly strengthened on November 22 to a super typhoon with maximum winds of 135 knots ( 250 km / h ) , but its outflow was disrupted by the Philippines to the southwest . Irma hit the northern Philippines on November 24 with maximum sustained winds of 85 knots ( 157 km / h ) , and rapidly weakened over the country . As a weakened tropical storm , Irma turned northeastward , where it was absorbed by a cold front on November 27 . A total of 409 fatalities and $ 9 million in damage ( 1981 USD ) can be attributed to the typhoon . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Jeff ( <unk> ) = = = 
 A distinct surface circulation formed by November 18 . Jeff became a tropical storm on November 23 on the heels of Irma and approaching Guam . It navigating through a break in the subtropical ridge and dissipated over cooler waters on November 26 due to increasing vertical wind shear well to the south of Japan . 
 = = = Typhoon Kit ( <unk> ) = = = 
 A strong and long lived tropical cyclone for December , the initial low level center for the system formed southwest of Ponape on December 4 . By December 7 , it had moved southwest of Truk without further development . By the morning of December 10 , its structure was improving , and by the next afternoon a tropical depressions had formed . Late on December 11 , it had evolved into a tropical storm . A slow moving system , Kit shifted from the northwest to a westerly heading , passing just south of Guam without any further development . Intensification resumed on the following two days reaching its first peak in intensity on December 16 . The storm moved sharply northward for a second time at a slow rate of motion before resuming its westward motion due to a northeast surge in the trade winds . Reintensification occurred as the upper trough to its north acted as an outflow channel . Kit reached its peak intensity on the evening of December 17 before increasing westerlies aloft began to weaken the cyclone . On December 20 , the surface circulation began to emerge south of its central convection . Thereafter , Kit was steered the low @-@ level flow to the south and southwest as a deck of stratocumulus . On December 21 . Kit became a tropical depression once more and by afternoon no longer qualified as a tropical cyclone . Late on December 22 , the low level cloud swirl moved into Mindanao before dissipating . 
 = = = Typhoon Lee ( Dinang ) = = = 
 While Kit was dissipating in the western Philippine Sea on December 21 , a disturbed area of weather organized west of Truk . Strong <unk> previously diverted into Kit closed off a portion of the monsoon trough , with near gale @-@ force winds wrapping around the convection . Development continued , and by the afternoon of December 22 , the system became classified as a tropical depression . Tropical storm status was achieved that night . Moving west @-@ northwest , Lee intensified rapidly into a typhoon on December 23 and reaching its peak intensity by December 24 . Rapid weakening began as Lee crossed the Philippines , and the cyclone was once again a tropical storm by December 25 ( Christmas Day ) . On December 28 , all of the cyclone 's convection was removed well east of the circulation center due to moderate to strong westerly vertical wind shear . Turning to the north , Lee dissipated as a tropical cyclone around 280 kilometres ( 170 mi ) south of Hong Kong . A total of 188 perished during the cyclone 's passage . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 During the season 28 named tropical cyclones developed in the Western Pacific and were named by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center , when it was determined that they had become tropical storms . These names were contributed to a revised list which started on 1979 . 
 = = = Philippines = = = 
 The Philippine Atmospheric , Geophysical and Astronomical Services Administration uses its own naming scheme for tropical cyclones in their area of responsibility . PAGASA assigns names to tropical depressions that form within their area of responsibility and any tropical cyclone that might move into their area of responsibility . Should the list of names for a given year prove to be insufficient , names are taken from an auxiliary list , the first 6 of which are published each year before the season starts . Names not retired from this list will be used again in the 1985 season . This is the same list used for the 1977 season . PAGASA uses its own naming scheme that starts in the Filipino alphabet , with names of Filipino female names ending with " ng " ( A , B , K , D , etc . ) . Names that were not assigned / going to use are marked in gray . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 It is unknown , but possibly due to damage , the name Hazen was retired and was later replaced by Hal , which was first used in the 1985 season . 
 = = Season effects = = 
 This table will list all the storms that developed in the northwestern Pacific Ocean west of the International Date Line and north of the equator during 1981 . It will include their intensity , duration , name , areas affected , deaths , and damage totals . Classification and intensity values will be based on estimations conducted by the JMA , the JTWC , and / or PAGASA . Peak wind speeds are in ten @-@ minute sustained standards unless otherwise noted . All damage figures will be in 1981 USD . Damages and deaths from a storm will include when the storm was a precursor wave or an extratropical low . 
 = 1928 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1928 Atlantic hurricane season featured the Okeechobee hurricane , which was second deadliest tropical cyclone in the history of the United States . Only eight tropical cyclones developed during the season . Of these eight tropical systems , seven of them intensified into a tropical storm and four further strengthened into hurricanes . One hurricane deepened into a major hurricane , which is Category 3 or higher on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . The first system , the Fort Pierce hurricane , developed near the Lesser Antilles on August 3 . The storm crossed the Bahamas and made landfall in Florida . Two fatalities and approximately $ 235 @,@ 000 in damage was reported . A few days after the first storm developed , the Haiti hurricane , formed near the southern Windward Islands on August 7 . The storm went on to strike Haiti , Cuba , and Florida . This storm left about $ 2 million in damage and at least 210 deaths . Impacts from the third system are unknown . 
 The most significant storm of the season was Hurricane Four , nicknamed the Okeechobee hurricane . Becoming a Category 5 hurricane , the hurricane struck Puerto Rico at that intensity . Several islands of the Greater and Lesser Antilles suffered " great destruction " , especially Guadeloupe and Puerto Rico . The storm then crossed the Bahamas as a Category 4 hurricane , leaving deaths and severe damage on some islands . Also as a Category 4 , the cyclone struck West Palm Beach , Florida , resulting in catastrophic wind damage . Inland flooding and storm surge resulted in Lake Okeechobee overflowing its banks , flooding nearby towns and leaving at least 2 @,@ 500 deaths , making it the second deadliest hurricane in the United States after the 1900 Galveston hurricane . Overall , this storm caused at least $ 100 million in damage and 4 @,@ 079 deaths . The three remaining systems did not impact land . Collectively , the storms of this season left over $ 102 million in damage and at least 4 @,@ 289 fatalities . 
 The season 's activity was reflected with an accumulated cyclone energy ( ACE ) rating of 83 . ACE is , broadly speaking , a measure of the power of the hurricane multiplied by the length of time it existed , so storms that last a long time , as well as particularly strong hurricanes , have high ACEs . It is only calculated for full advisories on tropical systems at or exceeding 39 mph ( 63 km / h ) , which is tropical storm strength . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Hurricane One = = = 
 This storm developed from a tropical wave north of the Virgin Islands on August 3 . The system paralleled the Greater Antilles throughout much of its early existence . On August 6 , the tropical storm strengthened to the equivalent of a Category 1 hurricane while positioned over the Bahamas . The hurricane continued to intensify , and after reaching Category 2 hurricane strength , peaked with sustained winds of 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) on August 7 . Shortly thereafter , the hurricane made landfall as a slightly weaker storm near Fort Pierce , Florida , at 07 : 00 UTC on August 8 . Weakening as it moved across Florida over the course of the next day , the storm briefly moved over the Gulf of Mexico before recurving northwards . It made a second landfall on the Florida Panhandle on August 10 as a tropical storm . Once inland , the system continued to weaken , degenerating to tropical depression strength before transitioning into an extratropical storm later that day . The extratropical remnants progressed outwards into the Atlantic Ocean before dissipating on August 14 . 
 In its early developmental stages north of the Greater Antilles , the storm disrupted shipping routes through the Bahamas and generated rough seas offshore Cuba . At its first landfall on Fort Pierce , the hurricane caused property damage in several areas , particularly in coastal regions , where numerous homes were unroofed . Central Florida 's citrus crop was hampered by the strong winds and heavy rain . Several of Florida 's lakes , including Lake Okeechobee , rose past their banks , inundating coastal areas . Damage to infrastructure was less in inland regions than at the coast , though power outages caused a widespread loss of communication . At the hurricane 's second landfall , wind damage was relatively minor , though torrential rainfall , aided by orthographic lift , caused extensive flooding as far north as the Mid @-@ Atlantic states . Overall , the hurricane caused $ 235 @,@ 000 in damages , primarily in Florida , and two deaths . 
 = = = Hurricane Two = = = 
 A tropical wave developed into a tropical depression near Tobago on August 7 . The system then passed through the Windward Islands just south of Carriacou and Petite Martinique . Upon entering the Caribbean Sea early on August 8 , the tropical depression strengthened into a tropical storm . On August 9 , the storm strengthened to the equivalent of a Category 1 hurricane , while positioned south of Dominican Republic . The next day , the hurricane peaked with winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) . After striking the Tiburon Peninsula of Haiti , the cyclone began weakening and fell to tropical storm intensity on August 12 . By midday on the following day , the storm made landfall near Cienfuegos , Cuba . Upon emerging into the Straits of Florida , the storm began to re @-@ strengthen . Early on August 13 , it struck Big Pine Key , Florida , as a strong tropical storm . Weakening slowly while moving north @-@ northwestward , the system made another landfall near St. George Island . After moving inland , the tropical storm slowly deteriorated , falling to tropical depression intensity on August 15 and dissipating over West Virginia on August 17 . 
 In Haiti , the storm completely wiped out live stock and many crops , particularly coffee , cocoa , and sugar . Several villages were also destroyed , rendering approximately 10 @,@ 000 people homeless . The damage totaled $ 1 million and at least 200 deaths were reported . The only impact in Cuba was downed banana trees . In Florida , the storm left minor wind damage along the coast . A Seaboard Air Line Railroad station was destroyed in Boca Grande , while signs , trees , and telephone poles were knocked down in Sarasota . Several streets in St. Petersburg were closed due to flooding or debris . Between Cedar Key and the Florida Panhandle , several vessels capsized . Water washed up along the side of roads and in wooded areas . The storm contributed to flooding onset by the previous hurricane , with rainfall peaking at 13 @.@ 5 in ( 340 mm ) in Caesars Head , South Carolina . The worst impact from flooding occurred in North Carolina , where several houses were demolished . Six people were killed in the state , of which four due to flooding . Property damage in the state totaled over $ 1 million . Overall , the storm caused at least $ 2 million in damage and 210 fatalities . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Three = = = 
 A tropical storm formed on September 1 just south of Hispaniola . Moving just north of due west , the system brushed the south coast of Jamaica as a 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) tropical storm on September 2 before slowly beginning to intensify on September 3 . The strengthening tropical storm reached its peak of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) on September 4 shortly before making landfall on the Yucatan Peninsula near Playa del Carmen near its peak intensity early on September 5 . The system deteriorated after crossing the peninsula and entering the Bay of Campeche early on September 6 as a weak tropical storm . Later , the storm restrengthened slightly to winds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) while nearing mainland Mexico on September 7 . The tropical storm then weakened slightly shortly before making landfall north of Tampico early on September 8 as a weak 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) tropical storm . After moving inland , the system weakened quickly to a depression and dissipated . The storm brought 2 @.@ 18 in ( 55 mm ) of rain to Brownsville , Texas . 
 = = = Hurricane Four = = = 
 This system developed as a tropical depression just offshore the west coast of Africa on September 6 . The depression strengthened into a tropical storm later that day , shortly before passing south of the Cape Verde Islands . Further intensification was slow and halted by late on September 7 . However , about 48 hours later , the storm resumed strengthening and became a Category 1 hurricane on the modern @-@ day Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . Still moving westward , the system reached Category 4 intensity before striking Guadeloupe on September 12 . There , the storm brought 1 @,@ 200 deaths and extensive damage , including the destruction of approximately 85 % – 95 % of banana crops , the severe damage dealt to 70 % – 80 % of tree crops , and the roughly 40 % of the sugar cane crops ruined . Martinique , Montserrat , and Nevis also reported damage and fatalities , but the impacts at those locations were not nearly as severe as in Guadeloupe . 
 Around midday on September 13 , the storm strengthened into a Category 5 hurricane , based on the anemometer at San Juan observing sustained winds of 160 mph ( 268 km / h ) . The hurricane peaked with sustained winds at the intensity . About six hours later , the system made landfall in Puerto Rico ; it was the only recorded tropical cyclone to strike the island as a Category 5 . Very strong winds resulted in severe damage in Puerto Rico . Throughout the island , 24 @,@ 728 homes were destroyed and 192 @,@ 444 were damaged , leaving over 500 @,@ 000 people homeless . Heavy rainfall also led to extreme damage to vegetation and agriculture . On Puerto Rico alone , there were 312 deaths and about $ 50 million in damage . After emerging into the Atlantic , the storm weakened slightly , falling to Category 4 intensity . It began crossing through the Bahamas on September 16 . Many buildings and houses were damaged or destroyed , especially on Bimini , Eleuthera , New Providence , and San Salvador Island . Nineteen deaths were reported , eighteen from a sloop disappearing and one due to drowning . 
 Early on September 17 , the storm made landfall near West Palm Beach , Florida , with winds of 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) . In the city , more than 1 @,@ 711 homes were destroyed . Elsewhere in Palm Beach County , impact was severest around Lake Okeechobee . The storm surge caused water to pour out of the southern edge of the lake , flooding hundreds of square miles as high as 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) above ground . Numerous houses and buildings were swept away in the cities of Belle Glade , Canal Point , Chosen , Pahokee , and South Bay . At least 2 @,@ 500 people drowned , while damage was estimated at $ 25 million . While crossing Florida , the system weakened significantly , falling to Category 1 intensity late on September 17 . It curved north @-@ northeastward and briefly re @-@ emerged into the Atlantic on September 18 , but soon made another landfall near Edisto Island , South Carolina with winds of 85 mph ( 140 km / h ) . Early on the following day , the system weakened to a tropical storm and became extratropical over North Carolina hours later . Overall , the system caused $ 100 million in damage and at least 4 @,@ 079 deaths . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Five = = = 
 A tropical storm developed about 835 mi ( 1 @,@ 345 km ) northeast of Barbados on September 8 . The storm moved rapidly north @-@ northwestward and slowly strengthened . Upon turning northward on September 10 , the system attained its peak intensity as a strong tropical storm with maximum sustained winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) and a high minimum barometric pressure of 1 @,@ 015 mbar ( 30 @.@ 0 inHg ) , both of which were measured by ships . Shortly thereafter , it began losing tropical characteristics and transitioned into an extratropical cyclone later that day while located about 700 mi ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) south @-@ southeast of Cape Race , Newfoundland and Labrador . The extratropical remnants continued to move rapidly northeastward until being absorbed by an extratropical low pressure . 
 = = = Tropical Depression = = = 
 A low pressure area previously associated with a frontal system developed into a tropical depression near Bermuda on September 22 . The depression had sustained winds of 30 mph ( 45 km / h ) and failed to strengthen further . It became extratropical on September 23 . 
 = = = Hurricane Six = = = 
 The final cyclone of the season developed about 740 mi ( 1 @,@ 190 km ) west @-@ northwest of the easternmost islands of Cape Verde on October 10 . Moving north @-@ northwest , the system maintained intensity on October 11 , before beginning to intensify more rapidly on October 12 . Early the next day , it strengthened into a Category 1 hurricane and peaked with maximum sustained winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) . After turning northeastward , the hurricane weakened to a tropical storm on October 14 . Around 06 : 00 UTC on October 15 , the cyclone transitioned into an extratropical cyclone while situated approximately 285 mi ( 460 km ) northwest of Flores Island in the Azores . 
 = Sisters at Heart = 
 " Sisters at Heart " is the thirteenth episode of the seventh season , and 213th episode overall , of the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) fantasy television sitcom Bewitched . This Christmas episode aired on ABC on December 24 , 1970 , and again the following December . 
 The narrative follows Lisa Wilson ( Venetta Rogers ) , an African @-@ American girl , as she visits her friend Tabitha Stephens ( Erin Murphy ) , a white girl . Meanwhile , Tabitha 's father Darrin Stephens ( Dick Sargent ) , who works at an advertising agency , fails to land a million @-@ dollar account with toy company owner Mr. Brockway ( Parley Baer ) because Mr. Brockway is racist and incorrectly believes Darrin to be married to Lisa 's mother Dorothy ( Janee Michelle ) . In an attempt to convince Mr. Brockway to overcome his bigotry , Darrin 's wife Samantha ( Elizabeth Montgomery ) , who is a witch , casts a spell on Mr. Brockway so he sees everyone , including himself , as having black skin . 
 The story of " Sisters at Heart " was written by 22 African @-@ American students from a tenth grade English class at Jefferson High School after Montgomery and her husband William Asher , the director of the episode , had the students visit the set of Bewitched . Most students at the school were unable to read , write , or comprehend at a high school level , with 44 % reading at a third grade level and very few students reading at a level much higher than that . Sargent said that the students , " who might have been stuck in the ghetto for the rest of their lives , loved Bewitched , and with just a little approval and motivation , came alive on the set . " Montgomery considered " Sisters at Heart " her favorite episode of the series , and said that it " was created in the true spirit of Christmas ... conceived in the image of innocence and filled with truth . " The episode received the Governors Award at the 23rd Primetime Emmy Awards ceremony in 1971 . Montgomery 's biographer Herbie Pilato wrote that " no episode of the series more clearly represented [ the ] cry against prejudice " than " Sisters at Heart " . Critic Walter Metz praised Asher 's choice of camera angles , but denounced the episode 's liberalism as excessively sentimental and simplistic . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Keith Wilson ( Don Marshall ) , his wife Dorothy ( Janee Michelle ) , their daughter Lisa ( Venetta Rogers ) , and Keith 's boss , Larry Tate ( David White ) , visit the home of the Stephens family , with whom Lisa is to spend a few days while Keith is away on a business trip for Larry . The Wilsons are African @-@ American and all of the other characters are white , including the Stephens family : Darrin ( Dick Sargent ) , his wife Samantha ( Elizabeth Montgomery ) , their daughter Tabitha ( Erin Murphy ) , and their son Adam ( David Lawrence ) . Tabitha is glad to be able to spend a few days with Lisa and says they will temporarily be sisters . Darrin is another of Larry 's employees at advertising agency McMann and Tate . Darrin is trying to land a million @-@ dollar account from Mr. Brockway ( Parley Baer ) , who owns a toy company . Mr. Brockway visits the Stephens residence unannounced to find out if Darrin has any dark secrets . When Mr. Brockway arrives , Samantha is tending to Adam upstairs , so Lisa answers the door . When Lisa says her father works for McMann and Tate and that she is Tabitha 's sister , Mr. Brockway leaves , saying he has seen enough . 
 Samantha takes the children to the park , where another child tells Lisa and Tabitha that they cannot be sisters because they have different skin colors . When they arrive home , Tabitha casts a spell on herself and Lisa so that Tabitha 's skin has black spots and Lisa 's skin has white spots . Lisa thereby discovers that Tabitha and Samantha are witches . When Samantha finds the two girls polka @-@ dotted , she tells Tabitha to reverse the spell , which Tabitha unsuccessfully tries to do . Eventually , Samantha realizes that Tabitha 's attempt was unsuccessful because Tabitha subconsciously wants the spots to remain so she and Lisa will continue to be sisters . Samantha tells the girls that differences in appearance won 't prevent them from being sisters , and Tabitha then successfully reverses the spell just as Lisa 's parents arrive to pick up Lisa . 
 Larry tells Darrin that Mr. Brockway has insisted that Darrin be removed from the account . Darrin and Samantha host a Christmas party which Larry , Keith , and Dorothy attend . When Mr. Brockway arrives , he sees Darrin and Dorothy standing next to each other and assumes they are married to each other . When Mr. Brockway realizes his mistake , and that Darrin is instead married to Samantha , Mr. Brockway tells Larry that he is willing to allow Darrin back on the account . After discovering that Mr. Brockway initially was unwilling because he thought Darrin was married to an African @-@ American woman , Larry rejects Mr. Brockway 's offer . Mr. Brockway expresses disbelief that anyone would reject such a lucrative account . Through witchcraft , Samantha causes Mr. Brockway to see everyone in the room , including himself , as having black skin . On Christmas Day , while the Wilsons are visiting the Stephens , Mr. Brockway arrives , apologizes for his previous actions , and repents of his racism . Samantha invites Mr. Brockway to join them for Christmas dinner , and he accepts . 
 = = Production = = 
 In 1969 , Marcella Saunders , a 23 @-@ year @-@ old teacher at Jefferson High School in Los Angeles , found that her ninth @-@ grade students were unable to read the short stories and poetry in the class textbook . She thought that , because her students were more familiar with television than poetry or short stories , she would have more success in teaching her students if she taught them by way of a television series . She found that her students liked Bewitched , Room 222 , and Julia , so she contacted the corresponding television studios to tell them about her idea . Only Bewitched responded . Having gained an audience with Montgomery and her husband William Asher , Saunders told the couple that most students at the school were unable to read , write , or comprehend at a high school level , with 44 % reading at a third grade level and very few students reading at a level much higher than that ; less than 1 % were reading at a ninth grade level . Saunders added that Bewitched was the students ' favorite television series . 
 Out of concern for the students in Saunders ' English class , Montgomery and Asher invited Saunders ' class of 22 African @-@ American students to visit the set of Bewitched . Because many of these teenagers , now in the tenth grade , did not have the financial means to make their way to Hollywood , Montgomery and Asher paid for all 22 to be transported there and back by chartered bus . The students were impressed by the visit and later collaborated to write a teleplay for a Bewitched episode under Saunders ' supervision . The teleplay was called " Sisters at Heart . " At Christmas in 1969 , they presented Montgomery and Asher with the teleplay , gift @-@ wrapped . Montgomery and Asher were impressed with the quality of the script . Montgomery later said , " We 've had bad scripts submitted by professional writers that weren 't as well written or creative . " 
 Asher told Barbara Avedon about the students ' script , saying that it only needed a little reworking , and he asked if she would help the students with the rewrite . Avedon , who had written for The Donna Reed Show and been a regular writer for Bewitched , accepted his request . Avedon visited Jefferson High School and later said of the experience , " I was horrified . Locker doors were hanging off their hinges . There wasn 't a blade of grass in sight . " Avedon expressed amazement over the script the students produced and helped them revise it and expand its length so it would sustain a full half @-@ hour episode . She promised the students that no changes would be made to the script unless they approved . It was because of her recommendation that the story was reformulated as a Christmas episode , which she suggested because the script " was so imbued with the spirit . " She said that one of the students indicated a desire to write for Bewitched because the series deals with miscegenation by way of a marriage between a witch and a mortal . 
 All 22 students attended a production and rehearsal meeting for the episode . The government of California gave Jefferson High School a grant to support a program to allow the students to be part of the filming and post @-@ production of the episode . Film production company Screen Gems joined Montgomery and Asher in making donations to the program as well . The students donated the money they received for writing the episode to a foundation to keep the program going . Two more trips were organized , bringing a total of fifty Jefferson High School students to the set of Bewitched . Asher sent copies of thirty scripts of other Bewitched episodes to the school for use in classrooms . Saunders found the program a great success , saying " kids who could never write before were now writing three pages . Kids who could not read were now doubling up on scripts and fighting over who would be able to play the leads . " Asher also expressed pleasure with the program 's success , and recommended that other white businesspeople invite minority groups into their lives . Sargent considered Saunders the main reason for the success of the program , saying , " She was interested in innovative forms of teaching . These kids , who might have been stuck in the ghetto for the rest of their lives , loved Bewitched , and with just a little approval and motivation , came alive on the set . " 
 Asher produced and directed the episode . A high school student who was granted the role of assistant director at one point screamed " Quiet on the set ! " , a memory that Sargent later recalled fondly . For the scene in which Samantha casts a spell that makes Mr. Brockway see everyone as having black skin , the white actors , including Sargent and White , appeared in blackface . The name of Mr. Brockway 's toy company is never mentioned . Samantha 's statement at the end of the episode , " We 're having integrated turkey : white meat and dark " , was repeated in Spike Lee 's 1986 film She 's Gotta Have It . The final shot of the episode , which zooms out from the scene of Samantha and Darrin kissing to reveal the French doors at the back of their house as " Silent Night " plays in the background , is the only shot in any episode of Bewitched to depict the interior of the house from the perspective of the backyard . " Sisters at Heart " is the only episode of the series in which Lisa appears . Seven years before acting together in " Sisters at Heart " , Montgomery and Baer appeared together in an episode of the CBS television series Rawhide called " Incident at El Crucero " , which aired when the pilot episode of Bewitched was in pre @-@ production . In 1970 , Montgomery appeared on The Merv Griffin Show to promote " Sisters at Heart " , thereby making one of the only three talk show appearances of her career . After Griffin left the network , CBS wiped all episodes of The Merv Griffin Show produced between 1969 and 1972 , but a copy of the episode featuring Montgomery 's promotion of " Sisters at Heart " was later discovered when it became known that relevant kinescopes and master tapes had survived . 
 Endorsed by meat production company Oscar Mayer , " Sisters at Heart " is a half @-@ hour , color episode that aired on December 24 , 1970 , as the 213th episode of Bewitched to be aired . As an introduction and conclusion to the episode , Montgomery briefly spoke to the camera about the episode , saying that it " was created in the true spirit of Christmas ... conceived in the image of innocence and filled with truth . " ABC aired the episode only once more , in December 1971 . Unlike many of the other episodes in the season , it was neither a remake of an episode from a previous season nor part of the Salem , Massachusetts , story arc that was filmed in the area where the 17th @-@ century Salem witch trials took place . Don Marshall , who made a guest appearance in " Sisters at Heart " as Keith Wilson , was known for his role in Land of the Giants , while Janee Michelle , who portrayed Dorothy Wilson in " Sisters at Heart " , later became best known for her role in the 1974 horror film The House on Skull Mountain . " Sisters at Heart " was Montgomery 's favorite episode of the series . Reflecting on the episode in 1989 , she said , " Yeah , this is what I want Bewitched to be all about . " Sony Pictures Home Entertainment eventually released the episode on a VHS collection called A Bewitched Christmas 2 . On June 16 , 2005 , the episode was screened in Salem as the first entry in " The Art and Politics of Elizabeth Montgomery " , a film @-@ watching and discussion group that met at First Church in Salem . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Sisters at Heart " received the Governors Award at the 23rd Primetime Emmy Awards ceremony in 1971 . Montgomery 's biographer Herbie Pilato wrote that the theme of overcoming prejudice is central to Bewitched because of the prominence of the marriage between a witch and a mortal , and that " no episode of the series more clearly represented this cry against prejudice than the holiday story , ' Sisters at Heart . ' " A reviewer from the Australian newspaper the Daily Liberal wrote that " Sisters at Heart " is " very thoughtful " and argued that it is the sole episode of the series that is not simply a " lightweight offering " reflective of " the United States ' post @-@ war society of new consumerism and advertising . " When the seventh season of Bewitched was released on DVD in 2009 , DVD Talk reviewer Paul Mavis wrote that " Sisters at Heart " has a more overt message than any other episode of the season . He praised the actors ' performances in the episode and wrote that , because of the episode 's obvious @-@ yet @-@ effective critique of racism , " what 's highly ironic about Sisters at Heart today is that it would most likely be dubbed politically incorrect and ' insensitive ' by some because the cast wear blackface at one point . " 
 Hal Erickson of AllMovie called the episode " refreshingly free of the patronization which usually attended ' racially sensitive ' TV episodes of the period . " In his book about Bewitched , critic Walter Metz writes that " Sisters at Heart " exemplifies the liberalism endorsed by the series , which he argues is excessively sentimental and simplistic . He praises Asher for his " skillful understanding of film aesthetics " , calling particular attention to Asher 's choice of camera angles in the scene in which Mr. Brockway first meets Lisa . Metz argues that the Stephens ' foyer is an important location in the series , and that this importance is exemplified in the episode both by the scene of Mr. Brockway 's first encounter with Lisa as well as in the epilogue when Mr. Brockway revisits the house and apologizes for his prior racism . Metz criticizes Mr. Brockway 's " magically found soft @-@ heartedness " as a " paternalistic approach to liberal racial tolerance [ that ] implies that only white patriarchs have the cultural authority to declare that racism is wrong . " Metz further argues that the episode problematically figures Samantha as the protector and provider for black people , a role that he says Samantha also fills in " Samantha at the Keyboard " , another Bewitched episode . 
 = Rock Bottom ( SpongeBob SquarePants ) = 
 " Rock Bottom " is the 17th episode of the first season of the American animated television series SpongeBob SquarePants . It originally was produced in 1999 and aired on Nickelodeon in the United States on March 15 , 2000 . The series follows the adventures of the title character in the underwater city of Bikini Bottom . In the episode , SpongeBob becomes stranded in a <unk> zone called Rock Bottom . 
 The episode was written by Paul Tibbitt , Ennio Torresan , Jr . , and David Fain , and was directed by Tom Yasumi . Upon release , " Rock Bottom " was viewed by two million households and received positive reviews from media critics . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
