 The Beatles achieved mainstream success in the UK during the beginning of 1963 . Lennon was on tour when his first son , Julian , was born in April . During their Royal Variety Show performance , attended by the Queen Mother and other British royalty , Lennon poked fun at his audience : " For our next song , I 'd like to ask for your help . For the people in the cheaper seats , clap your hands ... and the rest of you , if you 'll just rattle your jewellery . " After a year of Beatlemania in the UK , the group 's historic February 1964 US debut appearance on The Ed Sullivan Show marked their breakthrough to international stardom . A two @-@ year period of constant touring , moviemaking , and songwriting followed , during which Lennon wrote two books , In His Own Write and A Spaniard in the Works . The Beatles received recognition from the British Establishment when they were appointed Members of the Order of the British Empire ( MBE ) in the 1965 Queen 's Birthday Honours . 
 Lennon grew concerned that fans attending Beatles concerts were unable to hear the music above the screaming of fans , and that the band 's musicianship was beginning to suffer as a result . Lennon 's " Help ! " expressed his own feelings in 1965 : " I meant it ... It was me singing ' help ' " . He had put on weight ( he would later refer to this as his " Fat Elvis " period ) , and felt he was subconsciously seeking change . In March that year he was unknowingly introduced to LSD when a dentist , hosting a dinner party attended by Lennon , Harrison and their wives , spiked the guests ' coffee with the drug . When they wanted to leave , their host revealed what they had taken , and strongly advised them not to leave the house because of the likely effects . Later , in an elevator at a nightclub , they all believed it was on fire : " We were all screaming ... hot and hysterical . " In March 1966 , during an interview with Evening Standard reporter Maureen Cleave , Lennon remarked , " Christianity will go . It will vanish and shrink ... We 're more popular than Jesus now — I don 't know which will go first , rock and roll or Christianity . " The comment went virtually unnoticed in England but caused great offence in the US when quoted by a magazine there five months later . The furore that followed — burning of Beatles records , Ku Klux Klan activity and threats against Lennon — contributed to the band 's decision to stop touring . 
 = = = = 1967 – 70 : Studio years , break @-@ up and solo work = = = = 
 Deprived of the routine of live performances after their final commercial concert on 29 August 1966 , Lennon felt lost and considered leaving the band . Since his involuntary introduction to LSD , he had made increasing use of the drug , and was almost constantly under its influence for much of 1967 . According to biographer Ian MacDonald , Lennon 's continuous experience with LSD during the year brought him " close to erasing his identity " . 1967 saw the release of " Strawberry Fields Forever " , hailed by Time magazine for its " astonishing inventiveness " , and the group 's landmark album Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band , which revealed Lennon 's lyrics contrasting strongly with the simple love songs of the Lennon – McCartney 's early years . 
 In August , after having been introduced to the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi , the group attended a weekend of personal instruction at his Transcendental Meditation seminar in Bangor , Wales , and were informed of Epstein 's death during the seminar . " I knew we were in trouble then " , Lennon said later . " I didn 't have any misconceptions about our ability to do anything other than play music , and I was scared " . Led primarily by Harrison and Lennon 's interest in Eastern religion , the Beatles later travelled to Maharishi 's ashram in India for further guidance . While there , they composed most of the songs for The Beatles and Abbey Road . 
 The anti @-@ war , black comedy How I Won the War , featuring Lennon 's only appearance in a non – Beatles full @-@ length film , was shown in cinemas in October 1967 . McCartney organised the group 's first post @-@ Epstein project , the self @-@ written , <unk> and -directed television film Magical Mystery Tour , released in December that year . While the film itself proved to be their first critical flop , its soundtrack release , featuring Lennon 's acclaimed , Lewis Carroll @-@ inspired " I Am the Walrus " , was a success . With Epstein gone , the band members became increasingly involved in business activities , and in February 1968 they formed Apple Corps , a multimedia corporation composed of Apple Records and several other subsidiary companies . Lennon described the venture as an attempt to achieve , " artistic freedom within a business structure " , but his increased drug experimentation and growing preoccupation with Yoko Ono , and McCartney 's own marriage plans , left Apple in need of professional management . Lennon asked Lord Beeching to take on the role , but he declined , advising Lennon to go back to making records . Lennon approached Allen Klein , who had managed The Rolling Stones and other bands during the British Invasion . Klein was appointed as Apple 's chief executive by Lennon , Harrison and Starr , but McCartney never signed the management contract . 
 At the end of 1968 , Lennon was featured in the film The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus ( not released until 1996 ) in the role of a Dirty Mac band member . The supergroup , composed of Lennon , Eric Clapton , Keith Richards and Mitch Mitchell , also backed a vocal performance by Ono in the film . Lennon and Ono were married on 20 March 1969 , and soon released a series of 14 lithographs called " Bag One " depicting scenes from their honeymoon , eight of which were deemed indecent and most of which were banned and confiscated . Lennon 's creative focus continued to move beyond the Beatles and between 1968 and 1969 he and Ono recorded three albums of experimental music together : Unfinished Music No.1 : Two Virgins ( known more for its cover than for its music ) , Unfinished Music No.2 : Life with the Lions and Wedding Album . In 1969 , they formed the Plastic Ono Band , releasing Live Peace in Toronto 1969 . Between 1969 and 1970 , Lennon released the singles " Give Peace a Chance " ( widely adopted as an anti @-@ Vietnam @-@ War anthem in 1969 ) , " Cold Turkey " ( documenting his withdrawal symptoms after he became addicted to heroin ) and " Instant Karma ! " In protest at Britain 's involvement in the Nigerian Civil War , its support of America in the Vietnam war and ( perhaps jokingly ) against " Cold Turkey " slipping down the charts , Lennon returned his MBE medal to the Queen , though this had no effect on his MBE status , which could not be renounced . 
 Lennon left the Beatles in September 1969 , and agreed not to inform the media while the group renegotiated their recording contract , but he was outraged that McCartney publicised his own departure on releasing his debut solo album in April 1970 . Lennon 's reaction was , " Jesus Christ ! He gets all the credit for it ! " He later wrote , " I started the band . I disbanded it . It 's as simple as that . " In later interviews with Rolling Stone magazine , he revealed his bitterness towards McCartney , saying , " I was a fool not to do what Paul did , which was use it to sell a record . " He spoke too of the hostility he perceived the other members had towards Ono , and of how he , Harrison , and Starr " got fed up with being sidemen for Paul ... After Brian Epstein died we collapsed . Paul took over and supposedly led us . But what is leading us when we went round in circles ? " 
 = = = 1970 – 80 : Solo career = = = 
 = = = = 1970 – 72 : Initial solo success and activism = = = = 
 In 1970 , Lennon and Ono went through primal therapy with Arthur Janov in Los Angeles , California . Designed to release emotional pain from early childhood , the therapy entailed two half @-@ days a week with Janov for four months ; he had wanted to treat the couple for longer , but they felt no need to continue and returned to London . Lennon 's emotional debut solo album , John Lennon / Plastic Ono Band ( 1970 ) , was received with high praise . Critic Greil Marcus remarked , " John 's singing in the last verse of ' God ' may be the finest in all of rock . " The album featured the songs " Mother " , in which Lennon confronted his feelings of childhood rejection , and the Dylanesque " Working Class Hero " , a bitter attack against the bourgeois social system which , due to the lyric " you 're still fucking peasants " , fell foul of broadcasters . The same year , Tariq Ali 's revolutionary political views , expressed when he interviewed Lennon , inspired the singer to write " Power to the People " . Lennon also became involved with Ali during a protest against Oz magazine 's prosecution for alleged obscenity . Lennon denounced the proceedings as " disgusting fascism " , and he and Ono ( as Elastic Oz Band ) released the single " God Save Us / Do the Oz " and joined marches in support of the magazine . 
 With Lennon 's next album , Imagine ( 1971 ) , critical response was more guarded . Rolling Stone reported that " it contains a substantial portion of good music " but warned of the possibility that " his posturings will soon seem not merely dull but irrelevant " . The album 's title track would become an anthem for anti @-@ war movements , while another , " How Do You Sleep ? " , was a musical attack on McCartney in response to lyrics from Ram that Lennon felt , and McCartney later confirmed , were directed at him and Ono . However , Lennon softened his stance in the mid @-@ 1970s and said he had written " How Do You Sleep ? " about himself . He said in 1980 : " I used my resentment against Paul … to create a song … not a terrible vicious horrible vendetta [ … ] I used my resentment and withdrawing from Paul and the Beatles , and the relationship with Paul , to write ' How Do You Sleep ' . I don 't really go ' round with those thoughts in my head all the time . " 
 Lennon and Ono moved to New York in August 1971 , and in December released " Happy Xmas ( War Is Over ) " . The new year saw the Nixon administration take what it called a " strategic counter @-@ measure " against Lennon 's anti @-@ war and anti @-@ Nixon propaganda , embarking on what would be a four @-@ year attempt to deport him . In 1972 , Lennon and Ono attended a post @-@ election wake held in the New York home of activist Jerry Rubin after McGovern lost to Nixon . <unk> in a continuing legal battle with the immigration authorities , Lennon was denied permanent residency in the US ( which wouldn 't be resolved until 1976 ) . Depressed , Lennon got intoxicated and had sex with a female guest , leaving Ono embarrassed . Her song " Death of Samantha " was inspired by the incident . 
 Recorded as a collaboration with Ono and with backing from the New York band Elephant 's Memory , Some Time in New York City was released in 1972 . Containing songs about women 's rights , race relations , Britain 's role in Northern Ireland and Lennon 's problems obtaining a green card , the album was poorly received — unlistenable , according to one critic . " Woman Is the Nigger of the World " , released as a US single from the album the same year , was televised on 11 May , on The Dick Cavett Show . Many radio stations refused to broadcast the song because of the word " nigger " . Lennon and Ono gave two benefit concerts with Elephant 's Memory and guests in New York in aid of patients at the Willowbrook State School mental facility . Staged at Madison Square Garden on 30 August 1972 , they were his last full @-@ length concert appearances . 
 = = = = 1973 – 75 : " Lost weekend " = = = = 
 While Lennon was recording Mind Games ( 1973 ) , he and Ono decided to separate . The ensuing 18 @-@ month period apart , which he later called his " lost weekend " , was spent in Los Angeles and New York in the company of May Pang . Mind Games , credited to the " Plastic <unk> Band " , was released in November 1973 . Lennon also contributed " I 'm the Greatest " to Starr 's album Ringo ( 1973 ) , released the same month ( an alternate take , from the same 1973 Ringo sessions , with Lennon providing a guide vocal , appears on John Lennon Anthology ) . 
 In early 1974 , Lennon was drinking heavily and his alcohol @-@ fuelled antics with Harry Nilsson made headlines . Two widely publicised incidents occurred at The Troubadour club in March , the first when Lennon placed a menstrual pad on his forehead and scuffled with a waitress , and the second , two weeks later , when Lennon and Nilsson were ejected from the same club after heckling the Smothers Brothers . Lennon decided to produce Nilsson 's album Pussy Cats and Pang rented a Los Angeles beach house for all the musicians but after a month of further debauchery , with the recording sessions in chaos , Lennon moved to New York with Pang to finish work on the album . In April , Lennon had produced the Mick Jagger song " Too Many Cooks ( Spoil the Soup ) " which was , for contractual reasons , to remain unreleased for more than 30 years . Pang supplied the recording for its eventual inclusion on The Very Best of Mick Jagger ( 2007 ) . 
 Settled back in New York , Lennon recorded the album Walls and Bridges . Released in October 1974 , it included " Whatever Gets You thru the Night " , which featured Elton John on backing vocals and piano , and became Lennon 's only single as a solo artist to top the US Billboard Hot 100 chart during his <unk> A second single from the album , " # 9 Dream " , followed before the end of the year . Starr 's Goodnight Vienna ( 1974 ) again saw assistance from Lennon , who wrote the title track and played piano . On 28 November , Lennon made a surprise guest appearance at Elton John 's Thanksgiving concert at Madison Square Garden , in fulfilment of his promise to join the singer in a live show if " Whatever Gets You thru the Night " — a song whose commercial potential Lennon had doubted — reached number one . Lennon performed the song along with " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " and " I Saw Her Standing There " , which he introduced as " a song by an old estranged fiancée of mine called Paul " . 
 Lennon co @-@ wrote " Fame " , David Bowie 's first US number one , and provided guitar and backing vocals for the January 1975 recording . The same month , Elton John topped the charts with his cover of " Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds " , featuring Lennon on guitar and back @-@ up vocals ( Lennon is credited on the single under the moniker of " Dr. Winston O <unk> " ) . He and Ono were reunited shortly afterwards . Lennon released Rock ' n ' Roll ( 1975 ) , an album of cover songs , in February . " Stand by Me " , taken from the album and a US and UK hit , became his last single for five years . He made what would be his final stage appearance in the ATV special A Salute to Lew Grade , recorded on 18 April and televised in June . Playing acoustic guitar and backed by an eight @-@ piece band , Lennon performed two songs from Rock ' n ' Roll ( " Stand by Me " , which was not broadcast , and " Slippin ' and Slidin ' " ) followed by " Imagine " . The band , known as Etc . , wore masks behind their heads , a dig by Lennon who thought Grade was two @-@ faced . 
 = = = = 1975 – 80 : Retirement and return = = = = 
 With the birth of his second son Sean on 9 October 1975 , Lennon took on the role of househusband , beginning what would be a five @-@ year hiatus from the music industry during which he gave all his attention to his family . Within the month , he fulfilled his contractual obligation to EMI / Capitol for one more album by releasing Shaved Fish , a compilation album of previously recorded tracks . He devoted himself to Sean , rising at 6 am daily to plan and prepare his meals and to spend time with him . He wrote " Cookin ' ( In the Kitchen of Love ) " for Starr 's Ringo 's Rotogravure ( 1976 ) , performing on the track in June in what would be his last recording session until 1980 . He formally announced his break from music in Tokyo in 1977 , saying , " we have basically decided , without any great decision , to be with our baby as much as we can until we feel we can take time off to indulge ourselves in creating things outside of the family . " During his career break he created several series of drawings , and drafted a book containing a mix of autobiographical material and what he termed " mad stuff " , all of which would be published posthumously . 
 Lennon emerged from retirement in October 1980 with the single " ( Just Like ) Starting Over " , followed the next month by the album Double Fantasy , which contained songs written during a journey to Bermuda on a 43 @-@ foot sailing boat the previous June , that reflected his fulfilment in his new @-@ found stable family life . Sufficient additional material was recorded for a planned follow @-@ up album Milk and Honey ( released posthumously in 1984 ) . Released jointly by Lennon and Ono , Double Fantasy was not well received , drawing comments such as Melody Maker 's " indulgent sterility ... a <unk> yawn " . 
 = = = 8 December 1980 : Death = = = 
 At around 10 : 50 p.m. ( EST ) on 8 December 1980 , as Lennon and Ono returned to their New York apartment in the Dakota , Mark David Chapman shot Lennon in the back four times at the entrance to the building . Lennon was taken to the emergency room of nearby Roosevelt Hospital and was pronounced dead on arrival at 11 : 00 p.m. ( EST ) . Earlier that evening , Lennon had autographed a copy of Double Fantasy for Chapman . 
 Ono issued a statement the next day , saying " There is no funeral for John " , ending it with the words , " John loved and prayed for the human race . Please pray the same for him . " His body was cremated at Ferncliff Cemetery in Hartsdale , New York . Ono scattered his ashes in New York 's Central Park , where the Strawberry Fields memorial was later created . Chapman pleaded guilty to second @-@ degree murder and was sentenced to 20 @-@ years @-@ to @-@ life . As of 2016 , he remains in prison , having been denied parole eight times . 
 = = Personal relationships = = 
 = = = Cynthia Lennon = = = 
 Lennon and Cynthia Powell ( 1939 – 2015 ) met in 1957 as fellow students at the Liverpool College of Art . Although being scared of Lennon 's attitude and appearance , she heard that he was obsessed with French actress Brigitte Bardot , so she dyed her hair blonde . Lennon asked her out , but when she said that she was engaged , he screamed out , " I didn 't ask you to fuckin ' marry me , did I ? " She often accompanied him to Quarrymen gigs and travelled to Hamburg with McCartney 's girlfriend at the time to visit him . Lennon , jealous by nature , eventually grew possessive and often terrified Powell with his anger and physical violence . Lennon later said that until he met Ono , he had never questioned his chauvinistic attitude to women . The Beatles song " Getting Better " , he said , told his own story , " I used to be cruel to my woman , and physically — any woman . I was a hitter . I couldn 't express myself and I hit . I fought men and I hit women . That is why I am always on about peace " . 
 Recalling his reaction in July 1962 on learning that Cynthia was pregnant , Lennon said , " There 's only one thing for it Cyn . We 'll have to get married . " The couple were married on 23 August at the Mount Pleasant Register Office in Liverpool . His marriage began just as Beatlemania took hold across the UK . He performed on the evening of his wedding day , and would continue to do so almost daily from then on . Epstein , fearing that fans would be alienated by the idea of a married Beatle , asked the Lennons to keep their marriage secret . Julian was born on 8 April 1963 ; Lennon was on tour at the time and did not see his son until three days later . 
 Cynthia attributed the start of the marriage breakdown to LSD , and as a result , she felt that he slowly lost interest in her . When the group travelled by train to Bangor , Wales , in 1967 , for the Maharishi Yogi 's Transcendental Meditation seminar , a policeman did not recognise her and stopped her from boarding . She later recalled how the incident seemed to symbolise the ending of their marriage . After arriving home at Kenwood , and finding Lennon with Ono , Cynthia left the house to stay with friends . Alexis Mardas later claimed to have slept with her that night , and a few weeks later he informed her that Lennon was seeking a divorce and custody of Julian on grounds of her adultery with him . After negotiations , Lennon capitulated and agreed to her divorcing him on the same grounds . The case was settled out of court in November 1968 , with Lennon giving her £ 100 @,@ 000 ( $ 240 @,@ 000 in US dollars at the time ) , a small annual payment and custody of Julian . 
 = = = Brian Epstein = = = 
 The Beatles were performing at Liverpool 's Cavern Club in November 1961 , when they were introduced to Epstein after a midday concert . Epstein was homosexual . According to biographer Philip Norman , one of his reasons for wanting to manage the group was that he was physically attracted to Lennon . Almost as soon as Julian was born , Lennon went on holiday to Spain with Epstein , leading to speculation about their relationship . Questioned about it later , Lennon said , " Well , it was almost a love affair , but not quite . It was never consummated . But it was a pretty intense relationship . It was my first experience with a homosexual that I was conscious was homosexual . We used to sit in a café in Torremolinos looking at all the boys and I 'd say , ' Do you like that one ? Do you like this one ? ' I was rather enjoying the experience , thinking like a writer all the time : I am experiencing this . " Soon after their return from Spain , at McCartney 's twenty @-@ first birthday party in June 1963 , Lennon physically attacked Cavern Club MC Bob Wooler for saying " How was your honeymoon , John ? " The MC , known for his wordplay and affectionate but cutting remarks , was making a joke , but ten months had passed since Lennon 's marriage , and the honeymoon , deferred , was still two months in the future . To Lennon , who was intoxicated with alcohol at the time , the matter was simple : " He called me a queer so I battered his bloody ribs in " . 
 Lennon delighted in mocking Epstein for his homosexuality and for the fact that he was Jewish . When Epstein invited suggestions for the title of his autobiography , Lennon offered Queer Jew ; on learning of the eventual title , A Cellarful of Noise , he parodied , " More like A Cellarful of Boys " . He demanded of a visitor to Epstein 's flat , " Have you come to blackmail him ? If not , you 're the only bugger in London who hasn 't . " During the recording of " Baby , You 're a Rich Man " , he sang altered choruses of " Baby , you 're a rich fag Jew " . 
 = = = Julian Lennon = = = 
 Lennon 's first son , Julian , was born as his commitments with the Beatles intensified at the height of Beatlemania during his marriage to Cynthia . Lennon was touring with the Beatles when Julian was born on 8 April 1963 . Julian 's birth , like his mother Cynthia 's marriage to Lennon , was kept secret because Epstein was convinced public knowledge of such things would threaten the Beatles ' commercial success . Julian recalls how some four years later , as a small child in Weybridge , " I was trundled home from school and came walking up with one of my watercolour paintings . It was just a bunch of stars and this blonde girl I knew at school . And Dad said , ' What 's this ? ' I said , ' It 's Lucy in the sky with diamonds . ' " Lennon used it as the title of a Beatles song , and though it was later reported to have been derived from the initials LSD , Lennon insisted , " It 's not an acid song . " McCartney corroborated Lennon 's explanation that Julian innocently came up with the name . Lennon was distant from Julian , who felt closer to McCartney than to his father . During a car journey to visit Cynthia and Julian during Lennon 's divorce , McCartney composed a song , " Hey Jules " , to comfort him . It would evolve into the Beatles song " Hey Jude " . Lennon later said , " That 's his best song . It started off as a song about my son Julian ... he turned it into ' Hey Jude ' . I always thought it was about me and Yoko but he said it wasn 't . " 
 Lennon 's relationship with Julian was already strained , and after Lennon and Ono 's 1971 move to New York , Julian would not see his father again until 1973 . With Pang 's encouragement , it was arranged for him ( and his mother ) to visit Lennon in Los Angeles , where they went to Disneyland . Julian started to see his father regularly , and Lennon gave him a drumming part on a Walls and Bridges track . He bought Julian a Gibson Les Paul guitar and other instruments , and encouraged his interest in music by demonstrating guitar chord techniques . Julian recalls that he and his father " got on a great deal better " during the time he spent in New York : " We had a lot of fun , laughed a lot and had a great time in general . " 
 In a Playboy interview with David Sheff shortly before his death , Lennon said , " Sean was a planned child , and therein lies the difference . I don 't love Julian any less as a child . He 's still my son , whether he came from a bottle of whiskey or because they didn 't have pills in those days . He 's here , he belongs to me , and he always will . " He said he was trying to re @-@ establish a connection with the then 17 @-@ year @-@ old , and confidently predicted , " Julian and I will have a relationship in the future . " After his death it was revealed that he had left Julian very little in his will . 
 = = = Yoko Ono = = = 
 Two versions exist of how Lennon met Ono . According to the first , told by the Lennons , on 9 November 1966 Lennon went to the Indica Gallery in London , where Ono was preparing her conceptual art exhibit , and they were introduced by gallery owner John Dunbar . Lennon was intrigued by Ono 's " Hammer A Nail " : patrons hammered a nail into a wooden board , creating the art piece . Although the exhibition had not yet begun , Lennon wanted to hammer a nail into the clean board , but Ono stopped him . Dunbar asked her , " Don 't you know who this is ? He 's a millionaire ! He might buy it . " Ono had supposedly not heard of the Beatles , but relented on condition that Lennon pay her five shillings , to which Lennon replied , " I 'll give you an imaginary five shillings and hammer an imaginary nail in . " The second version , told by McCartney , is that in late 1965 , Ono was in London compiling original musical scores for a book John Cage was working on , Notations , but McCartney declined to give her any of his own manuscripts for the book , suggesting that Lennon might oblige . When asked , Lennon gave Ono the original handwritten lyrics to " The Word " . 
 Ono began visiting and telephoning Lennon 's home and , when his wife asked for an explanation , Lennon explained that Ono was only trying to obtain money for her " avant @-@ garde bullshit " . In May 1968 , while his wife was on holiday in Greece , Lennon invited Ono to visit . They spent the night recording what would become the Two Virgins album , after which , he said , they " made love at dawn . " When Lennon 's wife returned home she found Ono wearing her bathrobe and drinking tea with Lennon who simply said , " Oh , hi . " Ono became pregnant in 1968 and miscarried a male child they named John Ono Lennon II on 21 November 1968 , a few weeks after Lennon 's divorce from Cynthia was granted . 
 During Lennon 's last two years in the Beatles , he and Ono began public protests against the Vietnam War . They were married in Gibraltar on 20 March 1969 , and spent their honeymoon at the Hilton Amsterdam campaigning with a week @-@ long Bed @-@ In for Peace . They planned another Bed @-@ In in the United States , but were denied entry , so held one instead at the Queen Elizabeth Hotel in Montreal , where they recorded " Give Peace a Chance " . They often combined advocacy with performance art , as in their " <unk> " , first introduced during a Vienna press conference . Lennon detailed this period in the Beatles song " The Ballad of John and Yoko " . Lennon changed his name by deed poll on 22 April 1969 , adding " Ono " as a middle name . The brief ceremony took place on the roof of the Apple Corps building , made famous three months earlier by the Beatles ' Let It Be rooftop concert . Although he used the name John Ono Lennon thereafter , official documents referred to him as John Winston Ono Lennon , since he was not permitted to revoke a name given at birth . The couple settled at Tittenhurst Park at Sunninghill in Berkshire . After Ono was injured in a car accident , Lennon arranged for a king @-@ sized bed to be brought to the recording studio as he worked on the Beatles ' last album , Abbey Road . To escape the acrimony of the band 's break @-@ up , Ono suggested they move permanently to New York , which they did on 31 August 1971 . 
 They first lived in The St. Regis Hotel on 5th Avenue , East 55th Street , then moved to a street @-@ level flat at 105 Bank Street , Greenwich Village , on 16 October 1971 . After a robbery , they relocated to the more secure Dakota at 1 West 72nd Street , in 1973 . 
 = = = May Pang = = = 
 ABKCO Industries , formed in 1968 by Allen Klein as an umbrella company to ABKCO Records , recruited May Pang as a receptionist in 1969 . Through involvement in a project with ABKCO , Lennon and Ono met her the following year . She became their personal assistant . After she had been working with the couple for three years , Ono confided that she and Lennon were becoming estranged from one another . She went on to suggest that Pang should begin a physical relationship with Lennon , telling her , " He likes you a lot . " Pang , 22 , astounded by Ono 's proposition , eventually agreed to become Lennon 's companion . The pair soon moved to California , beginning an 18 @-@ month period he later called his " lost weekend " . In Los Angeles , Pang encouraged Lennon to develop regular contact with Julian , whom he had not seen for two years . He also rekindled friendships with Starr , McCartney , Beatles roadie Mal Evans , and Harry Nilsson . Whilst drinking with Nilsson , after misunderstanding something Pang said , Lennon attempted to strangle her , relenting only when physically restrained by Nilsson . 
 Upon returning to New York , they prepared a spare room in their newly rented apartment for Julian to visit . Lennon , hitherto inhibited by Ono in this regard , began to reestablish contact with other relatives and friends . By December he and Pang were considering a house purchase , and he was refusing to accept Ono 's telephone calls . In January 1975 , he agreed to meet Ono who claimed to have found a cure for smoking . But after the meeting he failed to return home or call Pang . When Pang telephoned the next day , Ono told her Lennon was unavailable , being exhausted after a hypnotherapy session . Two days later , Lennon reappeared at a joint dental appointment , stupefied and confused to such an extent that Pang believed he had been brainwashed . He told her his separation from Ono was now over , though Ono would allow him to continue seeing her as his mistress . 
 = = = Sean Lennon = = = 
 When Lennon and Ono were reunited , she became pregnant , but having previously suffered three miscarriages in her attempt to have a child with Lennon , she said she wanted an abortion . She agreed to allow the pregnancy to continue on condition that Lennon adopt the role of househusband ; this he agreed to do . Sean was born on 9 October 1975 , Lennon 's 35th birthday , delivered by Caesarean section . Lennon 's subsequent career break would span five years . He had a photographer take pictures of Sean every day of his first year , and created numerous drawings for him , posthumously published as Real Love : The Drawings for Sean . Lennon later proudly declared , " He didn 't come out of my belly but , by God , I made his bones , because I 've attended to every meal , and to how he sleeps , and to the fact that he swims like a fish . " 
 = = = Former Beatles = = = 
 Although his friendship with Starr remained consistently friendly during the years following the Beatles ' break @-@ up in 1970 , Lennon 's relationships with McCartney and Harrison varied . He was close to Harrison initially , but the two drifted apart after Lennon moved to America . When Harrison was in New York for his December 1974 Dark Horse tour , Lennon agreed to join him on stage , but failed to appear after an argument over Lennon 's refusal to sign an agreement that would finally dissolve the Beatles ' legal partnership . ( Lennon eventually signed the papers while holidaying in Florida with Pang and Julian . ) Harrison offended Lennon in 1980 , when he published an autobiography that made little mention of him . Lennon told Playboy , " I was hurt by it . By glaring omission ... my influence on his life is absolutely <unk> ... he remembers every two @-@ bit sax player or guitarist he met in subsequent years . I 'm not in the book . " 
 Lennon 's most intense feelings were reserved for McCartney . In addition to attacking him through the lyrics of " How Do You Sleep ? " , Lennon argued with him through the press for three years after the group split . The two later began to reestablish something of the close friendship they had once known , and in 1974 , they even played music together again before eventually growing apart once more . Lennon said that during McCartney 's final visit , in April 1976 , they watched the episode of Saturday Night Live in which Lorne Michaels made a $ 3 @,@ 000 cash offer to get the Beatles to reunite on the show . The pair considered going to the studio to make a joke appearance , attempting to claim their share of the money , but were too tired . Lennon summarised his feelings towards McCartney in an interview three days before his death : " Throughout my career , I 've selected to work with ... only two people : Paul McCartney and Yoko Ono ... That ain 't bad picking . " 
 Along with his estrangement from McCartney , Lennon always felt a musical competitiveness with him and kept an ear on his music . During his five @-@ year career break he was content to sit back so long as McCartney was producing what Lennon saw as mediocre material . When McCartney released " Coming Up " , in 1980 , the year Lennon returned to the studio and the last year of his life , he took notice . " It 's driving me crackers ! " he jokingly complained , because he could not get the tune out of his head . Asked the same year whether the group were dreaded enemies or the best of friends , he replied that they were neither , and that he had not seen any of them in a long time . But he also said , " I still love those guys . The Beatles are over , but John , Paul , George and Ringo go on . " 
 = = Political activism = = 
 Lennon and Ono used their honeymoon as what they termed a " Bed @-@ In for Peace " at the Amsterdam Hilton Hotel ; the March 1969 event attracted worldwide media ridicule . At a second Bed @-@ In three months later at the Queen Elizabeth Hotel in Montreal Lennon wrote and recorded " Give Peace a Chance " . Released as a single , it was quickly taken up as an anti @-@ war anthem and sung by a quarter of a million demonstrators against the Vietnam War in Washington , DC , on 15 November , the second Vietnam Moratorium Day . In December , they paid for billboards in 10 cities around the world which declared , in the national language , " War Is Over ! If You Want It " . 
 Later that year , Lennon and Ono supported efforts by the family of James Hanratty , hanged for murder in 1962 , to prove his innocence . Those who had condemned Hanratty were , according to Lennon , " the same people who are running guns to South Africa and killing blacks in the streets . ... The same bastards are in control , the same people are running everything , it 's the whole bullshit bourgeois scene . " In London , Lennon and Ono staged a " Britain Murdered Hanratty " banner march and a " Silent Protest For James Hanratty " , and produced a 40 @-@ minute documentary on the case . At an appeal hearing years later , Hanratty 's conviction was upheld after DNA evidence matched . His family continued to appeal in 2010 . 
 Lennon and Ono showed their solidarity with the Clydeside UCS workers ' work @-@ in of 1971 by sending a bouquet of red roses and a cheque for £ 5 @,@ 000 . On moving to New York City in August that year , they befriended two of the Chicago Seven , Yippie peace activists Jerry Rubin and Abbie Hoffman . Another political activist , John Sinclair , poet and co @-@ founder of the White Panther Party , was serving ten years in prison for selling two joints of marijuana after previous convictions for possession of the drug . In December 1971 at Ann Arbor , Michigan , 15 @,@ 000 people attended the " John Sinclair Freedom Rally " , a protest and benefit concert with contributions from Lennon , Stevie Wonder , Bob Seger , Bobby Seale of the Black Panther Party , and others . Lennon and Ono , backed by David Peel and Rubin , performed an acoustic set of four songs from their forthcoming Some Time in New York City album including " John Sinclair " , whose lyrics called for his release . The day before the rally , the Michigan Senate passed a bill that significantly reduced the penalties for possession of marijuana and four days later Sinclair was released on an appeal bond . The performance was recorded and two of the tracks later appeared on John Lennon Anthology ( 1998 ) . 
 Following the Bloody Sunday incident in Northern Ireland in 1972 , in which 14 unarmed civil rights protesters were shot dead by the British Army , Lennon said that given the choice between the army and the IRA ( who were not involved in the incident ) he would side with the latter . Lennon and Ono wrote two songs protesting British presence and actions in Ireland for their Some Time in New York City album : " Luck of the Irish " and " Sunday Bloody Sunday " . In 2000 , David Shayler , a former member of Britain 's domestic security service MI5 , suggested that Lennon had given money to the IRA , though this was swiftly denied by Ono . Biographer Bill Harry records that following Bloody Sunday , Lennon and Ono financially supported the production of the film The Irish Tapes , a political documentary with a Republican slant . 
 According to FBI surveillance reports ( and confirmed by Tariq Ali in 2006 ) Lennon was sympathetic to the International Marxist Group , a Trotskyist group formed in Britain in 1968 . However , the FBI considered Lennon to have limited effectiveness as a revolutionary since he was " constantly under the influence of narcotics " . 
 In 1973 , Lennon contributed a limerick called " Why Make It Sad To Be Gay ? " to Len Richmond 's The Gay Liberation Book . 
 Lennon 's last act of political activism was a statement in support of the striking minority sanitation workers in San Francisco on 5 December 1980 . He and Ono planned to join the workers ' protest on 14 December . By this time , however , Lennon had also quietly renounced the counterculture views which he had helped promote during the 1960s and 1970s and became more aligned with conservatism , though whether he had actually aligned to a more conservative world view is disputed . 
 = = = Deportation attempt = = = 
 Following the impact of " Give Peace a Chance " and " Happy Xmas ( War Is Over ) " , both strongly associated with the anti – Vietnam War movement , the Nixon administration , hearing rumours of Lennon 's involvement in a concert to be held in San Diego at the same time as the Republican National Convention , tried to have him deported . Nixon believed that Lennon 's anti @-@ war activities could cost him his re @-@ election ; Republican Senator Strom Thurmond suggested in a February 1972 memo that " deportation would be a strategic counter @-@ measure " against Lennon . The next month the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service ( INS ) began deportation proceedings , arguing that his 1968 misdemeanor conviction for cannabis possession in London had made him ineligible for admission to the United States . Lennon spent the next three and a half years in and out of deportation hearings until 8 October 1975 , when a court of appeals barred the deportation attempt , stating " ... the courts will not condone selective deportation based upon secret political grounds . " While the legal battle continued , Lennon attended rallies and made television appearances . Lennon and Ono co @-@ hosted The Mike Douglas Show for a week in February 1972 , introducing guests such as Jerry Rubin and Bobby Seale to mid @-@ America . In 1972 , Bob Dylan wrote a letter to the INS defending Lennon , stating : 
 John and Yoko add a great voice and drive to the country 's so @-@ called art institution . They inspire and transcend and stimulate and by doing so , only help others to see pure light and in doing that , put an end to this dull taste of petty commercialism which is being passed off as Artist Art by the overpowering mass media . Hurray for John and Yoko . Let them stay and live here and breathe . The country 's got plenty of room and space . Let John and Yoko stay ! 
 On 23 March 1973 , Lennon was ordered to leave the US within 60 days . Ono , meanwhile , was granted permanent residence . In response , Lennon and Ono held a press conference on 1 April 1973 at the New York City Bar Association , where they announced the formation of the state of Nutopia ; a place with " no land , no boundaries , no passports , only people " . Waving the white flag of Nutopia ( two handkerchiefs ) , they asked for political asylum in the US . The press conference was filmed , and would later appear in the 2006 documentary The US vs. John Lennon . Lennon 's Mind Games ( 1973 ) included the track " Nutopian International Anthem " , which comprised three seconds of silence . Soon after the press conference , Nixon 's involvement in a political scandal came to light , and in June the Watergate hearings began in Washington , DC . They led to the president 's resignation 14 months later . Nixon 's successor , Gerald Ford , showed little interest in continuing the battle against Lennon , and the deportation order was overturned in 1975 . The following year , his US immigration status finally resolved , Lennon received his " green card " certifying his permanent residency , and when Jimmy Carter was inaugurated as president in January 1977 , Lennon and Ono attended the Inaugural Ball . 
 = = = FBI surveillance and declassified documents = = = 
 After Lennon 's death , historian Jon Wiener filed a Freedom of Information Act request for FBI files documenting the Bureau 's role in the deportation attempt . The FBI admitted it had 281 pages of files on Lennon , but refused to release most of them on the grounds that they contained national security information . In 1983 , Wiener sued the FBI with the help of the American Civil Liberties Union of Southern California . It took 14 years of litigation to force the FBI to release the withheld pages . The ACLU , representing Wiener , won a favourable decision in their suit against the FBI in the Ninth Circuit in 1991 . The Justice Department appealed the decision to the Supreme Court in April 1992 , but the court declined to review the case . In 1997 , respecting President Bill Clinton 's newly instigated rule that documents should be withheld only if releasing them would involve " foreseeable harm " , the Justice Department settled most of the outstanding issues outside court by releasing all but 10 of the contested documents . 
 Wiener published the results of his 14 @-@ year campaign in January 2000 . Gimme Some Truth : The John Lennon FBI Files contained facsimiles of the documents , including " lengthy reports by confidential informants detailing the daily lives of anti @-@ war activists , memos to the White House , transcripts of TV shows on which Lennon appeared , and a proposal that Lennon be arrested by local police on drug charges " . The story is told in the documentary The US vs. John Lennon . The final 10 documents in Lennon 's FBI file , which reported on his ties with London anti @-@ war activists in 1971 and had been withheld as containing " national security information provided by a foreign government under an explicit promise of confidentiality " , were released in December 2006 . They contained no indication that the British government had regarded Lennon as a serious threat ; one example of the released material was a report that two prominent British leftists had hoped Lennon would finance a left @-@ wing bookshop and reading room . 
 = = Writing and art = = 
 Beatles biographer Bill Harry writes that Lennon began drawing and writing creatively at an early age with the encouragement of his uncle . He collected his stories , poetry , cartoons and caricatures in a Quarry Bank High School exercise book that he called the Daily Howl . The drawings were often of crippled people , and the writings satirical , and throughout the book was an abundance of wordplay . According to classmate Bill Turner , Lennon created the Daily Howl to amuse his best friend and later Quarrymen bandmate Pete Shotton , to whom he would show his work before he let anyone else see it . Turner said that Lennon " had an obsession for Wigan Pier . It kept cropping up " , and in Lennon 's story A Carrot in a Potato Mine , " the mine was at the end of Wigan Pier . " Turner described how one of Lennon 's cartoons depicted a bus stop sign annotated with the question , " Why ? " . Above was a flying pancake , and below , " a blind man wearing glasses leading along a blind dog — also wearing glasses " . 
 Lennon 's love of wordplay and nonsense with a twist found a wider audience when he was 24 . Harry writes that In His Own Write ( 1964 ) was published after " Some journalist who was hanging around the Beatles came to me and I ended up showing him the stuff . They said , ' Write a book ' and that 's how the first one came about " . Like the Daily Howl it contained a mix of formats including short stories , poetry , plays and drawings . One story , " Good Dog Nigel " , tells the tale of " a happy dog , urinating on a lamp post , barking , wagging his tail — until he suddenly hears a message that he will be killed at three o 'clock " . The Times Literary Supplement considered the poems and stories " remarkable ... also very funny ... the nonsense runs on , words and images prompting one another in a chain of pure fantasy " . Book Week reported , " This is nonsense writing , but one has only to review the literature of nonsense to see how well Lennon has brought it off . While some of his homonyms are gratuitous word play , many others have not only double meaning but a double edge . " Lennon was not only surprised by the positive reception , but that the book was reviewed at all , and suggested that readers " took the book more seriously than I did myself . It just began as a laugh for me " . 
 In combination with A Spaniard in the Works ( 1965 ) , In His Own Write formed the basis of the stage play The John Lennon Play : In His Own Write , co @-@ adapted by Victor Spinetti and Adrienne Kennedy . After negotiations between Lennon , Spinetti and the artistic director of the National Theatre , Sir Laurence Olivier , the play opened at The Old Vic in 1968 . Lennon and Ono attended the opening night performance , their second public appearance together . In 1969 , Lennon wrote " Four in Hand " ‍ — ‌ a skit based on his teenaged experiences of group masturbation ‍ — ‌ for Kenneth Tynan 's play Oh ! Calcutta ! . After Lennon 's death , further works were published , including <unk> by Word of Mouth ( 1986 ) ; Ai : Japan Through John Lennon 's Eyes : A Personal Sketchbook ( 1992 ) , with Lennon 's illustrations of the definitions of Japanese words ; and Real Love : The Drawings for Sean ( 1999 ) . The Beatles Anthology ( 2000 ) also presented examples of his writings and drawings . 
 = = Musicianship = = 
 = = = Instruments played = = = 
 Lennon 's playing of a mouth organ during a bus journey to visit his cousin in Scotland caught the driver 's ear . Impressed , the driver told Lennon of a harmonica he could have if he came to Edinburgh the following day , where one had been stored in the bus depot since a passenger left it on a bus . The professional instrument quickly replaced Lennon 's toy . He would continue to play harmonica , often using the instrument during the Beatles ' Hamburg years , and it became a signature sound in the group 's early recordings . His mother taught him how to play the banjo , later buying him an acoustic guitar . At 16 , he played rhythm guitar with the Quarrymen . 
 As his career progressed , he played a variety of electric guitars , predominantly the Rickenbacker 325 , Epiphone Casino and Gibson J @-@ <unk> , and , from the start of his solo career , the Gibson Les Paul Junior . Double Fantasy producer Jack Douglas claimed that since his Beatle days Lennon habitually tuned his D @-@ string slightly flat , so his Aunt Mimi could tell which guitar was his on recordings . Occasionally he played a six @-@ string bass guitar , the Fender Bass VI , providing bass on some Beatles numbers ( " Back in the U.S.S.R. " , " The Long and Winding Road " , " Helter Skelter " ) that occupied McCartney with another instrument . His other instrument of choice was the piano , on which he composed many songs , including " Imagine " , described as his best @-@ known solo work . His jamming on a piano with McCartney in 1963 led to the creation of the Beatles ' first US number one , " I Want to Hold Your Hand " . In 1964 , he became one of the first British musicians to acquire a Mellotron keyboard , though it was not heard on a Beatles recording until " Strawberry Fields Forever " in 1967 . 
 = = = Vocal style = = = 
 When the Beatles recorded " Twist and Shout " , the final track during the mammoth one @-@ day session that produced the band 's 1963 debut album , Please Please Me , Lennon 's voice , already compromised by a cold , came close to giving out . Lennon said , " I couldn 't sing the damn thing , I was just screaming . " In the words of biographer Barry Miles , " Lennon simply shredded his vocal cords in the interests of rock ' n ' roll . " The Beatles ' producer , George Martin , tells how Lennon " had an inborn dislike of his own voice which I could never understand . He was always saying to me : ' DO something with my voice ! ... put something on it ... Make it different . ' " Martin obliged , often using double @-@ tracking and other techniques . 
 As his Beatles era segued into his solo career , his singing voice found a widening range of expression . Biographer Chris Gregory writes of Lennon " tentatively beginning to expose his insecurities in a number of acoustic @-@ led ' confessional ' ballads , so beginning the process of ' public therapy ' that will eventually culminate in the primal screams of " Cold Turkey " and the cathartic John Lennon / Plastic Ono Band . " Music critic Robert Christgau calls this Lennon 's " greatest vocal performance ... from scream to whine , is modulated electronically ... echoed , filtered , and double tracked . " David Stuart Ryan notes Lennon 's vocal delivery to range from " extreme vulnerability , sensitivity and even naivety " to a hard " rasping " style . Wiener too describes contrasts , saying the singer 's voice can be " at first subdued ; soon it almost cracks with despair " . Music historian Ben Urish recalls hearing the Beatles ' Ed Sullivan Show performance of " This Boy " played on the radio a few days after Lennon 's murder : " As Lennon 's vocals reached their peak ... it hurt too much to hear him scream with such anguish and emotion . But it was my emotions I heard in his voice . Just like I always had . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Music historians Schinder and Schwartz , writing of the transformation in popular music styles that took place between the 1950s and the 1960s , say that the Beatles ' influence cannot be overstated : having " revolutionised the sound , style , and attitude of popular music and opened rock and roll 's doors to a tidal wave of British rock acts " , the group then " spent the rest of the 1960s expanding rock 's stylistic frontiers " . Liam Gallagher , his group Oasis among the many who acknowledge the band 's influence , identifies Lennon as a hero ; in 1999 he named his first child Lennon Gallagher in tribute . On National Poetry Day in 1999 , after conducting a poll to identify the UK 's favourite song lyric , the BBC announced " Imagine " the winner . 
 In a 2006 Guardian article , Jon Wiener wrote : " For young people in 1972 , it was thrilling to see Lennon 's courage in standing up to [ US President ] Nixon . That willingness to take risks with his career , and his life , is one reason why people still admire him today . " For music historians Urish and Bielen , Lennon 's most significant effort was " the self @-@ portraits ... in his songs [ which ] spoke to , for , and about , the human condition . " 
 In 2013 , Downtown Music Publishing signed a publishing administration agreement for the U.S. with <unk> Music and Ono Music , home to the song catalogs of John Lennon and Yoko Ono respectively . Under the terms of the agreement , Downtown represents Lennon 's solo works -- including " Imagine , " " Instant Karma ( We All Shine On ) , " " Power to the People , " " Happy X @-@ Mas ( War Is Over ) , " " Jealous Guy , " " ( Just Like ) Starting Over " and others . 
 Lennon continues to be mourned throughout the world and has been the subject of numerous memorials and tributes . In 2002 , the airport in Lennon 's home town was renamed the Liverpool John Lennon Airport . In 2010 , on what would have been Lennon 's 70th birthday , the John Lennon Peace Monument was unveiled in Chavasse Park , Liverpool , by Cynthia and Julian Lennon . The sculpture entitled ' Peace & Harmony ' exhibits peace symbols and carries the inscription " Peace on Earth for the Conservation of Life · In Honour of John Lennon 1940 – 1980 " . 
 In December 2013 the International Astronomical Union named one of the craters on Mercury after Lennon . 
 = = = Awards and sales = = = 
 The Lennon – McCartney songwriting partnership is regarded as one of the most influential and successful of the 20th century . As performer , writer or co @-@ writer Lennon has had 25 number one singles on the US Hot 100 <unk> His album sales in the US stand at 14 million units . Double Fantasy was his best @-@ selling solo album , at three million shipments in the US ; Released shortly before his death , it won the 1981 Grammy Award for Album of the Year . The following year , the BRIT Award for Outstanding Contribution to Music went to Lennon . 
 Participants in a 2002 BBC poll voted him eighth of " 100 Greatest Britons " . Between 2003 and 2008 , Rolling Stone recognised Lennon in several reviews of artists and music , ranking him fifth of " 100 Greatest Singers of All Time " and 38th of " 100 Greatest Artists of All Time " , and his albums John Lennon / Plastic Ono Band and Imagine , 22nd and 76th respectively of " Rolling Stone 's 500 Greatest Albums of All Time " . He was appointed Member of the Order of the British Empire ( MBE ) with the other Beatles in 1965 ( returned in 1969 ) . Lennon was posthumously inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 1987 and into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1994 . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Unfinished Music No. 1 : Two Virgins ( with Yoko Ono ) ( 1968 ) 
 Unfinished Music No. 2 : Life with the Lions ( with Yoko Ono ) ( 1969 ) 
 Wedding Album ( with Yoko Ono ) ( 1969 ) 
 John Lennon / Plastic Ono Band ( 1970 ) 
 Imagine ( 1971 ) 
 Some Time in New York City ( with Yoko Ono ) ( 1972 ) 
 Mind Games ( 1973 ) 
 Walls and Bridges ( 1974 ) 
 Rock ' n ' Roll ( 1975 ) 
 Double Fantasy ( with Yoko Ono ) ( 1980 ) 
 Milk and Honey ( with Yoko Ono ) ( 1984 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 = 411th Engineer Brigade ( United States ) = 
 The 411th Engineer Brigade ( Theater Army ) is a combat engineer brigade of the United States Army headquartered in New Windsor , New York . It is a major engineer command of the United States Army Reserve . 
 Tracing its lineage back to the 355th Engineer Regiment , the brigade assumed its predecessor 's campaign participation credit and honors , which were received fighting in the European Theater of World War II . The reserve brigade did not participate in any Cold War era fighting , and only saw periodic moves to various army bases around New York State . After the Cold War , however , the brigade saw several deployments to the Middle East in a supporting role for US @-@ led contingencies . These included Operation Desert Storm , Operation Joint Endeavor , Operation Iraqi Freedom and Operation Enduring Freedom . 
 = = Organization = = 
 The 411th Engineer Brigade is a subordinate unit of the 412th Engineer Command and its Headquarters and Headquarters Company is stationed at New Windsor , New York . It contains two subordinate battalions and separate companies which are also reserve units . The 479th Engineer Battalion ( Combat ) ( Mechanized ) headquartered at Watertown , New York and the <unk> Engineer Battalion located at Saugerties , New York are the Brigade 's two principal components . Additionally , the Brigade commands the 306th Engineer Company in Farmingdale , New York and the 328th Engineer Company ( Combat ) ( Heavy ) of Northfield , New Jersey , and the 417th Engineer Company ( Combat ) ( Heavy ) in <unk> , New York . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The 411th Engineer Brigade traces its lineage back to the 355th Engineer Regiment , which was first constituted on 15 October 1921 in the Organized Reserves . The regiment was organized in January 1922 with its headquarters at Chapel Hill , North Carolina . 
 It was ordered into active duty military service on 1 September 1942 at Camp White , Oregon in preparation for deployment to Europe during World War II . During World War II , the regiment saw action in the European Theater , undertaking numerous bridging and mobility missions in Normandy , Northern France , the Rhineland and the Ardennes area . The Regiment was awarded the Meritorious Unit Commendation for its service during the war . After the war was over in 1945 , the regiment remained in the country until it was inactivated on 17 June 1946 in Germany . A year later , on 27 May 1947 the regiment was reactivated with its Headquarters in Detroit , Michigan . It was again deactivated on 31 December 1948 in Detroit . 
 After the deactivation , the Regiment was broken up and its subordinate elements were redesignated . The regimental Headquarters and Headquarters Company and Service Company were reorganized on 25 February 1949 as Headquarters and Headquarters Company , 411th Engineer Brigade , allowing them a larger staff with the ability to take command of more subordinate units . The regiment 's 1st Battalion was reorganized and redesignated on 25 February 1949 as the <unk> Engineer Construction Battalion . The 2nd Battalion was reorganized and redesignated on 15 March 1949 as the 929th Engineer Construction Battalion . The 3rd Battalion disbanded on 9 July 1953 . The two separated battalions retained separate lineage from this point and the 355th Engineer Regiment ceased to exist . 
 = = = Cold War years = = = 
 The 411th Engineer Brigade was activated on 14 March 1949 at New York City . It was reorganized on 22 December 1950 as the 411th Engineer Aviation Brigade . A few years later , the Organized Reserve Corps itself was redesignated as the Army Reserve , and the brigade was delegated to Reserve status . On 1 January 1957 , the brigade was again redesignated as the 411th Engineer Brigade . On 31 January 1968 , the brigade headquarters was relocated to Fort Tilden , New York . 
 For most of its operational existence , the brigade remained in Reserve status except for a few brief activations in the Active Duty force . It was ordered into active military service on 24 March 1970 at Fort Tilden , New York , before being reverted to reserve status two days later . The brigade received its distinctive unit insignia on 28 January 1971 and its shoulder sleeve insignia on 20 December 1973 . On 3 January 1978 the brigade headquarters location was changed to Brooklyn , New York . 
 The brigade was again ordered into active duty to play a supporting role in the Gulf War in 1990 . It officially switched to active service on 6 December 1990 at Brooklyn , New York . It participated in Operation Desert Shield and Operation Desert Storm and earned two campaign streamers for participation in the conflict . On 11 March 1991 it was released from active military service and reverted to reserve status . The next day , while still in the country , the brigade was one of numerous units thought to have been exposed to chemical agents released during the <unk> Pit demolition . Much of the NATO invasion force in the country at the time is suspected to have been exposed to these agents . 
 On 1 April 1996 , the brigade relocated to New Windsor , New York . It provided engineer Support to Operation Joint Endeavor in Bosnia and Kosovo by augmenting the staff of the 412th Engineer Command , and by deploying the 139th and 141st Transportation Company Detachments to the region which were under the brigade 's peacetime command and control . 
 = = = Iraq War = = = 
 The Brigade was alerted for deployment to Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom in late 2005 . In the summer of 2006 , it trained for three months at Fort McCoy , Wisconsin to prepare . Its mission in Iraq was to integrate other smaller engineer units and provide engineer support to the other Army units operating in the country . The brigade headquarters took command of several other engineer battalions during this deployment . Among the units under brigade 's control was the 502nd Engineer Battalion based in Hanau , Germany which worked on bridges around Baghdad , as well as the 875th Engineer Battalion of the Arkansas Army National Guard based at Camp Striker and the active duty 92nd Engineer Battalion . Also attached to the brigade 's command was the Us Air Force 's 557th Expeditionary RED HORSE Squadron , a contingent of Air Force engineers . 
 The brigade arrived in Iraq in September 2006 . It assumed control of over 3 @,@ 000 engineers from the US Army , US Navy , US Air Force and US Marine Corps , having taken over the duty from the 130th Engineer Brigade which was departing following the end of its deployment . During the deployment , the brigade had five principle duties : route clearance and sanitation , rapid crater repair , engineer support to the 3rd Infantry Division and other combat units , planning , design and construction of contingency operating bases , and command of tactical bridging assets . The first major project of the brigade after arriving in country in September 2006 was to assist Iraqi engineers in repairing and operating the run down and damaged water treatment plant at Al Bakir which provided a major source of fresh water from the Tigris River . The brigade allowed Iraqi engineers to lead this operation and played a supporting role in evaluating their work . One of the brigade 's major projects was the construction of Forward Operating Base ( FOB ) Hammer , which was completed in just 45 days . The base required construction materials from all over the country as well as foreign materials brought to Camp Victory and Balad Air Base . The 411th Brigade 's attached B CO 92nd EN BN soldiers focused primarily on land work , perimeter fences and ground fortifications totaling over nine kilometers , with a detachment from the RED HORSE USAF focused on construction of buildings and other " vertical " projects . After completion , the FOB had space for 4 @,@ 000 soldiers , and was occupied by 3rd Brigade Combat Team , 3rd Infantry Division . 
 After the completion of the FOB , 411th Engineer Brigade soldiers commenced construction on other facilities throughout Camp Liberty for other incoming Army units . At the same time , other units in the brigade were responsible for route clearance in the areas of Logistics Support Area Anaconda along routes used for military supply as well as civilian traffic . The brigade 's soldiers used Buffalo mine protected vehicles to clear these routes of suspected Improvised Explosive Devices and other dangerous obstacles . 
 During this deployment , the brigade completed over 200 projects on every major Forward Operating Base in the country , and three major projects supporting the Iraq War troop surge of 2007 . It completed over 400 @,@ 000 kilometers of route clearance and blast hole repair using over 2 @,@ 800 pieces of major equipment . The brigade headquarters returned home to New York in fall of 2007 , after one year of deployment to Iraq . 
 = = = Operation Enduring Freedom = = = 
 In 2012 , the 411th Engineer Brigade was again activated and deployed to Bagram Air Base in Afghanistan to take command of theater @-@ wide engineer operations . The brigade formed a task force dubbed " Joint Task Force Empire " and remained deployed in Afghanistan until March 2013 when it returned home to New York and was reverted to reserve status . 
 = = Honors = = 
 = = = Unit decorations = = = 
 = = = Campaign streamers = = = 
 = Stanley Matthews = 
 Sir Stanley Matthews , CBE ( 1 February 1915 – 23 February 2000 ) was an English footballer . Often regarded as one of the greatest players of the English game , he is the only player to have been knighted while still playing , as well as being the first winner of both the European Footballer of the Year and the Football Writers ' Association Footballer of the Year awards . Matthews ' nicknames included " The Wizard of the <unk> " and " The Magician " . 
 Matthews kept fit enough to play at the top level until he was 50 years old . He was also the oldest player ever to play in England 's top football division and the oldest player ever to represent the country . He played his final competitive game in 1985 , at the age of 70 . Matthews was also an inaugural inductee to the English Football Hall of Fame in 2002 to honour his contribution to the English game . 
 He spent 19 years with Stoke City , playing for the Potters from 1932 to 1947 , and again from 1961 to 1965 . He helped Stoke to the Second Division title in 1932 – 33 and 1962 – 63 . Between his two spells at Stoke he spent 14 years with Blackpool , where , after being on the losing side in the 1948 and 1951 FA Cup finals , he helped Blackpool to win the cup with a formidable personal performance in the " Matthews Final " of 1953 . Between 1934 and 1957 he won 54 caps for England , playing in the FIFA World Cup in 1950 and 1954 , and winning nine British Home Championship titles . 
 Following an unsuccessful stint as Port Vale 's general manager between 1965 and 1968 , he travelled around the world , coaching enthusiastic amateurs . The most notable of his coaching experiences came in 1975 in South Africa , where in spite of the harsh apartheid laws of the time he established an all @-@ black team in Soweto known as " Stan 's Men " . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 Stanley Matthews was born on 1 February 1915 in a terraced house in Seymour Street , Hanley , Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent , Staffordshire . He was the third of four sons born to Jack Matthews , a local boxer who was also known as the " Fighting Barber of Hanley " . In the summer of 1921 , Jack Matthews took six @-@ year @-@ old Stanley to the Victoria Ground , home of the local club Stoke City , for an open race for boys under the age of 14 , with a staggered start according to age . His father placed a bet on his son winning , and he did . Matthews attended Hanley 's Wellington Road School , and later described himself as " in many respects a model pupil " . He also said the <unk> games the children played helped to improve his dribbling , and prepared the children for future life by giving them " a focus , a purpose , discipline , and in many respects an escape " . At home he also spent " countless hours " practising dribbling around kitchen chairs he placed in his backyard . 
 Though he would later become indelibly associated with Stoke City , Matthews grew up supporting that club 's local rivals Port Vale . His father wanted him to follow in his footsteps and become a boxer , but Stanley decided at the age of 13 that he wanted to be a footballer . After a rigorous training session that made Matthews vomit , his mother , Elizabeth , stood firm and made Jack realise that his son , who had one more year at school , should follow his passion of football . His father conceded that should he be picked for England Schoolboys then he could continue his footballing career ; around this time his school football master picked Matthews as an outside @-@ right , rather than as his then @-@ preferred position of centre @-@ half . Matthews played for England Schoolboys against Wales in 1929 , in front of around 20 @,@ 000 spectators at Dean Court , Bournemouth . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Stoke City = = = 
 Wolverhampton Wanderers , Birmingham City , Aston Villa and West Bromwich Albion were all rumoured to be interested in Matthews in the wake of his appearance for England Schoolboys . The Stoke City manager Tom Mather persuaded Matthews ' father to allow Stanley to join his club 's staff as an office boy on his 15th birthday for pay of £ 1 a week . Matthews played for Stoke 's reserve team during the 1930 – 31 season , coming up first against Burnley . After the game his father gave his usual realist assessment : " I 've seen you play better and I 've seen you play worse " . 
 Matthews played 22 reserve games in 1931 – 32 , shunning the social scene to focus on improving his game . In one of these games , against Manchester City , he attempted to run at the left @-@ back and take him on with a deft swerve as the defender committed himself to a challenge , rather than follow the accepted wisdom of the day which was to first wait for the defender to run at the attacker – his new technique " worked a treat " . The national press were already predicting a bright future for the teenager , and though he could have then joined any club in the country , he signed as a professional with Stoke on his 17th birthday . Paid the maximum wage of £ 5 a week ( £ 3 in the summer break ) , he was on the same wage as seasoned professionals before he even kicked a ball . Despite this his father insisted that Matthews save this money , and only spend any winning bonus money he earned . He made his first team debut against Bury at Gigg Lane on 19 March 1932 ; the " Potters " won the game 1 – 0 and Matthews learned how physical and dirty opponents could be – and get away with it . 
 After spending the 1932 – 33 pre @-@ season training intensely by himself ( as opposed to playing golf with his teammates ) , Mather selected Matthews in 15 games , enough to earn him in a winners medal after Stoke were crowned Second Division champions , one point ahead of Tottenham Hotspur . On 4 March 1933 he scored his first senior goal in a 3 – 1 win over local rivals Port Vale at The Old Recreation Ground . 
 He played 29 First Division games in 1933 – 34 , as Stoke secured their top @-@ flight status with a 12th @-@ place finish . He continued to progress in the 1934 – 35 campaign , and was selected by The Football League for an Inter @-@ League game with the Irish League at The Oval , which finished 6 – 1 to the English . His England debut followed , and so did a further game for the Football League against the Scottish League . Stoke finished the season in 10th place . 
 In 1935 – 36 Matthews continued to improve , and he added the double body swerve technique to his increasing arsenal of tricks . Largely out of the international picture , he put in 45 games for the " Potters " as Stoke finished fourth under Bob McGrory – the club 's best ever finish . He played 42 games in 1936 – 37 , including the club 's record 10 – 3 win over West Brom at the Victoria Ground . At the end of the season he was paid a loyalty bonus of £ 650 , though the Stoke board initially insisted he was only due £ 500 as he had spent his first two years at the club as an amateur – this attitude left a sour taste in Matthew 's mouth . 
 Stoke slipped down the league in an extremely tight 1937 – 38 season , and , annoyed by rumours circulating the city of resentment in the dressing room against him for his England success , Matthews requested a transfer in February ; his request was denied . His request became public knowledge , and , disturbed by the attention and harassment he was receiving from Stoke supporters urging him to stay , Matthews decided to take a few days off from the club to relax in Blackpool . Finding no peace there either , Stoke chairman Albert Booth told Matthews he would not be allowed to leave the club , and 3 @,@ 000 City supporters organized a meeting to make their feelings known – they too demanded that he stay . Touched by their strength of feeling and worn out by the attention he was receiving , Matthews agreed to stay . Despite playing regularly for the national side , Matthews put in 38 games for Stoke in 1938 – 39 , helping them to a seventh @-@ place finish – there would not be another full season of Football League action until 1946 . 
 The war cost Matthews his professional career from the age of 24 to the age of 30 . He instead joined the Royal Air Force , and was based just outside Blackpool , with Ivor Powell his NCO . He rose to the rank of corporal , though he admitted to being one of the most lenient and easy @-@ going NCOs in the forces . He played 69 Wartime League and Cup games for Stoke , and also made 87 guest appearances for Blackpool . In addition to these , he also played a handful of games for Scottish sides Airdrieonians , Morton and Rangers , and also played for Arsenal against FC Dynamo Moscow in extremely thick fog . He also played 29 times for England , though no caps were awarded as these were unofficial games . One of the last games of the period was an FA Cup Sixth Round second @-@ leg tie clash between Stoke and Bolton Wanderers ; the match ended in tragedy in what would be known as the Burnden Park disaster – 33 people died and 500 were injured . Matthews sent £ 30 to the disaster fund and couldn 't bring himself to train for several days afterwards . Matthews ' father died in 1945 . From his deathbed he made his son promise him two things : to look after his mother , and to win an FA Cup Final . 
 The regular Football League returned in time for the 1946 – 47 season , during which Matthews played 23 league games and was a major contributor to 30 of the club 's 41 league goals . Stoke matched their record finish of fourth in the league , finishing just two points shy of champions Liverpool after losing to Sheffield United on the final day of the season . However , in February Matthews was returning from a knee injury when manager McGrory told him he was not in the first XI for the game against Arsenal ; the press reported this as a bust @-@ up . Relations between McGrory , the Stoke City board , and Matthews had indeed always been sour – though once again a story that the players sided against Matthews were untrue . Recalled against Brentford , only after the game did he find out that this was only because he was a last @-@ minute replacement for an injured Bert Mitchell . Matthews put in a second transfer request , which the Stoke board eventually accepted . He selected Blackpool as his next club as he still lived in the area following his service in the RAF ; the Stoke board sanctioned the move on the condition that the deal was to remain a secret until the end of the season , so as to not disrupt the club 's title bid . The secret was revealed in a matter of hours , as an unknown person informed the press . 
 = = = Blackpool = = = 
 On 10 May 1947 , immediately after a Great Britain versus Rest of Europe match in Glasgow ( Britain won 6 – 1 ) , he made the move for £ 11 @,@ 500 , at the age of 32 . The match itself raised £ 30 @,@ 000 for the four Home Nations Football Associations , and since the eleven British players received £ 14 each , Matthews questioned where exactly this money ended up – he doubted that much of it ended up as funding for grass @-@ roots football . 
 " You 're 32 , do you think you can make it for another couple of years ? " – Blackpool manager Joe Smith in 1947 . 
 Smith told Matthews " there are no shackles here ... express yourself ... play your own game and whatever you do on the pitch , do it in the knowledge that you have my full support . " He assembled a talented frontline in Matthews , Stan Mortensen , Jimmy McIntosh , and Alex Munro ; with an emphasis on entertaining football . The Seasiders finished in ninth place and reached the 1948 FA Cup Final . On 23 April 1948 , the eve of the final , Matthews won the inaugural Football Writers ' Association Footballer of the Year award . Despite taking the lead twice in the match , Blackpool lost out 4 – 2 to Matt Busby 's Manchester United in the final , with Matthews assisting Mortensen for Blackpool 's second . 
 Injury limited him to only 28 appearances in 1948 – 49 , as Blackpool struggled to a 16th @-@ place finish . He spent the summer touring theatres in a variety act with his brother Ronnie , though he was troubled by an ankle injury he picked up in a charity game . Blackpool finished seventh in 1949 – 50 , and though they were never title contenders vast crowds still turned out home and away to witness the entertaining football they displayed . At this time he received the maximum wage allowed for a professional player – £ 12 a week . 
 In 1950 – 51 Blackpool stormed to a third @-@ place finish , and Matthews played 44 games in league and cup . He cited his highlights of the season as a 2 – 0 win at Sunderland , a 4 – 4 draw at Arsenal , and a 4 – 2 defeat at Newcastle United . They also reached the 1951 FA Cup Final , where they were favourites to beat opponents Newcastle ; however Matthews ended up with a second runners @-@ up medal thanks to a brace from Jackie Milburn . 
 After picking up an ankle injury in November , he missed most of the 1951 – 52 campaign , and was forced to instead spent most of his time working at the hotel he and his wife ran . It was during this time that he cut red meat from his diet to begin his new near @-@ vegetarian diet . At this point new Stoke manager Frank Taylor enquired as to whether he might bring Matthews back to the club ; all parties agreed to the idea in principle until Joe Smith put his foot down to ensure he stayed , with an inspirational speech he promised Matthews that an FA Cup winners medal was still possible , telling him that " a lot of people think I 'm mad , but even though you 're 37 , I believe your best football is still to come . " 
 Despite spending some three months of the season out with a muscle injury , the 1952 – 53 campaign proved Smith 's words to be accurate , as a 38 @-@ year @-@ old Matthews won an FA Cup winners medal in a match which was , despite Mortensen 's hat @-@ trick , subsequently dubbed the " Matthews Final " . Bolton were leading 3 – 1 with 35 minutes to go , but Matthews had " the game of his life " in " the greatest ever FA Cup final " and spurred his team on to a last gasp 4 – 3 victory . He always credited the team and especially Mortensen for the victory , and never accepted the nickname of the " Matthews Final " . 
 He helped the Tangerines to record a sixth @-@ place finish in 1953 – 54 , though hopes of retaining their FA Cup title were ended with a defeat to Port Vale at Vale Park in the Fifth Round . Matthews missed just eight league games in 1954 – 55 , though journalists were keen to write him off with every occasional off @-@ performance and missed game – " it was all <unk> " , he replied . Despite his age , and more <unk> the media 's constant references to his age , Arsenal manager Tom Whittaker tried , unsuccessfully , to lure Matthews to Highbury with a lucrative , if somewhat illegal approach . 
 As Smith began to establish a new side with talents such as Jackie Mudie and Jimmy Armfield , Blackpool posted a second @-@ place finish in 1955 – 56 , though they ended up some 11 points behind champions Manchester United . Matthews believed that the performance he gave in a 3 – 1 win over Arsenal on the opening day of the season was the finest he ever gave . At the end of the campaign Matthews was made the inaugural winner of the European Footballer of the Year award , having narrowly defeated Alfredo Di Stéfano 47 to 44 in the poll . 
 Remaining a key first team member in 1956 – 57 , injury restricted him to 25 league appearances , though Blackpool claimed a creditable fourth @-@ place finish . Matthews scored his 18th and final goal for Blackpool in a 4 – 1 league victory over Tottenham Hotspur at Bloomfield Road on 3 September 1956 . Blackpool finished seventh in 1957 – 58 , after which Joe Smith left the club . 
 Smith 's replacement was Ron Suart , who wanted Matthews to stay out wide , and did not value his contribution in the way that Smith had done . Suart limited Matthews to 19 league appearances in 1958 – 59 . Matthews was then used just 15 times in 1959 – 60 , as Suart signed Arthur Kaye to take his place , and local lad Steve Hill also vied for the outside @-@ right position . He enjoyed more games in 1960 – 61 , playing 27 league games as the club narrowly avoiding relegation by the odd point . 
 He started the 1961 – 62 season behind Hill in the pecking order , only getting his place back in time for a 4 – 0 win over Chelsea after Hill picked up an injury . He made his <unk> and final appearance in a Blackpool shirt in a 3 – 0 defeat at Arsenal on 7 October 1961 . It was a fitting final bow as he always enjoyed playing against Arsenal , and he had " so many wonderful memories " at Highbury . With former team @-@ mate and close friend Jackie Mudie at Stoke City , and with Tony Waddington keen to welcome Matthews back to the Victoria Ground , his return to his home @-@ town club was sealed . However Matthews was not impressed when the Blackpool board demanded a £ 3 @,@ 500 transfer fee , with one director being so bold as to tell him " You forget . As a player , we made you . " Having kept secret from Stoke a niggling knee injury Matthews had been carrying , Blackpool got their £ 3 @,@ 500 for the player . 
 = = = Return to Stoke = = = 
 At Stoke , Matthews found himself playing Second Division football for the first time in 28 years . Despite Stoke being strapped for cash , Tony Waddington gave him a two @-@ year contract at £ 50 a week – this was double the wages he received at Blackpool . The signing was broadcast live on <unk> , as Waddington whispered in his ear " Welcome home , Stan . For years this club has been going nowhere . Now we 're on our way " . Waddington delayed his return debut until 24 October 1961 , when Stoke played Huddersfield Town at the Victoria Ground , the attendance was 35 @,@ 974 – more than treble the previous home game – and Matthews set up one of City 's goals in a 3 – 0 win . He went on to score three goals in 21 games in the rest of the 1961 – 62 campaign . 
 Waddington signed <unk> Eddie Clamp to protect Matthews in the 1962 – 63 season , and the two would also become close friends off the pitch . Along with veteran teammates Jackie Mudie , Jimmy O 'Neill , Eddie Stuart , Don Ratcliffe , Dennis Viollet , and Jimmy McIlroy , Stoke had the oldest team in the Football League . Matthews scored his only goal of the season in the final home game of the campaign , as Luton Town were beaten 2 – 0 , the result ensured Stoke gained promotion to the top flight . Stoke went up as Second Division champions , and Matthews was voted FWA Footballer of the Year for the second time in his career , 15 years after he was made the inaugural winner of the award . 
 After picking up an injury , he missed January onwards of the 1963 – 64 campaign , and thereby missed the 1964 Football League Cup Final defeat to Leicester City . Discovering that niggling injuries which would have cost him one day out of action now required more than two weeks worth of rest to recover from , Matthews decided to retire after one more season . 
 He spent the 1964 – 65 season playing for the reserve side . On 1 January 1965 he became the only footballer to ever be knighted ( for services to football ) whilst still an active professional player ; though he never thought himself worthy of such an honour . His only first team appearance of the season was also the last Football League game of his career ; it came on 6 February 1965 , just after his 50th birthday , and was necessitated by injuries to both Peter Dobing and Gerry <unk> . The opponents that day were Fulham , and Stoke won the game 3 – 1 . Though he felt he had retired too early , and could have carried on playing for another two years , this brought an end to his 35 @-@ year professional career . 
 Stoke City arranged a testimonial match in honour of Matthews ; it was much needed as he had spent most of his career constricted to the tight maximum wage that had been enforced upon the English game . The game was played at the Victoria Ground on 28 April 1965 , by which time Matthews had decided to retire as a player , and the pre @-@ match entertainment consisted of another match of two veteran teams featuring many legends of the game . Harry Johnston led out a team consisting of Bert Trautmann , Tim Ward , George Hardwick , Jimmy Hill , Neil Franklin , Don Revie , Stan Mortensen , Nat Lofthouse , Jimmy Hagan , Tom Finney and Frank Bowyer ( reserve ) . Walley Barnes led out an opposing team consisting of Jimmy O 'Neill , Jimmy Scoular , Danny Blanchflower , Jimmy Dickinson , Hughie Kelly , Bill McGarry , Jackie Mudie , Jackie Milburn , Jock Dodds , Ken Barnes , and Arthur Rowley ( reserve ) . 
 In the main game itself , two teams of legends were formed , a Stan 's XI ( consisting of Football League players ) and an International XI . The International side won 6 – 4 , and Matthews was carried shoulder @-@ high from the field at full time by Puskás and Yashin . 
 = = = England international career = = = 
 After playing for England Schoolboys , playing in a trial at Roker Park in front of the England selectors , and representing The Football League , Matthews was given his England debut at Ninian Park in 1934 . Matthews scored the third goal as England beat the Welsh 4 – 0 . His second game would be the infamous Battle of Highbury , where he set up Eric Brook for the first goal of a 3 – 2 win over world champions Italy . The Italians turned the match into a " bloodbath " , and it ended up as the most violent match that Matthews would ever be involved in . 
 His third cap came in a 3 – 0 over Germany at White Hart Lane on 4 December 1935 , after Ralph Birkett was unable to play due to injury ; Matthews was outplayed by his opposite number Reinhold Münzenberg in both attack and defence . Matthews was jeered by England supporters and condemned by the press . 
 He would have to wait until 17 April 1937 for another chance in an England shirt , when he was selected to play in front of 149 @,@ 000 spectators against the auld enemy at Scotland 's Hampden Park . He was physically sick before the match , as he would be before any big game . The " Hampden Roar " a big factor , the Scots won 3 – 1 despite a good English performance . After another game against Wales , Matthews scored a hat @-@ trick in a 5 – 4 win against Czechoslovakia . 
 In 1938 he played eight games for England , starting with defeat to a Scotland team containing a young Bill Shankly . He then travelled to Berlin for another encounter with Münzenberg , where pre @-@ match he witnessed first hand the foreboding devotion the people showed the Führer when his motorcade drove past a café the England team were dining in . The game became infamous as The FA , themselves under instruction from the British government , informed the England team that they had to perform the Nazi salute as part of the strategy of appeasement . England won 6 – 3 with Matthews himself getting on the scoreboard having got the better of Münzenberg this time . The next game was a shock 2 – 1 defeat to Switzerland , which in turn was followed by a 4 – 2 win over France in Paris . Following the conclusion of this summer tour of the continent , Matthews scored in a 4 – 2 defeat to Wales in Cardiff , and then played in England 's 3 – 0 win over a Europe XI at Highbury , their 4 – 0 win over Norway in Newcastle , and their 7 – 0 win over Ireland at Old Trafford . 
 On 15 April 1939 , he returned to a muddy Hampden Park with England to claim a 2 – 1 victory in front of 142 @,@ 000 rain @-@ soaked supporters ; he set up Tommy Lawton for the winner with seconds to spare . That summer was the last time the England would tour Europe before Hitler 's Nazis were defeated . The first game was against Italy , who gave the English a warm reception despite Benito Mussolini 's breast @-@ beating and the bad blood of five years previous . Again the World Champions , the Italians managed to salvage a 2 – 2 draw at the San Siro after scoring with a clear handball ; this time Matthews left the field with a chipped hip bone for his efforts . The next game was a 2 – 1 loss to Yugoslavia , with Matthews and captain Eddie Hapgood passengers in the game after picking up early injuries ; this injury forced him to sit out the following encounter with Romania . 
 Following the war , his return for England came against Scotland on 12 April 1947 at Wembley , in a match which finished as a 1 – 1 draw . In the summer he took part in England 's tour of Switzerland and Portugal . Following a surprise defeat to the Swiss , England <unk> to a 10 – 0 win over the Portuguese , with Matthews scoring the 10th . In September , he put in one of his finest performances in an England shirt as he set up all of England 's five goals in a 5 – 2 victory over Belgium . 
 In April 1948 he once again travelled with England to Hampden Park , helping his country to a 2 – 0 victory ; however after the match he was the subject of an FA inquiry after he claimed tea and scones on his expenses ( at the cost of sixpence ) . Regardless of this treatment by the FA , the next month he helped England record a 4 – 0 victory over Italy in Turin . Folklore told that he beat Alberto <unk> only to have the audacity to then pull a comb from his shorts pocket and comb his hair ; the reality was that he simply used his hand to wipe his sweating brow in the beating Italian sun . However the legend would follow him around the world in later life , and spectators in the crowd were convinced that they had witnessed it . Later in the year he played in a goalless draw with Denmark , a 6 – 2 win over Northern Ireland , a 1 – 0 win over Wales , and a 6 – 0 triumph over Switzerland . 
 Manager Walter Winterbottom began to look for a more defensive winger , and so used Matthews just once in 1949 – a 3 – 1 defeat to Scotland in the British Home Championship . Only after impressing in an FA tour of Canada was he was named as a last minute inclusion in the England squad for the 1950 FIFA World Cup in Brazil . He did not play in the win over Chile or in the infamous defeat to the United States , but played just once , in the 1 – 0 defeat to Spain at the Estádio do Maracanã . The preparation was not ideal as the FA did not take the competition seriously , and the hotel had " unpalatable " food and no training facilities . 
 After playing only in two further games , a 4 – 4 draw with a Europe XI and a 3 – 1 win over Northern Ireland , he found himself back in the international scene following his heroics in the 1953 FA Cup Final . He was selected to play Hungary 's Golden Team on 25 November 1953 , in a 6 – 3 defeat that became known as the " Match of the Century " . He blamed the FA and the selectors for the heavy loss , though he had great admiration for the Hungarians , particularly Ferenc Puskás . 
 He did not play in the England 's 7 – 1 defeat to Hungary in Budapest in May 1954 . However he was in the squad for the 1954 FIFA World Cup in Switzerland . Matthews helped England to a 4 – 4 draw with Belgium , though was left out of a win over Switzerland , before he returned to the first XI as England crashed out of the competition with a 4 – 2 defeat to Uruguay at the St. Jakob Stadium after mistakes from goalkeeper Gil Merrick . His third match of the year was a 2 – 0 win over Northern Ireland at Windsor Park in the 1955 British Home Championship , though on the pitch he did not gel well with Don Revie . Matthews then put in a superb in a 2 – 0 win over the Welsh , before he helped England to record a 3 – 1 victory over World Champions West Germany , though only three of the Germans used at Wembley had been in the first XI in the World Cup Final . 
 England beat Scotland 7 – 2 in April 1955 , and this time Matthews linked up much better with Revie , and 40 @-@ year @-@ old Matthews was largely credited for the outstanding margin of victory . In this game Duncan Edwards was making his England debut ; when Matthews made his , Edwards had not even been born . Matthews went on England 's unsuccessful tour of the continent in 1955 , as the selectors erratic choices helped to ensure a 1 – 0 defeat to France , a 1 – 1 draw with Spain , and a 3 – 1 defeat to Portugal . Left out against Denmark , he was back in the team in October for a 1 – 1 draw with Wales . 
 Having been awarded the inaugural Ballon d 'Or in 1956 , that May he was recalled to the England front line for an encounter with Brazil ; Brazil would go on to lift the World Cup in 1958 , but Matthews helped the English to record a 4 – 1 victory . He then refused to take part in that summer 's European tour , having already committed himself to his second summer of coaching in South Africa . In his next international game , against Northern Ireland on 6 October 1956 , aged 41 years and 248 days , he became the oldest England player ever to score an international goal . 
 He played three of England four qualification games for the 1958 FIFA World Cup : a 5 – 1 victory over the Republic of Ireland , and the 5 – 2 and 4 – 1 wins over Denmark . On 15 May 1957 , Matthews became the oldest player ever to represent England , when at 42 years and 104 days old he turned out for the victory over the Danes in Copenhagen . Despite calls by the press for him to be included in the 1958 World Cup squad , this time the selectors did not bow to the pressure . Yet at 23 years , nobody would ever enjoy a longer career with the England team . 
 He was the subject of This Is Your Life in 1956 when he was surprised by Eamonn Andrews at the BBC Television Theatre . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Franz Beckenbauer said that the speed and skill Matthews possessed meant that " almost no one in the game could stop him " . John Charles noted that " he was the best crosser I 've ever seen – and he had to contend with the old heavy ball " . Johnny Giles said that " he had everything – good close control , great dribbling ability and he was lightning quick . He was also an intelligent player , who knew how to pass the ball " . Despite his great talents , he rarely tackled opponents and was not adept at heading the ball or using his left foot . 
 Before 1937 – 38 he had scored 43 goals in four seasons , and full @-@ backs began to mark him more tightly ; because of this he decided to drop deeper to collect the ball and aim to play pinpoint crosses as opposed to going for glory himself . Though he would never again score more than six goals in a season , this made him more an effective team player and a greater threat to the opposition . 
 When running along Blackpool 's beach , at 7 am , no matter the weather , Matthews wore shoes that contained lead , so that when he changed into his football boots , his feet felt light , giving himself the impression that he could run faster . Having trained to a level of fitness few other players would reach , by the mid @-@ 1950s he was able to cut back on his intense training as his level of fitness was by then ingrained in his body . He never smoked ; instead , he was very conscious of every item of food and drink he consumed , and he maintained a rigid daily training regime from childhood up until his old age . In an interview with the FA he said , " I had some very good advice and started to eat more salads and fruit , and every Monday I had no food . Just one day , on a Monday , but I felt better . " The only time he knowingly consumed alcohol was when drinking champagne out of the FA Cup in 1953 . 
 In addition to his attention to detail in diet and fitness , he also afforded close scrutiny to his kit . 1950 – 51 he struck a boot sponsorship deal with the Co @-@ op , though he instead began wearing a more lightweight pair of boots he had discovered on show at the World Cup – at the time they were not available to buy in England . He would wear the customized boots until his retirement , though they were so delicate that he got through countless pairs every season . 
 An avid student of the game , in the 1950 FIFA World Cup Matthews stayed on to watch teams such as Brazil and Uruguay compete in the tournament after England 's elimination – the English FA , manager and media all returned home to , as Matthews said , " bury their heads in the sand . " Matthews regularly condemned the " blazer brigade " at the FA in his autobiography , slating them as " conservative " and stressing that many of them were Old Etonians ; in his view they treated players and supporters poorly , demonstrated arrogance by ignoring competitions they did not control ( the World Cup and European domestic competitions ) , and viewed innovations with excessive suspicion ( for example the FA sanctioned only the use of floodlights in 1952 despite artificial lighting having been experimented with as far back as 1878 , and for years insisted on using outdated kit such as heavy " reinforced " boots ) . Writing about the fact that the FA allocated only 12 @,@ 000 of the 100 @,@ 000 available tickets for the 1953 FA Cup Final to Blackpool supporters , Matthews wrote : " I couldn 't make my mind up whether they were dunderheads or simply didn 't care about the genuine supporters who were the lifeblood of the game " . 
 He was never booked or sent off throughout his entire career , and teammate Jimmy Armfield noted that Matthews would never retaliate to the many extremely physical challenges opponents would often make to try and take him out of the game . Indeed , he ran the full gauntlet of emotions that all footballers run , but always retained a level head on the pitch , never losing his temper or allowing his emotions to affect his game . 
 = = Coaching and management career = = 
 Matthews was appointed general manager at Stoke 's rivals Port Vale in July 1965 , alongside good friend Jackie Mudie ; Matthews was unpaid , though was given expenses . The pair had a plan of bringing through talented schoolboys and selling one or two off every so often to improve the club 's bleak financial picture , whilst at the same time advancing through the leagues ; in his autobiography he said that what Dario Gradi later achieved at Crewe Alexandra is what he had in mind for the Vale . Matthews concentrated his search in North East England and Central Scotland , where he discovered talented striker Mick Cullerton , though overlooked a teenage Ray Kennedy . 
 Handed complete managerial control following Mudie 's resignation in May 1967 , Matthews couldn 't guide the club to success – instead , Port Vale were fined £ 4 @,@ 000 in February / March 1968 and expelled from the Football League for financial irregularities . He was forced to use his name to plead with the other Football League clubs to re @-@ elect the Vale , which they duly did . He stood down as manager in May 1968 , and despite being owed £ 9 @,@ 000 in salary and expenses , agreed to stay at Vale Park to continue his work with the youth team . A " final settlement " was reached in December 1970 , Matthews was given £ 3 @,@ 300 , with the other £ 7 @,@ 000 he was owed to be written off . Player Roy Sproson later said that " he [ Matthews ] trusted people who should never have been trusted and people took advantage of him . I am convinced a lot of people sponged off him and , all the while , the club were sliding . " The experience " left a sour taste " in his mouth , and was enough to convince him never to try his hand as management in English football again . 
 Matthews gave up his summers every year between 1953 and 1978 to coach poor children in South Africa , Nigeria , Ghana , Uganda and Tanzania . In South Africa in 1975 , he ignored apartheid to form a team of black schoolboys in Soweto called " Stan 's Men " . The members of his team told him that it was their dream to play in Brazil , so Matthews organised a trip there ; they were the first black team ever to tour outside of South Africa . He did not have the money to fund the trip himself , though used his connections ( for the only time other than when he used them to save Port Vale in 1968 ) to arrange sponsorship from Coca @-@ Cola and the Johannesburg Sunday Times newspaper . The South African authorities did not want to cause an international incident , so did not prevent Stan 's Men from getting on the plane to Rio de Janeiro , where they would meet legendary player Zico . It was on this trip that Matthews met Ronnie Biggs . On the way back from the trip , the Stan 's Men captain Gilbert <unk> called Matthews " black man with the white face " . 
 He played his final game of football for an England Veterans XI against a Brazil Veterans XI in Brazil in 1985 at the age of 70 ; the English lost 6 – 1 to the likes of <unk> , <unk> , and Jairzinho . He damaged his cartilage during the match : " a promising career cut tragically short " , he wrote in his autobiography . 
 = = Retirement and death = = 
 Having toured the world coaching in Australia , the United States , Canada and especially in Africa , Matthews returned to Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent with wife Mila in 1989 . He later served as president of Stoke City and honorary vice @-@ president of Blackpool . 
 Matthews died on 23 February 2000 , aged 85 , after falling ill while on holiday in Tenerife . Mila had died the previous year . It was a recurrence of an illness that he first suffered in 1997 . His death was announced on the radio just before the start of an England v Argentina friendly match . He was cremated following a funeral service in Stoke on 3 March 2000 . His funeral was attended by many of his fellow footballers , such as Bobby Charlton and Jack Charlton , Gordon Banks , Nat Lofthouse and Tom Finney . His ashes were buried beneath the centre circle of Stoke City 's Britannia Stadium , which he had officially opened in August 1997 . After his death , more than 100 @,@ 000 people lined the streets of Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent to pay tribute . As the cortège wound its way along the 12 @-@ mile route , employees downed tools and schoolchildren stood motionless to witness his final passing . 
 After his death , dozens of footballing legends paid tribute to him , and the epilogue to his autobiography contains several pages of quotations . Pelé said he was " the man who taught us the way football should be played " , and Brian Clough added that " he was a true gentleman and we shall never see his like again " . English goalkeeping legend Gordon Banks said that " I don 't think anyone since had a name so synonymous with football in England " , whilst World Cup winning German defender Berti Vogts commented that " It is not just in England where his name is famous . All over the world he is regarded as a true football genius " . 
 = = = Legacy = = = 
 Stanley Matthews was inducted into the Ontario Sports Hall of Fame in 1995 . Matthews was made an inaugural inductee of the English Football Hall of Fame in 2002 in recognition of his talents . The International Federation of Football History & Statistics voted him the 11th greatest footballer of the 20th century . He was inducted into the Blackpool F.C. Hall of Fame at Bloomfield Road when it was officially opened by Jimmy Armfield in April 2006 . Organised by the Blackpool Supporters Association , Blackpool fans around the world voted on their all @-@ time heroes . Five players from each decade are inducted ; Matthews is in the 1950s . The West Stand at Blackpool 's Bloomfield Road is named in his honour . He was also inducted into the Stoke @-@ on @-@ Trent Hall of Fame when it was opened in January 2011 . There is a statue of Matthews outside Stoke City 's Britannia Stadium and another in the centre of Hanley . The dedication on the former reads : " His name is symbolic of the beauty of the game , his fame timeless and international , his sportsmanship and modesty universally acclaimed . A magical player , of the people , for the people . " 
 The Stanley Matthews Collection is held by the National Football Museum . In February 2010 , the boots worn by Matthews in the 1953 FA Cup Final were auctioned at Bonhams in Chester for £ 38 @,@ 400 , to an undisclosed buyer . Sierra Leonean football club Mighty Blackpool F.C. , based in the capital city of Freetown , changed their name from <unk> United in 1954 because of their admiration for Matthews . Ormiston Sir Stanley Matthews Academy is a secondary school in <unk> , Staffordshire named after him . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In the summer of 1934 , Matthews married Betty Vallance , daughter of Stoke City trainer Jimmy Vallance , whom he first met on his 15th birthday in 1930 on his first day as office boy at the Victoria Ground . The couple had two children together : Jean ( born 1 January 1939 ) and Stanley Jr . ( born 20 November 1945 ) , who went on to become a tennis player under the tutelage of John Barrett . He became Wimbledon Boys ' Champion in 1962 , making him the last English player to do so . He never translated his success into the senior game , though , and instead moved to the United States to run the Four Seasons Racquet Club in Wilton , Connecticut . Jean married Robert Gough , whom she had met at their tennis club , in January 1963 ; she later said of her father that " He was a very good father and family man . He kept my brother and me out of the limelight , he was very protective . " In 1965 , Matthews became a grandfather after Jean gave birth to a son , Matthew Gough . She would have two other children — daughters Samantha and Amanda . Gough made Matthews a great @-@ grandfather in 1999 when he and his wife had a son , Cameron . Matthews had six other great @-@ grandchildren . 
 In 1967 , while on a tour of Czechoslovakia with Port Vale , Matthews met 40 @-@ year @-@ old Mila , who was the group 's interpreter for the trip . Matthews was still married to Betty , but as he was convinced he had found the true love of his life in Mila , he and Betty divorced . He and Mila spent the ensuing years living at various times in Malta ( specifically Marsaxlokk ) , South Africa and Canada . They also travelled extensively as Matthews 's coaching jobs and guest appearances dictated . After Mila died in 1999 at the age of 71 , according to Les Scott ( who helped Matthews write his autobiography ) , Matthews " was never the same person " . 
 " Self @-@ willed , strong @-@ minded , humorous , generous of spirit and , for all his fame as down to earth as the folk who once adorned the terraces in the hope of seeing him sparkle gold dust on to their harsh working lives . " 
 = = Statistics = = 
 a . ^ These three matches were played before competitive football was suspended due to the outbreak of the Second World War and are not included in the total . 
 b . ^ Domestic and international statistics listed in Matthew 's autobiography : 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Blackpool 
 FA Cup ( 1 ) : 1953 
 FA Cup runner @-@ up ( 2 ) : 1948 , 1951 
 Football League First Division runner @-@ up ( 1 ) : 1955 – 56 
 Stoke City 
 Football League Second Division ( 2 ) : 1932 – 33 , 1962 – 63 
 = = = Country = = = 
 England 
 British Home Championship ( 9 ) : 1935 , 1938 , 1939 , 1947 , 1948 , 1950 , 1952 , 1954 , 1955 
 a . ^ The Championship was shared with Scotland in 1935 , with Wales and Scotland in 1939 , and with Wales in 1952 . 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 FWA Footballer of the Year : 1948 , 1963 
 Ballon d 'Or : 1956 
 CBE : 1957 
 Knight Bachelor : 1965 
 Football League 100 Legends : 1966 
 English Football Hall of Fame : 2002 
 PFA Team of the Century ( 1907 @-@ 1976 ) : 2007 
 = = Autobiography = = 
 Matthews ' autobiography , The Way It Was , was released by Headline in 2000 . The book is dedicated to his wife Mila , who died the year before its publication . Matthews , then 84 , collaborated with Les Scott , his friend of 10 years , in the writing of the book over an 18 @-@ month period on an almost daily basis . " Stan , as he had been all his life , was an early riser , " wrote Scott in the epilogue . " Our collaborations were over by eleven in the morning and , without fail , took place in his den . He loved working on his book and , after I had left him , he would give the morning 's session more applied thought — more often than not ringing me at home to provide additional thoughts or anecdotes . " 
 = Choiseul pigeon = 
 The Choiseul pigeon ( Microgoura meeki ) is an extinct species of bird in the pigeon and dove family , Columbidae . It was endemic to the island of Choiseul in the Solomon Islands , although there are unsubstantiated reports that it may once have lived on several nearby islands . The last confirmed sighting was in 1904 . Other common names were Solomons crested pigeon , Solomon Islands crowned @-@ pigeon and <unk> . 
 The Choiseul pigeon was monotypic within the genus Microgoura and had no known subspecies . Its closest living relative is believed to be the thick @-@ billed ground pigeon , and some authors have suggested that the Choiseul pigeon may be a link between that species and the crowned pigeons . The adult pigeon was largely blue @-@ grey , with a buffy orange belly and a distinctive slaty @-@ blue crest . It is unknown how this crest was held by the bird in life . The bird 's head sported a blue frontal shield surrounded by black feathers and a bicoloured beak . The wings were brown and the short tail was a blackish purple . It was described as having a beautiful rising and falling whistling call . 
 As the bird became extinct before significant field observations could be made , not much is known about its behaviour . It is believed to have been a terrestrial species that laid a single egg in an unlined depression in the ground . It roosted in pairs or small groups of three or four in small shrubs and was reportedly very tame , allowing hunters to pick it up off its roost . The Choiseul pigeon lived in lowland forests , particularly in coastal swampy areas that lacked mangroves . It was only recorded by Albert Stewart Meek , who collected six adults and an egg from the northern part of the island in 1904 . Despite many subsequent searches , the bird has not been definitively reported since . It is believed to have been rare when Meek collected his specimens . The indigenous peoples reported that the species was driven to extinction due to the introduction of cats , as the pigeon had never previously confronted a carnivorous mammal on Choiseul . The last unconfirmed report of a Choiseul pigeon was in the early 1940s , and the species is considered extinct . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The Choiseul pigeon was described by Walter Rothschild in 1904 on the basis of six skins — three male and three female — and an egg collected by Albert Stewart Meek earlier that year . It was placed in the monotypic genus Microgoura , whose name comes from the Ancient Greek word mikros " small " , and <unk> , a New Guinean aboriginal name for the similarly @-@ crested crowned pigeons of the genus Goura . Rothschild named the species after Meek , giving the bird the specific name meeki . Though its relationships are unclear , the Choiseul pigeon is believed to have been closest to the thick @-@ billed ground pigeon ( Trugon terrestris ) from Indonesia and Papua New Guinea , which has similar plumage . It has been suggested that the Choiseul pigeon was a link between the thick @-@ billed ground pigeon and the crowned pigeons ; however , other sources argue that it may not have been closely related to the crowned pigeons as its crest was quite different . Based on behavioural and morphological evidence , Jolyon C. Parish proposed that the Choiseul pigeon should be placed in the Gourinae subfamily along with the Groura pigeons , the dodo , the Rodrigues solitaire , and others . The Choiseul pigeon has no known subspecies . 
 Today , five skins and a partial skeleton are kept in the American Museum of Natural History , while a single skin and the egg are kept at the Natural History Museum at Tring . The Choiseul pigeon is also known as the Solomon crowned pigeon , Solomon Islands pigeon , Solomons crested pigeon , Solomon Islands crested pigeon , Choiseul crested pigeon , crested Choiseul pigeon , Meek 's pigeon , Meek 's ground pigeon , and dwarf <unk> . The indigenous peoples of Choiseul called the species either " <unk> @-@ <unk> " or " <unk> @-@ ni @-@ lua , " which translates literally as " pigeon @-@ belong @-@ ground . " 
 = = Description = = 
 The Choiseul pigeon was about 31 cm ( 12 in ) long . The wing of the male was 195 – 197 mm ( 7 @.@ 7 – 7 @.@ 8 in ) , the tail 100 – 105 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 – 4 @.@ 1 in ) , the culmen 34 mm ( 1 @.@ 3 in ) , and the tarsus was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) . The wing of the female was 180 – 190 mm ( 7 @.@ 1 – 7 @.@ 5 in ) , the tail 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) , the culmen 33 mm ( 1 @.@ 3 in ) , and the tarsus was 60 mm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) . Adult Choiseul pigeons of both sexes were blue @-@ grey overall with a buffy orange belly . The pigeon had a distinctive long , rounded crest that had a hairy texture . This crest , like the crown , was slaty @-@ blue and emerged from the bird 's hindcrown . Though many artists have speculated , it is unknown how the pigeon held its crest in life as Meek 's notes did not cover this subject . John Gerrard Keulemans ( who produced the illustration accompanying Rothschild 's original description ) , depicted the crest as being flat based on Meek 's specimens ; other artists have presented it as spread and scraggly like that of the crowned pigeons . It has been suggested that the crests of the museum specimens were flattened during preparation . 
 On the bird 's forehead was a naked and pale chalky @-@ blue frontal shield . This was surrounded by short , velvety black feathers that extended from the base of the bill to the area just below and in front of the eye , while the area below the eye was a pinkish wash . The bird 's chin and throat were sparsely covered with black , velvety feathers , while the neck was a slaty @-@ blue that transitioned into a brownish @-@ grey breast . The abdomen and undertail @-@ coverts were a rich orange , while the undertail was a blackish @-@ grey . The wing was slaty with a hint of brown at its base and became a warm , dark brown by the wingtips ; the underwing was brown . The back was grey and transitioned into a browner rump , while the uppertail @-@ coverts were a dark sooty @-@ grey with blackish tips . The tail , which was short and rounded , was a very dark indigo that had a slightly purple iridescent sheen . The bill was bicoloured ; the upper mandible was chalky @-@ blue with a black tip while the lower mandible was red . The plumage of the juvenile is unknown . The bird 's feet were a dull purplish @-@ red and unfeathered up to the heel , while the iris was a dark brown . 
 The bird 's voice was never recorded ; however , after it became extinct , the indigenous peoples described it as possessing a " beautiful rising and falling whistling call given from the roost site every evening . " Others described the call as a low " c @-@ r @-@ r @-@ ooo , " " cr @-@ ooo , " or " cr @-@ o @-@ o @-@ o . " 
 = = Behaviour and ecology = = 
 Not much is known about the species ' behaviour , as it became extinct before significant field observations could be made . It is likely that the Choiseul pigeon was a largely terrestrial species , feeding and nesting near the forest floor . The indigenous people of the town of <unk> said that the pigeon would roost in pairs or small groups of three or four in small shrubs close to the ground . They claimed that the species was very tame , allowing local hunters to approach it and pick it up off of its perch by hand . They reported that the species had stones in its gizzard . It laid a single dark , cream @-@ coloured egg in an unlined depression on the ground . The egg was about 43 by 31 @.@ 3 mm ( 1 @.@ 69 by 1 @.@ 23 in ) in size , which is considered small in proportion to the bird . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The Choiseul pigeon was non @-@ migratory and is thought to have lived on the forest floor in lowland forests , including coastal swampy areas that lacked mangroves . The Choiseul pigeon is usually considered to have been endemic to the island of Choiseul in the Solomon Islands off the coast of New Guinea , where the only specimens were collected . The specimens Meek acquired were likely collected near Choiseul Bay in the northern part of the island . The last reports of the species from the indigenous population came from the Kolombangara River . It also reportedly lived on the neighboring islands of Santa Isabel and Malaita , and it is suspected that it may once have lived on Bougainville Island . However , these reports were never confirmed and must be considered anecdotal . It would be considered very unusual if the Choiseul pigeon were truly endemic to Choiseul as the island hosts no other endemic species , and the pigeon was never linked ecologically with another species on the island . 
 = = = Last sightings = = = 
 In January 1904 six specimens and an egg were collected by Albert Stewart Meek , a bird collector for Lord Walter Rothschild , near Choiseul Bay on Choiseul . Several local boys told Meek that the pigeon was also present on the nearby islands of Santa Isabel and Malaita . Though Meek did not travel to these islands , he did search for the Choiseul pigeon on the adjacent Bougainville Island , but did not find any evidence of its presence . No other specimens were ever collected or seen by Western scientists . 
 The Choiseul pigeon was not searched for again until briefly in 1927 and again in October 1929 , when five veteran collectors belonging to the Whitney South Seas Expedition dedicated three months to searching for the pigeon in multiple locations across Choiseul without success . The indigenous people interviewed by this expedition largely believed that the pigeon was extinct in 1929 . The last reported indigenous sighting was sometime in the early 1940s near <unk> by the Kolombangara River , although this sighting was never confirmed . Searches of the small , cat @-@ free islands of Rob Roy Island and <unk> off Choiseul 's southeast coast and Choiseul 's forested coastal swampland in the 1960s by British ornithologist Shane A. Parker did not discover any signs of the pigeon . American scientist Jared Diamond searched for the bird in 1974 without success . 
 = = Relationship with humans = = 
 This pigeon was a source of food for the local people , who would locate its roosting sites either due to the bird calling or by the droppings that had accumulated below its perches . It was well @-@ remembered by the indigenous peoples , and stories of the delicious ground @-@ dwelling pigeon were passed down by local elders after its extinction . One indigenous person implied that the gizzard stones of the pigeon may have had value locally . After the bird 's extinction , the indigenous people have occasionally confused the Choiseul pigeon with the arboreal crested cuckoo @-@ dove in modern folklore , and several claims of the pigeon 's continued existence turned out to be based on the cuckoo @-@ dove . After its discovery , several Western bird collections highly desired its skins ; the Whitney South Seas Expedition spent three months at high expense on Choiseul with the primary objective being the acquisition of the Choiseul pigeon . In 2012 the Choiseul pigeon was commemorated on a stamp from Mozambique along with several other extinct birds . The Choiseul pigeon is depicted on the flag of the Choiseul Province . 
 = = = Extinction = = = 
 The indigenous population believed that the pigeon became extinct due to predation by feral cats and , to a lesser extent , feral dogs . As Choiseul has no indigenous carnivorous mammals , the ground @-@ dwelling pigeon was particularly susceptible to the introduced cats . If the pigeon existed on islands that feral cats had never reached , it is believed that the clearance of its forest habitat would have led to its local extinction . As there have been no substantiated reports since 1904 despite multiple searches , the IUCN has declared it extinct . As several ornithologists had visited Choiseul and the nearby islands prior to Meek without noting any sign of the bird 's existence , it is likely that the Choiseul pigeon was already close to extinction in 1904 . 
 = Charles Boycott = 
 Charles Cunningham Boycott ( 12 March 1832 – 19 June 1897 ) was an English land agent whose ostracism by his local community in Ireland gave the English language the verb " to boycott " . He had served in the British Army 39th Foot , which brought him to Ireland . After retiring from the army , Boycott worked as a land agent for Lord Erne ( John Crichton , 3rd Earl Erne ) , a landowner in the Lough Mask area of County Mayo . 
 In 1880 , as part of its campaign for the Three Fs ( fair rent , fixity of tenure , and free sale ) and specifically in resistance to proposed evictions on the estate , local activists of the Irish Land League encouraged Boycott 's employees ( including the seasonal workers required to harvest the crops on Lord Erne 's estate ) to withdraw their labour , and began a campaign of isolation against Boycott in the local community . This campaign included shops in nearby Ballinrobe refusing to serve him , and the withdrawal of services . Some were threatened with violence to ensure compliance . 
 The campaign against Boycott became a cause célèbre in the British press after he wrote a letter to The Times . Newspapers sent correspondents to the West of Ireland to highlight what they viewed as the victimisation of a servant of a peer of the realm by Irish nationalists . Fifty Orangemen from County Cavan and County Monaghan travelled to Lord Erne 's estate to harvest the crops , while a regiment of the 19th Royal Hussars and more than 1 @,@ 000 men of the Royal Irish Constabulary were deployed to protect the harvesters . The episode was estimated to have cost the British government and others at least £ 10 @,@ 000 to harvest about £ 500 worth of crops . 
 Boycott left Ireland on 1 December 1880 , and in 1886 , became land agent for Hugh Adair 's Flixton estate in Suffolk . He died at the age of 65 on 19 June 1897 in his home in Flixton , after an illness earlier that year . 
 = = Early life and family = = 
 Charles Cunningham Boycott was born in 1832 to Reverend William Boycatt and his wife Georgiana . He grew up in the village of Burgh St Peter in Norfolk , England ; the Boycatt family had lived in Norfolk for almost 150 years . They were of Huguenot origin , and had fled from France in 1685 when Louis XIV revoked civil and religious liberties to French Protestants . Charles Boycott was named Boycatt in his baptismal records . The family changed the spelling of its name from Boycatt to Boycott in 1841 . 
 Boycott was educated at a boarding school in Blackheath , London . He was interested in the military — and in 1848 , entered the Royal Military Academy , Woolwich , in hopes of serving in the Corps of Royal Sappers and Miners . He was discharged from the academy in 1849 after failing a periodic exam , and the following year his family bought him a commission in the 39th Foot regiment for £ 450 . 
 Boycott 's regiment transferred to Belfast shortly after his arrival . Six months later , it was sent to Newry before marching to Dublin , where it remained for a year . In 1852 , Boycott married Anne Dunne in St Paul 's Church , Arran Quay , Dublin . He was ill between August 1851 and February 1852 and sold his commission the following year , but decided to remain in Ireland . He leased a farm in County Tipperary , where he acted as a landlord on a small scale . 
 = = Life on Achill Island = = 
 After receiving an inheritance , Boycott was persuaded by his friend , Murray McGregor Blacker , a local magistrate , to move to Achill Island , a large island off the coast of County Mayo . McGregor Blacker agreed to sublet 2 @,@ 000 acres ( 810 ha ) of land belonging to the Irish Church Mission Society on Achill to Boycott , who moved there in 1854 . According to Joyce Marlow in the book , Captain Boycott and the Irish , Boycott 's life on the island was difficult initially , and in Boycott 's own words it was only after " a long struggle against adverse circumstances " that he became prosperous . With money from another inheritance and profits from farming , he built a large house near <unk> . 
 Boycott was involved in a number of disputes while on Achill . Two years after his arrival , he was unsuccessfully sued for assault by Thomas Clarke , a local man . Clarke said that he had gone to Boycott 's house because Boycott owed him money . He said that he had asked for repayment of the debt , and that Boycott had refused to pay him and told him to go away , which Clarke refused to do . Clarke alleged that Boycott approached him and said : " If you do not be off , I will make you . " Clarke later withdrew his allegations , and said that Boycott did not actually owe him any money . 
 Both Boycott and McGregor Blacker were involved in a protracted dispute with Mr Carr , the agent for the Achill Church Mission Estate , from whom McGregor Blacker leased the lands , and Mr O 'Donnell , Carr 's bailiff . The dispute began when Boycott and Carr supported different sets of candidates in elections for the Board of Guardians to the Church Mission Estate , and Boycott 's candidates won . Carr was also the local receiver of wrecks , which meant that he was entitled to collect the salvage from all shipwrecks in the area , and guard it until it was sold in a public auction . The local receiver had a right to a percentage of the sale and to keep whatever did not sell . In 1860 Carr wrote a letter to the Official Receiver of Wrecks stating that Boycott and his men had illegally broken up a wreck and moved the salvage to Boycott 's property . In response to this accusation , Boycott sued Carr for libel and claimed £ 500 in damages . 
 = = Life in Lough Mask before controversy = = 
 In 1873 , Boycott moved to Lough Mask House , owned by Lord Erne , four miles ( 6 km ) from Ballinrobe in County Mayo . Lord Erne , the third Earl of Erne , was a wealthy landowner who lived in Crom Castle in County Fermanagh . He owned 40 @,@ 386 acres ( 163 @.@ 44 km2 ) of land in Ireland , of which 31 @,@ 389 were in County Fermanagh , 4 @,@ 826 in County Donegal , 1 @,@ 996 in County Sligo , and 2 @,@ 184 in County Mayo . Lord Erne also owned properties in Dublin . 
 Boycott agreed to be Lord Erne 's agent for 1 @,@ 500 acres ( 6 @.@ 1 km2 ) he owned in County Mayo . One of Boycott 's responsibilities was to collect rents from tenant farmers on the land , for which he earned ten per cent of the total rent due to Lord Erne , which was £ 500 each year . In his roles as farmer and agent , Boycott employed numerous local people as labourers , grooms , coachmen , and house @-@ servants . Joyce Marlow wrote that Boycott had become set in his mode of thought , and that his twenty years on Achill had " ... strengthened his innate belief in the divine right of the masters , and the tendency to behave as he saw fit , without regard to other people 's point of view or feelings . " 
 During his time in Lough Mask before the controversy began , Boycott had become unpopular with the tenants . He had become a magistrate and was an Englishman , which may have contributed to his unpopularity , but according to Marlow it was due more to his personal temperament . While Boycott himself maintained that he was on good terms with his tenants , they said that he had laid down many petty restrictions , such as not allowing gates to be left open and not allowing hens to trespass on his property , and that he fined anyone who transgressed these restrictions . He had also withdrawn privileges from the tenants , such as collecting wood from the estate . In August 1880 , his labourers went on strike in a dispute over a wage increase . 
 = = Lough Mask affair = = 
 = = = Historical background = = = 
 In the nineteenth century , agriculture was the biggest industry in Ireland . In 1876 , the government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland commissioned a survey to find who owned the land in Ireland . The survey found that almost all land was the property of just 10 @,@ 000 people , or 0 @.@ 2 % of the population . The majority were small landlords , but the 750 richest landlords owned half of the country between them . Many of the richest were absentee landlords who lived in Britain or elsewhere in Ireland , and paid agents like Charles Boycott to manage their estates . 
 Landlords generally divided their estates into smaller farms that they rented to tenant farmers . Tenant farmers were generally on one @-@ year leases , and could be evicted even if they paid their rents . Some of the tenants were large farmers who farmed over 100 acres ( 0 @.@ 40 km2 ) , but the majority were much smaller — on average between 15 and 50 acres ( 0 @.@ 06 – 0 @.@ 20 km2 ) . Many small farmers worked as labourers on the larger farms . The poorest agricultural workers were the landless labourers , who worked on the land of other farmers . Farmers were an important group politically , having more votes than any other sector of society . 
 In the 1850s , some tenant farmers formed associations to demand the three Fs : fair rent , fixity of tenure , and free sale . In the 1870s , the Fenians tried to organise the tenant farmers in County Mayo to resist eviction . They mounted a demonstration against a local landlord in Irishtown and succeeded in getting him to lower his rents . 
 Michael Davitt was the son of a small tenant farmer in County Mayo who became a journalist and joined the Irish Republican Brotherhood . He was arrested and given a 15 @-@ year sentence for gun @-@ running . Charles Stewart Parnell , then Member of Parliament for Meath and member of the Home Rule League , arranged to have Davitt released on probation . When Davitt returned to County Mayo , he was impressed by the Fenians ' attempts to organise farmers . He thought that the " land question " was the best way to get the support of the farmers for Irish independence . 
 In October 1879 , after forming the Land League of Mayo , Davitt formed the Irish National Land League . The Land League 's aims were to reduce rents and to stop evictions , and in the long term , to make tenant farmers owners of the land they farmed . Davitt asked Parnell to become the leader of the league . In 1880 , Parnell was also elected leader of the Home Rule Party . 
 = = = Parnell 's speech in Ennis = = = 
 On 19 September 1880 , Parnell gave a speech in Ennis , County Clare to a crowd of Land League members . He asked the crowd , " What do you do with a tenant who bids for a farm from which his neighbour has been evicted ? " The crowd responded , " kill him , " " shoot him . " Parnell replied : 
 I wish to point out to you a very much better way – a more Christian and charitable way , which will give the lost man an opportunity of repenting . When a man takes a farm from which another has been evicted , you must shun him on the roadside when you meet him – you must shun him in the streets of the town – you must shun him in the shop – you must shun him on the fair green and in the market place , and even in the place of worship , by leaving him alone , by putting him in moral Coventry , by isolating him from the rest of the country , as if he were the leper of old – you must show him your detestation of the crime he committed . 
 This speech set out the Land League 's powerful weapon of social ostracism , which was first used against Charles Boycott . 
 = = = Community action = = = 
 The Land League was very active in the Lough Mask area , and one of the local leaders , Father John O 'Malley , had been involved in the labourer 's strike in August 1880 . The following month Lord Erne 's tenants were due to pay their rents . He had agreed to a 10 per cent reduction owing to a poor harvest , but all except two of his tenants demanded a 25 per cent reduction . Boycott said that he had written to Lord Erne , and that Erne had refused to accede to the tenants ' demands . He then issued demands for the outstanding rents , and obtained eviction notices against eleven tenants . 
 Three days after Parnell 's speech in Ennis , a process server and seventeen members of the Royal Irish Constabulary began the attempt to serve Boycott 's eviction notices . Legally , they had to be delivered to the head of the household or his spouse within a certain time period . The process server successfully delivered notices to three of the tenants , but a fourth , Mrs <unk> , refused to accept the notice and began waving a red flag to alert other tenants that the notices were being served . The women of the area descended on the process server and the constabulary , and began throwing stones , mud , and manure at them , succeeding in driving them away to seek refuge in Lough Mask House . 
 The process server tried unsuccessfully to serve the notices the following day . News soon spread to the nearby Ballinrobe , from where many people descended on Lough Mask House , where , according to journalist James Redpath , they advised Boycott 's servants and labourers to leave his employment immediately . Boycott said that many of his servants were forced to leave " ... under threat of ulterior consequences . " Martin <unk> , a labourer who subsequently sued Boycott for non @-@ payment of wages , claimed he left because he was afraid of the people who came into the field where he was working . Eventually , all Boycott 's employees left , forcing him to run the estate without help . 
 Within days , the blacksmith , postman , and laundress were persuaded or volunteered to stop serving Boycott . Boycott 's young nephew volunteered to act as postman , but he was intercepted en route between Ballinrobe and Lough Mask , and told that he would be in danger if he continued . Soon , shopkeepers in Ballinrobe stopped serving Boycott , and he had to bring food and other provisions by boat from Cong . 
 = = = Newspaper coverage = = = 
 Before October 1880 , Boycott 's situation was little known outside County Mayo . On 14 October of that year , Boycott wrote a letter to The Times about his situation : 
 THE STATE OF <unk> 
 Sir , The following detail may be interesting to your readers as exemplifying the power of the Land League . On the 22nd September a process @-@ server , escorted by a police force of seventeen men , retreated to my house for protection , followed by a howling mob of people , who yelled and <unk> at the members of my family . On the ensuing day , September 23rd , the people collected in crowds upon my farm , and some hundred or so came up to my house and ordered off , under threats of ulterior consequences , all my farm labourers , workmen , and <unk> , commanding them never to work for me again . My herd has been frightened by them into giving up his employment , though he has refused to give up the house he held from me as part of his emolument . Another herd on an off farm has also been compelled to resign his situation . My blacksmith has received a letter threatening him with murder if he does any more work for me , and my laundress has also been ordered to give up my washing . A little boy , twelve years of age , who carried my post @-@ bag to and from the neighbouring town of Ballinrobe , was struck and threatened on 27th September , and ordered to desist from his work ; since which time I have sent my little nephew for my letters and even he , on 2nd October , was stopped on the road and threatened if he continued to act as my messenger . The shopkeepers have been warned to stop all supplies to my house , and I have just received a message from the post mistress to say that the telegraph messenger was stopped and threatened on the road when bringing out a message to me and that she does not think it safe to send any telegrams which may come for me in the future for fear they should be abstracted and the messenger injured . My farm is public property ; the people wander over it with impunity . My crops are trampled upon , carried away in quantities , and destroyed wholesale . The locks on my gates are smashed , the gates thrown open , the walls thrown down , and the stock driven out on the roads . I can get no workmen to do anything , and my ruin is openly avowed as the object of the Land League unless I throw up everything and leave the country . I say nothing about the danger to my own life , which is apparent to anybody who knows the country . 
 CHARLES C. <unk> 
 Lough Mask House , County Mayo , 14 October 
 After the publication of this letter , Bernard Becker , special correspondent of the Daily News , traveled to Ireland to cover Boycott 's situation . On 24 October , he wrote a dispatch from Westport that contained an interview with Boycott . He reported that Boycott had £ 500 worth of crops that would rot if help could not be found to harvest them . According to Becker , " Personally he is protected , but no woman in Ballinrobe would dream of washing him a cravat or making him a loaf . All the people have to say is that they are sorry , but that they ' dare not . ' " Boycott had been advised to leave , but he told Becker that " I can hardly desert Lord Erne , and , moreover , my own property is sunk in this place . " Becker 's report was reprinted in the Belfast News @-@ Letter and the Dublin Daily Express . On 29 October , the Dublin Daily Express published a letter proposing a fund to finance a party of men to go to County Mayo to save Boycott 's crops . Between them , the Daily Express , Daily Telegraph , Daily News , and News Letter raised £ 2 @,@ 000 to fund the relief expedition . 
 = = = Saving the crops = = = 
 In Belfast in early November 1880 , The Boycott Relief Fund was established to arrange an armed expedition to Lough Mask . Plans soon gained momentum , and within days , the fund had received many subscriptions . The committee had arranged with the Midland Great Western Railway for special trains to transport the expedition from Ulster to County Mayo . Many nationalists viewed the expedition as an invasion . The Freeman 's Journal denounced the organisers of the expedition , and asked , " How is it that this Government do not consider it necessary to prosecute the promoters of these warlike expeditions ? " 
 William Edward Forster , Chief Secretary for Ireland made it clear in a communication with the proprietor of the Dublin Daily Express that he would not allow an armed expedition of hundreds of men , as the committee was planning , and that 50 unarmed men would be sufficient to harvest the crops . He said that the government would consider it their duty to protect this group . On 10 November 1880 , the relief expedition consisting of one contingent from County Cavan and one from County Monaghan left for County Mayo . Additional troops had already arrived in County Mayo to protect the expedition . Boycott himself said that he did not want such a large number of Ulstermen , as he had saved the grain harvest himself , and that only ten or fifteen labourers were needed to save the root crops . He feared that a large number of Ulstermen would lead to sectarian violence . While local Land League leaders said that there would be no trouble from them if the aim was simply to harvest the crops , more extreme sections of the local population did threaten violence against the expedition and the troops . 
 The expedition experienced hostile protests on their route through County Mayo , but there was no violence , and they harvested the crops without incident . Rumours spread amongst the Ulstermen that an attack was being planned on the farm , but none materialised . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 On 27 November 1880 , Boycott , his family and a local magistrate were escorted from Lough Mask House by members of the 19th Hussars . A carriage had been hired for the family , but no driver could be found for it , and an army ambulance and driver had to be used . The ambulance was escorted to <unk> railway station , where Boycott and his family boarded a train to Dublin , where Boycott was received with some hostility . The hotel he stayed in received letters saying that it would be boycotted if Boycott remained . He had intended to stay in Dublin for a week , but Boycott was advised to cut his stay short . He left Dublin for England on the Holyhead mail boat on 1 December . 
 The cost to the government of harvesting Boycott 's crops was estimated at £ 10 @,@ 000 : in Parnell 's words , " ... one shilling for every turnip dug from Boycott 's land . " In a letter requesting compensation to William Ewart Gladstone , then Prime Minister of the United Kingdom , Boycott said that he had lost £ 6 @,@ 000 of his investment in the estate . 
 <unk> had strengthened the power of the peasants , and by the end of 1880 there were reports of boycotting from all over Ireland . The events at Lough Mask had also increased the power of the Land League , and the popularity of Parnell as a leader . 
 On 28 December 1880 , Parnell and other Land League leaders were put on trial on charges of conspiracy to prevent the payment of rent . The trial attracted thousands of people onto the streets outside the court . A Daily Express reporter wrote that the court reminded him " ... more of the stalls of the theatre on opera night . " On 24 January 1881 , the judge dismissed the jury , it having been hung ten to two in favour of acquittal . Parnell and Davitt received this news as a victory . 
 After the boycotting , Gladstone discussed the issue of land reform , writing in an 1880 letter , " The subject of the land weighs greatly on my mind and I am working on it to the best of my ability . " In December 1880 , the Bessborough Commission , headed by Frederick Ponsonby , 6th Earl of Bessborough , recommended major land reforms , including the three Fs . 
 William Edward Forster argued that a Coercion Act — which would punish those participated in events like those at Lough Mask , and would include the suspension of Habeas Corpus — should be introduced before any Land Act . Gladstone eventually accepted this argument . When Forster attempted to introduce the Protection of Person and Property Act 1881 , Parnell and other Land League MP 's attempted to obstruct its passage with tactics such as filibustering . One such filibuster lasted for 41 hours . Eventually , the Speaker of the house intervened , and a measure was introduced whereby the Speaker could control the house if there was a three to one majority in favour of the business being urgent . This was the first time that a check was placed on a debate in a British parliament . The act was passed on 28 February 1881 . There was a negative reaction to the passing of the act in both England and Ireland . In England , the Anti @-@ Coercion Association was established , which was a precursor to the Labour Party . 
 In April 1881 , Gladstone introduced the Land Law ( Ireland ) Act 1881 , in which the principle of the dual ownership of the land between landlords and tenants was established , and the three Fs introduced . The act set up the Irish Land Commission , a judicial body that would fix rents for a period of 15 years and guarantee fixity of tenure . According to The Annual Register , the act was " ... probably the most important measure introduced into the House of Commons since the passing of the Reform Bill . " 
 = = = The word " boycott " = = = 
 According to James Redpath , the verb " to boycott " was coined by Father O 'Malley in a discussion between them on 23 September 1880 . The following is Redpath 's account : 
 I said , " I 'm bothered about a word . " 
 " What is it ? " asked Father John . 
 " Well , " I said , " When the people ostracise a land @-@ grabber we call it social excommunication , but we ought to have an entirely different word to signify ostracism applied to a landlord or land @-@ agent like Boycott . <unk> won 't do – the peasantry would not know the meaning of the word – and I can 't think of any other . " 
 " No , " said Father John , " ostracism wouldn 't do " 
 He looked down , tapped his big forehead , and said : " How would it do to call it to Boycott him ? " 
 According to Joyce Marlow , the word was first used in print by Redpath in the Inter @-@ Ocean on 12 October 1880 . The coining of the word , and its first use in print , came before Boycott and his situation was widely known outside County Mayo . In November 1880 , an article in the Birmingham Daily Post referred to the word as a local term in connection to the boycotting of a Ballinrobe merchant . Still in 1880 , The Illustrated London News described how " To ' Boycott ' has already become a verb active , signifying to ' <unk> ' , to intimidate , to ' send to Coventry ' , and to ' taboo ' " . In 1888 , the word was included in the first volume of A New English Dictionary on Historical Principles ( later known as the Oxford English Dictionary ) . According to Gary <unk> in his book , Boycott in America : how imagination and ideology shape the legal mind , " Apparently there was no other word in the English language to describe this dispute . " The word also entered the lexicon of languages other than English , such as Dutch , French , German , Polish and Russian . 
 = = Later life = = 
 After leaving Ireland , Boycott and his family visited the United States . His arrival in New York generated a great deal of media interest ; the New York Tribune said that , " The arrival of Captain Boycott , who has involuntarily added a new word to the language , is an event of something like international interest . " The New York Times said , " For private reasons the visitor made the voyage incognito , being registered simply as ' Charles Cunningham . ' " The purpose of the visit was to see friends in Virginia , including Murray McGregor Blacker , a friend from his time on Achill Island who had settled in the United States . Boycott returned to England after some months . 
 In 1886 , Boycott became a land agent for Hugh Adair 's Flixton estate in Suffolk , England . He had a passion for horses and racing , and became secretary of the Bungay race committee . Boycott continued to spend holidays in Ireland , and according to Joyce Marlow , he left Ireland without bitterness . 
 In early 1897 , Boycott 's health became very poor . In an attempt to improve his health , he and his wife went on a cruise to Malta . In Brindisi , he became seriously ill , and had to return to England . His health continued to deteriorate , and on 19 June 1897 he died at his home in Flixton , aged 65 . His funeral took place in the church at Burgh St Peter , conducted by his nephew Arthur St John Boycott , who was at Lough Mask during the first boycott . Charles Boycott 's widow , Annie , was subsequently sued over the funeral expenses and other debts , and had to sell some assets . A number of London newspapers , including The Times , published obituaries . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 Charles Boycott and the events that led to his name entering the English language have been the subject of several works of fiction . The first was Captain Boycott , a 1946 romantic novel by Phillip Rooney . This was the basis for the 1947 film Captain Boycott — directed by Frank Lauder and starred Stewart Granger , Kathleen Ryan , Alastair Sim , and Cecil Parker as Charles Boycott . More recently the story was the subject of the 2012 novel Boycott , by Colin C. Murphy . 
 = Neighbours = 
 Neighbours is an Australian television soap opera . It was first broadcast on the Seven Network on 18 March 1985 . It was created by TV executive Reg Watson , who proposed the idea of making a show that focused on realistic stories and portrayed adults and teenagers who talk openly and solve their problems together . Seven decided to commission the show following the success of Watson 's Sons and Daughters , which aired on the network . Although successful in Melbourne , Neighbours underperformed in the Sydney market and struggled for months before Seven cancelled it . The show was immediately bought by rival network Ten . After taking over production of the show , the new network had to build replica sets because Seven destroyed the originals to prevent its rival from obtaining them . Ten began screening Neighbours on 20 January 1986 , taking off where the previous series left off and commencing with episode 171 . Neighbours has since become the longest running drama series in Australian television and in 2005 , it was inducted collectively into the Logie Hall of Fame . On 11 January 2011 , Neighbours moved to Ten 's digital channel , Eleven . 
 The show 's storylines concern the domestic and professional lives of the people who live and work in Erinsborough , a fictional suburb of Melbourne , Victoria . The series primarily centres on the residents of Ramsay Street , a short cul @-@ de @-@ sac , and its neighbouring area , the Lassiters complex , which includes a bar , hotel , cafe , police station , lawyers ' office and park . Neighbours began with three families created by Watson – the Ramsays , the Robinsons and the Clarkes . Watson said that he wanted to show three families who are friends living in a small street . The Robinsons and the Ramsays had a long history and were involved in an ongoing rivalry . Pin Oak Court , in Vermont South , is the real cul @-@ de @-@ sac that has doubled for Ramsay Street since 1985 . All of the houses featured are real and the residents allow the production to shoot external scenes in their yards . The interior scenes are filmed at the Global Television studios in Forest Hill . 
 Through its entire run in Australia , Neighbours has been screened as a twenty @-@ two @-@ minute episode each week night in an early @-@ evening slot . In Australia it is currently broadcast each weeknight at 6 : 30 pm on Eleven . The show is produced by FremantleMedia and has been sold to over sixty countries around the world , making it one of Australia 's most successful media exports . Neighbours was first screened in the United Kingdom in October 1986 on BBC1 where it achieved huge popularity among British audiences in the late 1980s and 1990s . In 2008 , it moved to the UK 's Channel 5 . 
 = = History = = 
 Neighbours was created in the early @-@ to @-@ mid @-@ 1980s by Australian TV executive Reg Watson . Watson decided to create a soap opera after working on Crossroads and seeing how successful it and Coronation Street were in Britain . He had already created such successful Australian made soap operas as The Young Doctors , Prisoner and Sons and Daughters . Watson proposed the idea of making a show that would focus on more realistic stories and portray teens and adults who talk openly to each other and solve their problems together . Watson , who worked for the Grundy production company , decided to make his show appeal to both Australia and Britain . In 2005 , Darren Devlyn and Caroline Frost from the Herald Sun reported that Watson then took his idea to the Nine Network in 1982 , but it was rejected . Former Network Nine chief executive Ian Johnson commented that it was one of the " biggest missed opportunities " in his twenty @-@ four years at the network . He added " I remember it being discussed , but I 'm not exactly sure what went against it . It may have had something to do with the fact we 'd picked up Sale of the Century with Tony Barber in 1980 and it was doing huge business , so we didn 't have a pressing need for a five @-@ night @-@ a @-@ week show . " Watson then took his idea to the Seven Network , who commissioned the show , following the success of his other Seven Network soap opera , Sons and Daughters . Several titles for the show were discussed , including People Like Us , One Way Street , No Through Road and Living Together until the network programmers voted on Neighbours . The first episode was broadcast on 18 March 1985 and reviews for the show were favourable . However , the Melbourne @-@ produced programme underperformed in the Sydney market and after a meeting of the general managers , Seven decided to drop the show in October 1985 . Seven 's Melbourne programme boss , Gary Fenton said Sydney chief Ted Thomas told the other general managers that Seven could not afford three dramas and argued that the Sydney @-@ based A Country Practice and Sons and Daughters be retained . 
 Neighbours was immediately bought by Seven 's rival Network Ten . The new network had to build replica sets when it took over production after Seven destroyed the original sets to prevent the rival network obtaining them . Ten began screening the series with episode 171 on 20 January 1986 . In 1986 , the series was bought by the BBC as part of their new daytime schedule in the United Kingdom . Neighbours made its debut on BBC1 on 27 October 1986 starting with the pilot episode . It soon gained a loyal audience and the show became very popular within the student market and was watched by 16 million viewers . In 1988 Neighbours became the only television show to have its entire cast flown over to the UK to make an appearance at the Royal Variety Performance in front of the Queen . Neighbours has since become the longest running drama series in Australian television and the seventh longest running serial drama still on the air in the world . In 2005 , Neighbours celebrated its 20th anniversary and over twenty former cast members returned for a special episode , which saw them sitting down to watch a documentary about Ramsay Street . At the Logie Award ceremony that year , the show was inducted into the Logie Hall of Fame . 
 2007 saw the show undergo a revamp , which included a switch to recording in HDTV , the introduction of a new family , the departure of several existing characters and a new version of the show 's familiar theme song and opening titles . In addition , episode titles were abandoned , having been in use for the previous three years . Daniel Bennett , the new head of drama at Network Ten , announced that the crux of the Ramsay Street story would go " back to basics " and follow a less sensational path than of late with the emphasis on family relations and suburban reality . Executive producer Ric Pellizzeri said new writers , actors and sets would bring the soap back to its glory days . He added " We moved too far into event @-@ driven stories rather than the character @-@ driven stories that made Neighbours what it is " . The relaunch failed to attract more viewers in Australia . Pellizzeri left the series at the end of 2007 and former Neighbours scriptwriter , Susan Bower , became the new executive producer . In 2008 , Neighbours was branded " too white " by black and Asian viewers in Britain and in Australia there was talk of a " White Australia policy " when it came to casting actors for soaps . In response to the criticism , Bower made a decision to add more ethnically diverse extras , small walk on roles and speaking parts , as well as introducing the character of Sunny Lee ( played by Hany Lee ) an exchange student from South Korea . 
 On 18 March 2010 , Neighbours celebrated its 25th anniversary . In April , Channel 5 in the UK launched a search to find a female actress to play the part of Poppy Rogers . The search was similar to the Dolly magazine competition in Australia . August saw Neighbours air its 6000th episode . Digital Spy revealed that the week @-@ long 6000th episode celebrations would see the wedding of regular characters , Donna Freedman ( Margot Robbie ) and Ringo Brown ( Sam Clark ) . It was later announced that an attempt on the life of long term regular , Paul Robinson ( Stefan Dennis ) would be the focus of the actual 6000th episode . Bower said " Last week I saw episode 6 @,@ 000 . This marks Australian television history . The <unk> episode falls on a Friday so the whole week is a special one . As Stefan Dennis – Paul Robinson – was in the first episode 25 years ago , it was decided that his character play a most important role in this very special event " . 
 In late 2010 , TV Tonight reported that Neighbours would reduce crew operations in 2011 so production could be upgraded . The changes meant that the location manager and catering team were no longer required , studio shoots would be reduced from three cameras to two , and location shots will be mainly confined to the Ramsay Street and Lassiter 's complex sets , with occasional filming in one @-@ off places . Of the changes , FremantleMedia said " Neighbours is undergoing a work flow upgrade to accommodate advances in technology and production techniques to ensure we are at the forefront of professionalism and efficiency . " They added that the show 's production model had been in place since 1985 and that it was time to evolve it . On 14 March 2011 , The Australian reported that Neighbours has become the first television show available to watch on a free iPhone application . Viewers are able to watch whole episodes within three hours of them airing on Eleven . Nick Spooner , the head of Ten digital media said " This is part of what we call our ' three @-@ screen approach ' – broadcast , online and mobile – and it is intended to build viewer engagement with a show and our brand . This is a way for us to stay in touch with our audience and to keep them coming back . " To celebrate the wedding of Prince William of Wales and Kate Middleton , Neighbours filmed a specially commissioned scene for the UK episode airing on the same day as the wedding . The episode , which had already aired in Australia , marked the first time an Australian show recorded extra scenes for a UK broadcaster . 
 On 25 October 2011 , it was announced Bower would be leaving Neighbours in December 2011 to move into a new international role with FremantleMedia . Of her departure , Bower told Colin Vickery of the Herald Sun , " I love Neighbours , it is a wonderful show and because of this I felt it was important that fresh eyes and brains take over to keep this Australian icon contemporary . Having said that , I 'm really excited about the new role and thank FremantleMedia for this wonderful opportunity . " Former City Homicide producer , Richard Jasek , took over Bower 's role , while Alan Hardy took over the role of producer . On 4 December 2013 , it was confirmed that Jasek would be leaving Neighbours and Jason Herbison had been promoted to series producer . FremantleMedia 's head of drama Jo Porter became executive producer , while Laurence Wilson is the associate producer . In March 2015 , Neighbours celebrated its 30th anniversary and twelve former cast members returned for the anniversary episodes that revolved around an Erinsborough Festival . Network Ten and Channel 5 aired a documentary special titled Neighbours 30th : The Stars <unk> , which featured interviews with current and former cast members , including Kylie Minogue , Jason Donovan and Guy Pearce , reflecting on their time on the show . 
 = = Setting = = 
 Neighbours ' main focus is the fictional Ramsay Street , a residential cul @-@ de @-@ sac in the fictional Melbourne suburb of Erinsborough . The street was named after the grandfather of original character Max Ramsay ( Francis Bell ) . Other locations include Erinsborough High School and the Lassiter 's complex , which contains the Lassiter 's Hotel , Waterhole bar , Harold 's Store cafe , the lawyers office Rebecchi Law , and the police station . Ahead of the 25th anniversary the Erinsborough village set underwent a makeover . The cafe and bar remained the same , but the centre of the complex was upgraded . Lassiter 's Hotel was given a new logo and gained a second floor with outdoor seating area . Erinsborough Hospital and the police station received new facades , a used car lot was created near the garage and a new university set was created . 
 Pin Oak Court , in Vermont South , is the real cul @-@ de @-@ sac that doubles for Ramsay Street . All of the houses featured in the show are real and the residents allow Neighbours to shoot external scenes in their front and back yards and on occasions , in their garages . Neighbours has been filmed in Pin Oak Court since the series began in 1985 and it has since become popular with tourists . Tours to the cul @-@ de @-@ sac run throughout the year . The interior scenes are filmed at the Global Television studios in Forest Hill , the adjoining suburb in which Pin Oak Court is located . 
 Through much of the show 's run , it was not stated in which Australian city Erinsborough was located . The rivalry between Sydney and Melbourne meant that scripts did not mention that Erinsborough was a suburb of the latter city , until 1994 . Since the 2000s , it has been explicitly stated that Erinsborough is a suburb of Melbourne . Other Australian locations mentioned and sometimes seen in the series include the fictitious suburbs of West Waratah , Eden Hills , and Anson 's Corner . Real @-@ life Australian towns in the state of Victoria such as Colac , Frankston and Shepparton are sometimes referred to . Oakey in Queensland is also mentioned and sometimes seen . On 27 August 2010 , Neighbours filmed scenes in Sydney 's Darling Harbour and on board a cruise ship . The episodes marked only the third time that the show has filmed scenes outside of Victoria . In October 2011 , Neighbours filmed scenes in Port Douglas , Queensland and around the Great Barrier Reef region . The show filmed scenes in Geelong in 2016 . 
 Filming locations outside of Australia have included Kenya , the United States and the UK , which has seen Neighbours episodes filmed there on three occasions . In February 1990 , Lyme Park in Cheshire doubled as the Ledgerwood estate set in Yorkshire . Derek Nimmo guest @-@ starred as the fictitious Lord Ledgerwood in two of the episodes . In November 1992 , the characters Rick Alessi ( Dan Falzon ) and Debbie Martin ( Marnie Reece @-@ Wilmore ) visited London to attend a Michael Jackson concert . The second London @-@ based storyline was broadcast in late March 2007 , when Susan ( Jackie Woodburne ) and Karl Kennedy ( Alan Fletcher ) were seen taking a ride on the London Eye and being married on a boat on the River Thames . 
 = = Broadcasting = = 
 Through its entire run in Australia , Neighbours has been screened as a 21 @-@ minute episode each weeknight in an early @-@ evening slot . Neighbours is on air for approximately forty @-@ four weeks per year . It is broadcast from early January to early December and goes off air for around four to five weeks during the Christmas and New Year period . The show currently airs at 6 : 30 pm . The last five aired episodes shown are available to watch on the Neighbours official Australian website , as a part of Network Ten 's Catch Up TV service . 
 When the show began in 1985 , the first season was broadcast on the Seven Network , at 5 : 30 pm in Sydney , at 6 : 00 pm in Melbourne and Adelaide and at 7 : 00 pm in Brisbane . The show 's transmission in other areas was varied and many regional channels declined to purchase the series . When the show debuted on Network Ten in 1986 it screened at 7 : 00 pm . In 1992 the show moved to 6 : 30 pm to avoid direct competition from rival soap opera Home and Away on the Seven Network . Repeat episodes of Neighbours episodes from the 1988 – 1991 period were broadcast between 2000 and June 2003 on Network Ten . These episodes were seen at 3 : 30 pm , before moving to 11 : 30 am . During 2008 Ten HD broadcast the previous week 's episodes in an omnibus edition each Sunday . These omnibus editions did not return in 2009 as Ten HD was replaced by One HD from March 2009 . 
 In August 2010 , The Daily Telegraph reported that Neighbours would be moving to Ten 's new digital channel , to make way for a new current affairs show . They said " It 's part of a re @-@ branding of Ten 's free @-@ to @-@ air channel , targeting the older demographic . The ' younger ' shows , like Neighbours , will go on to one of Ten 's digital channels " . It was later confirmed that the show would be moving to digital channel , Eleven . Network Ten 's programmer , David Mott said " We believe Neighbours is perfectly suited to Eleven 's audience strategy and will find a successful and enduring home on Eleven " . Neighbours moved to Eleven on 11 January 2011 , the channel 's launch day . An encore of the previous day 's episode is broadcast at 7 : 00 am weekdays on Network Ten . Eleven also broadcast the last five aired episodes shown in an omnibus edition each Sunday . Repeat episodes of Neighbours from the 2007 period , titled Old School Neighbours , were broadcast in 2013 on Eleven . These episodes were seen during weekdays at 9 : 30 am , before moving to 11 : 00 am . 
 = = = International = = = 
 Neighbours has been sold to over 60 countries around the world and is one of Australia 's most successful media exports . 
 Neighbours has proved to be more popular in the United Kingdom than in Australia . It was screened on BBC One from 1986 until 2008 . The series started airing on 27 October 1986 , as part of BBC1 's revamped daytime schedules . Neighbours went out twice a day , with an earlier morning omnibus and then a showing at lunchtime . Michael Grade , the channel 's then controller , was advised by his daughter to move the series to 5 : 35 pm , as she and her friends kept missing it due to being at school , which took place from January 1988 . The show then started attracting larger audiences , peaking in 1990 at over 21 million . Towards the late 2000s , Neighbours was normally attracting an average of 3 million viewers for its lunchtime showing and 2 @.@ 6 million viewers for its early @-@ evening repeat . It was frequently the highest @-@ rating daytime programme in the UK , outside of news bulletins . 
 In 2008 , the UK broadcast moved to rival channel Channel 5 following the BBC 's decision not to keep the show after being asked to pay £ 300m over eight years by FremantleMedia ( three times the show 's usual fee ) . Both Channel 5 and FremantleMedia were owned at that time by the German RTL Group . The first episode to be shown on Channel 5 in February 2008 was watched by 2 @.@ 2 million viewers ( an audience share of 14 @.@ 2 % ) , a drop of 300 @,@ 000 from the BBC 's average . However , the move boosted Channel 5 's usual share for the 5 @.@ 30 pm slot by three and a half times . On 4 February 2009 , Neighbours ' 5 : 30 pm showing was seen by 1 @.@ 94 million viewers and by 2012 , the <unk> showing had averaged 1 million viewers . UK viewers are able to catch up with episodes with Channel 5 's video catch up service , Demand 5 , similar to the catch up service in Australia . Channel 5 also have a deal with YouTube , allowing viewers to watch episodes for free on the video sharing site after they have been transmitted . 
 From 4 January 2016 , Channel 5 began broadcasting episodes on the same day as Australia . Channel 5 's commissioning editor Greg Barnett explained that closing the transmission gap would reduce spoilers and the amount of viewers watching the show illegally online . From mid @-@ 2016 , the show also began airing every week @-@ night on Nickelodeon as part of their Nick at Nite programming block , broadcasting the same episode that was earlier seen on Channel 5 . 
 In New Zealand , Neighbours is broadcast on TV2 at 6 : 30 pm weekdays . In October 2010 , it began airing episodes at the same pace as Australia . The show was initially broadcast by TVNZ in 1988 , but by 1996 it was removed from the schedule . TV4 ( now C4 ) picked the show up and began broadcasting it from 1997 . They dropped it in 2000 and it returned to TV2 in 2002 . Repeats of the previous day 's episode of Neighbours were formerly shown at 2 : 30 pm weekdays and are now shown at 11 @.@ 00 am weekdays . The show moved to 5 : 25 pm weeknights on TV One in late 2007 . After a couple of months , the show moved to 3 : 50 pm weekdays . The show eventually moved back to TV2 . The TV2 website offers viewers the chance to watch episodes online with its <unk> service . In Ireland , Neighbours is broadcast on RTÉ Television at 1 : 55 pm on RTÉ One and repeated on RTÉ Two at 5 : 35 pm each weekday . FremantleMedia secured a long term deal with RTÉ in 2007 for them to transmit the show after the BBC pulled out of negotiations . In Kenya , Neighbours is broadcast on the <unk> network Monday to Friday at 12 : 30 pm with an omnibus on Sunday mornings . In Barbados , Neighbours is broadcast on the <unk> channel at 1 : 00 pm Monday to Friday . In Canada , CFMT @-@ TV in Toronto broadcast Neighbours on weeknights at 11 : 00 pm , starting in September 1990 . From 20 May 1991 , CFMT moved the show to 4 : 00 pm . After announcing its cancellation , CFMT decided to keep Neighbours on its schedule throughout September 1994 , following numerous letters and telephone calls . In Belgium Neighbours airs Monday till Friday at <unk> ( episodes are 7 months behind Australia ) After 27 years on air , it is still the most popular foreign soap in Belgium . 
 In the United States , Neighbours premiered on KCOP @-@ TV in Los Angeles on 3 June 1991 at 5 : 30 pm weekdays . KCOP planned on cancelling the show by the end of the month due to low ratings , but brought it back due to viewer demand at a 9 : 30 am daily time slot from 1 July to 30 August 1991 . New York City station WWOR @-@ TV showed Neighbours weekdays 5 : 30 pm from 17 June to 17 September 1991 . In April 2004 , the show began broadcasting nationally on the television channel Oxygen . A spokeswomen from the channel said " Now our viewers can join in on the good , the bad and the endlessly entertaining lives of our Aussie neighbours . " The episodes started from the Scully family 's arrival in 1999 and were aired for a six @-@ week trial basis . The show was broadcast in the afternoon with two episodes being shown back to back at 1 : 00 pm and 2 : 00 pm . After a couple of weeks , the show was moved to a late @-@ night time slot and it eventually left the air . On 7 July 2014 , Todd Spangler from Variety reported that FremantleMedia International had signed a deal with U.S. subscription service Hulu giving it exclusive rights to the most recent season of Neighbours . The soap began airing from 14 July , with new episodes airing daily from Monday through to Friday , on Hulu and Hulu Plus services . The episodes were four weeks behind the Australian broadcast . All past and current episodes of Neighbours were removed from Hulu on 19 September 2015 , stating they had lost the rights . 
 = = Popularity and viewership = = 
 = = = 1985 – 1990s = = = 
 Neighbours initially aired on Seven Network where it struggled to attract high ratings leading to its cancellation by the network four months after it premiered . The series was then picked up by Network Ten . After the usual break in broadcast over the summer non ratings period the series made its debut on Ten in 1986 . Ten revamped the show , adding several new , younger cast members including Jason Donovan as Scott Robinson and Kylie Minogue as Charlene Mitchell . When the show began on Ten it initially attracted low ratings , so the Network worked hard to publicise the series . Ten 's publicity drive was designed to promote the show in a star @-@ focused campaign recalling that of the Hollywood star system where stars were packaged to feed into a fan culture . This paid off and by the end of 1987 ratings had improved for the show . The episode featuring Scott and Charlene 's wedding achieved the highest ever ratings for Neighbours and it became one of the highest rating soap episodes ever in Australia . The same episode attracted 20 million viewers when it was aired in the United Kingdom . By the early 1990s , Australian audiences had decreased although viewing figures had recovered slightly by the end of the decade . In 1994 , Network Ten told TV Week that they would be introducing a " younger , livelier look with six regular characters under the age of 18 " in a bid to generate interest . It was then that they introduced the characters of <unk> Rebecchi played by Anthony <unk> and Serendipity Gottlieb played by <unk> Hill . 
 In 1996 , Kimberley Davies , who played Annalise Hartman , quit the series . Then Caroline <unk> fell ill and her character Cheryl Stark was temporarily recast with former Prisoner actress Colette Mann . This made producers nervous that viewing figures might decrease , so they implemented a series of plots to keep viewers interested . These included a cameo from Clive James and an explosion , which destroyed the doctor 's surgery in the Lassiter 's complex . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 In the 2000s , rival soap opera Home and Away emerged as more popular than Neighbours in Australia . As of 2004 , Neighbours was regularly attracting just under a million viewers per episode . In 2007 , Home and Away was averaging 1 @.@ 4 million viewers in Australia to Neighbours ' 700 @,@ 000 . During the revamp of 2007 , the episode broadcast on 23 July 2007 saw the introduction of a new family , updated sets , new theme music and graphics . Ratings for that episode averaged 1 @.@ 05 million viewers in the 6 : 30 pm. slot . It was the first time the programme 's viewing figures had topped 1 million in 2007 . By the end of 2007 it was reported that producers had hoped the Neighbours revamp would push the ratings up to between 900 @,@ 000 to 1 million an episode . It had , however , resulted in a more modest boost , with ratings hovering at about 800 @,@ 000 a night . The same viewing period had shown an increase in ratings for Home and Away , which was now averaging 1 @.@ 4 million viewers every night . 
 In February 2008 , new executive producer , Susan Bower , announced that she would be implementing further changes to the programme . Bower promised to retain the return to traditional Neighbours values , but with an injection of drama that remains recognisable and relevant . Ratings rose to almost 900 @,@ 000 in mid @-@ 2008 , but generally ratings begin to fall towards the end of each year , usually averaging around 700 @,@ 000 . On 17 July 2009 , during the aftermath of the Parker family 's car accident and the dramatic death of Bridget Parker ( Eloise Mignon ) , Neighbours achieved higher ratings than Home And Away . Neighbours achieved 998 @,@ 000 viewers and placed 6th for the night , Home And Away placed 7th . 
 = = = 2010s = = = 
 In January 2010 , Neighbours returned to Australian screens to an audience of 563 @,@ 000 . On 20 January , the ratings fell to a low of 426 @,@ 000 , making it one of the programme 's lowest ever ratings in Australia . A July 2010 report showed figures had dropped 20 % , from having 1 @.@ 2 million viewers in 1991 to a low of 618 @,@ 000 in 2010 . A Network Ten spokesperson commented " Most of the show 's budget is covered by its UK deal with Channel 5 and the 50 @-@ odd other countries it is seen in , so it 's not a financial problem for Ten despite the low ratings . And Ten needs the show to score the Australian content and drama points required for it to hold on to a broadcasting licence " . On 29 October 2010 , Neighbours ' ratings dropped to a low figure of 386 @,@ 000 viewers . Viewing numbers for Network Ten that night were down across all programmes . The show 's highest figure of the week was 590 @,@ 000 on 25 October 2010 . 
 Following its move to digital multichannel Eleven , Neighbours attracted 254 @,@ 000 viewers for the first episode broadcast on 11 January 2011 . This was half the number of viewers that watched it on Network Ten ; the Herald Sun reported that it was a good result as " bosses were only expecting 133 @,@ 000 . " Neighbours became Eleven 's most @-@ watched show and the third highest rating show on digital multichannels that night . Programming chief , David Mott stated " Last night 's strong result for Neighbours already suggests the audience will follow the folks from Ramsay Street to their brand new neighbourhood on Eleven . " On 24 January 2011 , Neighbours achieved 330 @,@ 000 viewers and three days later 355 @,@ 000 viewers tuned in , becoming the show 's highest rating yet on Eleven . The show had more viewers than the Ten Evening News in the 16 – 39 and 18 – 49 demographic . On 13 June 2011 , Neighbours was watched by 455 @,@ 000 viewers , making it the highest rating show on digital multichannels that night and breaking its previous ratings record on the channel . On 27 May 2013 , episode <unk> of Neighbours was watched by an audience of 405 @,@ 000 viewers , which was the highest rating the series had achieved in nearly two years . Neighbours has traditionally rated between 250 @,@ 000 and 350 @,@ 000 since moving to Eleven in January 2011 . 
 = = Storylines = = 
 Neighbours storylines frequently focus on family problems , intergenerational clashes , school problems , romances and domestic issues . Despite the restrictive 6 : 30 pm time slot , Neighbours has also covered many serious problems such as teenage pregnancy , marital breakdown , imprisonment , career problems , financial problems , pregnancy , abortion , eating disorders , alcoholism , adultery , drug use and drug trafficking , robbery , stalking , kidnapping , accidental death , hit @-@ and @-@ runs , murder , shootings , and incest . In the 2000s , the show dealt with controversial issues such as sexuality , gambling , prostitution , and surrogacy . Health issues were also focused on , including multiple sclerosis , bipolar disorder , epilepsy , amnesia , congenital diaphragmatic hernia , and <unk> 's disease . In September 2014 , the show featured a natural disaster storyline , in which a tornado descended on Erinsborough and Ramsay Street . 
 = = Characters = = 
 In 1985 , Neighbours started out with three families created by Watson – the Ramsays , the Robinsons and the Clarkes . Watson said that he wanted to show three families living in a small street , who are friends . Max Ramsay ( Francis Bell ) , his wife Maria ( Dasha <unk> ) and their sons Shane ( Peter O 'Brien ) and Danny ( David <unk> ) lived at <unk> Ramsay Street . Single father , Jim Robinson ( Alan Dale ) lived next door with his children , Paul ( Stefan Dennis ) , Julie ( Vikki Blanche ) , Scott ( Darius Perkins ) and Lucy ( Kylie <unk> ) . His mother @-@ in @-@ law , Helen Daniels ( Anne Haddy ) also lived with him . Bachelor Des Clarke ( Paul Keane ) invited Daphne Lawrence ( Elaine Smith ) to live at No. 28 with him and they were later married . The Robinsons and the Ramsays had a long history in the street and they were often involved in an ongoing rivalry . When Network Ten picked up the show and revamped it , they brought in new and younger actors including Kylie Minogue as Charlene Mitchell and Jason Donovan , who replaced Darius Perkins as Scott Robinson . Many families , including the Alessi , Bishop , Hancock , Hoyland , Rebecchi , <unk> , Timmins ' and <unk> have moved in and out of the street over the years . 
 When storylines for certain characters become tired , the scriptwriters simply move one family out and replace it with a new one . Ramsay Street is now a mixture of older characters like Lou Carpenter ( Tom Oliver ) , Toadfish Rebecchi ( Ryan Moloney ) , Karl ( Alan Fletcher ) and Susan Kennedy ( Jackie Woodburne ) , as well as newer characters such as the Canning and Turner families . Watson originally wanted to show young people communicating with older people , which means that the cast is a mix of young actors in their teens or early 20s and older , more experienced hands . The last remaining original character , Helen Daniels , departed the show in 1997 due to the ill @-@ health of Anne Haddy . In 2004 , original cast member Stefan Dennis returned to Neighbours full @-@ time as Paul Robinson . Paul is currently the only remaining original character in the series . In February 2009 , it was announced that producers would be introducing a new generation of the Ramsay family to the show , over a decade after the family had last appeared . Kate ( Ashleigh Brewer ) , Harry ( Will Moore ) and Sophie Ramsay ( Kaiya Jones ) made their first appearances in May 2009 . 
 = = = Celebrity guest appearances = = = 
 Throughout its run , Neighbours has featured several guest appearances from celebrities playing themselves or characters . Early cameos included former Skyhooks musician Red Symons , Warwick Capper , Molly Meldrum , Chris Lowe of Pet Shop Boys , and Clive James . During the 2000s and 2010s , the series featured appearances from The Wiggles , Shane Warne , former Spice Girls singer Emma Bunton , Little Britain 's Matt Lucas and David Walliams , The Veronicas , André Rieu , wrestler Dave Batista , Lily Allen and Paula Abdul . 
 = = Theme tune = = 
 The theme tune to Neighbours was composed by Tony Hatch whose then wife , Jackie Trent , wrote the lyrics . Since 1985 , there have been eight versions of the theme tune . The song has been voted the world 's most recognised television theme song and the lyrics were quoted by John Smith , then British Shadow Chancellor , in a House of Commons debate on Government economic policy . From 2007 , the theme tune to Neighbours was sung by Sandra de Jong . In February 2013 , Network Ten and FremantleMedia announced that they were searching across Australia and the United Kingdom for a singer to record a new version of the theme tune . The competition resulted in a tie and the new theme was sung as a duet by Daniel Boys and Stephanie Angelini . That version of the theme tune began airing from 15 April 2013 . A new retro @-@ inspired theme tune sung by Garth Ploog debuted on 5 January 2015 as part of the show 's 30th anniversary celebrations . 
 = = Titles = = 
 Since Neighbours began in 1985 , it has used its opening titles sequence to introduce the major characters which currently feature in the show . The sequences often feature the characters in family or domestic groups . Each episode 's titles sequence was preceded by a recap of events from recent episodes featuring the characters who were to appear in the new episode . 
 In 2002 , Neighbours debuted an all new style of titles with a remixed version of the theme tune . The titles showed characters together in groups according to gender , a change from the previous ones which were taken outside . 2007 saw Neighbours debut an updated theme , a new logo and new " optimistic , contemporary " titles . A photo booth montage was played and characters were seen rowing boats , walking along piers and eating outside . The sequence also contained shots of upcoming scenes . In August 2009 , Neighbours introduced a new titles format . The first episode of each week begins with a trailer previewing the week 's events . The usual recap of storylines switched to after the opening titles of each episode for the first time since 1998 . The end of episode teasers returned and are now made in @-@ house by the Neighbours production team . 
 In September 2009 , Susan Bower announced that Neighbours would introduce new opening titles for the 25th anniversary and they would feature a bit of " bling " . The titles were created by Visual Playground , who shot a series of scenes featuring the cast in settings familiar to viewers . The titles made their debut on 18 March 2010 . A new set of opening titles made their debut on 15 April 2013 , along with a new version of the theme tune . Visual Playground once again created and produced the titles . The titles depict the Ramsay Street residents gathering outside their houses for a street party . A writer for Visual Playground explained that they " invented a <unk> graphic device that uses the play of light in a formation to locate the houses in the cul @-@ de @-@ sac . Six overlapping circles represent the six houses of Ramsay St and the off street cast members . All the circles together reinforce the sense of community that makes up Neighbours . " A new retro @-@ inspired logo , theme tune and opening titles debuted on 5 January 2015 as part of the show 's 30th anniversary celebrations . The new logo is a reimagined contemporary version of the original Neighbours logo from 1985 . The titles show characters in a variety of familiar settings around Erinsborough and ends with a look at Ramsay Street from above . 
 = = Awards and nominations = = 
 Neighbours has received a wide variety of awards and nominations throughout its run . The show has received 81 Logie Award nominations , of which it has won 30 . It has also been nominated for " Most Popular Daytime Programme " at the UK 's National Television Awards in five of the six years from 2000 to 2006 . In 1997 , the show won an award for Best Episode in A Television Drama Serial at the Australian Film Institute Awards . Two Neighbours actors have been nominated for Rose D 'Or awards , once in 2004 for Ryan Moloney and again in 2005 for Jackie Woodburne . Neighbours has also won three Australian Writers ' Guild awards . 
 = = Home media and spin @-@ offs = = 
 Since the show 's inception , several spin @-@ offs have been produced , including books , music , DVDs and internet webisodes . In 1991 , an officially licensed video game of Neighbours was created by Ian Copeland and developed by Zeppelin Games under their <unk> label for the ZX Spectrum , Commodore 64 , Atari ST , and Amiga ; it was re @-@ released by Zeppelin in 1992 on budget price . In the game , the player took on the role of Scott Robinson and had to skateboard around four whole courses . 
 Episodes of Neighbours have been released on several DVDs . Neighbours : Defining Moments was the first DVD box set released in 2002 . It is a compilation of fifteen classic episodes and a photo gallery . The Neighbours : The Iconic Episodes Volume 1 DVD box set was released in 2008 and contains twenty @-@ three episodes , the 1000th episode party celebration special and a photo gallery . Neighbours : The Iconic Episodes Volume Two contains twenty @-@ four episodes over three discs . One disc is dedicated to the character of Charlene . In 2012 , early episodes of Neighbours were released on three DVD box sets in Germany . From April 2012 , Shock Entertainment began releasing DVD box sets of Neighbours episodes in broadcast order from the beginning . As of October 2014 , five box sets have been released . 
 Neighbours has released three internet webisode series via their YouTube channel . The first series was titled Steph in Prison and coincided with Stephanie Scully 's ( Carla Bonner ) return to Neighbours in April 2013 . The following year , Brennan on the Run focusing on Mark Brennan 's ( Scott McGregor ) time in witness protection was released . Neighbours vs Zombies was launched in October 2014 and featured the returns of many former characters who had previously died in the show . 
 = Francis Harvey = 
 Major Francis John William Harvey , VC ( 29 April 1873 – 31 May 1916 ) was an officer of the British Royal Marine Light Infantry during the First World War . Harvey was posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross , the highest military award for gallantry in the face of the enemy given to British and Commonwealth forces , for his actions at the height of the Battle of Jutland . A long serving Royal Marine officer descended of a military family , during his career Harvey became a specialist in naval artillery , serving on many large warships as gunnery training officer and gun commander . Specially requested for HMS Lion , the flagship of the British battlecruiser fleet , Harvey fought at the battles of Heligoland Bight , Dogger Bank and Jutland . 
 At Jutland , Harvey , although mortally wounded by German shellfire , ordered the magazine of Q turret on the battlecruiser Lion to be flooded . This action prevented the tons of cordite stored there from catastrophically detonating in an explosion that would have destroyed the vessel and all aboard her . Although he succumbed to his injuries seconds later , his dying act may have saved over a thousand lives and prompted Winston Churchill to later comment : " In the long , rough , glorious history of the Royal Marines there is no name and no deed which in its character and consequences ranks above this " . 
 = = Gunnery expert = = 
 Harvey was born in Upper Sydenham , Kent , the son of Commander John William Francis Harvey , RN and Elizabeth Edwards Lavington Harvey née Penny . At age 11 in 1884 , Harvey moved with his family to Southsea and he attended Portsmouth Grammar School , achieving excellent academic results and showing proficiency in languages and debating . Harvey was descended from a military family ; his great @-@ great @-@ grandfather John Harvey had been killed in the Glorious First of June in 1794 and his great @-@ grandfather Admiral Sir Edward Harvey , GCB , RN and grandfather Captain John Harvey of the 9th Regiment of Foot were also prominent military figures . 
 After leaving school , Harvey chose a military career and was accepted by both the Royal Military College , Sandhurst and the Royal Naval College , Greenwich for officer training . Choosing the latter school as a Royal Marines officer cadet , Harvey graduated in 1892 and the following year was made a full lieutenant , joining HMS Wildfire for his first seagoing commission . After just a year at sea , Harvey was back on shore attending gunnery courses at HMS Excellent , qualifying in 1896 as an instructor first class in naval gunnery . Harvey was appointed to the cruiser HMS Phaeton when she was commissioned at Devonport on 8 June 1897 for service on the Pacific Station . In 1898 , whilst on the <unk> , he was reprimanded by the Admiralty for an unfavourable report he released on San Diego Harbour . Returning home the same year , Harvey was given the position of Assistant Instructor for Gunnery at Plymouth Division . During this period , Harvey married Ethel <unk> and had one son , John . 
 Between 1898 and 1904 Harvey spent much of his time attached to the Channel Fleet , aboard HMS Edgar and HMS Diadem , practising and instructing in gunnery . On 28 January 1900 he was promoted to captain . In 1903 he was posted aboard HMS Royal Sovereign , the first of a string of big ship appointments teaching gunnery to the heavy units of the Channel Fleet . By 1909 , Harvey had served on HMS Duke of Edinburgh , HMS St George and the new battlecruiser HMS Inflexible . In 1910 Harvey became Instructor of Gunnery at Chatham Dockyard and the following year was promoted to major , a report on the gunnery school commenting " Degree of efficiency in Gunnery Establishment at Chatham is very high both as regards general training and attention to detail . Great credit is due all concerned particularly to Major <unk> Harvey , the I of G " . 
 The strength of this report subsequently gained Harvey a position as senior marine officer aboard HMS Lion , the 27 @,@ 000 ton flagship of the British battlecruiser fleet . Lion had eight 13 @.@ 5 @-@ inch guns and Harvey was stationed in an office under Q turret directing their operation and fire . Under her new commander , Admiral David Beatty , Harvey served as the senior marine officer on board into the First World War , his first military campaign . 
 = = First World War = = 
 Harvey did not have to wait long to see action , seeing combat for the first time at the Battle of Heligoland Bight just weeks into the war . On 28 August 1914 , Lion and her squadron of HMS Queen Mary and HMS Princess Royal , swept into the Heligoland Bight where German and British cruiser forces were already engaged in a bitter struggle . One German cruiser had already been sunk by the time Beatty 's force arrived , but the German flagship SMS Cöln and cruiser SMS Ariadne were surprised in the fog and destroyed by heavy calibre shells from Beatty 's battlecruisers . German Admiral Leberecht Maass and over 1 @,@ 000 of his sailors were killed , Harvey 's guns scoring several hits on the cruisers . 
 Six months later , Harvey 's guns again caused severe damage to a German force at the Battle of Dogger Bank . Over the previous months , a German battlecruiser squadron under Rear @-@ Admiral Hipper had crossed the North Sea and bombarded British coastal towns on several occasions . On 24 January 1915 another attempt was made , but this time British signals analysts had detected the German movement and using this information the Admiralty dispatched Beatty 's force to intercept and destroy them . Beatty and Hipper 's squadrons collided at 09 : 00 and during the engagement that followed , Lion was left exposed by mis @-@ communication between the ships , which led to HMS Tiger engaging the wrong ship , leaving SMS Moltke uncovered and so able to fire more accurately . The British flagship was hard pressed until one of Lion 's shots penetrated one of Seydlitz 's turrets . A huge explosion destroyed the neighbouring turret as well and killed 160 men , the German flagship only surviving due to the actions of sailor Wilhelm Heidkamp , who wrenched open the water valves to the magazines despite them glowing red hot . 
 Lion was badly damaged in the action by shells from the passing SMS Derfflinger and with her engines failing , dropped back to engage the already sinking SMS Blücher . <unk> signals resulted in the rest of the British fleet returning to support Lion in this task , allowing the rest of the battered German fleet to retire as the British destroyed the hapless Blücher and 792 of her crew . Following the battle , Harvey remained aboard Lion at Rosyth for the whole of 1915 and the first five months of 1916 , continuing his gunnery training and preparations for major fleet action . His preparations came to fruition on the last day of May , when the British fleet sailed to engage the main body of the German High Seas Fleet at the Battle of Jutland . 
 Just after Dogger Bank , Harvey had written to a fellow <unk> officer in HMS Orion describing his experiences : 
 = = = Jutland = = = 
 Beatty 's battlecruisers led the British fleet in its attack , casting south into the North Sea to find the enemy during the afternoon of 31 May 1916 . At 14 : 15 , scouting cruisers spotted the German vanguard and Beatty closed to attack the enemy with his main force . Given time to prepare , Hipper was ready for Beatty with his battlecruisers in line to face Beatty 's approaching ships with their full broadsides . Hipper was also encouraged by the main German battleship fleet under Vice @-@ Admiral Reinhard Scheer , which was steaming northwards close behind him . At 15 : 45 Beatty came within range of the German fleet and the vanguards engaged one another with their opening fusillades . As the two squadrons closed , the Germans found the range better and faster than the British , who were silhouetted against the sun . As a result , German shells pounded the British ships while the German ships remained untouched for the first 10 minutes of the engagement . During this stage of the battle Lion was hit by nine shells from SMS Lützow . One shell at 16 : 00 struck the right upper corner of the left hand gun port at the junction of the face plate and the roof , and punched a piece of the 9 @-@ inch face plate into the turret before detonating , blowing off the armoured roof of the turret and starting a fire , which a damage control party working from outside the turret fought to put out . 
 The initial explosion killed or wounded everyone stationed in the gun house itself . Harvey , despite severe wounds and burns , realised that the shell hoist leading to the ship 's main forward magazine was jammed open . With the hatch open , the flash fire would rapidly travel down to the main magazine resulting in an explosion that would tear the ship in two and kill everyone on board . Staggering across the wreckage of the turret , Harvey gave orders down the voice pipe for the magazine doors to be closed and the magazine compartments to be flooded , an action which would prevent the cordite in the magazines detonating . Turning to his sergeant , the one man still standing , Harvey instructed him to proceed to the bridge and give a full report to the ship 's captain Ernle Chatfield ( a standard drill in damage exercises ) . Seconds later , Harvey collapsed and died from his wounds . The sergeant went immediately to the bridge and notified the captain of Harvey 's actions before being taken below to have his wounds dressed . 
 As soon as the turret had been hit the captain had ordered Q magazine doors closed and the magazine flooded , the order passing to the Transmitting Station below the armoured deck where Stoker 1st Class William Yeo was entrusted with passing the order on . The magazine was consequently flooded and locked up within minutes of the hit . However the cordite charges which had fallen down from gun house after the hit were not removed to safety , and there were still ready charges in the working chamber . A large number of crewmen still remained in the shell room , magazine handing room and working chamber . The fire which was thought to have been put out after the hit on the turret gained strength and ignited the remaining cordite charges , setting off a large explosion at 16 : 28 which killed the turret crewmen , the flame of the explosion reaching as high as the top of the ship 's masts . Even with the precautions taken in hand , the magazine doors were later found to be severely buckled – only the seawater in the magazine behind it prevented the blast reaching inside . Other ships of the battlecruiser fleet were less lucky ; at about the same time as Harvey 's death , HMS Indefatigable was torn to pieces by a series of magazine explosions that claimed 1 @,@ 013 lives and just minutes after that HMS Queen Mary exploded " like a puffball " in one huge column of grey smoke , killing 1 @,@ 275 sailors . Hours later during the main battlefleet engagement , Admiral Horace Hood 's flagship HMS Invincible was destroyed with 1 @,@ 032 lives . All three ships were lost as the result of magazine explosions similar to the one narrowly avoided on Lion . 
 = = Remembrance = = 
 Harvey 's charred corpse was taken from the wreckage of Q turret in the aftermath of battle and buried at sea with full honours alongside the other 98 fatal casualties Lion had suffered . His bravery in the face of certain death did not go unnoticed ; he was mentioned by name in Admiral Jellicoe 's post @-@ battle dispatch and he was posthumously awarded the Victoria Cross . Harvey 's widow Ethel was presented with the award at Buckingham Palace by King George V on 15 September 1916 . His medal group was later loaned to the Royal Marines Museum , <unk> Barracks by his son Lieutenant @-@ Colonel John Malcolm Harvey of the King 's Regiment in 1973 . Harvey 's name is inscribed on the Chatham Naval Memorial to those with no known grave , administered by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission . 
 = = = Victoria Cross citation = = = 
 = DayZ ( mod ) = 
 DayZ is a multiplayer open world survival third @-@ person shooter modification designed by Dean Hall for the 2009 tactical shooter video game ARMA 2 and its 2010 expansion pack , ARMA 2 : Operation Arrowhead . The mod places the player in the fictional post @-@ Soviet state of <unk> , where a mysterious plague has infected most of the population , turning people into violent zombies . As a survivor with limited supplies , the player must scavenge the world for supplies such as food , water , weapons and medicine , while killing or avoiding both zombies and other players , and sometimes non @-@ player characters , in an effort to survive the zombie apocalypse . 
 DayZ has been praised for its innovative design elements . The mod reached one million players in its first four months on August 6 , 2012 , with hundreds of thousands of people purchasing ARMA 2 just to play it . The mod version of DayZ remains in continued development by its community , where as the standalone game was developed by ARMA 2 creators Bohemia Interactive . 
 During the alpha , designer Dean Hall became part of Bohemia Interactive , and the mod , retitled to Arma II : DayZ Mod , was officially released on February 21 , 2013 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 DayZ attempts to portray a realistic scenario within the gameplay , with the environment having different effects on the player . A character may receive bone fractures from damage to their legs , go into shock from bullet wounds or zombie bites , receive infections from zombies or diseased players , or faint due to low blood pressure . Thirst and hunger must be kept under control by finding sustenance in either cities or the wilderness , with body temperature playing a key part in the character 's survival . The game focuses on surviving and the human elements of a zombie apocalypse by forcing the player to acknowledge basic human needs like thirst , hunger and shelter . These mechanics require the player to focus on immediate goals before they can consider long @-@ term strategies . 
 DayZ is praised for its level of emergent gameplay . BuzzFeed author Russell <unk> suggested that the mod has spawned the first photojournalist in a massively multiplayer online role @-@ playing game , creating articles that are not only about a game world but journalism told from within it . <unk> claimed that DayZ is a unique example of the massively multiplayer online game genre in giving players the freedom to harm or murder each other , whilst adding no restrictions on how or why they may do it , quoting a player who described it as " the story of people " . The mod has been compared by Kotaku to The Walking Dead and its focus on interactions between the characters when faced with desperate situations . The players in DayZ are forced to deal with dilemmas in similar ways as portrayed in both the comics and TV series for The Walking Dead . 
 It has been proposed that DayZ provides some insight into people 's motivations and behaviors when reacting to real crisis events , mirroring controlled experiments of a similar nature . However , some critics of this theory argue that participants do not react as they would in a real world situation in which their life is truly threatened . Despite the game being biased towards self @-@ interested , hostile competition , many players enter the game with their own perceptions and priorities . These varied approaches and experiences within the game suggest that even in a system that should theoretically promote rational behaviour , people act in unexpected ways . It has been proposed that this dispels the idea that chaos is an objective and defining feature of the system , rather it is what players make of it . 
 = = Development = = 
 Dean Hall created the concept while he was a soldier in the New Zealand Army , as a suggestion for training soldiers through exposure to situations provoking emotion and relevant thought processes . He has stated he was inspired by experiences during jungle training while on exchange with the Singapore Armed Forces in Brunei , where he was badly injured in a survival skills exercise . Hall has stated that what he had endured then directly affected the development of DayZ , and the creation of immersion through forcing the player to experience emotion and tension as part of gameplay . Hall believed that early rapid success of the mod was largely due to social media and consumers ' desire for games that provided significant challenge . Hall has described the mod as something of an " anti @-@ game " as it broke what he felt were generally considered to be basic rules of game design such as balance and not frustrating users . 
 First requiring manual installation , DayZ now uses two third @-@ party programs called Six <unk> Suite and DayZ Commander to facilitate its installation . On August 7 , 2012 , Dean Hall announced on the game 's development blog that the mod was going to be made into its own game , with Bohemia Interactive as the developer , and himself as the project leader . On October 29 , 2012 , development of the mod officially transferred to a largely community driven effort with the release of version 1 @.@ 7 @.@ 3 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 DayZ acquired a large user base due to its unique gameplay . By August 2012 , three months after release , the mod had registered more than one million unique users . IGN called it one of the most popular PC games in the world " right now " four months after release . It was credited for over 300 @,@ 000 unit sales of ARMA 2 within two months of the mod 's release , putting this three @-@ year @-@ old title in the top seller charts on Steam for over seven weeks , much of this time as the top selling game . 
 Marek <unk> , CEO of ARMA 2 developer Bohemia Interactive , said the mod was directly driving sales of the game and applauded it for an addictive and thrilling experience , saying that it could stand as a gaming experience on its own . The mod was also praised by video game developers not involved with the series . Kristoffer <unk> from CCP ( EVE @-@ Online ) said it was the best game he has played in several months and called it particularly innovative given the first @-@ person shooter genre , which he considered to be one of gaming 's least innovative genres . Game designers Erik Wolpaw and Tim Schafer stated at PAX Prime 2012 that they believe that player @-@ driven experiences such as DayZ are the future of gaming , commenting on what the title achieved without having a driving narrative . 
 = = = Media reception = = = 
 The mod received widespread media acclaim . Edge called DayZ the mod of the year . Wired UK 's <unk> Smith said it could be the most terrifying game of 2012 , and Rock Paper Shotgun 's Jim Rossignol called it the best game he had played so far in 2012 . PC Gamer stated the game was one of the most important things to happen to PC gaming in 2012 and included it in their 2012 list of the top five scariest PC games of all time . Metro called it one of the best games to ever to come out of PC modding and one of the single most impressive experiences available on the system . Eurogamer called it the best zombie game ever made and the break out phenomenon of PC gaming in 2012 . Kotaku called it possibly the greatest zombie game of all time and the most interesting PC game of 2012 . PC PowerPlay said DayZ was the most important thing to happen to PC gaming in 2012 . 
 Eurogamer 's Stace Harman suggested that the mod 's designer Dean Hall might be responsible for some of the most emotive stories to come from playing a video game . Chris <unk> of 1UP.com called it a " shining example of PC gaming at its finest " , stating the tension from interacting with other players leads to an experience unlike anything else he had experienced in gaming apart from making love in Heavy Rain , and cited the game as an example that PC gaming is not in decline , as the creation of such a mod is something that is only possible on a computer ( as opposed to video game consoles ) . According to bit @-@ tech 's Joe Martin , no other game in the genre has offered so compelling take on a zombie apocalypse and its impact of the mod on the industry might be similar to that of Defense of the Ancients and Counter @-@ Strike . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 The mod was nominated for the " Online Innovation " category at the Game Developers Conference Online Awards 2012 . 
 PC Gamer gave DayZ the " Mod of the Year " 2012 award , calling it " one of the least @-@ forgiving and most intimidating games of the year . " 
 Good Game gave DayZ the " Quiet Achiever " award for 2012 . 
 PC PowerPlay gave DayZ the " Game of the Year 2012 " and named it number five on their list of top 100 games of all time . 
 = = Standalone game = = 
 The standalone title , also called DayZ , carries over many of the core gameplay mechanisms of the ARMA 2 mod . DayZ has enhanced graphics , enhanced UI , and AI compared to the mod . DayZ is planned to launch on 8th generation consoles ( PlayStation 4 and Xbox One ) once the game is fully complete . 
 = Ted Bundy = 
 Theodore Robert Bundy ( born Theodore Robert Cowell ; November 24 , 1946 – January 24 , 1989 ) was an American serial killer , kidnapper , rapist , and <unk> who assaulted and murdered numerous young women and girls during the 1970s and possibly earlier . Shortly before his execution , after more than a decade of denials , he confessed to 30 homicides committed in seven states between 1974 and 1978 . The true victim count remains unknown , and could be much higher . 
 Bundy was regarded as handsome and charismatic by many of his young female victims , traits he exploited to win their trust . He typically approached them in public places , feigning injury or disability , or impersonating an authority figure , before overpowering and assaulting them at more secluded locations . He sometimes revisited his secondary crime scenes for hours at a time , grooming and performing sexual acts with the decomposing corpses until putrefaction and destruction by wild animals made further interaction impossible . He decapitated at least 12 of his victims , and kept some of the severed heads in his apartment for a period of time as mementos . On a few occasions , he simply broke into dwellings at night and bludgeoned his victims as they slept . 
 Initially incarcerated in Utah in 1975 for aggravated kidnapping and attempted criminal assault , Bundy became a suspect in a progressively longer list of unsolved homicides in multiple states . Facing murder charges in Colorado , he engineered two dramatic escapes and committed further assaults , including three murders , before his ultimate recapture in Florida in 1978 . He received three death sentences in two separate trials for the Florida homicides . 
 Ted Bundy died in the electric chair at Raiford Prison in Starke , Florida , on January 24 , 1989 . Biographer Ann Rule described him as " ... a sadistic sociopath who took pleasure from another human 's pain and the control he had over his victims , to the point of death , and even after . " He once called himself " ... the most cold @-@ hearted son of a bitch you 'll ever meet . " Attorney Polly Nelson , a member of his last defense team , agreed . " Ted " , she wrote , " was the very definition of heartless evil . " 
 = = Early life = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Bundy was born Theodore Robert Cowell at the Elizabeth Lund Home for Unwed Mothers ( now the Lund Family Center ) in Burlington , Vermont on November 24 , 1946 to Eleanor Louise Cowell ( 1924 – 2012 ; known for most of her life as Louise ) . His father 's identity has never been determined with certainty . His birth certificate assigns paternity to a salesman and Air Force veteran named Lloyd Marshall , but Louise later claimed that she had been seduced by " a sailor " whose name may have been Jack Worthington . ( Years later , investigators would find no record of anyone by that name in Navy or Merchant Marine archives . ) Some family members expressed suspicions that Bundy might have been fathered by Louise 's own violent , abusive father , Samuel Cowell , but no material evidence has ever been cited to support or refute this . 
 For the first three years of his life Bundy lived in the Philadelphia home of his maternal grandparents , Samuel and Eleanor Cowell , who raised him as their son to avoid the social stigma that accompanied birth outside wedlock at the time . Family , friends , and even young Ted were told that his grandparents were his parents and that his mother was his older sister . Eventually he discovered the truth ; he told his girlfriend that a cousin showed him a copy of his birth certificate after calling him a " bastard " , but he told biographers Stephen Michaud and Hugh Aynesworth that he found the certificate himself . Biographer and true crime writer Ann Rule , who knew Bundy personally , believes that he located his original birth record in Vermont in 1969 . Bundy expressed a lifelong resentment toward his mother for lying about his true parentage and leaving him to discover it for himself . 
 Bundy spoke warmly of his grandparents in some interviews , and told Rule that he " identified with " , " respected " , and " clung to " his grandfather ; but he and other family members told attorneys in 1987 that Samuel Cowell was a tyrannical bully and a bigot who hated blacks , Italians , Catholics , and Jews , beat his wife and the family dog , and swung neighborhood cats by their tails . He once threw Louise 's younger sister Julia down a flight of stairs for oversleeping . He sometimes spoke aloud to unseen presences , and at least once he flew into a violent rage when the question of Ted 's paternity was raised . Bundy described his grandmother as a timid and obedient woman who periodically underwent electroconvulsive therapy for depression and feared leaving their house toward the end of her life . Ted occasionally exhibited disturbing behavior , even at that early age . Julia recalled awakening one day from a nap to find herself surrounded by knives from the Cowell kitchen ; her three @-@ year @-@ old nephew was standing by the bed , smiling . 
 In 1950 Louise abruptly changed her surname from Cowell to Nelson , and at the urging of multiple family members , left Philadelphia with her son to live with cousins Alan and Jane Scott in Tacoma , Washington . In 1951 Louise met Johnny Culpepper Bundy , a hospital cook , at an adult singles night at Tacoma 's First Methodist Church . They married later that year and Johnny Bundy formally adopted Ted . Johnny and Louise conceived four children of their own , and although Johnny tried to include his adoptive son in camping trips and other family activities , Ted remained distant . He later complained to his girlfriend that Johnny wasn 't his real father , " wasn 't very bright " , and " didn 't make much money . " 
 Bundy 's Tacoma recollections varied from biographer to biographer : To Michaud and Aynesworth he described roaming his neighborhood , picking through trash barrels in search of pictures of naked women . To Polly Nelson he spoke of perusing detective magazines , crime novels , and true crime documentaries for stories involving sexual violence , particularly when illustrated with pictures of dead or maimed bodies ; yet in a letter to Rule he asserted that he " ... never , ever read fact @-@ detective magazines , and shuddered at the thought [ that anyone would ] " . To Michaud , he described consuming large quantities of alcohol and " canvass [ ing ] the community " late at night in search of undraped windows where he could observe women undressing , or " whatever [ else ] could be seen . " 
 Accounts of his social life also varied : He told Michaud and Aynesworth that he " chose to be alone " as an adolescent because he was unable to understand interpersonal relationships . He claimed that he had no natural sense of how to develop friendships . " I didn 't know what made people want to be friends , " he said . " I didn 't know what underlay social interactions . " Classmates from Woodrow Wilson High School told Rule , however , that Bundy was " well known and well liked " there , " a medium @-@ sized fish in a large pond " . 
 Bundy 's only significant athletic avocation was snow skiing , which he pursued enthusiastically using stolen equipment and forged lift tickets . During high school he was arrested at least twice on suspicion of burglary and auto theft . When he reached age 18 the details of the incidents were expunged from his record , as is customary in Washington and most other states . 
 = = = University years = = = 
 After graduating from high school in 1965 Bundy spent a year at the University of Puget Sound ( UPS ) before transferring to the University of Washington ( UW ) in 1966 to study Chinese . In 1967 he became romantically involved with a UW classmate who is identified in Bundy biographies by several pseudonyms , most commonly Stephanie Brooks . In early 1968 he dropped out of college and worked at a series of minimum @-@ wage jobs . He also volunteered at the Seattle office of Nelson Rockefeller 's presidential campaign , and in August , attended the 1968 Republican National Convention in Miami as a Rockefeller delegate . Shortly thereafter Brooks ended their relationship and returned to her family home in California , frustrated by what she described as Bundy 's immaturity and lack of ambition . Psychiatrist Dorothy Lewis would later pinpoint this crisis as " ... probably the pivotal time in his development . " Devastated by Brooks 's rejection , Bundy traveled to Colorado and then farther east , visiting relatives in Arkansas and Philadelphia , and enrolling for one semester at Temple University . It was at this time in early 1969 , Rule believes , that Bundy visited the office of birth records in Burlington and confirmed his true parentage . 
 Back in Washington in the fall of 1969 , he met Elizabeth Kloepfer ( identified in Bundy literature as Meg Anders , Beth Archer , or Liz Kendall ) , a divorcée from Ogden , Utah , who worked as a secretary at the University of Washington School of Medicine . Their stormy relationship would continue well past his initial incarceration in Utah in 1976 . In mid @-@ 1970 , now focused and goal @-@ oriented , he re @-@ enrolled at UW , this time as a psychology major . He became an honor student , well @-@ regarded by his professors . In 1971 he took a job at Seattle 's Suicide Hotline crisis center . There he met and worked alongside Rule , a former Seattle police officer and aspiring crime writer who would later write one of the definitive Bundy biographies , The Stranger Beside Me . Rule saw nothing disturbing in Bundy 's personality at the time , describing him as " kind , solicitous , and empathetic " . 
 After graduating from UW in 1972 Bundy joined Governor Daniel J. Evans 's reelection campaign . Posing as a college student , he shadowed Evans 's opponent , former governor Albert Rosellini , recording his stump speeches for analysis by Evans 's team . After Evans 's reelection he was hired as an assistant to Ross Davis , Chairman of the Washington State Republican Party . Davis thought well of Bundy , describing him as " smart , aggressive ... and a believer in the system . " In early 1973 , despite mediocre Law School Admission Test scores , Bundy was accepted into the law schools of UPS and the University of Utah on the strength of letters of recommendation from Evans , Davis , and several UW psychology professors . 
 During a trip to California on Republican Party business in the summer of 1973 Bundy rekindled his relationship with Brooks , who marveled at his transformation into a serious , dedicated professional , seemingly on the cusp of a distinguished legal and political career . He continued to date Kloepfer as well , though neither woman was aware of the other 's existence . In the fall of 1973 Bundy matriculated at UPS Law School and continued courting Brooks , who flew to Seattle several times to stay with him . They discussed marriage ; at one point he introduced her to Davis as his fiancée . In January 1974 , however , he abruptly broke off all contact ; her phone calls and letters went unreturned . Finally reaching him by phone a month later , Brooks demanded to know why Bundy had unilaterally ended their relationship without explanation . In a flat , calm voice , he replied , " Stephanie , I have no idea what you mean ... " and hung up . She never heard from him again . Later he explained , " I just wanted to prove to myself that I could have married her . " At about the same time Bundy began skipping classes at law school , and by April he had stopped attending entirely , as young women began to disappear in the Pacific Northwest . 
 = = First two series of murders = = 
 = = = Washington , Oregon = = = 
 There is no consensus on when or where Bundy began killing women . He told different stories to different people , and refused to divulge the specifics of his earliest crimes , even as he confessed in graphic detail to dozens of later murders in the days preceding his execution . He told Nelson that he attempted his first kidnapping in 1969 in Ocean City , New Jersey , but did not kill anyone until sometime in 1971 in Seattle . He told psychologist Art Norman that he killed two women in Atlantic City in 1969 while visiting family in Philadelphia . To homicide detective Robert D. Keppel he hinted at a murder in Seattle in 1972 , and another in 1973 involving a hitchhiker near Tumwater , Washington , but refused to elaborate . Rule and Keppel both believe that he may have started killing as a teenager . Circumstantial evidence suggests that he abducted and killed 8 @-@ year @-@ old Ann Marie Burr of Tacoma in 1961 when he was 14 , an allegation he denied repeatedly . His earliest documented homicides were committed in 1974 when he was 27 years old . By then he had ( by his own admission ) mastered the skills needed — in the era before DNA profiling — to leave minimal incriminating evidence at a crime scene . 
 Shortly after midnight on January 4 , 1974 — around the time that he terminated his relationship with Brooks — Bundy entered the basement apartment of 18 @-@ year @-@ old Karen Sparks ( identified as Joni Lenz or Terri Caldwell by various sources ) , a dancer and student at UW . After bludgeoning the sleeping woman with a metal rod from her bed frame he sexually assaulted her with a speculum , causing extensive internal injuries . She remained unconscious for 10 days but survived , with permanent brain damage . Less than a month later , in the early morning hours of February 1 , Bundy broke into the basement room of Lynda Ann Healy , a UW undergraduate who broadcast morning radio weather reports for skiers . He beat her unconscious , dressed her in blue jeans , a white blouse , and boots , and carried her away . 
 Female college students continued disappearing at the rate of about one per month . On March 12 , Donna Gail Manson , a 19 @-@ year @-@ old student at The Evergreen State College in Olympia , 60 miles ( 97 km ) southwest of Seattle , left her dormitory for a jazz concert on campus but never arrived . On April 17 , Susan Elaine Rancourt disappeared while on her way to a movie after an evening advisors ' meeting at Central Washington State College ( now Central Washington University ) in Ellensburg , 110 miles ( 180 km ) southeast of Seattle . Two female Central Washington students later came forward to report encounters — one on the night of Rancourt 's disappearance , the other three nights earlier — with a man wearing an arm sling , asking for help carrying a load of books to his brown or tan Volkswagen Beetle . On May 6 Roberta Kathleen Parks left her dormitory at Oregon State University in Corvallis , 260 miles ( 420 km ) south of Seattle , to have coffee with friends at the Student Union Building , but never arrived . 
 Detectives from the King County Sheriff 's Office and the Seattle Police Department grew increasingly concerned . There was no significant physical evidence , and the missing women had little in common , apart from being young , attractive , white college students with long hair parted in the middle . On June 1 , Brenda Carol Ball , 22 , disappeared after leaving the Flame Tavern in Burien , Washington near Seattle – Tacoma International Airport . She was last seen talking in the parking lot to a brown @-@ haired man with his arm in a sling . In the early hours of June 11 , UW student Georgann Hawkins vanished while walking down the brightly lit alley between her boyfriend 's dormitory residence and her sorority house . The next morning three Seattle homicide detectives and a <unk> combed the entire alleyway on their hands and knees , finding nothing . After Hawkins 's disappearance was publicized , witnesses came forward to report seeing a man that night in the alley behind a nearby dormitory , on crutches with a leg cast , struggling to carry a briefcase . One woman recalled that the man asked her to help him carry the case to his car , a light @-@ brown Volkswagen Beetle . 
 During this period Bundy was working at the Washington State Department of Emergency Services ( DES ) in Olympia , a government agency involved in the search for the missing women . There he met and dated Carole Ann Boone , a twice @-@ divorced mother of two who , six years later , would play an important role in the final phase of his life . 
 Reports of the six missing women and Sparks 's brutal beating appeared prominently in newspapers and on television throughout Washington and Oregon . Fear spread among the population ; hitchhiking by young women dropped sharply . While pressure mounted on law enforcement agencies , the paucity of physical evidence severely hampered them . Police could not provide reporters with the little information that was available for fear of compromising the investigation . Further similarities between the victims were noted : The disappearances all took place at night , usually near ongoing construction work , within a week of midterm or final exams ; all of the victims were wearing slacks or blue jeans ; and at most crime scenes there were sightings of a man wearing a cast or a sling , and driving a brown or tan Volkswagen Beetle . 
 The Pacific Northwest murders culminated on Sunday , July 14 with the broad @-@ daylight abductions of two women from a crowded beach at Lake Sammamish State Park in Issaquah , 20 miles ( 32 km ) east of Seattle . Five female witnesses described an attractive young man wearing a white tennis outfit with his left arm in a sling , speaking with a light accent , perhaps Canadian or British . Introducing himself as " Ted " , he asked their help in unloading a sailboat from his tan- or bronze @-@ colored Volkswagen Beetle . Four refused ; one accompanied him as far as his car , saw that there was no sailboat , and fled . Three additional witnesses saw him approach Janice Anne Ott , 23 , a probation case worker at the King County Juvenile Court , with the sailboat story , and watched her leave the beach in his company . About four hours later Denise Naslund , an 18 @-@ year @-@ old woman who was studying to become a computer programmer , left a picnic to go to the restroom and never returned . While Bundy later told Stephen Michaud that Ott was still alive when he returned with Naslund — and that one was forced to watch as the other was murdered — he retracted that detail on the eve of his execution . 
 King County police , finally armed with a detailed description of their suspect as well as his car , posted fliers throughout the Seattle area . A composite sketch was printed in regional newspapers and broadcast on local television stations . Elizabeth Kloepfer , Ann Rule , a DES employee , and a UW psychology professor all recognized the profile , the sketch , and the car , and reported Ted Bundy as a possible suspect ; but detectives — who were receiving up to 200 tips per day — thought it unlikely that a clean @-@ cut law student with no adult criminal record could be the perpetrator . 
 On September 6 two grouse hunters stumbled across the skeletal remains of Ott and Naslund near a service road in Issaquah , 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) east of Lake Sammamish State Park . An extra femur and several vertebrae found at the site were later identified by Bundy as Georgann Hawkins 's . Six months later , forestry students from Green River Community College discovered the skulls and mandibles of Healy , Rancourt , Parks , and Ball on Taylor Mountain , where Bundy frequently hiked , just east of Issaquah . Manson 's remains were never recovered . 
 = = = Idaho , Utah , Colorado = = = 
 In August 1974 Bundy received a second acceptance from the University of Utah Law School and moved to Salt Lake City , leaving Kloepfer in Seattle . While he called Kloepfer often , he dated " at least a dozen " other women . As he studied the first @-@ year law curriculum a second time , " he was devastated to find out that the other students had something , some intellectual capacity , that he did not . He found the classes completely incomprehensible . ' It was a great disappointment to me , ' he said . " 
 A new string of homicides began the following month with two that went undiscovered until Bundy confessed to them shortly before his execution . On September 2 he raped and strangled a still @-@ unidentified hitchhiker in Idaho , then either disposed of the corpse immediately in a nearby river or returned the next day to photograph and dismember the victim . On October 2 he seized 16 @-@ year @-@ old Nancy Wilcox in Holladay , a suburb of Salt Lake City , and dragged her into a wooded area , intending to " de @-@ escalate " his pathological urges , he said , by raping and releasing her . However , he strangled her — by accident , he claimed — in the process of trying to silence her . Wilcox was buried , he said , near Capitol Reef National Park , some 200 miles ( 320 km ) south of Holladay , but her remains were never found . 
 On October 18 Melissa Smith , the 17 @-@ year @-@ old daughter of the police chief of Midvale , another Salt Lake City suburb , disappeared after leaving a pizza parlor . Her nude body was found in a nearby mountainous area nine days later . Postmortem examination indicated that she may have remained alive for up to seven days following her disappearance . On October 31 , 25 miles ( 40 km ) south in Lehi , Laura Ann Aime , also 17 , disappeared after leaving a café just after midnight . Her naked body was found by hikers 9 miles ( 14 km ) to the northeast in American Fork Canyon on Thanksgiving Day . Both women had been beaten , raped , sodomized , and strangled with nylon stockings . Years later Bundy described his postmortem rituals with Smith 's and Aime 's remains , including hair <unk> and application of makeup . 
 In the late afternoon of November 8 , Bundy approached 18 @-@ year @-@ old telephone operator Carol DaRonch at Fashion Place Mall in Murray , Utah , less than a mile from the Midvale restaurant where Melissa Smith was last seen . He identified himself as " Officer Roseland " of the Murray Police Department , told DaRonch that someone had attempted to break into her car , and asked her to accompany him to the station to file a complaint . When DaRonch pointed out that Bundy was driving on a road that did not lead to the police station , he immediately pulled to the shoulder and attempted to handcuff her . During their struggle he inadvertently fastened both handcuffs to the same wrist , and DaRonch was able to open the car door and escape . Later that evening Debra Kent , a 17 @-@ year @-@ old student at <unk> High School in Bountiful , 19 miles ( 31 km ) north of Murray , disappeared after leaving a theater production at the school to pick up her brother . The school 's drama teacher and a student told police that " a stranger " had asked each of them to come out to the parking lot to identify a car . Another student later saw the same man pacing in the rear of the auditorium , and the drama teacher spotted him again shortly before the end of the play . Outside the auditorium , investigators found a key that unlocked the handcuffs removed from Carol DaRonch 's wrist . 
 In November Elizabeth Kloepfer , having read that young women were disappearing in towns surrounding Salt Lake City , called King County police a second time . Detective Randy Hergesheimer of the Major Crimes division interviewed her in detail . By then , Bundy had risen considerably on the King County hierarchy of suspicion , but the Lake Sammamish witness considered most reliable by detectives failed to pick him from a photo lineup . In December , Kloepfer called the Salt Lake County Sheriff 's Office and repeated her suspicions . Bundy 's name was added to their list of suspects , but at that time no credible evidence linked him to the Utah crimes . In January 1975 Bundy returned to Seattle after his final exams and spent a week with Kloepfer , who did not tell him that she had reported him three separate times to police . She made plans to visit him in Salt Lake City in August . 
 In 1975 Bundy shifted much of his criminal activity eastward to Colorado from his base in Utah . On January 12 , a 23 @-@ year @-@ old registered nurse named Caryn Campbell disappeared while walking down a well @-@ lit hallway between the elevator and her room at the Wildwood Inn ( now the Wildwood Lodge ) in Snowmass Village , 400 miles ( 640 km ) southeast of Salt Lake City . Her nude body was found a month later next to a dirt road just outside the resort . She had been killed by blows to her head from a blunt instrument that left distinctive linear grooved depressions on her skull ; her body also had deep cuts from a sharp weapon . A hundred miles ( 160 km ) northeast of Snowmass on March 15 , Vail ski instructor Julie Cunningham , 26 , disappeared while walking from her apartment to a dinner date with a friend . Bundy later told Colorado investigators that he approached her on crutches and asked that she help carry his ski boots to his car , where he clubbed and handcuffed her , then assaulted and strangled her at a remote secondary site near Rifle , Colorado , 90 miles ( 140 km ) west of Vail . Weeks later he made the six @-@ hour drive from Salt Lake City to revisit her remains . Denise Oliverson , 25 , disappeared near the Utah – Colorado border in Grand Junction on April 6 while riding her bicycle to her parents ' house ; her bike and sandals were found under a viaduct near a railroad bridge . On May 6 Bundy lured 12 @-@ year @-@ old Lynette Culver from Alameda Junior High School in Pocatello , Idaho , 160 miles ( 260 km ) north of Salt Lake City . He drowned and then sexually assaulted her in his hotel room , then disposed of her body in a river north of Pocatello ( possibly the Snake ) . 
 In mid @-@ May three of Bundy 's Washington State DES coworkers , including Carole Ann Boone , visited him in Salt Lake City and stayed for a week in his apartment . Bundy spent a week in Seattle with Kloepfer in early June and they discussed getting married the following Christmas . Again , Kloepfer made no mention of her discussions with the King County Police and Salt Lake County Sheriff 's Office , and Bundy disclosed neither his ongoing relationship with Boone nor a concurrent romance with a Utah law student known in various accounts as Kim Andrews or Sharon Auer . 
 On June 28 Susan Curtis vanished from the campus of Brigham Young University in Provo , 45 miles ( 72 km ) south of Salt Lake City . Curtis 's murder became Bundy 's last confession , tape @-@ recorded moments before he entered the execution chamber . The bodies of Wilcox , Kent , Cunningham , Culver , Curtis , and Oliverson were never recovered . 
 In August or September 1975 he was baptized into The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints , although he was not an active participant in services and ignored most church restrictions . He would later be excommunicated by the LDS Church following his 1976 kidnapping conviction . ( When asked his religious preference after his arrest , Bundy answered " Methodist " , the religion of his childhood . ) 
 In Washington state , investigators were still struggling to analyze the Pacific Northwest murder spree that had ended as abruptly as it had begun . In an effort to make sense of an overwhelming mass of data , they resorted to the then @-@ innovative strategy of compiling a database . They used the King County payroll computer , a " huge , primitive machine " by contemporary standards , but the only one available for their use . After inputting the many lists they had compiled — classmates and acquaintances of each victim , Volkswagen owners named " Ted " , known sex offenders , and so on — they queried the computer for coincidences . Out of thousands of names , 26 turned up on four separate lists ; one was Ted Bundy . Detectives also manually compiled a list of their 100 " best " suspects , and Bundy was on that list as well . He was " literally at the top of the pile " of suspects when word came from Utah of his arrest . 
 = = Arrest and first trial = = 
 Bundy was arrested in August 1975 by a Utah Highway Patrol officer in Granger , another Salt Lake City suburb , after he failed to pull over for a routine traffic stop . The officer , noting that the Volkswagen 's front passenger seat was missing , searched his car ; he found a ski mask , a second mask fashioned from pantyhose , a crowbar , handcuffs , trash bags , a coil of rope , an ice pick , and other items initially assumed to be burglary tools . Bundy explained that the ski mask was for skiing , he had found the handcuffs in a dumpster , and the rest were common household items . However , Detective Jerry Thompson remembered a similar suspect and car description from the November 1974 DaRonch kidnapping , and Bundy 's name from Kloepfer 's December 1974 phone call . In a search of Bundy 's apartment police found a guide to Colorado ski resorts with a checkmark by the Wildwood Inn , and a brochure advertising the <unk> High School play in Bountiful ( where Debra Kent had disappeared ) , but nothing sufficiently incriminating to hold him . He was released on his own recognizance . ( Bundy later said that searchers missed a collection of Polaroid photographs of his victims hidden in the utility room , which he destroyed after he was released . ) 
 Salt Lake City police placed Bundy on 24 @-@ hour surveillance , and Thompson flew to Seattle with two other detectives to interview Kloepfer . She told them that in the year prior to Bundy 's move to Utah she had discovered objects she " couldn 't understand " in her house and in Bundy 's apartment : a set of crutches ; a bag of plaster of Paris that he admitted stealing from a medical supply house ; a meat cleaver , never used for cooking , that he packed when he moved to Utah ; surgical gloves ; an Oriental knife in a wooden case that he kept in his glove compartment ; and a sack full of women 's clothing . Bundy was perpetually in debt to everyone , and Kloepfer suspected he had stolen almost everything of significant value that he owned . Once , when she confronted him over a new TV and stereo , he warned her , " If you tell anyone , I 'll break your fucking neck . " She said Bundy became " very upset " whenever she considered cutting her hair — which was long and parted in the middle . She would sometimes awaken in the middle of the night to find him under the bed covers with a flashlight , examining her body . He kept a lug wrench , taped halfway up the handle , in the trunk of her car ( she too owned a Volkswagen Beetle , which Ted often borrowed ) " for protection " . The detectives confirmed that Bundy had not been with Kloepfer on any of the nights during which the Pacific Northwest victims had vanished , nor on the day Ott and Naslund were abducted . Shortly thereafter , Kloepfer was interviewed by Seattle homicide detective Kathy McChesney and learned of the existence of Stephanie Brooks and her brief engagement to Bundy around Christmas 1973 . 
 In September Bundy sold his Volkswagen Beetle to a Midvale teenager . Utah police impounded it , and FBI technicians dismantled and searched it . They found hairs matching samples obtained from Caryn Campbell 's body . Later , they also identified hair strands " microscopically indistinguishable " from those of Melissa Smith and Carol DaRonch . FBI lab specialist Robert Neill concluded that the presence of hair strands in one car matching three different victims who had never met one another would be " a coincidence of mind @-@ boggling rarity " . 
 On October 2 , detectives put Bundy in a lineup before DaRonch , who immediately identified him as " Officer Roseland " . Witnesses from Bountiful picked him from the same lineup as the stranger lurking about the high school auditorium . There was insufficient evidence linking him to Debra Kent ( whose body was never found ) , but more than enough to charge him with aggravated kidnapping and attempted criminal assault in the DaRonch case . He was freed on $ 15 @,@ 000 bail , paid by his parents , and spent most of the time between indictment and trial in Seattle , living in Kloepfer 's house . Seattle police had insufficient evidence to charge him in the Pacific Northwest murders , but kept him under close surveillance . " When Ted and I stepped out on the porch to go somewhere , " Kloepfer wrote , " so many unmarked police cars started up that it sounded like the beginning of the Indy 500 . " 
 In November , the three principal Bundy investigators — Jerry Thompson from Utah , Robert Keppel from Washington , and Michael Fisher from Colorado — met and exchanged information with 30 detectives and prosecutors from five states in Aspen , Colorado . While officials left the meeting ( later known as the Aspen Summit ) convinced that Bundy was the murderer they sought , they agreed that more hard evidence would be needed before he could be charged with any of the murders . 
 On February 23 , 1976 , Bundy stood trial for the DaRonch kidnapping , waiving his right to a jury on the advice of his attorney , John O 'Connell , due to the publicity surrounding the case . On March 1 , after a four @-@ day trial and a weekend of deliberation , Judge Stewart Hanson Jr. found him guilty of kidnapping and assault . He was sentenced to 1 to 15 years in the Utah State Prison on June 30 . In October he was found hiding in bushes in the prison yard carrying an " escape kit " — road maps , airline schedules , and a social security card — and spent several weeks in solitary confinement . Later that month , Colorado authorities charged him with Caryn Campbell 's murder . After a period of resistance , he waived extradition proceedings and was transferred to Aspen in January 1977 . 
 = = Escapes = = 
 On June 7 , 1977 , Bundy was transported 40 miles ( 64 km ) from the Garfield County jail in Glenwood Springs to Pitkin County Courthouse in Aspen for a preliminary hearing . He had elected to serve as his own attorney and as such was excused by the judge from wearing handcuffs or leg shackles . During a recess he asked to visit the courthouse 's law library to research his case . Concealed behind a bookcase , he opened a window and jumped from the second story , spraining his right ankle as he landed . After shedding an outer layer of clothing he walked through Aspen as roadblocks were being set up on its outskirts , then hiked southward onto Aspen Mountain . Near its summit he broke into a hunting cabin and stole food , clothing , and a rifle . The following day he left the cabin and continued south toward the town of Crested Butte , but became lost in the forest . For two days he wandered aimlessly on the mountain , missing two trails that led downward to his intended destination . On June 10 Bundy broke into a camping trailer on Maroon Lake , 10 miles ( 16 km ) south of Aspen , taking food and a ski parka ; but instead of continuing southward he walked back north toward Aspen , eluding roadblocks and search parties . Three days later he stole a car at the edge of Aspen Golf Course . Cold , sleep @-@ deprived , and in constant pain from his sprained ankle , he drove back into Aspen , where two police officers noticed his car weaving in and out of its lane and pulled him over . He had been a fugitive for six days . In the car were maps of the mountain area around Aspen that prosecutors were using to demonstrate the location of Caryn Campbell 's body ( as his own attorney , Bundy had rights of discovery ) , indicating that his escape had been planned . 
 Back in jail in Glenwood Springs , Bundy ignored the advice of friends and legal advisors to stay put . The case against him , already weak at best , was deteriorating steadily as pretrial motions consistently resolved in his favor and significant bits of evidence were ruled inadmissible . " A more rational defendant might have realized that he stood a good chance of acquittal , and that beating the murder charge in Colorado would probably have dissuaded other prosecutors ... with as little as a year and a half to serve on the DaRonch conviction , had Ted persevered , he could have been a free man . " Instead , Bundy devised a new escape plan . He acquired a detailed floor plan of the jail and a hacksaw blade from other inmates and accumulated $ 500 in cash , smuggled in over a six @-@ month period , he later said , by visitors — Carole Ann Boone in particular . During the evenings , while other prisoners were showering , he sawed a hole about one foot ( 0 @.@ 30 m ) square between the steel reinforcing bars in his cell 's ceiling and , after losing 35 pounds ( 16 kg ) , was able to wriggle through it into the crawl space above . In the weeks that followed he made a series of practice runs , exploring the space . Multiple reports from an informant of movement within the ceiling during the night were not investigated . 
 By late 1977 , Bundy 's impending trial had become a cause célèbre in the small town of Aspen , and Bundy filed a motion for a change of venue to Denver . On December 23 the Aspen trial judge granted the request — but to Colorado Springs , where juries had historically been hostile to murder suspects . On the night of December 30 , with most of the jail staff on Christmas break and nonviolent prisoners on furlough with their families , Bundy piled books and files in his bed , covered them with a blanket to simulate his sleeping body , and climbed into the crawlspace . He broke through the ceiling into the apartment of the chief jailer — who was out for the evening with his wife — changed into street clothes from the jailer 's closet , and walked out the front door to freedom . 
 After stealing a car , Bundy drove eastward out of Glenwood Springs , but the car soon broke down in the mountains on Interstate 70 . A passing motorist gave him a ride into Vail , 60 miles ( 97 km ) to the east . From there he caught a bus to Denver , where he boarded a flight to Chicago . In Glenwood Springs , the jail 's skeleton crew did not discover the escape until noon on December 31 , more than 17 hours later . By then Bundy was already in Chicago . 
 = = Florida = = 
 From Chicago , Bundy traveled by train to Ann Arbor , Michigan . There , on January 2 in a local tavern , he watched his alma mater UW defeat Michigan in the Rose Bowl . Five days later he stole a car and drove to Atlanta , where he boarded a bus and arrived in Tallahassee , Florida , on January 8 . He rented a room under the alias Chris Hagen at a boarding house near the Florida State University ( FSU ) campus . Bundy later said that he initially resolved to find legitimate employment and refrain from further criminal activity , knowing he could probably remain free and undetected in Florida indefinitely as long as he did not attract the attention of police ; but his lone job application , at a construction site , had to be abandoned when he was asked to produce identification . He reverted to his old habits of shoplifting and stealing credit cards from women 's wallets left in shopping carts . 
 Sometime during the evening of January 14 or the early hours of January 15 , 1978 — one week after his arrival in Tallahassee — Bundy entered FSU 's Chi Omega sorority house through a rear door with a faulty lock . Beginning at about 2 : 45 am he bludgeoned Margaret Bowman , 21 , with a piece of oak firewood as she slept , then <unk> her with a nylon stocking . He then entered the bedroom of 20 @-@ year @-@ old Lisa Levy and beat her unconscious , strangled her , tore one of her nipples , bit deeply into her left buttock , and sexually assaulted her with a hair mist bottle . In an adjoining bedroom he attacked Kathy Kleiner , breaking her jaw and deeply lacerating her shoulder ; and Karen Chandler , who suffered a concussion , broken jaw , loss of teeth , and a crushed finger . Tallahassee detectives later determined that the four attacks took place in a total of less than 15 minutes , within earshot of more than 30 witnesses who heard nothing . After leaving the sorority house Bundy broke into a basement apartment eight blocks away and attacked FSU student Cheryl Thomas , dislocating her shoulder and fracturing her jaw and skull in five places . She was left with permanent deafness , and equilibrium damage that ended her dance career . On Thomas 's bed police found a semen stain and a pantyhose " mask " containing two hairs " similar to Bundy 's in class and characteristic " . 
 On February 8 Bundy drove 150 miles ( 240 km ) east to Jacksonville in a stolen FSU van . In a parking lot he approached 14 @-@ year @-@ old Leslie Parmenter , the daughter of Jacksonville Police Department 's Chief of Detectives , identifying himself as " Richard Burton , Fire Department " , but retreated when Parmenter 's older brother arrived . That afternoon he backtracked 60 miles ( 97 km ) westward to Lake City . At Lake City Junior High School the following morning , 12 @-@ year @-@ old Kimberly Diane Leach was summoned to her homeroom by a teacher to retrieve a forgotten purse ; she never returned to class . Seven weeks later , after an intensive search , her partially mummified remains were found in a pig farrowing shed near Suwannee River State Park , 35 miles ( 56 km ) northwest of Lake City . 
 On February 12 , with insufficient cash to pay his overdue rent and a growing suspicion that police were closing in on him , Bundy stole a car and fled Tallahassee , driving westward across the Florida Panhandle . Three days later at around 1 : 00 a.m. , he was stopped by Pensacola police officer David Lee near the Alabama state line after a " wants and warrants " check showed his Volkswagen Beetle as stolen . When told he was under arrest , Bundy kicked Lee 's legs out from under him and took off running . Lee fired a warning shot and then a second round , gave chase , and tackled him . The two struggled over Lee 's gun before the officer finally subdued and arrested Bundy . In the stolen vehicle were three sets of IDs belonging to female FSU students , 21 stolen credit cards , and a stolen television set . Also found were a pair of dark @-@ rimmed non @-@ prescription glasses and a pair of plaid slacks , later identified as the disguise worn in Jacksonville . As Lee transported his suspect to jail , unaware that he had just arrested one of the FBI Ten Most Wanted Fugitives , he heard Bundy say , " I wish you had killed me . " 
 = = Florida trials , marriage = = 
 Following a change of venue to Miami , Bundy stood trial for the Chi Omega homicides and assaults in June 1979 . The trial was covered by 250 reporters from five continents , and was the first to be televised nationally in the United States . Despite the presence of five court @-@ appointed attorneys , Bundy again handled much of his own defense . From the beginning , he " sabotaged the entire defense effort out of spite , distrust , and grandiose delusion " , Nelson later wrote . " Ted [ was ] facing murder charges , with a possible death sentence , and all that mattered to him apparently was that he be in charge . " 
 According to Mike Minerva , a Tallahassee public defender and member of the defense team , a pre @-@ trial plea bargain was negotiated in which Bundy would plead guilty to killing Levy , Bowman , and Leach in exchange for a firm 75 @-@ year prison sentence . Prosecutors were amenable to a deal , by one account , because " prospects of losing at trial were very good . " Bundy , on the other hand , saw the plea deal not only as a means of avoiding the death penalty , but also as a " tactical move " : He could enter his plea , then wait a few years for evidence to disintegrate or become lost , and for witnesses to die , move on , or retract their testimony . Once the case against him had deteriorated beyond repair , he could file a post @-@ conviction motion to set aside the plea and secure an acquittal . At the last minute , however , Bundy refused the deal . " It made him realize he was going to have to stand up in front of the whole world and say he was guilty " , Minerva said . " He just couldn 't do it . " 
 At trial , crucial testimony came from Chi Omega members Connie Hastings , who placed Bundy in the vicinity of Chi Omega House that evening ; and Nita Neary , who saw him leaving the sorority house clutching the oak murder weapon . <unk> physical evidence included the bite impressions Bundy left in Levy 's left buttock , which forensic <unk> Richard <unk> and Lowell Levine matched to castings of Bundy 's teeth . The jury deliberated less than seven hours before convicting him on July 24 , 1979 of the two murders , three counts of attempted first degree murder , and two counts of burglary . Trial judge Edward Cowart imposed death sentences for the murder convictions . 
 Six months later , a second trial took place in Orlando for the abduction and murder of Kimberly Leach . Bundy was found guilty once again , after less than eight hours ' deliberation , due principally to the testimony of an eyewitness who saw him leading Leach from the schoolyard to his stolen van . Important material evidence included clothing fibers with an unusual manufacturing error , found in the van and on Leach 's body , which matched fibers from the jacket Bundy was wearing when he was arrested . 
 During the penalty phase of the trial , Bundy took advantage of an obscure Florida law providing that a marriage declaration in court , in the presence of a judge , constituted a legal marriage . As he was questioning former Washington State DES coworker Carole Ann Boone — who had moved to Florida to be near Bundy , had testified on his behalf during both trials , and was again testifying on his behalf as a character witness — he asked her to marry him . She accepted , and Bundy declared to the court that they were legally married . 
 On February 10 , 1980 , Bundy was sentenced to death by electrocution for a third time . As the sentence was announced , he reportedly stood and shouted , " Tell the jury they were wrong ! " This third death sentence would be the one ultimately carried out nearly nine years later . 
 In October 1982 , Boone gave birth to a daughter and named Bundy as the father . While conjugal visits were not allowed at Raiford Prison , inmates were known to pool their money to bribe guards to allow them intimate time alone with their female visitors . 
 = = Death row , confessions , and execution = = 
 Shortly after the conclusion of the Leach trial and the beginning of the long appeals process that followed , Bundy initiated a series of interviews with Stephen Michaud and Hugh Aynesworth . Speaking mostly in third person to avoid " the stigma of confession " , he began for the first time to divulge details of his crimes and thought processes . 
 He recounted his career as a thief , confirming Kloepfer 's long @-@ time suspicion that he had shoplifted virtually everything of substance that he owned . " The big payoff for me , " he said , " was actually possessing whatever it was I had stolen . I really enjoyed having something ... that I had wanted and gone out and taken . " Possession proved to be an important motive for rape and murder as well . Sexual assault , he said , fulfilled his need to " totally possess " his victims . At first he killed the women " as a matter of expediency ... to eliminate the possibility of [ being ] caught " ; but later , murder became part of the " adventure " . " The ultimate possession was , in fact , the taking of the life " , he said . " And then ... the physical possession of the remains . " 
 Bundy also confided in Special Agent William Hagmaier of the FBI Behavioral Analysis Unit . Hagmaier was struck by the " deep , almost mystical satisfaction " that Bundy took in murder . " He said that after a while , murder is not just a crime of lust or violence " , Hagmaier related . " It becomes possession . They are part of you ... [ the victim ] becomes a part of you , and you [ two ] are forever one ... and the grounds where you kill them or leave them become sacred to you , and you will always be drawn back to them . " Bundy told Hagmaier he considered himself an " amateur " , an " impulsive " killer in his early years , before moving into what he called his " prime " or " predator " phase at about the time of Lynda Healy 's murder in 1974 . This implied that he began killing well before 1974 — though he never explicitly admitted doing so . 
 In July 1984 Raiford guards found two hacksaw blades hidden in Bundy 's cell . A steel bar in one of its windows had been sawed completely through at the top and bottom and glued back in place with a homemade soap @-@ based adhesive . Several months later his cell was changed again after guards found a mirror . 
 Sometime during this period Bundy was attacked by a group of his fellow death row inmates . Though he denied having been assaulted , a number of inmates confessed to the crime , characterized by one source as a " gang rape " . Shortly thereafter he was charged with a disciplinary infraction for unauthorized correspondence with another high @-@ profile criminal , John Hinckley , Jr . In October 1984 Bundy , who by then considered himself an expert on serial killers , contacted Robert Keppel and offered to share his self @-@ proclaimed expertise in the ongoing hunt for his successor in Washington , the Green River Killer . Keppel and Green River Task Force detective Dave Reichert interviewed Bundy , but Gary Leon Ridgway remained at large for a further 17 years . Keppel published a detailed documentation of the Green River interviews , and later collaborated with Michaud on another examination of the interview material . 
 In early 1986 an execution date ( March 4 ) was set on the Chi Omega convictions ; the Supreme Court issued a brief stay , but the execution was quickly rescheduled . In April , shortly after the new date ( July 2 ) was announced , Bundy confessed to Hagmaier and Nelson what they believed was the full range of his depredations , including details of what he did to some victims after their deaths . He told them that he revisited Taylor Mountain , Issaquah , and other secondary crime scenes , often several times , to lie with his victims and perform sexual acts with their decomposing bodies until putrefaction forced him to stop . In some cases he drove several hours each way and remained the entire night . In Utah he applied makeup to Melissa Smith 's lifeless face , and he repeatedly washed Laura Aime 's hair . " If you 've got time , " he told Hagmaier , " they can be anything you want them to be . " He decapitated approximately twelve of his victims with a hacksaw , and kept at least one group of severed heads — probably the four later found on Taylor Mountain ( Rancourt , Parks , Ball , and Healy ) — in his apartment for a period of time before disposing of them . 
 Less than 15 hours before the scheduled July 2 execution , the Eleventh Circuit Court of Appeals stayed it indefinitely and remanded the Chi Omega case for review of multiple technicalities — including Bundy 's mental competency to stand trial , and an erroneous instruction by the trial judge during the penalty phase requiring the jury to break a 6 – 6 tie between life imprisonment and the death penalty — that , ultimately , were never resolved . A new date ( November 18 , 1986 ) was then set to carry out the Leach sentence ; the Eleventh Circuit Court issued a stay on November 17 . In mid @-@ 1988 the Eleventh Circuit ruled against Bundy , and in December the Supreme Court denied a motion to review the ruling . Within hours of that final denial a firm execution date of January 24 , 1989 was announced . Bundy 's journey through the appeals courts had been unusually rapid for a capital murder case : " Contrary to popular belief , the courts moved Bundy as fast as they could ... Even the prosecutors acknowledged that Bundy 's lawyers never employed delaying tactics . Though people everywhere seethed at the apparent delay in executing the archdemon , Ted Bundy was actually on the fast track . " 
 With all appeal avenues exhausted and no further motivation to deny his crimes , Bundy agreed to speak frankly with investigators . To Keppel , he confessed to all eight of the Washington and Oregon homicides for which he was the prime suspect . He described three additional previously unknown victims in Washington and two in Oregon whom he declined to identify ( if indeed he ever knew their identities ) . He said he left a fifth corpse — Donna Manson 's — on Taylor Mountain , but incinerated her head in Kloepfer 's fireplace . ( " Of all the things I did to [ Kloepfer ] , " he told Keppel , " this is probably the one she is least likely to forgive me for . Poor Liz . " ) 
 He described in detail his abduction of Georgann Hawkins from the brightly lit UW alley — how he lured her to his car , clubbed and handcuffed her , drove her to Issaquah and strangled her , spent the entire night with her body , and revisited her corpse on three later occasions . He also admitted , for the first time , that he returned the following morning to the UW alley . There , in the very midst of a major crime scene investigation , he located and gathered Hawkins 's earrings and one of her shoes where he had left them in the adjoining parking lot and departed , unobserved . " It was a feat so brazen , " wrote Keppel , " that it astonishes police even today . " 
 " He described the Issaquah crime scene [ where the bones of Ott , Naslund , and Hawkins were found ] , and it was almost like he was just there " , Keppel said . " Like he was seeing everything . He was infatuated with the idea because he spent so much time there . He is just totally consumed with murder all the time . " Nelson 's impressions were similar : " It was the absolute misogyny of his crimes that stunned me , " she wrote , " his manifest rage against women . He had no compassion at all ... he was totally engrossed in the details . His murders were his life 's accomplishments . " 
 To detectives from Idaho , Utah , and Colorado , Bundy confessed to numerous additional homicides , including several that police had been unaware of . He explained that in Utah he could bring his victims back to his apartment , " where he could reenact scenarios depicted on the covers of detective magazines . " A new ulterior strategy quickly became apparent : He withheld many details , hoping to parlay the incomplete information into yet another stay of execution . " There are other buried remains in Colorado " , he admitted , but refused to elaborate . The new strategy — immediately dubbed " Ted 's bones @-@ for @-@ time scheme " — served only to deepen the resolve of authorities to see Bundy executed on schedule , and yielded little new detailed information . In cases where he did give details , nothing was found . Colorado detective Matt Lindvall interpreted this as a conflict between his desire to postpone his execution by divulging information and his need to remain in " total possession — the only person who knew his victims ' true resting places . " 
 When it became clear that no further stays would be forthcoming from the courts , Bundy supporters began lobbying for the only remaining option , executive clemency . Diana Weiner , a young Florida attorney and Bundy 's last purported love interest , asked the families of several Colorado and Utah victims to petition Florida Governor Bob Martinez for a postponement to give Bundy time to reveal more information . All refused . " The families already believed that the victims were dead and that Ted had killed them " , wrote Nelson . " They didn 't need his confession . " Martinez made it clear that he would not agree to further delays in any case . " We are not going to have the system manipulated " , he told reporters . " For him to be negotiating for his life over the bodies of victims is despicable . " 
 Carole Ann Boone , who had championed Bundy 's innocence throughout all of his trials , felt " deeply betrayed " by his admission that he was , in fact , guilty . She moved back to Washington with her daughter and refused to accept his final , pre @-@ execution phone call . " She was hurt by his relationship with Diana [ Wiener ] , " Nelson wrote , " and devastated by his sudden wholesale confessions in his last days . " 
 Hagmaier was present during Bundy 's final interviews with investigators . On the eve of his execution , he talked of suicide . " He did not want to give the state the satisfaction of watching him die " , Hagmaier said . Ted Bundy died in the Raiford electric chair at 7 : 16 a.m. EST on January 24 , 1989 ; he was 42 years old . Hundreds of revelers — including 20 off @-@ duty police officers , by one account — sang , danced , and set off fireworks in a pasture across the street from the prison as the execution was carried out , then cheered loudly as the white hearse containing Bundy 's corpse departed the prison . His remains were cremated in Gainesville and the ashes scattered at an undisclosed location in the Cascade Range of Washington State in accordance with his will . 
 = = Modus operandi and victim profiles = = 
 Bundy was an unusually organized and calculating criminal who used his extensive knowledge of law enforcement methodologies to elude identification and capture for years . His crime scenes were distributed over large geographic areas ; his victim count had risen to at least 20 before it became clear that numerous investigators in widely disparate jurisdictions were hunting the same man . His assault methods of choice were blunt trauma and strangulation , two relatively silent techniques that could be accomplished with common household items . He deliberately avoided firearms due to the noise they made and the ballistic evidence they left behind . He was a " meticulous researcher " who explored his surroundings in minute detail , looking for safe sites to seize and dispose of victims . He was unusually skilled at minimizing physical evidence . His fingerprints were never found at a crime scene , nor was any other incontrovertible evidence of his guilt , a fact he repeated often during the years in which he attempted to maintain his innocence . 
 Other significant obstacles for law enforcement were Bundy 's generic , essentially anonymous physical features , and a curious chameleon @-@ like ability to change his appearance almost at will . Early on , police complained of the futility of showing his photograph to witnesses ; he looked different in virtually every photo ever taken of him . In person , " ... his expression would so change his whole appearance that there were moments that you weren 't even sure you were looking at the same person " , said Stewart Hanson , Jr . , the judge in the DaRonch trial . " He [ was ] really a changeling . " Bundy was well aware of this unusual quality and he exploited it , using subtle modifications of facial hair or hairstyle to significantly alter his appearance as necessary . He concealed his one distinctive identifying mark , a dark mole on his neck , with turtleneck shirts and sweaters . Even his Volkswagen Beetle proved difficult to pin down ; its color was variously described by witnesses as metallic or non @-@ metallic , tan or bronze , light brown or dark brown . 
 Bundy 's modus operandi evolved in organization and sophistication over time , as is typical of serial murderers , according to FBI experts . Early on , it consisted of forcible late @-@ night entry followed by a violent attack with a blunt weapon on a sleeping victim . Some victims were sexually assaulted with inert objects ; all except Healy were left as they lay , unconscious or dead . As his methodology evolved Bundy became progressively more organized in his choice of victims and crime scenes . He would employ various ruses designed to lure his victim to the vicinity of his vehicle where he had pre @-@ positioned a weapon , usually a crowbar . In many cases he wore a plaster cast on one leg or a sling on one arm , and sometimes hobbled on crutches , then requested assistance in carrying something to his vehicle . Bundy was regarded as handsome and charismatic by many of his victims , traits he exploited to win their confidence . " Ted lured females " , Michaud wrote , " the way a lifeless silk flower can dupe a honey bee . " Once near or inside his vehicle the victim would be overpowered , bludgeoned , and restrained with handcuffs . Most were sexually assaulted and strangled , either at the primary crime scene or ( more commonly ) after transport to a pre @-@ selected secondary site , often a considerable distance away . In situations where his looks and charm were not useful , he invoked authority by identifying himself as a police officer or firefighter . Toward the end of his spree , in Florida , perhaps under the stress of being a fugitive , he regressed to indiscriminate attacks on sleeping victims . 
 At secondary sites he would remove and later burn the victim 's clothing , or in at least one case ( Cunningham 's ) deposit them in a Goodwill Industries collection bin . Bundy explained that the clothing removal was ritualistic , but also a practical matter , as it minimized the chance of leaving trace evidence at the crime scene that could implicate him . ( A manufacturing error in fibers from his own clothing , ironically , provided a crucial incriminating link to Kimberly Leach . ) He often revisited his secondary crime scenes to engage in acts of necrophilia , and to groom or dress up the cadavers . Some victims were found wearing articles of clothing they had never worn , or nail polish that family members had never seen . He took Polaroid photos of many of his victims . " When you work hard to do something right , " he told Hagmaier , " you don 't want to forget it . " Consumption of large quantities of alcohol was an " essential component " , he told Keppel , and later Michaud ; he needed to be " extremely drunk " while on the prowl in order to " significantly diminish " his inhibitions and to " sedate " the " dominant personality " that he feared might prevent his inner " entity " from acting on his impulses . 
 All of Bundy 's known victims were white females , most of middle @-@ class backgrounds . Almost all were between the ages of 15 and 25 and most were college students . He apparently never approached anyone he might have met before . ( In their last conversation before his execution , Bundy told Kloepfer he had purposely stayed away from her " when he felt the power of his sickness building in him . " ) Rule noted that most of the identified victims had long straight hair , parted in the middle — like Stephanie Brooks , the woman who rejected him , and to whom he later became engaged and then rejected in return . Rule speculated that Bundy 's animosity toward his first girlfriend triggered his protracted rampage and caused him to target victims who resembled her . Bundy dismissed this hypothesis : " [ T ] hey ... just fit the general criteria of being young and attractive " , he told Hugh Aynesworth . " Too many people have bought this crap that all the girls were similar ... [ but ] almost everything was dissimilar ... physically , they were almost all different . " He did concede that youth and beauty were " absolutely indispensable criteria " in his choice of victims . 
 = = Pathology = = 
 Bundy underwent multiple psychiatric examinations ; the experts ' conclusions varied . Dorothy <unk> Lewis , Professor of Psychiatry at the New York University School of Medicine and an authority on violent behavior , initially made a diagnosis of bipolar disorder , but later changed her impression more than once . She also suggested the possibility of a multiple personality disorder , based on behaviors described in interviews and court testimony : A great @-@ aunt witnessed an episode during which Bundy " ... seemed to turn into another , unrecognizable person ... [ she ] suddenly , inexplicably found herself afraid of her favorite nephew as they waited together at a dusk @-@ darkened train station . He had turned into a stranger . " Lewis recounted a prison official in Tallahassee describing a similar transformation : " He said , ' He became weird on me . ' He did a metamorphosis , a body and facial change , and he felt there was almost an odor emitting from him . He said , ' Almost a complete change of personality ... that was the day I was afraid of him . ' " Narcissistic personality disorder ( NPD ) has also been proposed in at least one subsequent retrospective analysis . 
 While experts found Bundy 's precise diagnosis elusive , the majority of evidence pointed away from bipolar disorder or other psychoses , and toward antisocial personality disorder ( <unk> ) . <unk> patients — frequently identified as " sociopaths " or " psychopaths " — are often outwardly charming , even charismatic ; but beneath the facade there is little true personality or genuine insight . Most sociopaths are not demonstrably psychotic ; they can readily distinguish right from wrong , but such ability has minimal effect on their behavior . They are devoid of feelings of guilt or remorse , a point readily admitted by Bundy himself . " Guilt doesn 't solve anything , really " , he said in 1981 . " It hurts you ... I guess I am in the enviable position of not having to deal with guilt . " Other hallmarks include narcissism , poor judgment , and manipulative behavior . " <unk> " , prosecutor George Dekle wrote , " are egotistical manipulators who think they can con anybody . " " Sometimes he manipulates even me " , admitted one psychiatrist . In the end , Lewis agreed with the majority : " I always tell my graduate students that if they can find me a real , true psychopath , I 'll buy them dinner " , she told Nelson . " I never thought they existed ... but I think Ted may have been one , a true psychopath , without any remorse or empathy at all . " 
 On the afternoon before he was executed Bundy granted an interview to James Dobson , a psychologist and founder of the Christian evangelical organization Focus on the Family . He used the opportunity to make new statements about violence in the media and the pornographic " roots " of his crimes . " It happened in stages , gradually " , he said . " My experience with ... pornography that deals on a violent level with sexuality , is once you become addicted to it ... I would keep looking for more potent , more explicit , more graphic kinds of material . Until you reach a point where the pornography only goes so far ... where you begin to wonder if maybe actually doing it would give that which is beyond just reading it or looking at it . " Violence in the media , he said , " particularly sexualized violence " , sent boys " down the road to being Ted Bundys . " The FBI , he suggested , should stake out adult movie houses and follow patrons as they leave . " You are going to kill me , " he said , " and that will protect society from me . But out there are many , many more people who are addicted to pornography , and you are doing nothing about that . " 
 Multiple biographers , researchers , and other observers have concluded that Bundy 's sudden condemnation of pornography was one last manipulative attempt to shift blame by catering to Dobson 's agenda as a longtime anti @-@ pornography advocate , telling him precisely what he wanted to hear . While he asserted in the Dobson interview that detective magazines and other reading material had " corrupted " him and " fueled [ his ] fantasies ... to the point of becoming a serial killer " , in a 1977 letter to Ann Rule he wrote , " Who in the world reads these publications ? ... I have never purchased such a magazine , and [ on only ] two or three occasions have I ever picked one up . " He told Michaud and <unk> in 1980 , and Hagmaier the night before he spoke to Dobson , that pornography played a negligible role in his development as a serial killer . " The problem wasn 't pornography " , wrote Dekle . " The problem was Bundy . " Nelson expressed the minority view , that Bundy 's concern about the dangers of violent pornography was genuine . 
 Rule and Aynesworth both noted that , for Bundy , the fault always lay with someone or something else . While he eventually confessed to 30 murders , he never accepted responsibility for any of them , even when offered that opportunity prior to the Chi Omega trial — which would have averted the death penalty . He deflected blame onto a wide variety of scapegoats , including his abusive grandfather , the absence of his biological father , the concealment of his true parentage , alcohol , the media , the police ( whom he accused of planting evidence ) , " society " in general , violence on television , and ultimately , true crime periodicals and pornography . He blamed television programming — which he watched mostly on sets that he had stolen — for " brainwashing " him into stealing credit cards . On at least one occasion he even tried to blame his victims : " I have known people who ... radiate vulnerability " , he wrote in a 1977 letter to Kloepfer . " Their facial expressions say ' I am afraid of you . ' These people invite abuse ... By expecting to be hurt , do they subtly encourage it ? " 
 A significant element of delusion permeated his thinking : 
 Bundy was always surprised when anyone noticed that one of his victims was missing , because he imagined America to be a place where everyone is invisible except to themselves . And he was always astounded when people testified that they had seen him in incriminating places , because Bundy did not believe people noticed each other . 
 " I don 't know why everyone is out to get me " , he complained to Lewis . " He really and truly did not have any sense of the enormity of what he had done , " she said . " A long @-@ term serial killer erects powerful barriers to his guilt , " Keppel wrote , " walls of denial that can sometimes never be breached . " Nelson agreed . " Each time he was forced to make an actual confession , " she wrote , " he had to leap a steep barrier he had built inside himself long ago . " 
 = = Victims = = 
 Bundy confessed to 30 homicides , but the true total remains unknown . Published estimates have run as high as 100 or more , and Bundy occasionally made cryptic comments to encourage that speculation . He told Hugh Aynesworth in 1980 that for every murder " publicized " , there " could be one that was not . " When FBI agents proposed a total tally of 36 , Bundy responded , " Add one digit to that , and you 'll have it . " Years later he told attorney Polly Nelson that the common estimate of 35 was accurate , but Robert Keppel wrote that " [ Ted ] and I both knew [ the total ] was much higher . " " I don 't think even he knew ... how many he killed , or why he killed them " , said Rev. Fred Lawrence , the Methodist clergyman who administered Bundy 's last rites . " That was my impression , my strong impression . " 
 On the evening before his execution , Bundy reviewed his victim tally with Bill Hagmaier on a state @-@ by @-@ state basis : 
 in Washington , 11 ( including Parks , abducted in Oregon but killed in Washington ; and including 3 unidentified ) 
 in Utah , 8 ( 3 unidentified ) 
 in Colorado , 3 
 in Florida , 3 
 in Oregon , 2 ( both unidentified ) 
 in Idaho , 2 ( 1 unidentified ) 
 in California , 1 ( unidentified ) 
 The following is a chronological summary of the 20 identified victims and 5 identified survivors : 
 = = = 1974 = = = 
 = = = = Washington , Oregon = = = = 
 January 4 : Karen Sparks ( often identified as Joni Lenz in Bundy literature ) ( age 18 ) : Bludgeoned and sexually assaulted in her bed as she slept ; survived 
 February 1 : Lynda Ann Healy ( 21 ) : Bludgeoned while asleep and abducted ; skull and mandible recovered at Taylor Mountain site 
 March 12 : Donna Gail Manson ( 19 ) : Abducted while walking to a concert at The Evergreen State College ; body left ( according to Bundy ) at Taylor Mountain site , but never found 
 April 17 : Susan Elaine Rancourt ( 18 ) : Disappeared after attending an evening advisors ' meeting at Central Washington State College ; skull and mandible recovered at Taylor Mountain site 
 May 6 : Roberta Kathleen Parks ( 22 ) : Vanished from Oregon State University in Corvallis ; skull and mandible recovered at Taylor Mountain site 
 June 1 : Brenda Carol Ball ( 22 ) : Disappeared after leaving the Flame Tavern in Burien ; skull and mandible recovered at Taylor Mountain site 
 June 11 : Georgann ( often misspelled " <unk> " ) Hawkins ( 18 ) : Abducted from an alley behind her sorority house , UW ; skeletal remains identified by Bundy as Hawkins 's recovered at Issaquah site 
 July 14 : Janice Ann Ott ( 23 ) : Abducted from Lake Sammamish State Park in broad daylight ; skeletal remains recovered at Issaquah site 
 July 14 : Denise Marie Naslund ( 19 ) : Abducted four hours after Ott from the same park ; skeletal remains recovered at Issaquah site 
 = = = = Utah , Colorado , Idaho = = = = 
 October 2 : Nancy Wilcox ( 16 ) : <unk> , assaulted , and strangled in Holladay , Utah ; body buried ( according to Bundy ) near Capitol Reef National Park , 200 miles ( 320 km ) south of Salt Lake City , but never found 
 October 18 : Melissa Anne Smith ( 17 ) : Vanished from Midvale , Utah ; body found in nearby mountainous area 
 October 31 : Laura Ann Aime ( 17 ) : Disappeared from Lehi , Utah ; body discovered by hikers in American Fork Canyon 
 November 8 : Carol DaRonch ( 18 ) : Attempted abduction in Murray , Utah ; escaped from Bundy 's car and survived 
 November 8 : Debra Kent ( 17 ) : Vanished after leaving a school play in Bountiful , Utah ; body left ( according to Bundy ) near Fairview , Utah , 100 miles ( 160 km ) south of Bountiful ; minimal skeletal remains ( one patella ) found , but never positively identified as Kent 's 
 = = = 1975 = = = 
 January 12 : Caryn Campbell ( 23 ) : Disappeared from hotel hallway in Snowmass , Colorado ; body discovered on a dirt road near the hotel 
 March 15 : Julie Cunningham ( 26 ) : Disappeared on the way to a tavern in Vail , Colorado ; body buried ( according to Bundy ) near Rifle , 90 miles ( 140 km ) west of Vail , but never found 
 April 6 : Denise Oliverson ( 25 ) : Abducted while bicycling to her parents ' house in Grand Junction , Colorado ; body thrown ( according to Bundy ) into the Colorado River 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) west of Grand Junction , but never found 
 May 6 : Lynette Culver ( 12 ) : Abducted from Alameda Junior High School in Pocatello , Idaho ; body thrown ( according to Bundy ) into what authorities believe to be the Snake River , but never found 
 June 28 : Susan Curtis ( 15 ) : Disappeared during a youth conference at Brigham Young University ; body buried ( according to Bundy ) near Price , Utah , 75 miles ( 121 km ) southeast of Provo , but never found 
 = = = 1978 = = = 
 = = = = Florida = = = = 
 January 15 : Margaret Bowman ( 21 ) : Bludgeoned and then strangled as she slept , Chi Omega sorority , FSU ( no secondary crime scene ) 
 January 15 : Lisa Levy ( 20 ) : Bludgeoned , strangled and sexually assaulted as she slept , Chi Omega sorority , FSU ( no secondary crime scene ) 
 January 15 : Karen Chandler ( 21 ) : Bludgeoned as she slept , Chi Omega sorority , FSU ; survived 
 January 15 : Kathy Kleiner ( 21 ) : Bludgeoned as she slept , Chi Omega sorority , FSU ; survived 
 January 15 : Cheryl Thomas ( 21 ) : Bludgeoned as she slept , eight blocks from Chi Omega ; survived 
 February 9 : Kimberly Diane Leach ( 12 ) : Abducted from her junior high school in Lake City , Florida ; skeletal remains found near Suwannee River State Park , 43 miles ( 69 km ) west of Lake City 
 = = = Other possible victims = = = 
 Bundy remains a suspect in several unsolved homicides , and is likely responsible for others that may never be identified ; in 1987 he confided to Keppel that there were " some murders " that he would " never talk about " , because they were committed " too close to home " , " too close to family " , or involved " victims who were very young " . 
 Ann Marie Burr , age 8 , vanished from her Tacoma home on August 31 , 1961 when Bundy was 14 . The Burr house was on Bundy 's newspaper delivery route . The victim 's father was certain that he saw Bundy in a ditch at a construction site on the nearby UPS campus the morning his daughter disappeared . Other circumstantial evidence implicates him as well , but detectives familiar with the case have never agreed on the likelihood of his involvement . Bundy repeatedly denied culpability and wrote a letter of denial to the Burr family in 1986 ; but Keppel has observed that Burr fits all three of Bundy 's " no discussion " categories of " too close to home " , " too close to family " , and " very young " . Forensic testing of material evidence from the Burr crime scene , in 2011 , yielded insufficient intact DNA sequences for comparison with Bundy 's . 
 Flight attendants Lisa E. Wick and Lonnie Trumbull , both 20 , were bludgeoned with a piece of lumber as they slept in their basement apartment in Seattle 's Queen Anne Hill district on June 23 , 1966 near the Safeway store where Bundy worked at the time , and where the women regularly shopped . Trumbull died . In retrospect , Keppel noted many similarities to the Chi Omega crime scene . Wick , who suffered permanent memory loss as a result of the attack , later contacted Ann Rule : " I know that it was Ted Bundy who did that to us , " she wrote , " but I can 't tell you how I know . " In the absence of incriminating evidence , Bundy 's involvement remains speculative . 
 <unk> college friends Susan Davis and Elizabeth Perry , both 19 , were stabbed to death on May 30 , 1969 . Their car was found that day abandoned beside the Garden State Parkway outside Somers Point , New Jersey , near Atlantic City , 60 miles ( 97 km ) south of Philadelphia ; and their bodies — one nude , one fully clothed — were found in nearby woods three days later . Bundy attended Temple University from January through May , 1969 and apparently did not move west until after Memorial Day weekend . While Bundy 's accounts of his earliest crimes varied considerably between interviews , he told forensic psychologist Art Norman that his first murder victims were two women in the Philadelphia area . Biographer Richard Larsen believed that Bundy committed the murders using his feigned @-@ injury ruse , based on an investigator 's interview with Julia , Bundy 's aunt : Ted , she said , was wearing a leg cast due to an automobile accident on the weekend of the homicides , and therefore could not have traveled from Philadelphia to the Jersey Shore ; there is no official record of any such accident . Bundy is considered a " strong suspect " , but the case remains open . 
 Rita Curran , a 24 @-@ year @-@ old elementary school teacher and part @-@ time motel maid , was murdered in her basement apartment on July 19 , 1971 in Burlington , Vermont ; she had been strangled , bludgeoned and raped . The location of the motel where she worked ( adjacent to Bundy 's birthplace , the Elizabeth Lund Home for Unwed Mothers ) and similarities to known Bundy crime scenes led retired FBI agent John Bassett to propose him as a suspect . No evidence firmly places Bundy in Burlington on that date , but municipal records note that a person named " Bundy " was bitten by a dog that week , and long stretches of Bundy 's time — including the summer of 1971 — remain unaccounted for . Curran 's murder officially remains unsolved . 
 Joyce LePage , 21 , was last seen on July 22 , 1971 on the campus of Washington State University , where she was an undergraduate . Nine months later her skeletal remains were found wrapped in carpeting and military blankets , bound with rope , in a deep ravine south of Pullman , Washington . Multiple suspects — including Bundy — have " never been cleared " , according to investigators . Whitman County authorities have said that Bundy remains a suspect . 
 Rita Lorraine Jolly , 17 , disappeared from West Linn , Oregon on June 29 , 1973 ; Vicki Lynn Hollar , 24 , disappeared from Eugene , Oregon on August 20 , 1973 . Bundy confessed to two homicides in Oregon without identifying the victims . Oregon detectives suspected that they were Jolly and Hollar , but were unable to obtain interview time with Bundy to confirm it . Both women remain classified as missing . 
 Katherine Merry Devine , 14 , was abducted on November 25 , 1973 , and her body was found the next month in the Capitol State Forest near Olympia , Washington . Brenda Joy Baker , 14 , was seen hitchhiking near Puyallup , Washington on May 27 , 1974 ; her body was found in <unk> State Park a month later . Though Bundy was widely believed responsible for both murders , he told Keppel that he had no knowledge of either case . DNA analysis led to the arrest and conviction of William E. <unk> for Devine 's murder in 2002 . The Baker homicide remains unsolved . 
 Sandra Jean Weaver , 19 , a Wisconsin native who had been living in Tooele , Utah , was last seen in Salt Lake City on July 1 , 1974 ; her nude body was discovered the following day near Grand Junction , Colorado . Sources conflict on whether Bundy mentioned Weaver 's name during the death row interviews . Her murder remains unsolved . 
 Carol L. Valenzuela , 20 , was last seen hitchhiking near Vancouver , Washington , on August 2 , 1974 . Her remains were discovered two months later in a shallow grave south of Olympia , along with those of another female later identified as Martha Morrison , 17 ( last seen in Eugene , Oregon on September 1 , 1974 ) . Both victims had long hair parted in the middle . In August 1974 Bundy drove from Seattle to Salt Lake City and could have passed through Vancouver and Eugene en route , but there is no evidence that he did . Both cases remain open . 
 Melanie Suzanne " Suzy " Cooley , 18 , disappeared on April 15 , 1975 , after leaving Nederland High School in Nederland , Colorado , 50 miles ( 80 km ) northwest of Denver . Her bludgeoned and strangled corpse was discovered by road maintenance workers two weeks later in Coal Creek Canyon , 20 miles ( 32 km ) away . While gas receipts place Bundy in nearby Golden on the day Cooley disappeared , and Cooley is included on the list of Bundy victims in most Bundy literature , Jefferson County authorities say the evidence is inconclusive and continue to treat her homicide as a cold case . 
 Shelly ( or Shelley ) Kay Robertson , 24 , failed to show up for work in Golden , Colorado on July 1 , 1975 . Her nude , decomposed body was found in August , 500 feet ( 150 m ) inside a mine on Berthoud Pass near Winter Park Resort by two mining students . Gas station receipts place Bundy in the area at the time , but there is no direct evidence of his involvement ; the case remains open . 
 Nancy Perry Baird , 23 , disappeared from the service station where she worked in Farmington , Utah , 20 miles ( 32 km ) north of Salt Lake City , on July 4 , 1975 and remains classified as a missing person . Bundy specifically denied involvement in this case during the death row interviews . 
 Debbie Smith , 17 , was last seen in Salt Lake City in early February 1976 , shortly before the DaRonch trial began ; her body was found near the Salt Lake City International Airport on April 1 , 1976 . Though listed as a Bundy victim by some sources , her murder remains officially unsolved . 
 Minutes before his execution , Hagmaier queried Bundy about unsolved homicides in New Jersey , Illinois , Vermont ( the Curran case ) , Texas , and Miami , Florida . Bundy provided directions — later proven inaccurate — to Susan Curtis 's burial site in Utah , but denied involvement in any of the open cases . 
 = = Artifacts = = 
 Bundy 's 1968 Volkswagen Beetle was displayed in the lobby of the National Museum of Crime and Punishment in Washington DC until its closure in 2015 . It is presently on exhibit at the Alcatraz East Crime Museum in Pigeon Forge , Tennessee . 
 = = In media = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 The Deliberate Stranger ( 1986 ) , starring Mark Harmon 
 Ted Bundy ( 2002 ) , starring Michael Reilly Burke 
 The Stranger Beside Me ( 2003 ) , starring Billy Campbell 
 Bundy : A Legacy of Evil ( 2008 ) , starring Corin Nemec 
 = Lovely ( Desperate Housewives ) = 
 " Lovely " is the fifteenth episode of the sixth season of the American comedy @-@ drama series , Desperate Housewives , and the 126th overall episode of the series . It originally aired on ABC in the United States on February 21 , 2010 . In the episode , former stripper Robin Gallagher ( Julie Benz ) interacts with each of the women of Wisteria Lane , drastically affecting their lives . She grows particularly close to Katherine Mayfair ( Dana Delany ) , with whom she shares a kiss during a bar outing . 
 The episode was written by David <unk> and directed by David Warren . It included the second in a string of guest appearances by Benz , who had recently departed as a regular from the Showtime drama series , Dexter . " Lovely " introduced an ongoing storyline of Katherine exploring her sexuality , a subplot which was met with enthusiasm by actress Delany . The pairing between Robin and Katherine was the first lesbian relationship in Desperate Housewives . 
 " Lovely " received generally mixed reviews , with detractors criticizing it for failing to advance the show 's plotlines . According to Nielsen ratings , the episode was seen by 10 @.@ 9 million viewers , and matched the series low rating from the previous episode , " The Glamorous Life " , although the subsequent episode , " The Chase " , drew even poorer ratings . Viewership for " Lovely " suffered because of competition from the 2010 Winter Olympics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Back story = = = 
 Desperate Housewives focuses on the lives of several residents on the suburban neighborhood of Wisteria Lane . In recent episodes , Susan Mayer ( Teri Hatcher ) has encouraged a stripper Robin Gallagher ( Julie Benz ) to quit her job and turn her life around . Susan invited Robin to move into her house until she gets back on her feet . Katherine Mayfair ( Dana Delany ) has been admitted to a psychiatric hospital after suffering a mental breakdown stemming from the breakup of her relationship with Mike Delfino ( James Denton ) , who has since married Susan . Orson Hodge ( Kyle MacLachlan ) has recently learned that his wife , Bree Van de Kamp ( Marcia Cross ) , was having an affair with Susan 's ex @-@ husband Karl Mayer ( Richard Burgi ) . Orson has been using a wheelchair since Christmas , as a result of a small passenger plane crash landing into a building he and Karl were inside ; Karl died as a result of the accident . Angie ( Drea de Matteo ) and Nick Bolen ( Jeffrey Nordling ) recently moved onto Wisteria Lane to escape circumstances that are yet to be fully explained ; however , Gabrielle ( Eva Longoria ) and Carlos Solis ( Ricardo Antonio Chavira ) overheard the Bolens arguing about their circumstances , and have grown concerned about their niece Ana ( Maiara Walsh ) dating the Bolens ' son , Danny ( Beau Mirchoff ) . 
 = = = Episode = = = 
 As Robin becomes integrated into Wisteria Lane , she gradually begins to affect the lives of several of her new neighbors . 
 Lynette Scavo ( Felicity Huffman ) , who is in the middle of celebrating her wedding anniversary with Tom ( Doug Savant ) , grows angry when she learns her son Parker ( Joshua Logan Moore ) is spying on Robin while she showers next door . Lynette rudely confronts Robin , who tells Lynette that Parker offered her money to have sex with him . Later , Parker tells his parents he is the only one of his friends who have not had sex . Tom assures him it will happen when the time is right , and Lynette apologizes to Robin . 
 Later , Robin learns Bree has had trouble connecting with Orson due to her recent affair . Robin suggests Bree restart their sex life , prompting Bree to later try giving Orson a lap @-@ dance . The dance proves awkward , especially when Bree falls over and Orson runs over her foot with the wheelchair . Bree explains she wants to become intimate with her husband again , and the two share a romantic moment . 
 Meanwhile , Gabrielle and Carlos plot to break up Ana and Danny . Gabrielle arranges for an old photographer friend in New York City to help Ana with her modeling career , but she turns down the offer because of her relationship with Danny . After Robin tells Gabrielle that she gave up a career in ballet for a boy in her youth , only for the boy to break up with her two months later , and that she then got in a car crash ruining her chances of a future in ballet , Gabrielle convinces Robin to tell the story to Ana . Ana breaks up with Danny and leaves for New York , but after Robin realizes she has been used , she speaks to Danny , who secretly leaves town in a taxi to chase after Ana . 
 Susan grows jealous when Robin starts giving Mike massages to ease his sore back . Susan tries to give Mike a massage , but being the klutz that Susan is , ends up putting him in the hospital . Susan confesses her jealousy to Robin , who decides to preserve their friendship by moving out . 
 Robin becomes a roommate to Katherine , who is still feeling depressed after her recent stint in a mental hospital . Robin encourages Katherine to go out to a bar , and the two have a great time . When two men hit on Robin and show no interest in Katherine , Robin shows them up by kissing Katherine on the lips . Katherine initially laughs at the funny moment , but later learns Robin really is a lesbian . Katherine insists she is not interested in women when Robin suggests she explores the possibility , but later it appears that Katherine may be intrigued by the idea . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Lovely " was written by David <unk> and directed by David Warren . It marked the second in a string of at least four guest appearances by actress Julie Benz as Robin Gallagher , a former stripper seeking a new life . Benz joined the show soon after her departure as a regular cast member from the Showtime drama series Dexter , where her character Rita Morgan was killed in the fourth season finale , " The Getaway " . Benz said of her role in Desperate Housewives , " I love the show so much , and I am honored to be part of the whole [ world ] of Wisteria Lane . And to work with all these great , amazing women ! I 've done a lot of male @-@ dominated movies and television shows , so it 's so amazing for me to be a part of a show that is female @-@ dominated . " 
 " Lovely " introduced an ongoing storyline of Katherine Mayfair exploring her sexuality . Actress Dana Delany , who previously played a lesbian character in the Showtime series The L Word , said she felt the subplot was an excellent idea : " A lot of the ladies on the set have said , ' Why has this not happened before ? ' I think everybody wanted to be the one who got to do it . " In an interview with E ! Online , actress Marcia Cross jokingly said of the kiss scene , " I 'm a little jealous that I 'm not involved . What is going on ? " Delany said she did not know if the character would become a lesbian permanently , because the story lines change so often in Desperate Housewives , but that series creator Marc Cherry " is interested in playing the complexity of that " . The pairing between Robin and Katherine was the first lesbian relationship in Desperate Housewives . 
 Delany compared Katherine 's new realizations to that of actress Meredith Baxter , who realized she was a lesbian late in her life after entering into a relationship with a woman . Delany said she believed her character would be taken by surprise by the new feelings she is experiencing : " I think that she ’ s still so emotionally vulnerable from getting out of the loony bin , and I think she and Robin connect on a kind of wounded , emotional level . And I think if anything , she ’ s feeling this kind of emotional solace with her , and that draws her to Robin in a physical way , and that ’ s confusing to her . " Delany and Benz were both sick when they filmed their kiss scene . Benz said of the scene , " Dana 's a great kisser . " Delany said more male crew members were present for the filming of the lesbian kiss scene than usual due to the sensuality of the scene . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast on February 21 , 2010 , " Lovely " was seen by 10 @.@ 9 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings , which is 20 percent below the season average . Among viewers between ages 18 and 49 , it received a 3 @.@ 7 rating / 9 share ; a share represents the percentage of households using a television at the time the program is airing . This rating matched the previous episode , " The Glamorous Life " , for the lowest rating for an individual episode of Desperate Housewives in series history . However , it held that distinction only two weeks before " The Glamorous Life " , and the subsequent episode " The Chase " , received even lower ratings . " Lovely " continued a downward trend in the ratings : " The Glamorous Life " was seen by 11 @.@ 82 million viewers , and the previous episode , " How About a Friendly Shrink ? " , was seen by 11 @.@ 2 million viewers and achieved the lowest rating of the series at the time . " Lovely " suffered in the ratings partially due to competition from the NBC broadcast of the 2010 Winter Olympics . The day " Lovely " was originally broadcast , the 2010 Winter Olympics drew an average of 24 @.@ 67 million viewers during the episode 's 9 p.m. timeslot . Desperate Housewives was also outperformed by the CBS reality series Undercover Boss which , in its third episode , drew 13 @.@ 6 million viewers . 
 " Lovely " received generally mixed reviews . Gerrick D. Kennedy of the Los Angeles Times said he was initially skeptical of the Robin and Katherine romance subplot , but said he liked how it was presented . " It wasn ’ t contrived like other girl @-@ on @-@ girl scenes on television that we see . ... I just hate it when it ’ s used to seem ' edgy ' or to sell an episode , and I hope that isn 't the case here . " Kennedy said the Bree and Orson scenes led to " a tender moment " , but said Susan was annoying and the Lynette plotline was somewhat insulting toward women . Isabelle Carreau of TV Squad said he was surprised Robin 's back story was fleshed out so quickly , and speculated it could lead to a permanent role in the series . Carreau said the pairing of Robin and Katherine could be " very interesting " , and that the best part of the episode was the comical conversation between Robin and Karen McCluskey ( Kathryn Joosten ) at the end . 
 Entertainment Weekly writer Tanner Stransky criticized " Lovely " for stringing together several uninteresting and unfunny segments rather than advancing existing plotlines or introducing new ones . He was particularly critical of the Susan and Lynette segments , but said the introduction of Katherine 's possible lesbianism was " intriguing for the moment " . Gael Fashingbauer Cooper of MSNBC also criticized the episode for failing to advance the plot , and sarcastically wrote of the Katherine development , " Oh , because lesbian storylines have worked so well on this show in the past , except , never . " Cooper said the segment involving Robin and Bree was the only one that didn 't feel " stilted and sad " . 
 = Hurricane Blanca ( 2015 ) = 
 Hurricane Blanca was the earliest recorded tropical cyclone to make landfall in Baja California in any given year . Forming as a tropical depression on May 31 , Blanca initially struggled to organize due to strong wind shear . However , once this abated , the system took advantage of high sea surface temperatures and ample moisture . After becoming a tropical storm on June 1 , Blanca rapidly intensified on June 2 – 3 , becoming a powerful Category 4 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale ; maximum sustained winds reached 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) at this time . The hurricane 's slow motion resulted in tremendous upwelling of cooler water , resulting in a period of weakening . Blanca gradually recovered from this and briefly regained Category 4 status on June 6 as it moved generally northwest toward the Baja California peninsula . Cooler waters and increased shear again prompted weakening on June 7 and the system struck Baja California Sur on June 8 as a weak tropical storm . It quickly degraded to a depression and dissipated early the next day . 
 Although Blanca remained far from Jalisco , large swells and rip currents produced by the hurricane claimed four lives . In Northwestern Mexico , watches and warnings were raised prior to the storm 's landfall . Blanca caused generally light damage in the region , consisting of downed trees and power lines . Remnant moisture from the system spread across the Southwestern United States , resulting in several days of scattered thunderstorms . Flash flooding occurred in multiple states , washing out roads and damaging homes , though the overall effects were limited . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On May 26 , 2015 , a tropical wave traversed Central America and entered the Eastern Pacific . Little development occurred over the following few days as the system drifted westward . Convective activity finally blossomed on May 30 and following the consolidation of a surface low , it was classified as a tropical depression by 12 : 00 UTC on May 31 . At this time , the depression was situated 370 mi ( 595 km ) south @-@ southwest of Acapulco , Mexico . The system initially drifted northwest along the edge of a weak ridge ; however , steering currents soon collapsed and left the depression to meander in the same general region for four days . Strong wind shear stemming from the nearby Hurricane Andres precluded intensification of the nascent depression . Other factors , including a moist atmosphere and sea surface temperatures of 86 ° F ( 30 ° C ) presented favorable conditions for development once the shear relaxed . Formation of a central dense overcast on June 1 marked the transition into a tropical storm , at which time the system was assigned the name Blanca . As shear steadily relaxed , conditions became exceptionally favorable for rapid intensification . Accordingly the Statistical Hurricane Intensity Prediction Scheme showed a 90 percent chance of winds increasing by 45 mph ( 75 km / h ) in 24 hours , among the highest probabilities seen by National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) forecaster Michael Brennan . 
 The upper @-@ level environment became even more favorable during the overnight of June 1 – 2 as anticyclonic outflow developed above Blanca , providing necessary ventilation for intensification . Turning south along an erratic , drifting course , an eye feature developed within the storm 's convective mass on June 2 . Blanca reached hurricane strength by 18 : 00 UTC and underwent rapid intensification thereafter . A small , pinhole eye soon appeared on visible and infrared satellite imagery . Reaching major hurricane intensity by 12 : 00 UTC on June 3 , Blanca marked the earliest occurrence of a season 's second such storm on record . The system featured a small , well @-@ defined eye surrounded by intense convection . Hours later , at 18 : 00 UTC , the hurricane achieved its estimated peak strength as a Category 4 on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale with maximum sustained winds of 145 mph ( 230 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 936 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 64 inHg ) . Given continued favorable conditions , forecasters at the NHC predicted Blanca to achieve Category 5 status — the highest ranking on the scale , indicating winds in excess of 156 mph ( 251 km / h ) . 
 Contrary to forecasts , the still quasi @-@ stationary Blanca soon degraded . The hurricane 's persistence over the same location for several days resulted in tremendous upwelling of cooler waters , with temperatures underneath the storm falling from 30 to 21 ° C ( 86 to 70 ° F ) . Compounding the effects of cooler water was an eyewall replacement cycle . This resulted in rapid weakening , with Blanca 's winds falling to 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) by 12 : 00 UTC on June 5 . The previously small core of Blanca dramatically expanded to 65 mi ( 100 km ) across , with convection asymmetrically wrapping around it . During this period , a mid @-@ level ridge north of the hurricane moved east and allowed Blanca to acquire a steady northwest track . Re @-@ intensification ensued on June 6 as the hurricane moved away from its cold wake and traversed an area of warmer water . 
 Throughout June 6 , Blanca 's convective structure became more symmetric as it completed its eyewall replacement cycle . Aided by impressive outflow , the hurricane regained Category 4 status by 12 : 00 UTC , marking its secondary peak intensity with winds of 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) . Soon thereafter , Blanca moved back over cooler waters and began weakening . A turn to the north @-@ northwest also occurred at this time as it rounded a mid @-@ level ridge over Mexico . The hurricane passed roughly 30 mi ( 45 km ) northeast of Socorro Island on June 7 . An automated weather station there recorded sustained winds of 74 mph ( 119 km / h ) , with a peak gust of 101 mph ( 163 km / h ) , before it ceased reporting . Additionally , a pressure of 977 @.@ 3 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 86 inHg ) was observed . Deep convection steadily weakened and the hurricane 's eye filled as the winds decreased . 
 Increasing wind shear accelerated the rate of weakening , causing Blanca 's mid- and low @-@ level circulation centers to decouple . By 18 : 00 UTC on June 7 , the hurricane degraded to a tropical storm . Around 10 : 30 UTC on June 8 , Blanca made landfall over Isla Santa Margarita off the coast of Baja California Sur before striking the mainland , near Puerto <unk> , at 11 : 15 UTC . This marked the earliest known landfall in the state , and peninsula , on record during a calendar year . It surpassed the previous earliest — Tropical Storm Calvin on July 8 , 1993 — by a month . Turning back to the northwest , the system briefly emerged back over the Pacific Ocean before weakening to a tropical depression . Blanca made its third and final landfall near El <unk> around 20 : 30 UTC . With deep convection no longer present , the depression degraded into a remnant low early on June 9 over the central Baja California peninsula before dissipating hours later . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Mexico = = = 
 On June 3 , precautionary alerts were raised across the southern Baja California Peninsula and much of Western Mexico , due to potential impacts from the hurricane . Two days later , the Government of Mexico issued a tropical storm watch for parts of Baja California Sur before upgrading it to a warning on June 6 . Warnings ultimately extended northward to Punta Abreojos . A hurricane watch was temporarily in place ; however , Blanca 's abrupt weakening on June 7 prompted its discontinuation . All schools were closed in Baja California Sur on June 8 . A collective 3 @,@ 300 troops from the Mexican Army and Navy were deployed to Baja California Sur to ensure the safety of residents . Under the threat of 16 ft ( 5 m ) waves , the port of Los Cabos suspended operations . Within Sonora , all schools in the Empalme , Guaymas , and Hermosillo municipalities were canceled for June 8 . 
 Waves up to 16 ft ( 5 m ) damaged coastal installations in Puerto Vallarta , Jalisco . A surfer was pulled out by rip currents near Villa Obregón and required rescue ; however , the rescuer was also overcome and both drowned . Two fishermen ignored warnings to remain at port and died amid rough seas from the hurricane . Striking Baja California Sur on June 8 , Blanca brought tropical storm @-@ force winds and heavy rain to the region . The highest sustained winds were observed at Cabo San Lucas International Airport , reaching 46 mph ( 74 km / h ) while gusts were measured at 52 mph ( 84 km / h ) in San Juanico . Across the state , high winds downed power lines and left 104 @,@ 106 residents without electricity . However , around 90 percent of the outages were fixed within 12 hours of the storm . The winds also broke a few windows . Sinaloa experienced similar effects , with strong winds downing many trees and tearing apart billboards , primarily in Los Mochis and Guasave . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 The remnants of Blanca , aided by an unusually late @-@ season coastal low , later brought several days of scattered thunderstorms to the Southwestern United States . Effects in California were primarily concentrated across the Mojave Desert and southern Great Basin . Daily rainfall records were broken in several areas , though accumulations were generally less than 1 in ( 25 mm ) . Maricopa and Taft received 1 @.@ 5 in ( 38 mm ) of rain in 30 minutes , triggering flash flooding that stranded vehicles and prompted the temporary closure of State Route 166 . Flooding and mud flows covered parts of State Route 190 in Inyo County , resulting in an accident that injured two people . Thunderstorm winds downed several trees , two of which fell on mobile homes . Hail up to 1 in ( 2 @.@ 5 cm ) in diameter was observed in Ford City . Some flooding took place in Santa Barbara County . Damage across the state amounted to $ 67 @,@ 000 . 
 Record rainfall was observed in parts of Arizona , with Yuma recording measurable precipitation for only the seventeenth time in June since records began in 1876 . Rainfall amounted to 0 @.@ 31 in ( 7 @.@ 9 mm ) in the city , and 0 @.@ 21 in ( 5 @.@ 3 mm ) fell in Tucson . In Six Mile Canyon in Nevada , near the border of Lyon and Storey counties , 1 @.@ 13 in ( 29 mm ) of rain fell in an hour , resulting in flash flooding . Damage was primarily to landscaping with minor effects to homes . The normally dry Pine Nut Creek in <unk> rose 4 to 5 ft ( 1 @.@ 2 to 1 @.@ 5 m ) in a short period of time , inundating nine homes and covering low water crossings . Multiple roads across Esmeralda , Eureka , and Lander counties were subjected to flooding . Damage across Nevada was $ 46 @,@ 000 . 
 Following above @-@ average rainfall since April , renewed precipitation in New Mexico led to flash flooding . Roads were washed away near <unk> Dam and minor flooding took place near <unk> . A strong thunderstorm over the Navajo Nation in New Mexico spawned a brief EF0 tornado near <unk> Headquarters . Hail up to 1 @.@ 75 in ( 4 @.@ 4 cm ) in diameter was observed and rainfall caused the Animas River to overflow . Damage in the state reached $ 20 @,@ 000 . Flash flooding also took place in Utah , including along the Paria River ; a stream gauge observed a peak flow of 1 @,@ 160 ft3 ( 32 @.@ 8 m3 ) per second . A peak wind gust of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) was observed on Flattop Mountain in Emery County . 
 = Coral Springs , Florida = 
 Coral Springs , officially the City of Coral Springs , is a city in Broward County , Florida , approximately 20 miles ( 32 km ) northwest of Fort Lauderdale . As of the 2010 United States Census , the city had a population of 121 @,@ 096 . The city is part of the Miami metropolitan area , which was home to 5 @,@ 564 @,@ 635 people in 2010 . 
 The city , officially chartered on July 10 , 1963 , was master @-@ planned and primarily developed by <unk> Communities , then known as Coral Ridge Properties , a division of Westinghouse . The city 's name is derived from the company 's name , and was selected after several earlier proposals had been considered and rejected . Despite the name , there are no springs in the city ; Florida 's springs are found in the central and northern portions of the state . 
 During the 1970s , 1980s , and 1990s the young city grew rapidly , adding over 35 @,@ 000 residents each decade . Coral Springs has notably strict building codes , which are designed to maintain the city 's distinctive aesthetic appeal . The city government 's effective fiscal management has maintained high bond ratings , and the city has won accolades for its overall livability , its low crime rate , and its family @-@ friendly orientation . 
 = = History = = 
 Coral Springs is a planned community . Prior to its incorporation as a city in July 1963 , the area which is now Coral Springs was part of 20 @,@ 000 acres ( 81 km2 ) of marshy lands bought by Henry Lyons between 1911 and 1939 . After several floods in 1947 , Florida created the Central and Southern Florida Flood Control District ( now the South Florida Water Management District ) . Canals and levees drained much of the area upon which Coral Springs was built . After the land was drained and cleared , most of the area was used as a bean farm . After Lyons ' death in 1952 , his heirs changed the focus to cattle . 
 A post @-@ World War II real estate boom in South Florida attracted the interest of developers . Coral Ridge Properties , which already had several developments in Broward County , bought 3 @,@ 869 acres ( 16 km2 ) of land from the Lyons family on December 14 , 1961 for $ 1 million . The City of Coral Springs was chartered on July 10 , 1963 . Other names that were considered for the new city included " Curran Village , " " Pompano Springs " and " <unk> " . By 1964 , the company had developed a master plan for a city of 50 @,@ 000 residents . On July 22 , 1964 , the first sale of 536 building lots netted $ 1 @.@ 6 million . The landmark covered bridge was built that same year to promote the town . In 1965 , Coral Ridge Properties bought an additional 6 @,@ 000 acres ( 24 km2 ) from the Lyons family , increasing the city 's land area to 16 square miles ( 41 km2 ) . The first city government elections were held in 1967 . 
 The city added nineteen public schools , a regional mall , shopping centers and parks during the last three decades of the twentieth century in response to rapid population growth . The construction of the Sawgrass Expressway in 1986 brought even more growth . A museum and a theater opened in the 1990s . The city reached residential build @-@ out in 2003 and is very close to a commercial build @-@ out . 
 The city 's historically low crime rate was marred in the early 1990s , when teen gang violence made headlines , with fights and murders reported . The violence subsided and the city returned to its previously peaceful state in 1995 . 
 Coral Springs was ranked as the 27th best city in the United States in which to live by Money Magazine in 2006 ; was named the 10th safest city in the US by Morgan Quitno in 2007 ; and was a multiple recipient of America 's Promise " 100 Best Cities for Young People " award , identified by the group as a three @-@ time winner in 2008 . In 2007 , Coral Springs became the first state or local government in the nation to receive the Malcolm <unk> National Quality Award . 
 In 2010 , CNNMoney.com listed Coral Springs as the 44th best place to live in the United States . 
 = = Geography and climate = = 
 Coral Springs is located at 26 ° 16 ′ 14 ″ N 80 ° 15 ′ 33 ″ W. According to the United States Census Bureau , the city has a total area of 24 @.@ 0 square miles ( 62 @.@ 1 km2 ) , 23 @.@ 8 square miles ( 61 @.@ 6 km2 ) of which is land and 0 @.@ 19 square miles ( 0 @.@ 5 km2 ) of which is water ( 0 @.@ 83 % ) . Coral Springs is bordered by the cities of Parkland to the north , Coconut Creek to the east , Margate and North Lauderdale to the southeast and Tamarac to the south . To the west lies The Everglades . 
 = = = Cityscape = = = 
 Coral Springs is a sprawling city , with few tall or prominent structures . The tallest building in the city is a 12 story condominium ( Country Club Tower ) , with five more buildings topping out at 10 stories , including three office buildings lining University Drive , one of the city 's main roads . Buildings include Preferred Exchange Tower ( originally the Bank of Coral Springs Building ) , 210 Tower , Bank of America Center and the Briarwood Towers . 
 Coral Ridge Properties established strict landscaping and sign laws for the city — a question in the original version of Trivial Pursuit noted that the city hosted the first McDonald 's without the distinctive Golden Arches sign . Restrictions on commercial signs , exterior paint colors , roofing materials , recreational vehicle and boat storage , and landscaping specifications are all strictly enforced ; consequently , real estate values in the city are significantly higher than the county as a whole . In 2006 , the median price of a single family home in Coral Springs was US $ 415 @,@ 000 , while the median price county @-@ wide was US $ 323 @,@ 000 . 
 The city 's downtown is the focus of an extensive redevelopment plan , estimated to cost close to US $ 700 million . The plan to revitalize the city 's core started with an open @-@ air shopping and entertainment center — " The Walk " — and progressed with the construction of " One Charter Place , " opened April 2007 . When completed , the redeveloped downtown area will offer office , retail , and a new government center , encompassing approximately three million square feet of floor space , in addition to approximately 1 @,@ 000 residential units and a new hotel . 
 The City of Coral Springs ' Parks and Recreation Department operates over 50 municipal parks , including a water park and a skate park , encompassing over 675 acres ( 2 @.@ 7 km2 ) . Coral Springs ' largest park is Mullins Park ( 70 acres ) . Of the four conservation areas in the city , Sandy Ridge Sanctuary is the biggest , at 38 acres ( 150 @,@ 000 m2 ) . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Average monthly rainfall is higher from April to September , with January and February as the driest months . The average monthly rainfall ranges from 2 @.@ 8 inches ( 7 cm ) in January and February to 7 @.@ 3 inches ( 19 cm ) in June . The hurricane season is from June to November , with September as the month during which hurricanes are most likely to occur . The most powerful hurricane to strike Coral Springs since its incorporation was Wilma in 2005 ; the eye of the hurricane passed directly over the city . The city estimated that " as a result of the numerous hurricanes and storms that hit Coral Springs in 2004 / 2005 , and especially as a result of Hurricane Wilma , the tree canopy coverage throughout the city has been reduced by about one third " . 
 = = Demographics = = 
 As of 2010 , there were 45 @,@ 433 households , with 8 @.@ 1 % being vacant . As of 2000 , 19 @,@ 151 ( 43 @.@ 2 % ) households had children under the age of 18 living with them , 26 @,@ 875 ( 60 @.@ 6 % ) were married couples living together , 7 @,@ 663 ( 17 @.@ 3 % ) had a female householder with no husband present , and 8 @,@ 387 ( 18 @.@ 9 % ) were non @-@ families . 5 @,@ 922 of all households ( 13 @.@ 4 % ) were made up of individuals and 1 @,@ 408 ( 3 @.@ 2 % ) had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older . The average household size was 3 @.@ 11 and the average family size was 3 @.@ 45 . 
 In 2000 , the city 's age distribution was as follows : 38 @,@ 335 residents ( 27 @.@ 8 % ) under the age of 18 , 14 @,@ 560 ( 10 @.@ 5 % ) from 18 to 24 , 35 @,@ 927 ( 26 @.@ 0 % ) from 25 to 44 , 39 @,@ 821 ( 28 @.@ 8 % ) from 45 to 64 , and 9 @,@ 358 ( 6 @.@ 8 % ) who were 65 years of age or older . The median age was 35 @.@ 7 years . For every 100 females there were 93 @.@ 5 males . For every 100 females age 18 and over , there were 85 @.@ 7 males . 
 In 2000 , the median income for a household in the city was US $ 69 @,@ 808 , and the median income for a family was $ 76 @,@ 106 . Males had a median income of $ 47 @,@ 427 versus $ 34 @,@ 920 for females . The per capita income for the city was $ 29 @,@ 285 . About 5 @.@ 8 % of families and 7 @.@ 3 % of the population were below the poverty line , including 11 @.@ 1 % of those under age 18 and 2 @.@ 1 % of those age 65 or over . 
 As of 2000 , those who spoke only English at home accounted for 74 @.@ 6 % of residents . Other languages spoken at home included Spanish ( 15 @.@ 0 % ) , French Creole ( 2 @.@ 2 % ) , Portuguese ( 1 @.@ 4 % ) , French ( 1 @.@ 1 % ) , and Italian ( 0 @.@ 8 % . ) 
 As of 2000 , 2 @.@ 1 % of the city 's population was from Haiti , 2 @.@ 1 % of the population was from Colombia , and 1 @.@ 7 % of the population was from Cuba . 
 = = Government and infrastructure = = 
 Coral Springs uses the commission @-@ manager form of municipal government , with all governmental powers resting in a legislative body called a commission . Coral Springs ' commission is composed of five elected commissioners , one of whom is the mayor of the city and another of whom is the vice @-@ mayor . The mayor and vice @-@ mayor serve a two @-@ year term ; the commissioners serve four @-@ year terms . The offices are non @-@ partisan ; no candidate is allowed to declare a party affiliation . The role of the commission is to pass ordinances and resolutions , adopt regulations , and appoint city officials , including the city manager . While the mayor serves as a presiding officer of the commission , the city manager is the administrative head of the municipal government , and is responsible for the administration of all departments . The city commission holds its regular meetings biweekly . As of 2014 , the Mayor is Walter " Skip " Campbell . The Vice @-@ Mayor is Larry Vignola , the other commissioners are Joy Carter , Lou <unk> & Dan Daley . The City Manager is Erdal <unk> . 
 In @-@ city buses are provided free of charge by the local government . Regional transportation is provided by Broward County Transit . The closest passenger airport to Coral Springs is Fort Lauderdale @-@ Hollywood International Airport , located 27 miles ( 43 km ) southeast . The only limited @-@ access highway in Coral Springs is the Sawgrass Expressway ( State Road 869 ) , which borders the city on its northern and western edges . Major roads in the city include Atlantic Boulevard , University Drive , and Sample Road . 
 Coral Springs is served by Broward Health , and is home to the 200 @-@ bed Coral Springs Medical Center . The hospital received a 99 ( out of 100 ) from the Joint Commission , ranking in the top 2 % of over 9 @,@ 000 surveyed hospitals . 
 Coral Springs ' water supply comes from the Biscayne Aquifer , South Florida 's primary source of drinking water . There are four different water districts within the city ; the providers are the City of Coral Springs Water District , Coral Springs Improvement District , North Springs Improvement District and Royal Utilities . The South Florida Water Management District provides flood control protection and water supply protection to local residents , controls all water shortage management efforts and assigns water restrictions when necessary . Collection and disposal of city 's trash or garbage is provided by Waste Pro . Electric power service is distributed by Florida Power & Light . 
 = = Economy = = 
 Of residents aged 16 years and over , 72 @.@ 6 % were in the labor force , 95 % were employed and 5 % unemployed . 39 @.@ 5 % of the population worked in management , professional , and related occupations ; 32 @.@ 9 % in sales and office occupations ; 12 @.@ 8 % in service occupations ; 7 @.@ 6 % in construction , extraction , and maintenance occupations ; 7 % in production , transportation , and material moving occupations ; and 0 @.@ 1 % in farming , fishing , and forestry occupations . The industries for which Coral Springs inhabitants worked were 17 @.@ 6 % educational , health and social services ; 16 @.@ 1 % retail trade ; 12 @.@ 9 % professional , scientific , management , administrative , and waste management services ; 10 @.@ 1 % finance , insurance , real estate , and rental and leasing ; 8 @.@ 2 % arts , entertainment , recreation , accommodation and food services ; 7 @.@ 0 % manufacturing ; 6 @.@ 6 % construction ; 5 @.@ 0 % wholesale trade ; 4 % transportation , warehousing , and utilities ; , 4 @.@ 9 % other services ( except public administration ) ; 3 @.@ 7 % information ; 3 @.@ 6 % public administration ; and 0 @.@ 2 % agriculture , forestry , fishing and hunting , and mining . 85 @.@ 2 % of workers worked in the private sector , 9 @.@ 6 % in government , 5 % self @-@ employed in unincorporated businesses , and 0 @.@ 3 % as unpaid family workers . The predominant method of commuting was driving alone in own car , accounting for 81 @.@ 5 % of commuting trips , followed by 11 @.@ 2 % who were <unk> and 7 @.@ 4 % who used other methods or worked from home . 
 Fitch , Moody 's , and Standard & Poor 's rate Coral Springs bonds as " AAA " . Standard & Poor 's , in a 2004 report , noted that Coral Springs had a " vibrant regional economy with above @-@ average wealth levels and consistently low unemployment " and praised the city administration . In 2004 , the city 's industrial and commercial base represented 24 % of the city valuation — 50 % higher than the previous decade . The city 's tax rate of 3 @.@ <unk> <unk> is the lowest in Broward County of cities with more than 70 @,@ 000 people . The city has twice received the Florida Sterling Award for excellence in administration . First Data and Alliance Entertainment are the largest companies that have offices in the Corporate Park of Coral Springs . ABB Asea Brown Boveri and Royal Plastics Group have subsidiaries headquartered in the city as well . The biggest shopping mall in the city is Coral Square , which opened in October 1984 with 945 @,@ 000 square feet ( 87 @,@ 800 m2 ) of retail space and more than 120 stores . Preferred Exchange Tower is the largest office building in the city — it has 10 floors and 203 @,@ 000 sq ft ( 18 @,@ 900 m2 ) . 
 = = Education = = 
 According to the 2005 American Community Survey ( conducted by the US Census Bureau ) , 39 @.@ 2 % of all adults over the age of 25 in Coral Springs have obtained a bachelor 's degree , as compared to a national average of 27 @.@ 2 % of adults over 25 , and 91 @.@ 7 % of Coral Springs residents over the age of 25 have earned a high school diploma , as compared to the national average of 84 @.@ 2 % . Coral Springs had approximately 29 @,@ 900 students in 2006 . Three charter schools offer both primary and secondary education . Higher education is offered by Barry University , Nova Southeastern University and Broward College through a partnership with Coral Springs Charter School . 
 Public primary and secondary education is handled by the Broward County Public Schools District ( <unk> ) . <unk> operates 3 high schools , 4 middle schools and 12 elementary schools within the city limits . <unk> Elementary School received a Florida Sterling Award for its efforts in 2006 . In 2008 the Florida Department of Education awarded all public schools in the city , with the exception of Coral Springs High School , " A " grades based on their performance on the Florida Comprehensive Assessment Test . In 2008 , Coral Springs High School received a " B , " and in 2010 the school received its first " A. " In 2009 , all public elementary , middle , and charter schools in the city received " A 's , " except for Broward Community Charter School West , which received a " B. " 
 North Broward Preparatory School maintains a satellite campus in Coral Springs . The Coral Springs campus has boarding facilities , a playground , and a gymnasium . The school 's main campus is in Coconut Creek . 
 = = Sports = = 
 Coral Springs does not have any professional sports teams , but has more than 25 amateur sports leagues . Coral Springs Youth Soccer had more than 3300 players in their 2006 season , playing for 284 teams in 20 separate leagues , divided by age group and sex . The Honda Classic golf tournament was played at the TPC at Eagle Trace from 1984 to 1991 and 1996 and then at the TPC at Heron Bay from 1997 to 2002 . The short @-@ lived professional soccer team Coral Springs Kicks ( <unk> ) was based in the city . 
 The regional Sportsplex has a jogging path , an aquatic center , tennis courts , ice rinks and a dog park . The NHL 's Florida Panthers call the <unk> Iceplex , part of the Sportsplex , their official home and conduct much of their training there . The International Tennis Championships — an ATP International Series men 's tennis tournament was held at the Sportsplex from 1993 to 1998 . 
 A number of professional athletes are from Coral Springs : MLS soccer player Stephen Herdsman , Latvian Higher League soccer player Nate Weiss , NFL football players Dan Morgan , Todd Weiner , Darius Butler , Steve Hutchinson , Cody Brown and Sam Young , and Major League Baseball player Anthony Rizzo of the Chicago Cubs . 
 Pro golfer Lexi Thompson , youngest winner ever of a LPGA tour event at 16 , was born in Coral Springs . 
 Several athletes who participated in the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing are from or currently living in Coral Springs , including beach volleyball gold medalist Misty May @-@ Treanor , swimming silver medalist Dara Torres ( who resides in neighboring Parkland , Florida but trains in Coral Springs ) , and track @-@ and @-@ field bronze medalist Walter Dix . 
 = = Media and culture = = 
 Coral Springs is a part of the Miami @-@ Fort Lauderdale @-@ Hollywood media market , which is the twelfth largest radio market and the seventeenth largest television market in the United States . Its primary daily newspapers are the South Florida @-@ Sun Sentinel and The Miami Herald , and their Spanish @-@ language counterparts El Sentinel and El Nuevo Herald . 
 The city is home to two local weekly newspapers , the Coral Springs Forum and Our Town News . Both publications focus on local issues and human interest stories . The Coral Springs Forum was founded in 1971 by local high school students , the publication was sold after their graduation to local residents . Later the company became a subsidiary of the Tribune Company , the South Florida @-@ Sun Sentinel publisher . 
 The Coral Springs Center for the Arts opened in 1990 . Originally planned to be a gymnasium , a US $ 4 million renovation in 1996 added a 1 @,@ 471 seat theater . The theater presents a program of popular shows and a yearly Broadway series . The 8 @,@ 000 @-@ square @-@ foot ( 700 m2 ) Coral Springs Museum of Art has a small number of exhibits and focuses on art classes and programs for the local community . There is currently one public library in the city , the Northwest Regional Library , affiliated with the county @-@ wide Broward County Library system . The band New Found Glory hails from Coral Springs and was formed in the city . 
 The " Our Town " Festival has been continuously held since 1979 , first sponsored by the Coral Springs Chamber of Commerce , and promoted by a non @-@ profit organization since 1997 . The event has a car show , a beauty pageant and carnival rides . The festival attracted more than 100 @,@ 000 attendees in 1984 , and the city estimated 200 @,@ 000 visitors at the 1990 event . A parade was added to the event in 1985 ; since 1994 , the parade has been run as a separate event during the Christmas season . Several other festivals are held throughout the year , such as " Fiesta Coral Springs " , a Hispanic culture celebration , and the Festival of the Arts . At Coral Springs ' 25th Anniversary Party , the Guinness World Record for " Largest Hamburger and Milkshake " was broken on July 10 , 1988 . The hamburger measured 26 feet ( 8 m ) in diameter and weighed <unk> pounds . The record stood for just over a year . 
 Coral Springs has two designated Florida Heritage sites . The Coral Springs Covered Bridge was the first structure built in the city , in 1964 . The steel bridge , 40 feet ( 12 m ) in length , is the only covered bridge in Florida in the public right @-@ of @-@ way . The American Snuff Company provided two historical designs for the bridge sides , to make the structure appear aged . The Covered Bridge is depicted in Coral Springs ' seal . The Museum of Coral Springs History started as a real estate office . Built outside the city limits , the single @-@ room wooden structure was moved to Coral Springs and became its first administration building . Later it was used as the first police station , and as a Jaycees clubhouse ; it was moved to the city dump in 1976 , where it was used as a fire department training site for smoke drills . After it was inadvertently set on fire , public outcry prompted the building 's relocation to Mullins Park for restoration . Since 1978 , it has housed the city 's history museum . The exhibits in the museum are historic items and city models . 
 Coral Springs is a sister city of Paraíso , Costa Rica . 
 = Young Blood ( Sophie Ellis @-@ Bextor song ) = 
 " Young Blood " is a song by English recording artist Sophie Ellis @-@ Bextor from her fifth studio album Wanderlust ( 2014 ) . The song was released as the album 's lead single on 21 November 2013 . It was co @-@ written by Ed Harcourt and Ellis @-@ Bextor ; the former also produced it . The song is a chamber pop piano ballad , which features instrumentation from subdued drums and various string instruments . In the track , Ellis @-@ Bextor sings with restrain , incorporating a low register in the verses and hitting her highest note in the chorus . A demo version of the track was offered online in March 2013 . 
 " Young Blood " received mostly positive reviews from music critics , who complimented Ellis @-@ Bextor 's vocals and the song 's tenderness . The song became her first single to enter the UK Singles Chart since her 2011 single " Bittersweet " . On its component UK Indie chart , the track peaked within the top five . Sophie Muller was commissioned to direct its video , which shows Ellis @-@ Bextor on a pier and inside a living room . The song was performed on some television programmes in the United Kingdom . 
 = = Composition = = 
 As with the rest of Wanderlust , " Young Blood " was composed by the English musician Ed Harcourt , with additional songwriting from Ellis @-@ Bextor . It was recorded at the State of the Ark studios , mixed and engineered by Richard <unk> , and mastered by Miles Showell . It is a chamber pop piano ballad , with a viola , a violin , muffled drums , a cello and a double bass . 
 According to the sheet music published by Universal Music , it is set in a tempo of 60 beats per minute . It is written in the key of F major , and its verses follow the chord progression B ♭ <unk> — F. The song begins with a gentle piano melody , transitioning into Ellis @-@ Bextor 's sung section . During the verses of the song , she sings in a low register , reaching her lowest note of F4 ; conversely , in the chorus , her voice reaches C6 and trembles . Throughout the song , her vocals are restrained and incorporate the melisma technique . The bridge of the song features " choral harmonies " . The song 's lyrics are written in first and second @-@ person narrative , following the common verse – chorus form . According to Ludovic Hunter @-@ Tilney from Financial Times , the track discusses " the joys of growing old with one 's spouse " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 For Time Out magazine , Clare Considine described " Young Blood " as a " delicate love song " and opined that the strings and piano melodies effectively complement Ellis @-@ Bextor 's vocals . Michael Cragg of The Guardian stated that the song 's sonority " fits [ Ellis @-@ Bextor ] like a glove " , and also deemed its melody " gorgeous " . James Gareth from Clash characterised the song as " sincerely beautiful " , and Digital Spy 's Robert Copsey agreed , calling it " doe @-@ eyed " and " fantastically pretty " . From Virgin Media , Matthew Horton called the track " heart @-@ stinging " , while Hermoine Hoby , writing for The Observer considered that the song is " surprisingly successfully " similar to the works of Adele . Sam Lansky of Idolator complimented the song for being " beautiful " and " timeless " . Louise Bruton from The Irish Times wrote that Ellis @-@ Bextor 's " icy vocals forgive [ d ] " the " blunders " of Wanderlust , while musicOMH 's Kate Bennett provided a polarized review for the song . Although she praised Ellis @-@ Bextor 's vocals , Bennett described the track as " heroine @-@ gazing @-@ forlornly @-@ into @-@ the @-@ distance " due to its instrumentation . David Farrell , writing on behalf of PopMatters , commented that " Young Blood " was the best of the album and highlighted Ellis @-@ Bextor 's vocal performance . 
 The song only charted in the United Kingdom . Reaching number 34 on its singles chart , the song became Ellis @-@ Bextor 's first to enter the chart since " Bittersweet " , which was released in 2010 and peaked at 25 . " Young Blood " spent three weeks on the chart , and as of January 2014 , it is her fifteenth best @-@ selling song in the country . On the UK Indie chart , the track reached number 3 . 
