 The Stoney ( Assiniboine ) First Nations were removed from Banff National Park between the years 1890 and 1920 . The park was designed to appeal to sportsmen , and tourists . The exclusionary policy met the goals of sports hunting , tourism , and game conservation , as well as of those attempting to " civilize " the Indians . 
 Early on , Banff was popular with wealthy European and American tourists , the former of which arrived in Canada via trans @-@ Atlantic luxury liner and continued westward on the railroad . Some visitors participated in mountaineering activities , often hiring local guides . Guides Jim and Bill Brewster founded one of the first outfitters in Banff . From 1906 , the Alpine Club of Canada organized climbs , hikes and camps in the park . 
 By 1911 , Banff was accessible by automobile from Calgary . Beginning in 1916 , the Brewsters offered motorcoach tours of Banff . In 1920 , access to Lake Louise by road was available , and the Banff @-@ Windermere Road opened in 1923 to connect Banff with British Columbia . 
 In 1902 , the park was expanded to cover 11 @,@ 400 km2 ( 4 @,@ 400 sq mi ) , encompassing areas around Lake Louise , and the Bow , Red Deer , Kananaskis , and Spray rivers . Bowing to pressure from grazing and logging interests , the size of the park was reduced in 1911 to 4 @,@ 663 km2 ( 1 @,@ 800 sq mi ) , eliminating many eastern foothills areas from the park . Park boundaries changed several more times up until 1930 , when the area of Banff was fixed at 6 @,@ 697 km2 ( 2 @,@ 586 sq mi ) , with the passage of the National Parks Act . The Act , which took effect May 30 , 1930 , also renamed the park Banff National Park , named for the Canadian Pacific Railway station , which in turn was named after the Banffshire region in Scotland . With the construction of a new east gate in 1933 , Alberta transferred 0 @.@ 84 km2 ( 0 @.@ 32 sq mi ) to the park . This , along with other minor changes in the park boundaries in 1949 , set the area of the park at 6 @,@ 641 km2 ( 2 @,@ 564 sq mi ) . 
 = = = Coal mining = = = 
 In 1887 , local aboriginal tribes signed Treaty 7 , which gave Canada rights to explore the land for resources . At the beginning of the 20th century , coal was mined near Lake <unk> in Banff . For a brief period , a mine operated at Anthracite but was shut down in 1904 . The Bankhead mine , at Cascade Mountain , was operated by the Canadian Pacific Railway from 1903 to 1922 . In 1926 , the town was dismantled , with many buildings moved to the town of Banff and elsewhere . 
 = = = Internment camps = = = 
 During World War I , immigrants from Austria , Hungary , Germany and Ukraine were sent to Banff to work in internment camps . The main camp was located at Castle Mountain , and was moved to Cave and Basin during winter . Much early infrastructure and road construction was done by men of various Slavic origins although Ukrainians constituted a majority of those held in Banff . Historical plaques and a statue erected by the Ukrainian Canadian Civil Liberties Association commemorate those interned at Castle Mountain , and at Cave and Basin National Historic Site where an interpretive pavilion dealing with Canada 's first national internment operations opened in September 2013 . 
 In 1931 , the Government of Canada enacted the Unemployment and Farm Relief Act which provided public works projects in the national parks during the Great Depression . In Banff , workers constructed a new bathhouse and pool at Upper Hot Springs , to supplement Cave and Basin . Other projects involved road building in the park , tasks around the Banff townsite and construction of a highway connecting Banff and Jasper . In 1934 , the Public Works Construction Act was passed , providing continued funding for the public works projects . New projects included construction of a new registration facility at Banff 's east gate and construction of an administrative building in Banff . By 1940 , the Icefields Parkway reached the Columbia Icefield area of Banff and connected Banff and Jasper . Most of the infrastructure present in the national park dates from public work projects enacted during the Great Depression . 
 Internment camps were once again set up in Banff during World War II , with camps located at Lake Louise , Stoney Creek , and Healy Creek . Prison camps were largely composed of Mennonites from Saskatchewan . 
 = = = Winter tourism = = = 
 Winter tourism in Banff began in February 1917 , with the first Banff Winter Carnival . It was marketed to a regional middle class audience , and became the centerpiece of local boosters aiming to attract visitors , which in wintertime were a low priority for the Canadian Pacific Railway ( CPR ) . The carnival featured a large ice palace , which in 1917 was built by World War I internees . Carnival events included cross @-@ country skiing , ski jumping , curling , snowshoe , and skijoring . In the 1930s , the first downhill ski resort , Sunshine Village , was developed by the Brewsters . Mount Norquay ski area was also developed during the 1930s , with the first chair lift installed there in 1948 . 
 Since 1968 , when the Banff Springs Hotel was <unk> , Banff has been a year @-@ round destination . In the 1950s , the Trans @-@ Canada Highway was constructed , providing another transportation corridor through the Bow Valley , making the park more accessible . 
 Canada launched several bids to host the Winter Olympics in Banff , with the first bid for the 1964 Winter Olympics , which were eventually awarded to Innsbruck , Austria . Canada narrowly lost a second bid , for the 1968 Winter Olympics , which were awarded to Grenoble , France . Once again , Banff launched a bid to host the 1972 Winter Olympics , with plans to hold the Olympics at Lake Louise . The 1972 bid was controversial , as environmental lobby groups strongly opposed the bid , which had sponsorship from Imperial Oil . Bowing to pressure , Jean Chrétien , then the Minister of Environment , the government department responsible for Parks Canada , withdrew support for the bid , which was eventually lost to Sapporo , Japan . When nearby Calgary hosted the 1988 Winter Olympics , the cross @-@ country ski events were held at the Canmore Nordic Centre Provincial Park at Canmore , Alberta , located just outside the eastern gates of Banff National Park on the Trans @-@ Canada Highway . 
 = = = Conservation = = = 
 Since the original Rocky Mountains Park Act , subsequent acts and policies placed greater emphasis on conservation . With public sentiment tending towards environmentalism , Parks Canada issued major new policy in 1979 , which emphasized conservation . The National Parks Act was amended in 1988 , which made preserving ecological integrity the first priority in all park management decisions . The act also required each park to produce a management plan , with greater public participation . 
 In 1984 , Banff was declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site , together with the other national and provincial parks that form the Canadian Rocky Mountain Parks , for the mountain landscapes containing mountain peaks , glaciers , lakes , waterfalls , canyons and limestone caves as well as fossil beds . With this designation came added obligations for conservation . 
 During the 1980s , Parks Canada moved to privatize many park services such as golf courses , and added user fees for use of other facilities and services to help deal with budget cuts . In 1990 , the town of Banff was incorporated , giving local residents more say regarding any proposed developments . 
 In the 1990s , development plans for the park , including expansion at Sunshine Village , were under fire with lawsuits filed by Canadian Parks and Wilderness Society ( CPAWS ) . In the mid @-@ 1990s , the Banff @-@ Bow Valley Study was initiated to find ways to better address environmental concerns , and issues relating to development in the park . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Banff National Park is located in the Rocky Mountains on Alberta 's western border with British Columbia in the Alberta Mountain forests ecoregion . By road , the town of Banff is 128 kilometres ( 80 mi ) west of Calgary and 401 km ( 249 mi ) southwest of Edmonton . Jasper National Park borders Banff National Park to the north , while Yoho National Park is to the west and Kootenay National Park is to the south . Kananaskis Country , which includes Bow Valley Wildland Provincial Park , Spray Valley Provincial Park , and Peter Lougheed Provincial Park , is located to the south and east of Banff . 
 The Trans @-@ Canada Highway passes through Banff National Park , from the eastern boundary near Canmore , through the towns of Banff and Lake Louise , and into Yoho National Park in British Columbia . The Banff townsite is the main commercial centre in the national park . The village of Lake Louise is located at the junction of the Trans @-@ Canada Highway and the Icefields Parkway , which extends north to the Jasper townsite . 
 = = = Banff = = = 
 Banff , established in 1885 , is the main commercial centre in Banff National Park , as well as a centre for cultural activities . Banff is home to several cultural institutions , including the Banff Centre , the Whyte Museum , the Buffalo Nations Luxton Museum , Cave and Basin National Historic Site , and several art galleries . Throughout its history , Banff has hosted many annual events , including Banff Indian Days which began in 1889 , and the Banff Winter Carnival . Since 1976 , The Banff Centre has organized the Banff Mountain Film Festival . In 1990 , Banff incorporated as a town of Alberta , though still subject to the National Parks Act and federal authority in regards to planning and development . In its 2014 census , the town of Banff had a permanent population of 8 @,@ 421 as well as 965 non @-@ permanent residents for a total population of 9 @,@ 386 . The Bow River flows through the town of Banff , with the Bow Falls located on the outskirts of town . 
 = = = Lake Louise = = = 
 Lake Louise , a hamlet located 54 km ( 34 mi ) northwest of the town of Banff , is home to the landmark Chateau Lake Louise at the edge of Lake Louise . Located 15 km ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) from Lake Louise , Moraine Lake provides a scenic vista of the Valley of the Ten Peaks . This scene was pictured on the back of the $ 20 Canadian banknote , in the 1969 – 1979 ( " Scenes of Canada " ) series . The Lake Louise Mountain Resort is also located near the village . Lake Louise is one of the most visited lakes in the world and is framed to the south @-@ west by the Mount Victoria Glacier . 
 = = = Icefields Parkway = = = 
 The Icefields Parkway is a 230 kilometres ( 140 mi ) , long road connecting Lake Louise to Jasper , Alberta . The Parkway originates at Lake Louise , and extends north up the Bow Valley , past Hector Lake , which is the largest natural lake in the park . Other scenic lakes near the parkway include Bow Lake , and Peyto Lakes , both north of Hector Lake . The Parkway then crosses Bow Summit ( 2 @,@ 088 m ( 6 @,@ 850 ft ) ) , and follows the <unk> River to Saskatchewan Crossing , where it converges with the Howse and North Saskatchewan River . Bow Summit is the highest elevation crossed by a public road in Canada . 
 The North Saskatchewan River flows east from Saskatchewan Crossing , out of Banff , into what is known as David Thompson Country , and onto Edmonton . The David Thompson Highway follows the North Saskatchewan River , past the man @-@ made Abraham Lake , and through David Thompson Country . At Saskatchewan Crossing , basic services are available , including gasoline , cafeteria , gift shop , and small motel . 
 North of Saskatchewan Crossing , the Icefields Parkway follows the North Saskatchewan River up to the Columbia Icefield . The Parkway crosses into Jasper National Park at <unk> Pass at 2 @,@ 035 metres ( 6 @,@ 677 ft ) in elevation , and continues on from there to the Jasper townsite . 
 = = Geology = = 
 The Canadian Rockies consist of several northwest @-@ southeast trending ranges . Two main mountain ranges are within the park , each consisting of numerous subranges . The western border of the park follows the crest of the Main Ranges ( also known as the Park Ranges ) , which is also the continental divide . The Main Ranges in Banff National Park include from north to south , the <unk> , Bow and Blue Ranges . The high peaks west of Lake Louise are part of the Bow Range . The eastern border of the park includes all of the Front Ranges consisting of from north to south , the Palliser , Sawback and Sundance Ranges . The Banff townsite is located in the Front Ranges . Just outside of the park to the east lie the foothills that extend from Canmore at the eastern entrance of the park eastward into the Great Plains . Well west of the park , the Western Ranges of the Rockies pass through Yoho and Kootenay National Parks . Though the tallest peak entirely within the park is Mount Forbes at 3 @,@ 612 metres ( 11 @,@ 850 ft ) , Mount Assiniboine on the Banff @-@ Mount Assiniboine Provincial Park border is slightly higher at 3 @,@ 618 m ( 11 @,@ 870 ft ) . 
 The Canadian Rockies are composed of sedimentary rock , including shale , sandstone , dolomite and limestone . The vast majority of geologic formations in Banff range in age from Precambrian to the Jurassic periods ( 600 – 145 m.y.a. ) . However , rocks as young as the lower Cretaceous ( 145 – 66 m.y.a. ) can be found near the east entrance and on Cascade Mountain above the Banff townsite . These sedimentary rocks were laid down in shallow seas between 600 and 175 m.y.a. and were pushed east and over top younger rocks during the Laramide orogeny . Mountain building in Banff National Park ended approximately 55 m.y.a. 
 The Canadian Rockies may have towered up to 8 @,@ 000 metres ( 26 @,@ 000 ft ) approximately 70 m.y.a. Once mountain formation ceased , erosion from water and greatly augmented later from glacier ice beginning with the Quaternary glaciation 2 @.@ 5 m.y.a. carved the mountains into their present shapes . Glacial landforms dominate Banff 's geomorphology , with examples of all classic glacial forms , including cirques , arêtes , hanging valleys , moraines , and U @-@ shaped valleys . The pre @-@ existing structure left over from mountain @-@ building strongly guided glacial erosion : mountains in Banff include complex , irregular , anticlinal , synclinal , <unk> , dogtooth , and sawback mountains . Many of the mountain ranges trend northwest to southeast , with sedimentary layering dipping down to the west at 40 – 60 degrees . This leads to dip slope landforms , with generally steeper east and north faces , and trellis drainage , where rivers and old glacial valleys followed the weaker layers in the rocks as they were relatively easily weathered and eroded . 
 Classic examples are found at the Banff townsite proper : Mount Rundle is a classic dip slope mountain . Just to the north of the Banff townsite , Castle Mountain is composed of numerous Cambrian age rock formations . The uppermost section of the peak consists of relatively harder dolomite from the Eldon Formation . Below that lies the less dense shales of the Stephen Formation and the lowest exposed cliffs are limestones of the Cathedral Formation . <unk> mountains , such as Mount Louis , exhibit sharp , jagged slopes . The Sawback Range , which consists of nearly vertical dipping sedimentary layers , has been eroded by cross gullies . The erosion of these almost vertical layers of rock strata in the Sawback Range has resulted in formations that appear like the teeth on a saw blade . Erosion and deposition of higher elevation rock layers has resulted in scree deposits at the lowest elevations of many of the mountains . 
 = = = Glaciers and icefields = = = 
 Banff National Park has numerous large glaciers and icefields , 100 of which can be observed from the Icefields Parkway . Small cirque glaciers are fairly common in the Main Ranges , situated in depressions on the side of many mountains . As with the majority of mountain glaciers around the world , the glaciers in Banff are retreating . While Peyto Glacier is one of the longest continuously studied glaciers in the world , with research extending back to the 1970s , most of the glaciers of the Canadian Rockies have only been scientifically evaluated since the late 1990s . Glaciologists are now researching the glaciers in the park more thoroughly , and have been analyzing the impact that reduced glacier ice may have on water supplies to streams and rivers . Estimates are that 150 glaciers disappeared in the Canadian Rockies ( areas both inside and outside Banff National Park ) between the years 1920 and 1985 . Another 150 glaciers disappeared between 1985 and 2005 , indicating that the retreat and disappearance of glaciers is accelerating . In Banff National Park alone , in 1985 there were 365 glaciers but by 2005 , 29 glaciers had disappeared . The total glaciated area dropped from 625 to 500 square kilometres ( 241 to 193 sq mi ) in that time period . 
 The largest glaciated areas include the <unk> and Wapta Icefields , which both lie on the Banff @-@ Yoho National Park border . Wapta Icefield covers approximately 80 km2 ( 31 sq mi ) in area . Outlets of Wapta Icefield on the Banff side of the continental divide include Peyto , Bow , and Vulture Glaciers . Bow Glacier retreated an estimated 1 @,@ 100 m ( 3 @,@ 600 ft ) between the years 1850 and 1953 , and since that period , there has been further retreat which has left a newly formed lake at the terminal moraine . Peyto Glacier has lost 70 percent of its volume since record keeping began and has retreated approximately 2 @,@ 000 m ( 6 @,@ 600 ft ) since 1880 ; the glacier is at risk of disappearing entirely within the next 30 to 40 years . 
 The Columbia Icefield , at the northern end of Banff , straddles the Banff and Jasper National Park border and extends into British Columbia . Snow Dome , in the Columbia Icefield is a hydrological apex of North America , with water flowing via outlet glaciers to the Atlantic , Pacific and Arctic Oceans . Saskatchewan Glacier , which is approximately 13 km ( 8 @.@ 1 mi ) in length and 30 km2 ( 12 sq mi ) in area , is the major outlet of the Columbia Icefield that flows into Banff National Park . Between the years 1893 and 1953 , Saskatchewan Glacier had retreated a distance of 1 @,@ 364 m ( 4 @,@ 475 ft ) , with the rate of retreat between the years 1948 and 1953 averaging 55 m ( 180 ft ) per year . Overall , the glaciers of the Canadian Rockies lost 25 percent of their mass during the 20th century . 
 = = Climate = = 
 Under the Köppen climate classification , the park has a subarctic climate ( Dfc ) with cold , snowy winters , and mild summers . The climate is influenced by altitude with lower temperatures generally found at higher elevations . Located on the eastern side of the Continental Divide , Banff National Park receives 472 millimetres ( 18 @.@ 6 in ) of precipitation annually . This is considerably less than in Yoho National Park on the western side of the divide in British Columbia , where 884 mm ( 34 @.@ 8 in ) is received at Wapta Lake and 616 mm ( 24 @.@ 3 in ) at Boulder Creek annually . Being influenced by altitude , snowfall is also greater at higher elevations . As such , 234 cm ( 92 in ) of snow falls on average each year in the Banff townsite , while 304 cm ( 120 in ) falls in Lake Louise , which is located at a higher altitude . 
 During winter months , temperatures in Banff are moderated , compared to other areas of central and northern Alberta , due to Chinook winds and other influences from British Columbia . The mean low temperature during January is − 15 ° C ( 5 ° F ) , and the mean high temperature is − 5 ° C ( 23 ° F ) for the town of Banff . However , temperatures can drop below − 20 ° C ( − 4 @.@ 0 ° F ) with wind chill values dropping below − 30 ° C ( − 22 @.@ 0 ° F ) . Weather conditions during summer months are warm , with high temperatures during July averaging 22 ° C ( 72 ° F ) , and daily low temperatures averaging 7 ° C ( 45 ° F ) , leading to a large diurnal range owing to the relative dryness of the air . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Banff National Park spans three ecoregions , including montane , subalpine , and alpine . The subalpine ecoregion , which consists mainly of dense forest , comprises 53 percent of Banff 's area . 27 percent of the park is located above the tree line , in the alpine ecoregion . The tree line in Banff lies approximately at 2 @,@ 300 m ( 7 @,@ 500 ft ) , with open meadows at alpine regions and some areas covered by glaciers . A small portion ( 3 percent ) of the park , located at lower elevations , is in the montane ecoregion . Lodgepole pine forests dominate the montane region of Banff , with Engelmann spruce , willow , aspen , occasional Douglas @-@ fir and a few Douglas maple interspersed . Engelmann spruce are more common in the subalpine regions of Banff , with some areas of lodgepole pine , and subalpine fir . The montane areas in the Bow Valley , which tend to be the preferred habitat for wildlife , have been subjected to significant human development over the years . 
 = = = Wildlife = = = 
 The park has 56 recorded mammal species . Grizzly and black bear inhabit the forested regions . Cougar , Canada lynx , wolverine , red fox , weasel , river otter , coyote , and timber wolf are the primary predatory mammals . Elk , mule deer , and white @-@ tailed deer are common in the valleys of the park , including around ( and sometimes in ) the Banff townsite , while moose tend to be more elusive , sticking primarily to wetland areas and near streams . In the alpine regions , mountain goat , bighorn sheep , marmot and pika are widespread . Other mammals such as beaver , porcupine , squirrel , chipmunk , snowshoe hare , and Columbian ground squirrel are the more commonly observed smaller <unk> were the rarest large mammals in the park , but an avalanche in 2009 may have killed the last five remaining within park boundaries . 
 Due to the harsh winters , the park has few reptile and amphibian species with only one species of toad , three species of frog , one salamander species and two species of snakes that have been identified . At least 280 species of birds can be found in Banff including bald and golden eagles , red @-@ tailed hawk , osprey , and merlin , all of which are predatory species . Additionally , commonly seen species such as the gray jay , American three @-@ toed woodpecker , mountain bluebird , Clark 's nutcracker , mountain chickadee and pipit are frequently found in the lower elevations . The white @-@ tailed ptarmigan is a ground bird that is often seen in the alpine zones . Rivers and lakes are frequented by over a hundred different species including loon , heron and mallard which spend their summers in the park . 
 Endangered species in Banff include the Banff Springs snail ( <unk> johnsoni ) which is found in the hot springs of Banff . Woodland caribou , found in Banff , are listed as a threatened species . 
 = = = Mountain pine beetles = = = 
 Mountain pine beetles have caused a number of large @-@ scale infestations in Banff National Park , feeding on the phloem of mature lodgepole pines . Alberta 's first known outbreak occurred in 1940 , infecting 43 km2 ( 17 sq mi ) of forest in Banff . A second major outbreak occurred in the late 1970s and early 1980s in Banff and the surrounding Rocky Mountains region . 
 = = Tourism = = 
 Banff National Park is the most visited Alberta tourist destination and one of the most visited national parks in North America , with more than three million tourists annually . During summer , 51 percent of park visitors are from Canada ( 30 percent from Alberta ) , while 31 percent are from the United States and 14 percent from Europe . Tourism in Banff contributes an estimated C $ 6 billion annually to the economy . 
 A park pass is required for stopping in the park and permit checks are common during the summer months , especially at Lake Louise and the start of the Icefields Parkway . A permit is not required if travelling straight through the park without stopping . Approximately 5 million people pass through Banff annually on the Trans @-@ Canada Highway without stopping . 
 Attractions in Banff include Upper Hot Springs , and a 27 @-@ hole golf course at Fairmont Banff Springs Hotel , and three ski resorts including Sunshine Village , Lake Louise Mountain Resort , and Mount Norquay ski resort . The Banff Lodging Co is a hospitality company in the park . Day hikes , such as the Cory Pass Loop , are popular with visitors . Other activities include alpine and Nordic skiing , and horseback riding . 
 Backcountry activities in Banff include hiking , camping , climbing , and skiing . Parks Canada requires those using backcountry campgrounds , Alpine Club of Canada huts , or other backcountry facilities to purchase a wilderness pass . Reservations for using the campgrounds are also required . 
 In 2009 , Banff Lake Louise Tourism hoped the appearance of the " Crasher Squirrel " internet meme would stimulate interest in the park . The meme is based a photograph of a Minnesotan couple visiting the park on the shore of Lake <unk> that was " crashed " by a Columbian ground squirrel ; the photograph was published in major news sources around the world and the image of the squirrel was digitally manipulated into humorous photos . 
 = = General management = = 
 Banff National Park is managed by Parks Canada , under the National Parks Act which was passed in 1930 . Over time , park management policies have increasingly emphasized environmental protection over development . In 1964 , a policy statement was issued that reiterated ideals of conservation laid out in the 1930 act . With the controversial bid for the 1972 Winter Olympics , environmental groups became more influential , leading Parks Canada to withdraw its support for the bid . The 1979 Beaver Book was a major new policy , which emphasized conservation . In 1988 , the National Parks Act was amended , making the maintenance of ecological integrity the top priority . The amendment also paved the way for non @-@ governmental organizations to challenge Parks Canada in court , for breaches in adhering to the act . In 1994 , Parks Canada established revised " Guiding Principles and Operating Policies " , which included a mandate for the Banff @-@ Bow Valley Study to draft management recommendations . As with other national parks , Banff is required to have a Park Management Plan . On a provincial level , the park area and the included communities ( other than the town of Banff which is an incorporated municipality ) are administered by Alberta Municipal Affairs as Improvement District No. 9 ( Banff ) . 
 = = Wildlife management = = 
 = = = Previous management = = = 
 The park was originally considered as a recreational area for visitors offering multiple leisure activities – the original wildlife policy viewed wildlife in Banff only as game or pests up until the 1960s and 1970s . As ecological awareness increased , management procedures expanded with the inclusion of public participation in many management decisions . Simultaneously , the increase in human construction ( such as new highways ) on the natural landscape increased the frequency of human – animal conflicts . In 1988 wildlife began to be considered an integral part of the ecosystem . 
 The park now has a number of wildlife management strategies that aim to conserve certain species . Parks Canada uses an ecosystem based management approach that aims to preserve the ecology of the park while still providing for visitors . Management decisions are based on modern scientific ecological information as well as traditional knowledge . 
 = = = Large species management = = = 
 Elk are a very important species in Banff National Park , partly because they represent a source of food for declining wolves . However they also have harsh impacts on the environment . Large elk populations cause vegetation degradation , human – animal conflicts and destabilization of biological interactions . In 1999 , the implementation of the Banff National Park Elk Management Strategy by Parks Canada and the Elk Advisory Committee aimed to monitor and control the population to decrease conflicts and aid ecological process recovery . 
 Elk handling facilities are areas of pens with loading and unloading ramps where water and food are provided to the elk . They were created to help reduce herd numbers by increasing wariness and encouraging migratory behaviour , deterring the elk from the town of Banff . These measures allowed more predator – prey interactions thanks to the creation of corridors . It also increased elk migration , restored the willow and aspen communities and highlighted the primary role of wolves in elk population management . 
 The state of grizzly bear populations in Banff is seen as a proxy for ecological integrity . To keep bears away from humans , an electric fence was put up around the summer gondola and parking lot at Lake Louise in 2001 . Bear @-@ proof garbage cans , which do not allow bears to access their contents , help to deter them from human sites . The fruit of <unk> bushes is eaten by bears , so the bushes have been removed in some areas where the risk of a bear – human encounter is high . 
 Aversive conditioning deters bears by modifying their behaviour . <unk> such as noise makers and rubber bullets are used each time the bear performs an undesirable action . Advice is also given to people to avoid an eventual habituation of bears to human presence . If this conditioning is continual the bear will be less likely to continue the undesirable behaviour ( crossing into campsites and roads etc . ) . 
 Southern mountain caribou management previously aimed to identify what was threatening caribou populations and find solutions to mitigate the threats , but the last caribou in the park was found dead in an avalanche in 2009 . There was concern over why more had not been done to save the caribou population . The primary reason for their decline is thought to have been habitat loss and altered predator – prey dynamics . Park management began monitoring the last five caribou in the park in 2002 and taking actions such as reducing impacts of humans , conducting studies of the population , and investigating the possibility of <unk> caribou to increase the Banff population . 
 In the mid @-@ 1980s gray wolves recolonized the Bow Valley in Banff National Park . They had been absent for 30 years due to systematic predator control hunting which began in 1850 . Wolves filtered back to Banff and recolonized one zone of the Bow Valley in 1985 and another in 1991 . A high level of human use surrounding a third zone at Banff townsite has deterred the wolves from that area . The wolves are important in controlling elk populations and improve the balance of the ecosystem . A routine park study to monitor the wolves in Banff has now grown into the Southern Rockies Canine Project – the largest wolf research project in North America . The estimated wolf population in Banff National Park and the surrounding areas is now 60 – 70 animals . 
 = = = Strategies = = = 
 Wildlife crossings have been successful in Banff National Park at reducing the number of animals killed on the roads . There is also 82 km of fencing at the edge of the highway in the park to prevent animals from getting onto the roads . Since it was put up , this has reduced collisions between wildlife and vehicles by over 80 per cent . 
 Train tracks still pose challenges to conservationists . Many bears have been killed by trains , often because they are attracted to grain spills along the tracks . Transportation corridors provide openings for plants which are also utilised by bears . A partnership between Parks Canada and Canadian Pacific Railway allowed the creation of the first Railway @-@ Bear Conflict Mitigation Symposium in 2010 . Initiatives included building wooden <unk> to fence off the sides of tracks and chemically treating grains to deter the bears . After a complete review of the research projects , the development of some of them has been authorized , including grain alteration and the use of cameras to study the behavioural response of bears to trains . 
 <unk> , that give a small electric shock to animals that step on them , are also being used and one has been put near the Trans @-@ Canada Highway on a section of Highway 93 North . ( They have no effect on vehicles . ) Their purpose is to deter animals from roads to prevent them being hit by vehicles . A trial installment of <unk> in Banff is designed to see how effective they are at keeping animals like bears from gaining access to the fenced Trans @-@ Canada Highway from human overpasses and road junctions . 
 General prohibitions implemented to ensure wildlife respect include the prohibition of feeding , touching , or holding animals in captivity , and the disturbance or destruction of bird nests . 
 = = Human impact = = 
 = = = Environment = = = 
 Since the 19th century , humans have impacted Banff 's environment through introduction of non @-@ native species , controls on other species , and development in the Bow Valley , among other human activities . Bison once lived in the valleys of Banff , but were hunted by indigenous people and the last bison was killed off in 1858 . Elk are not indigenous to Banff , and were introduced in 1917 with 57 elk brought in from Yellowstone National Park . The introduction of elk to Banff , combined with controls on coyote and wolves by Parks Canada beginning in the 1930s , has caused imbalance of the ecosystem . Other species that have been displaced from the Bow Valley include grizzly bears , cougars , lynx , wolverine , otter , and moose . Beginning in 1985 , gray wolves were recolonizing areas in the Bow Valley . However , the wolf population has struggled , with 32 wolf deaths along the Trans @-@ Canada Highway between 1987 and 2000 , leaving only 31 wolves in the area . 
 The population of bull trout and other native species of fish in Banff 's lakes has also dwindled , with the introduction of non @-@ native species including brook trout , and rainbow trout . Lake trout , westslope cutthroat trout , and <unk> are rare native species , while chinook salmon , White sturgeon , Pacific lamprey , and Banff longnose dace are likely extirpated locally . The Banff longnose dace , once only found in Banff , is now an extinct species . 
 The Trans @-@ Canada Highway , passing through Banff , has been problematic , posing hazards for wildlife due to vehicle traffic and as an impediment to wildlife migration . Grizzly bears are among the species impacted by the highway , which together with other developments in Banff , has caused fragmentation of the landscape . Grizzly bears prefer the montane habitat , which has been most impacted by development . Wildlife crossings , including a series of underpasses , and six wildlife overpasses , have been constructed at a number of points along the Trans @-@ Canada Highway to help alleviate this problem . 
 = = = Fire management = = = 
 Parks Canada management practices , notably fire suppression , since Banff National Park was established have impacted the park 's ecosystem . Since 1983 , Parks Canada has adopted a strategy that employed prescribed burns , which helps to mimic effects of natural fires . 
 = = = Transportation = = = 
 Banff National Park is bisected by two highways that cross the Alberta / British Columbia border while another provides a third access within Alberta . The Trans @-@ Canada Highway ( Highway 1 ) bisects the park in an east @-@ west direction , connecting it to Vancouver to the west and Calgary to the east . Highway 93 bisects the park in a north @-@ south direction , connecting it to Cranbrook to the south and Jasper to the north . The portion of Highway 93 north of Lake Louise is known as the Icefields Parkway whereas the portion southwest of Castle Junction is known as the Banff @-@ Windermere Parkway . Highway 11 ( the David Thompson Highway ) connects the Icefields Parkway at Saskatchewan River Crossing to Rocky Mountain House to the northeast . Within the park , Highway 1A , also known as the Bow Valley Parkway , loosely parallels Highway 1 between Banff and Lake Louise . 
 Other transportation facilities within Banff National Park include a Canadian Pacific rail line that generally parallels Highway 1 and an airport known as the Banff Park Compound Heliport . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 In 1978 , expansion of Sunshine Village ski resort was approved , with added parking , hotel expansion , and development of Goat 's Eye Mountain . Implementation of this development proposal was delayed through the 1980s , while environmental assessments were conducted . In 1989 , Sunshine Village withdrew its development proposal , in light of government reservations , and submitted a revised proposal in 1992 . This plan was approved by the government , pending environmental review . Subsequently , Canadian Parks and Wilderness Society ( CPAWS ) filed a court injunction , which halted the development . CPAWS also put pressure on UNESCO to revoke Banff 's World Heritage Site status , over concerns that developments were harming the park 's ecological health . 
 = = = Banff @-@ Bow Valley Study = = = 
 While the National Parks Act and the 1988 amendment emphasize ecological integrity , in practice Banff has suffered from inconsistent application of the policies . In 1994 , the Banff @-@ Bow Valley Study was mandated by Sheila Copps , the minister responsible for Parks Canada , to provide recommendations on how to better manage human use and development , and maintain ecological integrity . While the two @-@ year Banff @-@ Bow Valley Study was underway , development projects were halted , including the expansion of Sunshine Village , and the twinning of the Trans @-@ Canada Highway between Castle Junction and Sunshine . 
 The panel issued over 500 recommendations , including limiting the growth of the Banff townsite , capping the town 's population at 10 @,@ 000 , placing quotas for popular hiking trails , and curtailing development in the park . Another recommendation was to fence off the townsite to reduce confrontations between people and elk . The proposed fencing was also intended to reduce access to this refuge for elk from predators , such as wolves that tended to avoid the townsite . Upon release of the report , Copps immediately moved to accept the proposal to cap the town population . She also ordered a small airstrip to be removed , along with a buffalo paddock , and cadet camp , that inhibited wildlife movement . 
 In response to concerns and recommendations raised by the Banff @-@ Bow Valley Study , a number of development plans were curtailed in the 1990s . Plans to add nine holes at the Banff Springs Golf Resort were withdrawn in 1996 . 
 = = = Canmore = = = 
 With the cap on growth in the town of Banff , Canmore , located just outside the Banff boundary , has been growing rapidly to serve increasing demands of tourists . Major development proposals for Canmore have included the Three Sisters Golf Resorts , proposed in 1992 , which has been the subject of contentious debate , with environmental groups arguing that the development would fragment important wildlife corridors in the Bow Valley . 
 = <unk> = 
 A hemmema ( from Finnish " Hämeenmaa " , Tavastia ) was a type of warship built for the Swedish archipelago fleet and the Russian Baltic navy in the late 18th and early 19th centuries . The hemmema was initially developed for use against the Russian Navy in the Archipelago Sea and along the coasts of Svealand and Finland . It was designed by the prolific and innovative Swedish naval architect Fredrik Henrik af Chapman ( 1721 – 1808 ) in collaboration with Augustin Ehrensvärd ( 1710 – 1772 ) , an artillery officer and later commander of the Swedish archipelago fleet . The hemmema was a specialized vessel for use in the shallow waters and narrow passages that surround the thousands of islands and islets extending from the Swedish capital of Stockholm into the Gulf of Finland . 
 The hemmema replaced the galleys that had made up the core of the Swedish archipelago fleets until the mid @-@ 18th century . Compared to galleys , the hemmema had a deeper draft and was slower under oars , but offered superior accommodation for the crew , carried more stores , was more seaworthy and had roughly ten times as many heavy guns . It could be propelled by either sails or oars but was still smaller and more maneuverable than most sailing warships , which made it suitable for operations in confined waters . 
 Between 1764 and 1809 , Sweden built six hemmemas . The hemmema became the largest and most heavily armed vessel in the archipelago fleet and served in the Russo @-@ Swedish War of 1788 – 90 . Oden , the first hemmema , was relatively small and very similar to a turuma , a different type of " archipelago frigate " . Russia built six hemmemas based on the Swedish design between 1808 and 1823 after capturing three of the Swedish vessels at the surrender of Sveaborg in 1808 . The later versions , both Swedish and Russian , were much larger and much more heavily armed than Oden . 
 = = Background = = 
 Russian Tsar Peter the Great had established a new capital and powerful naval base in Saint Petersburg in 1703 . Russian naval power in the Baltic grew to challenge the interests of Sweden , the other leading power in the Baltic . Swedish holdings at that time included territory in Northern Germany , all of modern Finland and most of the Baltic states , a dominion depending on , and connected by , the Baltic Sea trade routes . During the Great Northern War ( 1700 – 1721 ) , Sweden lost all its territories in the Baltic states and suffered Russian raids in Finland and along the chain of islands and archipelagos stretching from the Gulf of Finland to Stockholm . The Swedes began to deploy inshore flotillas of shallow @-@ draft vessels , beginning with smaller versions of the traditional Mediterranean galleys . Most of these new vessels were more akin to galiots and were complemented with gun prams . The disastrous war with Russia ( 1741 – 43 ) and the minor involvement against Prussia in the Seven Years ' War ( 1757 – 62 ) showed the need for further expansion and development of the inshore flotillas with more specialized vessels . 
 Galleys were effective as troop transports for amphibious operations , but were severely under @-@ gunned , especially in relation to their large crews ; a galley with a 250 @-@ man crew , most of whom were rowers , would typically carry only one 24 @-@ pounder cannon and two 6 @-@ pounders , all in the bow . The galleys also lacked decks and adequate shelter for the rower @-@ soldiers , many of whom succumbed to illness as a result of exposure during the war of 1741 – 43 . 
 = = = Archipelago fleet = = = 
 After the Russian victory against Sweden in 1743 , the Swedes established a commission to identify weaknesses in the eastern defenses . In 1747 , the commission concluded that the fortifications in southeastern Finland needed to be improved and expanded , and that Sweden needed to build a strong coastal navy . Augustin Ehrensvärd ( 1710 – 72 ) , an artillery officer , was the driving force behind these changes . The committee based many of its conclusions and decisions on his ideas . In 1756 , Sweden established the archipelago fleet with the official name arméns flotta ( " fleet of the army " ) under the command of the army department , Krigskollegium , with Ehrensvärd as supreme commander . For two decades , the struggle for power between the Hats and the Caps , the dominant political factions at the time , and rivalries between army and navy brought about changes to the archipelago fleet . The parliamentary victory of the Hats in the Riksdag in 1769 – 70 and the coup d <unk> by King Gustav III in 1772 secured the archipelago fleet 's status as an independent branch of the army . Starting in 1770 , the archipelago fleet merged with the Finnish Squadron ( Finska eskadern ) based at Sveaborg . In 1777 , it incorporated the Swedish Squadron ( Svenska eskadern ) , the galley fleet based at Stockholm . The Swedish armed forces invested considerable resources in the new army branch and made it a professional , independent organization . The archipelago fleet attracted members of the social and cultural elite who enjoyed the protection and patronage of King Gustav III , who had established himself as an absolute monarch in the 1772 coup . 
 After the poor performance of galleys in Russo – Swedish war of 1741 – 43 and the Pomeranian War ( 1757 – 62 ) , development of replacements became prioritized . During the Pomeranian War , trials had been made with " gun prams " ( skottpråmar ) , heavily armed , oar @-@ driven , flat @-@ bottomed barges with a shallow draft that carried guns in broadside arrangements . The prams carried more guns than the galleys , but proved far too slow to be effective . Augustin Ehrensvärd argued for new archipelago vessels that combined firepower , maneuverability , seaworthiness , and decent crew accommodations . He began a successful collaboration with shipwright Fredrik Henrik Chapman ( ennobled " af Chapman " in 1772 ) , and together they developed five new vessels : a gunboat with a 12 @-@ pounder gun and a schooner rigging , as well as four types of " archipelago frigates " ( skärgårdsfregatter ) : the smaller udema and pojama , and the larger turuma and hemmema . All four types have been called skärgårdsfregatter ( archipelago frigates ) in Swedish and English historical literature , though some authors have called the udema and pojama " archipelago corvettes " . Chapman specifically designed the archipelago frigates for service off the south coast of Finland and named them after the Finnish provinces of Uusimaa , Pohjanmaa ( Österbotten ) , Turunmaa ( Åboland ) , and Hämeenmaa ( Tavastia ) . 
 = = Development = = 
 The concept of small sailing frigates with a complementary set of oars ( or " sweeps " ) was not new . The English Tudor navy had used small " galleasses " in the mid @-@ 16th century . In the 1660s its successor , the Royal Navy , equipped the equivalent of sixth @-@ rates with oar ports on or below the gundeck . During the 18th century the Russian Navy introduced " shebecks " , Baltic variants on the Mediterranean xebecs , for inshore duties . The xebecs were good <unk> , could be rowed if necessary and had more guns and greater stores than galleys ; they were also less expensive to maintain . The Russian designs influenced Chapman and the Swedish naval commanders . Consequently , Chapman 's designs for new ships were elaborations on those principles , but with adaptations to archipelago warfare . 
 Chapman 's archipelago frigates provided better protection for their crew than the galleys they replaced , and up to three times the capacity for stores and provisions . They could operate in the narrow , shallow waters around skerries in all weathers and in open water in all but the worst storms . They had a deeper draft than galleys , but considerably shallower draft than traditional sailing warships . The new ship types also increased the archipelago fleet 's firepower , provided it with better defensive capabilities , and made possible more efficient fire support in amphibious operations . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Of the new designs , turumas and hemmemas best fit the description of " archipelago frigate " because of their similarities to small ocean @-@ going frigates . The first hemmema , the Oden , was completed in 1764 . It was c . 33 m ( 108 @.@ 2 ft ) long and 8 @.@ 2 m ( 26 @.@ 8 ft ) wide with a draft of 2 @.@ 8 m ( 9 @.@ 25 ft ) . It had a low hull with no forecastle , only a low quarterdeck , and no poop deck . It had three masts that were initially rigged with lateen sails , like a galley . The navy later replaced the lateen rigs with a more conventional square @-@ sail frigate rig . The early design provided for 14 pairs of oars with four men per oar . The rowers plied their oars from the gun deck through oar ports positioned between the gunports , close to the waterline , which gave the rowers better leverage . The oars were also placed on a rectangular outrigger , designed to further improve the leverage . Even so , hemmemas performed poorly when rowed and were difficult in contrary winds . They were slower than ordinary sailing ships , but sailed better than galleys . 
 During the Russian war of 1788 – 1790 , Sweden built three hemmemas of a new design . They were considerably larger , 44 @.@ 5 by 11 m ( 146 by 36 ft ) , and the number of oars were increased to 20 pairs . They also had some of the heaviest broadsides , even when compared with the much larger frigates of the high seas navy . The artillery officer Carl Fredrik <unk> had cooperated with Chapman to increase the main armament to twenty @-@ two 36 @-@ pounders and two 12 @-@ pounders , which increased the draft by about 30 cm ( 1 ft ) . The addition of diagonal bracers to reinforce the hull allowed the later hemmemas to carry guns more powerful even than those on the largest sailing frigates of the high seas navy . Due to their considerable firepower and relative size , naval historian Jan Glete has described the hemmemas as " super archipelago frigates " . 
 The hemmema 's design was very similar to that of the turuma . The primary difference was that the turuma 's oarsmen sat on the weather deck above the guns , whereas the hemmema 's oarsmen sat on the gundeck . The later hemmemas were considerably larger , more heavily armed , and of a more robust construction . Glete has described them as variations on the same type , especially when considering the pre @-@ war designs . 
 = = Service = = 
 Hemmemas served in the Finnish squadrons during the war of 1788 – 1790 . They supported amphibious operations and conducted raids on the Russian archipelago fleet , while at the same time acting as sea @-@ borne flank support for the Swedish army on the Finnish mainland . Hemmemas fought in the first and second battles of Svensksund . During the first battle in 1789 , one hemmema complemented the similar turumas , and in the second battle in July 1790 , two hemmemas made up the defensive center and provided a considerable percentage of the firepower . 
 The Swedes were building three additional hemmemas at the shipyards within the fortress of Sveaborg when it was surrendered to the Russians in 1808 , and all three were incorporated in the Russian Navy . Shortly afterward , the Russian Navy built its own 32 @-@ gun versions , with the final vessel launched as late as 1823 . Two more were built in Sweden in 1809 , Birger Jarl and Erik Segersäll . Birger Jarl sank in an accident in 1813 and Erik Segersäll was planned for conversion as a paddlewheel steam battery for coastal defense , though the idea was eventually abandoned and the ship scrapped in 1826 . 
 Like the other specialized archipelago vessels , the hemmema had specific strengths and weaknesses . Although it had superior firepower relative to galleys , its sailing qualities were somewhat mediocre and while highly manoeuvrable under oars , it was still difficult to propel while rowed . A hemmema had the potential to be an effective weapon against galleys , matching their forward firepower and severely outgunning them with its broadside armament . Inside an enemy galley formation , it could wreak considerable havoc , but such a maneuver was never achieved in an actual battle , leaving that tactical role untested . 
 = = Ships = = 
 A total of twelve hemmemas were built , six of them for the Swedish archipelago fleet and six for the Russian Navy . Details of individual vessels are listed below . The Swedish hemmemas were all built to the same specifications , except for the early design Oden , and Birger Jarl and Erik Segersäll carried heavier armament than the others . <unk> and Sozaev list Oden as a turuma rebuilt as a hemmema in 1784 , though Oscar <unk> and Lars @-@ Otto Berg do not . The Russian vessels were built between 1808 and 1823 and have been described by <unk> and Sozaev as <unk> @-@ class " rowing frigates " . 
 Under the Finnish form " Hämeenmaa " , the name of the ship type was later carried on to several vessels of the 20th century Finnish Navy . 
 = Hurricane Donna = 
 Hurricane Donna brought severe damage to the Lesser Antilles , the Greater Antilles , and the East Coast of the United States , especially Florida in August – September 1960 . The fifth tropical cyclone , third hurricane , and first major hurricane of the season , Donna developed south of Cape Verde on August 29 , spawned by a tropical wave to which 63 deaths from a plane crash in Senegal were attributed . The depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Donna by the following day . Donna moved west @-@ northwestward at roughly 20 mph ( 32 km / h ) and by September 1 , it reached hurricane status . Significant deepening occurred during the next 30 hours , with Donna being a moderate Category 4 hurricane by late on September 2 . Intensification continued and it briefly became a Category 5 hurricane early on September 4 . Thereafter , it weakened to a Category 4 and brushed the Lesser Antilles later that day . On Sint Maarten , the storm left a quarter of the island homeless and killed seven people . An additional five deaths were reported in Anguilla and there were seven other fatalities throughout the Virgin Islands . In Puerto Rico , severe flash flooding led to 107 fatalities , 85 of them in Humacao alone . Donna further weakened to a Category 3 hurricane late on September 5 , but eventually became a Category 4 hurricane again . While passing through The Bahamas , several small island communities in the central regions of the country were leveled , but no damage total or fatalities were reported . 
 Early on September 10 , Donna made landfall near Marathon , Florida with winds of 130 mph ( 215 km / h ) , hours before another landfall south of Naples at the same intensity . Florida bore the brunt of Hurricane Donna . In the Florida Keys , coastal flooding severely damaged 75 % of buildings , destroyed several subdivisions in Marathon . On the mainland , 5 @,@ 200 houses were impacted , which does not include the 75 % of homes damaged at Fort Myers Beach ; 50 % of buildings were also destroyed in the city of Everglades . Crop losses were also extensive . A total of 50 % of grapefruit crop was lost , 10 % of the orange and tangerine crop was lost , and the avocado crop was almost destroyed . In the state of Florida alone , there were 13 deaths and $ 300 million in losses . Donna weakened over Florida and was a Category 2 hurricane when it re @-@ emerged into the Atlantic from North Florida . By early on September 12 , the storm made landfall near Topsail Beach , North Carolina as a strong Category 2 hurricane . Donna brought tornadoes and wind gusts up to 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) , damaging or destroying several buildings in Eastern North Carolina , while crops were impacted as far as 50 miles ( 80 km ) inland . Additionally , storm surge caused significant beach erosion and structural damage at Wilmington and Nags Head . Eight people were killed and there were over 100 injuries . Later on September 12 , Donna reemerged into the Atlantic Ocean and continued to move northeastward . The storm struck Long Island , New York late on September 12 and rapidly weakened inland . On the following day , Donna became extratropical over Maine . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 29 , a tropical wave exited the west coast of Africa near Dakar . That day , it is estimated a tropical depression developed along the wave southeast of Cape Verde . There was a lack of data for several days , but it is estimated that the system gradually intensified . On September 2 , ships in the region suggested there was a tropical storm after reporting winds of over 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) . That day , the Hurricane Hunters flew into the system and observed a well @-@ defined eye , along with winds of 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) . Based on the data , the United States Weather Bureau office in San Juan , Puerto Rico initiated advisories on Hurricane Donna at 2200 UTC on September 2 , about 700 mi ( 1 @,@ 100 km ) east of the Lesser Antilles . It is estimated that the storm attained hurricane status a day prior . The Azores High to the north was unusually powerful , which caused Donna to move to the west @-@ northwest . When advisories began , Donna was a major hurricane , which is the equivalent of a Category 3 or higher on the Saffir @-@ Simpson hurricane wind scale ; it would ultimately maintain this status for nine days . 
 Continuing to the west @-@ northwest , Donna strengthened further , and on September 4 , the Hurricane Hunters estimated peak maximum sustained winds of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) ; this made Donna a Category 5 hurricane . After maintaining peak winds for about 12 hours , the hurricane weakened slightly as it approached the Lesser Antilles . Late on September 4 , the eye of Donna moved over Barbuda , Saint Barthélemy , Saint Martin , and Anguilla , and passed just south of Anegada . Despite having weakened , Donna remained well @-@ organized , described in the Monthly Weather Review as akin to " an intense , idealized hurricane . " A weakening trough to the north turned the hurricane more northwesterly , bringing it within 85 mi ( 137 km ) of the north coast of Puerto Rico . By September 7 , Donna had turned more to the west after the ridge built to the north . Over the next few days , the intense hurricane moved slowly through the southern Bahamas without defined steering currents , and the eye passed near or over Mayaguana , Acklins , Fortune Island , and Ragged Island . 
 While passing through the Straits of Florida , Donna brushed the northern coast of Cuba on September 9 with gale force winds . Subsequently , a cold front moved eastward through the United States and weakened the ridge , causing the hurricane to turn more to the northwest . It re @-@ intensified over warm sea surface temperatures , and the hurricane 's minimum barometric pressure dropped to 932 mbar ( 27 @.@ 5 inHg ) on September 10 . Between 0200 and 0300 UTC that day , the 21 mi ( 34 km ) wide eye of Donna crossed through the Florida Keys just northeast of Marathon , with sustained winds of 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) and gusts to 178 mph ( 286 km / h ) . The hurricane continued to the northwest along the southwest coast of Florida , passing over Naples and Fort Myers before turning inland to the northeast . At 0800 UTC on September 11 , Donna exited Daytona Beach into the western Atlantic with winds of about 105 mph ( 165 km / h ) , still as an organized hurricane . Accelerating to the northeast due to an approaching trough , the hurricane re @-@ intensified slightly before making landfall near Wilmington , North Carolina , early on September 12 . At 0900 UTC that day , Donna again emerged over open waters near Virginia , although it had weakened and the eye expanded to over 50 mi ( 80 km ) in diameter . Late on September 12 , the hurricane crossed Long Island and later moved through New England . On September 13 , Donna became extratropical over northern Maine before entering eastern Canada , having become associated with the approaching cold front . After moving across Quebec and Labrador , Donna reached the Labrador Sea and dissipated early on September 14 . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 At noon on September 3 , a hurricane watch was issued for the Leeward Islands , which at 6 p.m was upgraded to a warning . Also at 6 p.m. , hurricane watches were raised for Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands , which at 6 a.m. on September 4 , were upgraded to warnings . By 6 a.m. on September 5 , hurricane warnings were dropped for the Leeward Islands , and at 9 a.m. , southwest Puerto Rico and the Virgin Island 's hurricane warnings were downgraded to gale warnings . By noon , all remaining hurricane warnings for Puerto Rico were changed to gale warnings . In Puerto Rico , flood warnings were issued on September 5 , although some residents in the region did not heed the notice ; many returned to their homes after the hurricane passed to the north . On Vieques Island , about 1 @,@ 700 United States Marines evacuated to naval ships . Officials advised small boats to remain at port , and thousands of residents evacuated to schools set up as Red Cross shelters . Along the Cuban coast , about 3 @,@ 000 people evacuated inland or to churches and schools , while in the Bahamas , stores closed and boats were sent to port . 
 Beginning on September 7 , hurricane watches were put in place for the Florida coast from Key West to Melbourne . The next day , the watches were upgraded to hurricane warnings from Key West to Key Largo , with hurricane watches raised on the west coast northward to Fort Myers , and gale warnings issued from Key Largo to Vero Beach . By September 11 , hurricane warnings were in effect for southern Florida from Daytona Beach on the east coast to Cedar Key on the west coast , including Lake Okeechobee . Gale warnings were in place northward from Cedar Key to St. Marks , as well as from Daytona Beach northward to Savannah , Georgia . Evacuations in the Florida Keys disrupted traffic along the Overseas Highway . The Air Force evacuated 90 Boeing B @-@ 47 Stratojets from Homestead Air Reserve Base . At Kennedy Space Center , the threat of the storm caused the launching of two missiles to be postponed . Most flights out of Miami International Airport were canceled during the storm 's approach . Officials closed schools in Miami and the Florida Keys , and recommended residents in low @-@ lying areas of the Florida Keys and southwestern Florida to evacuate . Ultimately , about 12 @,@ 000 people in southern Florida sought refuge in storm shelters , two of which were damaged during the storm . In Miami @-@ Dade County alone , there were 77 storm shelters housing 10 @,@ 000 people . 
 At 5 p.m. on September 10 , gale warnings were extended northward to Myrtle Beach . At 11 p.m. , hurricane warnings were lowered in the Florida Keys but extended northward from Daytona Beach to Savannah , Georgia . At 11 a.m. on September 11 , all warnings were lowered south of Vero Beach and along the Florida west coast , while hurricane warnings were extended northward from Savannah to Myrtle Beach . At 5 p.m. , hurricane warnings were lowered south of Fernandina Beach , while they were extended northward to include the entire North Carolina coast . Gale warnings were issued northward to Cape May . At 9 p.m. , hurricane warnings were extended northward to Portsmouth , New Hampshire , while gale warnings and a hurricane watch were issued northward to Eastport , Maine . Ships at dock in Newport , Rhode Island were towed out into the bay to weather the storm . On September 12 at 5 a.m. , hurricane warnings were extended northward to Eastport , and dropped south of Cape Hatteras . At 7 a.m. , hurricane warnings were lowered south of Cape Charles . At 2 p.m. , hurricane warnings were dropped south of Cape May . At 5 p.m. , hurricane warnings were discontinued south of Manasquan , New Jersey . At 8 p.m. , hurricane warnings expired south of Block Island . By 11 p.m. on September 12 , all hurricane warnings had been lowered . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Hurricane Donna was a very destructive hurricane that caused extensive damage from the Lesser Antilles to New England . At least 364 people were killed by the hurricane and property damage was estimated at $ 900 million ( 1960 USD ) . 
 = = = West Africa and Caribbean = = = 
 The precursor to Hurricane Donna brought severe weather to the Dakar area of Senegal . Air France Flight <unk> , which was flying from Paris , France to Abidjan , Ivory Coast , attempted to land at the Léopold Sédar Senghor International Airport as a layover . However , due to squally weather , the plane instead crashed into the Atlantic Ocean , killing all 63 people on board . Heavy rainfall was also reported in Cape Verde on August 30 . 
 A weather station in Sint Maarten reported sustained winds of 120 mph ( 195 km / h ) and a 952 mbar ( 28 @.@ 1 inHg ) pressure reading in the main airport . Donna killed two people on Antigua and five on Anguilla . 
 Hurricane Donna caused very extensive damage on the island , killed 7 and left at least a quarter of the island 's population homeless . During the passing of hurricane Donna Anguilla recorded five deaths , including a woman who died when the roof of her house collapsed . 
 Despite passing only 35 mi ( 56 km ) north of the island , Donna caused only minor damage on St. Thomas in the United States Virgin Islands . A station there reported a wind gust of 60 mph ( 97 km / h ) . Some fences were toppled , while several houses were reported to have been damaged or destroyed . Electrical and telephone services were also disrupted . The highest daily rainfall total on the island was 8 @.@ 78 inches ( 223 mm ) , causing minor local flooding . On Saint John , several small boats capsized . 
 While passing to the north of Puerto Rico , Donna produced winds of 38 mph ( 61 km / h ) in San Juan . Along the north coast of the island , high tides of around 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) and strong waves caused coastal flooding . The hurricane dropped torrential rainfall , peaking at 16 @.@ 23 in ( 412 mm ) at Naguabo in the central portion of the island . Large areas of eastern Puerto Rico received over 10 in ( 250 mm ) of precipitation . The hurricane left about 2 @,@ 500 people homeless on the island . Despite advanced warning of the floods , the hurricane killed 107 people on the island , of which 84 were in Humacao . 
 In Haiti , the southern periphery of the hurricane killed three people in Port au Prince . Later , Donna brushed the north coast of Cuba with strong winds and heavy rainfall , causing damage along much of the coast . In <unk> , the storm wrecked 80 houses . 
 = = = Turks and Caicos and Bahamas = = = 
 On Grand Turk in what is now the Turks and Caicos , Donna produced winds of 58 mph ( 93 km / h ) , as the strongest winds remained north of the island . However , the storm dropped heavy rainfall of over 20 in ( 510 mm ) , much of which fell in a 12 ‑ hour period . Despite the rains , damage there was minor . 
 In the Bahamas , the anemometer at Ragged Island blew away after registering a 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) wind gust . At Mayaguana , where residents evacuated to a missile tracking base , hurricane @-@ force winds raged for 13 hours . The winds largely destroyed the village of Abraham 's Bay on the island . Andros experienced hurricane @-@ force winds for a few hours , and winds on Fortune Island were estimated at 173 mph ( 278 km / h ) before the anemometer blew away . The strongest winds remained south of the northwestern Bahamas , which limited damage there . Donna cut communications between several islands . 
 Several small island communities in the central Bahamas were leveled . North Caicos reported 20 inches ( 510 mm ) of rainfall in 24 hours . 
 = = = United States = = = 
 Fifty people were reported dead in the United States , with damages totaling to $ 3 @.@ 35 billion . Donna crossed directly over Texas Tower 4 , causing severe damage to the structure and leading to its eventual loss in January 1961 . 
 Donna was the only hurricane to affect every state along the East Coast with hurricane @-@ force winds . 
 = = = = Florida = = = = 
 The U.S. state of Florida received the most damage from Hurricane Donna . Portions of southern and western Florida received over 10 in ( 250 mm ) of rainfall from the hurricane , peaking at 13 @.@ 24 in ( 336 mm ) . Strong winds were observed in the state , with a sustained wind speed of 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) in Tavernier and a gusts up to 150 mph ( 240 km / h ) at Sombrero Key Light . In Miami , winds reached 97 mph ( 156 km / h ) . Southeast of the city , high waves washed a 104 ft ( 32 m ) freighter onshore an island . The highest observed storm surge of 13 ft ( 4 @.@ 0 m ) was reported at Marathon . The hurricane also lashed Southwest Florida , where tides were 4 to 7 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 to 2 @.@ 1 m ) above normal . 
 In Miami @-@ Dade County , thousands of low @-@ lying homes in the Homestead area were flooded . Overall , 857 houses in the country were destroyed , while about 2 @,@ 317 others suffered damage . Significant agricultural losses were also reported . Donna was the first hurricane to affect Miami , Florida since Hurricane King in October 1950 . 
 In the Florida Keys , some areas experienced " almost complete destruction " . Further north between Marathon and Tavernier , an estimated 75 % of buildings were extensively damaged . In the former , tides inundated the city and destroyed several subdivisions . In Key West , one death was confirmed and 71 people were injured . About 564 homes were demolished and an additional 1 @,@ 382 were damaged , 583 of them severely . Storm surge inundated parts of the Overseas Highway and washed out several portions near bridges . Many boats and docks were severely damaged or destroyed . Additionally , the pipeline supplying water to the Florida Keys was wrecked in three places . 
 Large tracts of mangrove forest were lost in the western portion of Everglades National Park , while at least 35 % of the white heron population in the park were killed . In Everglades , about 50 % of buildings were destroyed due to strong winds and coastal flooding . Late on September 11 , 2 to 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 61 to 0 @.@ 91 m ) of water was reported throughout the area . The city briefly became inaccessible due to inundated roads . Many small building were destroyed , and roofs were blown off or damaged . Thousands of trees were toppled , blocking portions of the Tamiami Trail . Throughout Collier County , strong winds and coastal flooding combined destroyed 153 homes , inflicted major impact on an additional 409 , and 1 @,@ 049 others suffered minor damage . The turn into southern Florida lessened damage in the Tampa area . 
 Throughout the state , the storm destroyed 2 @,@ 156 homes and trailers , severely damaged 3 @,@ 903 , and inflicted minor impact on 30 @,@ 524 others . Approximately 391 farm buildings were destroyed , an additional 989 suffered extensive impact , and 2 @,@ 499 others received minor damage . Roughly 174 buildings were demolished , 1 @,@ 029 received major impact , and 4 @,@ 254 suffered minor damage . Additionally , 281 boats were destroyed or severely damaged . A total of 50 % of grapefruit crop was lost , 10 % of the orange and tangerine crops were ruined , and the avocado crop was almost destroyed . With at least $ 350 million in damage in Florida alone , Donna was the costliest hurricane to impact the state , at the time . Additionally , there were 13 confirmed fatalities , six from drowning , four from heart attacks , two from automobile accidents , and two from electrocution . About 1 @,@ 188 others were injured . 
 = = = = Southeastern United States and Mid @-@ Atlantic = = = = 
 The storm brought minor impact to Georgia . Wind gusts of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) along the coast felled trees and tree limbs , resulting in electrical and telephone service outages . In Brunswick , a power outage at the power plant caused a minor explosion . Heavy rainfall temporarily flooded some streets in the city . Further north in South Carolina , gale force winds were reported along the coast , but caused little damage . A tornado spawned in the Charleston area destroyed several houses and severely damaged a number of others , and injured a few people by flying glass . Damage from this tornado was over $ 500 @,@ 000 . Another tornado touched down in Garden City and destroyed and extensively damaged six buildings . In Beaufort County , many trees were uprooted , power lines were downed , homes were unroofed , piers were destroyed , and there was significant damage to corn and soybean crops . 
 In North Carolina , Donna brought two tornadoes to the state . The first of which damaged several small buildings in Bladen County . The second tornado was spawned in Sampson County , where it destroyed a dwelling with eight occupants , all of whom were hospitalized . Along the coast , wind gusts as high as 100 mph ( 155 km / h ) damaged or destroyed several buildings . Additionally crops were impacted as far as 50 miles ( 80 km ) inland . Storm tides ranging from 4 to 8 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 to 2 @.@ 4 m ) above normal caused significant beach erosion and structural damage Wilmington and Nags Head . Additionally , Topsail Beach was reported to have been 50 % destroyed . In Southport , the town docks were almost completely demolished . There were eight deaths , including three from drowning , two from falling trees , two from weather @-@ related traffic accidents , and one from electrocution . At least 100 people were injured enough to require hospitalization . Damage in North Carolina exceeded $ 5 million , with the worst impact occurring in New Hanover County . 
 In Virginia , the east coast of the state reported hurricane @-@ force winds , while gusts reached up to 89 mph ( 143 km / h ) in Virginia Beach . Strong winds toppled trees and electrical wires , which blocked streets . Additionally , buildings suffered roof damage and broken windows ; some structures were completely destroyed . Offshore , rough seas sunk or destroyed numerous small crafts , while a 12 @,@ 000 tonnes ( 26 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 lb ) vessel was driven aground . The storm killed three people in Virginia ; two of the deaths occurred when barge collided when a freighter and later sank , and another after a man attempted to safeguard his boat . Strong winds and heavy rains were observed in eastern Maryland . Ocean City suffered the worst impact , with over $ 300 @,@ 000 in property damage . The storm also impacted crops in the area , especially corn and apples . Effects from the storm in Delaware were similar , with property damage and considerable losses to corn and apple crops . In Pennsylvania , wind gusts up to 59 mph ( 95 km / h ) in the southeastern portions of the state toppled many trees and utility wires . Heavy rains and poor drainage in some areas flooded basements , lawns , and streets . Low @-@ lying areas in Bucks and Montgomery counties were inundated with up to 3 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) of water after many streams and creeks nearby overflowed . One death in the state was reported after a boy was swept into a swollen creek behind his home in Sharon Hill . 
 Winds as strong as 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) were observed along the coast of New Jersey . Rainfall in the state was generally between 5 and 6 inches ( 130 and 150 mm ) , with a peak of 8 @.@ 99 inches ( 228 mm ) near Hammonton . Damage from the storm was most severe in Atlantic , Cape May , Monmouth , and Ocean counties , where numerous boats , docks , boardwalks , and cottages were damaged or destroyed . A resort area in Cliffwood Beach , New Jersey saw its boardwalk and tourist attractions destroyed by the hurricane , and the area has never recovered . Losses to agriculture were significant , with damage to apple and peach trees " considerable " , the former of which lost about one @-@ third of its crops . Wind damage to corn , Sudan grass , and <unk> resulted in a delay in their harvest . Nine deaths were reported in the state of New Jersey . In southeastern New York , heavy rains , hurricane @-@ force winds , and " unprecedented " high tides were observed . Severe small stream flooding caused significant damage , especially on Long Island , the waterfront of New York City , and further north in Greene County . The storm caused three fatalities in the state , two from drowning and another from a person crushed by a falling tree . 
 = = = Elsewhere in North America = = = 
 In Connecticut , strong winds left 15 @,@ 000 people without telephone service , while 88 @,@ 000 homes lost electricity . Along the coast , tides caused beach erosion , inundated streets , and weakened foundations . Four seaside cottages were destroyed . Crop damage was isolated and mainly limited to apples and corn . In Rhode Island , the storm brought a wind gust as strong as 130 mph ( 210 km / h ) to Block Island . Telephone and electrical services were severely disrupted . Along the coast , high tides significantly impacted or destroyed about 200 homes at Narragansett Bay and Warwick cove . Damage to these vessels collectively totaled to over $ 2 million . Agriculture also suffered impact , particularly to fruit , timber , and poultry , especially in Newport and Portsmouth . 
 Strong winds were also observed in Massachusetts , with a wind gust of 145 mph ( 233 km / h ) at the Blue Hill Observatory . Extensive losses to apple orchards occurred , as the fruit was blown out of trees . Widespread telephone and power outages were reported . The strong southwest winds associated with Donna , in combination with very little rainfall , led to a significant deposit of salt spray , which whitewashed southwest @-@ facing windows . Many trees and shrubs saw their leaves brown due to the salt . However , in other areas , 4 to 6 in ( 100 to 150 mm ) of precipitation fell , causing some washouts and local flooding . Waves along the coast ripped of small boats and pleasure craft from their moorings and subsequently smashed them against rocks or seawalls . 
 In Vermont , winds damaged trees , tree branches , and power lines , causing telephone and electrical service outages in a few communities . Rainfall totals ranged from 2 to 5 in ( 51 to 127 mm ) , resulted in washouts in some areas . Damage to apple orchards totaled $ 50 @,@ 000 . Along the coast of New Hampshire , many boats were smashed or damage in some way . Strong winds felled trees and power lines , causing residents in the southern portions of the state to lose telephone service and electricity . Additionally , apple orchard suffered $ 200 @,@ 000 in damage . Rainfall in the state peaked at 7 @.@ 25 in ( 184 mm ) near Peterborough , resulting in local flooding and washouts . 
 Along the coast , large waves damaged 15 to 20 boats in Falmouth harbor . Total boat damage was estimated at $ 250 @,@ 000 . Coastal residents in low @-@ lying beach areas of Cumberland and York counties were evacuated . Several counties lost power during the storm . In Southwest Harbor , lightning struck the <unk> Hotel , causing a fire that resulted in $ 100 @,@ 000 in damages . Winds caused a lost of telephone and electrical services in Auburn @-@ Lewiston area due to falling trees and tree branches . Television antennas were damaged , as were several signs including a Sears sign . In addition , 25 % to 40 % of the apple crop was destroyed . 
 After becoming extratropical , the remnants of Donna continued northeastward into New Brunswick , Quebec , and then Labrador . Wind gusts of 53 mph ( 85 km / h ) in Quebec snapped electrical poles and trees . One death occurred when a man suffered a heart attack when his home was threatened by a fire . Additionally , weather @-@ related traffic accidents in the province resulted in two injuries . 
 = = Depictions in popular culture = = 
 Nobel Prize @-@ winner John Steinbeck wrote about Hurricane Donna in his 1962 non @-@ fiction memoir Travels with Charley : In Search of America . Steinbeck had had a truck fitted with a custom camper @-@ shell for a journey he intended to take across the United States , accompanied by his poodle Charley . He planned on leaving after Labor Day from his home in Sag Harbor , Long Island , New York . Steinbeck delayed his trip slightly due to Donna , which made a direct hit on Long Island . Steinbeck wrote of saving his boat during the middle of the hurricane , during which he jumped into the water and was blown to shore clinging to a fallen branch driven by the high winds . It was an exploit which foreshadowed his fearless , or even reckless , state of mind to dive into the unknown . 
 The winds of Donna can be seen in the feature film Blast of Silence ( 1961 ) ; a fist fight scene on Long Island had been previously scheduled , and the filmmakers decided to go ahead and shoot the exterior scene despite the hurricane . 
 = = Aftermath , records and retirement = = 
 Following the storm , President of the United States Dwight D. Eisenhower issued a disaster declaration for Florida and North Carolina , allowing residents of those states to be eligible for public assistance . 
 The United States military sent a plane carrying doctors and food from Patrick Air Force Base to Mayaguana in the Bahamas . Crews of doctors and workers with food and supplies left from Key West and Miami to traverse the Florida Keys , bringing aid to impacted residents . In Marathon , a large reconstruction program rehabilitated the key by Christmas . 
 Coral reefs were damaged in the Key Largo National Marine Sanctuary by the hurricane . Donna caused a significant negative impact on aquatic life in north Florida Bay . Marine life was either stranded by retreating salt water which had been driven inland or killed by muddied waters in its wake . Oxygen depletion due to animals perishing in the hurricane caused additional mortality . Although salinity levels returned to normal within six weeks , dissolved oxygen concentrations remained quite low for a longer time frame . Marine life was scarce for several months in areas of greatest oxygen depletion . Sports fishing in the area took a few months to recover . Juvenile pink shrimp moved from their estuarine nursery grounds into deeper water about 60 mi ( 97 km ) offshore , where they were subsequently captured by fishermen . A Caspian tern was swept up the North American coast well to the north of its traditional breeding grounds , to Nova Scotia , which was witnessed four hours after the storm went by Digby Neck . 
 Because of its devastating impacts and the high mortality associated with the hurricane , the name Donna was retired , and will never again be used for an Atlantic hurricane ; the name was replaced by Dora in 1964 . 
 = Dumbbell Indemnity = 
 " Dumbbell Indemnity " is the sixteenth episode in the ninth season of the American animated television series The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on March 1 , 1998 . It was written by Ron Hauge and directed by Dominic Polcino . The episode sees Moe trying to keep his new girlfriend by using a large amount of money , but when it runs out , he decides to commit insurance fraud . Homer helps him , but is caught and sent to jail , and attempts to take revenge on Moe when he does not bail him out . Helen Hunt makes a guest appearance as Moe 's girlfriend , Renee . The episode contains several cultural references and was generally well received . 
 = = Plot = = 
 At Moe 's Tavern , Homer notices that Moe is depressed because he cannot get a date . Homer decides to take Moe out to meet a woman . The trip to a disco proves to be unsuccessful , but on their way home , a flower vendor named Renee starts a conversation with Moe , and he ends up asking her out . 
 Moe and Renee seem to form a strong relationship , but Moe is insecure about his hold on her and he feels he must spend large amounts of money so she will stay with him . Upon maxing out his credit card , Moe comes up with a scheme to commit insurance fraud by having Homer steal his car and park it on train tracks so it would be destroyed . The night the scheme is supposed to take place , Moe and Renee attend a police charity event aboard a yacht ; the event 's attendance by all the officers in town ensures Homer will not get caught perpetrating the scheme , and gives Moe an alibi so that no one will suspect he was behind the act . Homer botches the plan by stopping to watch a drive @-@ in movie , while the train they were counting on to destroy Moe 's car passes by . Deciding all is not lost , Homer drives the car over a cliff — but his attempt to exit the car before it sinks into the water below fails . The car ends up sinking just near the yacht where the police charity event is taking place , and when Homer swims to the surface , he is arrested . 
 Moe speaks to Homer through the bars of his jail cell window and promises to bail him out , but changes his mind when Renee talks about wanting to vacation in Hawaii . While packing for the trip , Moe is confronted by his own conscience , in the form of Homer , who makes him feel bad for his betrayal . Moe ends up telling Renee the truth about the insurance fraud scheme , and she is at first happy he was honest . However , when Moe starts scheming again for a way to get Homer out of jail without paying the bail , Renee is disgusted and leaves him . 
 Moe 's idea involved setting his bar on fire , which he ends up doing by accident as he realizes Renee has left . Meanwhile , Homer escapes jail by attacking Hans Moleman , who was delivering books to the inmates . He enters the burning bar to confront Moe , and the two start fighting . They are both soon rendered unconscious from smoke inhalation , but Barney appears and rescues them . The bar is completely destroyed , and during their reconciliation Homer promises to help Moe get back on his feet . In the final scene , Homer has allowed Moe to relocate his bar to the Simpsons ' home . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode was written by Ron Hauge , who has said he thought of the episode while attempting to create a story involving general illegal activity . Originally , Hauge had a different title for the episode , " Mutual of <unk> " , parodying the name of the Mutual of Omaha insurance company . The episode was going to add to the development of Moe 's character in the show , though the staff did not think they were able to develop him more until later episodes . 
 Director Dominic Polcino and the animators of the episode were praised for their efforts by the other staff members , especially during the scene where Homer is driving down the cliff and attempts to escape Moe 's car . Polcino and his animators went to great lengths to correctly time Homer 's rolling and create a vivid and detailed lake , as well as animate Homer sinking to the bottom of the lake . Show runner Mike Scully commented that , " It 's hard enough for us to come up with the ideas , but when Dominic and the animators can make it , it 's really fantastic . " 
 The episode guest starred Helen Hunt as Renee , Moe 's girlfriend . Hunt has said she liked the design of her character , who was named after Hauge 's wife . During the making of the episode , Hunt and Hank Azaria , who voices Moe , were dating . In an interview with People Magazine in 1998 , Scully stated : " Hank and Helen got along so well it 's hard to believe they are a real couple . " In July 1999 , the couple married , but divorced in December 2000 , after a long separation . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The title of the episode is a reference to the film Double Indemnity , which also had a plot involving an insurance scam . In the scenes where Moe and Renee are seen dating , the song " I 'm a Believer " by The Monkees is playing . Other songs include " One Bourbon , One Scotch , One Beer " by George Thorogood & The Destroyers and " Brick House " by the Commodores . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Dumbbell Indemnity " finished 25th in ratings for the week of February 23 - March 1 , 1998 , with a Nielsen rating of 10 @.@ 5 , equivalent to approximately 10 @.@ 3 million viewing households . It was the third highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following The X @-@ Files and King of the Hill . 
 The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , enjoyed the episode , commenting : " A case perhaps of life reflecting art as guest star Helen Hunt is now married to Hank Azaria , who is , of course , Moe , which is rather nice as you can 't help but feel sad that , by the end of this rather clever and charming episode , Moe has been unlucky in love once more . " In a 2006 article in USA Today , " Dumbbell Indemnity " was highlighted among the six best episodes of The Simpsons season 9 , along with " Trash of the Titans " , " The Last Temptation of Krust " , " The Cartridge Family " , " The Joy of Sect " , and " Das Bus " . IGN ranked Hail to the Chimp , the film Homer goes to see in the episode , as the seventh best fictional film within another work . Show runner Mike Scully greatly enjoyed the scene where Homer attempts to escape Moe 's car when it is going down the cliff , and has said that it is one of his favorite scenes from the show . 
 = SMS Kaiserin Augusta = 
 SMS Kaiserin Augusta was a unique protected cruiser , built for the German Kaiserliche Marine ( Imperial Navy ) in the early 1890s . Named for Empress Augusta , who died in January 1890 , she was laid down in 1890 , launched in January 1892 , and completed in November of that year . Owing to budgetary restrictions , Kaiserin Augusta was designed to fill both fleet scout and colonial cruiser roles . The ship was initially armed with a main battery of four 15 cm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) and eight 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns , which by 1896 was replaced with twelve new model 15 cm guns . She was the first ship in the German Navy to feature a three @-@ shaft propeller arrangement . 
 Kaiserin Augusta served abroad between 1897 and 1902 , primarily in the East Asia Squadron under the command of Admiral Otto von Diederichs . During this time , the ship 's crew assisted in the suppression of the Boxer Rebellion in 1900 . In 1902 , she returned to Germany for an extensive overhaul that lasted until 1907 , after which she went into reserve . Following the outbreak of World War I in 1914 , Kaiserin Augusta was mobilized to serve as a gunnery training ship . She served in this role throughout the war ; the ship was ultimately sold for scrapping in October 1919 and broken up the following year . 
 = = Design = = 
 Design work on Kaiserin Augusta began in 1887 ; budgetary restrictions forced the German Navy to design a ship that could serve in both colonial and fleet scout roles . During the design process , it was determined a three @-@ shaft arrangement of the machinery would be necessary to attain the high speed requirement . This resulted in the first warship of the German Navy to use three screws . This was a relatively novel development ; at the time of Kaiserin Augusta 's construction , only a handful of French and American ships had experimented with the arrangement , and had not yet been to sea for a thorough evaluation of the design . Kaiserin Augusta was laid down at the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel in 1890 . She was launched on 15 January 1892 and commissioned into the fleet less than a year later on 17 November 1892 . 
 = = = General characteristics and machinery = = = 
 Kaiserin Augusta was 122 @.@ 2 meters ( 400 ft 11 in ) long at the waterline and 123 @.@ 2 m ( 404 ft 2 in ) overall . She had a beam of 15 @.@ 6 m ( 51 ft 2 in ) and a draft of 6 @.@ 48 m ( 21 ft 3 in ) forward and 7 @.@ 4 m ( 24 ft 3 in ) aft . She was designed to displace 6 @,@ 056 metric tons ( 5 @,@ 960 long tons ) , and at full combat load the displacement increased to 6 @,@ 318 t ( 6 @,@ 218 long tons ) . Her hull was constructed with transverse and longitudinal steel frames ; the outer wall consisted of a single layer of timber planks covered with Muntz metal sheathing to protect the hull from fouling . The hull contained 10 watertight compartments and a double bottom . A double bottom ran for 55 percent of the length of the hull . The ship 's armor consisted of Krupp steel ; the deck was 50 millimeters ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick with 70 mm ( 2 @.@ 8 in ) thick sloping sides . The conning tower had 50 mm thick sides and a 20 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 in ) thick roof . 
 Kaiserin Augusta 's crew consisted of 13 officers and 417 enlisted men . She carried several smaller boats , including two picket boats , one launch , one pinnace , two cutters , two yawls , and two dinghies . The ship suffered from severe pitch and roll , though these effects were reduced in heavy winds and a beam sea . The forecastle shipped excessive amounts of water in a head sea . The ship maneuvered poorly , though this was improved at high speed . The transverse metacentric height was <unk> m ( 2 ft 7 in ) . 
 The ship was powered by three 3 @-@ cylinder triple expansion engines built by AG Germania ; each drove a screw that was 4 @.@ 5 m ( 14 ft 9 in ) in diameter . Each engine had its own separate engine room . The engines were supplied with steam by eight cylindrical double boilers split into three boiler rooms . The engines were rated at 12 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 8 @,@ 900 kW ) and a top speed of 21 kn ( 39 km / h ; 24 mph ) , though on trials they reached a half knot better at 14 @,@ 015 ihp ( 10 @,@ 451 kW ) . This rendered her one of the fastest cruisers in the world at the time . Kaiserin Augusta was equipped with four electrical generators providing 48 kilowatts at 67 volts . Steering was controlled by a single rudder . 
 = = = Armament = = = 
 As built , Kaiserin Augusta was armed with four 15 @-@ centimeter ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) K L / 30 guns with a total of 292 rounds of ammunition , eight 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) SK L / 35 guns with 777 rounds of ammunition , eight 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 5 in ) SK L / 30 guns with 1 @,@ 361 rounds of ammunition , and four machine guns . The ship was also equipped with five 35 cm ( 14 in ) torpedo tubes with thirteen torpedoes ; four were placed in swivel mounts on the broadside and one was placed in the bow , below the waterline . In 1896 , her armament was updated ; the old 15 cm and 10 @.@ 5 cm guns were replaced with twelve 15 cm SK L / 35 guns that had a maximum range of 12 @,@ 600 m ( 41 @,@ 300 ft ) . The guns were supplied with a total of 1 @,@ 064 shells . After 1907 , the swivel @-@ mounted torpedo tubes were removed , leaving only the tube in the bow with three torpedoes . 
 = = Service history = = 
 In early 1893 , Kaiserin Augusta and Seeadler conducted a good @-@ will visit to the United States , a belated celebration of the 400th anniversary of Columbus 's first voyage across the Atlantic . On 21 June 1895 , the Kaiser Wilhelm Canal , connecting the North and Baltic Seas , was opened ; Kaiserin Augusta was present during the opening ceremonies . She led a group of twenty @-@ one unarmored ships , in company with the four Brandenburg @-@ class battleships , the four Sachsen @-@ class ironclads , and four of the Siegfried @-@ class coastal defense ships . Later that year , the ship took part in an expedition to Morocco along with the coastal defense ship Hagen and the frigates Marie and Stosch to secure an indemnity demanded in the aftermath of the murder of two Germans . The operation was heavily criticized , especially in Britain , where anti @-@ German sentiment was beginning to rise . 
 In February 1897 , an international naval demonstration took place off Crete , to protest Greece 's annexation of the island . Kaiserin Augusta was the sole German contribution to the force , until she was ordered to the Far East , at which point she was replaced by the old ironclad Oldenburg . Immediately following the seizure of the Kiautschou Bay concession in China , Admiral Otto von Diederichs , the commander of the East Asia Squadron , requested reinforcements to secure the new colonial territory . In mid @-@ November , he specifically requested Kaiserin Augusta and additional ground troops to garrison the port . The ship was joined by the cruisers Deutschland and Gefion , which carried the III <unk> , and Cormoran . As Kaiserin Augusta had been stationed in the Mediterranean , she arrived first , on 30 December . 
 Following the outbreak of the Spanish – American War in 1898 , Diederichs was ordered to proceed to the Philippines , where Commodore George Dewey had defeated a Spanish squadron commanded by Rear Admiral Patricio <unk> . Diederichs was instructed to protect local German interests , and if possible , seize another colonial concession in the Philippines . With his ships dispersed on various colonial missions or under repair , Diederichs initially concentrated his forces slowly ; he recalled Kaiserin Augusta to serve as his flagship while the rest of the force assembled . After the end of the Battle of Manila , Kaiserin Augusta steamed to Hong Kong where the ship notified Berlin of the defeat of the Spanish garrison . She also carried the former Governor General of the Philippines , Basilio Augustín , out of Manila . The ship left Filipino waters on 13 August and arrived two days later . 
 Kaiserin Augusta remained stationed in Asia and participated in the international effort to suppress the Boxer Rebellion in 1900 . She contributed landing parties to Admiral Edward Seymour 's relief force , based in Tientsin . In 1902 , the ship returned to Germany for an extensive overhaul , which began in 1903 , and lasted until 1907 . During the refit , the ship 's generators were replaced with more powerful units that more than doubled electrical output , at 124 kW at 110 V. Her bridge was significantly expanded , with a second deck and extended aft of the foremast . The three funnels were lengthened by 2 m ( 6 ft 7 in ) and one searchlight was installed on each of the mast tops . The four swivel @-@ mounted torpedo tubes were also removed during this period . After emerging from the modernization , the ship was placed in reserve . 
 Following the outbreak of World War I in 1914 , Kaiserin Augusta was reactivated for use as a gunnery training ship , to replace more modern ships that joined the High Seas Fleet . To facilitate the training of gunners , the ship 's armament was diversified . She carried one 15 cm SK L / 45 gun , four 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 45 guns , four 8 @.@ 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 46 in ) SK L / 45 guns , four 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 35 guns , five 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 30 guns , and one 8 @.@ 8 cm SK L / 30 gun in a U @-@ boat mounting . She served in this capacity for the duration of the war , until she was decommissioned 14 December 1918 . The ship was formally stricken from the naval register on 1 October 1919 and sold to Norddeutsche Tiefbauges in Berlin , and broken up the next year in Kiel @-@ Nordmole . 
 = Holly Lincoln @-@ Smith = 
 Holly Jane Lincoln @-@ Smith ( born 26 March 1988 ) is an Australian water polo centre forward . Her sister is skeleton competitor Emma Lincoln @-@ Smith . They are the first set of Australian siblings where one competed at the Summer Olympics and the other at the Winter Olympics . 
 She started playing water polo when she was thirteen years old while attending school . She went on to represent New South Wales on the national level . She plays club water polo for the Cronulla Water Polo Club in the National Water Polo League . In 2005 , she was called up to represent Australia on the junior national team . In 2006 , she was made her first appearance on Australia 's senior team , with her first major international tournament representing Australia being the 2009 FINA World League Super Finals . As a member of Australian national sides , she has earned gold medals at the 2007 FINA Junior World Championships and 2011 Canada Cup , and a silver medal at the 2010 FINA Women 's Water Polo World Cup . She is one of 17 players competing to earn 13 spots on the Australia women 's national water polo team in order to represent the country at the 2012 Summer Olympics . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Lincoln @-@ Smith was born on 26 March 1988 in Sydney . She has two sisters and is her parents 's youngest child . She currently lives in Mona Vale , New South Wales . In 2004 , she was living in <unk> , New South Wales . In 2005 , her father had open @-@ heart surgery in order to remove a tumour and her mother was diagnosed with breast cancer . In 2009 her oldest sister died " after a long battle with anorexia and depression " . In 2010 , her sister Emma Lincoln @-@ Smith represented Australia at the 2010 Winter Olympics in skeleton . The sisters are hoping to become the first set of sibling Olympians where one competed at the Summer Games and the other at the Winter Games . She is currently involved in a long term relationship . 
 In 2001 at the age of 12 , Lincoln @-@ Smith competed in the <unk> finals of the NSW Junior Surf Life Saving Championships . During the event , she saved the life of fellow competitor Tom Fabian after he was in distress . She left the course to rescue him and , after helping , got the attention of the safety crew on a boat , resumed her swim and finished 27th in the field of 40 swimmers . 
 Lincoln @-@ Smith attended Mackellar Girls School , where Debbie Watson was her physical education teacher . In 2005 , she completed her Higher School Certificate while a student at Queenwood School for Girls . She went on to attend Macquarie University where she is doing a course on Human Resource Management . As of 2011 , she was in her third year of the programme . In 2008 , she earned a scholarship from Macquarie Sports to help her focus on water polo . As part of the scholarship , the Macquarie Group required her to spend a week in their offices where she received some " work experience as a trader in foreign exchange " . 
 Lincoln @-@ Smith is 183 cm ( 6 ft 0 in ) tall , weighs 83 kilograms ( 13 st 1 lb ) , is right handed and has a tattoo on her left ankle of a cherry blossom , which represents her family . 
 = = Water polo = = 
 Lincoln @-@ Smith is a centre forward and prefers to wear cap number two or four . She started playing the sport as a 13 @-@ year @-@ old at Mackellar Girls Campus where Debbie Watson , an Olympic gold medalist and the school 's water polo coach , nagged her to try the sport . She has held a scholarship for water polo from the New South Wales Institute of Sport and the Australian Institute of Sport . 
 In 2004 she represented New South Wales at the U17 national championships where the team came out on top , and she was the leading goal scorer and named the player of the tournament . This victory was one of the contributing factors to her getting a call up to the junior national team . In 2008 , she represented New South Wales as a member of the U20 team at the national championships . Her team took home gold after a 9 – 6 victory over Western Australia where she scored three goals in the match . The 2008 win was her fourth and final U20 national championship win . In 2009 , shortly after her eldest sister 's death , she seriously injured her shoulder when she dislocated it while at the gym and required reconstruction surgery on it . As a result , she was unable to compete in water polo for nine months . 
 = = = Club water polo = = = 
 Lincoln @-@ Smith plays her club water polo for the Cronulla Water Polo Club in the National Water Polo League . She was a member of the team in 2009 and 2011 . She was with the club for the 2012 season that started in February . As a member of the team , she helped them win the first two games of the season 8 – 4 and 7 – 4 . She took a break from the team following their 18 February 2012 game in order to attend the national team training camp . Her last game before the break was against the Balmain Tigers . She did not play in the National Water Polo League in 2010 because of an injury . 
 = = = Junior national team = = = 
 Lincoln @-@ Smith has represented Australia on the junior national level . Her first call up to the team was in 2005 when the U17 and U20 teams toured the United States and Europe . She was a member of the junior national side at the 2007 FINA U20 World Championships in Porto , Portugal that took home gold . 
 = = = Senior national team = = = 
 Lincoln @-@ Smith is a member of the Australia women 's national water polo team . She competed in a tournament in the United States for the senior side in 2006 because Melissa Rippon and <unk> <unk> were injured . In 2009 , she was part of the Australian side that finished third at the FINA World League Super Finals in Kirishi , Russia . This was her first major tournament on the senior side . In 2009 , at the FINA World Championships where Australia finished sixth , she was named by her team as the Australian Player of the Tournament . This was her first major international tournament with the team . 
 In 2010 , Lincoln @-@ Smith was a member of the Stingers squad that competed at the FINA World Cup in Christchurch , New Zealand that took home a silver medal . She was part of the Australian side that won a silver medal at the 2011 Kirishi Cup in June . In the game for the medal , they played Kazakhstan women 's national water polo team . In that match , she scored three goals . At the 2011 Canada Cup , she scored a goal in the first period in the gold medal match against China that the Australian team ended up winning . She represented Australia at the 2011 FINA World Championships . She competed in the Pan Pacific Championships in January 2012 for the Australian Barbarians . In early 2012 , she survived the first cut of players for the team that would compete at the Olympics when the selection was narrowed down to nineteen players . In February 2012 , she was named to the final training squad for the 2012 Summer Olympics . She attended training camp that started on 20 February 2012 at the Australian Institute of Sport . The team of seventeen players will be cut to thirteen before the team departs for the Olympic games , with the announcement being made on 13 June . She was part of the Stingers squad that competed in a five @-@ game test against Great Britain at the AIS in late February 2012 . This was the team 's first matches against Great Britain 's national team in six years . In the first game of the test series on 21 February 2012 that Australia won 13 – 5 , she scored one goal . 
 = = Awards = = 
 In 2005 , the New South Wales Institute of Sport awarded Lincoln @-@ Smith the Ian Thorpe Grand Slam International outstanding achievement award , and she had an opportunity to meet Ian Thorpe . 
 = USS Tucker ( DD @-@ 57 ) = 
 USS Tucker ( Destroyer No. 57 / DD @-@ 57 ) was the lead ship of her class of destroyers built for the United States Navy prior to the American entry into World War I. The ship was the first U.S. Navy vessel named for Samuel Tucker . 
 Tucker was laid down by the Fore River Shipbuilding Company of Quincy , Massachusetts , in November 1914 and launched in May 1915 . The ship was a little more than 315 feet ( 96 m ) in length , nearly 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) abeam , and had a standard displacement of 1 @,@ 090 long tons ( 1 @,@ 110 t ) . She was armed with four 4 in ( 100 mm ) / 50 caliber guns and had eight 21 @-@ inch ( 530 mm ) torpedo tubes . Tucker was powered by a pair of steam turbines that propelled her at up to 29 @.@ 5 knots ( 54 @.@ 6 km / h ) . 
 After her April 1916 commissioning , Tucker sailed in the Atlantic and the Caribbean . After the United States entered World War I in April 1917 , Tucker was part of the second U.S. destroyer squadron sent overseas . Patrolling the Irish Sea out of Queenstown , Ireland , Tucker made several rescues of passengers and crew from ships sunk by U @-@ boats . For her part in rescuing crewmen from the Dupetit @-@ Thouars in August 1918 , Tucker received a commendation from the Préfet Maritime . In June , Tucker was transferred to Brest , France , and spent the remainder of the war there . 
 Upon returning to the United State near the end of 1918 , Tucker underwent repairs at the Boston Navy Yard . After a New England recruiting tour through October 1919 , she was placed in reduced commission and then decommissioned in May 1921 . In March 1926 , Tucker was transferred to the United States Coast Guard to help enforce Prohibition as a part of the " Rum Patrol " . She operated under the name USCGC Tucker ( CG @-@ 23 ) until 1933 ; during her Coast Guard service , she was the first American ship to arrive at the crash site of Navy airship Akron . After her transfer back to the Navy later in 1933 , the ship was renamed DD @-@ 57 to free the name Tucker for another destroyer . She was sold for scrap and hulked in December 1936 . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 Tucker was authorized in 1913 as the lead ship of her class which , like the related O 'Brien class , was an improved version of the Cassin @-@ class destroyers authorized in 1911 . Construction of the vessel was awarded to Fore River Shipbuilding Company of Quincy , Massachusetts , which laid down her keel on 9 November 1914 . Six months later , on 4 May 1915 , Tucker was launched by sponsor Mrs. William <unk> , the great @-@ great @-@ granddaughter of the ship 's namesake , Samuel Tucker ( 1747 – 1833 ) , a Continental Navy officer . As built , Tucker was 315 feet 3 inches ( 96 @.@ 09 m ) in length and 29 feet 9 inches ( 9 @.@ 07 m ) abeam and drew 9 feet 4 inches ( 2 @.@ 84 m ) . The ship had a standard displacement of 1 @,@ 090 long tons ( 1 @,@ 110 t ) and displaced 1 @,@ 205 long tons ( 1 @,@ 224 t ) when fully loaded . 
 Tucker had two Curtis steam turbines that drove her two screw propellers , and an additional steam turbine geared to one of the propeller shafts for cruising purposes . The power plant could generate 17 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 13 @,@ 000 kW ) and move the ship at speeds of up to 29 @.@ 5 knots ( 54 @.@ 6 km / h ) , though Tucker reached a top speed of 30 @.@ 03 knots ( 55 @.@ 62 km / h ) during her trials . 
 Tucker 's main battery consisted of four 4 @-@ inch ( 100 mm ) / 50 Mark 9 guns , with each gun weighing in excess of 6 @,@ 100 pounds ( 2 @,@ 800 kg ) . The guns fired 33 @-@ pound ( 15 kg ) armor @-@ piercing projectiles at 2 @,@ 900 feet per second ( 880 m / s ) . At an elevation of 20 ° , the guns had a range of 15 @,@ 920 yards ( 14 @,@ 560 m ) . 
 Tucker was also equipped with eight 21 @-@ inch ( 533 mm ) torpedo tubes . The General Board of the United States Navy had called for two anti @-@ aircraft guns for the Tucker @-@ class ships , as well as provisions for laying up to 36 floating mines . From sources , it is unclear if these recommendations were followed for Tucker or any of the other ships of the class . 
 = = Early career = = 
 USS Tucker was commissioned into the United States Navy on 11 April 1916 under the temporary command of Lieutenant , junior grade , Frank <unk> , Jr . ; Lieutenant Commander <unk> B. <unk> assumed permanent command 13 days later . Following her commissioning , Tucker commenced trials off the east coast before reporting to Division 8 , Destroyer Force , United States Atlantic Fleet . With World War I ongoing in Europe , Tucker and units of the Fleet conducted exercises and maneuvers in southern and Cuban waters into the spring of 1917 . 
 Steaming independently in the West Indies , she received word of the United States ' declaration of war on 6 April 1917 . Tucker joined the fleet at its anchorage in the York River before being ordered to proceed to the Boston Navy Yard , for fitting @-@ out for war . 
 = = World War I = = 
 The immediate and pressing need for escort ships led to the deployment of American destroyers to Queenstown , Ireland ; Tucker , Rowan , Cassin , Ericsson , Winslow , and Jacob Jones set out from Boston on 7 May 1917 as the second contingent of United States ships designated to operate in conjunction with British surface forces patrolling off the Irish coast . Arriving ten days later , Tucker and her sister ships soon commenced wartime operations . On 12 June , she rescued 47 survivors from the stricken merchantman SS <unk> ; on 1 August , she saved 39 men from SS Karina , which had been torpedoed by German submarine UC @-@ 75 . For the remainder of 1917 and into the late spring of 1918 , Tucker operated out of Queenstown , hunting German submarines , escorting and convoying ships through the submarine @-@ infested war zones , and providing assistance to ships in distress . 
 In June 1918 , Tucker joined the escorts working out of Brest , France . On 1 August , while steaming out to meet an inbound convoy , she received word that the group 's escort , the French cruiser Dupetit @-@ <unk> , had been torpedoed and sunk by a German submarine . The American destroyer soon arrived on the scene and helped to save the survivors of the stricken French warship from the waters of the Bay of Biscay . Tucker 's efforts , and those of the five other American destroyers who were also present , were rewarded by a commendation from the Préfet Maritime , on behalf of the French Ministry of Marine . 
 Tucker obtained her share of the submarine hunting the day after assisting in the rescue of Dupetit @-@ <unk> ' crew , on 8 August . Sighting a U @-@ boat , Tucker sped to the attack , dropping depth bombs on the vessel . The British Admiralty gave credit to Tucker for a " possibly sunk " as a result of the attack . As antisubmarine warfare was in its infancy , however , attempts to verify the " kill " proved to be inconclusive . On 11 November 1918 , the armistice was signed , and hostilities ceased along the war @-@ torn Western Front . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 While American forces withdrew from Europe and headed home to the United States , Tucker carried passengers and mail between French and British ports . Departing from Brest for the last time on 16 December 1918 , she headed for Boston , where she entered the navy yard for extended repairs . 
 In July 1919 , she departed Boston and cruised along the coastlines of Massachusetts and Maine , engaged in recruiting duty . In October 1919 , she was placed in reserve in Philadelphia , Pennsylvania , where she remained until placed out of commission on 16 May 1921 . On 17 July 1920 , Tucker was designated DD @-@ 57 under the Navy 's new hull classification system . 
 = = United States Coast Guard career = = 
 On 17 January 1920 , Prohibition was instituted by law in the United States . Soon , the smuggling of alcoholic beverages along the coastlines of the United States became widespread and blatant . The Treasury Department eventually determined that the United States Coast Guard simply did not have the ships to constitute a successful patrol . To cope with the problem , President Calvin Coolidge in 1924 authorized the transfer from the Navy to the Coast Guard of twenty old destroyers that were in reserve and out of commission . Tucker was activated and acquired by the Coast Guard on 25 March 1926 , as part of a second group of five to augment the original twenty . 
 Designated CG @-@ 23 , Tucker was commissioned on 29 September , and joined the " Rum Patrol " to aid in the attempt to enforce prohibition laws . She served as the flagship of Division 4 of the Destroyer Force through October 1927 , when she was transferred to Division 1 . On 4 April 1933 , the greatest disaster which aeronautics had experienced up to that time occurred off the New Jersey coast . The Navy airship Akron crashed in a storm killing 73 men , including Rear Admiral William A. Moffett , Chief of the Bureau of Aeronautics . Tucker received word of the crash and sped to the scene . Upon arrival , she found that the German <unk> Phoebus had rescued four men from the sea — one of whom died shortly after being rescued . The survivors were transferred to Tucker and were disembarked at the New York Navy Yard . 
 After the United States Congress proposed the Twenty @-@ first Amendment to end prohibition in February 1933 , plans were made for Tucker to be returned to the Navy . On 26 May , Tucker arrived at the Philadelphia Navy Yard , and was decommissioned ten days later , on 5 June . Tucker was transferred back to the Navy on 30 June . On 1 November , Tucker was renamed DD @-@ 57 in order to free the name Tucker for a new destroyer of the same name . For a time , DD @-@ 57 served as a Sea Scout training ship at Sandy Hook , New Jersey . She was struck from the Naval Vessel Register on 24 October 1936 . DD @-@ 57 was sold on 10 December and reduced to a hulk on 23 December . 
 = Mycena stylobates = 
 Mycena stylobates , commonly known as the bulbous bonnet , is a species of inedible mushroom in the family Mycenaceae . Found in North America and Europe , it produces small whitish to gray fruit bodies with bell @-@ shaped caps that are up to 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 6 in ) in diameter . The distinguishing characteristic of the mushroom is the fragile stipe , which is seated on a flat disk marked with distinct grooves , and fringed with a row of bristles . The mushrooms grow in small troops on leaves and other debris of deciduous and coniferous trees . The mushroom 's spores are white in deposit , smooth , and ellipsoid @-@ shaped with dimensions of 6 – 10 by 3 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 5 μm . In the development of the fruit body , the preliminary stipe and cap structures appear at the same time within the primordium , and hyphae originating from the stipe form a cover over the developing structures . The mycelia of the mushroom is believed to have bioluminescent properties . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was first named Agaricus stylobates by Christian Hendrik Persoon in 1801 , and sanctioned under this name by Elias Magnus Fries . It was later transferred to the genus Mycena in 1871 by Paul Kummer when he raised many of Fries ' " tribes " to the rank of genus . The species has also been placed in the genera <unk> by Franklin Sumner Earle in 1909 , and <unk> by Karel Cejp in 1930 ; both of those genera have since been subsumed into Mycena . 
 The Greek word stylobates means " column foundation or base " . The mushroom is commonly known as the " bulbous bonnet " . British mycologist Mordecai Cubitt Cooke called it the " discoid Mycena " in his 1871 Handbook of British Fungi . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap of M. stylobates is 3 – 15 mm ( 0 @.@ 1 – 0 @.@ 6 in ) in diameter , and depending on its age may range in shape from obtusely conic to convex to bell @-@ shaped to flattened . The structure of the cap margin also depends on the age of the mushroom , progressing from straight or curved inward slightly , to margin flaring or curved backward . The cap surface is smooth , although if viewed with a magnifying glass , minute spines can be seen . As it ages , the surface becomes smooth , moist and somewhat glistening , and it shows grooves corresponding to the position of the gills underneath the cap . The cap color is evenly pale watery gray . The flesh is thin , pallid , and has no distinguishable odor or taste . 
 The gills appear closely spaced in unexpanded caps , but usually more distant in old individuals . Between 8 and 16 gills extend from the margin to the stipe ; there are additionally one or two tiers of small gills ( lamellulae ) that do not reach fully from the margin to the stipe . The gills are narrow but become ventricose ( swelling in the middle ) and sometimes very broad in age , and are attached by a line or are very narrowly adnate . Sometimes the gills split away from the stipe while remaining attached to each other ; in this way they form a collar around the stipe . Gills are pale gray but soon become whitish , with even edges . The stipe is 10 – 60 mm ( 0 @.@ 4 – 2 @.@ 4 in ) long , 0 @.@ 5 – 1 mm thick , and , above the level of the flat circular disc at the base , is equal in width throughout . The stipe is covered with fine white scattered fibrils , or is delicately pruinose ( as if covered with a fine white powder ) , but it later becomes smooth . Its color is bluish @-@ gray when fresh but soon it fades to gray . The basal disc is grooved ( from gill impressions ) and pruinose or covered with fine minute hairs , but soon becomes smooth . The insubstantial fruit bodies are considered inedible . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores are 6 – 10 by 3 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 5 μm , narrowly ellipsoid , and faintly amyloid . The basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are four @-@ spored , rarely two @-@ spored . The pleurocystidia ( cystidia on the gill face ) are not differentiated . The <unk> ( cystidia on the gill edge ) are abundant and variable in structure , usually club @-@ shaped with between two and five thick obtuse projections that arise from near the apex , sometimes more or less covered with numerous protuberances over the enlarged portion and the neck more or less contorted . They measure 26 – 38 by 8 – 13 μm , and are hyaline . The gill flesh is made of greatly enlarged cells , and stains pale vinaceous ( red wine color ) in iodine . The flesh of the cap has a pellicle which usually gelatinizes in potassium hydroxide or water mounts prepared for microscopy . The surface hyphae are covered with short rodlike projections . Sometimes some of the hyphae become aggregated into <unk> structures that project from the surface , and cause the appearance of scattered coarse spines on the cap when viewed under a <unk> magnifying lens . The tissue beneath the pellicle is made entirely of greatly enlarged cells , which appear pale vinaceous in iodine stain . 
 The mycelia of M. stylobates , when grown in pure culture , is bioluminescent , a phenomenon first reported in 1931 . The fruit bodies are not known to be bioluminescent . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 There are several species of Mycena that have a basal disc similar to M. stylobates . Mycena <unk> is usually smaller than M. stylobates , and grows on fallen , decaying leaves of oak . It has different cheilocystidia , with very slender excrescences . Also , the margin of the basal disc is not ciliate like M. stylobates . M. bulbosa , a species that grows on woody stalks in wet habitats , has nonamyloid spores , and gill edges that contain a tough @-@ elastic , gelatinous thread . M. <unk> , described as a new species from Thailand in 2003 forms smaller fruit bodies with differently shaped cheilocystidia and cap hyphae . 
 = = Fruit body development = = 
 The ontogeny , or development , of Mycena stylobates fruit bodies has been investigated in detail using light microscopy and scanning electron microscopy . According to Volker Walther and colleagues , the development can be divided into two phases : in the first , the primordium is established that contains all the structures of the mature fruit body ; in the second stage , the primordial stipe elongates rapidly , and the newly exposed hymenium immediately begins spore production . The first detected stage of fruit body formation was an irregularly arranged hyphal structure within the colonized substrate . After rupturing the surface of the substrate and establishing itself there , the structure develops a layer of wrapping hyphae that covers the entire primordium . The structures of the stipe and the cap develop simultaneously . The developing stipe , cap , and basal disc together form a secondary ring @-@ like cavity , in which the gills develop . Gill development initiates with a number of small alveolae on the lower side of the cap , which are covered with a hymenophoral palisade ( a group of tightly packed , roughly parallel cells ) . The margins of these alveolae form the primary gills . The hymenophoral palisade spreads from the developing alveolae to the gill edge ; the edge of the primary gills is forked in the early stages of its development . The secondary gills ( lamellulae ) are formed by the ridges folding down from the lower side of the cap . In contrast to the primary gills , they are covered with hymenophoral palisade from the beginning . Spore production begins immediately after the stipe elongates . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The fruit bodies of Mycena stylobates grow scattered or in groups on oak leaves or coniferous needles , in the spring and summer or early autumn . It is common during warm , wet seasons . Mycena specialist Alexander H. Smith has collected it in Tennessee , Michigan , Idaho , and Washington in the United States , and in Nova Scotia and Ontario in Canada . It is also found in Europe , including Britain , Denmark , Germany , Norway , Poland , Romania , Scotland , Serbia , Sweden , and Turkey . Although it has been reported several times from Australia , mycologist Cheryl Grgurinovic concluded in a 2003 publication that the records " are best regarded as erroneous " . 
 = History of macroeconomic thought = 
 Macroeconomic theory has its origins in the study of business cycles and monetary theory . In general , early theorists believed monetary factors could not affect real factors such as real output . John Maynard Keynes attacked some of these " classical " theories and produced a general theory that described the whole economy in terms of aggregates rather than individual , microeconomic parts . Attempting to explain unemployment and recessions , he noticed the tendency for people and businesses to hoard cash and avoid investment during a recession . He argued that this invalidated the assumptions of classical economists who thought that markets always clear , leaving no surplus of goods and no willing labor left idle . 
 The generation of economists that followed Keynes synthesized his theory with neoclassical microeconomics to form the neoclassical synthesis . Although Keynesian theory originally omitted an explanation of price levels and inflation , later Keynesians adopted the Phillips curve to model price @-@ level changes . Some Keynesians opposed the synthesis method of combining Keynes 's theory with an equilibrium system and advocated disequilibrium models instead . <unk> , led by Milton Friedman , adopted some Keynesian ideas , such as the importance of the demand for money , but argued that Keynesians ignored the role of money supply in inflation . Robert Lucas and other new classical macroeconomists criticized Keynesian models that did not work under rational expectations . Lucas also argued that Keynesian empirical models would not be as stable as models based on microeconomic foundations . 
 The new classical school culminated in real business cycle theory ( RBC ) . Like early classical economic models , RBC models assumed that markets clear and that business cycles are driven by changes in technology and supply , not demand . New Keynesians tried to address many of the criticisms leveled by Lucas and other new classical economists against Neo @-@ Keynesians . New Keynesians adopted rational expectations and built models with microfoundations of sticky prices that suggested recessions could still be explained by demand factors because rigidities stop prices from falling to a market @-@ clearing level , leaving a surplus of goods and labor . The new neoclassical synthesis combined elements of both new classical and new Keynesian macroeconomics into a consensus . Other economists avoided the new classical and new Keynesian debate on short @-@ term dynamics and developed the new growth theories of long @-@ run economic growth . The Great Recession led to a retrospective on the state of the field and some popular attention turned toward heterodox economics . 
 = = Origins = = 
 Macroeconomics descends from two areas of research : business cycle theory and monetary theory . Monetary theory dates back to the 16th century and the work of Martín de <unk> , while business cycle analysis dates from the mid 19th . 
 = = = Business cycle theory = = = 
 Beginning with William Stanley Jevons and Clément <unk> in the 1860s , economists attempted to explain the cycles of frequent , violent shifts in economic activity . A key milestone in this endeavor was the foundation of the U.S. National Bureau of Economic Research by Wesley Mitchell in 1920 . This marked the beginning of a boom in <unk> , statistical models of economic fluctuation ( models based on cycles and trends instead of economic theory ) that led to the discovery of apparently regular economic patterns like the Kuznets wave . 
 Other economists focused more on theory in their business cycle analysis . Most business cycle theories focused on a single factor , such as monetary policy or the impact of weather on the largely agricultural economies of the time . Although business cycle theory was well established by the 1920s , work by theorists such as Dennis Robertson and Ralph Hawtrey had little impact on public policy . Their partial equilibrium theories could not capture general equilibrium , where markets interact with each other ; in particular , early business cycle theories treated goods markets and financial markets separately . Research in these areas used microeconomic methods to explain employment , price level , and interest rates . 
 = = = Monetary theory = = = 
 Initially , the relationship between price level and output was explained by the quantity theory of money ; David Hume had presented such a theory in his 1752 work Of Money ( Essays , Moral , Political , and Literary , Part II , Essay III ) . Quantity theory viewed the entire economy through Say 's law , which stated that whatever is supplied to the market will be sold — in short , that markets always clear . In this view , money is neutral and cannot impact the real factors in an economy like output levels . This was consistent with the classical dichotomy view that real aspects of the economy and nominal factors , such as price levels and money supply , can be considered independent from one another . For example , adding more money to an economy would be expected only to raise prices , not to create more goods . 
 The quantity theory of money dominated macroeconomic theory until the 1930s . Two versions were particularly influential , one developed by Irving Fisher in works that included his 1911 The Purchasing Power of Money and another by Cambridge economists over the course of the early 20th century . Fisher 's version of the quantity theory can be expressed by holding money velocity ( the frequency with which a given piece of currency is used in transactions ) ( V ) and real income ( Q ) constant and allowing money supply ( M ) and the price level ( P ) to vary in the equation of exchange : 
 <formula> 
 Most classical theories , including Fisher 's , held that velocity was stable and independent of economic activity . Cambridge economists , such as John Maynard Keynes , began to challenge this assumption . They developed the Cambridge cash @-@ balance theory , which looked at money demand and how it impacted the economy . The Cambridge theory did not assume that money demand and supply were always at equilibrium , and it accounted for people holding more cash when the economy sagged . By factoring in the value of holding cash , the Cambridge economists took significant steps toward the concept of liquidity preference that Keynes would later develop . Cambridge theory argued that people hold money for two reasons : to facilitate transactions and to maintain liquidity . In later work , Keynes added a third motive , speculation , to his liquidity preference theory and built on it to create his general theory . 
 In 1898 , Knut Wicksell proposed a monetary theory centered on interest rates . His analysis used two rates : the market interest rate , determined by the banking system , and the real or " natural " interest rate , determined by the rate of return on capital . In Wicksell 's theory , cumulative inflation will occur when technical innovation causes the natural rate to rise or when the banking system allows the market rate to fall . Cumulative deflation occurs under the opposite conditions causing the market rate to rise above the natural . Wicksell 's theory did not produce a direct relationship between the quantity of money and price level . According to Wicksell , money would be created endogenously , without an increase in quantity of hard currency , as long as the natural exceeded the market interest rate . In these conditions , borrowers turn a profit and deposit cash into bank reserves , which expands money supply . This can lead to a cumulative process where inflation increases continuously without an expansion in the monetary base . Wicksell 's work influenced Keynes and the Swedish economists of the Stockholm School . 
 = = Keynes 's General Theory = = 
 Modern macroeconomics can be said to have begun with Keynes and the publication of his book The General Theory of Employment , Interest and Money in 1936 . Keynes expanded on the concept of liquidity preferences and built a general theory of how the economy worked . Keynes 's theory was brought together both monetary and real economic factors for the first time , explained unemployment , and suggested policy achieving economic stability . 
 Keynes contended that economic output is positively correlated with money velocity . He explained the relationship via changing liquidity preferences : people increase their money holdings during times of economic difficulty by reducing their spending , which further slows the economy . This paradox of thrift claimed that individual attempts to survive a downturn only worsen it . When the demand for money increases , money velocity slows . A slowdown in economic activities means markets might not clear , leaving excess goods to waste and capacity to idle . Turning the quantity theory on its head , Keynes argued that market changes shift quantities rather than prices . Keynes replaced the assumption of stable velocity with one of a fixed price @-@ level . If spending falls and prices do not , the surplus of goods reduces the need for workers and increases unemployment . 
 Classical economists had difficulty explaining involuntary unemployment and recessions because they applied Say 's Law to the labor market and expected that all those willing to work at the prevailing wage would be employed . In Keynes 's model , employment and output are driven by aggregate demand , the sum of consumption and investment . Since consumption remains stable , most fluctuations in aggregate demand stem from investment , which is driven by many factors including expectations , " animal spirits " , and interest rates . Keynes argued that fiscal policy could compensate for this volatility . During downturns , government could increase spending to purchase excess goods and employ idle labor . Moreover , a multiplier effect increases the effect of this direct spending since newly employed workers would spend their income , which would percolate through the economy , while firms would invest to respond to this increase in demand . 
 Keynes 's prescription for strong public investment had ties to his interest in uncertainty . Keynes had given a unique perspective on statistical inference in A Treatise on Probability , written in 1921 , years before his major economic works . Keynes thought strong public investment and fiscal policy would counter the negative impacts the uncertainty of economic fluctuations can have on the economy . While Keynes 's successors paid little attention to the probabilistic parts of his work , uncertainty may have played a central part in the investment and liquidity @-@ preference aspects of General Theory . 
 The exact meaning of Keynes 's work has been long debated . Even the interpretation of Keynes 's policy prescription for unemployment , one of the more explicit parts of General Theory , has been the subject of debates . Economists and scholars debate whether Keynes intended his advice to be a major policy shift to address a serious problem or a moderately conservative solution to deal with a minor issue . 
 = = Keynes 's successors = = 
 Keynes 's successors debated the exact formulations , mechanisms , and consequences of the Keynesian model . One group emerged representing the " orthodox " interpretation of Keynes ; They combined classical microeconomics with Keynesian thought to produce the " neoclassical synthesis " that dominated economics from the 1940s until the early 1970s . Two camps of Keynesians were critical of this synthesis interpretation of Keynes . One group focused on the disequilibrium aspects of Keynes 's work , while the other took a fundamentalist stance on Keynes and began the heterodox post @-@ Keynesian tradition . 
 = = = Neoclassical synthesis = = = 
 The generation of economists that followed Keynes , the neo @-@ Keynesians , created the " neoclassical synthesis " by combining Keynes 's macroeconomics with neoclassical microeconomics . Neo @-@ Keynesians dealt with two microeconomic issues : first , providing foundations for aspects of Keynesian theory such as consumption and investment , and , second , combining Keynesian macroeconomics with general equilibrium theory . ( In general equilibrium theory , individual markets interact with one another and an equilibrium price exists if there is perfect competition , no externalities , and perfect information . ) Paul Samuelson 's Foundations of Economic Analysis ( 1947 ) provided much of the microeconomic basis for the synthesis . Samuelson 's work set the pattern for the methodology used by neo @-@ Keynesians : economic theories expressed in formal , mathematical models . While Keynes 's theories prevailed in this period , his successors largely abandoned his informal methodology in favor of Samuelson 's . 
 By the mid 1950s , the vast majority of economists had ceased debating Keynesianism and accepted the synthesis view ; however , room for disagreement remained . The synthesis attributed problems with market clearing to sticky prices that failed to adjust to changes in supply and demand . Another group of Keynesians focused on disequilibrium economics and tried to reconcile the concept of equilibrium with the absence of market clearing . 
 = = = Neo @-@ Keynesian models = = = 
 In 1937 John Hicks published an article that incorporated Keynes 's thought into a general equilibrium framework where the markets for goods and money met in an overall equilibrium . Hick 's IS / LM ( Investment @-@ Savings / Liquidity preference @-@ Money supply ) model became the basis for decades of theorizing and policy analysis into the 1960s . The model represents the goods market with the IS curve , a set of points representing equilibrium in investment and savings . The money market equilibrium is represented with the LM curve , a set of points representing the equilibrium in supply and demand for money . The intersection of the curves identifies an aggregate equilibrium in the economy where there are unique equilibrium values for interest rates and economic output . The IS / LM model focused on interest rates as the " monetary transmission mechanism , " the channel through which money supply affects real variables like aggregate demand and employment . A decrease in money supply would lead to higher interest rates , which reduce investment and thereby lower output throughout the economy . Other economists built on the IS / LM framework . Notably , in 1944 , Franco Modigliani added a labor market . Modigliani 's model represented the economy as a system with general equilibrium across the interconnected markets for labor , finance , and goods , and it explained unemployment with rigid nominal wages . 
 Growth had been of interest to 18th @-@ century classical economists like Adam Smith , but work tapered off during the 19th and early 20th century <unk> revolution when researchers focused on microeconomics . The study of growth revived when neo @-@ Keynesians Roy Harrod and <unk> Domar independently developed the Harrod – Domar model , an extension of Keynes 's theory to the long @-@ run , an area Keynes had not looked at himself . Their models combined Keynes 's multiplier with an accelerator model of investment , and produced the simple result that growth equaled the savings rate divided by the capital output ratio ( the amount of capital divided by the amount of output ) . The Harrod – Domar model dominated growth theory until Robert Solow and Trevor Swan independently developed neoclassical growth models in 1956 . Solow and Swan produced a more empirically appealing model with " balanced growth " based on the substitution of labor and capital in production . Solow and Swan suggested that increased savings could only temporarily increase growth , and only technological improvements could increase growth in the long @-@ run . After Solow and Swan , growth research tapered off with little or no research on growth from 1970 until 1985 . 
 Economists incorporated the theoretical work from the synthesis into large @-@ scale <unk> models that combined individual equations for factors such as consumption , investment , and money demand with empirically observed data . This line of research reached its height with the MIT @-@ Penn @-@ Social Science Research Council ( MPS ) model developed by Modigliani and his collaborators . MPS combined IS / LM with other aspects of the synthesis including the neoclassical growth model and the Phillips curve relation between inflation and output . Both large @-@ scale models and the Phillips curve became targets for critics of the synthesis . 
 = = = Phillips curve = = = 
 Keynes did not lay out an explicit theory of price level . Early Keynesian models assumed wage and other price levels were fixed . These assumptions caused little concern in the 1950s when inflation was stable , but by the mid @-@ 1960s inflation increased and became an issue for macroeconomic models . In 1958 A.W. Phillips set the basis for a price level theory when he made the empirical observation that inflation and unemployment seemed to be inversely related . In 1960 Richard Lipsey provided the first theoretical explanation of this correlation . Generally Keynesian explanations of the curve held that excess demand drove high inflation and low unemployment while an output gap raised unemployment and depressed prices . In the late 1960s and early 1970s , the Phillips curve faced attacks on both empirical and theoretical fronts . The presumed trade @-@ off between output and inflation represented by the curve was the weakest part of the Keynesian system . 
 = = = <unk> macroeconomics = = = 
 Despite its prevalence , the neoclassical synthesis had its Keynesian critics . A strain of disequilibrium or " non @-@ Walrasian " theory developed that criticized the synthesis for apparent contradictions in allowing disequilibrium phenomena , especially involuntary unemployment , to be modeled in equilibrium models . Moreover , they argued , the presence of disequilibrium in one market must be associated with disequilibrium in another , so involuntary unemployment had to be tied to an excess supply in the goods market . Many see Don Patinkin 's work as the first in the disequilibrium vein . Robert W. Clower ( 1965 ) introduced his " dual @-@ decision hypothesis " that a person in a market may determine what he wants to buy , but is ultimately limited in how much he can buy based on how much he can sell . Clower and Axel Leijonhufvud ( 1968 ) argued that disequilibrium formed a fundamental part of Keynes 's theory and deserved greater attention . Robert Barro and Herschel Grossman formulated general disequilibrium models in which individual markets were locked into prices before there was a general equilibrium . These markets produced " false prices " resulting in disequilibrium . Soon after the work of Barro and Grossman , disequilibrium models fell out of favor in the United States , and Barro abandoned Keynesianism and adopted new classical , market clearing hypotheses . 
 While American economists quickly abandoned disequilibrium models , European economists were more open to models without market clearing . Europeans such as Edmond Malinvaud and Jacques <unk> expanded on the disequilibrium tradition and worked to explain price rigidity instead of simply assuming it . Malinvaud ( 1977 ) used disequilibrium analysis to develop a theory of unemployment . He argued that disequilibrium in the labor and goods markets could lead to rationing of goods and labor , leading to unemployment . Malinvaud adopted a <unk> framework and argued that pricing would be rigid in modern , industrial prices compared to the relatively flexible pricing systems of raw goods that dominate agricultural economies . Prices are fixed and only quantities adjust . Malinvaud considers an equilibrium state in classical and Keynesian unemployment as most likely . Work in the neoclassical tradition is confined as a special case of Malinvaud 's typology , the Walrasian equilibrium . In Malinvaud 's theory , reaching the Walrasian equilibrium case is almost impossible to achieve given the nature of industrial pricing . 
 = = Monetarism = = 
 Milton Friedman developed an alternative to Keynesian macroeconomics eventually labeled monetarism . Generally monetarism is the idea that the supply of money matters for the macroeconomy . When monetarism emerged in the 1950s and 1960s , Keynesians neglected the role money played in inflation and the business cycle , and monetarism directly challenged those points . 
 = = = Criticizing and augmenting the Phillips curve = = = 
 The Phillips curve appeared to reflect a clear , inverse relationship between inflation and output . The curve broke down in the 1970s as economies suffered simultaneous economic stagnation and inflation known as stagflation . The empirical implosion of the Phillips curve followed attacks mounted on theoretical grounds by Friedman and Edmund Phelps . Phelps , although not a monetarist , argued that only unexpected inflation or deflation impacted employment . Variations of Phelps 's " expectations @-@ augmented Phillips curve " became standard tools . Friedman and Phelps used models with no long @-@ run trade @-@ off between inflation and unemployment . Instead of the Phillips curve they used models based on the natural rate of unemployment where expansionary monetary policy can only temporarily shift unemployment below the natural rate . Eventually , firms will adjust their prices and wages for inflation based on real factors , ignoring nominal changes from monetary policy . The expansionary boost will be wiped out . 
 = = = Importance of money = = = 
 Anna Schwartz collaborated with Friedman to produce one of monetarism 's major works , A Monetary History of the United States ( 1963 ) , which linked money supply to the business cycle . The Keynesians of the 1950s and 60s had adopted the view that monetary policy does not impact aggregate output or the business cycle based on evidence that , during the Great Depression , interest rates had been extremely low but output remained depressed . Friedman and Schwartz argued that Keynesians only looked at nominal rates and neglected the role inflation plays in real interest rates , which had been high during much of the Depression . In real terms , monetary policy had effectively been <unk> , putting downward pressure on output and employment , even though economists looking only at nominal rates thought monetary policy had been stimulative . 
 Friedman developed his own quantity theory of money that referred to Irving Fisher 's but inherited much from Keynes . Friedman 's 1956 " The Quantity Theory of Money : A Restatement " incorporated Keynes 's demand for money and liquidity preference into an equation similar to the classical equation of exchange . Friedman 's updated quantity theory also allowed for the possibility of using monetary or fiscal policy to remedy a major downturn . Friedman broke with Keynes by arguing that money demand is relatively stable — even during a downturn . <unk> argued that " fine @-@ tuning " through fiscal and monetary policy is counterproductive . They found money demand to be stable even during fiscal policy shifts , and both fiscal and monetary policies suffer from lags that made them too slow to prevent mild downturns . 
 = = = Prominence and decline = = = 
 Monetarism attracted the attention of policy makers in the late @-@ 1970s and 1980s . Friedman and Phelps 's version of the Phillips curve performed better during stagflation and gave monetarism a boost in credibility . By the mid @-@ 1970s monetarism had become the new orthodoxy in macroeconomics , and by the late @-@ 1970s central banks in the United Kingdom and United States had largely adopted a monetarist policy of targeting money supply instead of interest rates when setting policy . However , targeting monetary aggregates proved difficult for central banks because of measurement difficulties . Monetarism faced a major test when Paul Volcker took over the Federal Reserve Chairmanship in 1979 . Volcker tightened the money supply and brought inflation down , creating a severe recession in the process . The recession lessened monetarism 's popularity but clearly demonstrated the importance of money supply in the economy . Monetarism became less credible when once @-@ stable money velocity defied monetarist predictions and began to move erratically in the United States during the early 1980s . <unk> methods of single @-@ equation models and non @-@ statistical analysis of plotted data also lost out to the simultaneous @-@ equation modeling favored by Keynesians . Monetarism 's policies and method of analysis lost influence among central bankers and academics , but its core tenets of the long @-@ run neutrality of money ( increases in money supply cannot have long @-@ term effects on real variables , such as output ) and use of monetary policy for stabilization became a part of the macroeconomic mainstream even among Keynesians . 
 = = New classical economics = = 
 " New classical economics " evolved from monetarism and presented other challenges to Keynesianism . Early new classicals considered themselves monetarists , but the new classical school evolved . New classicals abandoned the monetarist belief that monetary policy could systematically impact the economy , and eventually embraced real business cycle models that ignored monetary factors entirely . 
 New classicals broke with Keynesian economic theory completely while monetarists had built on Keynesian ideas . Despite discarding Keynesian theory , new classical economists did share the Keynesian focus on explaining short @-@ run fluctuations . New classicals replaced monetarists as the primary opponents to Keynesianism and changed the primary debate in macroeconomics from whether to look at short @-@ run fluctuations to whether macroeconomic models should be grounded in microeconomic theories . Like monetarism , new classical economics was rooted at the University of Chicago , principally with Robert Lucas . Other leaders in the development of new classical economics include Edward Prescott at University of Minnesota and Robert Barro at University of Rochester . 
 New classical economists wrote that earlier macroeconomic theory was based only tenuously on microeconomic theory and described its efforts as providing " microeconomic foundations for macroeconomics . " New classicals also introduced rational expectations and argued that governments had little ability to stabilize the economy given the rational expectations of economic agents . Most controversially , new classical economists revived the market clearing assumption , assuming both that prices are flexible and that the market should be modeled at equilibrium . 
 = = = Rational expectations and policy irrelevance = = = 
 Keynesians and monetarists recognized that people based their economic decisions on expectations about the future . However , until the 1970s , most models relied on adaptive expectations , which assumed that expectations were based on an average of past trends . For example , if inflation averaged 4 % over a period , economic agents were assumed to expect 4 % inflation the following year . In 1972 Lucas , influenced by a 1961 agricultural economics paper by John <unk> , introduced rational expectations to macroeconomics . Essentially , adaptive expectations modeled behavior as if it were backward @-@ looking while rational expectations modeled economic agents ( consumers , producers and investors ) who were forward @-@ looking . New classical economists also claimed that an economic model would be internally inconsistent if it assumed that the agents it models behave as if they were unaware of the model . Under the assumption of rational expectations , models assume agents make predictions based on the optimal forecasts of the model itself . This did not imply that people have perfect foresight , but that they act with an informed understanding of economic theory and policy . 
 Thomas Sargent and Neil Wallace ( 1975 ) applied rational expectations to models with Phillips curve trade @-@ offs between inflation and output and found that monetary policy could not be used to systematically stabilize the economy . Sargent and Wallace 's policy ineffectiveness proposition found that economic agents would anticipate inflation and adjust to higher price levels before the influx of monetary stimulus could boost employment and output . Only unanticipated monetary policy could increase employment , and no central bank could systematically use monetary policy for expansion without economic agents catching on and anticipating price changes before they could have a stimulative impact . 
 Robert E. Hall applied rational expectations to Friedman 's permanent income hypothesis that people base the level of their current spending on their wealth and lifetime income rather than current income . Hall found that people will smooth their consumption over time and only alter their consumption patterns when their expectations about future income change . Both Hall 's and Friedman 's versions of the permanent income hypothesis challenged the Keynesian view that short @-@ term stabilization policies like tax cuts can stimulate the economy . The permanent income view suggests that consumers base their spending on wealth , so a temporary boost in income would only produce a moderate increase in consumption . Empirical tests of Hall 's hypothesis suggest it may understate boosts in consumption due to income increases ; however , Hall 's work helped to popularize Euler equation models of consumption . 
 = = = The Lucas critique and microfoundations = = = 
 In 1976 Lucas wrote a paper criticizing large @-@ scale Keynesian models used for forecasting and policy evaluation . Lucas argued that economic models based on empirical relationships between variables are unstable as policies change : a relationship under one policy regime may be invalid after the regime changes . The Lucas 's critique went further and argued that a policy 's impact is determined by how the policy alters the expectations of economic agents . No model is stable unless it accounts for expectations and how expectations relate to policy . New classical economists argued that abandoning the disequilibrium models of Keynesianism and focusing on <unk> and behavior @-@ based equilibrium models would remedy these faults . Keynesian economists responded by building models with microfoundations grounded in stable theoretical relationships . 
 = = = Lucas supply theory and business cycle models = = = 
 Lucas and Leonard Rapping laid out the first new classical approach to aggregate supply in 1969 . Under their model , changes in employment are based on worker preferences for leisure time . Lucas and Rapping modeled decreases in employment as voluntary choices of workers to reduce their work effort in response to the prevailing wage . 
 Lucas ( 1973 ) proposed a business cycle theory based on rational expectations , imperfect information , and market clearing . While building this model , Lucas attempted to incorporate the empirical fact that there had been a trade @-@ off between inflation and output without ceding that money was non @-@ neutral in the short @-@ run . This model included the idea of money surprise : monetary policy only matters when it causes people to be surprised or confused by the price of goods changing relative to one another . Lucas hypothesized that producers become aware of changes in their own industries before they recognize changes in other industries . Given this assumption , a producer might perceive an increase in general price level as an increase in the demand for his goods . The producer responds by increasing production only to find the " surprise " that prices had increased across the economy generally rather than specifically for his goods . This " Lucas supply curve " models output as a function of the " price " or " money surprise , " the difference between expected and actual inflation . Lucas 's " surprise " business cycle theory fell out of favor after the 1970s when empirical evidence failed to support this model . 
 = = = Real business cycle theory = = = 
 While " money surprise " models floundered , efforts continued to develop a new classical model of the business cycle . A 1982 paper by Kydland and Prescott introduced real business cycle theory ( RBC ) . Under this theory business cycles could be explained entirely by the supply side , and models represented the economy with systems at constant equilibrium . RBC dismissed the need to explain business cycles with price surprise , market failure , price stickiness , uncertainty , and instability . Instead , Kydland and Prescott built parsimonious models that explained business cycles with changes in technology and productivity . Employment levels changed because these technological and productivity changes altered the desire of people to work . RBC rejected the idea of high involuntary unemployment in recessions and not only dismissed the idea that money could stabilize the economy but also the monetarist idea that money could destabilize it . 
 Real business cycle modelers sought to build macroeconomic models based on microfoundations of Arrow – Debreu general equilibrium . RBC models were one of the inspirations for dynamic stochastic general equilibrium ( DSGE ) models . DSGE models have become a common methodological tool for macroeconomists — even those who disagree with new classical theory . 
 = = New Keynesian economics = = 
 New classical economics had pointed out the inherent contradiction of the neoclassical synthesis : Walrasian microeconomics with market clearing and general equilibrium could not lead to Keynesian macroeconomics where markets failed to clear . New Keynesians recognized this paradox , but , while the new classicals abandoned Keynes , new Keynesians abandoned Walras and market clearing . During the late 1970s and 1980s , new Keynesian researchers investigated how market imperfections like monopolistic competition , nominal frictions like sticky prices , and other frictions made microeconomics consistent with Keynesian macroeconomics . New Keynesians often formulated models with rational expectations , which had been proposed by Lucas and adopted by new classical economists . 
 = = = Nominal and real rigidities = = = 
 Stanley Fischer ( 1977 ) responded to Thomas J. Sargent and Neil Wallace 's monetary ineffectiveness proposition and showed how monetary policy could stabilize an economy even in a model with rational expectations . Fischer 's model showed how monetary policy could have an impact in a model with long @-@ term nominal wage contracts . John B. Taylor expanded on Fischer 's work and found that monetary policy could have long @-@ lasting effects — even after wages and prices had adjusted . Taylor arrived at this result by building on Fischer 's model with the assumptions of staggered contract negotiations and contracts that fixed nominal prices and wage rates for extended periods . These early new Keynesian theories were based on the basic idea that , given fixed nominal wages , a monetary authority ( central bank ) can control the employment rate . Since wages are fixed at a nominal rate , the monetary authority can control the real wage ( wage values adjusted for inflation ) by changing the money supply and thus impact the employment rate . 
 By the 1980s new Keynesian economists became dissatisfied with these early nominal wage contract models since they predicted that real wages would be <unk> ( real wages would rise when the economy fell ) , while empirical evidence showed that real wages tended to be independent of economic cycles or even slightly <unk> . These contract models also did not make sense from a microeconomic standpoint since it was unclear why firms would use long @-@ term contracts if they led to inefficiencies . Instead of looking for rigidities in the labor market , new Keynesians shifted their attention to the goods market and the sticky prices that resulted from " menu cost " models of price change . The term refers to the literal cost to a restaurant of printing new menus when it wants to change prices ; however , economists also use it to refer to more general costs associated with changing prices , including the expense of evaluating whether to make the change . Since firms must spend money to change prices , they do not always adjust them to the point where markets clear , and this lack of price adjustments can explain why the economy may be in disequilibrium . Studies using data from the United States Consumer Price Index confirmed that prices do tend to be sticky . A good 's price typically changes about every four to six months or , if sales are excluded , every eight to eleven months . 
 While some studies suggested that menu costs are too small to have much of an aggregate impact , Laurence Ball and David Romer ( 1990 ) showed that real rigidities could interact with nominal rigidities to create significant disequilibrium . Real rigidities occur whenever a firm is slow to adjust its real prices in response to a changing economic environment . For example , a firm can face real rigidities if it has market power or if its costs for inputs and wages are locked @-@ in by a contract . Ball and Romer argued that real rigidities in the labor market keep a firm 's costs high , which makes firms hesitant to cut prices and lose revenue . The expense created by real rigidities combined with the menu cost of changing prices makes it less likely that firm will cut prices to a market clearing level . 
 = = = Coordination failure = = = 
 Coordination failure is another potential explanation for recessions and unemployment . In recessions a factory can go idle even though there are people willing to work in it , and people willing to buy its production if they had jobs . In such a scenario , economic downturns appear to be the result of coordination failure : The invisible hand fails to coordinate the usual , optimal , flow of production and consumption . Russell Cooper and Andrew John ( 1988 ) expressed a general form of coordination as models with multiple equilibria where agents could coordinate to improve ( or at least not harm ) each of their respective situations . Cooper and John based their work on earlier models including Peter Diamond 's ( 1982 ) coconut model , which demonstrated a case of coordination failure involving search and matching theory . In Diamond 's model producers are more likely to produce if they see others producing . The increase in possible trading partners increases the likelihood of a given producer finding someone to trade with . As in other cases of coordination failure , Diamond 's model has multiple equilibria , and the welfare of one agent is dependent on the decisions of others . Diamond 's model is an example of a " thick @-@ market externality " that causes markets to function better when more people and firms participate in them . Other potential sources of coordination failure include self @-@ fulfilling prophecies . If a firm anticipates a fall in demand , they might cut back on hiring . A lack of job vacancies might worry workers who then cut back on their consumption . This fall in demand meets the firm 's expectations , but it is entirely due to the firm 's own actions . 
 = = = Labor market failures = = = 
 New Keynesians offered explanations for the failure of the labor market to clear . In a Walrasian market , unemployed workers bid down wages until the demand for workers meets the supply . If markets are Walrasian , the ranks of the unemployed would be limited to workers transitioning between jobs and workers who choose not to work because wages are too low to attract them . They developed several theories explaining why markets might leave willing workers unemployed . Of these theories , new Keynesians were especially associated with efficiency wages and the insider @-@ outsider model used to explain long @-@ term effects of previous unemployment , where short @-@ term increases in unemployment become permanent and lead to higher levels of unemployment in the long @-@ run . 
 = = = = Insider @-@ outsider model = = = = 
 Economists became interested in hysteresis when unemployment levels spiked with the 1979 oil shock and early 1980s recessions but did not return to the lower levels that had been considered the natural rate . Olivier Blanchard and Lawrence Summers ( 1986 ) explained hysteresis in unemployment with insider @-@ outsider models , which were also proposed by of Assar <unk> and Dennis <unk> in a series of papers and then a book . Insiders , employees already working at a firm , are only concerned about their own welfare . They would rather keep their wages high than cut pay and expand employment . The unemployed , outsiders , do not have any voice in the wage bargaining process , so their interests are not represented . When unemployment increases , the number of outsiders increases as well . Even after the economy has recovered , outsiders continue to be disenfranchised from the bargaining process . The larger pool of outsiders created by periods of economic retraction can lead to persistently higher levels of unemployment . The presence of hysteresis in the labor market also raises the importance of monetary and fiscal policy . If temporary downturns in the economy can create long term increases in unemployment , stabilization policies do more than provide temporary relief ; they prevent short term shocks from becoming long term increases in unemployment . 
 = = = = Efficiency wages = = = = 
 In efficiency wage models , workers are paid at levels that maximize productivity instead of clearing the market . For example , in developing countries , firms might pay more than a market rate to ensure their workers can afford enough nutrition to be productive . Firms might also pay higher wages to increase loyalty and morale , possibly leading to better productivity . Firms can also pay higher than market wages to forestall shirking . <unk> models were particularly influential . Carl Shapiro and Joseph Stiglitz ( 1984 ) created a model where employees tend to avoid work unless firms can monitor worker effort and threaten slacking employees with unemployment . If the economy is at full employment , a fired shirker simply moves to a new job . Individual firms pay their workers a premium over the market rate to ensure their workers would rather work and keep their current job instead of shirking and risk having to move to a new job . Since each firm pays more than market clearing wages , the aggregated labor market fails to clear . This creates a pool of unemployed laborers and adds to the expense of getting fired . Workers not only risk a lower wage , they risk being stuck in the pool of unemployed . Keeping wages above market clearing levels creates a serious disincentive to shirk that makes workers more efficient even though it leaves some willing workers unemployed . 
 = = New growth theory = = 
 Following research on the neoclassical growth model in the 1950s and 1960s , little work on economic growth occurred until 1985 . Papers by Paul Romer were particularly influential in igniting the revival of growth research . Beginning in the mid @-@ 1980s and booming in the early 1990s many macroeconomists shifted their focus to the long @-@ run and started " new growth " theories , including endogenous growth . Growth economists sought to explain empirical facts including the failure of sub @-@ Saharan Africa to catch up in growth , the booming East Asian Tigers , and the slowdown in productivity growth in the United States prior to the technology boom of the 1990s . Convergence in growth rates had been predicted under the neoclassical growth model , and this apparent predictive failure inspired research into endogenous growth . 
 Three families of new growth models challenged neoclassical models . The first challenged the assumption of previous models that the economic benefits of capital would decrease over time . These early new growth models incorporated positive externalities to capital accumulation where one firm 's investment in technology generates spillover benefits to other firms because knowledge spreads . The second focused on the role of innovation in growth . These models focused on the need to encourage innovation through patents and other incentives . A third set , referred to as the " neoclassical revival " , expanded the definition of capital in exogenous growth theory to include human capital . This strain of research began with <unk> , Romer , and Weil ( 1992 ) , which showed that 78 % of the cross @-@ country variance in growth could be explained by a Solow model augmented with human capital . 
 Endogenous growth theories implied that countries could experience rapid " catch @-@ up " growth through an open society that encouraged the inflow of technology and ideas from other nations . Endogenous growth theory also suggested that governments should intervene to encourage investment in research and development because the private sector might not invest at optimal levels . 
 = = New synthesis = = 
 A " new synthesis " or " new neoclassical synthesis " emerged in the 1990s drawing ideas from both the new Keynesian and new classical schools . From the new classical school , it adapted RBC hypotheses , including rational expectations , and methods ; from the new Keynesian school , it took nominal rigidities ( price stickiness ) and other market imperfections . New synthesis theory developed RBC models called dynamic stochastic general equilibrium ( DSGE ) models . DSGE models formulate hypotheses about the behaviors and preferences of firms and households ; numerical solutions of the resulting DSGE models are computed . These models also included a " stochastic " element created by shocks to the economy . In the original RBC models these shocks were limited to technological change , but more recent models have incorporated other real changes . DSGE models have a theoretical advantage , avoiding the Lucas critique . The new synthesis was adopted by academic economists and soon by policy makers , such as central bankers . 
 <unk> analysis of DSGE models suggested that real factors sometimes affect the economy . A paper by Frank <unk> and Rafael <unk> ( 2007 ) stated that monetary policy explained only a small part of the fluctuations in economic output . In new synthesis models , shocks can affect both demand and supply . The new synthesis implies that monetary policy can have a stabilizing effect on the economy , contrary to new classical theory . 
 Under the synthesis , debates have become less ideological and more methodological . Business cycle modelers can be broken into two camps : those in favor of calibration and those in favor of estimation . When models are calibrated , the modeler selects parameter values based on other studies or casual empirical observation . Instead of using statistical diagnostics to evaluate models , the model 's operating characteristics determine the quality of the model . Kydland and Prescott ( 1982 ) offered no formal evaluation of their model , but noted how variables like hours worked did not match real data well while the variances of other elements of the model did . When estimation methods are used , models are evaluated based on standard statistical goodness of fit criteria . Calibration is generally associated with real business cycle modelers of the new classical school , but methodological differences cut across ideology . While Lucas , Prescott , and Kydland are calibration advocates , another prominent new classical , Sargent , favors estimation . 
 = = 2008 financial crisis , Great Recession , and the breakdown of consensus = = 
 The 2007 – 2008 financial crisis and subsequent Great Recession challenged macroeconomic theory . Few economists predicted the crisis , and , even afterwards , there was great disagreement on how to address it . The new synthesis consensus broke down as economists debated policy responses to deal with the deep recession . The new synthesis formed during the Great Moderation and had not been tested in a severe economic environment . Many economists agree that the crisis stemmed from an economic bubble , but neither of the major macroeconomic schools had paid much attention to finance or a theory of asset bubbles : how they form , how they can be recognized , and how they can be prevented . The failures of current economic theory to deal with the crisis spurred economists to reevaluate their thinking . Commentary ridiculed the mainstream and proposed a major reassessment . 
 Elements of modern macroeconomic consensus were criticized following the financial crisis . Robert Solow testified before the U.S. Congress that DSGE modeling " has nothing useful to say about anti @-@ recession policy because it has built into its essentially implausible assumptions the ' conclusion ' that there is nothing for macroeconomic policy to do . " Solow also criticized DSGE models for frequently assuming that a single , " representative agent " can represent the complex interaction of the many diverse agents that make up the real world . Robert Gordon criticized much of macroeconomics after 1978 . Gordon called for a renewal of disequilibrium theorizing and disequilibrium modeling . He disparaged both new classical and new Keynesian economists who assumed that markets clear ; he called for a renewal of economic models that could included both market clearing and sticky @-@ priced goods , such as oil and housing respectively . While criticizing DSGE models , Ricardo J. Caballero argues that recent work in finance shows progress and suggests that modern macroeconomics needed to be re @-@ centered but not scrapped in the wake of the financial crisis . 
 = = <unk> theories = = 
 <unk> economists adhere to theories sufficiently outside the mainstream to be marginalized and treated as irrelevant by the establishment . Initially , heterodox economists including Joan Robinson , worked alongside mainstream economists , but heterodox groups isolated themselves and created insular groups in the late 1960s and 1970s . Present day heterodox economists often publish in their own journals rather than those of the mainstream and eschew formal modeling in favor of more abstract theoretical work . 
 The 2008 financial crisis and subsequent recession highlighted limitations of existing macroeconomic theories , models , and econometrics . The popular press discussed post @-@ Keynesian economics and Austrian economics , two heterodox traditions that have little influence on mainstream economics . 
 = = = Post Keynesian economics = = = 
 While neo @-@ Keynesians integrated Keynes 's ideas with neoclassical theory , post @-@ Keynesians went in other directions . Post @-@ Keynesians opposed the neoclassical synthesis and shared a fundamentalist interpretation of Keynes that sought to develop economic theories without classical elements . The core of post @-@ Keynesian belief is the rejection of three axioms that are central to classical and mainstream Keynesian views : the neutrality of money , gross substitution , and the ergodic axiom . Post @-@ Keynesians not only reject the neutrality of money in the short @-@ run , they also see money as an important factor in the long @-@ run , a view other Keynesians dropped in the 1970s . Gross substitution implies that goods are interchangeable . Relative price changes cause people to shift their consumption in proportion to the change . The ergodic axiom asserts that the future of the economy can be predicted based on the past and present market conditions . Without the ergodic assumption , agents are unable to form rational expectations , undermining new classical theory . In a non @-@ ergodic economy , predictions are very hard to make and decision @-@ making is hampered by uncertainty . Partly because of uncertainty , post @-@ Keynesians take a different stance on sticky prices and wages than new Keynesians . They do not see nominal rigidities as an explanation for the failure of markets to clear . They instead think sticky prices and long @-@ term contracts anchor expectations and alleviate uncertainty that hinders efficient markets . Post Keynesian economic policies emphasize the need to reduce uncertainty in the economy including safety nets and price stability . Hyman Minsky applied post @-@ Keynesian notions of uncertainty and instability to a theory of financial crisis where investors increasingly take on debt until their returns can no longer pay the interest on leveraged assets , resulting in a financial crisis . The financial crisis of 2007 – 2008 brought mainstream attention to Minsky 's work . 
 = = = Austrian business cycle theory = = = 
 The Austrian School of economics began with Carl Menger 's 1871 Principles of Economics . Menger 's followers formed a distinct group of economists until around the World War II when the distinction between Austrian economics and other schools of thought had largely broken down . The Austrian tradition survived as a distinct school , however , through the works of Ludwig von Mises and Friedrich Hayek . Present @-@ day Austrians are distinguished by their interest in earlier Austrian works and abstention from standard empirical methodology including econometrics . Austrians also focus on market processes instead of equilibrium . Mainstream economists are generally critical of its methodology . 
 Hayek created the Austrian business cycle theory , which synthesizes Menger 's capital theory and Mises 's theory of money and credit . The theory proposes a model of inter @-@ temporal investment in which production plans precede the manufacture of the finished product . The producers revise production plans to adapt to changes in consumer preferences . Producers respond to " derived demand , " which is estimated demand for the future , instead of current demand . If consumers reduce their spending , producers believe that consumers are saving for additional spending later , so that production remains constant . Combined with a market of <unk> funds ( which relates savings and investment through the interest rate ) , this theory of capital production leads to a model of the macroeconomy where markets reflect inter @-@ temporal preferences . Hayek 's model suggests that an economic bubble begins when cheap credit initiates a boom where resources are <unk> , so that early stages of production receive more resources than they should and overproduction begins ; the later stages of capital are not funded for maintenance to prevent depreciation . <unk> in the early stages cannot be processed by poorly maintained later stage capital . The boom becomes a bust when a lack of finished goods leads to " forced saving " since fewer finished goods can be produced for sale . 
 = = = Articles = = = 
 de <unk> , Michel ( 2004 ) . " The History of Macroeconomics Viewed against the Background of the Marshall @-@ Walras Divide " . History of Political Economy 36 : 57 – 91 @.@ doi : 10 @.@ 1215 / <unk> @-@ 36 @-@ <unk> _ 1 @-@ 57 . 
 = = = Books = = = 
 Handbooks in Economics 
 Taylor , John B. ; Woodford , Michael , eds . ( 1999 ) . Handbook of macroeconomics . Handbooks in Economics 1 – 3 . North @-@ Holland . ISBN 0 @-@ 444 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 Handbook of Monetary Economics , Elsevier . 
 Friedman , Benjamin M. , and Frank H. Hahn , ed . , 1990 @.@ v. 1 links for description & contents and chapter @-@ outline previews 
 _ _ _ _ _ , 1990 @.@ v. 2 links for description & contents and chapter @-@ outline previews . 
 Friedman , Benjamin , and Michael Woodford , 2010 @.@ v. 3A & 3B links for description & and chapter abstracts . 
 Leijonhufvud , Axel ( 1981 ) . Information and coordination : essays in macroeconomic theory . New York : Oxford University Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ 7 . 
 Woodford , Michael ( 2003 ) . Interest and prices : Foundations of a theory of monetary policy . Princeton , New Jersey : Princeton University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 691 @-@ <unk> @-@ 8 . 
 = = = Podcasts and videos = = = 
 Related Nobel Prize lecture videos and other material 
 Thomas Sargent and Chris Sims ( 2011 ) " Empirical research on cause and effect in the macroeconomy " 
 Peter Diamond , Dale Mortensen , and Christopher <unk> ( 2010 ) " Analysis of markets with search frictions " 
 Edmund Phelps ( 2006 ) " Analysis of <unk> tradeoffs in macroeconomic policy " 
 Finn E. Kydland and Edward C. Prescott ( 2004 ) " Dynamic macroeconomics : the time consistency of economic policy and the driving forces behind business cycles " 
 George Akerlof , Michael Spence , and Joseph Stiglitz ( 2001 ) " Analyses of markets with asymmetric information " . 
 Institute for New Economic Thinking Conference Proceedings videos 
 Robert Skidelsky on " 1930 and the Challenge of the Depression for Economic Thinking : Friedrich Hayek versus John Maynard Keynes " – Keynes 's biographer on Keynesian theory and the economic crisis 
 Christopher Sims on " How empirical evidence does or does not influence economic thinking " – Sims defends DSGE models 
 <unk> podcasts 
 Don Boudreaux on Macroeconomics and Austrian Business Cycle Theory 
 Ricardo Reis on Keynes , Macroeconomics , and Monetary Policy 
 Allan Meltzer on Inflation 
 Paul Romer on Growth 
 Milton Friedman on Money 
 = Hurricane Able ( 1951 ) = 
 Hurricane Able was a rare hurricane that formed outside of the typical North Atlantic hurricane season . The first tropical cyclone in 1951 , Able developed from a trough of low pressure on May 15 about 300 miles ( 480 km ) south of Bermuda . Initially subtropical in nature , Able acquired tropical characteristics as it moved over the warm waters of the Gulf Stream and attained hurricane status on May 17 off the coast of Florida . This made Able one of only four May Atlantic hurricanes on record . On May 22 Able reached peak winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) about 70 miles ( 115 km ) off of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina . The hurricane weakened as it turned eastward , and became an extratropical cyclone on May 23 . 
 Hurricane Able did not affect land significantly . In Florida , the storm dropped light precipitation , while in the Bahamas it produced winds of up to 95 mph ( 152 km / h ) . From North Carolina through New England , Able produced higher than normal tides . No casualties were reported . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 An active trough of low pressure exited the East Coast of the United States on May 12 , and by the following day it passed near Bermuda . Initially the trough was located only near the surface , though as cold air from behind it advanced eastward , the trough extended into the mid- to upper @-@ levels of the atmosphere . By May 14 a closed low pressure area developed in seclusion from the westerlies . Continued cold air from behind the trough , about 12 ° F ( 7 ° C ) colder than usual for the time of year , extended across the low in conjunction with warm upper levels and warm sea surface temperatures , resulting in large amounts of instability . The polar trough gradually weakened as the low organized , and on May 15 it developed into a subtropical depression while located about 300 miles ( 480 km ) south of Bermuda . 
 Located under an upper @-@ level low , the depression initially tracked briskly to the northwest , followed by a turn to the west @-@ southwest on May 16 as the upper @-@ level low turned southwestward . Later on the 16th , the depression approached the warmest waters of the Gulf Stream . Strong divergence from the upper @-@ level low and a high pressure system to its northeast provided favorable conditions towards transitioning into a tropical cyclone , and late on the 16th the depression attained winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . The storm continued to intensify as it turned to the southwest , and early on May 17 a ship near the center reported about 55 mph ( 88 km / h ) winds and up to 30 foot ( 9 m ) waves while located about 125 miles ( 200 km ) east of Daytona Beach , Florida , indicating the system transitioned into a tropical storm . The Navy reconnaissance squadron flew into the system later that day , and reported a storm of full hurricane strength moving southward . 
 Receiving the name Able , the small hurricane turned to the southeast and to the east while passing near or over the Bahama Banks . Able subsequently turned to the northeast and later to the north , and finished executing its cyclonic loop on May 20 . The hurricane continued to intensify with an eye 20 miles ( 32 km ) in diameter , and on May 21 Reconnaissance Aircraft estimated the hurricane attained peak winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) . Shortly thereafter Able passed about 70 miles ( 110 km ) east of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina , and early on May 22 Able weakened from its peak intensity after turning to the east . On May 23 it deteriorated into a tropical storm while passing over cooler waters , and that night Able became an extratropical cyclone while located about 520 miles ( 840 km ) south of Halifax , Nova Scotia . The extratropical remnant turned to the northeast before losing its identity late on May 24 . 
 = = Impact and records = = 
 Storm warnings were issued from Savannah , Georgia to Fort Pierce , Florida subsequent to the discovery of the hurricane . The National Weather Bureau advised all small craft to remain at port and recommended residents in the northern Bahamas to take immediate precautions . On Grand Bahama , the threat of Hurricane Able resulted in a construction crew to evacuate further inland ; the crew was constructing an observation post for guiding long @-@ range missiles from Cape Canaveral . Fishermen on dozens of boats left the open ocean for safety on two Bahamian islands , while two airplanes safely rode out the hurricane . Small craft warnings and storm warnings were later issued from North Carolina through New England . 
 The outer rainbands of Able produced light rainfall and high seas along the Florida coastline . While moving slowly near the Bahamas , Able produced strong winds reaching 90 to 95 mph ( 145 to 152 km / h ) at Walker Cay , and minimal hurricane force on Grand Bahama and Little Abaco Island . The hurricane produced high surf in Wilmington , North Carolina and abnormally high tides northward through New England , though no damage was reported . A ship called " City of Eastbourne " sailed through the storm and reported hurricane @-@ force winds , along with " mountainous , confused seas and driving rain . " 
 Able is one of only four North Atlantic hurricanes on record to exist during the month of May , the others occurring in 1889 , 1908 , and 1970 . None of the others reached winds of more than 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) . It was described as " wrong way , wrong time " , referring to its unusual motion to the southwest near the Bahamas , as well as its presence outside of the normal hurricane season . Additionally , the Weather Bureau described it as a " freak of freaks " . 
 = 1974 – 75 Buffalo Braves season = 
 The 1974 – 75 Buffalo Braves season was the fifth season for the expansion Buffalo Braves franchise in the National Basketball Association and its Atlantic Division . It was the team 's third season under head coach Jack Ramsay . The team 's official home arena was Buffalo Memorial Auditorium . 
 Despite losing three key players in Gar Heard , Jim McMillian and Ernie DiGregorio for long stretches , the Braves continued to improve . The Braves finished in 2nd place with a 49 – 33 record , as Bob McAdoo captured the NBA MVP Award . McAdoo led the league with 34 @.@ 5 points per game , while adding 14 @.@ 1 rebounds per game , which was 4th best in the league . 
 In the 1975 NBA Playoffs , the Braves earned the franchise 's second playoff berth , this time against the Washington Bullets . The series went to seven games . However , the Braves lost game seven 115 – 96 on the road . After the season , the team was occupied with legal wrangling surrounding the departure of minority owner and general manager Eddie Donovan . 
 = = Transactions = = 
 On August 29 , 1974 , the Braves purchased Dale Schlueter from the Atlanta Hawks . On September 4 , 1974 , Matt <unk> was traded along with a 1977 NBA Draft second round pick and a future second round draft pick to the Chicago Bulls for Bob Weiss . Bernie Harris was waived on January 20 , 1975 . Mike <unk> did not return to play for the Braves and never played in the NBA again . 
 On March 21 , Braves general manager Eddie Donovan announced that he would resign effective April 1 . The resignation was controversial because there were rumors that he would return to work for his prior team , New York Knicks , but there were simultaneous rumors that the Knicks had unfairly tampered with Donovan while under contract with the Braves . Upon the announced resignation , NBA Commissioner Walter Kennedy announced that the league would conduct a hearing on the matter . The transition was complicated by Donovan 's 5 % ownership of the Braves . Incoming commissioner , Larry O 'Brien announced an amicable settlement as one of his first orders of business . 
 = = Offseason = = 
 Prior to the season the team lost Bob Kauffman to the New Orleans Jazz in the May 20 , 1974 NBA Expansion Draft . 
 = = = NBA Draft = = = 
 The following members of the 1974 – 75 Buffalo Braves were drafted during the 1974 NBA Draft . McMillen played for a year in Europe before joining the 1975 – 76 Buffalo Braves . He played for a team in Bologna , Italy . 
 = = Roster = = 
 = = Regular season = = 
 Overview 
 An early eleven @-@ game winning streak helped the Braves achieve a 16 – 4 record to start the season and a later seven @-@ game streak took them to 31 – 16 . Buffalo supplanted the New York Knicks as Boston 's closest competitor in the Atlantic foursome with 49 wins and 33 losses . Buffalo boasted high @-@ scoring super star Bob McAdoo , who posted a 34 @.@ 5 scoring average to lead the NBA , while making more field goals than any other player . He also led in minutes played , while also ranking among the best rebounders and shot blockers in the league . McAdoo also earned 798 free throw tries , another league high , converting 81 % of his attempts . The Braves lost reigning NBA Rookie of the Year Ernie DiGregorio to a knee injury that limited him to 31 games , watched former Laker Jim McMillian battle illness that caused him to miss 20 games , and also lost Gar Heard for 15 games , which dropped the team from the elite and put more of the load on their star . The Braves attendance increased by 40 @,@ 000 to 467 @,@ 267 in their 41 home games , but the team fell to 5th of 18 teams . The team defense improved sufficiently to create an average 2 @.@ 2 @-@ point scoring margin after a slight average deficit the year before . 
 McMillian ranked tenth in the league in field goal percentage . Heard ranked 9th in blocks per game ( 1 @.@ 8 ) . Jack Marin , who played in 81 games , ranked seventh in free throw percentage ( 86 @.@ 9 % ) . Randy Smith , who played in all 82 regular @-@ season games for the third consecutive season , finished fourth in assists per game ( 6 @.@ 5 ) . McAdoo , who also played all 82 games , led the NBA in minutes played , field goals , rebounds ( ranked fourth per game ) , points , and points per game . Meanwhile , he ranked sixth in blocks per game , second in total free throws , and fifth in field goal percentage . This performance earned him the league MVP and first team All @-@ NBA honors . 
 = = = October – November = = = 
 As he had the season before , DiGregorio had a tremendous opening night with 33 points . The Braves defeated the defending champion Boston Celtics 126 – 119 , giving them their first win in nine games against Boston as a visitor . The Celtics had eliminated the Braves from the 1975 NBA Playoffs . DiGregorio was sidelined after six games due to knee surgery . After a 4 – 3 start , the Braves won eleven in a row starting with a November 3 , 1974 , victory over the Los Angeles Lakers at the Los Angeles Forum and culminating with a November 23 victory over the Phoenix Suns at home . In order to win the eighth game of the streak , the Braves had to overcome a seventeen @-@ point deficit to earn a 111 – 106 victory against the Golden State Warriors . Even after losing to the Chicago Bulls on November 24 , their 15 – 4 record was the best in the NBA . 
 = = = December – January = = = 
 During December , the Braves dealt with injuries to McMillan , who required an emergency appendectomy , and DiGregorio . After their great start , the Braves compiled a 6 – 7 month of December . On December 19 , despite 49 points by McAdoo , the Braves lost to the Cleveland Cavaliers . On December 28 , the NBA 's smallest player , Calvin Murphy scored a career @-@ high 45 points to lead the Houston Rockets to a 125 – 117 victory over Buffalo . By January , Heard was suffering from a knee injury . As a result , in some games , the Braves only played seven players . In a January 3 game against the Detroit Pistons , Dale Schlueter was involved in two altercations that resulted in bench @-@ clearing brawls . In January 1975 , the Braves recorded a seven @-@ game winning streak starting with a January 10 win over the Cavaliers and ending with a January 24 victory over the New York Knicks . In the fifth game of the streak , McAdoo outscored Pete Maravich 43 – 40 at New Orleans . 
 = = = February – April = = = 
 Following an 11 – 4 January , the Braves struggled to a 7 – 7 record in February . On January 24 , DiGregorio returned to the active roster following his October 29 knee cartilage injury . The March 13 victory against the Golden State Warriors established the franchise record for most wins in a season at 43 , surpassing the prior season 's total of 42 . From March 14 to March 21 , the Braves posted their season @-@ worst four @-@ game losing streak . Donovan announced his April 1 resignation in late March . In late March , DiGregorio was sidelined for the rest of the season . The Braves then went on a five @-@ game winning streak from March 22 to March 29 , but the team lost three of four April regular @-@ season games . 
 = = = Season standings = = = 
 = = = Record vs. opponents = = = 
 = = = Season schedule = = = 
 Source : www.basketball @-@ reference.com 
 = = Playoffs = = 
 During the playoffs , the Braves captured home court advantage with a victory over the Washington Bullets in game 1 of the Eastern Conference Semifinals , but the Bullets returned the favor in game two . The home teams won the remaining games as Buffalo lost the series in seven games . DiGregorio missed the playoffs . McAdoo played 46 @.@ 7 minutes per game during the playoffs and averaged 37 @.@ 4 points , which both led the league . Heard averaged 11 @.@ 7 points and 10 @.@ 9 rebounds . 
 During the regular season the Bullets had been 36 – 5 ( which was an NBA single @-@ season record for home victories ) at home , but lost both games to the Braves . The Braves then opened the series at the Capital Centre with a 113 – 102 victory in game 1 . McAdoo was the game @-@ high scorer with 35 and game @-@ high rebounder with 14 . The Bullets rebounded for a 120 – 106 victory in game 2 in Buffalo . Wes Unseld totaled 25 rebounds and Elvin Hayes added 16 as well as 34 points . Meanwhile , McAdoo , who had averaged 14 @.@ 1 rebounds during the regular season only had 6 . In game 3 , Phil Chenier scored 18 points in the third quarter as the Bullets expanded a 53 – 52 lead to 81 – 70 . Unseld had 18 rebounds and Hayes had 16 to go along with his 30 points . McAdoo had a game @-@ high 34 and Smith added 26 in a losing effort . Before game 4 , McAdoo received his hardware for his league MVP and league scoring title and responded that night with a 50 @-@ point performance as the Braves evened the series 2 – 2 with a 108 – 102 victory . Two nights later Hayes responded with 46 points , including 16 in the fourth quarter , as the Bullets completed a 97 – 93 comeback victory to regain the series lead 3 – 2 . In the game , the score was tied at 89 with two minutes left when Nick Weatherspoon hit a 17 @-@ foot jumper to give the Bullets the lead for good . Chenier and Hayes built the lead up to 94 – 89 before McMillian made two short shots to bring the Braves back within 1 point in the final minute . An Unseld offensive rebound and putback of a Hayes miss gave the Bullets crucial points in the final seconds . On the night Hayes shot 19 @-@ for 26 and McAdoo countered with 34 points . In game 6 , the Braves earned a 102 – 96 victory as McAdoo scored 9 of his 37 points in the final five minutes . The game had 19 tie scores , with the last being at 89 . In game 7 , Washington jumped to a 28 – 13 lead after one quarter behind 14 points by Chenier . Washington expanded the lead to 42 – 19 before closing the first half with a 56 – 38 lead . On the night , Chenier had a career @-@ high 39 points in the 115 – 96 victory . McAdoo had 36 for Buffalo . 
 = = = Playoff schedule = = = 
 Source : www.basketball @-@ reference.com 
 = = Player stats = = 
 = = Awards and honors = = 
 Bob McAdoo , NBA Most Valuable Player 
 Bob McAdoo , NBA Scoring Champion 
 Bob McAdoo All @-@ NBA Team ( 1st team ) 
 Bob McAdoo 1975 NBA All @-@ Star Game 
 = A Streetcar Named Marge = 
 " A Streetcar Named Marge " is the second episode of The Simpsons ' fourth season . It first aired on the Fox network in the United States on October 1 , 1992 . In the episode , Marge wins the role of Blanche DuBois in a musical version of Tennessee Williams ' A Streetcar Named Desire . Homer offers little support for his wife 's acting pursuits , and Marge begins to see parallels between him and Stanley Kowalski , the play 's boorish lead male character . The episode contains a subplot in which Maggie Simpson attempts to retrieve her pacifier from a strict daycare owner . 
 Jeff Martin wrote the episode , and Rich Moore served as director . Jon Lovitz made his fourth guest appearance on The Simpsons , this time as musical director Llewellyn Sinclair , as well as Llewellyn 's sister , who runs the daycare . The episode generated controversy for its original song about New Orleans , which contains several unflattering lyrics about the city . One New Orleans newspaper published the lyrics before the episode aired , prompting numerous complaints to the local Fox affiliate . In response , the president of Fox Broadcasting issued an apology to anyone who was offended . Despite the controversial song , the episode was well received by many fans , and show creator Matt Groening has named it one of his favorite episodes . 
 = = Plot = = 
 While Homer , Bart and Lisa are watching television , Marge announces that she is going to audition for a local musical production of A Streetcar Named Desire , and she wants to meet new people because she usually spends all day caring for Maggie . The rest of the family pay no attention and continue to watch television . 
 The musical is called " Oh , Streetcar ! " , which is directed by Llewellyn Sinclair . After Ned Flanders is cast as Stanley Kowalski , Marge auditions for Blanche DuBois . Llewellyn immediately rejects Marge , explaining that Blanche is supposed to be a " delicate flower being trampled by an uncouth lout " . However , as a dejected Marge calls home and takes Homer 's dinner order , Llewellyn realizes that she is perfect for the role . 
 The next day , Maggie causes distractions when Marge brings her to rehearsal , so Llewellyn tells Marge to enroll the baby at the daycare center called Ayn Rand School for Tots which is run by his sister Ms. Sinclair , who immediately confiscates Maggie 's pacifier . Maggie and the other babies later engage in an attempt to retrieve their pacifiers , but Ms. Sinclair thwarts their efforts and sends Maggie to a playpen . 
 During rehearsal , Marge struggles with a scene in which Blanche is supposed to break a glass bottle and attack Stanley , but she cannot muster enough anger towards the Stanley character to break the bottle . After coming home , Marge asks Homer to help her learn her lines , but Homer is disinterested . The day before the performance , Marge and Ned are again practising the bottle scene as Homer arrives to drive Marge home . Homer repeatedly interrupts the rehearsal . Imagining that Stanley is Homer , Marge finally smashes the bottle and lunges at Ned . 
 The next day at the Ayn Rand School for Tots , Maggie again attempts to regain the pacifiers and this time succeeds . Homer arrives to pick her up and he and his children go to watch the musical . Homer immediately falls into boredom , but he perks up when Marge appears on stage and becomes saddened over the way Stanley treats Blanche . All the while Homer slowly picks up the plot and Marge 's feelings along with it . At the end of the musical , Marge receives a warm reaction from the crowd , but she misinterprets Homer 's sadness for boredom . Afterwards , she confronts him with hostility , but Homer is able to explain that he was genuinely moved by Blanche 's situation . Thus , he reacted with sadness because he wanted to be the husband that she deserves to have in her life who loved her , not like Stanley who neglects and mistreats her . Marge realizes that Homer really did watch the musical , and the two happily leave the theater . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing and music = = = 
 " A Streetcar Named Marge " was conceived about two years before it aired on television . Jeff Martin first pitched the idea of Homer being in a theatrical production of 1776 . Producer James L. Brooks then suggested that Marge could play Blanche DuBois in A Streetcar Named Desire . Brooks saw that Marge 's relationship with Homer was similar to Blanche 's relationship with Stanley , and he wanted to use that fact to build the emotional arc for an episode . The estate of Tennessee Williams would not let the show use large excerpts from the actual play , since the work was copyrighted . However , Fox lawyer Anatole Klebanow said that original songs based on the play were acceptable . According to producer Mike Reiss , Klebanow even promised to " take [ their ] case to the Supreme Court to get [ the ] episode aired . " Martin later explained that while the songs made the episode funnier , they also made it harder to write . 
 The Maggie subplot was present in Jeff Martin 's episode pitch . The music in the sequence is Elmer Bernstein 's march theme from The Great Escape . Simpsons composer Alf Clausen secured the rights to the score , along with the original orchestra charts . The Great Escape had been Martin 's favorite film as child , and he said " it was so exciting and so stirring " to hear the music being performed by the Simpsons ' studio orchestra . 
 = = = Animation = = = 
 " A Streetcar Named Marge " posed a challenge to the show 's animation directors . The episode contains many long setpieces , especially during the third and final act , which includes the end of the Maggie subplot and the performance of the musical . Several scenes required the animators to draw dozens of background characters . Rich Moore , the head director , initially feared the episode would not be completed in time . David Silverman , the supervising director , also had doubts ; according to Jeff Martin , Moore sent back a cartoon of himself reading the script with his eyes popping out and his jaw dropped . Producer Al Jean said that Moore " worked himself to death " to produce the episode 's most elaborate sequences . 
 A number of scenes that appeared in the storyboard and animatic were reordered or dropped altogether in the final version of the episode . Much of the Maggie subplot , for example , was modified before the episode aired . A scene in which the babies lock Ms. Sinclair in her office is missing from the final version of the episode . 
 = = = Voice acting = = = 
 All the main Simpsons cast members lent their voices to the episode , along with semi @-@ regulars Maggie Roswell and Phil Hartman . Assistant producer <unk> Williams also had a minor speaking role . Comedian Jon Lovitz , who played Llewellyn Sinclair and Ms. Sinclair , made his fourth guest appearance on The Simpsons . He had previously voiced characters in " The Way We Was " , " Brush with Greatness " , and " Homer Defined " . Lovitz later worked with Al Jean and Mike Reiss in the short @-@ lived animated sitcom The Critic , and returned to The Simpsons for the episodes " A Star Is Burns " , " Hurricane Neddy " , " Half @-@ Decent Proposal " , " The Ziff Who Came to Dinner " , and " <unk> " . In 2006 , Lovitz was named the eighth best Simpsons guest star by IGN . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Though " Oh , Streetcar ! " is based on A Streetcar Named Desire , the title of the musical alludes to the theatrical revue Oh ! Calcutta ! . Besides Blanche and Stanley , characters from A Streetcar Named Desire who appear in " Oh , Streetcar ! " include Stella ( played by Helen Lovejoy ) , the Young Collector ( played by Apu Nahasapeemapetilon ) , Mitch ( played by Lionel Hutz ) , the Doctor ( played by Chief Wiggum ) , Steve ( played by Jasper Beardley , although Apu originally said he was playing Steve ) , and Pablo ( originally played by Otto Mann but taken over by Llewellyn prior to curtain ) . The musical 's closing song , " Kindness of Strangers " , is a reference to Blanche 's last line in the original play : " I have always depended on the kindness of strangers . " However , the song is very cheery in tone , intentionally missing the point of Blanche 's line , which is meant to be ironic . 
 The episode contains multiple references to Ayn Rand 's novels and Objectivist philosophy . Maggie 's daycare center is called the " Ayn Rand School for Tots " , and Ms. Sinclair can be seen reading a book called The Fountainhead Diet , a reference to Rand 's novel The Fountainhead . On the wall of the daycare is a poster that reads " Helping is <unk> " , an allusion to Rand 's rejection of the ethical doctrine of altruism . Another wall sign reads " A is A " , the law of identity , which plays a central role in Rand 's novel Atlas Shrugged . The Ayn Rand School for Tots is seen again in the 2012 short film The Longest Daycare . 
 The Maggie subplot uses the musical score of The Great Escape and contains several other allusions to the film . At one point , Ms. Sinclair punishes Maggie by sending her to a playpen called " The Box " , a play on " The Cooler " from the 1963 film . Maggie even bounces a ball against the wall of the playpen , as Steve McQueen 's character Virgil <unk> does throughout the film while he is in confinement . 
 In the scene when Homer , Bart and Lisa pick up Maggie from the daycare center , babies are perched all over the building , staring at the family and quietly sucking on pacifiers . This is a spoof of the final shot of Alfred Hitchcock 's The Birds . Indeed , a cartoon @-@ version of Hitchcock can be seen walking his dogs past the daycare , a reference to his own cameo appearance in the film . The episode also contains an allusion to the opera scene in Citizen Kane , in which Homer plays with a shredded playbill while he watches his wife in the musical . 
 = = Merchandise = = 
 All the songs from " A Streetcar Named Marge " were released on Walt Disney Records ' 2000 album Songs in the Key of Springfield . The episode was included in the 2005 VHS set The Simpsons Go Hollywood and released on DVD in 2004 as part of The Simpsons Complete Fourth Season . Jon Lovitz participated in the DVD 's audio commentary , alongside Matt Groening , Al Jean , Mike Reiss , Jeff Martin , and Hank Azaria . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " A Streetcar Named Marge " finished 32nd in ratings for the week of September 27 – October 4 , 1992 , with a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 8 , equivalent to approximately 11 @.@ 0 million viewing households . It was the second highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , following Married ... with Children . Since airing , it has received many positive reviews from fans and television critics . Michael Moran of The Times ranked the episode as the seventh best in the show 's history . Entertainment Weekly 's Dalton Ross lauded it as " the show 's best ever musical episode " , while Dave Kehr of The New York Times called it a " brilliant ... parody of Broadway musicals that should be required viewing for every Tony viewer . " In a list of his favorite episodes , Kevin Williamson of Canadian Online Explorer added , " As pitch @-@ perfect eviscerations of community theatre go , this tops Waiting for <unk> . " Series creator Matt Groening has listed it as one of his own favorites , calling the subplot " Maggie 's finest moment " , and future Simpsons guest star Trey Anastasio said the episode " may have been the best TV show ever " . Executive producer James L. Brooks also listed it as one of his favorites , saying it " showed we could go into areas no one thought we could go into " . Following the episode , the Ayn Rand Society called Groening to say they were amazed at the references to Rand . They also asked him if the show was making fun of them . 
 In 1993 , " A Streetcar Named Marge " and " Mr. Plow " were submitted for the Primetime Emmy Award for " Outstanding Comedy Series " . Before this season , the series had only been allowed to compete in the " Outstanding Animated Program " category , winning twice , but in early 1993 the rules were changed so that animated television shows would be able to submit nominations for " Outstanding Comedy Series " . However , the Emmy voters were hesitant to pit cartoons against live action programs , and The Simpsons did not receive a nomination . The Simpsons ' crew submitted episodes for Outstanding Comedy Series the next season , but again these were not nominated . Since then , the show has submitted episodes in the animation category and has won seven times . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 The musical within the episode contains a controversial song about New Orleans , which describes the city as a " home of pirates , drunks and whores " , among other things . Jeff Martin , the writer of the episode , had meant the song to be a parody of a song in Sweeney Todd , which speaks of London in unflattering terms ( " There 's No Place Like London " ) . Al Jean later explained that two Cajun characters were supposed to walk out of the theater in disgust , but none of the voice actors could provide a convincing Cajun accent . An early version of the scene can be seen in an animatic included in the DVD boxset . 
 Before the premiere of the fourth season , the producers sent two episodes to critics : " Kamp Krusty " and " A Streetcar Named Marge " . A New Orleans critic viewed " A Streetcar Named Marge " and published the song lyrics in his newspaper before the episode aired . Many readers took the lyrics out of context , and New Orleans ' then @-@ Fox affiliate , WNOL @-@ TV ( then @-@ owned by musician Quincy Jones ; the Fox affiliation for the area later moved to WVUE ) , received about one hundred complaints on the day the episode aired . Several local radio stations also held on @-@ air protests in response to the song . 
 At the urging of WNOL , Fox president Jamie Kellner released a statement on October 1 , 1992 : 
 The Simpsons ' producers rushed out a chalkboard gag for " Homer the Heretic " , which aired a week after " A Streetcar Named Marge " . It read , " I will not defame New Orleans . " The gag was their attempt to apologize for the song and hopefully bring the controversy to an end . " We didn 't realize people would get so mad , " said Al Jean . " It was the best apology we could come up with in eight words or less . " The issue passed quickly , and a person in a Bart Simpson costume even served as <unk> of <unk> Grand Marshal at the 1993 New Orleans Mardi Gras . 
 The episode generated further controversy in September 2005 , when Channel 4 in the United Kingdom decided to air the episode a week after Hurricane Katrina struck New Orleans . Arguing that the episode was an insensitive choice , given recent events , several viewers filed complaints with Ofcom . Two days later , Channel 4 apologized on @-@ air and directly contacted all those who had complained . Channel 4 had screened the episode for offensive content , but the reviews focused on the main content of the episode , and the song was not considered a key part of the plot . Channel 4 promised to update their review process to ensure that similar incidents would not occur . 
 = Cortana ( Halo ) = 
 Cortana is a fictional synthetic intelligence character in the Halo video game series . Voiced by Jen Taylor , she appears in Halo : Combat Evolved and its sequels , Halo 2 , Halo 3 , Halo 4 and Halo 5 : Guardians . She also appears in a cutscene and the epilogue of the prequel Halo : Reach , as well as in several of the franchise 's novels and comics . During gameplay , Cortana provides backstory and tactical information to the player , who assumes the role of Master Chief Petty Officer John @-@ 117 . In the story , she is instrumental in preventing the activation of the Halo installations , which would have destroyed all sentient life in the galaxy . 
 Cortana 's original design was based on the Egyptian queen Nefertiti ; the character 's holographic representation always takes the form of a woman . Bungie first introduced Cortana — and Halo — through the Cortana Letters , emails sent during Combat Evolved 's production in 1999 . Since then , the character has been used extensively to advertise the series . Cortana has been recognized for her sex appeal , believability , and character depth . The character was the inspiration for Microsoft 's intelligent personal assistant . 
 = = Character design = = 
 The first Cortana was designed and modelled by Bungie artist Chris Hughes . Cortana 's original Halo model 's face was based on the sculpture of Egyptian Queen Nefertiti . 
 Voice actress Jen Taylor said that she remained somewhat distanced from the character , and she attended only one fan convention in six years after the release of Halo : Combat Evolved . Despite her role in voicing other video game characters , including Princess Peach , she is not a gamer . She felt that portraying Cortana was occasionally challenging because the character lacks a physical form and is " a computer . " Interviewed about Cortana in Halo 3 , Taylor said that " There 's a lot more drama and a lot less technical jargon this time around . I actually just finished a couple of lines that nearly had me in tears . " When choosing a voice actor for the character , Bungie originally wanted Cortana to have a British accent . Although this idea was later discarded , Cortana still uses British colloquialisms in Halo : Combat Evolved . 
 Halo Effect : An Unauthorized Look at the Most Successful Video Game of All Time , an essay on references to mythology in Halo and previous Bungie games , analyzed the significance of Cortana 's name , stating is a variant of Curtana , the sword used by the legendary Ogier the Dane , just as the titular AI character of Marathon 2 : Durandal is apparently named after another legendary sword , <unk> . Curtana 's inscription reveals that the sword has the same " temper as Joyeuse and <unk> . " Accordingly , some speculated before the release of Halo 3 whether the " smart " Cortana would follow Marathon 's Durandal in succumbing to rampancy , a concept invented by Bungie in which an AI character becomes insane by gaining too much knowledge . 
 = = = Attributes = = = 
 Cortana is constructed from the cloned brain of Dr. Catherine Elizabeth Halsey , the creator of the SPARTAN Project ; Halsey 's synaptic networks became the basis for Cortana 's processors . According to the Halo novels , Cortana is classified as a " smart " AI , meaning that her creative matrix is allowed to expand , in contrast to the limited matrix of other " dumb " AI characters in the stories . This ability allows Cortana to learn and adapt beyond her basic parameters , but at the cost of a limited " lifespan " of only seven years ; eventually , she will fall to rampancy , a terminal state of being for Artificial intelligence constructs , in which the AI " develops delusions of godlike power " , as well as utter contempt for its mentally inferior makers . Rampant AI normally cannot return to their previous state and must be destroyed before they harm themselves and others around them , but Cortana could be saved if she and the Master Chief can get back to Dr. Halsey on Earth ; because she was created using the living tissue of Dr. Halsey . 
 Cortana is highly skilled and capable of hacking alien computer systems and decoding transmissions and occasionally smug about her abilities . In Halo : The Fall of Reach she hacks into Top Secret Office of Naval Intelligence ( ONI ) documents out of boredom . Her intellect occasionally causes her to be loquacious to a fault ; in The Fall of Reach , Halsey notes that if she were to let Cortana continue with her hypothesis , then the AI would talk all day . The Doctor also sees Cortana as a teenage version of herself : smarter than her parents , always " talking , learning , and eager to share her knowledge . " Cortana is also described as having a sardonic sense of humor ; she often cracks jokes or wryly comments , even during combat . Her high spirits and lack of programming restrictions give her a set of behavioral " quirks " unique among most AI characters in the Halo universe . For example , she becomes irate and impatient when the Master Chief doubts her judgment in Halo : First Strike . 
 As an artificial construct , Cortana has no physical form or being . Cortana always speaks with a smooth female voice , and she can communicate through comm systems and project a holographic image of herself from appropriate projectors , such as <unk> , and appears <unk> as a woman . Cortana is said to resemble her creator , Dr. Catherine Halsey , with a similar attitude " only unchecked by military and social protocol . " In Halo : The Fall of Reach , Cortana is described as slender , with close @-@ cropped hair and a skin hue that varies from navy blue to lavender , depending on her mood . Numbers and symbols flash across her form when she is thinking . In Halo 4 Cortana has become more human in appearance with more subtle additions being added to her character model such as a gap being visible between her front teeth . Cortana was played by actress Mackenzie Mason using advanced facial rendering technology to capture movements in her face while speaking to add a more human look . 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = In video games = = = 
 Cortana first appears during the introductory cutscene of Halo : Combat Evolved . In the 2003 novelization of the game , Halo : The Flood , Cortana likewise plays an important role . Controlling the Pillar of Autumn 's defenses , Cortana destroys four Covenant targets before the ship 's weapons are disabled . Under the Cole Protocol , Captain Keyes , the Autumn 's commanding officer , prepares to abandon ship : the protocol mandates the evacuation of any AI constructs , thereby charging the Master Chief with safeguarding Cortana from the Covenant . When the Master Chief arrives on Halo , Cortana monitors the communications channels , helps direct human survivors scattered across the ring , and assists the Master Chief in the rescue of Captain Keyes from the Covenant ship Truth and Reconciliation . Inserted into Halo 's Control Room , Cortana looks for a way to activate Halo to use as a weapon against the Covenant but becomes visibly agitated and sends the Master Chief to find Captain Keyes . Cortana stays in Halo 's computer core as the Master Chief encounters the parasitic Flood and is conscripted by the Forerunner construct 343 Guilty Spark to activate Halo 's defenses . The Master Chief and Guilty Spark return to the Control Room intent on using the Index , the key to Halo , to eliminate the Flood , but Cortana reveals the truth that she has learned : Halo does not kill Flood , but their food . Activating Halo would destroy all sentient life in the galaxy . She takes the Index — thus becoming a target for 343 Guilty Spark — and plans with Master Chief to destroy Halo . They succeed after Cortana helps the Chief to detonate the Pillar of Autumn 's fusion reactors , causing an explosion powerful enough to destabilize the ringworld . The two escape in a fighter and witness the ring 's destruction . 
 Cortana appears next in Halo 2 at an awards ceremony for the heroes of Halo : Combat Evolved on the Earth defense platform Cairo Station . A Covenant fleet arrives , and Cortana takes control of the Cairo 's coilgun , the Magnetic Accelerator Cannon , to repel the invaders ; she successfully deactivates a bomb that would have destroyed the station with the help of the Master Chief . Following the Master Chief 's decision to leave the station to " give the Covenant back their bomb " , Cortana chooses to accompany him despite thinking his plan crazy and guides him through New Mombasa in his attempt to capture the Prophet of Regret . Later , upon discovering Delta Halo , Cortana gives Commander Miranda Keyes access to all information on the original Halo and provides intelligence to the Chief and United Nations Space Command ( UNSC ) Marines on the surface of the ring . When sent by the Flood leader , Gravemind , to the Covenant city @-@ ship of High Charity , Cortana stays put as the Master Chief follows the Prophet of Truth . She promises to detonate the crashed In Amber Clad 's reactors to destroy the city and Halo if the ring is activated . The Arbiter , and Sergeant Major Avery Johnson avert the firing of Halo , but Cortana is left with Gravemind , who has by then overrun High Charity . 
 Cortana returns in the third installment in the Halo series , the 2007 Xbox 360 game Halo 3 . During gameplay , Cortana appears to the player in broken transmissions , often reciting lines from Fall of Reach and earlier games . Cortana manages to send a message to the Master Chief on Earth through a Flood @-@ infected ship . In her message , she states that Gravemind is unaware of the portal opened by a Forerunner artifact on Earth . Cortana continues to appear to the Chief , who later recovers her from Flood @-@ controlled High Charity . Surprised that the Chief has against all odds rescued her ( as promised ) Cortana produces the Index from Installation 04 , which she has kept as a souvenir . With it , Cortana activates a new ringworld being constructed . While the Flood are destroyed as planned , the slipspace portal through which Master Chief , the Arbiter , and Cortana attempt to escape collapses , thus stranding the Chief and Cortana . Cortana activates a distress beacon , but she knows that years could pass before rescue comes . As the Master Chief prepares to go into cryonic sleep to await rescue , Cortana confides to him that she will miss him . He replies to wake him when she needs him . 
 Cortana makes an appearance in the last levels of 2010 's Halo : Reach , which in the game 's universe takes place before Combat Evolved . When the Spartan group Noble Team receives orders to destroy important intelligence inside the military installation Sword Base , Cortana contacts Noble Team and sends them to an excavation site under the base . There , Halsey contacts the team and shows them a massive Forerunner structure buried beneath the surface . Halsey downloads Cortana and gives her to the soldier Noble 6 , instructing the team to bring the AI to the UNSC ship Pillar of Autumn . While most of Noble Team 's six soldiers were killed , Noble 6 hands Cortana over to Captain Keyes and elects to stay behind and protect the ship while it makes its escape . 
 In the fourth game , the Xbox exclusive Halo 4 , Cortana wakes the Chief when Covenant forces attack the remains of the UNSC Forward Unto Dawn , then crashes with him on Requiem . Over the course of the game , Cortana begins showing strange signs and behavior : vocal and graphic glitches , irrational behavior and a tendency to become irritable or angered . Their cause is soon revealed : Cortana 's operation beyond her seven @-@ year lifespan and her interaction with the Halo installations and the Flood have caused her to become Rampant , a state of over @-@ knowledge that makes AIs ' think ' themselves to death . Helped by the Master Chief and kept safe from the captain of the Infinity , who wishes to delete her , she helps in the battle against the Didact , a rogue Forerunner who hates humanity , and stops his scheme to convert the Earth and its people into his army using the Composer . In doing so , she has to fragment her various rampant personalities and upload them into the system , which first brings down the shields around the central core , then enables her to save Master Chief from the Didact . In a final act of love , she shields the Master Chief when he destroys the Composer , then , using the last of her energy to manifest as a solid hologram , she bids a final farewell to the Chief , managing to touch him for the first time . 
 Halo 5 shows Halsey explaining that Cortana has recovered from <unk> and attained meta @-@ stability by gaining access to The Domain , a Forerunner database thought to have been destroyed after the firing of the Halo Array . How the UNSC and Halsey are aware that Cortana gained access to The Domain is unknown . She explains to Master Chief on Genesis that she survived by falling through slipspace , and likens the Domain to the " Water Of Life for AI 's " . Her goal now is to preserve an ever lasting peace by subjugating all biological life . Whether this is a direct reaction to her link with The Domain , influence from The Didact ( as their goals are now extremely similar ) or some other external influence is yet to be known . With all Promethean troops and most Forerunner tech now under her command , and believing she cannot trust the Chief , who tries to reason with her , she converts most , if not all of the UNSC 's AI constructs to her cause and begins her assault by plunging Humanity into a new Dark Age , using the Guardian 's EMP abilities to shut off most UNSC technology , except The Infinity which barely escapes with Roland , the ship 's AI , still intact and seemingly loyal . In the Legendary Ending , a Halo ring can be seen activating accompanied by Cortana humming . Whether she found it or built it is unknown although , considering she has access to the Domain , the Guardians , Forerunner tech and a multitude of different AI constructs at her disposal , building her own ring is not out of the realms of possibility . 
 = = = In novels = = = 
 The origin of Cortana is not explained in the video games , but in the Halo novels . Her first chronological appearance in the story is in Halo : The Fall of Reach , a 2001 prequel to the first Halo game . Dr. Halsey allows Cortana to choose which SPARTAN @-@ II soldier to accompany on an upcoming mission ; Cortana picks the Master Chief , whom she believes is her best match . Cortana makes a reference to this event via voiceover in Halo 3 during a cinematic before gameplay begins . Cortana and the Spartans are assigned a near @-@ suicidal mission : to take the cruiser Pillar of Autumn to the home world of the Covenant , an alliance of alien races , and capture one of their Prophets to force a truce . Cortana 's role is to act as a mission specialist , hacking the Covenant systems and piloting the captured Covenant ship . Before the mission , Cortana helps the Master Chief to survive the near @-@ lethal exercises designed to test the Chief 's MJOLNIR battle armor . Afterward , she plants incriminating evidence in the files of Colonel Ackerson , the ONI operative who nearly killed both of them , as revenge . When the Covenant attacks the planet Reach , one of the largest planetary military bases besides Earth , Cortana guides the Pillar of Autumn based on star charts on a Forerunner tablet , thus bringing them to Halo . During Halo : The Flood , Cortana serves the same role she did in Halo : Combat Evolved , but her role is expanded such as showing her saving the Master Chief 's life from a Flood Infection Form at one point . 
 Eric Nylund 's 2003 novel Halo : First Strike takes place immediately after the events of Halo : Combat Evolved . Cortana and the Master Chief , seemingly the sole survivors of the events of Halo , discover a small number of other UNSC personnel have in fact escaped the ring . Cortana helps to take control of a Covenant cruiser , Ascendant Justice , and later returns to Earth with the remaining survivors after destroying the Covenant space station Unyielding Hierophant . In this novel , Cortana gains the ability to create imperfect clones of her program . A clone that the Master Chief and his Spartan Blue Team bring to Unyielding Hierophant eventually re @-@ clones itself hundreds of times to aid the Spartans in completing their mission . 
 = = = In promotion = = = 
 Bungie first introduced the Halo series publicly in 1999 by sending the Cortana Letters , a series of cryptic email messages , to the maintainer of <unk> , a fan site for one of Bungie 's previous series , the Marathon Trilogy . The strategic use of cryptic messages in a publicity campaign was repeated in I Love Bees , a promotion for Halo 2 . Although Bungie does not consider most of the letters to be canon , Cortana speaks many of the same lines in Halo 3 . According to C. J. Cowan , Bungie 's director of cinematics , the studio used the character here to give story clues without actually revealing the story . 
 Cortana has been turned into an action figure twice to promote Halo . The first was released as a seven @-@ inch ( 178 mm ) miniature as part of the Halo : Combat Evolved series of action figures . The character is also featured in the first series of Halo 3 action figures , distributed by McFarlane Toys . In an interview , McLees noted that the first action figure was supposed to convey an older appearance than was depicted in the games . This was accomplished by making the figure look a little buxom , despite McLees ' direct request to reduce the mass of the figure . She explains that the sculptor appeared reluctant to make the change and that time constraints ultimately left the design intact . 
 = = = Windows Digital Assistant = = = 
 Microsoft developed its virtual assistant for the Windows Phone operating system under the codename Cortana , but retained the name for the final product following a strong response in the developer community . The voice actor of Cortana in the games , Jen Taylor , provides the voice for the virtual assistant . Microsoft released a beta for Cortana in April 2014 with the developer release of Windows Phone 8 @.@ 1 . Microsoft also released Cortana virtual assistant on the Xbox One , Windows Phone 8 @.@ 1 , and Windows 10 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 When Cortana 's role greatly expanded in Halo 3 , Fairfax New Zealand noted that the character " has inexplicably had a sexy makeover . " According to Cinema Blend , the " love story " between Master Chief and Cortana in this game provides " a focus to the game that an epic war between species can not accomplish . As Chief , the player needs something to anchor them into the story , and that happens to be Cortana . " 
 Part of Cortana 's appeal has lain in her good looks . In 2007 , the character was ranked as ninth on the list of top " Xbox babes " by Team Xbox , featured by GameDaily 's " Babe of the Week " , and listed as the sixth most " disturbingly sexual game character " by <unk> In 2008 , GameDaily ranked her as the 38th " hottest game babe . " In 2009 , 1UP.com ranked the character as the fifth best video game computer , noting that as Cortana 's sanity waned in the video games , her clothing appeared to decrease as well . In 2010 , GameTrailers included her on their countdown of the top 10 " babes who are out of your league " at number two . In 2011 , UGO.com included her on the list of the 50 " video game hotties " , calling her " a certified hottie " in spite of being " just ... a big pile of ones and zeroes . " In the " battle of the beauties " feature , Complex chose her over GLaDOS for her more human @-@ like voice . In 2012 , MSN included her among the 20 " hottest women in video game history " while <unk> ranked her the third sexiest " video game girl . " Thanh Niên ranked her as the fourth most sexy female video game character in 2015 . 
 Aside from appearance , the media found other aspects to praise . In 2007 , Cortana was named one of the 50 greatest female characters by Tom 's Hardware for the character 's determination and fearlessness , which meshed perfectly with the game 's protagonist . In 2010 , Cracked.com ranked her as first on the list of the supporting characters in video games . In 2011 , UGO.com ranked her as the second best video game companion , while Maximum PC included her in the list of the 25 of gaming 's greatest sidekicks . 
 = SM UB @-@ 3 = 
 SM UB @-@ 3 was a German Type UB I submarine or U @-@ boat in the German Imperial Navy ( German : Kaiserliche Marine ) during World War I. She disappeared on her first patrol in May 1915 , and was the first of her class to be lost . 
 UB @-@ 3 was ordered in October 1914 and was laid down at the Germaniawerft shipyard in Kiel in November . UB @-@ 3 was a little more than 28 metres ( 92 ft ) in length and displaced between 127 and 142 metric tons ( 125 and 140 long tons ) , depending on whether surfaced or submerged . She carried two torpedoes for her two bow torpedo tubes and was also armed with a deck @-@ mounted machine gun . She was launched and commissioned as SM UB @-@ 3 in March 1915 . 
 UB @-@ 3 was broken into sections and shipped by rail to the Austro @-@ Hungarian port of Pola in April for reassembly . She officially joined the Pola Flotilla on 1 May and departed on her first patrol for temporary duty in Turkey on 23 May , and was never seen again . A postwar German study concluded that UB @-@ 3 was likely the victim of an unexplained technical problem in the absence of any minefields or enemy action . 
 = = Design and construction = = 
 After the German Army 's rapid advance along the North Sea coast in the earliest stages of World War I , the German Imperial Navy found itself without suitable submarines that could be operated in the narrow and shallow environment off Flanders . Project 34 , a design effort begun in mid @-@ August 1914 , produced the Type UB I design : a small submarine that could be shipped by rail to a port of operations and quickly assembled . Constrained by railroad size limitations , the UB I design called for a boat about 28 metres ( 92 ft ) long and displacing about 125 metric tons ( 123 long tons ) with two torpedo tubes . UB @-@ 3 was part of the initial allotment of eight submarines — numbered UB @-@ 1 to UB @-@ 8 — ordered on 15 October from Germaniawerft of Kiel , just shy of two months after planning for the class began . 
 UB @-@ 3 was laid down by Germaniawerft on 3 November and was launched on 5 March 1915 . As built , UB @-@ 3 was 92 feet 2 inches ( 28 @.@ 09 m ) long , 3 @.@ 15 metres ( 10 ft 4 in ) abeam , and had a draft of 3 @.@ 03 metres ( 9 ft 11 in ) . She had a single 59 @-@ brake @-@ horsepower ( 44 kW ) Daimler 4 @-@ cylinder diesel engine for surface travel , and a single 119 @-@ shaft @-@ horsepower ( 89 kW ) Siemens @-@ Schuckert electric motor for underwater travel , both attached to a single propeller shaft . Her top speeds were 6 @.@ 47 knots ( 11 @.@ 98 km / h ; 7 @.@ 45 mph ) , surfaced , and 5 @.@ 51 knots ( 10 @.@ 20 km / h ; 6 @.@ 34 mph ) , submerged . At more moderate speeds , she could sail up to 1 @,@ 650 nautical miles ( 3 @,@ 060 km ; 1 @,@ 900 mi ) on the surface before refueling , and up to 45 nautical miles ( 83 km ; 52 mi ) submerged before recharging her batteries . Like all boats of the class , UB @-@ 3 was rated to a diving depth of 50 metres ( 160 ft ) , and could completely submerge in 33 seconds . 
 UB @-@ 3 was armed with two 45 @-@ centimeter ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedoes in two bow torpedo tubes . She was also outfitted for a single 8 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 31 in ) machine gun on deck . UB @-@ 3 's complement consisted of one officer and thirteen enlisted men . 
 = = Service career = = 
 The submarine was commissioned into the German Imperial Navy as SM UB @-@ 3 on 14 March under the command of Oberleutnant zur See Siegfried Schmidt , a 27 @-@ year @-@ old , first @-@ time U @-@ boat skipper , and underwent trials in German home waters . 
 As one of the UB I boats selected for Mediterranean duty , UB @-@ 3 was readied for rail shipment . The process of shipping a UB I boat involved breaking the submarine down into what was essentially a knock down kit . Each boat was broken into approximately fifteen pieces and loaded on to eight railway flatcars . UB @-@ 3 was shipped to the port of Pola , site of ally Austria – Hungary 's main naval base , on 15 April . After UB @-@ 3 's parts arrived at Pola , it took about two weeks to assemble them . UB @-@ 3 joined the Pola Flotilla ( German : Deutsche U @-@ Halbflotille Pola ) on 1 May . 
 By late May , UB @-@ 3 had made her way down the Adriatic to the Austro – Hungarian port of Cattaro , the base from which most boats of the Pola Flotilla actually operated . For her first patrol , UB @-@ 3 was loaded with ammunition for Turkish forces at İzmir , Turkey . Because of her limited range , UB @-@ 3 was towed by the light cruiser SMS Novara of the Austro @-@ Hungarian Navy through the Straits of Otranto and cast off near the island of <unk> . UB @-@ 3 's planned route was south of the Ionian Islands , around the Peloponnese , through the Cyclades , north around <unk> and Karaburun , and into the Gulf of İzmir . If all went well , UB @-@ 3 would have arrived at İzmir on 28 or 29 May with about half her fuel left . The Germans received a garbled radio message from UB @-@ 3 when she was about 80 nautical miles ( 150 km ; 92 mi ) from İzmir , but were unable to completely understand it . No trace of UB @-@ 3 has ever been found . UB @-@ 3 was the first of the UB I boats to be lost during the war . 
 A postwar German study concluded that UB @-@ 3 's loss was probably the result of some unexplained technical problem , because there were no minefields along UB @-@ 3 's route and no record of any attacks against U @-@ boats in the area . British records , and some sources based on them , give the particulars of UB @-@ 3 's demise as being in the North Sea on 24 April 1916 , which authors R. H. Gibson and Maurice Prendergast assert was actually the fate of UB @-@ 13 . They also point out that UB @-@ 3 had gone missing nearly a year before UB @-@ 3 's supposed sinking in the North Sea . 
 = London = 
 London / <unk> / is the capital and most populous city of England , Great Britain , and the United Kingdom . On the River Thames in the south east of the island of Great Britain , London has been a major settlement for two millennia . It was founded by the Romans , who named it Londinium . London 's ancient core , the City of London , largely retains its 1 @.@ 12 @-@ square @-@ mile ( 2 @.@ 9 km2 ) medieval boundaries . Since at least the 19th century , " London " has also referred to the metropolis around this core , which now forms the county of Greater London governed by the Mayor of London and the London Assembly , historically split between Middlesex , Essex , Surrey , Kent , and Hertfordshire . 
 London is a leading global city , in the arts , commerce , education , entertainment , fashion , finance , healthcare , media , professional services , research and development , tourism , and transport . It is one of the world 's leading financial centres and has the fifth @-@ or sixth @-@ largest metropolitan area GDP in the world . London is a world cultural capital . It is the world 's most @-@ visited city as measured by international arrivals and has the world 's largest city airport system measured by passenger traffic . London is one of the world 's leading investment destinations , hosting more international retailers and ultra high @-@ net @-@ worth individuals than any other city . London 's universities form the largest concentration of higher education institutes in Europe , and a 2014 report placed it first in the world university rankings . According to the report London also ranks first in the world in software , multimedia development and design , and shares first position in technology readiness . In 2012 , London became the first city to host the modern Summer Olympic Games three times . 
 London has a diverse range of peoples and cultures , and more than 300 languages are spoken within Greater London . Its estimated mid @-@ 2015 population was 8 @,@ 673 @,@ 713 , the largest of any city in the European Union , and accounting for 12 @.@ 5 per cent of the UK population . London 's urban area is the second most populous in the EU , after Paris , with 9 @,@ 787 @,@ 426 inhabitants at the 2011 census . The city 's metropolitan area is one of the most populous in Europe with 13 @,@ 879 @,@ 757 inhabitants , while the Greater London Authority states the population of the city @-@ region ( covering a large part of the south east ) as 22 @.@ 7 million . London was the world 's most populous city from around 1831 to 1925 . 
 London contains four World Heritage Sites : the Tower of London ; Kew Gardens ; the site comprising the Palace of Westminster , Westminster Abbey , and St Margaret 's Church ; and the historic settlement of Greenwich ( in which the Royal Observatory , Greenwich marks the Prime Meridian , 0 ° longitude , and GMT ) . Other famous landmarks include Buckingham Palace , the London Eye , Piccadilly Circus , St Paul 's Cathedral , Tower Bridge , Trafalgar Square , and The Shard . London is home to numerous museums , galleries , libraries , sporting events and other cultural institutions , including the British Museum , National Gallery , Natural History Museum , Tate Modern , British Library and West End theatres . The London Underground is the oldest underground railway network in the world . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Toponymy = = = 
 The etymology of London is uncertain . It is an ancient name , found in sources from the 2nd century . It is recorded <unk> as Londinium , which points to Romano @-@ British origin , and hand @-@ written Roman tablets recovered in the city from <unk> / 70 @-@ 80 include the word <unk> ( " in London " ) . The earliest attempted explanation , now disregarded , is attributed to Geoffrey of Monmouth in Historia Regum Britanniae . This had it that the name originated from a supposed King Lud , who had allegedly taken over the city and named it <unk> . 
 From 1898 , it was commonly accepted that the name was of Celtic origin and meant place belonging to a man called * <unk> ; this explanation has since been rejected . Richard Coates put forward an explanation in 1998 that it is derived from the pre @-@ Celtic Old European * ( p ) <unk> , meaning ' river too wide to ford ' , and suggested that this was a name given to the part of the River Thames which flows through London ; from this , the settlement gained the Celtic form of its name , * <unk> ; this requires quite a serious amendment however . The ultimate difficulty lies in reconciling the Latin form Londinium with the modern Welsh <unk> , which should demand a form * ( h ) <unk> ( as opposed to * <unk> ) , from earlier * <unk> . The possibility cannot be ruled out that the Welsh name was borrowed back in from English at a later date , and thus cannot be used as a basis from which to reconstruct the original name . 
 Until 1889 , the name " London " officially applied only to the City of London , but since then it has also referred to the County of London and now Greater London . 
 = = = Prehistory = = = 
 Two recent discoveries indicate probable very early settlements near the Thames in the London area . In 1999 , the remains of a Bronze Age bridge were found on the foreshore north of Vauxhall Bridge . This bridge either crossed the Thames , or went to a now lost island in the river . <unk> dated the timbers to 1500 BC . In 2010 the foundations of a large timber structure , dated to 4500 BC , were found on the Thames foreshore , south of Vauxhall Bridge . The function of the mesolithic structure is not known . Both structures are on South Bank , at a natural crossing point where the River Effra flows into the River Thames . 
 = = = Roman London = = = 
 Although there is evidence of scattered Brythonic settlements in the area , the first major settlement was founded by the Romans after the invasion of 43 AD . This lasted only until around 61 , when the Iceni tribe led by Queen Boudica stormed it , burning it to the ground . The next , heavily planned , incarnation of Londinium prospered , and it superseded Colchester as the capital of the Roman province of Britannia in 100 . At its height in the 2nd century , Roman London had a population of around 60 @,@ 000 . 
 = = = Anglo @-@ Saxon London ( and Viking period ) = = = 
 With the collapse of Roman rule in the early 5th century , London ceased to be a capital and the walled city of Londinium was effectively abandoned , although Roman civilisation continued in the St Martin @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Fields area until around 450 . From around 500 , an Anglo @-@ Saxon settlement known as Lundenwic developed in the same area , slightly to the west of the old Roman city . By about 680 , it had revived sufficiently to become a major port , although there is little evidence of large @-@ scale production of goods . From the 820s the town declined because of repeated Viking invasions . There are three recorded Viking assaults on London ; two of which were successful in 851 and 886 AD , although they were defeated during the attack of 994 AD . 
 The Vikings established Danelaw over much of the eastern and northern part of England with its boundary roughly stretching from London to Chester . It was an area of political and geographical control imposed by the Viking incursions which was formally agreed to by the Danish warlord , Guthrum and west @-@ Saxon king , Alfred the Great in 886 AD . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle recorded that London was " refounded " by Alfred the Great in 886 . Archaeological research shows that this involved abandonment of Lundenwic and a revival of life and trade within the old Roman walls . London then grew slowly until about 950 , after which activity increased dramatically . 
 By the 11th century , London was beyond all comparison the largest town in England . Westminster Abbey , rebuilt in the Romanesque style by King Edward the Confessor , was one of the grandest churches in Europe . Winchester had previously been the capital of Anglo @-@ Saxon England , but from this time on , London became the main forum for foreign traders and the base for defence in time of war . In the view of Frank Stenton : " It had the resources , and it was rapidly developing the dignity and the political self @-@ consciousness appropriate to a national capital . " 
 = = = Middle Ages = = = 
 Following his victory in the Battle of Hastings , William , Duke of Normandy , was crowned King of England in the newly finished Westminster Abbey on Christmas Day 1066 . William constructed the Tower of London , the first of the many Norman castles in England to be rebuilt in stone , in the southeastern corner of the city , to intimidate the native inhabitants . In 1097 , William II began the building of Westminster Hall , close by the abbey of the same name . The hall became the basis of a new Palace of Westminster . 
 In the 12th century , the institutions of central government , which had hitherto accompanied the royal English court as it moved around the country , grew in size and sophistication and became increasingly fixed in one place . In most cases this was Westminster , although the royal treasury , having been moved from Winchester , came to rest in the Tower . While the City of Westminster developed into a true capital in governmental terms , its distinct neighbour , the City of London , remained England 's largest city and principal commercial centre , and it flourished under its own unique administration , the Corporation of London . In 1100 , its population was around 18 @,@ 000 ; by 1300 it had grown to nearly 100 @,@ 000 . Disaster struck during the Black Death in the mid @-@ 14th century , when London lost nearly a third of its population . London was the focus of the Peasants ' Revolt in 1381 . 
 = = = Early modern = = = 
 During the Tudor period the Reformation produced a gradual shift to Protestantism , much of London passing from church to private ownership . The traffic in woollen cloths shipped undyed and undressed from London to the nearby shores of the Low Countries , where it was considered indispensable . But the tentacles of English maritime enterprise hardly extended beyond the seas of north @-@ west Europe . The commercial route to Italy and the Mediterranean Sea normally lay through Antwerp and over the Alps ; any ships passing through the Strait of Gibraltar to or from England were likely to be Italian or Ragusan . Upon the re @-@ opening of the Netherlands to English shipping in January 1565 , there ensued a strong outburst of commercial activity . The Royal Exchange was founded . <unk> grew , and monopoly trading companies such as the East India Company were established , with trade expanding to the New World . London became the principal North Sea port , with migrants arriving from England and abroad . The population rose from an estimated 50 @,@ 000 in 1530 to about 225 @,@ 000 in 1605 . 
 In the 16th century William Shakespeare and his contemporaries lived in London at a time of hostility to the development of the theatre . By the end of the Tudor period in 1603 , London was still very compact . There was an assassination attempt on James I in Westminster , through the Gunpowder Plot on 5 November 1605 . 
 During the English Civil War the majority of Londoners supported the Parliamentary cause . After an initial advance by the Royalists in 1642 culminating in the battles of Brentford and Turnham Green , London was surrounded by defensive perimeter wall known as the Lines of Communication . The lines were built by an up to 20 @,@ 000 people , and were completed in under two months . The fortifications failed their only test when the New Model Army entered London in 1647 , and they were levelled by Parliament the same year . 
 London was plagued by disease in the early 17th century , culminating in the Great Plague of 1665 – 1666 , which killed up to 100 @,@ 000 people , or a fifth of the population . 
 The Great Fire of London broke out in 1666 in Pudding Lane in the city and quickly swept through the wooden buildings . Rebuilding took over ten years and was supervised by Robert Hooke as Surveyor of London . In 1708 Christopher Wren 's masterpiece , St Paul 's Cathedral was completed . During the Georgian era , new districts such as Mayfair were formed in the west ; new bridges over the Thames encouraged development in South London . In the east , the Port of London expanded downstream . 
 In 1762 , George III acquired Buckingham House and it was enlarged over the next 75 years . During the 18th century , London was dogged by crime , and the Bow Street Runners were established in 1750 as a professional police force . In total , more than 200 offences were punishable by death , including petty theft . Most children born in the city died before reaching their third birthday . The coffeehouse became a popular place to debate ideas , with growing literacy and the development of the printing press making news widely available ; and Fleet Street became the centre of the British press . 
 According to Samuel Johnson : 
 You find no man , at all intellectual , who is willing to leave London . No , Sir , when a man is tired of London , he is tired of life ; for there is in London all that life can afford . 
 = = = Late modern and contemporary = = = 
 London was the world 's largest city from about 1831 to 1925 . London 's overcrowded conditions led to cholera epidemics , claiming 14 @,@ 000 lives in 1848 , and 6 @,@ 000 in 1866 . Rising traffic congestion led to the creation of the world 's first local urban rail network . The Metropolitan Board of Works oversaw infrastructure expansion in the capital and some of the surrounding counties ; it was abolished in 1889 when the London County Council was created out of those areas of the counties surrounding the capital . London was bombed by the Germans during the First World War , and during the Second World War , the Blitz and other bombings by the German Luftwaffe killed over 30 @,@ 000 Londoners , destroying large tracts of housing and other buildings across the city . Immediately after the war , the 1948 Summer Olympics were held at the original Wembley Stadium , at a time when London had barely recovered from the war . 
 In 1951 , the Festival of Britain was held on the South Bank . The Great <unk> of 1952 led to the Clean Air Act 1956 , which ended the " pea soup fogs " for which London had been notorious . From the 1940s onwards , London became home to a large number of immigrants , largely from Commonwealth countries such as Jamaica , India , Bangladesh and Pakistan , making London one of the most diverse cities in Europe . 
 Primarily starting in the mid @-@ 1960s , London became a centre for the worldwide youth culture , exemplified by the Swinging London subculture associated with the King 's Road , Chelsea and Carnaby Street . The role of trendsetter was revived during the punk era . In 1965 London 's political boundaries were expanded to take into account the growth of the urban area and a new Greater London Council was created . During The Troubles in Northern Ireland , London was subjected to bombing attacks by the Provisional IRA . Racial inequality was highlighted by the 1981 Brixton riot . 
 Greater London 's population declined steadily in the decades after the Second World War , from an estimated peak of 8 @.@ 6 million in 1939 to around 6 @.@ 8 million in the 1980s . The principal ports for London moved downstream to Felixstowe and Tilbury , with the London Docklands area becoming a focus for regeneration , including the Canary Wharf development . This was borne out of London 's ever @-@ increasing role as a major international financial centre during the 1980s . The Thames Barrier was completed in the 1980s to protect London against tidal surges from the North Sea . 
 The Greater London Council was abolished in 1986 , which left London as the only large metropolis in the world without a central administration . In 2000 , London @-@ wide government was restored , with the creation of the Greater London Authority . To celebrate the start of the 21st century , the Millennium Dome , London Eye and Millennium Bridge were constructed . On 6 July 2005 London was awarded the 2012 Summer Olympics , making London the first city to stage the Olympic Games three times . On 7 July 2005 , three London Underground trains and a double @-@ decker bus were bombed in a series of terrorist attacks . In January 2015 , Greater London 's population was estimated to be 8 @.@ 63 million , the highest level since 1939 . 
 During the <unk> referendum in 2016 , UK as a whole decided to leave the European Union , but London voted to remain in the EU . This led to over a hundred thousands of Londoners petitioning Mayor Sadiq Khan to declare London 's independence from the UK and rejoin the EU . Supporters cite London 's status as a " world city " and its demographic and economic differences from the rest of the United Kingdom , and argue that it should become a city @-@ state based on the model of Singapore , while remaining an EU member state . 
 = = Government = = 
 = = = Local government = = = 
 The administration of London is formed of two tiers — a city @-@ wide , strategic tier and a local tier . City @-@ wide administration is coordinated by the Greater London Authority ( GLA ) , while local administration is carried out by 33 smaller authorities . The GLA consists of two elected components ; the Mayor of London , who has executive powers , and the London Assembly , which <unk> the mayor 's decisions and can accept or reject the mayor 's budget proposals each year . The headquarters of the GLA is City Hall , Southwark ; the mayor is Sadiq Khan . The mayor 's statutory planning strategy is published as the London Plan , which was most recently revised in 2011 . The local authorities are the councils of the 32 London boroughs and the City of London Corporation . They are responsible for most local services , such as local planning , schools , social services , local roads and refuse collection . Certain functions , such as waste management , are provided through joint arrangements . In 2009 – 2010 the combined revenue expenditure by London councils and the GLA amounted to just over £ 22 billion ( £ 14 @.@ 7 billion for the boroughs and £ 7 @.@ 4 billion for the GLA ) . 
 The London Fire Brigade is the statutory fire and rescue service for Greater London . It is run by the London Fire and Emergency Planning Authority and is the third largest fire service in the world . National Health Service ambulance services are provided by the London Ambulance Service ( LAS ) NHS Trust , the largest free @-@ at @-@ the @-@ point @-@ of @-@ use emergency ambulance service in the world . The London Air Ambulance charity operates in conjunction with the LAS where required . Her Majesty 's Coastguard and the Royal National Lifeboat Institution operate on the River Thames , which is under the jurisdiction of the Port of London Authority from Teddington Lock to the sea . 
 = = = National government = = = 
 London is the seat of the Government of the United Kingdom . Many government departments are based close to the Palace of Westminster , particularly along Whitehall , including the Prime Minister 's residence at 10 Downing Street . The British Parliament is often referred to as the " Mother of Parliaments " ( although this sobriquet was first applied to England itself by John Bright ) because it has been the model for most other parliamentary systems . There are 73 Members of Parliament ( MPs ) from London , who correspond to local parliamentary constituencies in the national Parliament . As of May 2015 , 45 are from the Labour Party , 27 are Conservatives , and one is a Liberal Democrat . 
 = = = Policing and crime = = = 
 Policing in Greater London , with the exception of the City of London , is provided by the Metropolitan Police Service , overseen by the Mayor through the Mayor 's Office for Policing and Crime ( <unk> ) . The City of London has its own police force – the City of London Police . The British Transport Police are responsible for police services on National Rail , London Underground , Docklands Light Railway and Tramlink services . A fourth police force in London , the Ministry of Defence Police , do not generally become involved with policing the general public . 
 Crime rates vary widely by area , ranging from parts with serious issues to parts considered very safe . Today crime figures are made available nationally at Local Authority and Ward level . In 2015 there were 118 homicides , a 25 @.@ 5 % increase over 2014 . The Metropolitan Police have made detailed crime figures , broken down by category at borough and ward level , available on their website since 2000 . 
 = = Geography = = 
 = = = Scope = = = 
 London , also referred to as Greater London , is one of 9 regions of England and the top @-@ level subdivision covering most of the city 's metropolis . The small ancient City of London at its core once comprised the whole settlement , but as its urban area grew , the Corporation of London resisted attempts to amalgamate the city with its suburbs , causing " London " to be defined in a number ways for different purposes . 
 Forty per cent of Greater London is covered by the London post town , within which ' LONDON ' forms part of postal addresses . The London telephone area code ( 020 ) covers a larger area , similar in size to Greater London , although some outer districts are omitted and some places just outside are included . The Greater London boundary has been aligned to the M25 motorway in places . 
 Outward urban expansion is now prevented by the Metropolitan Green Belt , although the built @-@ up area extends beyond the boundary in places , resulting in a separately defined Greater London Urban Area . Beyond this is the vast London commuter belt . Greater London is split for some purposes into Inner London and Outer London . The city is split by the River Thames into North and South , with an informal central London area in its interior . The coordinates of the nominal centre of London , traditionally considered to be the original Eleanor Cross at Charing Cross near the junction of Trafalgar Square and Whitehall , are approximately 51 ° 30 ′ 26 ″ N 00 ° 07 ′ 39 ″ W. However the actual Geographical centre of London is in the London Borough of Lambeth , just 0 @.@ 1 miles to the northeast of Lambeth North tube station . 
 = = = Status = = = 
 Within London , both the City of London and the City of Westminster have city status and both the City of London and the remainder of Greater London are counties for the purposes of <unk> . The area of Greater London has incorporated areas that were once part of the historic counties of Middlesex , Kent , Surrey , Essex and Hertfordshire . London 's status as the capital of England , and later the United Kingdom , has never been granted or confirmed officially — by statute or in written form . 
 Its position was formed through constitutional convention , making its status as de facto capital a part of the UK 's unwritten constitution . The capital of England was moved to London from Winchester as the Palace of Westminster developed in the 12th and 13th centuries to become the permanent location of the royal court , and thus the political capital of the nation . More recently , Greater London has been defined as a region of England and in this context is known as London . 
 = = = Topography = = = 
 Greater London encompasses a total area of 1 @,@ 583 square kilometres ( 611 sq mi ) , an area which had a population of 7 @,@ 172 @,@ 036 in 2001 and a population density of 4 @,@ 542 inhabitants per square kilometre ( 11 @,@ 760 / sq mi ) . The extended area known as the London Metropolitan Region or the London Metropolitan Agglomeration , comprises a total area of 8 @,@ 382 square kilometres ( 3 @,@ 236 sq mi ) has a population of 13 @,@ 709 @,@ 000 and a population density of 1 @,@ 510 inhabitants per square kilometre ( 3 @,@ 900 / sq mi ) . Modern London stands on the Thames , its primary geographical feature , a navigable river which crosses the city from the south @-@ west to the east . The Thames Valley is a floodplain surrounded by gently rolling hills including Parliament Hill , Addington Hills , and Primrose Hill . The Thames was once a much broader , shallower river with extensive marshlands ; at high tide , its shores reached five times their present width . 
 Since the Victorian era the Thames has been extensively embanked , and many of its London tributaries now flow underground . The Thames is a tidal river , and London is vulnerable to flooding . The threat has increased over time because of a slow but continuous rise in high water level by the slow ' tilting ' of Britain ( up in the north and down in the south ) caused by post @-@ glacial rebound . 
 In 1974 , a decade of work began on the construction of the Thames Barrier across the Thames at Woolwich to deal with this threat . While the barrier is expected to function as designed until roughly 2070 , concepts for its future enlargement or redesign are already being discussed . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 London has a temperate oceanic climate ( Köppen : Cfb ) , similar to all of southern Britain . Despite its reputation as being a rainy city , London receives less precipitation ( 601 mm ( 24 in ) in a year ) , than Rome , Bordeaux , Toulouse , Naples , Sydney and New York . Temperature extremes for all sites in the London area range from 38 @.@ 1 ° C ( 100 @.@ 6 ° F ) at Kew during August 2003 down to − 16 @.@ 1 ° C ( 3 @.@ 0 ° F ) at Northolt during January 1962 . 
 Summers are generally warm and sometimes hot . London 's average July high is 24 ° C ( 75 @.@ 2 ° F ) . On average London will see 31 days above 25 ° C ( 77 @.@ 0 ° F ) each year , and 4 @.@ 2 days above 30 @.@ 0 ° C ( 86 @.@ 0 ° F ) every year . During the 2003 European heat wave there were 14 consecutive days above 30 ° C ( 86 @.@ 0 ° F ) and 2 consecutive days where temperatures reached 38 ° C ( 100 @.@ 4 ° F ) , leading to hundreds of heat related deaths . 
 Winters are generally cool and damp with little temperature variation . Snowfall occurs occasionally and can cause travel disruption when this happens . Snowfall is more common in Outer London . Spring and autumn are mixed seasons and can be pleasant . As a large city , London has a considerable urban heat island effect , making the centre of London at times 5 ° C ( 9 ° F ) warmer than the suburbs and outskirts . The effect of this can be seen below when comparing London Heathrow , 15 miles west of London , with the London Weather Centre , in the city centre . 
 = = = Districts = = = 
 London 's vast urban area is often described using a set of district names , such as Bloomsbury , Mayfair , Wembley and Whitechapel . These are either informal designations , reflect the names of villages that have been absorbed by sprawl , or are superseded administrative units such as parishes or former boroughs . 
 Such names have remained in use through tradition , each referring to a local area with its own distinctive character , but without official boundaries . Since 1965 Greater London has been divided into 32 London boroughs in addition to the ancient City of London . The City of London is the main financial district , and Canary Wharf has recently developed into a new financial and commercial hub in the Docklands to the east . 
 The West End is London 's main entertainment and shopping district , attracting tourists . West London includes expensive residential areas where properties can sell for tens of millions of pounds . The average price for properties in Kensington and Chelsea is over £ 2 million with a similarly high outlay in most of central London . 
 The East End is the area closest to the original Port of London , known for its high immigrant population , as well as for being one of the poorest areas in London . The surrounding East London area saw much of London 's early industrial development ; now , brownfield sites throughout the area are being redeveloped as part of the Thames Gateway including the London Riverside and Lower Lea Valley , which was developed into the Olympic Park for the 2012 Olympics and Paralympics . 
 = = = Architecture = = = 
 London 's buildings are too diverse to be characterised by any particular architectural style , partly because of their varying ages . Many grand houses and public buildings , such as the National Gallery , are constructed from Portland stone . Some areas of the city , particularly those just west of the centre , are characterised by white stucco or whitewashed buildings . Few structures in central London pre @-@ date the Great Fire of 1666 , these being a few trace Roman remains , the Tower of London and a few scattered Tudor survivors in the City . Further out is , for example , the Tudor period Hampton Court Palace , England 's oldest surviving Tudor palace , built by Cardinal Thomas Wolsey <unk> 
 Wren 's late 17th @-@ century churches and the financial institutions of the 18th and 19th centuries such as the Royal Exchange and the Bank of England , to the early 20th century Old Bailey and the 1960s Barbican Estate form part of the varied architectural heritage . 
 The disused , but soon to be rejuvenated , 1939 Battersea Power Station by the river in the south @-@ west is a local landmark , while some railway termini are excellent examples of Victorian architecture , most notably St. Pancras and Paddington . The density of London varies , with high employment density in the central area , high residential densities in inner London and lower densities in Outer London . 
 The Monument in the City of London provides views of the surrounding area while commemorating the Great Fire of London , which originated nearby . Marble Arch and Wellington Arch , at the north and south ends of Park Lane respectively , have royal connections , as do the Albert Memorial and Royal Albert Hall in Kensington . Nelson 's Column is a nationally recognised monument in Trafalgar Square , one of the focal points of central London . Older buildings are mainly brick built , most commonly the yellow London stock brick or a warm orange @-@ red variety , often decorated with carvings and white plaster mouldings . 
 In the dense areas , most of the concentration is via medium- and high @-@ rise buildings . London 's skyscrapers such as 30 St Mary Axe , Tower 42 , the Broadgate Tower and One Canada Square are mostly in the two financial districts , the City of London and Canary Wharf . High @-@ rise development is restricted at certain sites if it would obstruct protected views of St Paul 's Cathedral and other historic buildings . Nevertheless , there are a number of very tall skyscrapers in central London ( see Tall buildings in London ) , including the 95 @-@ storey Shard London Bridge , the tallest building in the European Union . 
 Other notable modern buildings include City Hall in Southwark with its distinctive oval shape , and the British Library in Somers Town / Kings Cross . What was formerly the Millennium Dome , by the Thames to the east of Canary Wharf , is now an entertainment venue called The O2 Arena . 
 = = = Natural history = = = 
 The London Natural History Society suggest that London is " one of the World 's Greenest Cities " with more than 40 percent green space or open water . They indicate that 2000 species of flowering plant have been found growing there and that the tidal Thames supports 120 species of fish . They also state that over 60 species of bird nest in central London and that their members have recorded 47 species of butterfly , 1173 moths and more than 270 kinds of spider around London . London 's wetland areas support nationally important populations of many water birds . London has 38 Sites of Special Scientific Interest ( SSSIs ) , two National Nature Reserves and 76 Local Nature Reserves . 
 Amphibians are common in the capital , including smooth newts living by the Tate Modern , and common frogs , common toads , palmate newts and great crested newts . On the other hand , native reptiles such as slow @-@ worms , common lizards , grass snakes and adders , are mostly only seen in Outer London . 
 Among other inhabitants of London are 10 @,@ 000 foxes , so that there are now 16 foxes for every square mile ( 2 @.@ 6 square kilometres ) of London . These urban foxes are noticeably bolder than their country cousins , sharing the pavement with pedestrians and raising cubs in people 's backyards . Foxes have even sneaked into the Houses of Parliament , where one was found asleep on a filing cabinet . Another broke into the grounds of Buckingham Palace , reportedly killing some of Queen Elizabeth II 's prized pink flamingos . Generally , however , foxes and city folk appear to get along . A survey in 2001 by the London @-@ based Mammal Society found that 80 percent of 3 @,@ 779 respondents who volunteered to keep a diary of garden mammal visits liked having them around . This sample cannot be taken to represent Londoners as a whole . 
 Other mammals found in Greater London are hedgehogs , rats , mice , rabbit , shrew , vole , and squirrels , In wilder areas of Outer London , such as Epping Forest , a wide variety of mammals are found including hare , badger , field , bank and water vole , wood mouse , yellow @-@ necked mouse , mole , shrew , and weasel , in addition to fox , squirrel and hedgehog . A dead otter was found at The Highway , in Wapping , about a mile from the Tower Bridge , which would suggest that they have begun to move back after being absent a hundred years from the city . Ten of England 's eighteen species of bats have been recorded in Epping Forest : soprano , <unk> and common pipistrelles , noctule , <unk> , barbastelle , <unk> 's , brown Long @-@ eared , <unk> 's and <unk> 's . 
 Among the strange sights seen in London have been a whale in the Thames , while the BBC Two programme " Natural World : Unnatural History of London " shows pigeons using the London Underground to get around the city , a seal that takes fish from fishmongers outside Billingsgate Fish Market , and foxes that will " sit " if given sausages . 
 Herds of red and fallow deer also roam freely within much of Richmond and Bushy Park . A cull takes place each November and February to ensure numbers can be sustained . Epping Forest is also known for its fallow deer , which can frequently be seen in herds to the north of the Forest . A rare population of melanistic , black fallow deer is also maintained at the Deer Sanctuary near Theydon Bois . <unk> deer , which escaped from deer parks at the turn of the twentieth century , are also found in the forest . While Londoners are accustomed to wildlife such as birds and foxes sharing the city , more recently urban deer have started becoming a regular feature , and whole herds of fallow and white @-@ tailed deer come into residential areas at night to take advantage of the London 's green spaces . 
 = = Demography = = 
 The 2011 census recorded that 2 @,@ 998 @,@ 264 people or 36 @.@ 7 % of London 's population are foreign @-@ born making London the city with the second largest immigrant population , behind New York City , in terms of absolute numbers . The table to the right shows the most common countries of birth of London residents . Note that some of the German @-@ born population , in 18th position , are British citizens from birth born to parents serving in the British Armed Forces in Germany . With increasing industrialisation , London 's population grew rapidly throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries , and it was for some time in the late 19th and early 20th centuries the most populous city in the world . Its population peaked at 8 @,@ 615 @,@ 245 in 1939 immediately before the outbreak of the Second World War , but had declined to 7 @,@ 192 @,@ 091 at the 2001 Census . However , the population then grew by just over a million between the 2001 and 2011 Censuses , to reach 8 @,@ 173 @,@ 941 in the latter enumeration . 
 However , London 's continuous urban area extends beyond the borders of Greater London and was home to 9 @,@ 787 @,@ 426 people in 2011 , while its wider metropolitan area has a population of between 12 and 14 million depending on the definition used . According to Eurostat , London is the most populous city and metropolitan area of the European Union and the second most populous in Europe ( or third if Istanbul is included ) . During the period 1991 – 2001 a net 726 @,@ 000 immigrants arrived in London . 
 The region covers an area of 1 @,@ 579 square kilometres ( 610 sq mi ) . The population density is 5 @,@ 177 inhabitants per square kilometre ( 13 @,@ 410 / sq mi ) , more than ten times that of any other British region . In terms of population , London is the 19th largest city and the 18th largest metropolitan region in the world . As of 2014 , London has the largest number of billionaires ( British Pound Sterling ) in the world , with 72 residing in the city . London ranks as one of the most expensive cities in the world , alongside Tokyo and Moscow . 
 = = = Ethnic groups = = = 
 According to the Office for National Statistics , based on the 2011 Census estimates , 59 @.@ 8 per cent of the 8 @,@ 173 @,@ 941 inhabitants of London were White , with 44 @.@ 9 per cent White British , 2 @.@ 2 per cent White Irish , 0 @.@ 1 per cent gypsy / Irish traveller and 12 @.@ 1 per cent classified as Other White . 
 20 @.@ 9 per cent of Londoners are of Asian and mixed @-@ Asian descent . 19 @.@ 7 per cent are of full Asian descent , with those of mixed @-@ Asian heritage comprising 1 @.@ 2 of the population . Indians account for 6 @.@ 6 per cent of the population , followed by Pakistanis and Bangladeshis at 2 @.@ 7 per cent each . Chinese peoples account for 1 @.@ 5 per cent of the population , with Arabs comprising 1 @.@ 3 per cent . A further 4 @.@ 9 per cent are classified as " Other Asian " . 
 15 @.@ 6 per cent of London 's population are of Black and mixed @-@ Black descent . 13 @.@ 3 per cent are of full Black descent , with those of mixed @-@ Black heritage comprising 2 @.@ 3 per cent . Black Africans account for 7 @.@ 0 per cent of London 's population , with 4 @.@ 2 per cent as Black Caribbean and 2 @.@ 1 per cent as " Other Black " . 5 @.@ 0 per cent are of mixed race . 
 Across London , Black and Asian children outnumber White British children by about six to four in state schools . Altogether at the 2011 census , of London 's 1 @,@ 624 @,@ 768 population aged 0 to 15 , 46 @.@ 4 per cent were White , 19 @.@ 8 per cent were Asian , 19 per cent were Black , 10 @.@ 8 per cent were Mixed and 4 per cent represented another ethnic group . In January 2005 , a survey of London 's ethnic and religious diversity claimed that there were more than 300 languages spoken in London and more than 50 non @-@ indigenous communities with a population of more than 10 @,@ 000 . Figures from the Office for National Statistics show that , in 2010 , London 's foreign @-@ born population was 2 @,@ 650 @,@ 000 ( 33 per cent ) , up from 1 @,@ 630 @,@ 000 in 1997 . 
 The 2011 census showed that 36 @.@ 7 per cent of Greater London 's population were born outside the UK . A portion of the German @-@ born population are likely to be British nationals born to parents serving in the British Armed Forces in Germany . Estimates produced by the Office for National Statistics indicate that the five largest foreign @-@ born groups living in London in the period July 2009 to June 2010 were those born in India , Poland , the Republic of Ireland , Bangladesh and Nigeria . 
 = = = Religion = = = 
 According to the 2011 Census , the largest religious groupings are Christians ( 48 @.@ 4 per cent ) , followed by those of no religion ( 20 @.@ 7 per cent ) , Muslims ( 12 @.@ 4 per cent ) , no response ( 8 @.@ 5 per cent ) , Hindus ( 5 @.@ 0 per cent ) , Jews ( 1 @.@ 8 per cent ) , Sikhs ( 1 @.@ 5 per cent ) , Buddhists ( 1 @.@ 0 per cent ) and other ( 0 @.@ 6 per cent ) . 
 London has traditionally been Christian , and has a large number of churches , particularly in the City of London . The well @-@ known St Paul 's Cathedral in the City and Southwark Cathedral south of the river are Anglican administrative centres , while the Archbishop of Canterbury , principal bishop of the Church of England and worldwide Anglican Communion , has his main residence at Lambeth Palace in the London Borough of Lambeth . 
 Important national and royal ceremonies are shared between St Paul 's and Westminster Abbey . The Abbey is not to be confused with nearby Westminster Cathedral , which is the largest Roman Catholic cathedral in England and Wales . Despite the prevalence of Anglican churches , observance is very low within the Anglican denomination . Church attendance continues on a long , slow , steady decline , according to Church of England statistics . 
 London is also home to sizeable Muslim , Hindu , Sikh , and Jewish communities . Notable mosques include the East London Mosque in Tower Hamlets , London Central Mosque on the edge of Regent 's Park and the Baitul Futuh Mosque of the Ahmadiyya Muslim Community . Following the oil boom , increasing numbers of wealthy Hindus and Middle @-@ Eastern Muslims have based themselves around Mayfair and Knightsbridge in West London . There are large Muslim communities in the eastern boroughs of Tower Hamlets and Newham . Large Hindu communities are in the north @-@ western boroughs of Harrow and Brent , the latter of which is home to Europe 's largest Hindu temple , Neasden Temple . London is also home to 42 Hindu temples . There are Sikh communities in East and West London , particularly in Southall , home to one of the largest Sikh populations and the largest Sikh temple outside India . 
 The majority of British Jews live in London , with significant Jewish communities in Stamford Hill , Stanmore , Golders Green , Finchley , Hampstead , Hendon and Edgware in North London . Bevis Marks Synagogue in the City of London is affiliated to London 's historic Sephardic Jewish community . It is the only synagogue in Europe which has held regular services continuously for over 300 years . Stanmore and Canons Park Synagogue has the largest membership of any single Orthodox synagogue in the whole of Europe , overtaking Ilford synagogue ( also in London ) in 1998 . The community set up the London Jewish Forum in 2006 in response to the growing significance of devolved London Government . 
 = = = Accent = = = 
 There are many accents that are traditionally thought of as London accents . The most well known of the London accents long ago acquired the Cockney label , which is heard both in London itself , and across the wider South East England region more generally . The accent of a 21st @-@ century Londoner varies widely ; what is becoming more and more common amongst the under @-@ 30s however is some fusion of Cockney with a whole array of ethnic accents , in particular Caribbean , which form an accent labelled Multicultural London English ( MLE ) . The other widely heard and spoken accent is RP ( Received Pronunciation ) in various forms , which can often be heard in the media and many of other traditional professions and beyond , although this accent is not limited to London and South East England , and can also be heard selectively throughout the whole UK amongst certain social groupings . 
 = = Economy = = 
 London generates about 20 per cent of the UK 's GDP ( or $ 446 billion in 2005 ) ; while the economy of the London metropolitan area — the largest in Europe — generates about 30 per cent of the UK 's GDP ( or an estimated $ 669 billion in 2005 ) . London is one of the pre @-@ eminent financial centres of the world as the most important location for international finance . As of 2015 London tops the world rankings on the global financial centres index . 
 London 's largest industry is finance , and its financial exports make it a large contributor to the UK 's balance of payments . Around 325 @,@ 000 people were employed in financial services in London until mid @-@ 2007 . London has over 480 overseas banks , more than any other city in the world . Over 85 percent ( 3 @.@ 2 million ) of the employed population of greater London works in the services industries . Because of its prominent global role , London 's economy had been affected by the Late @-@ 2000s financial crisis . However , by 2010 the City has recovered ; put in place new regulatory powers , proceeded to regain lost ground and re @-@ established London 's economic dominance . The City of London is home to the Bank of England , London Stock Exchange , and Lloyd 's of London insurance market . 
 Over half of the UK 's top 100 listed companies ( the FTSE 100 ) and over 100 of Europe 's 500 largest companies have their headquarters in central London . Over 70 per cent of the FTSE 100 are within London 's metropolitan area , and 75 per cent of Fortune 500 companies have offices in London . 
 Along with professional services , media companies are concentrated in London and the media distribution industry is London 's second most competitive sector . The BBC is a significant employer , while other broadcasters also have headquarters around the City . Many national newspapers are edited in London . London is a major retail centre and in 2010 had the highest non @-@ food retail sales of any city in the world , with a total spend of around £ 64 @.@ 2 billion . The Port of London is the second @-@ largest in the United Kingdom , handling 45 million tonnes of cargo each year . 
 London has five major business districts : the City , Westminster , Canary Wharf , Camden & Islington and Lambeth & Southwark . One way to get an idea of their relative importance is to look at relative amounts of office space : Greater London had 27 million m2 of office space in 2001 , and the City contains the most space , with 8 million m2 of office space . London has some of the highest real estate prices in the world . 
 A growing number of technology companies are based in London notably in East London Tech City , also known as Silicon Roundabout . In April 2014 , the city was among the first to receive a <unk> . In 2014 Forbes magazine ranked London as the most influential city in the world . In February 2014 London was ranked as the European City of the Future in the 2014 / 15 list by FDi Magazine . 
 London is the world 's most expensive office market for the last three years according to world property journal ( 2015 ) report . As of 2015 the residential property in London is worth $ 2 @.@ 2 trillion - same value as that of Brazil annual GDP . The city has the highest property prices of any European city according to the Office for National Statistics and the European Office of Statistics . On average the price per square metre in central London is € 24 @,@ 252 ( April 2014 ) . This is higher than the property prices in other G8 European capital cities ; Berlin € 3 @,@ 306 , Rome € 6 @,@ 188 and Paris € 11 @,@ 229 . 
 The gas and electricity distribution networks that manage and operate the towers , cables and pressure systems that deliver energy to consumers across the city are managed by National Grid plc , SGN and UK Power Networks . 
 = = = Tourism = = = 
 London is one of the leading tourist destinations in the world and in 2015 was ranked as the most visited city in the world with over 65 million visits . It is also the top city in the world by visitor cross @-@ border spending , estimated at US $ 20 @.@ 23 billion in 2015 Tourism is one of London 's prime industries , employing the equivalent of 350 @,@ 000 full @-@ time workers in 2003 , and the city accounts for 54 % of all inbound visitor spend in UK . As of 2016 London is rated as the world top ranked city destination by TripAdvisor users . 
 In 2010 the ten most @-@ visited attractions in London were : 
 British Museum 
 Tate Modern 
 National Gallery 
 Natural History Museum 
 Imperial War Museum 
 Science Museum 
 Victoria and Albert Museum 
 Madame Tussauds 
 National Maritime Museum 
