 Ralph Bakshi ( born October 29 , 1938 ) is an American director of animated and live @-@ action films . In the 1970s , he established an alternative to mainstream animation through independent and adult @-@ oriented productions . Between 1972 and 1992 , he directed nine theatrically released feature films , five of which he wrote . He has been involved in numerous television projects as director , writer , producer and animator . 
 Beginning his career at the Terrytoons television cartoon studio as a cel polisher , Bakshi was eventually promoted to animator , and then director . He moved to the animation division of Paramount Pictures in 1967 and started his own studio , Bakshi Productions , in 1968 . Through producer Steve Krantz , Bakshi made his debut feature film , Fritz the Cat , released in 1972 . It was the first animated film to receive an X rating from the Motion Picture Association of America , and the most successful independent animated feature of all time . 
 Over the next eleven years , Bakshi directed seven additional animated features . He is well known for such films as Wizards ( 1977 ) , The Lord of the Rings ( 1978 ) , American Pop ( 1981 ) and Fire and Ice ( 1983 ) . In 1987 , Bakshi returned to television work , producing the series Mighty Mouse : The New Adventures , which ran for two years . After a nine @-@ year hiatus from feature films , he directed Cool World ( 1992 ) , which was largely rewritten during production and received poor reviews . Bakshi returned to television with the live @-@ action film Cool and the Crazy ( 1994 ) and the anthology series Spicy City ( 1997 ) . 
 During the 2000s , he focused largely on fine art and painting and in 2003 co @-@ founded The Bakshi School of Animation with his son Eddie and Jess Gorell . Bakshi has received several awards for his work , including the 1980 Golden Gryphon for The Lord of the Rings at the Giffoni Film Festival , the 1988 Annie Award for Distinguished Contribution to the Art of Animation , and the 2003 Maverick Tribute Award at the Cinequest Film Festival . 
 = = Early life ( 1938 – 1956 ) = = 
 Ralph Bakshi was born to a Jewish family on October 29 , 1938 , in Haifa , Mandatory Palestine . In 1939 , his family immigrated to New York City to escape World War II , and he grew up in the Brownsville neighborhood of Brooklyn . The family lived in a low @-@ rent apartment , where Bakshi became fascinated with the urban milieu . As a child , he enjoyed comic books , and often dug through trash cans to find them . 
 In the spring of 1947 , Bakshi 's father and uncle traveled to Washington , D.C. , in search of business opportunities , and soon moved the family to the black neighborhood of Foggy Bottom . Bakshi recalled , " All my friends were black , everyone we did business with was black , the school across the street was black . It was segregated , so everything was black . I went to see black movies ; black girls sat on my lap . I went to black parties . I was another black kid on the block . No problem ! " 
 The racial segregation of local schools meant that the nearest white school was several miles away ; Bakshi obtained his mother 's permission to attend the nearby black school with his friends . Bakshi was the only white student in the classroom . Most of the students had no problem with Bakshi 's presence , but a teacher sought advice from the principal , who called the police . Fearing that segregated whites would riot if they learned that a white student was attending a black school , the police removed Bakshi from his classroom . Meanwhile , his father had been suffering from anxiety attacks . Within a few months , the family moved back to Brownsville , where they rarely spoke of these events . 
 At the age of 15 , after discovering Gene Byrnes ' Complete Guide to Cartooning at the public library , Bakshi took up cartooning to document his experiences and create fantasy @-@ influenced artwork . He stole a copy of the book and learned every lesson in it . During his teenage years , Bakshi took up boxing . While attending Thomas Jefferson High School , he took little interest in academics , spending most of his time focusing on " broads , mouthing off , and doodling " . After participating in a food fight and being caught smoking , Bakshi was sent to the principal 's office . Believing Bakshi was unlikely to prosper at Thomas Jefferson , the principal transferred him to Manhattan 's School of Industrial Art . In June 1956 , Bakshi graduated from the school with an award in cartooning . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early career ( 1956 – 1968 ) = = = 
 When Bakshi was 18 , his friend Cosmo Anzilotti was hired by the cartoon studio Terrytoons ; Anzilotti recommended Bakshi to the studio 's production manager , Frank Schudde . Bakshi was hired as a cel polisher and commuted four hours each day to the studio , based in suburban New Rochelle . His low @-@ level position required Bakshi to carefully remove dirt and dust from animation cels . 
 After a few months , Schudde was surprised that Bakshi was still showing up to work , and promoted him to cel painter . Bakshi began to practice animating ; to give himself more time , at one point he slipped ten cels he was supposed to work on into the " to @-@ do " pile of a fellow painter , Leo Giuliani . Bakshi 's deception was not noticed until two days later , when he was called to Schudde 's office because the cels had been painted on the wrong side . When Bakshi explained that Giuliani had made the mistake , an argument ensued between the three . Schudde eventually took Bakshi 's side . By this point , the studio 's employees were aware of Bakshi 's intention to become an animator , and he began to receive help and advice from established animators , including Connie Rasinski , Manny Davis , Jim Tyer , Larry Silverman and Johnnie <unk> . 
 Bakshi married his first wife , Elaine , when he was 21 . Their son , Mark , was born when Bakshi was 22 . Elaine disliked his long work hours ; parodying his marital problems , Bakshi drew Dum Dum and Dee Dee , a comic strip about a man determined " to get — and keep — the girl " . 
 As he perfected his animation style , he began to take on more jobs , including creating design tests for the studio 's head director , Gene Deitch . Deitch was not convinced that Bakshi had a modern design sensibility . In response to the period 's political climate and as a form of therapy , Bakshi drew the comic strips <unk> and Fudge , which satirized " idiots with an agenda " , and Junktown , which focused on " misfit technology and discarded ideals " . 
 Bakshi 's frustrations with his failing marriage and the state of the planet further drove his need to animate . In 1959 , he moved his desk to join the rest of the animators ; after asking Rasinski for material to animate , he received layouts of two scenes : a hat floating on water and Deputy Dawg , the lead character of one of Terrytoons ' syndicated television series , running . Despite threats of repercussion from the animators ' union , Rasinski fought to keep Bakshi as a layout artist . Bakshi began to see Rasinski as a father figure ; Rasinski , childless , was happy to serve as Bakshi 's mentor . 
 At the age of 25 , Bakshi was promoted to director . His first assignment was the series Sad Cat . Bakshi and his wife had separated by then , giving him the time to animate each short alone . Bakshi was dissatisfied with the traditional role of a Terrytoons director : " We didn 't really ' direct ' like you 'd think . We were ' animation directors , ' because the story department controlled the storyboards . We couldn 't affect anything , but I still tried . I 'd re @-@ time , mix up soundtracks — I 'd fuck with it so I could make it my own . " 
 Independent animation studios such as Hanna @-@ Barbera were selling shows to the networks , even as the series produced by Terrytoons ( which was owned by CBS ) were declining in popularity . In 1966 , Bill Weiss asked Bakshi to help him carry presentation boards to Manhattan for a meeting with CBS . The network executives rejected all of Weiss 's proposals as " too sophisticated " , " too corny " , or " too old @-@ timey " . 
 As Fred Silverman , CBS 's daytime programming chief , began to leave the office , an unprepared Bakshi pitched a superhero parody called The Mighty Heroes . He described the series ' characters , including Strong Man , Tornado Man , Rope Man , Cuckoo Man and Diaper Man : " They fought evil wherever they could and the villains were stupider than they were . " 
 The executives loved the idea , and while Silverman required a few drawings before committing , Weiss immediately put Bakshi to work on the series ' development . Once Silverman saw the character designs , he confirmed that CBS would greenlight the show , on the condition that Bakshi serve as its creative director . It would appear as a segment of Mighty Mouse Playhouse on the network 's 1966 – 67 Saturday morning schedule ; the series was renamed Mighty Mouse and the Mighty Heroes in recognition of the new segment . 
 Bakshi received a pay raise , but was not as satisfied with his career advancement as he had anticipated ; Rasinski had died in 1965 , Bakshi did not have creative control over The Mighty Heroes , and he was unhappy with the quality of the animation , writing , timing and voice acting . Although the series ' first 20 segments were successful , Bakshi wanted to leave Terrytoons to form his own company . In 1967 , he drew up presentation pieces for a fantasy series called Tee @-@ Witt , with help from Anzilotti , Johnnie <unk> and Bill <unk> . 
 On the way to the CBS offices to make his pitch , he was involved in a car accident . At the auto body shop , he met Liz , who later became his second wife . Though CBS passed on Tee @-@ Witt , its designs served as the basis for Bakshi 's 1977 film Wizards . While leaving the network offices , he learned that Paramount Pictures had recently fired Shamus Culhane , the head of its animation division . Bakshi met with Burt Hampft , a lawyer for the studio , and was hired to replace Culhane . 
 Bakshi enlisted comic book and pulp fiction artists and writers Harvey Kurtzman , Lin Carter , Gray Morrow , Archie Goodwin , Wally Wood and Jim Steranko to work at the studio . After finishing Culhane 's uncompleted shorts , he directed , produced , wrote and designed four short films at Paramount : The Fuz , Mini @-@ <unk> , Marvin Digs and Mouse Trek . 
 Marvin Digs , which Bakshi conceived as a " flower child picture " , was not completed the way he had intended : It " was going to have curse words and sex scenes , and a lot more than that . [ ... ] Of course , they wouldn 't let me do that . " He described the disappointing result as a " typical 1967 limited @-@ animation theatrical " . Animation historian Michael Barrier called the film " an offensively bad picture , the kind that makes people who love animation get up and leave the theater in disgust " . Production of Mighty Heroes ended when Bakshi left Terrytoons . 
 Bakshi served as head of the studio for eight months before Paramount closed its animation division on December 1 , 1967 . He learned that his position was always intended to be temporary and that Paramount never intended to pick up his pitches . Although Hampft was prepared to offer Bakshi a severance package , Bakshi immediately ripped up the contract . 
 Hampft suggested that Bakshi work with producer Steve Krantz , who had recently fired Culhane as supervising director on the Canadian science fiction series Rocket Robin Hood . Bakshi and background artist Johnnie Vita soon headed to Toronto , planning to commute between Canada and New York , with artists such as Morrow and Wood working from the United States . 
 Unknown to Bakshi , Krantz and producer Al Guest were in the middle of a lawsuit . Failing to reach a settlement with Guest , Krantz told Bakshi to grab the series ' model sheets and return to the United States . When the studio found out , a warrant for Bakshi 's arrest was issued by the Toronto police . He narrowly avoided capture before being stopped by an American border guard who asked him what he was doing . Bakshi responded , " All of these guys are heading into Canada to dodge the draft and I 'm running back into the States . What the fuck is wrong with that ! ? " The guard laughed , and let Bakshi through . Vita was detained at the airport ; he was searched and interrogated for six hours . 
 Bakshi soon founded his own studio , Bakshi Productions , in the Garment District of Manhattan , where his mother used to work and which Bakshi described as " the worst neighborhood in the world " . Bakshi Productions paid its employees higher salaries than other studios and expanded opportunities for female and minority animators . The studio began work on Rocket Robin Hood , and later took over the Spider @-@ Man television series . Bakshi married Liz in August 1968 . His second child , Preston , was born in June 1970 . 
 = = = Fritz the Cat ( 1969 – 1972 ) = = = 
 In 1969 , Ralph 's Spot was founded as a division of Bakshi Productions to produce commercials for Coca @-@ Cola and Max , the 2000 @-@ Year @-@ Old Mouse , a series of educational shorts paid for by Encyclopædia Britannica . Bakshi was uninterested in the kind of animation the studio was turning out , and wanted to produce something personal . He soon developed Heavy Traffic , a tale of inner @-@ city street life . Krantz told Bakshi that Hollywood studio executives would be unwilling to fund the film because of its content and Bakshi 's lack of film experience . While browsing the East Side Book Store on St. Mark 's Place , Bakshi came across a copy of Robert Crumb 's Fritz the Cat . Impressed by Crumb 's sharp satire , Bakshi purchased the book and suggested to Krantz that it would work as a film . Krantz arranged a meeting with Crumb , during which Bakshi presented the drawings he had created while learning the artist 's distinctive style to prove that he could adapt Crumb 's artwork to animation . Impressed by Bakshi 's tenacity , Crumb lent him one of his sketchbooks for reference . 
 Preparation began on a studio pitch that included a poster @-@ sized cel featuring the comic 's cast against a traced photo background — as Bakshi intended the film to appear . Despite Crumb 's enthusiasm , the artist refused to sign the contract Krantz drew up . Artist Vaughn Bodé warned Bakshi against working with Crumb , describing him as " slick " . Bakshi later agreed with Bodé 's assessment , calling Crumb " one of the slickest hustlers you 'll ever see in your life " . Krantz sent Bakshi to San Francisco , where he stayed with Crumb and his wife , Dana , in an attempt to persuade Crumb to sign the contract . After a week , Crumb left , leaving the film 's production status uncertain . Two weeks after Bakshi returned to New York , Krantz entered his office and told Bakshi that he had acquired the film rights through Dana , who had Crumb 's power of attorney and signed the contract . 
 After Bakshi pitched the project to every major Hollywood studio , Warner Bros. bought it and promised an $ 850 @,@ 000 budget . Bakshi hired animators he had worked with in the past , including Vita , Tyer , Anzilotti and Nick Tafuri , and began the layouts and animation . The first completed sequence was a junkyard scene in Harlem , in which Fritz smokes marijuana , has sex and incites a revolution . Krantz intended to release the sequence as a 15 @-@ minute short in case the picture 's financing fell through ; Bakshi , however , was determined to complete the film as a feature . They screened the sequence for Warner Bros. executives , who wanted the sexual content toned down and celebrities cast for the voice parts . Bakshi refused , and Warner Bros. pulled out , leading Krantz to seek funds elsewhere . He eventually made a deal with Jerry Gross , the owner of Cinemation Industries , a distributor specializing in exploitation films . Although Bakshi did not have enough time to pitch the film , Gross agreed to fund its production and distribute it , believing that it would fit in with his grindhouse slate . 
 Despite receiving financing from other sources , including Saul Zaentz ( who agreed to distribute the soundtrack album on his Fantasy Records label ) , the budget was tight enough to exclude pencil tests , so Bakshi had to test the animation by flipping an animator 's drawings in his hand before they were inked and painted . When a cameraman realized that the cels for the desert scenes were not wide enough and revealed the transparency , Bakshi painted a cactus to cover the mistake . Very few storyboards were used . Bakshi and Vita walked around the Lower East Side , Washington Square Park , Chinatown and Harlem , taking moody snapshots . Artist Ira Turek inked the outlines of these photographs onto cels with a Rapidograph , the technical pen preferred by Crumb , giving the film 's backgrounds a stylized realism virtually unprecedented in animation . The tones of the watercolor backgrounds were influenced by the work of Ashcan School painters such as George Luks and John French Sloan . Among other unusual techniques , bent and fisheye camera perspectives were used to portray the way the film 's hippies and hoodlums viewed the city . Many scenes featured documentary recordings of real conversations in place of scripted dialogue — this too would become a signature of Bakshi 's . 
 In May 1971 , Bakshi moved his studio to Los Angeles to hire additional animators . Some , including Rod Scribner , Dick Lundy , Virgil Walter Ross , Norman McCabe and John Sparey , welcomed Bakshi and felt that Fritz the Cat would bring diversity to the animation industry . Other animators were less pleased by Bakshi 's arrival and placed an advertisement in The Hollywood Reporter , stating that his " filth " was unwelcome in California . By the time production wrapped , Cinemation had released Melvin Van Peebles ' Sweet Sweetback 's Baadasssss Song to considerable success , despite the X rating it had received . When the Motion Picture Association of America gave Bakshi 's film an X rating as well , Cinemation exploited it for promotional purposes , advertising Fritz the Cat as " 90 minutes of violence , excitement , and SEX ... he 's X @-@ rated and animated ! " Variety called it an " amusing , diverting , handsomely executed poke at youthful attitudes " . John Grant writes in his book Masters of Animation that Fritz the Cat was " the breakthrough movie that opened brand new vistas to the commercial animator in the United States " , presenting an " almost disturbingly accurate " portrayal " of a particular stratum of Western society during a particular era , [ ... ] as such it has dated very well . " Fritz the Cat was released on April 12 , 1972 , opening in Hollywood and Washington , D.C. A major hit , it became the most successful independent animated feature of all time . The same month as the film 's release , Bakshi 's daughter , Victoria , was born . 
 = = = Heavy Traffic ( 1972 – 1973 ) = = = 
 By the time Fritz the Cat was released , Bakshi had become a celebrity , but his reputation was primarily based upon his having directed the first " dirty " animated film . Facing criticism of his work on publicity tours and in trade publications , he began writing poetry to express his emotions . This became a tradition , and Bakshi wrote poems before beginning production on each of his films . The first of these poems was " Street Arabs " , which preceded the production of Heavy Traffic in 1972 . Inspiration for the film came from penny arcades , where Bakshi often played pinball , sometimes accompanied by his 12 @-@ year @-@ old son , Mark . Bakshi pitched Heavy Traffic to Samuel Z. Arkoff , who expressed interest in his take on the " tortured underground cartoonist " and agreed to back the film . Krantz had not compensated Bakshi for his work on Fritz the Cat , and halfway through the production of Heavy Traffic , Bakshi asked when he would be paid . Krantz responded , " The picture didn 't make any money , Ralph . It 's just a lot of noise . " Bakshi found Krantz 's claims dubious , as the producer had recently purchased a new BMW and a mansion in Beverly Hills . Bakshi did not have a lawyer , so he sought advice from fellow directors with whom he had become friendly , including Martin Scorsese , Francis Ford Coppola and Steven Spielberg . He soon accused Krantz of ripping him off , which the producer denied . 
 As he continued to work on Heavy Traffic , Bakshi began pitching his next project , Harlem Nights , a film loosely based on the Uncle Remus story books . The idea interested producer Albert S. Ruddy , whom Bakshi encountered at a screening of The Godfather . Bakshi received a call from Krantz , who questioned him about Harlem Nights . Bakshi said , " I can 't talk about that " , and hung up . After locking Bakshi out of the studio the next day , Krantz called several directors , including Chuck Jones , in search of a replacement . Arkoff threatened to withdraw his financial backing unless Krantz rehired Bakshi , who returned a week later . 
 Bakshi wanted the voices to sound organic , so he experimented with improvisation , allowing his actors to ad lib during the recording sessions . Several animation sequences appear as rough sketchbook pages . The film also incorporated live @-@ action footage and photographs . Although Krantz , in an attempt to get the film an R rating , prepared different versions of scenes involving sex and violence , Heavy Traffic was rated X. However , due to the success of Fritz the Cat , many theaters were willing to book adult @-@ oriented animation , and the film did well at the box office . Bakshi became the first person in the animation industry since Walt Disney to have two financially successful movies released consecutively . Heavy Traffic was very well received by critics . Newsweek applauded its " black humor , powerful grotesquerie and peculiar raw beauty . " The Hollywood Reporter called it " shocking , outrageous , offensive , sometimes incoherent , occasionally unintelligent . However , it is also an authentic work of movie art and Bakshi is certainly the most creative American animator since Disney . " Vincent Canby of The New York Times ranked Heavy Traffic among his " Ten Best Films of 1973 " . Upon release , the movie was banned by the Film Censorship Board in the province of Alberta , Canada . 
 = = = Coonskin ( 1973 – 1975 ) = = = 
 In 1973 , Bakshi and Ruddy began the production of Harlem Nights , which Paramount was originally contracted to distribute . While Fritz the Cat and Heavy Traffic proved that adult @-@ oriented animation could be financially successful , animated films were still not respected , and Bakshi 's pictures were considered to be " dirty Disney flicks " that were " mature " only for depicting sex , drugs and profanity . Harlem Nights , based on Bakshi 's firsthand experiences with racism , was an attack on racist prejudices and stereotypes . Bakshi cast Scatman Crothers , Philip Michael Thomas , Barry White and Charles Gordone in live @-@ action and voice roles , cutting in and out of animation abruptly rather than seamlessly because he wanted to prove that the two mediums could " coexist with neither excuse nor apology " . He wrote a song for Crothers to sing during the opening title sequence : " Ah 'm a <unk> " . Its structure was rooted in the history of the slave plantation : slaves would " shout " lines from poems and stories great distances across fields in unison , creating a natural beat . Bakshi has described its vocal style , backed by fast guitar licks , as an " early version of rap " . 
 Bakshi intended to attack stereotypes by portraying them directly , culling imagery from blackface iconography . Early designs in which the main characters ( Brother Rabbit , Brother Bear and Preacher Fox ) resembled figures from The Wind in the Willows were rejected . Bakshi juxtaposed stereotypical designs of blacks with even more negative depictions of white racists , but the film 's strongest criticism is directed at the Mafia . Bakshi said , " I was sick of all the hero worship these guys got because of The Godfather . " Production concluded in 1973 . During editing , the title was changed to Coonskin No More ... , and finally to Coonskin . Bakshi hired several African American animators to work on Coonskin , including Brenda Banks , the first African American female animator . Bakshi also hired graffiti artists and trained them to work as animators . The film 's release was delayed by protests from the Congress of Racial Equality , which called Bakshi and his film racist . After its distribution was contracted to the Bryanston Distributing Company , Paramount canceled a project that Bakshi and Ruddy were developing , The American Chronicles . 
 Coonskin , advertised as an exploitation film , was given limited distribution and soon disappeared from theaters . Initial reviews were negative ; Playboy commented that " Bakshi seems to throw in a little of everything and he can 't quite pull it together . " Eventually , positive reviews appeared in The Hollywood Reporter , New York Amsterdam News ( an African American newspaper ) and elsewhere . The New York Times ' Richard Eder said the film " could be [ Bakshi 's ] masterpiece [ ... ] a shattering successful effort to use an uncommon form — cartoons and live action combined to convey the hallucinatory violence and frustration of American city life , specifically black city life [ ... ] lyrically violent , yet in no way [ does it ] exploit violence " . Variety called it a " brutal satire from the streets " . A reviewer for the Los Angeles Herald @-@ Examiner wrote , " Certainly , it will outrage some and , indeed , it 's not Disney . [ ... ] The dialog it has obviously generated — if not the box office obstacles — seems <unk> healthy . " Bakshi called Coonskin his best film . 
 = = = Hey Good Lookin ' ( 1973 – 1975 / 1982 ) = = = 
 After production concluded on Harlem Nights , Bakshi wanted to distinguish himself artistically by producing a film in which live action and animated characters would interact . Bakshi said , " The illusion I attempted to create was that of a completely live @-@ action film . Making it work almost drove us crazy . " Hey Good Lookin ' is set in Brooklyn during the 1950s ; its lead characters are Vinnie , the leader of a gang named " The Stompers " , his friend Crazy Shapiro and their girlfriends , Roz and Eva . Vinnie and Crazy Shapiro were based on Bakshi 's high school friends Norman <unk> and Allen <unk> . Warner Bros. optioned the screenplay and greenlit the film in 1973 . 
 An initial version of Hey Good Lookin ' was completed in 1975 . A three @-@ minute promo of this version was screened at the 1975 Cannes Film Festival , and the film was scheduled for a Christmas 1975 release , but was moved to the summers of 1976 and later 1977 , before ultimately being postponed indefinitely . Warner Bros. was concerned about any controversy the film would encounter as a result of the backlash over the film Coonskin , and felt that the film was " unreleasable " because of its mix of live action and animation , and it would not spend further money on the project . Bakshi financed the film 's completion himself from the director 's fees for other projects such as Wizards , The Lord of the Rings and American Pop . The live @-@ action sequences of Hey Good Lookin ' were gradually replaced by animation ; among the eliminated live @-@ action sequences was one featuring the glam punk band New York Dolls . Singer Dan Hicks worked on the initial musical score , but the final version was scored by John Madara . 
 Hey Good Lookin ' opened in New York City on October 1 , 1982 , and was released in Los Angeles in January 1983 . The film 's release was limited , and went largely unnoticed in the United States , although it garnered respectable business in foreign markets . In a brief review , Vincent Canby wrote that it was " not exactly incoherent , but whatever it originally had on its mind seems to have slipped away " . Animation historian Jerry Beck wrote , " the beginning of the film is quite promising , with a garbage can discussing life on the streets with some garbage . This is an example of what Bakshi did best — using the medium of animation to comment on society . Unfortunately , he doesn 't do it enough in this film . There is a wildly imaginative fantasy sequence during the climax , when the character named Crazy starts hallucinating during a rooftop shooting spree . This scene almost justifies the whole film . But otherwise , this is a rehash of ideas better explored in Coonskin , Heavy Traffic , and Fritz the Cat . " The film has since gained a cult following through cable television and home video . Quentin Tarantino stated that he preferred Hey Good Lookin ' to Martin Scorsese 's Mean Streets . 
 = = = Shift to fantasy film ( 1976 – 1978 ) = = = 
 In 1976 , Bakshi pitched War Wizards to 20th Century Fox . Returning to the fantasy drawings he had created in high school for inspiration , Bakshi intended to prove that he could produce a " family picture " that had the same impact as his adult @-@ oriented films . British illustrator Ian Miller and comic book artist Mike Ploog were hired to contribute backgrounds and designs . The crew included Vita , Turek , Sparey , <unk> and Spence , who had become comfortable with Bakshi 's limited storyboarding and lack of pencil tests . As the production costs increased , Fox president Alan Ladd , Jr. declined Bakshi 's requests for salary increases , and refused to give him $ 50 @,@ 000 to complete the film . At the same time , Ladd was dealing with similar budget problems on George Lucas 's Star Wars . Bakshi and Lucas had negotiated contracts entitling them to franchise ownership , merchandising and back @-@ end payment , so Ladd suggested that they fund the completion of their films themselves . 
 Bakshi chose rotoscoping as a cost @-@ effective way to complete the movie 's battle scenes with his own finances . Because he could not afford to hire a film crew or actors , or develop 35mm stock , Bakshi requested prints of films that contained the type of large battle scenes needed , including Sergei Eisenstein 's Alexander Nevsky , and spliced together the footage he needed . However , the cost of printing photographs of each frame would have cost $ 3 million . Learning that IBM had introduced an industrial @-@ sized photocopier , Bakshi asked one of the company 's technical experts if he would be able to feed 35mm reels into the machine to produce enlarged copies of each frame . The experiment worked , and Bakshi got the pages he needed for a penny per copy . 
 As War Wizards neared completion , Lucas requested that Bakshi change the title of his film to Wizards to avoid conflict with Star Wars ; Bakshi agreed because Lucas had allowed Mark Hamill to take time off from Star Wars to record a voice for Wizards . Although Wizards received a limited release , it was successful in the theaters that showed it and developed a worldwide audience . Dave Kehr of The Chicago Reader saw it as " marred by cut @-@ rate techniques and a shapeless screenplay " . In the view of film historian Jerry Beck , the lead character , an aging sorcerer , " clearly owes much to cartoonist Vaughn Bodé 's Cheech Wizard character . [ ... ] The film has a few interesting moments , particularly in a series of still illustrations by Marvel comic artist Mike Ploog , but is perhaps most notable as a turning point , not necessarily a positive one , in Bakshi 's film career . " 
 In late 1976 , Bakshi learned that John Boorman was contracted to direct an adaptation of The Lord of the Rings , in which J. R. R. Tolkien 's three @-@ volume novel would be condensed into a single film . Bakshi arranged a meeting with Mike Medavoy , United Artists ' head of production , who agreed to let Bakshi direct in exchange for the $ 3 million that had been spent on Boorman 's screenplay . Down the hall from Medavoy was Metro @-@ Goldwyn @-@ Mayer president Dan Melnick , who interrupted a meeting with Peter Bogdanovich when he learned that Bakshi wanted to discuss acquiring the rights to The Lord of the Rings . Melnick agreed to pay United Artists $ 3 million , but was soon fired ; the project was canceled by his replacement , Dick Shepherd . Bakshi contacted Saul Zaentz , who wrote a check to cover MGM 's debt and agreed to fund the $ 8 million budget for the first of what was initially planned as a series of three films , and later negotiated down to two . Before production began , Bakshi and Zaentz insisted that the Tolkien estate receive residuals from the film . 
 Bakshi did not want to produce a broad cartoon version of the tale , so he planned to shoot the entire film in live action and animate the footage with rotoscoping . The film also incorporated brief cel animation and straightforward live @-@ action footage . Production of the live @-@ action sequences took place in Spain . During the middle of a large shoot , union bosses called for a lunch break , and Bakshi secretly shot footage of actors in Orc costumes moving toward the craft service table , and used the footage in the film . Jerry Beck later wrote that , while he found the rotoscoped animation " beautiful " , he felt that it was unclear whether the use of live action was an artistic choice or due to budgetary constraints . 
 After the Spanish film development lab discovered that telephone lines , helicopters and cars were visible in the footage , they tried to incinerate it , telling Bakshi 's first assistant director , " if that kind of sloppy cinematography got out , no one from Hollywood would ever come back to Spain to shoot again . " When Bakshi returned to the United States , he learned that the cost of developing blown @-@ up prints of each frame had risen . He did not want to repeat the process that had been used on Wizards , which was unsuitable for the level of detail he intended for The Lord of the Rings , so Bakshi and camera technician Ted <unk> created their own photographic <unk> to process the footage cheaply . Live @-@ action special effects and analog optics were used in place of animation to keep the visual effects budget low and give the film a more realistic look . Among the voice actors was the well @-@ regarded John Hurt , who performed the role of Aragorn . The project 's high profile brought heavy trade journal coverage , and fans such as Mick Jagger visited the studio for the chance to play a role . Animator Carl Bell loved drawing Aragorn so much that Bakshi gave Bell the live @-@ action costume , which he wore while animating . 
 Viewing The Lord of the Rings as a holiday film , United Artists pressured Bakshi to complete it on schedule for its intended November 15 , 1978 , release . Once it was finished , Bakshi was told that audiences would not pay to see an incomplete story ; over his objections , The Lord of the Rings was marketed with no indication that a second part would follow . Reviews of the film were mixed , but it was generally seen as a " flawed but inspired interpretation " . Newsday 's Joseph Gelmis wrote that " the film 's principal reward is a visual experience unlike anything that other animated features are doing at the moment " . Roger Ebert called Bakshi 's effort a " mixed blessing " and " an entirely respectable , occasionally impressive job [ which ] still falls far short of the charm and sweep of the original story " . Vincent Canby found it " both numbing and impressive " . David Denby of New York felt that the film would not make sense to viewers who had not read the book . He wrote that it was too dark and lacked humor , concluding , " The lurid , meaningless violence of this movie left me exhausted and sickened by the end . " The film , which cost $ 4 million to produce , grossed $ 30 @.@ 5 million . The studio refused to fund the sequel , which would have adapted the remainder of the story . The Lord of the Rings won the Golden Gryphon at the 1980 Giffoni Film Festival . 
 = = = American Pop and Fire and Ice ( 1979 – 1983 ) = = = 
 Following the production struggles of The Lord of the Rings , Bakshi decided to work on something more personal . He pitched American Pop to Columbia Pictures president Dan Melnick . Bakshi wanted to produce a film in which songs would be given a new context in juxtaposition to the visuals . American Pop follows four generations of a Russian Jewish immigrant family of musicians , whose careers parallel the history of American pop and starred actor Ron Thompson in a dual lead role . While the film does not reflect Bakshi 's own experiences , its themes were strongly influenced by people he had encountered in Brownsville . The film 's crew included character layout and design artist Louise <unk> , Vita , Barry E. Jackson , and Marcia Adams . Bakshi again used rotoscoping , in an attempt to capture the range of emotions and movement required for the film 's story . According to Bakshi , " Rotoscoping is terrible for subtleties , so it was tough to get facial performances to match the stage ones . " Bakshi was able to acquire the rights to an extensive soundtrack — including songs by Janis Joplin , The Doors , George Gershwin , The Mamas & the Papas , Herbie Hancock , Lou Reed , and Louis Prima — for under $ 1 million . Released on February 12 , 1981 , the film was a financial success . The New York Times ' Vincent Canby wrote , " I 'm amazed at the success that Mr. Bakshi has in turning animated characters into figures of real feelings . " Jerry Beck called it " one of Bakshi 's best films " . Due to music clearance issues , it was not released on home video until 1998 . 
 By 1982 , fantasy films such as The Beastmaster and Conan the Barbarian had proven successful at the box office , and Bakshi wanted to work with his long @-@ time friend , the fantasy illustrator Frank Frazetta . Fire and Ice was financed by some of American Pop 's investors for $ 1 @.@ 2 million , while 20th Century Fox agreed to distribute . Fire and Ice was the most action @-@ oriented story Bakshi had directed , so he again used rotoscoping ; the realism of the design and rotoscoped animation replicated Frazetta 's artwork . Bakshi and Frazetta were heavily involved in the production of the live @-@ action sequences , from casting sessions to the final shoot . The film 's crew included background artists James Gurney and Thomas Kinkade , layout artist Peter Chung , and established Bakshi Productions artists Sparey , Steve Gordon , Bell and Banks . Chung greatly admired Bakshi 's and Frazetta 's work , and animated his sequences while working for The Walt Disney Company . The film was given a limited release , and was financially unsuccessful . Andrew Leal wrote , " The plot is standard [ ... ] recalling nothing so much as a more graphic episode of Filmation 's He @-@ Man series . [ ... ] Fire and Ice essentially stands as a footnote to the spate of barbarian films that followed in the wake of Arnold Schwarzenegger 's appearance as Conan . " 
 = = = Unproduced projects and temporary retirement ( 1983 – 1986 ) = = = 
 After production of Fire and Ice wrapped , Bakshi attempted several projects that fell through , including adaptations of Hunter S. Thompson 's Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas , William <unk> 's The Fan Man , Eric Rücker Eddison 's The Worm Ouroboros , Stephen Crane 's Maggie : A Girl of the Streets , Mickey Spillane 's Mike Hammer novels and an anthropomorphic depiction of Sherlock Holmes . He turned down offers to direct Ray Bradbury 's Something Wicked This Way Comes and Philip K. Dick 's Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep ? He passed the latter to Ridley Scott , who adapted it into the 1982 film Blade Runner . 
 During this period , Bakshi reread J. D. Salinger 's The Catcher in the Rye , which he had first read in high school , and saw parallels between his situation and that of the book 's protagonist , Holden Caulfield . Inspired to seek the film rights , he intended to shoot the story 's bracketing sequences in live action and to animate the core flashback scenes . Salinger had rejected previous offers to adapt the novel , and had not made a public appearance since 1965 or granted an interview since 1980 . Bakshi sent Salinger a letter explaining why he should be allowed to adapt the novel ; the writer responded by thanking Bakshi and asserting that the novel was unfit for any medium other than its original form . 
 Prompted in part by Salinger 's letter , Bakshi briefly retired to focus on painting . During this time he completed the screenplay for If I Catch Her , I 'll Kill Her , a live @-@ action feature he had been developing since the late 1960s . United Artists and Paramount Pictures each paid Bakshi to develop the film in the 1970s , but were unwilling to produce it , as were the studios he pitched the film to in the 1980s . According to Bakshi , " They thought that no one was going to admit that women can — and do — cheat on their husbands . They thought it was too hot , which made no sense . " In 1985 , he received a phone call from The Rolling Stones ' manager , Tony King , who told Bakshi that the band had recorded a cover of Bob & Earl 's " Harlem Shuffle " , and wanted Bakshi to direct the music video . He was told that the live @-@ action shoot needed to be completed within one day ( January 28 , 1986 ) for it to be shown at the Grammy Awards . Production designer Wolf Kroeger was forced to drastically compact his sets , and animation director and designer John Kricfalusi had to push his team , including Lynne Naylor , Jim Smith and Bob Jaques , to complete the animation within a few weeks . The band 's arrival at the set was delayed by a snowstorm and several takes were ruined when the cameras crossed paths . Bakshi was forced to pay the union wages out of his own fees , and the continuity between Kricfalusi 's animation and the live @-@ action footage did not match ; however , the video was completed on time . 
 Bakshi recognized Kricfalusi 's talent , and wanted to put him in charge of a project that would showcase the young animator 's skills . Bakshi and Kricfalusi co @-@ wrote the screenplay Bobby 's Girl as a take on the teen films of the era . Jeff <unk> , president of production at TriStar Pictures , put up $ 150 @,@ 000 to develop the project , prompting Bakshi to move back to Los Angeles . When <unk> left TriStar , Bakshi was forced to pitch the film again , but the studio 's new executives did not understand its appeal and cut off financing . Bakshi and <unk> began to develop a feature about Hollywood 's Golden Age , and Bakshi Productions crewmembers worked on proposed cartoons influenced by pulp fiction . Bobby 's Girl was reworked as a potential prime time series called Suzy 's in Love , but attracted no serious interest . 
 = = = Return to television ( 1987 – 1989 ) = = = 
 In April 1987 , Bakshi set up a meeting with Judy Price , the head of CBS 's Saturday morning block . Three days before the meeting , Bakshi , Kricfalusi , Naylor , Tom Minton , Eddie Fitzgerald and Jim Reardon met to brainstorm . Bakshi remembers , " My car was packed to the windows . Judy was my last stop before driving cross country back to New York to my family . " Price rejected Bakshi 's prepared pitches , but asked what else he had . He told her that he had the rights to Mighty Mouse , and she agreed to purchase the series . However , Bakshi did not own the rights and did not know who did . While researching the rights , he learned that CBS had acquired the entire Terrytoons library in 1955 and forgotten about it . According to Bakshi , " I sold them a show they already owned , so they just gave me the rights for nothin ' ! " 
 Kricfalusi 's team wrote story outlines for thirteen episodes in a week and pitched them to Price . By the next week , Kricfalusi had hired animators he knew who had been working at other studios . Mighty Mouse : The New Adventures went into production the month it was greenlighted ; it was scheduled to premiere on September 19 , 1987 . This haste required the crew to be split into four teams , led by supervising director Kricfalusi , Fitzgerald , Steve Gordon and Bruce Woodside . Each team was given a handful of episodes , and operated almost entirely independently of the others . Although the scripts required approval by CBS executives , Kricfalusi insisted that the artists add visual gags as they drew . Bruce Timm , Andrew Stanton , Dave Marshall and Jeff Pidgeon were among the artists who worked on the series . Despite the time constraints , CBS was pleased with the way Bakshi Productions addressed the network 's notes . 
 During the production of the episode " The Littlest Tramp " , editor Tom Klein expressed concern that a sequence showing Mighty Mouse sniffing the remains of a crushed flower resembled cocaine use . Bakshi did not initially view the footage ; he believed that Klein was overreacting , but agreed to let him cut the scene . Kricfalusi expressed disbelief over the cut , insisting that the action was harmless and that the sequence should be restored . Following Kricfalusi 's advice , Bakshi told Klein to restore the scene , which had been approved by network executives and the CBS standards and practices department . The episode aired on October 31 , 1987 , without controversy . 
 In 1988 , Bakshi received an Annie Award for " Distinguished Contribution to the Art of Animation " . The same year , he began production on a series pilot loosely adapted from his Junktown comic strips . According to Bakshi , the proposed series " was going to be a revitalization of cartoon style from the ' 20s and ' 30s . It was gonna have Duke Ellington and Fats Waller <unk> up the soundtrack . " Nickelodeon was initially willing to greenlight 39 episodes of Junktown . 
 On June 6 , 1988 , Donald Wildmon , head of the American Family Association ( AFA ) , alleged that " The Littlest Tramp " depicted cocaine use , instigating a media frenzy . The AFA , during its incarnation as the National Federation for Decency , had previously targeted CBS as an " accessory to murder " after a mother killed her daughter following an airing of Exorcist II : The Heretic . Concerning Bakshi 's involvement with Mighty Mouse : The New Adventures , the AFA claimed that CBS " intentionally hired a known pornographer to do a cartoon for children , and then allowed him to insert a scene in which the cartoon hero is shown sniffing cocaine . " Bakshi responded , " You could pick a still out of Lady and the Tramp and get the same impression . Fritz the Cat wasn 't pornography . It was social commentary . This all smacks of burning books and the Third Reich . It smacks of McCarthyism . I 'm not going to get into who sniffs what . This is lunacy ! " On CBS 's order , Klein removed the sequence from the master broadcast footage . Wildmon claimed that the edits were " a de facto admission that , indeed , Mighty Mouse was snorting cocaine " . Despite receiving an award from Action for Children 's Television , favorable reviews , and a ranking in Time magazine 's " Best of ' 87 " feature , Mighty Mouse : The New Adventures was canceled by CBS following the controversy . 
 The incident had a ripple effect , weakening Nickelodeon 's commitment to Junktown . Bakshi has also stated that " we were trying something different [ ... ] but a series didn 't make sense . It just didn 't work " . The series was scrapped , and the completed pilot aired as a special , Christmas in <unk> , in December 1988 . It was the first original animated special created for Nickelodeon . Bakshi moved into a warehouse loft in downtown Los Angeles to clear his head , and was offered $ 50 @,@ 000 to direct a half @-@ hour live @-@ action film for PBS 's Imagining America anthology series . Mark Bakshi produced the film , This Ain 't Bebop , his first professional collaboration with his father . Bakshi wrote a poem influenced by Jack Kerouac , jazz , the Beat Generation and Brooklyn that served as the narration , which was spoken by Harvey Keitel . After a car crash , Bakshi completed the post @-@ production in stitches and casts . Bakshi said of the work , " It 's the most proud I 've been of a picture since Coonskin — the last real thing I did with total integrity . " 
 As a result of the film , Bakshi received an offer to adapt Dr. Seuss 's The Butter Battle Book for TNT . Ted Geisel had never been satisfied with the previous screen versions of his Dr. Seuss work . Bakshi wanted to produce an entirely faithful adaptation , and Geisel — who agreed to storyboard the special himself — was pleased with the final product . Bakshi next directed the pilot Hound Town for NBC ; he described the result as " an embarrassing piece of shit " . 
 = = = Return to film , continued television projects and retirement ( 1990 – 1997 ) = = = 
 In 1990 , Bakshi pitched Cool World to Paramount Pictures as a partially animated horror film . The concept involved a cartoon and human having sex and conceiving a hybrid child who visits the real world to murder the father who abandoned him . The live @-@ action footage was intended to look like " a living , walk @-@ through painting " , a visual concept Bakshi had long wanted to achieve . Massive sets were constructed on a sound stage in Las Vegas , based on enlargements of designer Barry Jackson 's paintings . The animation was strongly influenced by the house styles of Fleischer Studios and Terrytoons . As the sets were being built , producer Frank Mancuso , Jr . , son of Paramount president Frank Mancuso , Sr. , had the screenplay rewritten in secret ; the new version , by Michael Grais and Mark Victor , was radically different from Bakshi 's original . Paramount threatened to sue Bakshi if he did not complete the film . As Bakshi and Mancuso wrangled over their creative differences , Bakshi and the studio also began to fight over the film 's casting . To keep actor Brad Pitt , Bakshi had to replace Drew Barrymore , his original choice for the character of Holli Would , with Kim Basinger , a bigger box office draw at the time . The film 's animators were never given a screenplay , and were instead told by Bakshi , " Do a scene that 's funny , whatever you want to do ! " 
 Designer Milton Knight recalled that " audiences actually wanted a wilder , raunchier Cool World . The premiere audience I saw it with certainly did . " The critical reaction to the film was generally negative . Roger Ebert wrote , " The DJ who was hosting the radio station 's free preview of Cool World leaped onto the stage and promised the audience : ' If you liked Roger Rabbit , you 'll love Cool World ! ' He was wrong , but you can 't blame him — he hadn 't seen the movie . I have , and I will now promise you that if you liked Roger Rabbit , quit while you 're ahead . " The film was a box @-@ office disappointment . While other film projects followed , Bakshi began to focus more attention on painting . 
 In 1993 , Lou Arkoff , the son of Samuel Z. Arkoff , approached Bakshi to write and direct a low @-@ budget live @-@ action feature for Showtime 's Rebel Highway series . For the third time , Bakshi revisited his screenplay for If I Catch Her , I 'll Kill Her , which he retitled Cool and the Crazy . The picture , which aired September 16 , 1994 , starred Jared Leto , Alicia Silverstone , Jennifer Blanc and Matthew Flint . Reviewer Todd Everett noted that it had the same " hyperdrive visual sense " of Bakshi 's animated films . He said , " Everything in ' Cool ' [ ... ] seems to exist in pastels and Bakshi shoots from more odd angles than any director since Sidney J. Furie in his heyday . And the closing sequences ably demonstrate how it 's possible to present strong violence without any blood being shed onscreen . Bakshi pulls strong [ performances ] from a cadre of <unk> and largely unknown actors " . 
 In 1995 , Hanna @-@ Barbera producer Fred Seibert offered Bakshi the chance to create two animated short films for Cartoon Network 's What a Cartoon ! : Malcom and Melvin and Babe , He Calls Me , focusing on a trumpet @-@ playing cockroach named Malcom and his best friend , a clown named Melvin . Both were heavily edited after Bakshi turned them in and he disowned them as a result . Bakshi was subsequently contacted by HBO , which was looking to launch the first animated series specifically for adults , an interest stirred by discussions involving a series based upon Trey Parker and Matt Stone 's video Christmas card , Jesus vs. Santa . Bakshi enlisted a team of writers , including his son Preston , to develop Spicy Detective , later renamed Spicy City , an anthology series set in a noir @-@ ish , technology @-@ driven future . Each episode was narrated by a female host named Raven , voiced by Michelle Phillips . The series premiered in July 1997 — one month before the debut of Parker and Stone 's South Park — and thus became the first " adults only " cartoon series . Although critical reaction was largely unfavorable , Spicy City received acceptable ratings . A second season was approved , but the network wanted to fire Bakshi 's writing team and hire professional Los Angeles screenwriters . When Bakshi refused to cooperate , the series was canceled . 
 = = = Painting , teaching and new animation projects ( 2000 – 2013 ) = = = 
 Bakshi retired from animation once more , returning to his painting . In 2000 , he began teaching an undergraduate animation class at New York 's School of Visual Arts . In December 14 , 2001 , he did some paintings for the Cameron Crowe film Vanilla Sky . He later became involved in several screen projects , including a development deal with the Sci Fi Channel , In September 2002 , Bakshi , Liz and their dogs moved to New Mexico , where he became more productive than ever in his painting and began development on the Last Days of Coney Island film . In 2003 , he appeared as the Fire Chief in the episode " Fire Dogs 2 " of John Kricfalusi 's Ren & Stimpy " Adult Party Cartoon " .. 
 In September 2008 , Main Street Pictures announced that it would collaborate with Bakshi on a sequel to Wizards . In 2012 , Bakshi began producing the short film series Bakshi Blues . The first of these shorts , Trickle <unk> Down , contains reused animation from Coonskin and criticizes Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney . The shorts will focus on " old and new characters " and will comment on modern @-@ day America . 
 = = = Last Days of Coney Island ( 2013 – present ) = = = 
 In February 2013 , Bakshi launched a successful Kickstarter campaign to obtain funding for his latest film Last Days of Coney Island . 
 Actor Matthew Modine was cast in the film in February 2013 after Modine , a longtime Bakshi fan , came across the film 's Kickstarter campaign online . 
 <unk> was released on Vimeo in 2015 . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 In 2003 , Bakshi received a Maverick Tribute Award at the Cinequest San Jose Film Festival . The same year , he began teaching an <unk> class in New Mexico - this became The Bakshi School of Animation and Cartooning , which is run by Ralph 's son Edward and his partner Jess Gorell . The availability of Bakshi 's work on the Internet sparked a resurgence of interest in his career , resulting in a three @-@ day American Cinematheque retrospective held at Grauman 's Egyptian Theatre in Hollywood and the Aero Theater in Santa Monica , California , in April 2005 . Unfiltered : The Complete Ralph Bakshi , a hardcover book of Bakshi 's art , was released on April 1 , 2008 . The foreword was written by Quentin Tarantino and the afterword by Bakshi . 
 The Online Film Critics Society released a list of the " Top 100 Animated Features of All Time " in March 2003 that included four of Bakshi 's films : Fritz the Cat , The Lord of the Rings , Coonskin and Fire and Ice . Fritz the Cat was ranked number 56 in the 2004 poll conducted by Britain 's Channel 4 for its documentary The 100 Greatest Cartoons . The Museum of Modern Art has added Bakshi 's films to its collection for preservation . 
 After attending a Quentin Tarantino FilmFest in April 1999 where Coonskin was screened , Ain 't It Cool News head writer Harry Knowles wrote that American Pop was still his favorite Ralph Bakshi film . 
 Gore Verbinski commented about Ralph Bakshi and showed that he was inspired by him during an interview in The Hollywood Reporter for his first animated movie , Rango . Saying , " What happened to the Ralph <unk> of the world ? We 're all sitting here talking family entertainment . Does animation have to be family entertainment ? Audiences want something new ; they just can 't articulate what . " 
 On January 12 , 2014 at The Egyptian Theatre in Hollywood , there was a special screening of Bakshi 's film American Pop with actors Ron Thompson and Mews Small in attendance , it was the first time lead actor Ron Thompson had ever introduced the film before a live audience . 
 At the Aero Theatre in Santa Monica , California on March 27 , 2015 , there was a screening of Heavy Traffic and American Pop with Ralph Bakshi , Ron Thompson and Mews Small attending . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Films = = = 
 = = = Television = = = 
 ^ I Selected episodes ^ II Provided the voices of Connelly and Goldblum in the episode " Sex Drive " , and Stevie in the episode " Mano 's Hands " ^ III Provided the voice of the Super Hero ^ IV Animated in conjunction with Doug Compton ^ V Provided the voice of Fire Chief in the episode " Fire Dogs 2 " 
 = George Ripley ( transcendentalist ) = 
 George Ripley ( October 3 , 1802 – July 4 , 1880 ) was an American social reformer , Unitarian minister , and journalist associated with Transcendentalism . He was the founder of the short @-@ lived Utopian community Brook Farm in West Roxbury , Massachusetts . 
 Born in Greenfield , Massachusetts , George Ripley was pushed to attend Harvard College by his father and completed his studies in 1823 . He went on graduate from the Harvard Divinity School and the next year married Sophia Dana . Shortly after , he became ordained as the minister of the Purchase Street Church in Boston , Massachusetts , where he began to question traditional Unitarian beliefs . He became one of the founding members of the Transcendental Club and hosted its first official meeting in his home . Shortly after , he resigned from the church to put Transcendental beliefs in practice by founding an experimental commune called Brook Farm . The community later converted to a model based on the work of Charles Fourier , although the community was never financially stable in either format . 
 After Brook Farm 's failure , Ripley was hired by Horace Greeley at the New York Tribune . He also published the New American Cyclopaedia , which made him financially successful . He built a national reputation as an arbiter of taste and literature before his death in 1880 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and education = = = 
 Ripley 's ancestors had lived in Hingham , Massachusetts for 140 years before Jerome Ripley moved his family to Greenfield , a town in the western part of the state , in 1789 . He was moderately successful as the owner of a general store and tavern and was a prominent member of the community . His son George Ripley was born in Greenfield on October 3 , 1802 , the ninth child in the family . 
 George Ripley 's early life was heavily influenced by women . His nearest brother was thirteen years older than he was and he was raised primarily by his conservative mother , who was distantly related to Benjamin Franklin , and his sisters . He was sent to a private academy run by a Mr. Huntington in Hadley , Massachusetts to prepare for college . Before going to college , he spent three months in Lincoln with Ezra Ripley , a distant relative who was also the stepfather of Ralph Waldo Emerson . Although Ripley wanted to attend the religiously conservative Yale University , his Unitarian father pushed him to attend Harvard College , then known as a hotbed of liberal Unitarianism . Ripley was a good and dedicated student , although he was not popular with students because of his trust of the establishment . Early in his time at Harvard , he had sided with the administration during a student @-@ led protest against poor food , and his attempts at reconciling the two sides prompted ridicule from his peers . Ripley , seeking a socially useful role , found work as a teacher in Fitchburg during winter vacation of his senior year . He graduated in 1823 . 
 During his time at the school , Ripley became disenchanted with his father and his home town , admitting " no particular attachment to Greenfield " . He hoped to enroll at Andover but his father convinced him to stay in Cambridge to attend Harvard Divinity School . There , he was influenced by Levi Frisbie , Professor of Natural Religion , who was largely interested in moral philosophy , which he termed " the science of the principles and obligations of duty " . Ripley was becoming very interested in more " liberal " religious views , what he wrote to his mother as " so simple , scriptural , and reasonable " . He graduated in 1826 . A year later , on August 22 , 1827 , he married Sophia Dana , a fact which he originally kept a secret from his parents . He asked his sister Marianne to inform them shortly after . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Ripley officially became a minister at Boston 's Purchase Street Church on November 8 , 1826 , and became influential in the developing the Unitarian religion . <unk> ten years of his tenure there were quiet and uneventful , until March 1836 , when Ripley published a long article titled " Schleiermacher as a Theologian " in the Christian Examiner . In it , Ripley praised Schleiermacher 's attempt to create a " religion of the heart " based on intuition and personal communion with God . Later that year , he published a review of British theologian James Martineau 's The Rationale of Religious Enquiry in the same publication . In the review , Ripley charged Unitarian church elders with religious intolerance because they forced the literal acceptance of miracles as a requirement for membership in their church . Andrews Norton , a leading theologian of the day , responded publicly and insisted that disbelief in miracles ultimately denied the truth of Christianity . Norton , formerly Ripley 's teacher at the Divinity School , had been labeled by many as the " hard @-@ headed Unitarian Pope " , and began his public battle with Ripley in the Boston Daily Advertiser on November 5 , 1836 , in an open letter charging Ripley with academic and professional incompetence . Ripley contended that to insist upon the reality of miracles was to demand material proof of spiritual matters , and that faith needed no such external confirmation ; but Norton and the mainstream of Unitarianism found this tantamount to heresy . This dispute laid the groundwork for the separation of a more extreme Transcendentalism from its liberal Unitarian roots . The debate between Norton and Ripley , which earned allies on both sides , continued until 1840 . 
 = = = Transcendental Club = = = 
 Ripley met with Ralph Waldo Emerson , Frederic Henry Hedge , and George Putnam in Cambridge , Massachusetts on September 8 , 1836 , to discuss the formation of a new club . Ten days later , on September 18 , 1836 , Ripley hosted their first official meeting at his house . The group at this first meeting of what would become known as the " Transcendental Club " included Bronson Alcott , Orestes Brownson , James Freeman Clarke , and <unk> Francis as well as Hedge , Emerson , and Ripley . Future members would include Henry David Thoreau , William Henry Channing , Christopher Pearse Cranch , Sylvester Judd , and Jones Very . Female members included Sophia Ripley , Margaret Fuller , and Elizabeth Peabody . The group planned its meetings for times when Hedge was visiting from Bangor , Maine , leading to the early nickname " Hedge 's Club " . The name Transcendental Club was given to the group by the public and not by its participants . Hedge wrote : " There was no club in the strict sense ... only occasional meetings of like @-@ minded men and women " , earning the nickname " the brotherhood of the ' Like @-@ Minded ' " . Beginning in 1839 , Ripley edited Specimens of Foreign Standard Literature : fourteen volumes of translations meant to demonstrate the breadth of Transcendental thoughts . 
 = = = Separation from church = = = 
 Amid the Panic of 1837 , many began to criticize social institutions . That year , Ripley gave a sermon titled " The Temptations of the Times " , suggesting that the major problem in the country was " the inordinate pursuit , the extravagant worship of wealth " . Ripley had been asked by church proprietors to avoid controversial topics in his sermons . He said , " Unless a minister is expected to speak out on all subjects which are uppermost in his mind , with no fear of incurring the charge of heresy or compromising the interests of his congregation , he can never do justice to himself , to his people , or the truth which he is bound to declare " . In May 1840 , he offered his resignation from the Purchase Street Church but was convinced to stay . He soon decided he should leave the ministry altogether and , on October 3 , 1840 , he read a 7 @,@ 300 @-@ word lecture , Letter Addressed to the Congregational Church in Purchase Street , expressing his dissatisfaction with Unitarianism . 
 Because of his experience with the Specimens translations , Ripley was chosen to be the managing editor of the Transcendental publication The Dial at its inception , working alongside its first editor Margaret Fuller . In addition to overseeing distribution , subscriptions , printing , and finances , Ripley also contributed essays and reviews . In October 1841 , he resigned his post with The Dial as he prepared for an experiment in communal living . As he told Emerson , although he was happy seeing all the Transcendental thoughts in print , he could not be truly happy " without the attempt to realize them " . 
 = = = Brook Farm = = = 
 In the late 1830s Ripley became increasingly engaged in " Associationism " , an early Fourierist socialist movement . In October 1840 he announced to the Transcendental Club his plan to form an <unk> community based on Fourier 's Utopian plans . His goals were lofty . As he wrote , " If wisely executed , it will be a light over this country and this age . If not the sunrise , it will be the morning star . " 
 Ripley and his wife formed a joint stock company in 1841 along with 10 other initial investors . Shares of the company were sold for $ 500 apiece with a promise of five percent of the profits to each investor . The founding membership of the original community included Nathaniel Hawthorne . They chose the Ellis Farm in West Roxbury , Massachusetts as the site of their experiment , which they named Brook Farm . Its 170 acres ( 0 @.@ 69 km2 ) were about eight miles ( 13 km ) from Boston ; a pamphlet described the land as a " place of great natural beauty , combining a convenient nearness to the city with a degree of retirement and freedom from unfavorable influences unusual even in the country " . The land , however , turned out to be difficult to farm and the community struggled with financial difficulties as it built greenhouses and craft shops . 
 Brook Farm was initially based mostly on the ideals of Transcendentalism ; its founders believed that by pooling labor they could sustain the community and still have time for literary and scientific pursuits . The experiment meant to serve as an example for the rest of the world , established on the principles of " industry without drudgery , and true equality without its vulgarity " . Many in the community wrote of how much they enjoyed their experience . One participant , a man named John Codman , joined the community at the age of 27 in 1843 . He wrote , " It was for the meanest a life above humdrum , and for the greatest something far , infinitely far beyond . They looked into the gates of life and saw beyond charming visions , and hopes springing up for all " . In their free time , the members of Brook Farm enjoyed music , dancing , card games , drama , costume parties , sledding , and skating . Hawthorne , eventually elected treasurer of the community , did not enjoy his experience . He wrote to his wife @-@ to @-@ be Sophia Peabody , " labor is the curse of the world , and nobody can meddle with it without becoming proportionately <unk> " . 
 Many outside the community were also critical , especially in the press . The New York Observer , for example , suggested that , " The <unk> , under the pretense of a desire to promote order and morals , design to overthrow the marriage institution , and in the place of the divine law , to substitute the ' passions ' as the proper regulator of the intercourse of the sexes " , concluding that they were " secretly and industriously aiming to destroy the foundation of society " . 
 In 1844 , the community , perpetually struggling financially , drafted an entirely new constitution and committed to following more closely the Fourierist model . Not everyone at the community supported the transition , and many left . Many were disappointed that the new , more structured daily routine de @-@ emphasized the carefree leisure time that had been a trademark . Ripley himself became a celebrity proponent of Fourierism and organized conventions throughout New England to discuss the community . 
 By May 1846 , troubled by the financial difficulties at Brook Farm , Ripley had made an informal split from the community . By its closure a year later , Brook Farm had amassed a total debt of $ 17 @,@ 445 . Ripley was devastated at the failure of his experiment and told a friend , " I can now understand how a man would feel if he could attend his own funeral " . His personal life was also taxed . His wife had converted to Catholicism in 1846 , encouraged by Orestes Brownson , and had become doubtful of his <unk> politics ; the <unk> ' relationship became strained by the 1850s . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 After Brook Farm , George Ripley began to work as a freelance journalist . In 1849 he was employed by Horace Greeley at the New York Tribune , taking the role left vacant by Margaret Fuller . Greeley had been a proponent of Brook Farm 's conversion to Fourierism . Ripley started his role with the Tribune at $ 12 a week and , at this wage , was not able to pay off the debt of Brook Farm until 1862 . As a critic , he believed in high moral standards for literature but offered good @-@ natured praise in the majority of his reviews . Greeley took advantage of Ripley 's cheerful style of writing to boost circulation amid significant competition . Ripley wrote a " Gotham Gossip " column and many articles discussing local personalities and notable public events , including speeches by Henry Clay and Frederick Douglass . He stayed away from philosophy of theology , despite some efforts to persuade him to write on the subject . As he told a friend , he had " long since lost ... immediate interest in that line of speculation " . 
 Ripley then edited Harper 's Magazine . Together with Bayard Taylor he compiled a Handbook of Literature and the Fine Arts ( 1852 ) . 
 With Charles A. Dana , he edited the 16 volume The New American Cyclopaedia ( 1857 – 1863 ) , reissued as The American Cyclopaedia ( 1873 – 1876 ) . It sold in the millions and its immediate earnings amounted to over $ 100 @,@ 000 . 
 He also continued his critical work and in 1860 reviewed On the Origin of Species by Charles Darwin . He was one of the few contemporary critics to be sympathetic to Darwin , although he was reluctant to show he was convinced of the theories . 
 = = = Later years = = = 
 In 1861 Sophia Ripley died . George Ripley remarried , to Louisa <unk> , in 1865 , and was a part of the Gilded Age New York literary scene for the remainder of his life . Because of his convivial nature , he was careful to avoid the city 's rampant literary feuds at the time . He became a public figure with a national reputation and , known as an arbiter of taste , he helped establish the National Institute of Literature , Art , and Science in 1869 . In his later years , he began suffering frequent illnesses , including a bout with influenza in 1875 which prevented him from traveling to Germany . He also suffered from gout and rheumatism . 
 Ripley was found dead at his desk on July 4 , 1880 , slumped over his work . <unk> at his funeral included Frederick Augustus Porter Barnard , George William Curtis , and Whitelaw Reid . At the time of his death , Ripley had become financially successful ; the New American Cyclopaedia had earned him royalties of nearly $ 1 @.@ 5 million . The biography of George Ripley ( 1882 ) was written by Octavius Brooks <unk> . 
 = = Critical assessment = = 
 Ripley built a wide reputation as a critic . Contemporary publications rated him as one of the most important critics of the day , including the Hartford Courant , the Springfield Republican , the New York Evening Gazette , and the Chicago Daily Tribune . Henry Theodore Tuckerman commended Ripley as " a scholar and an aesthetic as well as technical critic : [ he ] knows public taste and the laws of literature " . 
 = Battle of Svolder = 
 The Battle of Svolder ( <unk> , <unk> ) was a naval battle fought in September 999 or 1000 in the western Baltic Sea between King Olaf Tryggvason of Norway and an alliance of his enemies . The backdrop of the battle was the unification of Norway into a single state , long @-@ standing Danish efforts to gain control of the country , and the spread of Christianity in Scandinavia . 
 King Olaf was sailing home after an expedition to Wendland ( Pomerania ) , when he was ambushed by an alliance of Svein Forkbeard , King of Denmark , Olof Skötkonung ( also known as Olaf Eiríksson ) , King of Sweden , and Eirik Hákonarson , Jarl of Lade . Olaf had only 11 warships in the battle against a fleet of at least 70 . His ships were captured one by one , last of all the Ormen Lange , which Jarl Eirik captured as Olaf threw himself into the sea . After the battle , Norway was ruled by the Jarls of Lade as a fief of Denmark and Sweden . 
 The exact location of the battle is disputed , and depends on which group of sources is preferred : it is only Icelandic sources that place it near a place called Svolder , while Adam of Bremen places it in Øresund . 
 The most detailed sources on the battle , the kings ' sagas , were written approximately two centuries after it took place . Historically unreliable , they offer an extended literary account describing the battle and the events leading up to it in vivid detail . The sagas ascribe the causes of the battle to Olaf Tryggvason 's ill @-@ fated marriage proposal to Sigrid the Haughty and his problematic marriage to Thyri , sister of Svein Forkbeard . As the battle starts Olaf is shown dismissing the Danish and Swedish fleets with ethnic insults and bravado while admitting that Eirik Hákonarson and his men are dangerous because " they are Norwegians like us " . The best known episode in the battle is the breaking of Einarr Þambarskelfir 's bow , which heralds Olaf 's defeat . 
 In later centuries , the saga descriptions of the battle , especially that in Snorri Sturluson 's Heimskringla , have inspired a number of ballads and other works of literature . 
 = = Context = = 
 In earliest recorded history , Norway was divided into a number of small and sometimes warring petty kingdoms with weak central authority . In traditional historiography the rise of Harald Fairhair in the 9th century started the process of unification of the country and the consolidation of royal power . Harald 's descendants , and other claimants to the throne , had to contend with strong regional leaders such as the Jarls of Lade in the north and the rulers of <unk> in the east , while the kings of Denmark claimed regions in the south and were eager to acquire Norwegian vassals to increase their influence . The spread of Christianity also became an increasingly important political issue in the late 10th century . 
 In the 970s , Haakon Sigurdsson , Jarl of Lade , became the most powerful man in Norway , at first supported by Harald Bluetooth of Denmark and paying tribute to him — though the two later fell out over religious matters . Harald had converted to Christianity and was eager to Christianise Norway , while Haakon remained a staunch pagan . In 995 Haakon was deposed and the young Christian leader Olaf Tryggvason came to the throne . 
 While rejecting Danish authority , Olaf made it his mission to convert Norway and the Norse colonies in the west as quickly and as completely as possible . Proceeding with threats , torture and executions , Olaf broke down pagan resistance and within a few years Norway was , at least nominally , a Christian country . But King Olaf had acquired several enemies during his meteoric rise to power . The most prominent were Eirik Jarl , son of Haakon Jarl , and Svein Forkbeard , king of Denmark , both of whom felt that Olaf had deprived them of their share of Norway . 
 The same interests which clashed in the Battle of Svolder were to divide Norway for decades to come , leading to further major engagements , including the Battle of <unk> and the Battle of Stiklestad . The resolution came in 1035 with the accession of the Norwegian Magnus the Good to the throne of an independent and Christian Norway . 
 = = Events leading up to the battle = = 
 Nothing can be gleaned from the contemporary skaldic poems on the causes of the battle . Adam of Bremen states that Olaf Tryggvason 's Danish wife , Thyri , egged him on to make war against Denmark . When Olaf heard that Svein Forkbeard and Olaf the Swede had formed an alliance , he was angered and decided the time had come for an attack . Ágrip and Historia <unk> have a similar account . Thyri was the sister of Svein Forkbeard , and when Olaf Tryggvason married her , Svein refused to pay her promised dowry . Angered , Olaf launched an expedition to attack Denmark , but he was too impatient to wait for a fleet to assemble from all of Norway , and he set sail for the south with only 11 ships , expecting the rest to follow . When that hope was not realized , he set out for Wendland ( Pomerania ) to seek allies and on the way was ambushed by Svein and his allies . These accounts are contradicted by a contemporary verse of <unk> the Unchristian which states that Olaf Tryggvason was travelling from the south when he came to the battle . 
 Oddr Snorrason has an elaborate account of the problems arising from Thyri 's marriages . He tells us that she was betrothed and married to the Wendish king Burislav , who received a large dowry for her ; but she did not want to be his wife and starved herself after their wedding , so Burislav sent her back to Denmark . She then arranged to have herself married to Olaf Tryggvason , to the displeasure of her brother Svein . Svein 's queen , Sigrid the Haughty , a staunch opponent of Olaf , egged Svein to make war on him . Svein then conspired with Jarl Sigvaldi and King Olaf of Sweden to lure Olaf Tryggvason into a trap . Olaf Tryggvason travelled to Wendland to collect Thyri 's dowry from King Burislav and while there heard rumours of a planned ambush ; but Sigvaldi arrived to tell him these rumours were false . Believing Sigvaldi , Olaf sent most of his fleet home , as his men were impatient . He therefore had only a small fleet left when he was ambushed near Svolder . 
 Fagrskinna and Heimskringla largely follow Oddr 's account but simplify it and diverge from it in some respects . According to Heimskringla , Sigvaldi sailed from Wendland with Olaf and a fleet of Wendish ships and led him into the ambush . 
 Whether the above details are accurate or not , it is clear that Svein , Olaf the Swede and Eirik had ample reason to oppose Olaf Tryggvason . Olaf had taken control of Viken in south Norway , an area long under Danish overlordship . Olaf and Svein had been in England together , but Olaf had made peace while Svein kept campaigning . Svein was on friendly terms with Olaf the Swede and connected to him by marriage , so the two were natural allies . Finally , Jarl Eirik had been driven from his patrimony by Olaf Tryggvason , as arguably had his father , Jarl Hakon , whom he may have wished to avenge . 
 From the conflicting accounts of the sources , historians have tried to reconstruct the most likely sequence of events leading up to the battle . It is probable that Olaf Tryggvason was indeed sailing from Wendland to Norway when he was ambushed , though the kings ' sagas probably play up the importance of Thyri and her marriages . While it is possible that Olaf was collecting dowry , it seems more probable that he was expecting war and seeking allies in Wendland , but met with little success . The character of Sigvaldi remains enigmatic , though there is evidence from skaldic poetry that he did indeed betray Olaf . 
 = = Time and location = = 
 All sources which date the battle agree that it took place in 1000 . The oldest source to date it is the meticulous <unk> , written around 1128 , which specifies that it took place in the summer . Oddr Snorrason says further that the battle is " memorialized for the fallen men on the Third or Fourth Ides of September " , ( 10 or 11 September ) . Mesta states that the battle occurred on 9 September , and other sources agree with either date . Since some medieval writers reckoned the end of the year in September , it is possible that the year referred to is in fact the one we know as 999 . 
 The location of the battle cannot be identified with any certainty . According to Adam of Bremen , it took place in Oresund . Ágrip and Historia <unk> also place it off Zealand . <unk> says it took place " beside the island which is called <unk> ; and it lies near Slavia " . Fagrskinna speaks of " an island off the coast of <unk> ... [ t ] his island is called <unk> . " Oddr Snorrason and Heimskringla agree on the island 's name but do not specify its location . A stanza by <unk> <unk> speaks of " the mouth of Svolder " , suggesting that Svolder was originally the name of a river which Norse unfamiliarity with Wendish geography turned into an island . The Danish Annales <unk> are unique in placing the battle in the <unk> . Modern historians are divided , some locating the confrontation near the German island of Rügen while others prefer Oresund . 
 = = Composition of the fleets = = 
 The Norse sources agree that Olaf Tryggvason fought against overwhelming odds in the battle . Fagrskinna , for example , says that he had " only a small force " , and that the sea around him was " carpeted with warships " The sources which specify the number of warships all agree that Olaf Tryggvason had 11 vessels but they give various numbers for the allied fleets . 
 Though the sagas agree that Olaf Tryggvason had only 11 ships in the battle , some of them quote a verse by <unk> the Unchristian saying that Olaf had 71 ships when he sailed from the south . The sagas explain the discrepancy by saying that some of the 71 ships belonged to Jarl Sigvaldi , who deserted Olaf , and that others sailed past the trap at Svolder before it was sprung . 
 The sagas describe three of the ships in Olaf Tryggvason 's fleet . According to Heimskringla , the Crane was a large swift @-@ sailing warship with thirty rowers ' benches , high in stem and stern . It was commissioned by King Olaf and used as his flagship for some time . 
 Olaf confiscated the second of his great ships from a pagan he had tortured to death for refusing to convert to Christianity . King Olaf " steered it himself , because it was a much larger and finer ship than the Crane . Its stem had a dragon 's head on it , and on its stern , a crook shaped like a tail ; and both sides of the neck and all the stern were gilded . That ship the king called the Serpent , because when the sail was hoisted it was to look like the wing of a dragon . That was the finest ship in all Norway . " 
 Olaf 's third flagship , the Long Serpent , was a legendary vessel mentioned in several anecdotes in the sagas . 
 It was constructed as a dragon ship , on the model of the Serpent which the king had taken along from <unk> ; only it was much larger and more carefully wrought in all respects . He called it the Long Serpent and the other one , the Short Serpent . The Long Serpent had thirty @-@ four compartments . The head and the tail were all gilt . And the gunwales were as high as those on a seagoing ship . This was the best ship ever built in Norway , and the most costly . 
 The only allied ship described is Jarl Eirik 's Iron Ram . According to Fagrskinna it was " the biggest of all ships " . Heimskringla gives more detail : 
 Earl <unk> owned a mighty big ship which he was accustomed to take on his viking expeditions . It had a beak [ or ram ] on the upper part of the prow , fore and aft , and below that heavy iron plates as broad as the beak itself , which went down to the waterline . 
 = = The leaders assess their opponents = = 
 It is unlikely that the saga writers had accurate information on details of the battle beyond the sparse accounts in the surviving poems . Nevertheless , starting with Oddr Snorrason , they present an elaborate literary account , depicting the main participants through their words and deeds . 
 Olaf Tryggvason 's ships pass the anchorage of his allied enemies in a long column without order , as no attack is expected . Conveniently placed to observe the fleet , Jarl Eirik and the two kings remark upon the passing vessels . Svein and Olaf are eager to join battle , but Eirik is portrayed as more cautious and familiar with the Norwegian forces . 
 As progressively larger vessels appear , the Danes and Swedes think each one is the Long Serpent and want to attack straight away , but Eirik holds them off with informed comments : 
 It is not King Olaf on this ship . I know this ship because I have seen it often . It is owned by <unk> <unk> from <unk> , and it is better to attack this ship from the stern . It is manned with such fellows that , should we encounter King Olaf Tryggvason , we will quickly learn that it would be better for us to find a gap in his fleet than to do battle with this longship . 
 As Eirik finally consents to attack , King Svein boasts that he will command the Long Serpent " before the sun sets " . Eirik makes a remark " so that few men heard him " saying that " with only the Danish army at his disposal , King Sveinn would never command this ship " . As the allies set out to attack Olaf Tryggvason , the point of view shifts to the Norwegian fleet . 
 After spotting the enemy , Olaf might have used sail and oar to outrun the ambush and escape , but he refuses to flee and turns to give battle with the eleven ships immediately about him . Seeing the Danish fleet arrayed against him , he comments : " The forest goats will not overcome us , for the Danes have the courage of goats . We will not fear that force because the Danes have never carried off the victory if they fought on ships . " Similarly , Olaf writes off the Swedes with a reference to their pagan customs : 
 The Swedes will have an easier and more pleasant time licking out their sacrificial bowls than boarding the Long Serpent in the face of our weapons and succeeding in clearing our ships . I expect that we will not need to fear the horse eaters . 
 It is only when Olaf Tryggvason sights Eirik Hákonarson 's contingent that he realises he is in for a hard battle , because " they are Norwegians like us " . The sagas ' emphasis of Eirik 's contribution stands in marked contrast to the Danish accounts of Adam of Bremen and Saxo Grammaticus , who portray the battle as a Danish victory over Norwegians , with no mention of Jarl Eirik or his men . 
 = = The battle is joined = = 
 The disposition adopted in the battle was one which recurs in many sea @-@ fights of the Middle Ages where a fleet had to fight on the defensive . Olaf lashed his ships side to side , with his own , the Long Serpent , in the middle of the line , where her bows projected beyond the others . The advantages of this arrangement were that it left all hands free to fight , that a barrier could be formed with the oars and yards , and that it limited the enemy 's ability to make its superior numbers count . The Long Serpent was the longest ship and so also the tallest — another advantage to the defenders , who could rain down arrows , javelins and other missiles while the enemy would have to shoot upwards . Olaf , in effect , turned his eleven ships into a floating fort . 
 The sagas give all the credit to the Norwegians , praising Eirik Hákonarson for any intelligence and for most of the valour shown by Olaf Tryggvason 's opponents . The Danes and Swedes rush at the front of Olaf 's line and are repulsed , suffering heavy casualties and loss of ships . Jarl Eirik attacks the flank and forces his vessel , the Iron Ram , up against the last ship of Olaf 's line , which he clears with a fierce attack and then proceeds onto the next ship . In this way , Olaf 's ships were cleared one by one , till the Long Serpent alone was left . 
 = = Einarr Þambarskelfir = = 
 One of the best known episodes from the battle involves Einarr Þambarskelfir , an archer in King Olaf 's fleet who later became a cunning politician . Heimskringla describes his attempt at killing Jarl Eirik and saving the day for Olaf : 
 Einar shot an arrow at Earl Eirik , which hit the tiller end just above the earl 's head so hard that it entered the wood up to the arrow @-@ shaft . The earl looked that way , and asked if they knew who had shot ; and at the same moment another arrow flew between his hand and his side , and into the stuffing of the chief 's stool , so that the barb stood far out on the other side . Then said the earl to a man called Fin , -- but some say he was of Fin ( <unk> ) race , and was a superior archer , -- " Shoot that tall man by the mast . " Fin shot ; and the arrow hit the middle of Einar 's bow just at the moment that Einar was drawing it , and the bow was split in two parts . 
 " What is that " , cried King Olaf , " that broke with such a noise ? " 
 " Norway , king , from thy hands , " cried Einar . 
 " No ! not quite so much as that , " says the king ; " take my bow , and shoot , " flinging the bow to him . 
 Einarr took the bow , and drew it over the head of the arrow . " Too weak , too weak , " said he , " for the bow of a mighty king ! " and , throwing the bow aside , he took sword and shield , and fought valiantly . 
 The same story is found in Gesta Danorum , though there Einarr is aiming at Svein , rather than Eirik . 
 = = King Olaf 's death = = 
 At last , the Long Serpent is overpowered and Olaf Tryggvason defeated . The Danish sources report that when all was lost he committed suicide by throwing himself into the sea , " the end befitting his life " , according to Adam of Bremen . Saxo Grammaticus says that Olaf preferred suicide to death at the hands of the enemy and jumped overboard in full armour rather than see his foes victorious . The Norwegian and Icelandic accounts are more complex and more favourable to Olaf . Hallfreðr 's memorial poem for his lord had already alluded to rumours that Olaf escaped death at Svolder . The sagas offer a variety of possibilities . Ágrip reports : 
 " But of the fall of King Óláfr nothing was known . It was seen that as the fighting lessened he stood , still alive , on the high @-@ deck astern on the Long Serpent , which had thirty @-@ two rowing places . But when Eiríkr went to the stern of the ship in search of the king , a light flashed before him as though it were lightning , and when the light disappeared , the king himself was gone . " 
 Other sagas suggest that one way or another Olaf made his way to the shore ; perhaps by swimming , perhaps with the help of angels , most likely rescued by one of the Wendish ships present . After his escape , Olaf supposedly sought salvation for his soul abroad , perhaps joining a monastery . Mesta describes a series of " sightings " of him in the Holy Land , the last in the 1040s . 
 King Olaf , like Charlemagne , Frederick Barbarossa and Sebastian of Portugal , is one of those legendary heroic figures whose return was looked for by the people , their deaths never completely accepted . ( See King in the mountain . ) 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 After the Battle of Svolder , the victorious leaders split Norway into areas of control . Heimskringla gives the most detailed account of the division , describing it as threefold . Olaf the Swede received four districts in Trondheim as well as Møre , Romsdal and <unk> . He gave these to Jarl Svein Hákonarson , his son in law , to hold as a vassal . Svein Forkbeard gained possession of the Viken district , where Danish influence had long been strong . The rest of Norway was ruled by Eirik Hákonarson as Svein 's vassal . Fagrskinna , in contrast , says that the Swedish part consisted of Oppland and a part of Trondheim . Other sources are less specific . 
 The Jarls Eirik and Svein proved strong , competent rulers , and their reign was prosperous . Most sources say that they adopted Christianity but allowed the people religious freedom , leading to a backlash against Christianity which undid much of Olaf Tryggvason 's missionary work . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Several factors combined to make the Battle of Svolder one of the most famous battles of the Viking Age . In Norwegian @-@ Icelandic historiography , King Olaf Tryggvason was held in high regard as the man who brought Christianity to the North . His colourful end in a battle against overwhelming odds therefore makes a fitting narrative . Jarl Eirik 's court poets also ensured their lord a fair share of the glory . Mesta says : 
 The battle is acknowledged to have been for many reasons the most famous that was ever fought in Northern lands . For , first there was the noble defence made by King Olaf and his men on board the Long Serpent . No instance is known where men have defended themselves so long and so valiantly against such overwhelming numbers of foes as they had to encounter . Then there was the fierce attack made by Earl Eric and his men , which has been held in wide renown . ... The battle was very famous too , on account of the great slaughter , and the Earl 's success in clearing a ship that up to that time was the largest built and the fairest in Norway ; of which shipmen said that it would never , while floating on the sea , be won with arms in the face of such heroes as manned it . 
 In Iceland , where the kings ' sagas continued to be copied and studied , the battle exercised the imagination of several poets . A 15th century rímur cycle , <unk> rímur , chronicles the battle in verse , largely following the account of Oddr Snorrason . Two more rímur cycles on the same topic were composed in the 18th century , one of which is preserved . In the 19th century , the popular poet Sigurður <unk> composed yet another rímur cycle on the battle , based on the account in Mesta . 
 With the 19th century rise of nationalism and romanticism and the growing number of translations of the sagas , interest in the battle of Svolder increased outside of Iceland . Around 1830 , the Faroese poet Jens Christian <unk> composed a ballad on the battle titled <unk> <unk> , following Snorri 's account . The ballad was well received and remains among the most popular and well @-@ known Faroese ballads . In 2002 , a heavy metal version by the band Týr gained some following abroad . 
 In Norway , Johan Nordahl Brun 's rousing patriotic play Einar <unk> , written in 1772 , is considered a milestone in Norwegian literature . Later Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson wrote a well @-@ known short poem , Olav <unk> , on the fall of the king . Bjørnson also collaborated with Edvard Grieg on an opera about Olaf Tryggvason , but the two fell out before the work was finished . Ragnar Søderlind has now completed the opera , which premiered in September 2000 , 1000 years after the Battle of Svolder . Søderlind introduced fate motifs from Wagner , Beethoven and Liszt in the battle scene . 
 The battle has also inspired art outside of Scandinavia , including a manga volume by the Japanese artist Ryō <unk> . The best known English @-@ language work is probably Henry Wadsworth Longfellow 's cycle " The Saga of King Olaf " ( from his 1863 collection of poems Tales of a Wayside Inn ) , much of which is dedicated to the Battle of Svolder , and which includes the verse : 
 Louder the war @-@ horns growl and snarl , 
 Sharper the dragons bite and sting ! 
 Eric the son of Hakon Jarl 
 A death @-@ drink salt as the sea 
 Pledges to thee , 
 Olaf the King ! 
 = Charles Blackader = 
 Major @-@ General Charles Guinand Blackader , CB , DSO ( 20 September 1869 – 2 April 1921 ) was a British Army officer of the First World War . He commanded an Indian brigade on the Western Front in 1915 , and a Territorial brigade in Dublin during the Easter Rising of 1916 , before being appointed to command the 38th ( Welsh ) Division on the Western Front , a position he held until retiring due to ill @-@ health in May 1918 . 
 Originally joining the Army in 1888 as a junior officer in the Leicestershire Regiment , Blackader 's first active posting was in the late 1890s , when he served on attachment to the West African Frontier Force , closely followed by service during the Boer War , where he commanded a company at the defence of Ladysmith . An efficient and well @-@ regarded administrator , he commanded a series of detached stations in addition to his regimental duties for the next ten years , eventually rising to take command of the 2nd Battalion , Leicestershire Regiment , in 1912 . On the outbreak of the First World War , he commanded his battalion on the Western Front as part of an Indian Army formation ; when his superior officer was promoted in early 1915 , Blackader succeeded him as commander of the brigade , and led it through the Battle of Neuve Chapelle and the Battle of Loos . 
 After the Indian Army was withdrawn from France , Blackader was posted to a second @-@ line Territorial Force brigade training in the United Kingdom . In 1916 , it was sent to Dublin during the Easter Rising ; following the Rising , Blackader presided over a number of the resulting courts @-@ martial , including those of several of the signatories to the Proclamation of the Irish Republic . Later that year , he was ordered to France to take over command of the 38th ( Welsh ) Division , a New Army formation which had suffered heavy losses in the Battle of the Somme . He remained with the division for almost two years , helping retrain and reorganise it as an efficient fighting unit . The division would see significant successes in the Hundred Days Offensive of late 1918 , but by this point Blackader was no longer in command ; he had been invalided home earlier in the year . He died shortly after the war , in 1921 , aged 51 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Charles Guinand Blackader was born in Richmond , Surrey on 20 September 1869 . His father , Charles George Blackader , was a teacher to a small number of boarding pupils ; he had come from an Army family , and taught at Cheltenham College and Clifton College , Bristol , before moving to private tuition . His mother , Charlotte Guinand , was born in Germany ; her family may have come from Alsace @-@ Lorraine , as Blackader would later describe himself as half @-@ French . During his childhood , the <unk> moved from Richmond to Southampton , where his father headed the education department at the Hartley Institute , and then to Boulogne , where he taught at Beaurepaire School . 
 Returning from France in 1887 , Blackader studied at the Royal Military College , Sandhurst , where he was regarded as a generally promising pupil ; his marks were highest in administrative and academic subjects , but lower in drawing and physical education . He left Sandhurst in August 1888 , and joined the 1st Battalion , Leicestershire Regiment , as a second lieutenant . The battalion sailed for a posting in Bermuda two weeks after his arrival ; his departure was delayed , however , by remaining in London to marry . The ceremony took place on 2 October , at a registry office in Marylebone , and his biographer notes that it was " clearly in haste " - their first child was born six and a half months after the wedding . Such an early wedding was very unusual for a junior officer at this period ; on average , army officers did not marry until their mid @-@ thirties . 
 Blackader and his wife spent a year and a half in Bermuda , where their daughter Dorothy was born in April 1889 , and moved to Nova Scotia when the battalion was transferred there in 1890 ; shortly after arrival , on 21 March , he was promoted to lieutenant on 21 March . Their second daughter Joan was born in April 1892 , and a year later the battalion transferred again , this time to the West Indies ; Blackader was appointed adjutant - the officer responsible for administration - to one wing of the battalion , a force of three companies stationed at Jamaica . In late 1895 , the battalion moved to South Africa , but shortly after arrival Blackader returned to England ; he was promoted to captain on 6 December . 
 = = West Africa and the Boer War = = 
 In late 1897 , Blackader was seconded for service in West Africa , as one of the officers recruited by Frederick Lugard for the newly raised West African Frontier Force . Blackader was attached to the 1st Battalion , under Thomas Pilcher , who described him as always " cheery and anxious to do his work " ; he threw himself fully into the organisation of the force , and within six months of his arrival the battalion was able to be deployed successfully on operations against local slave @-@ traders . This was Blackader 's first active service , and saw his first mention in despatches ; it also saw an early appearance of his skill for administration and management , which would mark much of his later career . 
 He left West Africa in January 1899 , after a successful posting , but in ill @-@ health ; a third of the officers sent with him had died while on secondment , and Blackader had contracted malaria as well as suffering an attack of dysentery . He spent six months on leave to recover , and then sailed to take command of a company of the 1st Leicesters , still stationed in South Africa . 
 Blackader joined his company in Natal in early October 1899 . It saw action with the battalion within a few days of the outbreak of the Second Boer War , at the Battle of <unk> Hill on 20 October , and again at the Battle of Ladysmith on the 30th . Boer forces surrounded Ladysmith after the battle , and began a four @-@ month siege . 
 The battalion remained in the town , with the monotony broken by an occasional skirmish with the besiegers , until the relief column arrived at the end of February . Following the advance into Natal , they were stationed in Middelburg in October , for a second prolonged period of garrison duty broken by occasional raids in the Transvaal . The battalion 's area of responsibility was extended in April 1901 to take in <unk> , and Blackader was appointed commandant of the railway station and its associated collieries , with over 1 @,@ 500 staff . 
 Following the battalion 's move up the railway line in July , Blackader was transferred to a new post at Balmoral ; as well as the railway station , he was made responsible for a civilian concentration camp outside the town . These camps were frequently crowded , unhealthy , and badly supplied ; few reports have survived on the Balmoral camp , however , and it is not clear how efficient or otherwise Blackader 's administration was . 
 Blackader had applied for a home posting in December 1900 , as adjutant to a battalion of volunteers ; this had been approved in August 1901 , subject to his being released from duties in South Africa . However , the transfer was delayed , and he did not leave for home until June 1902 , when he sailed on board the SS Bavarian with troops returning for the Coronation of Edward VII . He had been twice mentioned in despatches during the war , received the Queen 's South Africa Medal , and was awarded the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) . 
 = = Home service and India = = 
 In August 1902 , Blackader took up his appointment as adjutant of the 1st Volunteer Battalion , Leicestershire Regiment , where he would spend the next two years . This was primarily an administrative post - he was the senior regular officer attached to the battalion , and responsible for its organisation and training . At the end of his tenure he was promoted to major in September 1904 , and left for India a few months later to join the regular 1st Battalion . Shortly after his arrival , he was appointed to command the cantonment at the <unk> Sanatorium , his fourth administrative posting in five years . He returned to England with the battalion at the end of 1906 , when it moved into camp at Shorncliffe . 
 In the summer of 1907 , he applied to become Chief Constable of Leicester - a move which would have meant leaving the Army - but did not succeed ; the job went to John Hall @-@ Dalwood , a lawyer and ex @-@ Army officer who had made a career in the police . He settled into the undemanding life of a home posting , with an active social as well as sporting calendar ; he and Edward Challenor , a fellow officer in the battalion , won the garrison tennis cup two years running , and Blackader was recorded to have made a good showing at sports as diverse as billiards and soccer . Blackader had passed the exams for " tactical fitness for command " of a battalion in 1908 , and was given command of a battalion and promoted to lieutenant colonel in September 1912 . 
 = = First World War = = 
 In August 1914 , on the outbreak of the First World War , Blackader was in India , commanding the 2nd Battalion of the Leicesters , which was mobilised for service as part of the 20th ( Garhwal ) Brigade of the 7th ( Meerut ) Division . The division was sent to France as part of Indian Expeditionary Force A , seeing its first action in the trenches on 29 October . On 19 December a force under Blackader 's command staged a successful attack on the German trenches , though the attack was overshadowed by the beginning of the German attack on Givenchy the following day , through which the Leicesters remained in reserve . 
 = = = Garhwal Brigade = = = 
 Brigadier <unk> , commanding the <unk> , was promoted to command the Lahore Division in January 1915 , and on 8 January Blackader was given the temporary rank of Brigadier @-@ General , assuming command of the Garhwal Brigade in his stead . The <unk> led the first wave of the Indian Corps ' attack at the Battle of Neuve Chapelle on 10 March , Three of the attacking battalions reached their objectives , but one was delayed by strong resistance ; after clearing the last German trenches , the brigade halted to let the second wave pass through . In the attack , two men were awarded the Victoria Cross , and nine the Indian Order of Merit , and Blackader was commended by his corps commander , General Willcocks , who wrote that " I had learned to respect him and to trust in his judgement . The manner in which he handled his brigade at Neuve Chapelle was good to see , and his report ... is written as brave and modest men write " . His force had taken heavy losses , however ; the trailing battalion on the flank , the 2 / 39th Garhwal Rifles , lost over half its men and all its officers . 
 The brigade repulsed a heavy attack on the morning of 12 March , but settled into a relatively static position thereafter . On 9 May , the Garhwal Brigade was used as a second wave in the first attacks of the Battle of Aubers Ridge , without success ; they saw action again on the night of 15 May , where the leading battalions met heavy resistance and Blackader was forced to call off the attack . 
 After Aubers Ridge , the corps was then rested in a quiet sector until September , when it deployed for the Battle of Loos . The initial attack was to be made by three divisions , with the Meerut Division leading the attack on the Indian front ; Blackader 's brigade , with two Gurkha battalions and the 2nd Leicesters , was on its right flank . Whilst the attack successfully crossed no @-@ man 's land under cover of the barrage , the right flank of the brigade was caught up in defensive wire , and only one battalion successfully made their way into the German trenches ; the brigade lost momentum and dug in . 
 The Indian Corps was withdrawn after Loos , and as a result this was Blackader 's last major action in command of Indian troops ; by the end of November , the Meerut Division had left France . 
 = = = Ireland = = = 
 He was transferred to command of the 177th ( 2 / 1st Lincoln and Leicester ) Brigade , part of the 59th ( 2nd North Midland ) Division in January 1916 . The 59th was a second @-@ line Territorial Force division , formed from those Territorials and new volunteers who had not volunteered for overseas service . As a result , it was generally undermanned and underequipped , with priority given to equipping its first @-@ line counterpart , and tasked mostly with home defence duties . The 177th Brigade had been formed as the duplicate of the 138th ( Lincoln and Leicester ) Brigade , with two second @-@ line battalions of the Lincolnshire Regiment and two of the Leicestershire Regiment . 
 The 59th Division was rushed to Ireland in response to the Easter Rising of April 1916 , where Blackader 's new brigade saw its first active service . Following the Rising , many of those believed by the British authorities to be responsible were tried by military courts ; ninety were sentenced to death , of whom fifteen were eventually executed . Blackader , as a senior officer , chaired a number of courts @-@ martial , including those of Éamonn <unk> , Thomas Clarke , Thomas MacDonagh , Patrick Pearse , and Joseph Plunkett , five of the seven signatories to the Proclamation of the Irish Republic . It appears that Blackader found this task difficult ; after Pearse 's trial , he is reported to have commented that " I have just done one of the hardest tasks I have ever had to do . I have had to condemn to death one of the finest characters I have ever come across . There must be something very wrong in the state of things that makes a man like that a rebel . I don 't wonder that his pupils adored him . " 
 = = = 38th ( Welsh ) Division = = = 
 On 21 June , Blackader was ordered to leave the brigade and go to France ; he described the news of the unexpected posting as " like a bombshell " . On 9 July , when the Ivor Philipps was removed from command of 38th ( Welsh ) Division , due to the failure of its hitherto limited attacks against Mametz Wood during the early stages of the Battle of the Somme as well as the poor communication between the division and Corps headquarters , Blackader was named as the preferred replacement by Henry Horne , the Corps commander . Horne was overruled , and the command was temporarily given to Herbert Watts . Under Watts , the division successfully took its objective , Mametz Wood , though with severe losses ; within a week , Watts was back in command of 7th Division and Blackader had taken permanent command . 
 The division had been raised in the New Armies in 1914 with a strong sense of Liberal patronage , and many of its officers had been personally appointed by Lloyd George ; as a result , political convenience had often taken priority over military competence when selecting officers . Under Blackader , a new officer from outside the Welsh Liberal milieu and able to sack his subordinates as he saw fit , the division 's standard improved significantly . It saw service at Pilckem Ridge in the early stages of the Third Battle of Ypres , but from September 1917 onwards it was kept on relatively quiet defensive sectors . The division trained through this period , and in April 1918 was able to mount a limited brigade @-@ size attack , which whilst it involved heavy losses was a clear success in a way that would not have been possible two years earlier . 
 In late May 1918 , Blackader was relieved of command and replaced by Thomas Cubitt , a younger officer . This was not apparently due to incompetence or age – Douglas Haig had described Blackader 's achievements with 38th Division as " excellent " – but due to illness ; according to Gary Sheffield , he had fallen ill after " being licked by a rabid dog " . Under Cubitt 's command , the 38th Division would build on its past training and fight through the Hundred Days Offensive with great success . In November 1918 , Blackader was appointed to command the Southern District in Ireland . 
 For his service in the war , he was appointed an aide @-@ de @-@ camp to the King in 1916 , and made a Companion of the Order of the Bath in 1917 . He was also made a Commander of the Belgian Order of Leopold , and awarded both the Belgian and French Croix de Guerre . 
 Blackader died , of liver cancer and heart failure on 2 April 1921 , at Queen Alexandra 's Military Hospital , Millbank , London , survived by his wife and two daughters , and leaving a small estate of just under £ 450 . There is a memorial to him in the regimental chapel in Leicester Cathedral . On 1 March 2013 , as a result of research into the circumstances of his death by the In From The Cold Project , he was accepted for commemoration by the Commonwealth War Graves Commission in their United Kingdom Book of Remembrance , until June when his grave had been belatedly found at Putney Vale Cemetery ( Section K ) . 
 = Secrets of Rætikon = 
 Secrets of Rætikon is an action @-@ adventure , open world video game developed and published by Broken Rules . The player controls a bird and must explore the environment of Rætikon to find its secrets . Game elements include animals with specific behaviors and ancient puzzles . Development began in 2011 and the game was formally announced in July 2013 and followed by alpha and Steam Early Access releases . Rætikon was released on April 17 , 2014 for Windows , OS X , and Linux platforms . It received mixed reviews from reviewers , who praised its artwork and movement physics , but criticized its inconsistency , lack of cohesion , and technical issues . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Secrets of Rætikon is a single @-@ player , story @-@ driven , open world sandbox action @-@ adventure video game . The player @-@ character takes form of a bird . The player controls the bird with three buttons : one that flaps its wings , another that takes items into the bird 's beak , and another that makes bird sounds . While the game can be played through keyboard and mouse , the developers instead recommend a controller . 
 The objective is to fly through the Rætikon environment to find its titular secrets , namely by collecting relics to power an ancient device . The environment is split into themed levels such as swamp , lagoon , mountaintops , and forests . Glowing are shards dispersed throughout each level , which can be collected and redeemed at an altar within each themed level for a glowing relic . These relics can be returned to where the player started the game to power a mysterious , ancient device . The player @-@ character carries the relics past aggressive enemies and treacherous environment , and completes puzzles of reconstructing animal statues from its pieces to access new levels . Each level features different animals and contain environmental objects that player can interact with . 
 = = Development = = 
 Rætikon was first announced in July 2013 , though its development began in 2011 . The game 's Viennese developer and publisher , Broken Rules Games , had previously worked on the 2012 Wii U game Chasing Aurora , which itself was based on a multiplayer prototype for Rætikon . The game is partly based on an Alps region culture conquered by the Roman Empire . Its visuals were inspired by dream @-@ like flying sensations . In an effort to increase the game 's replay value , the developers emphasized its artificial intelligence , physics , and interactive qualities , including animal @-@ specific behaviors and <unk> plant foliage . 
 Broken Rules released an alpha version of the game in October 2013 . Around the same time , they announced an Indiegogo crowdfunding campaign in lieu of searching for a publisher . The game later entered Steam Early Access . Rætikon was released on April 17 , 2014 for Windows , OS X , and Linux platforms via Steam , the Mac App Store , and the Humble Store . The Steam edition of the game supports Steam Workshop with a level editor for users to build and share original content . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The game received " mixed or average reviews " , according to video game review score aggregator Metacritic . Reviewers praised the game 's artwork and movement physics , but criticized its lack of cohesion . Some appreciated the moments where the game 's elements coalesced . They estimated the game to run between two and three hours in length . 
 Joystiq 's Sam Prell said that the adventure felt restrictive and linear , " like a guided tour " . He wrote that Rætikon 's map design encourages players to think methodically about their path rather than to explore the game as a non @-@ linear open world . In this way , he felt that its gameplay philosophies contradicted . Hardcore Gamer 's Geoff Thew wrote that the game " commits a number of fundamental design sins " as one of " few games so ceaselessly tiring to play " . He felt that the animals who steal the game objectives created " busywork " , and complained of copious backtracking and the " straight up discourteous " exclusion of an in @-@ game map . Eurogamer 's Jon Denton added that numerous " extremely irritating conflicts " with off @-@ screen animals hurt the game 's pacing . He noted its gameplay influence from Fez and compared its blue shards game mechanics to that of Dark Souls . Denton did not feel that the game deserved the amount of effort it required of its players to understand its story . Reviewers noted technical issues and glitches within the game . Prell noted issues in the game 's physics and game save features . As Rætikon does not support manual saves , he frequently found his progress automatically saved while his player @-@ character was stuck in the environment . Thew of Hardcore Gamer found similar physics glitches that trapped him in the environment , which led him to use his keyboard alongside the Xbox 360 controller to circumvent controller compatibility issues . 
 When mentioning the game 's art style , most reviewers gave positive response . Denton described the style as a " beautifully drawn , angular 2D world " . Prell wrote that Rætikon 's triangle @-@ based art style made its characters feel like papercraft and gave the game " a sense of reverence and spirituality " when complemented by the story , and gave comparison to Shadow of the Colossus . Thew gave similar response noting that it is reminiscent of <unk> . However , Thew continued to state that while the visuals were " distinctive " , the game 's " alpine " area was " clichéd and predictable " and its " good looks and smooth movement mechanics " did not compensate for the rest of the game 's design . He found the game " shallow " , uninteresting , and " a disappointment ... on almost every level " . Denton of Eurogamer praised the moments where he figured out how to find a shard or alphabet piece , but ultimately found Rætikon " awkward " , with " substance did not live up to its style " , and causing unjustified and unreasonable frustration . 
 = Tuisto = 
 According to Tacitus 's Germania ( 98 CE ) , " In their ancient songs , their only form of recorded history , the Germans celebrate the earth @-@ born god , Tuisto . They assign to him a son , Mannus , the author of their race , and to Mannus three sons , ... " The figure remains the subject of some scholarly discussion , largely focused upon etymological connections and comparisons to figures in later ( particularly Norse ) Germanic mythology . In the larger Indo @-@ European pantheon , Tuisto is equated to the Vedic <unk> . 
 = = Etymology = = 
 The Germania manuscript corpus contains two primary variant readings of the name . The most frequently occurring , Tuisto , is commonly connected to the Proto @-@ Germanic root <unk> ( " two " ) and its derivative <unk> ( " twice " ; " doubled " ) . Allusions to intersex is entirely conjectural , as the <unk> / <unk> roots are also the roots of any number of other concepts / words in the Germanic languages . Take for instance the Germanic " twist " , which , in all but the English has the primary meaning of " dispute / conflict " . 
 The second variant of the name , occurring originally in manuscript E , is <unk> ( sometimes rendered Tuiscon ) . One proposed etymology for this variant reconstructs a Proto @-@ Germanic <unk> , and connects this with Proto @-@ Germanic <unk> , yielded the meaning " son of Tiu " . This interpretation implies that <unk> is the son of the sky god ( Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European <unk> ) and the earth @-@ goddess . 
 = = = Tuisto , <unk> , and Ymir = = = 
 Connections have been proposed between the 1st century figure of Tuisto and the hermaphroditic primeval being Ymir in later Norse mythology , attested in 13th century sources , based upon etymological and functional similarity . Meyer ( 1907 ) sees the connection as so strong , that he considers the two to be identical . Lindow ( 2001 ) , while mindful of the possible semantic connection between Tuisto and Ymir , notes an essential functional difference : while Ymir is portrayed as an " essentially … negative figure " - Tuisto is described as being " celebrated " ( celebrant ) by the early Germanic peoples in song , with Tacitus reporting nothing negative about Tuisto . 
 Jacob ( 2005 ) attempts to establish a genealogical relationship between Tuisto and Ymir based on etymology and a comparison with ( post- ) Vedic Indian mythology : as <unk> , through his daughter <unk> and her husband <unk> , is said to have been the grandfather of the twins Yama and Yami , so Jacob argues that the Germanic Tuisto ( assuming a connection with <unk> ) must originally have been the grandfather of Ymir ( cognate to Yama ) . Incidentally , Indian mythology also places Manu ( cognate to Germanic Mannus ) , the Vedic progenitor of mankind , as a son of <unk> , thus making him the brother of Yama / Ymir . 
 = = Attestation = = 
 Tacitus relates that " ancient songs " ( Latin carminibus <unk> ) of the Germanic peoples celebrated Tuisto as " a god , born of the earth " ( <unk> terra <unk> ' ; see <unk> ( ancient Greece ) ) . These songs further attributed to him a son , Mannus , who in turn had three sons , the offspring of whom were referred to as <unk> , <unk> and <unk> , living near the Ocean ( <unk> <unk> ) , in the interior ( <unk> ) , and the remaining parts ( <unk> ) of the geographical region of Germania , respectively . 
 = = Theories and interpretations = = 
 Tacitus 's report falls squarely within the ethnographic tradition of the classical world , which often fused <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> together into a synthetic whole . The succession of father @-@ son @-@ three sons parallels occurs in both Germanic and non @-@ Germanic Indo @-@ European areas . The essential characteristics of the myth have been theorized as ultimately originating in Proto @-@ Indo @-@ European society around 2 @,@ 000 BCE . 
 According to Rives ( 1999 ) , the fact that the ancient Germanic peoples claimed descent from an earth @-@ born god was used by Tacitus to support his contention that they were an indigenous population : the Latin word <unk> was often used in the same sense as the Greek <unk> , meaning literally ' [ born from ] the earth itself ' ( from <unk> – <unk> " earth " ) . <unk> ( 1975 ) notes that , although this claim is to be judged as one made out of simple ignorance of the facts on the part of Tacitus , he was not entirely wrong , as he made the judgement based on a comparison with the relatively turbulent Mediterranean region of his day . 
 The sequence in which one god has a son , who has three famous sons , has a resemblance to how <unk> has a son <unk> who has three sons : Odin , <unk> and Vé . The same tradition occurs with the Slavs and their expansion , in the legend of Lech , Čech and Rus . 
 = = Later influence = = 
 In 1498 , a monk named <unk> da Viterbo published fragments known as " Pseudo @-@ <unk> " , now considered a forgery , claiming that Babylonian records had shown that Tuiscon or Tuisto , the fourth son of Noah , had been the first ruler of Scythia and Germany following the dispersion of peoples , with him being succeeded by his son Mannus as the second king . Later historians ( e.g. Johannes Aventinus ) managed to furnish numerous further details , including the assertion by James Anderson that this Tuiscon was in fact none other than the biblical Ashkenaz , son of Gomer . 
 In the following centuries , Tuisto was celebrated as the mythological founding father of the German nation in all forms of art . Burkhard <unk> mentions him in his work The Origins of the first Twelve German Kings and Princes from 1543 , as do Sigmund von Birken , Daniel Casper von <unk> and Ignaz <unk> in his opera Günther von Schwarzburg . In poetry , he is featured by Joseph Martin Kraus in his " I am a German Lad " , by Friedrich Gottlieb Klopstock in his <unk> , and by <unk> , who refers to Tuisto in an early poem , written in 1788 . He invokes the mythological figure in an idealized form , belonging to the spirit of a magic era , long bygone . 
 = 1994 – 95 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season = 
 The 1994 – 95 South @-@ West Indian Ocean cyclone season was fairly active , with storms forming regularly from October through April . It was much less damaging than its predecessor , and most of the storms in the season remained over water or only brushed land . The first system was Tropical Depression A1 , which formed in October and passed north of Madagascar . The first named storm was Albertine , which formed on November 23 in the northeastern portion of the basin and became one of three intense tropical cyclones . The last storm was Marlene , which was also an intense tropical cyclone and dissipated on April 11 . 
 Most of the storms originated from the intertropical convergence zone . In late December into early January , tropical storms Bentha and Christelle persisted to the east of Madagascar , undergoing the Fujiwhara effect with each other . Later in January , Dorina became the second of three intense tropical cyclones , but weakened before passing near Rodrigues . Tropical Depression Eliceca and Tropical Storm Fodah both formed in the Mozambique Channel toward the end of January , bringing gusty winds and rainfall to the region . In February , Gail produced gusty winds on Rodrigues , and Tropical Storm Heida entered the basin from Australian region . Later in the month , Ingrid brought strong winds to Mauritius . Tropical storms Josta and Kylie developed toward the beginning of March from the same overall system , affecting Madagascar and Réunion , respectively . After they dissipated , Tropical Depression Lidy caused flooding and damage on Rodrigues due to heavy rainfall . 
 = = Seasonal summary = = 
 During the year , the Météo @-@ France office on Réunion ( MFR ) issued warnings for tropical systems in the region as the Regional Specialised Meteorological Centre . In the year , MFR tracked tropical cyclones south of the equator from the coast of Africa to 90 ° E. The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) also issued warnings in an unofficial capacity . 
 Several of the storms in the season affected the island of Rodrigues , an outer island of Mauritius ; however , only one – Tropical Depression Lidy – caused damage after dropping heavy rainfall . The season as a whole was much less damaging than the preceding season . There were 58 days in which a storm or cyclone was active , 17 above normal . There were 11 systems that became moderate tropical storms , two above the normal of 9 . The six tropical cyclones – a storm with winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) – was also above the average of five . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Albertine = = = 
 The intertropical convergence zone ( ITCZ ) became active toward the end of November , spawning a low pressure area on November 23 about 400 km ( 250 mi ) east of Diego Garcia . This system quickly organized into a tropical disturbance , aided by favorable conditions . On November 24 , the JTWC began classifying it as Tropical Cyclone 02S . The next day , the system intensified into Tropical Storm Albertine while moving southwestward , steered by a ridge to the southeast . Late on November 25 , an eye developed in the center of the convection , and Albertine intensified to tropical cyclone status the next day . The eye gradually became better organized , attaining a diameter of 90 km ( 55 mi ) on November 28 as Albertine became an intense tropical cyclone . At that time , the MFR estimated peak 10 – minute winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) , with gusts to 250 km / h ( 160 mph ) . In contrast , the JTWC estimated 1 – minute winds of 215 km / h ( 130 mph ) . After moving over an area of cool water temperatures , Albertine quickly weakened and lost its well @-@ defined eye . On November 30 , the center passed about 110 km ( 68 mi ) northwest of Rodrigues after weakening to severe tropical storm status . After weakening gradually , the storm began deteriorating faster due to increasing wind shear . A polar low steered Albertine southeastward until absorbing the system on December 3 . 
 In its formative stages , Albertine brushed Diego Garcia with gusts of 63 km / h ( 39 mph ) . On <unk> , Albertine produced peak gusts of 170 km / h ( 110 mph ) , along with heavy rainfall , causing some damage . The island was under a cyclone watch for 39 hours , the first of the warning system set up by MFR during the season . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Christelle = = = 
 Toward the end of December , the equatorial trough spawned two areas of convection – one persisted southwest of Diego Garcia , which would become Tropical Storm Bentha , and the other persisted between Agalega and the Farquhar Group in the Seychelles . The latter system organized into Tropical Disturbance B1 on December 27 , but wind shear in the region prevented significant development and dislocated the center from the thunderstorms . A ridge to the southeast steered the disturbance slowly southwestward toward Madagascar . As it neared the country , the system turned westward and intensified into a tropical depression after developing a spiral band of convection . On January 2 , the depression made landfall near Antalaha in northeastern Madagascar , and quickly weakened over land . 
 The system moved to the northeast and looped back to the east , influenced by developing Tropical Storm Bentha . On January 4 , after Bentha was named , the system was renamed Tropical Disturbance C1 . Convection gradually reorganized over the center as the two storms interacted and moved cyclonically around each other . The disturbance intensified after Bentha began weakening , becoming Tropical Storm Christelle on January 5 . On the next day , the JTWC began issuing advisories on Tropical Cyclone 07S . Christelle slowly intensified as it turned more to the south , becoming the dominant system after absorbing Bentha . A warm spot formed in the center of the convection , and the MFR estimated peak winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) on January 6 . The same wind shear that weakened Bentha caused Christelle to deteriorate on January 7 . The center passed near Mauritius on January 8 as a tropical depression . Two days later , a cold front steered the system to the southeast , absorbing it after Christelle became extratropical on January 11 . 
 Both Bentha and Christelle brought gusty winds and rainfall to Mauritius , and caused Réunion to be under a cyclone watch for five days . The system also produced rainfall and landslides in Madagascar . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Bentha = = = 
 The same broad system that spawned Christelle also produced an area of convection southwest of Diego Garcia toward the end of December . On January 1 , the convection began organizing , aided by an anticyclone aloft , and it became a tropical depression on the next day . The system quickly intensified into Tropical Storm Bentha on January 3 while moving generally southwestward . Also on that day , the JTWC classified it as Tropical Cyclone 06S . On January 4 , Bentha attained peak winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) , and on the same day the storm began interacting with developing Tropical Storm Christelle to the west . On January 5 , increased shear weakened Bentha , and by the following day the storm deteriorated into a tropical depression . The system passed about 250 km ( 155 mi ) north of Réunion on January 6 , dissipating shortly thereafter near Tromelin Island while being absorbed into Christelle . 
 Both Bentha and Christelle brought gusty winds and rainfall to Mauritius , and caused Réunion to be under a cyclone watch for five days . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Dorina = = = 
 The ITCZ spawned an area of convection and a vortex in the northeastern portion of the basin on January 18 , which organized into a tropical disturbance that day . It initially moved southeastward under the influence of the monsoon , although it gradually recurved back to the southwest . On January 19 , the system intensified into Tropical Storm Dorina , and on the next day the JTWC initiated advisories on it as Tropical Cyclone 08S . Dorina quickly intensified into a tropical cyclone by January 21 , developing a 40 km ( 25 mi ) eye in the center of the convection . Later that day , the storm became an intense tropical cyclone , less than three days after its development ; such a quick time to attain that intensity is unusual for the basin . At 18 : 00 UTC on January 21 , Dorina attained peak winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) , according to the MFR , and 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) according to the JTWC . 
 After moving over an area of cooler waters , Dorina began weakening , indicated by the previously well @-@ defined eye becoming ragged . On January 24 , the cyclone weakened into a severe tropical storm . The motion became more west @-@ southwesterly after the ridge weakened . A passing trough increased shear over Dorina , which caused further weakening and for the convection to deteriorate . However , conditions became more favorable on January 27 , allowing Dorina to re @-@ intensify slightly as it redeveloped an eye feature . On that day , the storm passed about 250 km ( 155 mi ) south of Rodrigues , producing gusts of 115 km / h ( 70 mph ) . Subsequently , Dorina turned back to the southwest and later to the south , influenced by another passing trough that had absorbed Tropical Storm Fodah . Strong wind shear caused the storm to weaken again . On January 31 , Dorina became extratropical while turning to the southeast and was later absorbed into the trough . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Fodah = = = 
 After the remnants of Tropical Depression Eliceca dissipated over Madagascar , an area of disturbed weather persisted over the Mozambique Channel , spawning a low pressure area near Juan de Nova Island on January 21 . Convection greatly increased on the next day , indicating the system became a tropical disturbance . Moving southward , the system became a tropical depression on January 23 as the system organized further , aided by an anticyclone aloft . On January 24 , the depression intensified into Tropical Storm Fodah while near Europa Island , and soon after became a severe tropical storm . The MFR estimated peak winds of 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) , while the JTWC , which initiated advisories that day as Tropical Cyclone 09S , estimated winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) . Gusts on Europa Island were less than 110 km / h ( 70 mph ) , despite the storm being nearby . A strong band of convection spread along the Madagascar coastline , producing gusts of 180 km / h ( 110 mph ) at Morombe . Fodah also produced 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) of rainfall , as well as high seas . Moving around the ridge , Fodah continued southward , encountering stronger wind shear on January 25 . Steady weakening commenced as the convection deteriorated , and Fodah became extratropical on January 26 . A trough turned the remnants to the southeast , absorbing it on January 29 . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Gail = = = 
 The ITCZ spawned an area of convection near Diego Garcia that became a tropical disturbance on January 31 . The system slowly organized due to wind shear in the region , and it moved slowly for several days . On February 4 , the disturbance became a tropical depression after the convection organized slightly . Intensification became more rapid on the next day after conditions became more favorable , allowing the depression to intensify into Tropical Storm Gail . Also on February 5 , the JTWC began issuing warnings on the system as Tropical Cyclone 10S . Gail quickly strengthened while moving southwestward , developing a small , poorly @-@ defined eye in the center of the convection . On February 7 , it attained tropical cyclone status , reaching peak winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . Increasing shear caused Gail to weaken , beginning on February 8 . That night , the center passed less than 30 km ( 20 mi ) north of Rodrigues . Gail maintained its intensity as a severe tropical storm after the shear decreased slightly . A trough turned the storm to the south on February 10 and caused weakening , resulting in Gail 's dissipation on the next day . 
 While Gail approached the island of Rodrigues , the storm produced winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) and gusts to 193 km / h ( 120 mph ) at Port Mathurin . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Heida = = = 
 As Gail was developing , the ITCZ spawned another disturbance in the Australian region on February 3 . On the next day , it crossed 90 ° E into the south @-@ west Indian Ocean as a tropical depression . The system intensified into Tropical Storm Heida on February 5 while moving west @-@ southwestward , although the convection never organized beyond a disorganized central dense overcast . The JTWC initiated advisories that day as Tropical Cyclone 11S , and Heida quickly attained peak winds of 75 km / h ( 45 mph ) . Wind shear in the region caused the storm to weaken into a tropical depression , although Heida briefly re @-@ intensified into a tropical storm on February 6 . A trough in the region steered the circulation to the south @-@ southwest and increased wind shear , resulting in Heida 's dissipation on February 8 . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Ingrid = = = 
 On February 22 , a tropical disturbance formed southwest of Diego Garcia . It moved westward , intensifying into Tropical Storm Ingrid on February 24 . That day , the JTWC began issuing advisories on the storm as Tropical Cyclone 13S . Ingrid turned more to the southwest while passing just east of St. Brandon , where winds reached 56 km / h ( 35 mph ) . After continued intensification , the storm became a tropical cyclone on February 26 while passing between Mauritius and Rodrigues . On Mauritius , winds gusted to 91 km / h ( 56 mph ) at Sir <unk> <unk> International Airport , and the storm produced high waves . On the next day , the MFR estimated peak winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) , while the JTWC estimated winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . Ingrid turned to the southeast and weakened , becoming extratropical on March 1 . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Storm Josta = = = 
 An extended series of low pressure areas spawned what would become Tropical Storm Josta on March 5 near the Comoros in the northern Mozambique Channel . It initially drifted westward while slowly organizing , becoming a tropical storm on March 7 . On that day , the JTWC classified Josta as Tropical Cyclone 16S . On March 8 , Josta approached the coast of Mozambique within 90 km ( 55 mi ) of Pemba before turning abruptly to the east @-@ southeast . The convection fluctuated in intensity , eventually becoming better organized on March 9 . That day , an eye feature formed in the center of the convection , and the MFR estimated peak winds of 105 km / h ( 65 mph ) . By contrast , the JTWC upgraded Josta to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane with winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . The eye feature dissipated soon after due to increased shear , causing Josta to weaken . On March 10 , the storm re @-@ intensified slightly , aided by the monsoon , as it passed 160 km ( 100 mi ) south of Mayotte . It again weakened soon thereafter , with the convection spreading ahead of the circulation over Madagascar . On March 12 , the circulation dissipated off the northwest coast of Madagascar , partially due to the influence of the stronger Kylie to the southeast . Rains from the storm reached 270 mm ( 11 in ) along the coast of Madagascar , despite the storm not making landfall . 
 = = = Moderate Tropical Storm Kylie = = = 
 The same overall system that spawned Josta also produced a disturbance on March 6 off the east coast of Madagascar . While drifting southeastward within a trough , the system slowly organized until becoming a tropical storm on March 7 , the same day that the JTWC classified it as Tropical Cyclone 17S . On the next day , the system was named Kylie as it meandered to the north of Mauritius without further strengthening . The convection organized on March 10 into a central dense overcast , and the next day attained peak winds of 85 km / h ( 50 mph ) , according to the MFR . By contrast , the JTWC assessed Kylie as becoming much stronger , reaching winds of 160 km / h ( 100 mph ) . Subsequently , a trough turned the storm to the southwest , bringing it over the island of Réunion on March 13 . Increased wind shear deteriorated the convection as the storm turned to the southeast on March 14 . The next day , Kylie was absorbed by the trough . 
 On Réunion , Kylie produced rainfall along with gusts of over 100 km / h ( 65 km / h ) , along with high waves . The storm prompted classes to be canceled , as well as for the airport to be closed , causing flights to be canceled . 
 = = = Intense Tropical Cyclone Marlene = = = 
 The final storm of the season formed on March 29 from the ITCZ to the east of Diego Garcia . The large area of convection quickly became more organized , intensifying into Tropical Storm Marlene on March 30 . On that date , the JTWC classified it as Tropical Cyclone 19S . Marlene continued to strengthen as it moved west @-@ southwestward , aided by a surge in the monsoon . An eye formed on March 31 , and on the next day the storm became a tropical cyclone . The eye reached a diameter of 25 km ( 15 mi ) , embedded within a well @-@ defined central dense overcast . Later on April 1 , Marlene became an intense tropical cyclone , just three days after its genesis . That day , it turned to the south due to a passing trough . Less favorable conditions caused Marlene to weaken on April 2 , although it re @-@ intensified the next day . The MFR estimated peak winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) , and the JTWC estimated winds of 230 km / h ( 145 mph ) . The trough that turned it to the south later caused the cyclone to weaken and for the eye to dissipate . On April 5 , Marlene was downgraded into a severe tropical storm and subsequently drifted to the northwest , influenced by a ridge behind the trough . Two days later , the storm turned to the southeast and later to the east , gradually weakening into a tropical depression . On April 11 , a passing trough absorbed Marlene in the eastern periphery of the basin . 
 = = = Other storms = = = 
 On October 1 , an area of convection developed about 500 km ( 310 mi ) Seychelles at a low latitude . Moving southwestward , the system organized into Tropical Disturbance A1 on October 2 , the first of the season . A small central dense overcast subsequently developed over the circulation . A ridge to the south steered the disturbance westward , bringing it just north of the Farquhar Group . On October 5 , the disturbance intensified into a tropical depression , reaching peak winds of 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) . Subsequently , increased wind shear dissipated the convection as the rapidly weakening depression passed north of Madagascar . On October 7 , the circulation dissipated . There were two other disturbances between October and late November . 
 There was a tropical disturbance in the first two weeks of January before Dorina formed . Later in the month , the ITCZ spawned an area of convection in the northern Mozambique Channel near the Comoros . A circulation formed within the system on January 20 near the western coast of Madagascar , quickly becoming a tropical depression . That day , the Meteorological Service of Madagascar named the system Eliceca , but the depression quickly moved inland and dissipated . Two disturbances formed in February after the development of Heida and before Ingrid formed . 
 The ITCZ later produced a disturbance northeast of Rodrigues after Kylie dissipated on March 14 . It intensified into a tropical depression as it moved southwestward . Due to the threat to Rodrigues , the Mauritius Meteorological Service named the depression Lidy on March 15 , although wind shear in the region prevented further strengthening . It produced gusty winds while passing near Rodrigues on March 16 , and subsequently looped near the island . Convection from Lidy produced 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) of rainfall , causing flooding in some areas on Rodrigues . The rains caused erosion and the most damage on the island of any storm in the season . Later , Lidy drifted to the west in the trade winds , dissipating on March 20 to the north of Réunion . After Lidy , there was one final non @-@ developing disturbance . 
 = = Storm names = = 
 A tropical disturbance is named when it reaches moderate tropical storm strength . If a tropical disturbance reaches moderate tropical storm status west of 55 ° E , then the Sub @-@ regional Tropical Cyclone Advisory Centre in Madagascar assigns the appropriate name to the storm . If a tropical disturbance reaches moderate tropical storm status between 55 ° E and 90 ° E , then the Sub @-@ regional Tropical Cyclone Advisory Centre in Mauritius assigns the appropriate name to the storm . A new annual list is used every year , so no names are retired . 
 = Abou Diaby = 
 <unk> Abou Diaby ( French pronunciation : ​ [ abu <unk> ] ; born 11 May 1986 ) , known as Abou Diaby , is a French professional footballer who currently plays for French club Marseille . He plays primarily in a box to box role , as he is adept in both attacking and defending , and is described as a player who is " languid , elusive , and athletic " that can either " dribble past opponents or slip passes to team @-@ mates " . Of Ivorian descent , Diaby also possesses " superb touch " and " excellent close control " . Diaby 's career has been hampered by numerous repetitive injuries , a problem that has existed since his time in France . His physical appearance and positional preference have evoked comparisons to Arsenal legend and compatriot Patrick Vieira . 
 Diaby was born in the 10th arrondissement of Paris , but was raised in the Parisian commune of Aubervilliers . He began his football career playing for hometown club CM Aubervilliers . In 1998 , he joined Red Star Paris . A year later , Diaby was selected to attend the Clairefontaine academy . He spent four years at the academy while simultaneously training with Red Star . A year before departing Clairefontaine , Diaby moved to professional club Paris Saint @-@ Germain . Following an administrative error by club officials which made Diaby a free agent , he joined the academy of Auxerre . He spent two years in the club 's youth academy before making his professional debut in the 2004 – 05 season . Diaby also played in the UEFA Cup with the club . After spending the Autumn portion of the 2005 – 06 season with Auxerre , in January 2006 , Diaby signed with English club Arsenal on a long @-@ term contract for an undisclosed fee . He made his debut with the club that same month and scored his first goal three months later against Aston Villa . Diaby had his ankle broken by Dan Smith of Sunderland five months after joining Arsenal , and has since struggled with numerous injuries . 
 Diaby is a former French youth international having earned caps at under @-@ 19 and under @-@ 21 level . Prior to playing for the senior team , he played on the under @-@ 19 team that won the 2005 UEFA European Under @-@ 19 Football Championship . Diaby made his senior international debut in March 2007 in a UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying match against Lithuania . He has represented France at one major international tournament ; the 2010 FIFA World Cup . Diaby participated in all three group stage matches the team played as a starter . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Diaby was born in the 10th arrondissement of Paris , but was raised in a housing development in Aubervilliers , a northeastern suburb of Paris . He is the son of a long @-@ distance truck driver and developed an interest into the sport of football after becoming fascinated by several players who played on the 1998 FIFA World Cup @-@ winning team , most notably midfield stalwart Patrick Vieira , whom Diaby describes as " a monument to French football " . Diaby was also adept at playing other sports such as basketball and boxing . Of Ivorian descent , Diaby is a practicing Muslim and , while growing up , developed a fascination towards the subjects of religion , philosophy , science , and astronomy . Diaby became interested in accountancy after taking a course at the age of 17 , while he was at the Auxerre youth academy . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Diaby began his football career playing for hometown club CM Aubervilliers in December 1996 . While at Aubervilliers , Diaby was coached by David Giguère and Alain <unk> , the latter now serving as the manager of Red Star Paris . After two years at the club , Diaby 's quick progression at the amateur club led to a move to nearby semi @-@ professional outfit Red Star Paris in Saint @-@ Ouen . While in the club 's youth academy , Diaby was supervised by youth academy director Yves @-@ Henri <unk> and was described by club youth coach Marco <unk> as a player who was " fairly quiet and quite frail " . Diaby started his career at the club playing on its under @-@ 13 team in the Division <unk> Régionale of the Île @-@ de @-@ France region . After spending a year playing with Red Star , in 1999 , he was selected to attend the Clairefontaine academy . While at Clairefontaine , Diaby was a part of A la Clairefontaine , a documentary series which chronicled the lives of the France 's top young footballers during their time at the academy . During the series , an episode showed Diaby getting into a physical confrontation with Hatem Ben Arfa . 
 = = = Auxerre = = = 
 = = = = 2002 – 2004 = = = = 
 Towards the end of his development at Clairefontaine , Diaby departed Red Star to play domestic football with professional club Paris Saint @-@ Germain , despite being a supporter of Marseille . He spent a year at the Camp des Loges , the club 's training center , from 2001 – 2002 . After his departure from Clairefontaine , Diaby was expected to sign a youth contract with Paris Saint @-@ Germain . Club officials wanted to keep the player , however , the club 's human resources department failed to send a " letter of commitment " to Diaby 's parents ahead of the 30 April 2002 deadline , which resulted in the player becoming a free agent . Diaby was hastily recruited by Auxerre scouts and he joined the club 's academy ahead of the 2002 – 03 season . In his first season in the club 's youth academy , he won the Division d 'Honneur des 16 ans , the under @-@ 16 league title of the Bourgogne region . 
 During the 2003 – 04 season , Diaby alternated between playing on the club 's under @-@ 19 team in the Coupe Gambardella and playing in the club 's reserve team in the Championnat de France amateur , the fourth level of French football . During the reserve team season , he played on the team alongside future Arsenal teammate Bacary Sagna , as well as Younès Kaboul , Hassan <unk> , Jean @-@ Joël Perrier @-@ <unk> and former Clairefontaine classmate <unk> Dembélé . Diaby finished the season with the team with 11 appearances and one goal as the team finished first in its group . After the season , he signed his first professional contract with the club agreeing to a three @-@ year deal . Manager Guy Roux subsequently promoted Diaby to the first team and assigned him the number 24 shirt . 
 = = = = 2004 – 2006 = = = = 
 Similar to the previous season , Diaby regularly trained with the first team , while concurrently featuring as a starter on the club 's reserve team . He made his professional debut on 14 August 2004 appearing as a substitute in a 3 – 1 league win over Rennes . After making his debut for the club , Diaby spent the rest of the fall season either playing on the club 's reserve team or dealing with injuries . He returned to the team in March 2005 making his European debut in the team 's UEFA Cup Round of 16 first leg tie against domestic rivals Lille . Diaby appeared in both legs as a substitute as Auxerre won the round 1 – 0 on aggregate . The club later lost in the quarter @-@ finals to Russian club CSKA Moscow . Diaby made his first professional start on 20 March against his former youth club Paris Saint @-@ Germain . He played 74 minutes before being substituted out in a 1 – 0 loss . Diaby made three more appearances as a substitute to close out the season . 
 Following the season , Roux retired as manager of Auxerre after managing the club for 44 straight seasons . He was replaced with former France national team coach Jacques Santini . During the season , Diaby featured early on during the campaign , but as the season wore on , he struggled with injuries , which subsequently , led to the player failing to gain the confidence of Santini . Unlike fellow youngsters Sagna and Kaboul who were quickly establishing themselves at their respective positions , Diaby only featured in five league matches during the first half of the season . The midfielder did score his first professional goal on 10 September 2005 in a 3 – 1 loss to Rennes . In Europe , Diaby featured as a starter in the team 's first round defeat to Bulgarian club Levski Sofia in the UEFA Cup . Midway through the campaign , Diaby was deemed surplus to requirements by management . Following the sale of the player , vice @-@ president Gérard <unk> declared that , " We have always kept the young players which our coach wanted to use , but Diaby did not play , so this was a strategic sale for us . " 
 = = = Arsenal = = = 
 = = = = 2006 – 2009 = = = = 
 On 13 January 2006 , English club Arsenal confirmed that the club had signed Diaby on a long @-@ term contract for an undisclosed fee , later revealed to be £ 2 million . Prior to joining Arsenal , the player had reportedly turned down an offer to join Arsenal 's London rivals Chelsea . Upon joining Arsenal , Diaby was given the number 2 shirt , which was left vacant since the retirement of Lee Dixon . He made his club debut on 21 January 2006 appearing as a substitute in a 1 – 0 defeat to Everton . Three days later , he made his first start in a 2 – 1 Football League Cup victory over Wigan . On 21 February , Diaby made his UEFA Champions League debut appearing as a substitute in the team 's Round of 16 first leg victory over Spanish club Real Madrid . Two weeks later , Diaby assisted on a goal in Arsenal 's 4 – 0 win over Fulham . After dealing with an injury in the month of March , he returned to play in April scoring his first goal for the club in a 5 – 0 victory over Aston Villa on April Fools ' Day 2006 . He was set up for the goal by fellow club newcomer Emmanuel Adebayor . 
 On 1 May , Diaby suffered a severe ankle fracture after being on the receiving end of a tackle , described by the media as " horrendous " , from Sunderland defender Dan Smith . After the match , Wenger described the tackle as " a bad kick and an unnecessary one " and also criticized his competitors ' over @-@ physicality , while interim Sunderland manager Kevin Ball defended Smith stating " Smith is not a malicious , dirty player and I think it 's unfair to make that call on him and say he deliberately went to do it . Dan went for the ball , unfortunately Diaby was quicker than him " . As a result of the injury , Diaby missed the 2006 UEFA Champions League Final , as well as the 2006 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship . He underwent three surgeries to repair the injury and was told by doctors that the injury could possibly be career @-@ ending . Following the surgeries , he underwent eight months of rehabilitation and made his return to first team action in the 2006 – 07 season in a League Cup match against Liverpool . He appeared as a substitute in the match as Arsenal cruised to a 6 – 3 win . On 25 February 2007 , while participating in the 2007 Football League Cup Final against Chelsea , Diaby , while attempting to clear the ball out of the Arsenal defense , accidentally kicked rival defender John Terry in the face . Unconscious , Terry was stretchered off and hospitalized , but recovered to return to the Millennium Stadium in Cardiff for the trophy presentation following Chelsea 's 2 – 1 win . Though Arsenal lost , Diaby was credited with an assist on the team 's only goal of the match , which was converted by Theo Walcott . Diaby scored his first and only goal of the campaign on 14 March in a 1 – 0 win over Aston Villa when he deflected in a Julio Baptista shot . He remained a fixture within the team for the rest of the campaign , mostly as a substitute as he only started in consecutive matches once . 
 In Diaby 's first full season with Arsenal , he scored his first goal on 22 September 2007 in the club 's 5 – 0 win over Derby County . Three days later , he assisted on a goal in a 2 – 0 League Cup win over Newcastle United . In December 2007 , Diaby scored goals in back @-@ to @-@ back matches for the first time in his career . He scored the first goal on 12 December in the team 's final Champions League group stage match against Romanian club Steaua București . Arsenal won the match 2 – 1 . Six days later , Diaby scored Arsenal 's opening goal in the club 's 3 – 2 away win over Blackburn Rovers in the League Cup . Diaby failed to chart anything statistical for the rest of the winter months aside from an assist in a 4 – 1 win over Everton . On 29 March 2008 , Diaby was sent off for the first time in his professional career in a league match against Bolton Wanderers for a studs @-@ up tackle on defender <unk> <unk> . Diaby was defended by Wenger who stated " I don ’ t think Diaby ’ s tackle was malicious , it was more protective " . Wenger also stated that Diaby 's tackle should not be compared to what had happened to teammate Eduardo da Silva a few weeks earlier . Wenger was , subsequently , criticized by the English media for flip @-@ flopping on the subject due to providing differing statements when Arsenal players are on the receiving end of tackles and when they are the aggressors . 
 After serving his red card suspension , Diaby featured in only one match in the final two months of the season . The match was the second leg of the club 's quarter @-@ final Champions League tie against Liverpool . In the match , Diaby netted the opening goal to give Arsenal , who drew 1 – 1 in the first leg , a 2 – 1 advantage . Arsenal , however , conceded four goals from Liverpool and lost the tie 5 – 3 on aggregate . Following the match against Liverpool , Diaby began struggling with a thigh injury . After the injury relapsed in a reserve match in late April , Diaby was ruled out for the rest of the season . 
 Diaby began the 2008 – 09 season late in the season after the thigh injury from the previous season was discovered to be more serious than first thought . He made his debut in the season on 18 October 2008 in a 3 – 1 win over Everton . Three days later , Diaby scored the third goal in a 5 – 2 Champions League group stage win over Fenerbahçe . He appeared regularly in the campaign for the first time in his Arsenal career . On 26 December 2008 , Diaby scored his third career goal against Aston Villa in a 2 – 2 draw . The following month , he assisted on the equalising goal , scored by Robin van Persie , in the team 's 1 – 1 draw with Everton . Diaby scored his second goal of the campaign in Arsenal 's 3 – 1 league win against Newcastle on 21 March . He finished the season by scoring the team 's third goal in the 4 – 1 win over Stoke City . 
 = = = = 2009 – 2012 = = = = 
 Diaby started the 2009 – 10 season healthy for the first time since 2007 and quickly made an impact . Playing alongside Alex Song and Cesc Fàbregas , he became part of the dynamic three @-@ man midfield partnership . On 22 August 2009 , he scored a double in a 4 – 1 win over Portsmouth . The following month , Diaby assisted on a goal in the team 's 3 – 2 comeback win over Belgian club Standard Liège in the Champions League . After alternating between the bench and starting lineup for the rest of September , in November , Diaby returned to the first eleven and responding by scoring the game @-@ winning goal in a 3 – 1 win over Birmingham City . Three weeks later , in the Champions League , he netted another goal in a group stage win over Dutch club AZ . On 7 November , Diaby picked up an injury in a 4 – 1 win over Wolverhampton Wanderers . The injury resulted in the player missing France 's World Cup playoff tie with the Republic of Ireland . 
 Diaby grabbed his fifth goal of the season in a 3 – 0 win over Hull City on 19 December . He also assisted on a goal in the win . A week later , Diaby scored his fourth goal overall against Aston Villa in another 3 – 0 victory . In the new year , Diaby began the 2010 calendar year by assisting on goals in a 2 – 2 draw against Everton and a 4 – 2 win over Bolton . On 10 February , he scored the only goal in a victory over Liverpool . Despite failing to score a goal for the rest of the season , Diaby was ever @-@ present in the waning moments of the season starting 12 of the final 14 matches he appeared in . He finished the campaign with career @-@ highs in matches played , goals , and assists . 
 Diaby began the 2010 – 11 season scoring a goal and issuing an assist in the team 's second match of the season against Blackpool ; a 6 – 0 win . During a match against Bolton at the Emirates Stadium on 11 September , he was injured after a challenge by Paul Robinson . Diaby was replaced in the 72nd minute by Denílson in a 4 – 1 win . Due to the injury , he missed two weeks and return to the team in its 3 – 2 loss to West Bromwich Albion . Diaby featured primarily as a substitute after returning from the injury . On 5 February 2011 , he was sent off after being adjudged to have committed violent conduct on opposing midfielder Joey Barton in a league match away to Newcastle . Prior to Diaby 's expulsion , Arsenal had been leading the match 4 – 0 . The team went on to concede four unanswered goals while playing with ten men , which resulted in the club leaving St James ' Park with only a point . On 10 April , Diaby scored his second goal of the season in a 3 – 1 win against Blackpool . 
 The 2011 – 12 season for Diaby was blighted once again by injury problems . He made just four substitute appearances during the Premier League campaign and one in the UEFA Champions League . 
 = = = = 2012 – 2015 = = = = 
 With the departure of Alex Song ahead of the 2012 – 13 season , Diaby started all three of Arsenal 's opening games . His performance against Liverpool saw him awarded Man of the Match by Sky Sports in Arsenal 's 2 – 0 win at Anfield . However , he was later injured in Arsenal 's 2 @-@ 1 loss against Chelsea on 29 September and was substituted . On 13 January 2013 , Diaby made his return against Manchester City at the Emirates Stadium . This controversial fixture in the Premier League , saw two red cards awarded , one for each team . Arsenal lost the match 2 – 0 . 
 Following several spells on the sidelines during February and March , it was announced on 28 March that Diaby had torn the anterior cruciate ligament ( ACL ) in his left knee and that after surgery , he would be out for approximately eight or nine months . 
 Arsenal announced that Diaby had changed his squad number from 2 to 24 for the 2013 – 14 season . Soon it was announced that he would be out until March 2014 , following further treatment on his knee . 
 On 11 May 2014 , Diaby returned from injury as a substitute in a 2 – 0 win at Norwich City in Arsenal 's final match of the 2013 – 14 Premier League season . 
 On 15 November 2014 , according to some English newspapers , Diaby suffered a hamstring injury which would keep him off the pitch for the next three months . 
 On 10 June 2015 , Diaby was released by Arsenal . 
 = = = Marseille = = = 
 In July 2015 , Diaby signed for French Ligue 1 side Marseille after being out of football since leaving Arsenal in June 2015 . Following continuing injury problems in the first half of the season , he made his return on 18 March 2016 , coming on as a substitute in Marseille 's 5 – 2 home defeat to Rennes . On 3 April 2016 , he started in a league match against Bastia , his first league start in over three years . 
 = = International career = = 
 = = = Youth = = = 
 Diaby played under manager Jean <unk> . <unk> , initially , called up Diaby at under @-@ 18 level for a match against Greece in November 2003 . Diaby , however , was forced to withdraw from the squad after suffering an injury while playing domestically . He made his youth international debut at under @-@ 19 level in a 2 – 1 friendly match win over Turkey . In qualifying for the 2005 European Under @-@ 19 Football Championship , Diaby appeared in all six matches as France finished both the first qualifying round and the Elite Round undefeated . In the tournament , he missed the team 's opening 1 – 1 group stage draw with England due to suspension , but returned to the starting lineup in the team 's 3 – 1 victory over Norway in the second group stage match . Diaby , subsequently , started every remaining match , including the championship match against England . France won the match 3 – 1 giving the nation its sixth under @-@ 19 title and Diaby his first international honor . In total with the under @-@ 19 team , he featured in 12 matches and scored no goals . At under @-@ 21 level , Diaby made his debut on 28 February 2006 in a friendly match against Slovakia . He appeared as a substitute as France won the match 2 – 1 . Due to suffering a fractured ankle domestically , Diaby missed the 2006 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship . Due to repetitive injuries , he missed every qualifier for the 2007 UEFA European Under @-@ 21 Football Championship and made only one more appearance for the team , which occurred in a 1 – 1 draw in a friendly match with Armenia . 
 = = = Senior = = = 
 On 15 March 2007 , Diaby was called up to the senior team for the first time by coach Raymond Domenech for UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying match against Lithuania and a friendly against Austria . He described the call @-@ up as a " huge surprise " primarily because he has just returned from his ankle fracture just two months prior . Diaby made his senior international debut in the qualifier against Lithuania appearing as a substitute for Florent Malouda . He earned his first international start in the ensuing match against Austria ; the game ending in a 1 – 0 victory for France . Following the Austria match , Diaby went without an appearance for France for three years . The midfielder experienced several call ups to the team during the three years , but either withdrew from the squad due to injury or was not preferred by Domenech for a match . Despite this , Diaby was named to Domenech 's 30 @-@ man preliminary squad to participate in the 2010 FIFA World Cup . He made his return to the international scene in the team 's 2 – 1 friendly match win over Costa Rica . Diaby was later named to the 23 @-@ man team to serve as a possible backup in the holding midfield role . 
 Ahead of the competition , it was reported that Domenech was considering changing up the style of play in the team 's 4 – 3 – 3 formation with Malouda possibly moving from the winger role into the midfield . Following Malouda 's relegation to the bench for insubordination , Diaby was inserted in his place and made his World Cup debut in the team 's opening group stage match against Uruguay . The match ended 0 – 0 with Diaby playing the entire match . He was credited by Scottish newspaper The Scotsman as being the team 's best performer in the goalless draw . Diaby featured as a starter in both of France 's remaining group stage matches against Mexico and South Africa . France lost both matches as the competition ultimately ended in disastrous competitively and personally due to the players going on strike in response to its disagreement over the expulsion of striker Nicolas Anelka from the team . As a result of the players ' mutiny , Diaby , along with the 22 other members of the team , were suspended for the team 's friendly match against Norway . 
 Under manager Laurent Blanc , Diaby was penciled in as a starter in the team 's first two competitive matches of the new season . After playing the entire match in a 2 – 0 victory over Luxembourg , he missed the victory against England due to injury . Diaby returned to the team for its 9 February 2011 friendly against Brazil . He appeared as a second @-@ half substitute for Yann M <unk> as France cruised to a 1 – 0 win . In March 2011 , Diaby was called back into the team for matches against Luxembourg and Croatia , but , for the second time in the season , withdrew from the team due to injury . He returned to the team in June 2011 for a UEFA Euro 2012 qualifying match against Belarus and friendly matches against Poland and the Ukraine . Diaby featured in all three matches . Due to injuries during the 2011 – 12 season , he missed UEFA Euro 2012 . 
 After over a year without an appearance at international level , Diaby returned to the national team in September 2012 under new manager Didier Deschamps . In his first appearance since June 2011 , he scored his first international goal in a 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification match against Finland . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Diaby is often described as a typical box @-@ to @-@ box midfielder ; a midfielder who is adept both offensively and defensively . While he can play as a defensive midfielder , Diaby has often attempted to distance himself from that position , admitting that " I am better if I have a holding midfielder with me " . His club manager Arsène Wenger describes him similarly stating " He ( Diaby ) is more of an offensive player . He is not a defensive @-@ minded player and he 's not a holding player . He 's a player who crosses the field at ease , goes from box to box like it 's no distance and has good power as well " . During his early years with Auxerre , he was often used as an attacking midfielder or a support striker due to his technical ability , close control , and dexterity to dribble past opponents or slip passes to team @-@ mates . 
 Upon signing with Arsenal , club manager Wenger likened the player to former club player Patrick Vieira . Wenger compared the two primarily because of the similarities between each player 's physical appearance and positional preference . While the two are similar in appearance , Diaby has admitted that there are huge differences , stating , " I think maybe I am more attack @-@ minded , a more technical player , " and , " Vieira is much more aggressive . He makes more of a physical impact in a game , in midfield . He is amazing . I don ’ t think I have this quality yet . I think I can develop in that way but he is much stronger . " In 2009 , Wenger echoed Diaby 's sentiments , stating , " I believe Vieira was more of a passer of the ball . Diaby is more of a dribbler , more offensive and makes more penetrating runs . Vieira was more of a constructor . They have a similar elegance and type of play but are not completely comparable " . 
 Diaby is often described as being injury @-@ prone . Since returning from his fractured ankle injury in late 2006 , the midfielder has endured persistent niggling injuries that have resulted in Diaby failing to play a full season for his current club . During his second season at Auxerre , a season in which he was expected to get some significant playing time , Diaby failed to gain the confidence of manager Jacques Santini primarily due to repetitive injuries he endured during the Autumn portion of the 2005 – 06 season . After returning to the team , Diaby struggled to return to form , which ultimately resulted in his sale to Arsenal . His highest output for appearances with Arsenal came in the 2009 – 10 season when he played in 40 matches . Arsenal played a total of 55 competitive matches in the season . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 As of 24 <unk> 2016 . 
 = = = International = = = 
 Statistics accurate as of 7 September 2012 
 = = = = International goals = = = = 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 France 
 UEFA European Under @-@ 19 Football Championship : 2005 
 = Bud Grant = 
 Harry Peter " Bud " Grant , Jr . ( born May 20 , 1927 ) is a former coach and player of American football and Canadian football . Grant served as the head coach of the Minnesota Vikings of the National Football League ( NFL ) for eighteen seasons ; he was the team 's second ( 1967 – 83 ) and fourth ( 1985 ) head coach . Before coaching the Vikings , he was the head coach of the Winnipeg Blue Bombers of the Canadian Football League ( CFL ) for ten seasons , winning the Grey Cup four times . Grant is the most successful coach in Vikings history , and the third most successful professional football coach overall ( behind Don Shula and George Halas ) , with a combined 290 wins in the NFL and CFL . Grant was elected to the Canadian Football Hall of Fame in 1983 and to the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1994 . He was the first coach in the history of professional football to guide teams to the Grey Cup finals and the Super Bowl . 
 Grant attended the University of Minnesota and was a three @-@ sport athlete , in football , basketball , and baseball . After college , he played for the Minneapolis Lakers of the National Basketball Association ( NBA ) , the Philadelphia Eagles of the NFL , and the Winnipeg Blue Bombers of the CFL . 
 On October 23 , 2014 , a statue of Grant was unveiled in front of the Winnipeg Blue Bombers ' new stadium , Investors Group Field . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Childhood = = = 
 Bud Grant was born on May 20 , 1927 , in Superior , Wisconsin to Harry Peter Sr. and Bernice Grant . His mother called him " Buddy Boy " , which later became " Bud " . As a child , Grant was diagnosed with poliomyelitis and a doctor suggested he become active in sports to strengthen his weakened leg muscles over time . He started with baseball , adding basketball and football as he got older . Due to a lack of organized school teams , he arranged football games between neighborhoods and contacted kids from other schools to participate . During weekends , he would spend time outdoors alone hunting rabbits . In his late teens and college years , he played organized baseball in Minnesota and Wisconsin . 
 = = = Family = = = 
 Bud married Pat ( formerly Patricia Bellew ; born March 28 , 1927 ) in 1950 , and they had six children . Their son Mike Grant has been the football head coach for Eden Prairie High School in Eden Prairie , Minnesota since 1992 . Mike Grant has coached Eden Prairie to ten state championships since 1996 . Bud Grant 's grandson Ryan Grant was a quarterback and linebacker at Eden Prairie and played at the University of Minnesota ( 2008 @-@ 2012 ) as a linebacker . Bud 's granddaughter Jenny is married to former NFL quarterback Gibran Hamdan . Pat Grant died in 2009 , of Parkinson 's Disease . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = High school and college = = = 
 Grant played football , basketball , and baseball at Superior Central High School ( Wisconsin ) . He graduated from high school in 1945 and enlisted in the Navy during World War II . He was assigned to the Great Lakes Naval Training Station in Illinois and played on the football team coached by Paul Brown . Using an acceptance letter from the University of Wisconsin – Madison to be discharged from the service , Grant decided to attend the University of Minnesota instead . He was a three sport , nine letterman athlete in football , basketball , and baseball for the Minnesota Golden Gophers , earning All @-@ Big Ten honors in football twice . 
 = = = Professional basketball = = = 
 After leaving the University of Minnesota , Grant was selected in both the NFL and NBA Draft . He was selected in the first round ( fourteenth overall ) of the 1950 NFL Draft by the Philadelphia Eagles and fourth round ( forty @-@ second overall ) selection of the Minneapolis Lakers in the 1950 NBA Draft . He played thirty @-@ five games during the 1949 – 50 NBA season and signed with the Lakers for the 1950 – 51 NBA season . He chose to continue his basketball career with the Lakers because they were local and because he was offered a raise to stay for the season . Grant 's close personal friend , Sid Hartman , was the Lakers ' general manager , which may have influenced his decision to remain with the team . He averaged 2 @.@ 6 points per game in his two seasons as a reserve with the Lakers and was a member of the 1950 championship team . 
 = = = Professional football = = = 
 After two seasons in the NBA , Grant decided to end his professional basketball career . He contacted the Philadelphia Eagles of the NFL and agreed to play for the team during the 1951 NFL season . In his first season with the Eagles , Grant played as a defensive end and led the team in sacks ( an unofficial statistic at the time ) . He switched to offense as a wide receiver for his second season with the club and ranked second in the NFL for receiving yardage , with 997 yards on fifty @-@ six catches , including seven touchdowns . 
 Grant 's contract expired at the end of the 1952 NFL season and the Eagles refused to pay him what he thought he was worth . The Winnipeg Blue Bombers of the CFL had been interested in Grant while in college . Grant left for Winnipeg , Canada in 1953 and became the first professional player to " play out his option " and leave for another team . He played for the Blue Bombers until 1956 as an offensive end and was named a Western Conference all @-@ star three times . He led the Western Conference in pass receptions for the 1953 , 1954 , and 1956 seasons and receiving yards for the 1953 and 1956 seasons . He also holds the distinction of having five interceptions in a playoff game , played on October 28 , 1953 , which is a CFL record . The Blue Bombers played for the Grey Cup in 1953 , but lost to the Hamilton Tiger @-@ Cats in the 41st Grey Cup game . 
 = = Coaching career = = 
 = = = Winnipeg Blue Bombers = = = 
 Blue Bombers management decided that they needed a new coach prior to the 1957 season . On January 30 , 1957 , Grant accepted the Blue Bombers head coaching position after impressing management with his ability to make adjustments on offense and defense as a player . Club president , J.T. Russell , thought that Grant could coach even though nobody else did . Grant would remain the head coach of the Blue Bombers until 1966 . At age 29 ( he would be 30 by the time he coached his first game ) , Grant became the youngest head coach in CFL history . 
 During his ten seasons as head coach in Winnipeg , he led the team to six Grey Cup appearances , winning the championship four times in 1958 , 1959 , 1961 , and 1962 . He finished his Blue Bombers coaching career with a regular season record of 105 wins , 53 losses , and two ties and an overall record of 122 wins , 66 losses , and 3 ties . Grant was the CFL Coach of the Year in 1965 . Grant took on additional responsibilities as a club manager between 1964 and 1966 . Max Winter , the Minnesota Vikings founder , contacted Grant in 1961 and asked him to coach the new NFL expansion team . Grant declined the offer and remained in Winnipeg until 1967 when Winter and General Manager Jim Finks were successful in luring Grant to Minnesota . 
 = = = Minnesota Vikings = = = 
 Grant continued his coaching success in the NFL as he took over from original coach , Norm Van Brocklin . Over his tenure as Vikings head coach , Grant was known for instilling discipline in his teams and displaying a lack of emotion during games . He believed that football is a game of controlled emotion and teams would not follow the coach 's lead if he were to panic or lose his poise during the course of a game . He required his team to stand at attention in a straight line during the entire national anthem played before the game and even had national anthem practice . Grant required outdoor practice during the winter to get players used to the cold weather and would not allow heaters on the sidelines during games . 
 Grant and Finks orchestrated a rare trade in between leagues , which brought Joe Kapp from the British Columbia Lions to the Vikings . In return , the Vikings sent Jim Young , a Canadian born player , back to his native country . 
 In his second year , Grant led the team to a divisional championship and his first NFL playoffs appearance . In 1969 , he led the team to its first NFL Championship and their first appearance in the Super Bowl . The Vikings lost in Super Bowl IV to the American Football League champion Kansas City Chiefs . Prior to the 1970 season , Minnesota released Joe Kapp . After starting Gary <unk> at quarterback in 1970 and 1971 , the Vikings re @-@ acquired Fran Tarkenton prior to the 1972 season . During the 1970s , the Vikings would appear in three more Super Bowls ( VIII , IX , and XI ) under Grant and lose each one , but he was the first coach to lead a team to four Super Bowls . He retired after the 1983 NFL season and was succeeded by Les Steckel , who led the team to a 3 @-@ 13 record the following season . Steckel was fired as head coach after the 1984 season and Grant returned as coach for the Vikings in 1985 . After one season where he returned the club to a 7 @-@ 9 record , he stepped down again . Grant retired as the eighth most successful coach in NFL history with an overall record of 161 wins , 99 losses , and 5 ties . As of 2014 , he also remains the most successful coach in Vikings history . During his tenure with the Vikings , he led the Vikings to four Super Bowls , eleven division titles , one league championship and three NFC conference championships . 
 = = Head coaching record = = 
 = = Post @-@ coaching career = = 
 After retiring , Grant became a less prominent public figure and focused on hunting and fishing and supporting environmental reforms . He has been a spokesperson against Native American hunting and fishing treaty rights in Minnesota . In 1993 , Grant 's efforts resulted in a death threat . In 2005 , he spoke at a Capitol rally in Minnesota for the conservation of wetlands , wetland wildlife , and water . Grant addressed 5 @,@ 000 supporters , saying , " In this legislative session , we want to see some action . It ’ s more important than any stadium they could ever build in this state . " 
 Grant is still listed as a consultant for the Vikings and maintains an office at the team 's headquarters in Eden Prairie . 
 = Gerald Ford = 
 Gerald Rudolph Ford Jr . ( born Leslie Lynch King Jr . ; July 14 , 1913 – December 26 , 2006 ) was an American politician who served as the 38th President of the United States from 1974 to 1977 . Prior to this he was the 40th Vice President of the United States , serving from 1973 until President Richard Nixon 's resignation in 1974 . He was the first person appointed to the vice presidency under the terms of the 25th Amendment , following the resignation of Vice President Spiro Agnew on October 10 , 1973 . Becoming president upon Richard Nixon 's departure on August 9 , 1974 , he claimed the distinction as the first and to date the only person to have served as both Vice President and President of the United States without being elected to either office . As he was appointed to fill a vacancy and then succeeded to the presidency , Ford also earned the distinction of being the only person in American history to neither begin nor finish either a presidential or vice presidential term on the date of a regularly @-@ scheduled inauguration . Before ascending to the vice presidency , Ford served 25 years as Representative from Michigan 's 5th congressional district , the final 9 of them as the House Minority Leader . 
 As President , Ford signed the Helsinki Accords , marking a move toward détente in the Cold War . With the conquest of South Vietnam by North Vietnam nine months into his presidency , U.S. involvement in Vietnam essentially ended . Domestically , Ford presided over the worst economy in the four decades since the Great Depression , with growing inflation and a recession during his tenure . One of his more controversial acts was to grant a presidential pardon to President Richard Nixon for his role in the Watergate scandal . During Ford 's presidency , foreign policy was characterized in procedural terms by the increased role Congress began to play , and by the corresponding curb on the powers of the President . In the GOP presidential primary campaign of 1976 , Ford defeated then @-@ former California Governor Ronald Reagan for the Republican nomination . He narrowly lost the presidential election to the Democratic challenger , then @-@ former Georgia Governor Jimmy Carter , on November 2 . 
 Following his years as President , Ford remained active in the Republican Party . After experiencing health problems , he died in his home on December 26 , 2006 . Ford lived longer than any other U.S. president , 93 years and 165 days , while his 895 @-@ day presidency remains the shortest term of all presidents who did not die in office . As of 2016 , he is also the most recent former president and vice president to die . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Gerald Rudolph Ford was born Leslie Lynch King Jr . , on July 14 , 1913 , at <unk> Woolworth Avenue in Omaha , Nebraska , where his parents lived with his paternal grandparents . His mother was Dorothy Ayer Gardner , and his father was Leslie Lynch King Sr. , a wool trader and a son of prominent banker Charles Henry King and Martha Alicia King ( née Porter ) . Dorothy separated from King just sixteen days after her son 's birth . She took her son with her to the Oak Park , Illinois home of her sister <unk> and brother @-@ in @-@ law , Clarence Haskins James . From there , she moved to the home of her parents , Levi Addison Gardner and Adele Augusta Ayer , in Grand Rapids , Michigan . Dorothy and King divorced in December 1913 ; she gained full custody of her son . Ford 's paternal grandfather Charles Henry King paid child support until shortly before his death in 1930 . 
 Ford later said his biological father had a history of hitting his mother . James M. Cannon , a member of the Ford administration , wrote in a biography of Ford that the Kings ' separation and divorce were sparked when , a few days after Ford 's birth , Leslie King took a butcher knife and threatened to kill his wife , his infant son , and Ford 's nursemaid . Ford later told confidantes that his father had first hit his mother on their honeymoon for smiling at another man . 
 After two and a half years with her parents , on February 1 , 1916 , Dorothy married Gerald <unk> Ford , a salesman in a family @-@ owned paint and varnish company . They then called her son Gerald <unk> Ford Jr . The future president was never formally adopted , and did not legally change his name until December 3 , 1935 ; he also used a more conventional spelling of his middle name . He was raised in Grand Rapids with his three half brothers from his mother 's second marriage : Thomas Gardner " Tom " Ford ( 1918 – 1995 ) , Richard Addison " Dick " Ford ( 1924 – 2015 ) , and James Francis " Jim " Ford ( 1927 – 2001 ) . 
 Ford also had three half @-@ siblings from the second marriage of Leslie King Sr. , his biological father : Marjorie King ( 1921 – 1993 ) , Leslie Henry King ( 1923 – 1976 ) , and Patricia Jane King ( born 1925 ) . They never saw one another as children and he did not know them at all . Ford was not aware of his biological father until he was 17 , when his parents told him about the circumstances of his birth . That year his biological father , whom Ford described as a " carefree , well @-@ to @-@ do man who didn 't really give a damn about the hopes and dreams of his firstborn son " , approached Ford while he was waiting tables in a Grand Rapids restaurant . The two " maintained a sporadic contact " until Leslie King Sr. ' s death in 1941 . 
 Ford said that " My stepfather was a magnificent person and my mother equally wonderful . So I couldn 't have written a better prescription for a superb family upbringing . " 
 Ford was involved in the Boy Scouts of America , and earned that program 's highest rank , Eagle Scout . He is the only Eagle Scout to have ascended to the U.S. presidency . 
 Ford attended Grand Rapids South High School , where he was a star athlete and captain of his football team . In 1930 , he was selected to the All @-@ City team of the Grand Rapids City League . He also attracted the attention of college recruiters . 
 = = College and law school = = 
 Attending the University of Michigan as an undergraduate , Ford became a member of the Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity ( Omicron chapter ) and washed dishes at his fraternity house to earn money for college expenses . 
 Ford played center , linebacker and long snapper for the school 's football team , and helped the Wolverines to undefeated seasons and national titles in 1932 and 1933 . The team suffered a steep decline in his 1934 senior year , however , winning only one game . Ford was the team 's star nonetheless . After a game during which Michigan held heavily favored Minnesota ( the eventual national champion ) to a scoreless tie in the first half , assistant coach Bennie Oosterbaan later said , " When I walked into the dressing room at halftime , I had tears in my eyes I was so proud of them . Ford and [ Cedric ] Sweet played their hearts out . They were everywhere on defense . " Ford later recalled , " During 25 years in the rough @-@ and @-@ tumble world of politics , I often thought of the experiences before , during , and after that game in 1934 . Remembering them has helped me many times to face a tough situation , take action , and make every effort possible despite adverse odds . " His teammates later voted Ford their most valuable player , with one assistant coach noting , " They felt Jerry was one guy who would stay and fight in a losing cause . " 
 During Ford 's senior year a controversy developed when the Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets refused to play a scheduled game if a black player named Willis Ward took the field . Even after protests from students , players and alumni , university officials opted to keep Ward out of the game . Ford was Ward 's best friend on the team and they roomed together while on road trips . Ford reportedly threatened to quit the team in response to the university 's decision , but eventually agreed to play against Georgia Tech when Ward personally asked him to play . 
 During the same season , in a game against the University of Chicago , Ford became the only future U.S. president to tackle a future Heisman Trophy winner when he brought down running back Jay Berwanger , who won the Heisman Trophy the following year . In 1934 , Ford was selected for the Eastern Team on the Shriner 's East West Crippled Children game at San Francisco ( a benefit for crippled children ) , played on January 1 , 1935 . As part of the 1935 Collegiate All @-@ Star football team , Ford played against the Chicago Bears in the Chicago College All @-@ Star Game at Soldier Field . In honor of his athletic accomplishments and his later political career , the University of Michigan retired Ford 's No. 48 jersey in 1994 . With the blessing of the Ford family , it was placed back into circulation in 2012 as part of the Michigan Football Legends program and issued to sophomore linebacker Desmond Morgan before a home game against Illinois on October 13 . 
 Ford remained interested in football and his school throughout life , occasionally attending games . Ford also visited with players and coaches during practices , at one point asking to join the players in the huddle . Ford often had the Naval band play the University of Michigan fight song , The Victors , before state events instead of Hail to the Chief . 
 Following his graduation in 1935 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in Economics , Ford turned down contract offers from the Detroit Lions and Green Bay Packers of the National Football League . Instead , in September 1935 he took job as the boxing coach and assistant varsity football coach at Yale University , and applied to its law school . 
 Ford hoped to attend Yale 's law school beginning in 1935 . Yale officials at denied his admission to the law school because of his full @-@ time coaching responsibilities . He spent the summer of 1937 as a student at the University of Michigan Law School and was eventually admitted in the spring of 1938 to Yale Law School . Ford earned his LL.B. degree in 1941 ( later amended to Juris Doctor ) , graduating in the top 25 percent of his class . 
 While attending Yale Law School , Ford joined a group of students led by R. Douglas Stuart Jr . , and signed a petition to enforce the 1939 Neutrality Act . The petition was circulated nationally and was the inspiration for the America First Committee , a group determined to keep the U.S. out of World War II . In the summer of 1940 he worked in Wendell Willkie 's presidential campaign . 
 Ford graduated from law school in 1941 , and was admitted to the Michigan bar shortly thereafter . In May 1941 , he opened a Grand Rapids law practice with a friend , Philip W. <unk> , who would later serve as Ford 's White House counsel . 
 = = U.S. Navy Reserve : World War II = = 
 Ford responded to the December 7 , 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor by enlisting in the Navy . He received a commission as ensign in the U.S. Naval Reserve on April 13 , 1942 . On April 20 , he reported for active duty to the V @-@ 5 instructor school at Annapolis , Maryland . After one month of training , he went to Navy Preflight School in Chapel Hill , North Carolina , where he was one of 83 instructors and taught elementary navigation skills , ordnance , gunnery , first aid , and military drill . In addition , he coached in all nine sports that were offered , but mostly in swimming , boxing and football . During the year he was at the Preflight School , he was promoted to Lieutenant , Junior Grade , on June 2 , 1942 , and to Lieutenant , in March 1943 . 
 = = = Sea duty = = = 
 After applying for sea duty , Ford was sent in May 1943 to the pre @-@ commissioning detachment for the new aircraft carrier USS Monterey ( <unk> @-@ 26 ) , at New York Shipbuilding Corporation , Camden , New Jersey . From the ship 's commissioning on June 17 , 1943 , until the end of December 1944 , Ford served as the assistant navigator , Athletic Officer , and antiaircraft battery officer on board the Monterey . While he was on board , the carrier participated in many actions in the Pacific Theater with the Third and Fifth Fleets in late 1943 and 1944 . In 1943 , the carrier helped secure Makin Island in the Gilberts , and participated in carrier strikes against Kavieng , New Ireland in 1943 . During the spring of 1944 , the Monterey supported landings at Kwajalein and Eniwetok and participated in carrier strikes in the Marianas , Western Carolines , and northern New Guinea , as well as in the Battle of the Philippine Sea . After an overhaul , from September to November 1944 , aircraft from the Monterey launched strikes against Wake Island , participated in strikes in the Philippines and Ryukyus , and supported the landings at Leyte and Mindoro . 
 Although the ship was not damaged by Japanese forces , the Monterey was one of several ships damaged by the typhoon that hit Admiral William Halsey 's Third Fleet on December 18 – 19 , 1944 . The Third Fleet lost three destroyers and over 800 men during the typhoon . The Monterey was damaged by a fire , which was started by several of the ship 's aircraft tearing loose from their cables and colliding on the hangar deck . During the storm , Ford narrowly avoided becoming a casualty himself . As he was going to his battle station on the bridge of the ship in the early morning of December 18 , the ship rolled twenty @-@ five degrees , which caused Ford to lose his footing and slide toward the edge of the deck . The two @-@ inch steel ridge around the edge of the carrier slowed him enough so he could roll , and he twisted into the catwalk below the deck . As he later stated , " I was lucky ; I could have easily gone overboard . " 
 Ford , serving as General Quarters Officer of the Deck , was ordered to go below to assess the raging fire . He did so safely , and reported his findings back to the ship 's commanding officer , Captain Stuart Ingersoll . The ship 's crew was able to contain the fire , and the ship got underway again . 
 After the fire , the Monterey was declared unfit for service , and the crippled carrier reached Ulithi on December 21 before continuing across the Pacific to Bremerton , Washington where it underwent repairs . On December 24 , 1944 , at Ulithi , Ford was detached from the ship and sent to the Navy Pre @-@ Flight School at Saint Mary 's College of California , where he was assigned to the Athletic Department until April 1945 . One of his duties was to coach football . From the end of April 1945 to January 1946 , he was on the staff of the Naval Reserve Training Command , Naval Air Station , Glenview , Illinois , as the Staff Physical and Military Training Officer . On October 3 , 1945 , he was promoted to Lieutenant Commander . 
 Ford received the following military awards : the American Campaign Medal , the Asiatic @-@ Pacific Campaign Medal with nine 3 ⁄ 16 " bronze stars ( for operations in the Gilbert Islands , Bismarck Archipelago , Marshall Islands , Asiatic and Pacific carrier raids , Hollandia , Marianas , Western Carolines , Western New Guinea , and the Leyte Operation ) , the Philippine Liberation Medal with two 3 ⁄ 16 " bronze stars ( for Leyte and Mindoro ) , and the World War II Victory Medal . 
 = = = Post @-@ war = = = 
 In January 1946 , Ford was sent to the Separation Center , Great Lakes to be processed out . He was released from active duty under honorable conditions on February 23 , 1946 . On June 28 , 1946 , the Secretary of the Navy accepted Ford 's resignation from the Naval Reserve . 
 Ford was a member of several civic organizations , including the Junior Chamber of Commerce ( Jaycees ) , American Legion , <unk> , Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks , Sons of the Revolution , and Veterans of Foreign Wars . 
 Ford was initiated into Freemasonry on September 30 , 1949 . He later said in 1975 , " When I took my obligation as a master mason — incidentally , with my three younger brothers — I recalled the value my own father attached to that order . But I had no idea that I would ever be added to the company of the Father of our Country and 12 other members of the order who also served as Presidents of the United States . " 
 = = Marriage and children = = 
 On October 15 , 1948 , at Grace Episcopal Church in Grand Rapids , Ford married Elizabeth Bloomer Warren ( 1918 – 2011 ) , a department store fashion consultant . Warren had been a John Robert Powers fashion model and a dancer in the auxiliary troupe of the Martha Graham Dance Company . She had previously been married to and divorced from William G. Warren . 
 At the time of his engagement , Ford was campaigning for what would be his first of thirteen terms as a member of the United States House of Representatives . The wedding was delayed until shortly before the elections because , as The New York Times reported in a 1974 profile of Betty Ford , " Jerry was running for Congress and wasn 't sure how voters might feel about his marrying a divorced ex @-@ dancer . " 
 The couple had four children : 
 Michael Gerald , born in 1949 
 John Gardner , known as Jack , born in 1951 
 Steven Meigs , born in 1956 
 Susan Elizabeth , born in 1958 
 = = House of Representatives = = 
 After returning to Grand Rapids in 1946 , Ford became active in local Republican politics , and supporters urged him to take on Bartel J. <unk> , the incumbent Republican congressman . Military service had changed his view of the world . " I came back a converted internationalist " , Ford wrote , " and of course our congressman at that time was an avowed , dedicated isolationist . And I thought he ought to be replaced . Nobody thought I could win . I ended up winning two to one . " 
 During his first campaign in 1948 , Ford visited voters at their doorsteps and as they left the factories where they worked . Ford also visited local farms where , in one instance , a wager resulted in Ford spending two weeks milking cows following his election victory . 
 Ford was a member of the House of Representatives for 25 years , holding the Grand Rapids congressional district seat from 1949 to 1973 . It was a tenure largely notable for its modesty . As an editorial in The New York Times described him , Ford " saw himself as a negotiator and a <unk> , and the record shows it : he did not write a single piece of major legislation in his entire career . " Appointed to the House Appropriations Committee two years after being elected , he was a prominent member of the Defense Appropriations Subcommittee . Ford described his philosophy as " a moderate in domestic affairs , an internationalist in foreign affairs , and a conservative in fiscal policy . " Ford was known to his colleagues in the House as a " Congressman 's Congressman " . 
 In the early 1950s , Ford declined offers to run for either the Senate or the Michigan governorship . Rather , his ambition was to become Speaker of the House . 
 = = = Warren Commission = = = 
 On November 29 , 1963 , Democratic President Lyndon B. Johnson appointed Ford to the Warren Commission , a special task force set up to investigate the assassination of President John F. Kennedy . Ford was assigned to prepare a biography of Lee Harvey Oswald , the accused assassin . According to a 1963 FBI memo released in 2008 , Ford was in contact with the FBI throughout his time on the Warren Commission and relayed information to the deputy director , <unk> DeLoach , about the panel 's activities . In the preface to his book , A Presidential Legacy and The Warren Commission , Ford defended the work of the commission and reiterated his support of its conclusions . 
 = = = House Minority Leader = = = 
 In 1964 , Lyndon Johnson led a landslide victory for his party , securing another term as president and taking 36 seats from Republicans in the House of Representatives . Following the election , members of the Republican caucus looked to select a new Minority Leader . Three members approached Ford to see if he would be willing to serve ; after consulting with his family , he agreed . After a closely contested election , Ford was chosen to replace Charles Halleck of Indiana as Minority Leader . 
 In January 1965 , the Republicans had 140 seats in the House compared with the 295 seats held by the Democrats . With that large majority , and a majority in the U.S. Senate , the Johnson Administration proposed and passed a series of programs that was called by Johnson the " Great Society . " During the first session of the Eighty @-@ ninth Congress alone , the Johnson Administration submitted 87 bills to Congress , and Johnson signed 84 , or 96 % , arguably the most successful legislative agenda in Congressional history . 
 In 1966 , criticism over the Johnson Administration 's handling of the Vietnam War began to grow , with Ford and Congressional Republicans expressing concern that the United States was not doing what was necessary to win the war . Public sentiment also began to move against Johnson , and the 1966 midterm elections saw a 47 @-@ seat swing in favor of the Republicans . This was not enough to give Republicans a majority in the House , but the victory gave Ford the opportunity to prevent the passage of further Great Society programs . 
 Ford 's private criticism of the Vietnam War became public following a speech from the floor of the House , in which he questioned whether the White House had a clear plan to bring the war to a successful conclusion . The speech angered President Johnson , who accused Ford of playing " too much football without a helmet " . 
 As Minority Leader in the House , Ford appeared in a popular series of televised press conferences with Illinois Senator Everett Dirksen , in which they proposed Republican alternatives to Johnson 's policies . Many in the press jokingly called this " The Ev and Jerry Show . " Johnson said at the time , " Jerry Ford is so dumb he can 't fart and chew gum at the same time . " The press , used to sanitizing LBJ 's salty language , reported this as " Gerald Ford can 't walk and chew gum at the same time . " 
 After President Nixon was elected in November 1968 , Ford 's role shifted to being an advocate for the White House agenda . Congress passed several of Nixon 's proposals , including the National Environmental Policy Act and the Tax Reform Act of 1969 . Another high @-@ profile victory for the Republican minority was the State and Local Fiscal Assistance act . Passed in 1972 , the act established a Revenue Sharing program for state and local governments . Ford 's leadership was instrumental in shepherding revenue sharing through Congress , and resulted in a bipartisan coalition that supported the bill with 223 votes in favor ( compared with 185 against ) . 
 During the eight years ( 1965 – 1973 ) that Ford served as Minority Leader , he won many friends in the House because of his fair leadership and inoffensive personality . 
 = = Vice presidency ( 1973 – 74 ) = = 
 On October 10 , 1973 , Vice President Spiro Agnew resigned and then pleaded no contest to criminal charges of tax evasion and money laundering , part of a negotiated resolution to a scheme in which he accepted $ 29 @,@ 500 in bribes while governor of Maryland . According to The New York Times , Nixon " sought advice from senior Congressional leaders about a replacement . The advice was unanimous . ' We gave Nixon no choice but Ford , ' House Speaker Carl Albert recalled later " . 
 Ford was nominated to take Agnew 's position on October 12 , the first time the vice @-@ presidential vacancy provision of the 25th Amendment had been implemented . The United States Senate voted 92 to 3 to confirm Ford on November 27 . Only three Senators , all Democrats , voted against Ford 's confirmation : Gaylord Nelson of Wisconsin , Thomas Eagleton of Missouri and William Hathaway of Maine . On December 6 , 1973 , the House confirmed Ford by a vote of 387 to 35 . One hour after the confirmation vote in the House , Ford took the oath of office as Vice President of the United States . 
 Ford became Vice President as the Watergate scandal was unfolding . On Thursday , August 1 , Chief of Staff Alexander Haig contacted Ford to tell him that " smoking gun " evidence had been found . The evidence left little doubt that President Nixon had been a part of the Watergate cover @-@ up . At the time , Ford and his wife , Betty , were living in suburban Virginia , waiting for their expected move into the newly designated vice president 's residence in Washington , D.C. However , " Al Haig [ asked ] to come over and see me , " Ford later said , " to tell me that there would be a new tape released on a Monday , and he said the evidence in there was devastating and there would probably be either an impeachment or a resignation . And he said , ' I 'm just warning you that you 've got to be prepared , that things might change dramatically and you could become President . ' And I said , ' Betty , I don 't think we 're ever going to live in the vice president 's house . ' " 
 = = Presidency ( 1974 – 77 ) = = 
 = = = Swearing @-@ in = = = 
 When Nixon resigned on August 9 , 1974 , Ford assumed the presidency , making him the only person to assume the presidency without having been previously voted into either the presidential or vice presidential office . Immediately after taking the oath of office in the East Room of the White House , he spoke to the assembled audience in a speech broadcast live to the nation . Ford noted the peculiarity of his position : " I am acutely aware that you have not elected me as your president by your ballots , and so I ask you to confirm me as your president with your prayers . " He went on to state : 
 I have not sought this enormous responsibility , but I will not shirk it . Those who nominated and confirmed me as Vice President were my friends and are my friends . They were of both parties , elected by all the people and acting under the Constitution in their name . It is only fitting then that I should pledge to them and to you that I will be the President of all the people . 
 He also stated : 
 My fellow Americans , our long national nightmare is over . Our Constitution works ; our great Republic is a government of laws and not of men . Here , the people rule . But there is a higher Power , by whatever name we honor Him , who ordains not only righteousness but love , not only justice , but mercy . ... let us restore the golden rule to our political process , and let brotherly love purge our hearts of suspicion and hate . 
 A portion of the speech would later be memorialized with a plaque at the entrance to his presidential museum . 
 On August 20 , Ford nominated former New York Governor Nelson Rockefeller to fill the vice presidency he had vacated . Rockefeller 's top competitor had been George H. W. Bush . Rockefeller underwent extended hearings before Congress , which caused embarrassment when it was revealed he made large gifts to senior aides , such as Henry Kissinger . Although conservative Republicans were not pleased that Rockefeller was picked , most of them voted for his confirmation , and his nomination passed both the House and Senate . Some , including Barry Goldwater , voted against him . 
 = = = Pardon of Nixon = = = 
 On September 8 , 1974 , Ford issued Proclamation <unk> , which gave Nixon a full and unconditional pardon for any crimes he might have committed against the United States while President . In a televised broadcast to the nation , Ford explained that he felt the pardon was in the best interests of the country , and that the Nixon family 's situation " is a tragedy in which we all have played a part . It could go on and on and on , or someone must write the end to it . I have concluded that only I can do that , and if I can , I must . " 
 The Nixon pardon was highly controversial . Critics derided the move and said a " corrupt bargain " had been struck between the men . They said that Ford 's pardon was granted in exchange for Nixon 's resignation , which had elevated Ford to the presidency . Ford 's first press secretary and close friend Jerald terHorst resigned his post in protest after the pardon . According to Bob Woodward , Nixon Chief of Staff Alexander Haig proposed a pardon deal to Ford . He later decided to pardon Nixon for other reasons , primarily the friendship he and Nixon shared . Regardless , historians believe the controversy was one of the major reasons Ford lost the election in 1976 , an observation with which Ford agreed . In an editorial at the time , The New York Times stated that the Nixon pardon was a " profoundly unwise , divisive and unjust act " that in a stroke had destroyed the new president 's " credibility as a man of judgment , candor and competence " . On October 17 , 1974 , Ford testified before Congress on the pardon . He was the first sitting President since Abraham Lincoln to testify before the House of Representatives . 
 In the months following the pardon , Ford often declined to mention President Nixon by name , referring to him in public as " my predecessor " or " the former president . " When , on a 1974 trip to California , White House correspondent Fred Barnes pressed Ford on the matter , Ford replied in surprisingly frank manner : " I just can ’ t bring myself to do it . ” 
 After Ford left the White House in January 1977 , the former President privately justified his pardon of Nixon by carrying in his wallet a portion of the text of Burdick v. United States , a 1915 U.S. Supreme Court decision which stated that a pardon indicated a presumption of guilt , and that acceptance of a pardon was tantamount to a confession of that guilt . In 2001 , the John F. Kennedy Library Foundation awarded the John F. Kennedy Profile in Courage Award to Ford for his pardon of Nixon . In presenting the award to Ford , Senator Edward Kennedy said that he had initially been opposed to the pardon of Nixon , but later decided that history had proved Ford to have made the correct decision . 
 = = = Draft dodgers and deserters = = = 
 On September 16 , shortly after he announced the Nixon pardon , Ford introduced a conditional amnesty program for Vietnam War draft dodgers who had fled to countries such as Canada , and for military deserters , in Presidential Proclamation <unk> . The conditions of the amnesty required that those reaffirm their allegiance to the United States and serve two years working in a public service job or a total of two years service for those who had served less than two years of honorable service in the military . The program for the Return of Vietnam Era Draft <unk> and Military Deserters established a Clemency Board to review the records and make recommendations for receiving a Presidential Pardon and a change in Military discharge status . Full pardon for draft dodgers came in the Carter Administration . 
 = = = Administration officials = = = 
 Upon assuming office , Ford inherited Nixon 's Cabinet . During Ford 's brief administration , all members were replaced except Secretary of State Kissinger and Secretary of the Treasury William E. Simon . Ford 's dramatic reorganization of his Cabinet in the fall of 1975 has been referred to by political commentators as the " Halloween Massacre " . One of Ford 's appointees , William Coleman , as Secretary of Transportation , was the second black man to serve in a presidential cabinet ( after Robert C. Weaver ) and the first appointed in a Republican administration . 
 Other cabinet @-@ level posts : 
 White House Chief of Staff 
 Alexander Haig ( 1974 ) 
 Donald Rumsfeld ( 1974 – 1975 ) 
 Dick Cheney ( 1975 – 1977 ) 
 Director of the Office of Management and Budget 
 Roy Ash ( 1974 – 1975 ) 
 James Thomas Lynn ( 1975 – 1977 ) 
 United States Trade Representative 
 William Denman Eberle ( 1974 – 1975 ) 
 Frederick B. Dent ( 1975 – 1977 ) 
 Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency 
 Russell E. Train ( 1974 – 1977 ) 
 United States Ambassador to the United Nations 
 John A. <unk> ( 1974 – 1975 ) 
 Daniel Patrick Moynihan ( 1975 – 1976 ) 
 William Scranton ( 1976 – 1977 ) 
 Other important posts : 
 United States National Security Advisor 
 Henry Kissinger ( 1974 – 1975 ) 
 Brent Scowcroft ( 1975 – 1977 ) 
 Director of Central Intelligence 
 William Colby ( 1974 – 1976 ) 
 George H. W. Bush ( 1976 – 1977 ) 
 Press Secretary 
 Jerald terHorst ( 1974 ) 
 Ron <unk> ( 1974 – 1977 ) 
 Ford selected George H.W. Bush as Chief of the US Liaison Office to the People 's Republic of China in 1974 , and then Director of the Central Intelligence Agency in late 1975 . 
 Ford 's transition chairman and first Chief of Staff was former congressman and ambassador Donald Rumsfeld . In 1975 , Rumsfeld was named by Ford as the youngest @-@ ever Secretary of Defense . Ford chose a young Wyoming politician , Richard Cheney , to replace Rumsfeld as his new Chief of Staff ; Cheney became the campaign manager for Ford 's 1976 presidential campaign . 
 = = = Midterm elections = = = 
 The 1974 Congressional midterm elections took place less than three months after Ford assumed office and in the wake of the Watergate scandal . The Democratic Party turned voter dissatisfaction into large gains in the House elections , taking 49 seats from the Republican Party , increasing their majority to 291 of the 435 seats . This was one more than the number needed ( 290 ) for a two @-@ thirds majority , the number necessary to override a Presidential veto or to propose a constitutional amendment . Perhaps due in part to this fact , the 94th Congress overrode the highest percentage of vetoes since Andrew Johnson was President of the United States ( 1865 – 1869 ) . Even Ford 's former , reliably Republican House seat was won by a Democrat , Richard Vander Veen , who defeated Robert <unk> . In the Senate elections , the Democratic majority became 61 in the 100 @-@ seat body . 
 = = = Domestic policy = = = 
 = = = = Inflation = = = = 
 The economy was a great concern during the Ford administration . One of the first acts the new president took was to deal with the economy was to create , by Executive Order on September 30 , 1974 , the Economic Policy Board . In October 1974 , in response to rising inflation , Ford went before the American public and asked them to " Whip Inflation Now " . As part of this program , he urged people to wear " WIN " buttons . At the time , inflation was believed to be the primary threat to the economy , more so than growing unemployment ; there was a belief that controlling inflation would help reduce unemployment . To rein in inflation , it was necessary to control the public 's spending . To try to mesh service and sacrifice , " WIN " called for Americans to reduce their spending and consumption . On October 4 , 1974 , Ford gave a speech in front of a joint session of Congress ; as a part of this speech he kicked off the " WIN " campaign . Over the next nine days 101 @,@ 240 Americans mailed in " WIN " pledges . In hindsight , this was viewed as simply a public relations gimmick which had no way of solving the underlying problems . The main point of that speech was to introduce to Congress a one @-@ year , five @-@ percent income tax increase on corporations and wealthy individuals . This plan would also take $ 4 @.@ 4 billion out of the budget , bringing federal spending below $ 300 billion . At the time , inflation was over twelve percent . 
 = = = = Budget = = = = 
 The federal budget ran a deficit every year Ford was President . Despite his reservations about how the program ultimately would be funded in an era of tight public budgeting , Ford signed the Education for All Handicapped Children Act of 1975 , which established special education throughout the United States . Ford expressed " strong support for full educational opportunities for our handicapped children " according to the official White House press release for the bill signing . 
 The economic focus began to change as the country sank into the worst recession since the Great Depression four decades earlier . The focus of the Ford administration turned to stopping the rise in unemployment , which reached nine percent in May 1975 . In January 1975 , Ford proposed a 1 @-@ year tax reduction of $ 16 billion to stimulate economic growth , along with spending cuts to avoid inflation . Ford was criticized greatly for quickly switching from advocating a tax increase to a tax reduction . In Congress , the proposed amount of the tax reduction increased to $ 22 @.@ 8 billion in tax cuts and lacked spending cuts . In March 1975 , Congress passed , and Ford signed into law , these income tax rebates as part of the Tax Reduction Act of 1975 . This resulted in a federal deficit of around $ 53 billion for the 1975 fiscal year and $ 73 @.@ 7 billion for 1976 . 
 When New York City faced bankruptcy in 1975 , Mayor Abraham Beame was unsuccessful in obtaining Ford 's support for a federal bailout . The incident prompted the New York Daily News ' famous headline " Ford to City : Drop Dead " , referring to a speech in which " Ford declared flatly ... that he would veto any bill calling for ' a federal bail @-@ out of New York City ' " . The following month , November 1975 , Ford changed his stance and asked Congress to approve federal loans to New York City . 
 = = = = Swine flu = = = = 
 Ford was confronted with a potential swine flu pandemic . In the early 1970s , an influenza strain H1N1 shifted from a form of flu that affected primarily pigs and crossed over to humans . On February 5 , 1976 , an army recruit at Fort Dix mysteriously died and four fellow soldiers were hospitalized ; health officials announced that " swine flu " was the cause . Soon after , public health officials in the Ford administration urged that every person in the United States be vaccinated . Although the vaccination program was plagued by delays and public relations problems , some 25 % of the population was vaccinated by the time the program was canceled in December 1976 . The vaccine was blamed for twenty @-@ five deaths ; more people died from the shots than from the swine flu . 
 = = = = Other domestic issues = = = = 
 Ford was an outspoken supporter of the Equal Rights Amendment , issuing Presidential Proclamation no . <unk> in 1975 : 
 In this Land of the Free , it is right , and by nature it ought to be , that all men and all women are equal before the law . 
 Now , therefore , I , Gerald R. Ford , President of the United States of America , to remind all Americans that it is fitting and just to ratify the Equal Rights Amendment adopted by the Congress of the United States of America , in order to secure legal equality for all women and men , do hereby designate and proclaim August 26 , 1975 , as Women 's Equality Day . 
 As president , Ford 's position on abortion was that he supported " a federal constitutional amendment that would permit each one of the 50 States to make the choice " . This had also been his position as House Minority Leader in response to the 1973 Supreme Court case of Roe v. Wade , which he opposed . Ford came under criticism for a 60 Minutes interview his wife Betty gave in 1975 , in which she stated that Roe v. Wade was a " great , great decision " . During his later life , Ford would identify as pro @-@ choice . 
 = = = Foreign policy = = = 
 Ford continued the détente policy with both the Soviet Union and China , easing the tensions of the Cold War . Still in place from the Nixon Administration was the Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty ( SALT ) . The thawing relationship brought about by Nixon 's visit to China was reinforced by Ford 's December 1975 visit to that communist country . In 1975 , the Administration entered into the Helsinki Accords with the Soviet Union , creating the framework of the Helsinki Watch , an independent non @-@ governmental organization created to monitor compliance that later evolved into Human Rights Watch . 
 Ford attended the inaugural meeting of the Group of Seven ( G7 ) industrialized nations ( initially the G5 ) in 1975 and secured membership for Canada . Ford supported international solutions to issues . " We live in an interdependent world and , therefore , must work together to resolve common economic problems , " he said in a 1974 speech . 
 According to internal White House and Commission documents posted in February 2016 by the National Security Archive at The George Washington University , the Gerald Ford White House significantly altered the final report of the supposedly independent 1975 Rockefeller Commission investigating CIA domestic activities , over the objections of senior Commission staff . The changes included removal of an entire 86 @-@ page section on CIA assassination plots and numerous edits to the report by then @-@ deputy White House Chief of Staff Richard Cheney . 
 = = = = Middle East = = = = 
 In the Middle East and eastern Mediterranean , two ongoing international disputes developed into crises . The Cyprus dispute turned into a crisis with the Turkish invasion of Cyprus , causing extreme strain within the North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) alliance . In mid @-@ August , the Greek government withdrew Greece from the NATO military structure ; in mid @-@ September 1974 , the Senate and House of Representatives overwhelmingly voted to halt military aid to Turkey . Ford , concerned with both the effect of this on Turkish @-@ American relations and the deterioration of security on NATO 's eastern front , vetoed the bill . A second bill was then passed by Congress , which Ford also vetoed , although a compromise was accepted to continue aid until the end of the year . As Ford expected , Turkish relations were considerably disrupted until 1978 . 
 In the continuing Arab – Israeli conflict , although the initial cease fire had been implemented to end active conflict in the Yom Kippur War , Kissinger 's continuing shuttle diplomacy was showing little progress . Ford considered it " stalling " and wrote , " Their [ Israeli ] tactics frustrated the Egyptians and made me mad as hell . " During Kissinger 's shuttle to Israel in early March 1975 , a last minute reversal to consider further withdrawal , prompted a cable from Ford to Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin , which included : 
 I wish to express my profound disappointment over Israel 's attitude in the course of the negotiations ... Failure of the negotiation will have a far reaching impact on the region and on our relations . I have given instructions for a reassessment of United States policy in the region , including our relations with Israel , with the aim of ensuring that overall American interests ... are protected . You will be notified of our decision . 
 On March 24 , Ford informed congressional leaders of both parties of the reassessment of the administration policies in the Middle East . " Reassessment " , in practical terms , meant canceling or suspending further aid to Israel . For six months between March and September 1975 , the United States refused to conclude any new arms agreements with Israel . Rabin notes it was " an innocent @-@ sounding term that heralded one of the worst periods in American @-@ Israeli relations " . The announced reassessments upset the American Jewish community and Israel 's well @-@ wishers in Congress . On May 21 , Ford " experienced a real shock " when seventy @-@ six U.S. senators wrote him a letter urging him to be " responsive " to Israel 's request for $ 2 @.@ 59 billion in military and economic aid . Ford felt truly annoyed and thought the chance for peace was jeopardized . It was , since the September 1974 ban on arms to Turkey , the second major congressional intrusion upon the President 's foreign policy prerogatives . The following summer months were described by Ford as an American @-@ Israeli " war of nerves " or " test of wills " . After much bargaining , the Sinai Interim Agreement ( Sinai II ) , was formally signed on September 1 , and aid resumed . 
 = = = = Vietnam = = = = 
 One of Ford 's greatest challenges was dealing with the continued Vietnam War . American offensive operations against North Vietnam had ended with the Paris Peace Accords , signed on January 27 , 1973 . The accords declared a cease fire across both North and South Vietnam , and required the release of American prisoners of war . The agreement guaranteed the territorial integrity of Vietnam and , like the Geneva Conference of 1954 , called for national elections in the North and South . The Paris Peace Accords stipulated a sixty @-@ day period for the total withdrawal of U.S. forces . 
 The accords had been negotiated by United States National Security Advisor Kissinger and North Vietnamese politburo member Lê Đức Thọ . South Vietnamese President Nguyen Van Thieu was not involved in the final negotiations , and publicly criticized the proposed agreement . However , anti @-@ war pressures within the United States forced Nixon and Kissinger to pressure Thieu to sign the agreement and enable the withdrawal of American forces . In multiple letters to the South Vietnamese president , Nixon had promised that the United States would defend Thieu 's government , should the North Vietnamese violate the accords . 
 In December 1974 , months after Ford took office , North Vietnamese forces invaded the province of Phuoc Long . General Trần Văn Trà sought to gauge any South Vietnamese or American response to the invasion , as well as to solve logistical issues , before proceeding with the invasion . 
 As North Vietnamese forces advanced , Ford requested Congress approve a $ 722 million aid package for South Vietnam , funds that had been promised by the Nixon administration . Congress voted against the proposal by a wide margin . Senator Jacob K. Javits offered " ... large sums for evacuation , but not one nickel for military aid " . President Thieu resigned on April 21 , 1975 , publicly blaming the lack of support from the United States for the fall of his country . Two days later , on April 23 , Ford gave a speech at Tulane University . In that speech , he announced that the Vietnam War was over " ... as far as America is concerned " . The announcement was met with thunderous applause . 
 1 @,@ 373 U.S. citizens and 5 @,@ 595 Vietnamese and third country nationals were evacuated from the South Vietnamese capital of Saigon during Operation Frequent Wind . In that operation , military and Air America helicopters took evacuees to U.S. Navy ships off @-@ shore during an approximately 24 @-@ hour period on April 29 to 30 , 1975 , immediately preceding the fall of Saigon . During the operation , so many South Vietnamese helicopters landed on the vessels taking the evacuees that some were pushed overboard to make room for more people . Other helicopters , having nowhere to land , were deliberately crash landed into the sea after dropping off their passengers , close to the ships , their pilots bailing out at the last moment to be picked up by rescue boats . 
 Many of the Vietnamese evacuees were allowed to enter the United States under the Indochina Migration and Refugee Assistance Act . The 1975 Act appropriated $ 455 million toward the costs of assisting the settlement of Indochinese refugees . In all , 130 @,@ 000 Vietnamese refugees came to the United States in 1975 . Thousands more escaped in the years that followed . 
 = = = = Mayaguez and Panmunjom = = = = 
 North Vietnam 's victory over the South led to a considerable shift in the political winds in Asia , and Ford administration officials worried about a consequent loss of U.S. influence there . The administration proved it was willing to respond forcefully to challenges to its interests in the region on two occasions , once when Khmer Rouge forces seized an American ship in international waters and again when American military officers were killed in the demilitarized zone ( DMZ ) between North and South Korea . 
 The first crisis was the Mayaguez incident . In May 1975 , shortly after the fall of Saigon and the Khmer Rouge conquest of Cambodia , Cambodians seized the American merchant ship Mayaguez in international waters . Ford dispatched Marines to rescue the crew , but the Marines landed on the wrong island and met unexpectedly stiff resistance just as , unknown to the U.S. , the Mayaguez sailors were being released . In the operation , two military transport helicopters carrying the Marines for the assault operation were shot down , and 41 U.S. servicemen were killed and 50 wounded while approximately 60 Khmer Rouge soldiers were killed . Despite the American losses , the operation was seen as a success in the United States and Ford enjoyed an 11 @-@ point boost in his approval ratings in the aftermath . The Americans killed during the operation became the last to have their names inscribed on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial wall in Washington , D.C. 
 Some historians have argued that the Ford administration felt the need to respond forcefully to the incident because it was construed as a Soviet plot . But work by Andrew Gawthorpe , published in 2009 , based on an analysis of the administration 's internal discussions , shows that Ford 's national security team understood that the seizure of the vessel was a local , and perhaps even accidental , provocation by an immature Khmer government . Nevertheless , they felt the need to respond forcefully to discourage further provocations by other Communist countries in Asia . 
 The second crisis , known as the axe murder incident , occurred at Panmunjom , a village which stands in the DMZ between the two Koreas . At the time , this was the only part of the DMZ where forces from the North and the South came into contact with each other . Encouraged by U.S. difficulties in Vietnam , North Korea had been waging a campaign of diplomatic pressure and minor military harassment to try and convince the U.S. to withdraw from South Korea . Then , in August 1976 , North Korean forces killed two U.S. officers and injured South Korean guards who were engaged in trimming a tree in Panmunjom 's Joint Security Area . The attack coincided with a meeting of the Conference of Non @-@ Aligned Nations in Colombo , Sri Lanka , at which Kim Jong @-@ il , the son of North Korean leader Kim Il @-@ sung , presented the incident as an example of American aggression , helping secure the passage of a motion calling for a U.S. withdrawal from the South . 
 At administration meetings , Kissinger voiced the concern that the North would see the U.S. as " the paper tigers of Saigon " if they did not respond , and Ford agreed with that assessment . After mulling various options the Ford administration decided that it was necessary to respond with a major show of force . A large number of ground forces went to cut down the tree , while at the same time the air force was deployed , which included B @-@ 52 bomber flights over Panmunjom . The North Korean government backed down and allowed the tree @-@ cutting to go ahead , and later issued an unprecedented official apology . 
 = = = = Indonesian invasion of East Timor = = = = 
 East Timor 's decolonization due to political instability in Portugal saw Indonesia posture to annex the new state in 1975 . Just hours before the Indonesian invasion of East Timor ( now Timor Leste ) on December 7 , 1975 , Ford and Kissinger had visited Indonesian President Suharto in Jakarta and guaranteed American compliance with the Indonesian operation . Suharto had been a key supporter of American influence in Indonesia and Southeast Asia and Ford did not desire to place pressure on the American @-@ Indonesian relationship . 
 Under Ford , a policy of arms sales to the Suharto regime began in 1975 , before the invasion . " Roughly 90 % " of the Indonesian army 's weapons at the time of East Timor 's invasion were provided by the U.S. according to George H. Aldrich , a former State Department deputy legal advisor . Post @-@ invasion , Ford 's military aid averaged about $ 30 million annually throughout East Timor 's occupation , and arms sales increased exponentially under President Carter . This policy continued until 1999 . 
 = = = Assassination attempts = = = 
 Ford faced two assassination attempts during his presidency . In Sacramento , California , on September 5 , 1975 , Lynette " Squeaky " Fromme , a follower of Charles Manson , pointed a Colt .45 @-@ caliber handgun at Ford . As Fromme pulled the trigger , Larry <unk> , a Secret Service agent , grabbed the gun , and Fromme was taken into custody . She was later convicted of attempted assassination of the President and was sentenced to life in prison ; she was paroled on August 14 , 2009 . 
 In reaction to this attempt , the Secret Service began keeping Ford at a more secure distance from anonymous crowds , a strategy that may have saved his life seventeen days later . As he left the St. Francis Hotel in downtown San Francisco , Sara Jane Moore , standing in a crowd of onlookers across the street , pointed her .38 @-@ caliber revolver at him . Moore fired a single round but missed because the sights were off . Just before she fired a second round , retired Marine Oliver Sipple grabbed at the gun and deflected her shot ; the bullet struck a wall about six inches above and to the right of Ford 's head , then ricocheted and hit a taxi driver , who was slightly wounded . Moore was later sentenced to life in prison . She was paroled on December 31 , 2007 , after serving 32 years . 
 = = = Judicial appointments = = = 
 = = = = Supreme Court = = = = 
 In 1975 , Ford appointed John Paul Stevens as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States to replace retiring Justice William O. Douglas . Stevens had been a judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit , appointed by President Nixon . During his tenure as House Republican leader , Ford had led efforts to have Douglas impeached . After being confirmed , Stevens eventually disappointed some conservatives by siding with the Court 's liberal wing regarding the outcome of many key issues . Nevertheless , in 2005 Ford praised Stevens . " He has served his nation well , " Ford said of Stevens , " with dignity , intellect and without partisan political concerns . " 
 = = = = Other judicial appointments = = = = 
 Ford appointed 11 judges to the United States Courts of Appeals , and 50 judges to the United States district courts . 
 = = = 1976 presidential election = = = 
 Ford reluctantly agreed to run for office in 1976 , but first he had to counter a challenge for the Republican party nomination . Former Governor of California Ronald Reagan and the party 's conservative wing faulted Ford for failing to do more in South Vietnam , for signing the Helsinki Accords , and for negotiating to cede the Panama Canal . ( Negotiations for the canal continued under President Carter , who eventually signed the Torrijos – Carter Treaties . ) Reagan launched his campaign in autumn of 1975 and won numerous primaries , including North Carolina , Texas , Indiana , and California , but failed to get a majority of delegates ; Regan withdrew from the race at the Republican Convention in Kansas City , Missouri . The conservative insurgency did lead to Ford dropping the more liberal Vice President Nelson Rockefeller in favor of U.S. Senator Bob Dole of Kansas . 
 In addition to the pardon dispute and lingering anti @-@ Republican sentiment , Ford had to counter a plethora of negative media imagery . Chevy Chase often did pratfalls on Saturday Night Live , imitating Ford , who had been seen stumbling on two occasions during his term . As Chase commented , " He even mentioned in his own autobiography it had an effect over a period of time that affected the election to some degree . " 
 Ford 's 1976 election campaign benefitted from his being an incumbent president during several anniversary events held during the period leading up to the United States Bicentennial . The Washington , D.C. fireworks display on the Fourth of July was presided over by the President and televised nationally . On July 7 , 1976 , the President and First Lady served as hosts at a White House state dinner for Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip of the United Kingdom , which was televised on the Public Broadcasting Service network . The 200th anniversary of the Battles of Lexington and Concord in Massachusetts gave Ford the opportunity to deliver a speech to 110 @,@ 000 in Concord acknowledging the need for a strong national defense tempered with a plea for " reconciliation , not recrimination " and " reconstruction , not rancor " between the United States and those who would pose " threats to peace " . Speaking in New Hampshire on the previous day , Ford condemned the growing trend toward big government bureaucracy and argued for a return to " basic American virtues " . 
 Democratic nominee and former Georgia governor Jimmy Carter campaigned as an outsider and reformer , gaining support from voters dismayed by the Watergate scandal and Nixon pardon . After the Democratic National Convention , he held a huge 33 @-@ point lead over Ford in the polls . However , as the campaign continued , the race tightened , and , by election day , the polls showed the race as too close to call . There were three main events in the fall campaign . Most importantly , Carter repeated a promise of a " blanket pardon " for Christian and other religious refugees , and also all Vietnam War draft dodgers ( Ford had only issued a conditional amnesty ) in response to a question on the subject posed by a reporter during the presidential debates , an act which froze Ford 's poll numbers in Ohio , Wisconsin , Hawaii , and Mississippi . ( Ford had needed to shift just 11 @,@ 000 votes in Ohio plus one of the other three in order to win . ) It was the first act signed by Carter , on January 20 , 1977 . Earlier , Playboy magazine had published a controversial interview with Carter ; in the interview Carter admitted to having " lusted in my heart " for women other than his wife , which cut into his support among women and evangelical Christians . Also , on September 24 , Ford performed well in what was the first televised presidential debate since 1960 . Polls taken after the debate showed that most viewers felt that Ford was the winner . Carter was also hurt by Ford 's charges that he lacked the necessary experience to be an effective national leader , and that Carter was vague on many issues . 
 Televised presidential debates were reintroduced for the first time since the 1960 election . As such , Ford became the first incumbent president to participate in one . Carter later attributed his victory in the election to the debates , saying they " gave the viewers reason to think that Jimmy Carter had something to offer " . The turning point came in the second debate when Ford blundered by stating , " There is no Soviet domination of Eastern Europe and there never will be under a Ford Administration . " Ford also said that he did not " believe that the Poles consider themselves dominated by the Soviet Union " . In an interview years later , Ford said he had intended to imply that the Soviets would never crush the spirits of eastern Europeans seeking independence . However , the phrasing was so awkward that questioner Max Frankel was visibly incredulous at the response . As a result of this blunder , and Carter 's promise of a full presidential pardon for political refugees from the Vietnam era during the presidential debates , Ford 's surge stalled and Carter was able to maintain a slight lead in the polls . 
 In the end , Carter won the election , receiving 50 @.@ 1 % of the popular vote and 297 electoral votes compared with 48 @.@ 0 % and 240 electoral votes for Ford . The election was close enough that had fewer than 25 @,@ 000 votes shifted in Ohio and Wisconsin – both of which neighbored his home state – Ford would have won the electoral vote with 276 votes to 261 for Carter . Though he lost , in the three months between the Republican National Convention and the election Ford had managed to close what was once an alleged 33 @-@ point Carter lead to a 2 @-@ point margin . Ford carried 27 states versus 23 carried by Carter . 
 Had Ford won the election , the provisions of the 22nd Amendment would have disqualified him from running in 1980 , because he had served more than two years of Nixon 's remaining term . 
 = = Post @-@ presidential years , 1977 – 2006 = = 
 = = = Activity = = = 
 The Nixon pardon controversy eventually subsided . Ford 's successor , Jimmy Carter , opened his 1977 inaugural address by praising the outgoing President , saying , " For myself and for our Nation , I want to thank my predecessor for all he has done to heal our land . " 
 Ford remained relatively active in the years after his presidency . He continued to make appearances at events of historical and ceremonial significance to the nation , such as presidential <unk> and memorial services . In January 1977 , he became the president of Eisenhower Fellowships in Philadelphia , then served as the chairman of its board of trustees from 1980 to 1986 . Later in the 1977 , he reluctantly agreed to be interviewed by James M. Naughton , a New York Times journalist who was given the assignment to write the former President 's advance obituary , an article that would be updated prior to its eventual publication . In 1979 , Ford published his autobiography , A Time to Heal ( Harper / Reader 's Digest , 454 pages ) . A review in Foreign Affairs described it as , " Serene , unruffled , unpretentious , like the author . This is the shortest and most honest of recent presidential memoirs , but there are no surprises , no deep <unk> of motives or events . No more here than meets the eye . " 
 During the term of office of his successor , Jimmy Carter , Ford received monthly briefs by President Carter 's senior staff on international and domestic issues , and was always invited to lunch at the White House whenever he was in Washington , D.C. Their close friendship developed after Carter had left office , with the catalyst being their trip together to the funeral of Anwar el @-@ Sadat in 1981 . Until Ford 's death , Carter and his wife , Rosalynn , visited the Fords ' home frequently . Ford and Carter served as honorary co @-@ chairs of the National Commission on Federal Election Reform in 2001 and of the Continuity of Government Commission in 2002 . 
 Like Presidents Carter , George H.W. Bush , and Clinton , Ford was an honorary co @-@ chair of the Council for Excellence in Government , a group dedicated to excellence in government performance , which provides leadership training to top federal employees . 
 In retirement Ford also devoted much time to his love of golf , often playing both privately and in public events with comedian Bob Hope , a longtime friend . In 1977 , he shot a hole in one during a Pro @-@ am held in conjunction with the Danny Thomas Memphis Classic at Colonial Country Club in Memphis , Tennessee . 
 Ford considered a run for the Republican nomination in 1980 , foregoing numerous opportunities to serve on corporate boards to keep his options open for a rematch with Carter . Ford attacked Carter 's conduct of the SALT II negotiations and foreign policy in the Middle East and Africa . Many have argued that Ford also wanted to exorcise his image as an " Accidental President " and to win a term in his own right . Ford also believed the more conservative Ronald Reagan would be unable to defeat Carter and would hand the incumbent a second term . Ford was encouraged by his former Secretary of State , Henry Kissinger as well as Jim Rhodes of Ohio and Bill Clements of Texas to make the race . On March 15 , 1980 , Ford announced that he would forgo a run for the Republican nomination , vowing to support the eventual nominee . 
 After securing the Republican nomination in 1980 , Ronald Reagan considered his former rival Ford as a potential vice @-@ presidential running mate , but negotiations between the Reagan and Ford camps at the Republican National Convention were unsuccessful . Ford conditioned his acceptance on Reagan 's agreement to an unprecedented " co @-@ presidency " , giving Ford the power to control key executive branch appointments ( such as Kissinger as Secretary of State and Alan Greenspan as Treasury Secretary ) . After rejecting these terms , Reagan offered the vice @-@ presidential nomination instead to George H.W. Bush . Ford did appear in a campaign commercial for the Reagan @-@ Bush ticket , in which he declared that the country would be " better served by a Reagan presidency rather than a continuation of the weak and politically expedient policies of Jimmy Carter " . 
 After his presidency , Ford joined the American Enterprise Institute as a distinguished fellow . He founded the annual AEI World Forum in 1982 . Ford was awarded an honorary doctorate at Central Connecticut State University on March 23 , 1988 . 
 After leaving the White House , Ford and his wife moved to Denver , Colorado . Ford successfully invested in oil with Marvin Davis , which later provided an income for Ford 's children . 
 In 1987 , Ford testified before the Senate Judiciary Committee in favor of District of Columbia Circuit Court judge and former Solicitor General Robert Bork after Bork was nominated by President Reagan to be an Associate Justice of the United States Supreme Court . Bork 's nomination was rejected by a vote of 58 @-@ 42 . 
 In 1987 Ford 's Humor and the Presidency , a book of humorous political anecdotes , was published . 
 By 1988 , Ford was a member of several corporate boards including Commercial Credit , Nova Pharmaceutical , The Pullman Company , Tesoro Petroleum , and Tiger International , Inc . Ford also became an honorary director of Citigroup , a position he held till his death . 
 In 1977 , Ford established the Gerald R. Ford Institute of Public Policy at Albion College in Albion , Michigan , to give undergraduates training in public policy . In April 1981 , he opened the Gerald R. Ford Library in Ann Arbor , Michigan , on the north campus of his alma mater , the University of Michigan , followed in September by the Gerald R. Ford Museum in Grand Rapids . 
 In April 1991 , Ford joined former presidents Richard Nixon , Ronald Reagan , and Jimmy Carter , in supporting the Brady Bill . Three years later , he wrote to the U.S. House of Representatives , along with Carter and Reagan , in support of the assault weapons ban . 
 In October 2001 , Ford broke with conservative members of the Republican party by stating that gay and lesbian couples " ought to be treated equally . Period . " He became the highest ranking Republican to embrace full equality for gays and lesbians , stating his belief that there should be a federal amendment outlawing anti @-@ gay job discrimination and expressing his hope that the Republican Party would reach out to gay and lesbian voters . He also was a member of the Republican Unity Coalition , which The New York Times described as " a group of prominent Republicans , including former President Gerald R. Ford , dedicated to making sexual orientation a non @-@ issue in the Republican Party " . 
 On November 22 , 2004 , New York Republican Governor George Pataki named Ford and the other living former Presidents ( Carter , George H.W. Bush and Bill Clinton ) as honorary members of the board rebuilding the World Trade Center . 
 In a pre @-@ recorded embargoed interview with Bob Woodward of The Washington Post in July 2004 , Ford stated that he disagreed " very strongly " with the Bush administration 's choice of Iraq 's alleged weapons of mass destruction as justification for its decision to invade Iraq , calling it a " big mistake " unrelated to the national security of the United States and indicating that he would not have gone to war had he been President . The details of the interview were not released until after Ford 's death , as he requested . 
 = = = Health problems = = = 
 Ford suffered two minor strokes at the 2000 Republican National Convention , but made a quick recovery after being admitted to Hahnemann University Hospital . In January 2006 , he spent 11 days at the Eisenhower Medical Center near his residence at Rancho Mirage , California , for treatment of pneumonia . On April 23 , 2006 , President George W. Bush visited Ford at his home in Rancho Mirage for a little over an hour . This was Ford 's last public appearance and produced the last known public photos , video footage , and voice recording . 
 While vacationing in Vail , Colorado , Ford was hospitalized for two days in July 2006 for shortness of breath . On August 15 he was admitted to St. Mary 's Hospital of the Mayo Clinic in Rochester , Minnesota , for testing and evaluation . On August 21 , it was reported that he had been fitted with a pacemaker . On August 25 , he underwent an angioplasty procedure at the Mayo Clinic . On August 28 , Ford was released from the hospital and returned with his wife Betty to their California home . On October 13 , he was scheduled to attend the dedication of a building of his namesake , the Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy at the University of Michigan , but due to poor health and on the advice of his doctors he did not attend . The previous day , Ford had entered the Eisenhower Medical Center for undisclosed tests ; he was released on October 16 . By November 2006 , he was confined to a bed in his study . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 Ford died on December 26 , 2006 , at his home in Rancho Mirage , California , of <unk> cerebrovascular disease and diffuse arteriosclerosis . He had end @-@ stage coronary artery disease and severe aortic stenosis and insufficiency , caused by <unk> alteration of one of his heart valves . Ford died on the 34th anniversary of President Harry Truman 's death ; he was the last surviving member of the Warren Commission . 
 On December 30 , 2006 , Ford became the 11th U.S. President to lie in state . A state funeral and memorial services was held at the National Cathedral in Washington , D.C. , on January 2 , 2007 . After the service , Ford was interred at his Presidential Museum in Grand Rapids , Michigan . 
 Scouting was so important to Ford that his family asked that Scouts participate in his funeral . A few selected Scouts served as ushers inside the National Cathedral . About 400 Eagle Scouts were part of the funeral procession , where they formed an honor guard as the casket went by in front of the museum . 
 Ford selected the song to be played during his funeral procession at the U.S. Capitol . After his death in December 2006 , the University of Michigan Marching Band played the school 's fight song for him one final time , for his last ride from the Gerald R. Ford Airport in Grand Rapids , Michigan . 
 The State of Michigan commissioned and submitted a statue of Ford to the National Statuary Hall Collection , replacing Zachariah Chandler . It was unveiled on May 3 , 2011 in the Capitol Rotunda . On the proper right side is inscribed a quotation from a tribute by Thomas P. " Tip " O 'Neill , Speaker of the House at the end of Ford 's presidency : " God has been good to America , especially during difficult times . At the time of the Civil War , he gave us Abraham Lincoln . And at the time of Watergate , he gave us Gerald Ford — the right man at the right time who was able to put our nation back together again . " On the proper left side are words from Ford 's swearing @-@ in address : " Our constitution works . Our great republic is a government of laws and not of men . Here the people rule . " 
 Ford 's wife , Betty Ford , died on July 8 , 2011 . Like her husband , she was 93 years old when she died . 
 = = = Longevity = = = 
 On November 12 , 2006 , upon surpassing Ronald Reagan 's lifespan , Ford released his last public statement : 
 The length of one 's days matters less than the love of one 's family and friends . I thank God for the gift of every sunrise and , even more , for all the years He has blessed me with Betty and the children ; with our extended family and the friends of a lifetime . That includes countless Americans who , in recent months , have remembered me in their prayers . Your kindness touches me deeply . May God bless you all and may God bless America . 
 Ford 's age at the time of his death was 93 years and 165 days , making him the longest @-@ lived U.S. President , his lifespan being 45 days longer than Ronald Reagan 's . He was the third @-@ longest @-@ lived Vice President , falling short only of John Nance Garner , 98 , and Levi P. Morton , 96 . Ford also had the third @-@ longest post @-@ presidency ( 29 years and 11 months ) after Jimmy Carter ( 35 years , 6 months and counting ) and Herbert Hoover ( 31 years and 7 months ) 
 = = = Public image = = = 
 Ford was the only person to hold the presidential office without being elected as either president or vice @-@ president . The choice of Ford to fulfill Spiro Agnew 's vacated role as vice president was based on Ford 's reputation for openness and honesty . " In all the years I sat in the House , I never knew Mr. Ford to make a dishonest statement nor a statement part @-@ true and part @-@ false . He never attempted to shade a statement , and I never heard him utter an unkind word , " said Martha Griffiths . 
 The trust the American people had in him was rapidly and severely tarnished by his pardon of Nixon . Nonetheless , many grant in hindsight that he had respectably discharged with considerable dignity a great responsibility that he had not sought . His subsequent loss to Carter in 1976 has come to be seen as an honorable sacrifice he made for the nation . 
 In spite of his athletic record and remarkable career accomplishments , Ford acquired a reputation as a clumsy , likable , and simple @-@ minded Everyman . An incident in 1975 , when he tripped while exiting the presidential jet in Austria , was famously and repeatedly parodied by Chevy Chase , cementing Ford 's image as a klutz . Pieces of Ford 's common Everyman image have also been attributed to Ford 's inevitable comparison to Nixon , as well as his perceived Midwestern <unk> and self @-@ deprecation . Ridicule often extended to supposed intellectual limitations , with Lyndon B. Johnson once joking , " He 's a nice fellow but he spent too much time playing football without a helmet . " 
 = = Honors = = 
 Ford received the Distinguished Eagle Scout Award in May 1970 , as well as the Silver Buffalo Award , from the Boy Scouts of America . In 1985 he received the 1985 Old Tom Morris Award from the Golf Course Superintendents Association of America , <unk> 's highest honor . In 1992 , the U.S. Navy Memorial Foundation awarded Ford its Lone Sailor Award for his naval service and his subsequent government service . In 1999 , Ford was honored with a Golden Palm Star on the Palm Springs Walk of Stars . Also in 1999 , Ford was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by Bill Clinton . In 2001 , he was presented with the John F. Kennedy Profiles in Courage Award for his decision to pardon Richard Nixon to stop the agony America was experiencing over Watergate . 
 The following were named after Ford : 
 The Ford House Office Building in the U.S. Capitol Complex , formerly House Annex 2 . 
 Gerald R. Ford Freeway ( Nebraska ) 
 Gerald R. Ford Freeway ( Michigan ) 
 Gerald Ford Memorial Highway , I @-@ 70 in Eagle County , Colorado 
 Gerald R. Ford International Airport in Grand Rapids , Michigan 
 Gerald R. Ford Library in Ann Arbor , Michigan 
 Gerald R. Ford Museum in Grand Rapids , Michigan 
 Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy , University of Michigan 
 Gerald R. Ford Amphitheater in Vail , Colorado , in Ford Park , also named after him 
 Gerald R. Ford Institute of Public Policy , Albion College 
 USS Gerald R. Ford ( CVN @-@ 78 ) 
 Gerald R. Ford Elementary School , Indian Wells , California 
 Gerald Ford Boys and Girls Club , La Quinta , California 
 Gerald R. Ford Middle School , Grand Rapids , Michigan 
 Gerald Ford Drive , Coachella Valley , California ( Cathedral City , Rancho Mirage , Palm Desert ) 
 President Gerald R. Ford Park in Alexandria , Virginia , located in the neighborhood where Ford lived while serving as a Representative and Vice President 
 President Ford Field Service Council , Boy Scouts of America The council where he was awarded the rank of Eagle Scout . <unk> 25 counties in Western and Northern Michigan with its headquarters located in Grand Rapids , Michigan . 
 = Italian battleship Giulio Cesare = 
 Giulio Cesare was one of three Conte di Cavour @-@ class dreadnought battleships built for the Royal Italian Navy ( Regia Marina ) in the 1910s . She served in both World Wars , although she was little used and saw no combat during the former . The ship supported operations during the Corfu Incident in 1923 and spent much of the rest of the decade in reserve . She was rebuilt between 1933 and 1937 with more powerful guns , additional armor and considerably more speed than before . 
 Both Giulio Cesare and her sister ship , Conte di Cavour , participated in the Battle of Calabria in July 1940 , when the former was lightly damaged . They were both present when British torpedo bombers attacked the fleet at Taranto in November 1940 , but Giulio Cesare was not damaged . She escorted several convoys to North Africa and participated in the Battle of Cape Spartivento in late 1940 and the First Battle of Sirte in late 1941 . She was designated as a training ship in early 1942 , and escaped to Malta after Italy surrendered . The ship was transferred to the Soviet Union in 1949 and renamed Novorossiysk . The Soviets also used her for training until she was sunk when an old German mine exploded in 1955 . She was salvaged the following year and later scrapped . 
 = = Description = = 
 Named after Julius Caesar , Giulio Cesare was 168 @.@ 9 meters ( 554 ft 2 in ) long at the waterline , and 176 meters ( 577 ft 5 in ) overall . The ship had a beam of 28 meters ( 91 ft 10 in ) , and a draft of 9 @.@ 3 meters ( 30 ft 6 in ) . She displaced 23 @,@ 088 long tons ( 23 @,@ 458 t ) at normal load , and 25 @,@ 086 long tons ( 25 @,@ 489 t ) at deep load . She had a crew of 31 officers and 969 enlisted men . The ship 's machinery consisted of four Parsons steam turbines , each driving one propeller shaft . Steam for the turbines was provided by 24 Babcock & Wilcox boilers , half of which burned fuel oil and the other half burning both oil and coal . Designed to reach a maximum speed of 22 @.@ 5 knots ( 41 @.@ 7 km / h ; 25 @.@ 9 mph ) from 31 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 23 @,@ 000 kW ) , Giulio Cesare failed to reach this goal on her sea trials , despite generally exceeding the rated power of her turbines . The ship only made a maximum speed of 21 @.@ 56 knots ( 39 @.@ 93 km / h ; 24 @.@ 81 mph ) using 30 @,@ 700 shp ( 22 @,@ 900 kW ) . She had a cruising radius of 4 @,@ 800 nautical miles ( 8 @,@ 900 km ; 5 @,@ 500 mi ) at 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 The ship was armed with a main battery of thirteen 305 mm ( 12 @.@ 0 in ) guns in three triple @-@ gun turret and two twin @-@ gun turrets , designated ' A ' , ' B ' , ' Q ' , ' X ' , and ' Y ' from front to rear . The secondary battery comprised eighteen 120 mm ( 4 @.@ 7 in ) guns , all mounted in casemates in the sides of the hull . Giulio Cesare was also armed with fourteen 76 mm ( 3 @.@ 0 in ) guns . As was customary for capital ships of the period , she was equipped with three submerged 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes . She was protected with Krupp cemented steel manufactured by Terni . The belt armor was 250 mm ( 9 @.@ 8 in ) thick and the main deck was 40 mm ( 1 @.@ 6 in ) thick . The conning tower and main battery turrets were protected with 280 mm ( 11 in ) worth of armor plating . 
 = = Modifications and reconstruction = = 
 Shortly after the end of World War I , the number of 50 @-@ caliber 76 mm guns was reduced to 13 , all mounted on the turret tops , and six new 40 @-@ caliber 76 mm anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns were installed abreast the aft funnel . In addition two license @-@ built 2 @-@ pounder AA guns were mounted on the forecastle deck . In 1925 – 26 the foremast was replaced by a four @-@ legged mast , which was moved forward of the funnels , the rangefinders were upgraded , and the ship was equipped to handle a Macchi M.18 seaplane mounted on the center turret . Around that same time , either one or both of the ships was equipped with a fixed aircraft catapult on the port side of the forecastle . 
 Giulio Cesare began an extensive reconstruction in October 1933 at the Cantieri del Tirreno shipyard in Genoa that lasted until October 1937 . A new bow section was grafted over the existing bow which increased her length by 10 @.@ 31 meters ( 33 ft 10 in ) to 186 @.@ 4 meters ( 611 ft 7 in ) and her beam increased to 28 @.@ 6 meters ( 93 ft 10 in ) . The ship 's draft at deep load increased to 10 @.@ 02 meters ( 32 ft 10 in ) . All of the changes made increased her displacement to 26 @,@ 140 long tons ( 26 @,@ 560 t ) at standard load and 29 @,@ 100 long tons ( 29 @,@ 600 t ) at deep load . The ship 's crew increased to 1 @,@ 260 officers and enlisted men . Two of the propeller shafts were removed and the existing turbines were replaced by two Belluzzo geared steam turbines rated at 75 @,@ 000 shp ( 56 @,@ 000 kW ) . The boilers were replaced by eight Yarrow boilers . On her sea trials in December 1936 , before her reconstruction was fully completed , Giulio Cesare reached a speed of 28 @.@ 24 knots ( 52 @.@ 30 km / h ; 32 @.@ 50 mph ) from 93 @,@ 430 shp ( 69 @,@ 670 kW ) . In service her maximum speed was about 27 knots ( 50 km / h ; 31 mph ) and she had a range of 6 @,@ 400 nautical miles ( 11 @,@ 900 km ; 7 @,@ 400 mi ) at a speed of 13 knots ( 24 km / h ; 15 mph ) . 
 The main guns were bored out to 320 millimeters ( 12 @.@ 6 in ) and the center turret and the torpedo tubes were removed . All of the existing secondary armament and AA guns were replaced by a dozen 120 mm guns in six twin @-@ gun turrets and eight 102 @-@ millimeter ( 4 @.@ 0 in ) AA guns in twin turrets . In addition the ship was fitted with a dozen Breda 37 @-@ millimeter ( 1 @.@ 5 in ) light AA guns in six twin @-@ gun mounts and twelve 13 @.@ 2 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 52 in ) Breda M31 anti @-@ aircraft machine guns , also in twin mounts . In 1940 the 13 @.@ 2 mm machine guns were replaced by 20 @-@ millimeter ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) AA guns in twin mounts . Giulio Cesare received two more twin mounts as well as four additional 37 mm guns in twin mounts on the forecastle between the two turrets in 1941 . The tetrapodal mast was replaced with a new forward conning tower , protected with 260 @-@ millimeter ( 10 @.@ 2 in ) thick armor . Atop the conning tower there was a fire @-@ control director fitted with two large stereo @-@ rangefinders , with a base length of 7 @.@ 2 meters ( 23 @.@ 6 ft ) . 
 The deck armor was increased during the reconstruction to a total of 135 millimeters ( 5 @.@ 3 in ) over the engine and boiler rooms and 166 millimeters ( 6 @.@ 5 in ) over the magazines , although its distribution over three decks , each with multiple layers , meant that it was considerably less effective than a single plate of the same thickness . The armor protecting the barbettes was reinforced with 50 @-@ millimeter ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) plates . All this armor weighed a total of 3 @,@ 227 long tons ( 3 @,@ 279 t ) . The existing underwater protection was replaced by the Pugliese torpedo defense system that consisted of a large cylinder surrounded by fuel oil or water that was intended to absorb the blast of a torpedo warhead . It lacked , however , enough depth to be fully effective against contemporary torpedoes . A major problem of the reconstruction was that the ship 's increased draft meant that their waterline armor belt was almost completely submerged with any significant load . 
 = = Construction and service = = 
 Giulio Cesare , named after Julius Caesar , was laid down at the Gio . Ansaldo & C. shipyard in Genoa on 24 June 1910 and launched on 15 October 1911 . She was completed on 14 May 1914 and served as a flagship in the southern Adriatic Sea during World War I. She saw no action , however , and spent little time at sea . Admiral Paolo Thaon di Revel , the Italian naval chief of staff , believed that Austro @-@ Hungarian submarines and minelayers could operate too effectively in the narrow waters of the Adriatic . The threat from these underwater weapons to his capital ships was too serious for him to use the fleet in an active way . Instead , Revel decided to implement a blockade at the relatively safer southern end of the Adriatic with the battle fleet , while smaller vessels , such as the MAS torpedo boats , conducted raids on Austro @-@ Hungarian ships and installations . Meanwhile , Revel 's battleships would be preserved to confront the Austro @-@ Hungarian battle fleet in the event that it sought a decisive engagement . 
 Giulio Cesare made port visits in the Levant in 1919 and 1920 . Both Giulio Cesare and Conte di Cavour supported Italian operations on Corfu in 1923 after an Italian general and his staff were murdered on Corfu ; Benito Mussolini was not satisfied with the Greek government 's response so he ordered Italian troops to occupy the island . Cesare became a gunnery training ship in 1928 , after having been in reserve since 1926 . She was reconstructed at Cantieri del Tirreno , Genoa , between 1933 and 1937 . Both ships participated in a naval review by Adolf Hitler in the Bay of Naples in May 1938 and covered the invasion of Albania in May 1939 . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 Early in World War II , the ship took part in the Battle of Calabria ( also known as the Battle of Punto Stilo ) , together with Conte di Cavour , on 9 July 1940 , as part of the 1st Battle Squadron , commanded by Admiral Inigo Campioni , during which she engaged major elements of the British Mediterranean Fleet . The British were escorting a convoy from Malta to Alexandria , while the Italians had finished escorting another from Naples to Benghazi , Libya . Admiral Andrew Cunningham , commander of the Mediterranean Fleet , attempted to interpose his ships between the Italians and their base at Taranto . Crew on the fleets spotted each other in the middle of the afternoon and the battleships opened fire at 15 : 53 at a range of nearly 27 @,@ 000 meters ( 29 @,@ 000 yd ) . The two leading British battleships , HMS Warspite and Malaya , replied a minute later . Three minutes after she opened fire , shells from Giulio Cesare began to straddle Warspite which made a small turn and increased speed , to throw off the Italian ship 's aim , at 16 : 00 . At that same time , a shell from Warspite struck Giulio Cesare at a distance of about 24 @,@ 000 meters ( 26 @,@ 000 yd ) . The shell pierced the rear funnel and detonated inside it , blowing out a hole nearly 6 @.@ 1 meters ( 20 ft ) across . Fragments started several fires and their smoke was drawn into the boiler rooms , forcing four boilers off @-@ line as their operators could not breathe . This reduced the ship 's speed to 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . Uncertain how severe the damage was , Campioni ordered his battleships to turn away in the face of superior British numbers and they successfully disengaged . Repairs to Giulio Cesare were completed by the end of August and both ships unsuccessfully attempted to intercept British convoys to Malta in August and September . 
 On the night of 11 November 1940 , Giulio Cesare and the other Italian battleships were at anchor in Taranto harbor when they were attacked by 21 Fairey Swordfish torpedo bombers from the British aircraft carrier HMS Illustrious , along with several other warships . One torpedo sank Conte di Cavour in shallow water , but Giulio Cesare was not hit during the attack . She participated in the Battle of Cape Spartivento on 27 November 1940 , but never got close enough to any British ships to fire at them . The ship was damaged in January 1941 by splinters from a near miss during an air raid on Naples by Vickers Wellington bombers of the Royal Air Force ; repairs at Genoa were completed in early February . On 8 February , she sailed from to the Straits of Bonifacio to intercept what the Italians thought was a Malta convoy , but was actually a raid on Genoa . She failed to make contact with any British forces . She participated in the First Battle of Sirte on 17 December 1941 , providing distant cover for a convoy bound for Libya , again never firing her main armament . She also provided distant cover for another convoy to North Africa in early January 1942 . Giulio Cesare was reduced to a training ship afterwards at Taranto and later Pola . The German submarine U @-@ 596 unsuccessfully attacked the ship in the Gulf of Taranto in early March 1944 . After the Italian surrender on 9 September 1943 , she steamed to Taranto , putting down a mutiny and enduring an ineffective attack by five German aircraft en route . She then sailed for Malta where she arrived on 12 September to be interned . The ship remained there until 17 June 1944 when she returned to Taranto where she remained for the next four years . 
 = = = Soviet service = = = 
 After the war , Giulio Cesare was allocated to the Soviet Union as part of the war reparations and she was moved to Augusta , Sicily on 9 December 1948 where an unsuccessful attempt was made to sabotage the ship . The ship was stricken from the naval register on 15 December and turned over to the Soviets on 6 February 1949 under the temporary name of Z11 in Vlorë , Albania . She was renamed by them as Novorossiysk , after the Soviet city on the Black Sea . The Soviets used her as a training ship when she was not undergoing one of her eight refits in their hands . In 1953 , all remaining Italian light AA guns were replaced by eighteen 37 mm 70 @-@ K AA guns in six twin mounts and six singles . They also replaced her fire @-@ control systems and added radars , although the exact changes are unknown . The Soviets intended to rearm her with their own 305 mm guns , but this was forestalled by her loss . While at anchor in Sevastopol on the night of 28 / 29 October 1955 , she most likely detonated a large German mine left over from World War II . The explosion blew a hole completely through the ship , making a 4 @-@ by @-@ 14 @-@ meter ( 13 by 46 ft ) hole in the forecastle forward of ' A ' turret . The flooding could not be controlled and she later capsized with the loss of 608 men , including men sent from other ships to assist . 
 The cause of the explosion is still unclear . The officially named cause , regarded as the most probable , was a magnetic <unk> or <unk> bottom mine , laid by the Germans during World War II and triggered by the dragging of the battleship 's anchor chain before mooring for the last time . Subsequent searches located 32 mines of these types , some of them within 50 meters ( 160 ft ) of the explosion . The damage was consistent with an explosion of 1 @,@ 000 – 1 @,@ 200 kilograms ( 2 @,@ 200 – 2 @,@ 600 lb ) of TNT and more than one mine may have detonated . Nonetheless , other explanations for the ship 's loss have been proposed and the most popular of these is that she was sunk by Italian frogmen of the wartime special operations unit Decima <unk> MAS who — more than ten years after the cessation of hostilities — were either avenging the transfer of the former Italian battleship to the USSR or sinking it on behalf of NATO . Novorossiysk was stricken from the naval register on 24 February 1956 , salvaged on 4 May 1957 , and subsequently scrapped . 
 = Hugh Mason = 
 Hugh Mason ( 30 January 1817 – 2 February 1886 ) was an English mill owner , social reformer and Liberal politician . He was born in Stalybridge and brought up in Stalybridge and Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne until he entered the family cotton business in 1838 after a seven year period working in a bank . Having originally opposed trade unions , Mason became a paternalistic mill owner , creating a colony for his workers with associated facilities and ensuring that they experienced good conditions . During the Lancashire Cotton Famine of the 1860s he refused to cut workers ' wages although it was common practice . 
 Mason became the first Liberal to be elected councillor for Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne in 1856 . He was mayor of the council from 1857 to 1860 and retired from local politics in 1874 due to conflict with his own party . Mason returned to the Liberals in 1878 when he stood for election as Member of Parliament for Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne . He was voted in and supported progressive policies , which included women 's suffrage , making him unpopular within his own party . He was MP from 1880 to 1885 . When he died in 1886 , aged 69 , Hugh Mason had amassed £ 290 @,@ 933 ( now about £ 17 million ) . 
 = = Early life and business career = = 
 Hugh Mason was born in Stalybridge , Cheshire , on 11 May 1817 and christened there . He was the youngest of four children of Thomas Mason , a former textile manager , and Mary , the daughter of John Holden , Esq . The family had moved to Stalybridge from Derbyshire in 1776 . After working as the manager of a mill in Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , Thomas established his own business in 1815 in partnership with James Booth and Edward Hulton at Currier <unk> Mill in the town . Rapid growth in their enterprise saw them expand into the Bank Mill and Royal George Mills in the 1820s and Albion Mill in the 1830s . At the age of 10 , Hugh was working in the mill , and his education consisted of attending Methodist Sunday schools in Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne and Stalybridge and spending three years at a private school in Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne . 
 After leaving school at the age of 14 , Mason got a job with the district bank while he attended night school in his spare time . He worked there until 1838 , when he left at the age of 21 to join the family 's cotton business . He became the driving force behind the business . The business thrived : by the early 1850s the Mason family had built two state @-@ of @-@ the @-@ art cotton mills in the <unk> area of Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , known as the Oxford Mills . He was able to purchase Groby Hall , in Ashton , the ancestral seat of the former Lord Greys of Groby . 
 In 1845 , to house the workers for the mills , Mason began construction of a " workers ' colony " . The colony not only provided 150 terrace houses ( housing an estimated 691 people in 1872 ) but also leisure facilities such as a library , a swimming pool , a gymnasium , and a reading room . Mason built up what he saw as a model industrial community , and according to Mason himself , the annual death rate was significantly lower than in the rest of Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne . Residents were expected to adhere to his strict moral code and he discouraged the use of public houses . He estimated that establishing the settlement cost him around £ 10 @,@ 000 and a further £ 1 @,@ 000 per year to maintain ( about £ 600 @,@ 000 today and a further £ 60 @,@ 000 to maintain ) . 
 Under Hugh Mason 's leadership , the company prospered . The number of mule spindles in use at the mills increased from 20 @,@ 000 in 1846 to 75 @,@ 000 in 1887 . His two brothers , Henry and Booth , also worked in the company until retired in 1848 and 1853 respectively . Their father remained active in the company until 1860 when he retired , leaving Hugh as the sole owner . The Manchester Cotton Company was set up in 1860 and Mason 's success in the cotton industry led him to become its chairman from the beginning until its winding up , which began in 1864 , but was not concluded until 1867 . The purpose of the company was to increase the number of producers of cotton ; this was important as the American market was closed off during the American Civil War , causing the Lancashire Cotton Famine . Mason served as President of the Manchester Chamber of Commerce from 1871 to 1874 , and came to hold interests in the Bridgewater Canal Navigation Company , the Midland Railway Company , the Mersey Dock Board , and various other coal and iron companies . 
 Having initially opposed trade unions and factory legislation , Mason changed his mind around the 1850s regarding how workers should be treated , believing that the welfare of the employees impacted on the welfare of the employer . He became popular among workers for such things as becoming the first local employer to give his workers Saturday afternoons off . During the Lancashire Cotton Famine of 1861 – 1865 he refused to cut workers ' wages as was common during the period . He stated : 
 I will keep my work people employed , and if there is no work , lend them money from my own pocket rather than have them apply for relief . The poor rate is only 1s 6d in the pound . I will pay as high a poor rate as the Poor Law Guardians deem necessary . 
 As well as this , he contributed £ 500 ( about the equivalent of £ 30 @,@ 000 today ) to the Ashton borough cotton famine relief . During the tumultuous 1870s and 1880s , Mason kept his workforce fully employed and continued to invest in his mills . By 1884 , wages in his mills were 25 % higher than they had been in 1870 even though his employees were working fewer hours . The Manchester Guardian noted : 
 Hugh Mason is one of the first amongst those wealthy manufacturers of Lancashire who devote the hours which are not occupied by business to the service of their fellow men . He has been accustomed to take a leading part in the various public improvements , and he has long been a political chief . At Ashton he is unpopular : the ruggedness which mars his virtues , and the self assertion which stamps his conduct , do not invite the affection of his fellow . Although he has done more than any other <unk> on securing the physical and social well @-@ being of his employees , he is not highly esteemed . He has built for his <unk> admirable cottages , swimming baths , gymnasiums and lecture halls , but beneficent acts do not suffice to secure popularity unless there is a suavity of manner and sympathy of nature in the benefactor , and these are qualities which Mr Mason lacks . Mr Mason is a staunch liberal , and is reckoned to be one of the oracles of the local party . His figure is a familiar one at free trade meetings where the citizens of Manchester never fail to receive him with the utmost enthusiasm . The working men hail his appearance with tempestuous applause , and invariable reward his rhetorical efforts with frequent and deafening cheers . 
 = = Political career = = 
 = = = Local = = = 
 Hugh Mason was influenced by his father 's Liberal politics and strongly opposed to injustice and prejudice . Thomas Mason was a supporter of political representation for Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne and supported the repeal of the Corn Laws . In the early 19th century , the area was poorly represented in Parliament . The major urban centres of Manchester , Salford , Bolton , Blackburn , Rochdale , Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , Oldham and Stockport – with a combined population of almost one million – were represented by either the two county MPs for Lancashire ( or the two for Cheshire in the case of Stockport ) . By comparison , more than half of all MPs were elected by a total of just 154 voters . These inequalities in political representation led to calls for reform and eventually the Peterloo Massacre in 1819 . Hugh said of his father that " To his life of honest industry , to his example of commercial probity , to his high Christian character , to his training , of me in my early years , to his wise consuls , I owe under God my position in society . " 
 Although he claimed he was reluctant to enter politics , Hugh Mason became the first Liberal elected councillor for Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne in November 1856 . He represented the Portland Place ward from 1856 until his retirement from politics in 1874 . Mason quickly made an impression and was elected mayor for three consecutive years between 1857 and 1860 , which had never happened before . He supported progressive measures such as opening a public park , providing public libraries , and addressing unsanitary conditions in parts of Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne . 
 Mason 's policies led him to come into constant clashes with the Conservative members of the council . He was not always popular within his own party either and he even financed his own newspaper , the Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne News , to convey his views and provide competition for the pro @-@ Liberal Ashton Reporter . Conflict with the Liberals drove Mason into early retirement from local politics in 1874 at the age of 57 . 
 As well as being a councillor , Mason was also elected a local magistrate for Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne in 1857 . During his time in office he had to deal with the bread riots of 21 – 22 March 1863 ( caused by the cotton famine ) and the Murphy Riots in May 1868 . The Murphy Riots were anti @-@ Catholic demonstrations , fueled by <unk> ( an Irish nationalist organisation ) , across Lancashire led by William Murphy . He personally went to one mob during the Murphy Riots to read them the riot act face @-@ to @-@ face . He was appointed a Deputy Lieutenant of the County Palatine of Lancaster on 21 June 1862 . Such was his significance in Manchester he was appointed President of the Chamber of Commerce for two years from 1871 . At the same time he was a Governor of Owen 's College in the city . Mason was appointed a member of the Board of the Mersey Docks and Harbour . 
 = = = National = = = 
 Mason , along with a group of other Advanced Liberals supporting John Morley , the <unk> , was one of the founding members of the Reform Club in Manchester , a political club founded in 1867 for Liberals and their supporters . Despite retiring from local politics because of conflict with the Liberals , by 1878 he was back in favour and Liberal councillors were encouraging Mason to stand for parliamentary election . Although he was a popular candidate , he was initially reluctant to put himself forward . However , he stood for Parliament in the 1880 General Elections . His campaign in March and April 1880 involved vitriolic attacks on the local Conservative Party and on 3 April 1880 he was elected MP for Ashton @-@ under @-@ Lyne , beating his opponent , John Ross <unk> , by 2 @,@ 966 votes to 2 @,@ 586 . 
 As an MP he lived at 33 Onslow Square , Kensington , and was a member of the Reform Club . Mason supported many reformist bills and became a spokesman of the Women 's Suffrage Association in 1881 . He proposed motions for women 's suffrage in 1881 and again in 1883 but was defeated on both occasions . He led the women 's suffrage movement until 1883 when illness forced him to retreat from public life temporarily . His defeat in the 1885 General Elections was ascribed to his support of William Ewart Gladstone over the issue of Irish Home Rule and to his illness . He lost to the Conservative John Wentworth Addison by 3 @,@ 152 votes to 3 @,@ 104 . Mason demanded a recount , but this increased the majority by one vote ; he succumbed to illness and died before the result was announced . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 In 1846 Hugh Mason married Sarah Buckley , the daughter of Abel Buckley , Esq , who was also the father of Abel Buckley Businessman and MP , another cotton mill owner who went on to be a millionaire businessman and landowner . They had one child , Arnold , who was born in 1851 . Sarah died in 1852 at the age of 29 . Mason next married Sarah 's sister , Betsy , though it was illegal to marry one 's sister @-@ in @-@ law in England at the time . To overcome this problem they married in Denmark on 7 June 1854 . Their marriage was approved by special licence from the King of Denmark and was held at the <unk> Reform Church , Altona in the Duchy of Holstein . They had four children : Bertha , born in 1855 , Edith in 1857 , Rupert in 1859 and Sydney in 1861 . Betsy died after the birth of Sydney and Mason then married for a third time Annie , daughter of George Ashworth , Esq , of Rochdale in 1864 . 
 Hugh Mason died three days after his 69th birthday on 2 February 1886 at his home , Groby Hall . At his death , he had amassed a fortune worth £ 290 @,@ 933 ( now worth about £ 17M ) . He was the first person to have a statue ( now protected as a Grade II listed building ) erected in his honour in Tameside ; it was financed by public subscription immediately after Mason 's death . 
 = Kepler @-@ 11g = 
 Kepler @-@ 11g is an exoplanet discovered in the orbit of the sunlike star Kepler @-@ 11 by the Kepler spacecraft , a NASA satellite tasked with searching for terrestrial planets . Kepler @-@ 11g is the outermost of the star 's six planets . The planet orbits at a distance of nearly half the mean distance between Earth and the Sun . It completes an orbit every 118 days , placing it much further from its star than the system 's inner five planets . Its estimated radius is a little over three times that of Earth , i.e. comparable to Neptune 's size . Kepler @-@ 11g 's distance from the inner planets made its confirmation more difficult than that of the inner planets , as scientists had to work to exhaustively disprove all reasonable alternatives before Kepler @-@ 11g could be confirmed . The planet 's discovery , along with that of the other Kepler @-@ 11 planets , was announced on February 2 , 2011 . According to NASA , the Kepler @-@ 11 planets form the flattest and most compact system yet discovered . 
 = = Name and discovery = = 
 Kepler @-@ 11 was originally called KOI @-@ 157 when NASA 's Kepler spacecraft flagged the star for possible transit events , which exhibit tiny and roughly periodic decreases in the star 's brightness are measured as it passes in front of its star as seen from Earth . Kepler @-@ 11 's name is incorporated into Kepler @-@ 11g 's name because it is the host star . As Kepler @-@ 11g and its five sister planets were discovered and announced at the same time , its planets were sorted alphabetically by distance from the host star , starting with the letter b . Because Kepler @-@ 11g was the furthest of the six , it was given the designation " g . " 
 The Kepler team 's scientists conducted follow @-@ up observations to confirm or reject the planetary nature of the detected object . To do so , they used the Keck 1 telescope at the W.M. Keck Observatory in Hawaii ; the Shane and Hale telescopes in California ; telescopes at the WIYN ( including MMT ) and Whipple observatories in Arizona ; Nordic Optical Telescope in the Canary Islands ; the Hobby @-@ Eberly and Harlan J. Smith telescopes in Texas ; and NASA 's Spitzer Space Telescope . Because Kepler @-@ 11g orbits its star at a far greater distance than the inner five planets , fewer transits were observed , and radial velocity ( the observation of a Doppler effect ) interactions could not be easily discerned . As with the discovery of Kepler @-@ 9d , the Kepler team ran the information through numerous models to see if Kepler @-@ 11g 's light curve could fit the profile of some other object , including an eclipsing binary star in the background that may have contaminated the data . The probability that Kepler @-@ 11g is not a planet but instead a false positive was determined to be 0 @.@ 18 % , effectively confirming its existence . 
 Kepler @-@ 11g , along with its five sister planets , were announced at a NASA press conference on February 2 , 2011 . The findings were published in the journal Nature a day later . 
 = = Host star = = 
 Kepler @-@ 11 is a G @-@ type star in the Cygnus constellation . It is located approximately 613 parsecs away . Kepler @-@ 11 is .95 ( ± 0 @.@ 1 ) times the mass and 1 @.@ 1 ( ± 0 @.@ 1 ) times the radius of the Sun . The star has an iron content ( metallicity ) of 0 ( ± 0 @.@ 1 ) , similar to that of the Sun . Metallicity plays a vital role in the formation of planets , as a more metal @-@ rich star tends to form more dense planets . Kepler @-@ 11 has an effective temperature of 5680 ( ± 100 ) K , only slightly cooler than the Sun ( 5778 K ) . Kepler @-@ 11 hosts six known planets : Kepler @-@ 11b , Kepler @-@ 11c , Kepler @-@ 11d , Kepler @-@ 11e , and Kepler @-@ 11f , all of which form a tight group well within the orbit of Mercury . Kepler @-@ 11g is considerably farther away from Kepler @-@ 11 than its five sister planets . According to NASA , the planets orbiting Kepler @-@ 11 form the flattest and most compact system known . 
 Kepler @-@ 11 has an apparent magnitude of 14 @.@ 2 , and thus cannot be seen with the naked eye . 
