 Golem Arcana is a tabletop miniature wargaming game developed and published by Harebrained Schemes for iOS and Android devices . The game combines physical miniatures on a game board with a mobile app that much of the gameplay takes place in ; the physical pieces and the app communicate through the use of a Bluetooth stylus . Several elements of the game , including special abilities and optional missions , exist only within the app . 
 Golem Arcana was funded through a Kickstarter campaign that launched in September 2013 and went on to raise over $ 500 @,@ 000 . The game was released just under a year later , on 13 August 2014 . Both studio co @-@ founder Jordan Weisman and executive producer Ray Winninger had extensive experience developing both video games and tabletop games , and one of their primary motivations in creating Golem Arcana was to merge the two gaming types . They also sought to create a more social experience than could be found in traditional multiplayer video games . 
 The game received mixed reviews upon release . Critics were split in their take on the hybrid of physical pieces and the digital app , with some seeing it as a boon and others as a detriment . The game received praise for its visuals , lore , and ruleset , but also received criticism for its price . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Golem Arcana is a two to eight @-@ player miniature wargaming game that interfaces with a digital app through the use of a Bluetooth stylus . Players compete against one another in one of several scenario types , including eliminating the opponent 's golems or capturing and holding a specific area of the map . The ultimate goal of the game is to collect a set number of " victory points " , which are gathered by defeating opposing golems , completing scenario objectives , and as rewards for completing optional missions encountered through the app . 
 Each player controls a number of physical miniatures called golems , which are placed on a game board built with interchangeable map tiles . Each map tile is divided into nine squares arranged 3 by 3 , and has terrain features pre @-@ printed on it . <unk> come in small , large , and very large sizes . Up to four small , two large , or one large and two small golems can share a square on a map tile . The very large " colossus " golems take up an entire square by themselves . Each golem comes with a card that lists the actions it can take . Another type of card , known as relics , allow players to active special abilities including healing and resurrection . 
 The golems , cards , and game board are covered in small magnetic dots . A Bluetooth stylus that comes with the starter kit reads the dots to transmit information from the board to a mobile app . Gameplay information such as the position of all of the golems , terrain and map effects , and the game 's rules are stored in the app , which uses that information to determine and present players with available moves , attack accuracy and damage , and other statistics . Players then use the stylus to choose where to move and what actions to take ; players still have to move the physical pieces on the board , but their moves are also reflected in the app . 
 The game also has several components that exist only within the app . The base game includes around 70 knights , which in the game 's lore are sorcerers that control the golems . Players pair each golem with one knight , or three knights for the " colossus " golems , and different knights provide golems with different bonuses . Players can also use spells , in the game 's lore by evoking ancestral gods called Ancient Ones . Ancient Ones are cast using mana , which can be acquired in several ways , including when a golem that the player controls is defeated or though missions that appear in the app . Players encounter missions , which provide optional objectives in exchange for victory points , while moving around the map . In some cases not completing the missions offers alternative rewards . Harebrained Schemes collects aggregate data on the decisions that players make in the game and uses it to alter the game 's lore . 
 = = Development = = 
 Golem Arcana was announced in July 2013 in a blog post on developer Harebrained Schemes ' website . The blog post indicated that the studio would return to Kickstarter to fund the game , and that most of the studio 's staff would continue to work on their other project , Shadowrun Returns , while a few would be split off to work on Golem Arcana . The Kickstarter campaign was launched on 10 September 2013 and ran until 15 October 2013 , with a funding goal of $ 500 @,@ 000 . Backers could get the base game by pledging at the $ 55 Kickstarter reward tier . 
 The game was released on 13 August 2014 , with the digital component available for both iOS and Android . In addition to the base game , a number of expansion sets have been released . Expansions sets contain three miniatures as well as cards and abilities . Harebrained Schemes has also released " Colossus " expansions , which contain one large miniature instead of the three normal @-@ sized ones . Expansions are planned for release at least through early 2016 . 
 Both studio co @-@ founder Jordan Weisman and executive producer Ray Winninger had experience developing both tabletop games and video games . One of the studio 's motivations for developing the game was to combine the two mediums , with Winninger explaining " One of the spaces we 're interested in exploring at Harebrained , and Golem is the first effort , is how can we take those tabletop games that we know and love so much and leverage technology to enhance that experience in some way . " Weisman and Winninger also stressed the social nature of the game . Winninger , comparing Golem Arcana to Skylanders , another game with both physical and digital components , stressed that Golem Arcana was less focused on components and more focused on the social experience . Weisman pointed to his disappointment that " kids ' idea of playing together after school these days usually means just meeting online from their own houses " in stressing that participants playing against each other in Golem Arcana would do so face @-@ to @-@ face . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Golem Arcana received mixed reviews upon release . Reviewers were divided on the game 's defining feature – the hybrid of physical miniature and digital app , but praised the game 's visuals , lore , and rules . 
 Writing for Rock , Paper , Shotgun , Robert Florence praised the app for calculating variables like movement range and tracking statistics like health and ability <unk> , but spoke of a disconnect caused by constantly shifting focus between the screen and the board . While ultimately questioning the need for the physical components at all , Florence also saw the game as having potential in the future . Chris Hutton of Tom 's Guide took a much more negative view . Hutton found it cumbersome that the starter kit came with only one stylus and that only one device running the app could be synced to a given game at a time , necessitating that the screen and stylus be passed back and forth between players . He also found the stylus itself to be unresponsive , slowing the game down to the point that he lost interest . VentureBeat 's Jay <unk> , on the other hand , had nothing but praise for the app and stylus . After fifteen minutes he found using the stylus to be " almost natural " , and found that the app handling all of the rules and stat @-@ keeping made for " one of the easiest experiences I ’ ve ever had getting into a new game " . He went on to say that players will look to see the technology spread to other miniature wargaming products . 
 One element that did receive near @-@ universal criticism was the game 's price of $ 80 for the base game . PC World called the price the game 's " biggest flaw " , Yahoo ! Tech called it " hefty " and " a steep investment " , and VentureBeat called it " quite the price tag " , but qualified their statement by pointing to the large number of items that come with the starter kit . 
 The game did receive praise for its visuals , storytelling , and rules . The Academy of Adventure Gaming Arts & Design awarded Golem Arcana the " Best Miniature Figure Rules " prize in the 2015 Origins Awards . In an otherwise negative review , Chris Hutton of Tom 's Guide praised the storyline and visuals , saying of the latter that " the colorful , interesting terrain created a unique universe " . Game Informer praised the game 's setting and its " gorgeous visual aesthetic " . 
 = Amazing Stories Quarterly = 
 Amazing Stories Quarterly was a U.S. science fiction pulp magazine published from 1928 to 1934 . It was launched by Hugo Gernsback as a companion to his Amazing Stories , the first science fiction magazine , which had begun publishing in April 1926 . Amazing Stories had been successful enough for Gernsback to try a single issue of Amazing Stories Annual in 1927 , which had sold well , and he decided to follow it up with a quarterly magazine . The first issue of Amazing Stories Quarterly was dated Winter 1928 and carried a reprint of H.G. Wells ' When the Sleeper Wakes . Gernsback 's policy of running a novel in each issue was popular with his readership , though the choice of Wells ' novel was less so . Over the next five issues only one more reprint appeared : Gernsback 's own novel Ralph 124C 41 + , in the Winter 1929 issue . Gernsback went bankrupt in early 1929 , and lost control of both Amazing Stories and Amazing Stories Quarterly ; his assistant , T. O 'Conor Sloane , took over as editor . The magazine began to run into financial difficulties in 1932 , and the schedule became irregular ; the last issue was dated Fall 1934 . 
 Authors whose work appeared in Amazing Stories Quarterly include Stanton A. Coblentz , Miles J. Breuer , A. Hyatt Verrill , and Jack Williamson . Critical opinions differ on the quality of the fiction Gernsback and Sloane printed : Brian Stableford regards several of the novels as being important early science fiction , but Everett Bleiler comments that few of the stories were of acceptable quality . Milton Wolf and Mike Ashley are more positive in their assessment ; they consider the work Sloane published in the early 1930s to be some of the best in the new genre . 
 = = Publication history = = 
 Although science fiction ( sf ) had been published before the 1920s , it did not begin to coalesce into a separately marketed genre until the appearance in 1926 of Amazing Stories , a U.S. pulp magazine published by Hugo Gernsback . The new magazine was successful , and in 1927 Gernsback brought out a double @-@ sized Amazing Stories Annual , which also sold well . These successes convinced him to start a companion magazine to Amazing Stories , titled Amazing Stories Quarterly . The first issue , dated Winter 1928 , appeared on newsstands on January 5 that year . 
 Gernsback went bankrupt in early 1929 , and lost control of both Amazing Stories and Amazing Stories Quarterly . After a short period in receivership , they were acquired by Bergan Mackinnon , who sold them on to Bernarr Macfadden 's Teck Publications . T. O 'Conor Sloane , who had worked on both magazines for Gernsback , took over as editor . In 1932 the magazine , which was probably never very profitable , began to suffer from financial problems , and the quarterly schedule became irregular after the Winter 1932 issue . The last two issues were filled completely with reprints from early issues and from Amazing Stories . The last issue was dated Fall 1934 , though the decision to discontinue the magazine was not taken until some time later , as an editorial comment in the May 1935 issue of Amazing Stories mentioned that further issues might still appear . 
 = = Contents = = 
 The first issue of Amazing Stories Quarterly contained a reprint of H. G. Wells ' novel When the Sleeper Wakes , though for some reason Wells did not provide Gernsback with the revised text published in 1910 under the title The Sleeper Awakes ; the text printed was that of the original 1899 edition . The other material in the issue was original , and the following issues included material by Edmond Hamilton , Stanton A. Coblentz , R.F. <unk> , David H. Keller , S.P. Meek , J. <unk> , and Clare Winger Harris , one of the earliest women writers of sf . Although readers ' reactions to the Wells novel were negative , they approved of Gernsback 's policy of publishing a novel in each issue . The only other reprint in the early days of the magazine was Gernsback 's own novel Ralph 124C 41 + , which appeared in the Winter 1929 issue . The novel , set in the year 2660 , was little more than a series of predictions about the future tied together by a minor plot . Gernsback included a letter column , and began a competition for the best editorials submitted by readers ; the first prize was awarded to Jack Williamson , later to become a successful science fiction writer but at that time just starting his career . Gernsback also started other departments to engage the readers , including book reviews , science quizzes , and science news . The last issue under Gernsback 's control was dated Spring 1929 ; under Sloane 's editorship , most of these nonfiction departments ceased . 
 According to Milton Wolf and Mike Ashley , historians of science fiction , over the next two years Sloane published some of the best sf of the early years of the field in Amazing Stories Quarterly . Wolf and Ashley cite " Paradox " , by Charles <unk> , an early time @-@ travel story ; The Bridge of Light , by A. Hyatt Verrill , a novel about a lost civilization in South America ; The Birth of a New Republic , by Miles J. Breuer and Jack Williamson , in which a man of the 24th century reminisces about a revolt by the inhabitants of the Moon rebel against the Earth ; " Paradise and Iron " , by Breuer ; and White Lily , by Eric Temple Bell , under the pseudonym John Taine , about a form of crystal life that endangers the planet . After 1931 , according to Wolf and Ashley , the fiction in Amazing Stories Quarterly became less entertaining . Everett Bleiler , the author of a detailed review of the first ten years of science fiction magazines , is less complimentary , describing John W. Campbell , Jr . ' s space operas , which appeared from 1930 to 1932 , as " turgid " , and commenting that only a dozen or so of the stories in the magazine 's entire run " might have been considered worth reading if one could put oneself back in the 1930s , accepting the standards of the time " . Bleiler mentions three authors , Coblentz , Taine , and Breuer , as having produced notably original material , but adds that their work was " not strong enough for mainstream fiction " and had " too little action and too much sophistication for pulp " . Bleiler does however agree with Wolf and Ashley that the magazines 's quality declined over time . Brian Stableford , in the Science Fiction Encyclopedia , also highlights Coblentz , Taine and Breuer , along with Williamson and Verrill , among the magazine 's contributors ; Stableford regards their contributions as being among " the most important early pulp sf novels " . 
 = = Bibliographic details = = 
 Amazing Stories Quarterly was published by Hugo Gernsback 's Experimenter Publishing until Spring 1929 . A single issue appeared from Irving Trust , the trustee in Gernsback 's bankruptcy ; then four issues , from Fall 1929 to Summer 1930 , again under the Experimenter Publishing imprint , and then four more from Radio @-@ Science Publications . The last ten issues , from Fall 1931 to Fall 1934 , were published by Teck Publishing , of Washington and Dunellen . The magazine was in large pulp format throughout , and was 144 pages long , except for the last two issues , which were 128 pages . It was priced at 50 cents . The first six issues were edited by Hugo Gernsback ; from the Summer 1929 issue on , the editor was T. O 'Conor Sloane . There was a Canadian reprint of a single issue , Fall 1934 . 
 Another 27 issues of Amazing Stories Quarterly appeared from Ziff @-@ Davis from 1940 to 1943 , and also from 1949 to 1951 , but these were not original magazines , only rebound issues of Amazing Stories . 
 = The Turk = 
 The Turk , also known as the Mechanical Turk or Automaton Chess Player ( German : <unk> , " chess Turk " ; Hungarian : A Török ) , was a fake chess @-@ playing machine constructed in the late 18th century . From 1770 until its destruction by fire in 1854 it was exhibited by various owners as an automaton , though it was eventually revealed to be an elaborate hoax . Constructed and unveiled in 1770 by Wolfgang von Kempelen ( Hungarian : Kempelen Farkas ; 1734 – 1804 ) to impress the Empress Maria Theresa of Austria , the mechanism appeared to be able to play a strong game of chess against a human opponent , as well as perform the knight 's tour , a puzzle that requires the player to move a knight to occupy every square of a chessboard exactly once . 
 The Turk was in fact a mechanical illusion that allowed a human chess master hiding inside to operate the machine . With a skilled operator , the Turk won most of the games played during its demonstrations around Europe and the Americas for nearly 84 years , playing and defeating many challengers including statesmen such as Napoleon Bonaparte and Benjamin Franklin . The operators within the mechanism during Kempelen 's original tour remain a mystery . The device was later purchased in 1804 and exhibited by Johann Nepomuk Mälzel . The chess masters who secretly operated it included Johann <unk> , <unk> , Aaron Alexandre , William Lewis , Jacques <unk> , and William Schlumberger . 
 = = Construction of the Turk = = 
 Kempelen was inspired to build the Turk following his attendance at the court of Maria Theresa of Austria at Schönbrunn Palace , where François Pelletier was performing an illusion act . An exchange afterward resulted in Kempelen promising to return to the Palace with an invention that would top the illusions . 
 The result of the challenge was the Automaton Chess @-@ player , known in modern times as the Turk . The machine consisted of a life @-@ sized model of a human head and torso , with a black beard and grey eyes , and dressed in Turkish robes and a turban – " the traditional costume " , according to journalist and author Tom Standage , " of an oriental sorcerer " . Its left arm held a long Turkish smoking pipe while at rest , while its right lay on the top of a large cabinet that measured about three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half feet ( 110 cm ) long , two feet ( 60 cm ) wide , and two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half feet ( 75 cm ) high . Placed on the top of the cabinet was a chessboard , which measured eighteen inches square . The front of the cabinet consisted of three doors , an opening , and a drawer , which could be opened to reveal a red and white ivory chess set . 
 The interior of the machine was very complicated and designed to mislead those who observed it . When opened on the left , the front doors of the cabinet exposed a number of gears and cogs similar to clockwork . The section was designed so that if the back doors of the cabinet were open at the same time one could see through the machine . The other side of the cabinet did not house machinery ; instead it contained a red cushion and some removable parts , as well as brass structures . This area was also designed to provide a clear line of vision through the machine . Underneath the robes of the Turkish model , two other doors were hidden . These also exposed clockwork machinery and provided a similarly unobstructed view through the machine . The design allowed the presenter of the machine to open every available door to the public , to maintain the illusion . 
 Neither the clockwork visible to the left side of the machine nor the drawer that housed the chess set extended fully to the rear of the cabinet ; they instead went only one third of the way . A sliding seat was also installed , allowing the director inside to slide from place to place and thus evade observation as the presenter opened various doors . The sliding of the seat caused dummy machinery to slide into its place to further conceal the person inside the cabinet . 
 The chessboard on the top of the cabinet was thin enough to allow for a magnetic linkage . Each piece in the chess set had a small , strong magnet attached to its base , and when they were placed on the board the pieces would attract a magnet attached to a string under their specific places on the board . This allowed the director inside the machine to see which pieces moved where on the chess board . The bottom of the chessboard had corresponding numbers , 1 – 64 , allowing the director to see which places on the board were affected by a player 's move . The internal magnets were positioned in a way that outside magnetic forces did not influence them , and Kempelen would often allow a large magnet to sit at the side of the board in an attempt to show that the machine was not influenced by magnetism . 
 As a further means of misdirection , the Turk came with a small wooden coffin @-@ like box that the presenter would place on the top of the cabinet . While Johann Nepomuk Mälzel , a later owner of the machine , did not use the box , Kempelen often peered into the box during play , suggesting that the box controlled some aspect of the machine . The box was believed by some to have supernatural power , with Karl Gottlieb von Windisch writing in his 1784 book Inanimate Reason that " [ o ] ne old lady , in particular , who had not forgotten the tales she had been told in her youth … went and hid herself in a window seat , as distant as she could from the evil spirit , which she firmly believed possessed the machine " . 
 The interior also contained a <unk> chess board connected to a pantograph @-@ style series of levers that controlled the model 's left arm . The metal pointer on the pantograph moved over the interior chessboard , and would simultaneously move the arm of the Turk over the chessboard on the cabinet . The range of motion allowed the director to move the Turk 's arm up and down , and turning the lever would open and close the Turk 's hand , allowing it to grasp the pieces on the board . All of this was made visible to the director by using a simple candle , which had a ventilation system through the model . Other parts of the machinery allowed for a clockwork @-@ type sound to be played when the Turk made a move , further adding to the machinery illusion , and for the Turk to make various facial expressions . A voice box was added following the Turk 's acquisition by Mälzel , allowing the machine to say " <unk> ! " ( French for " check " ) during matches . 
 An operator inside the machine also had tools to assist in communicating with the presenter outside . Two brass discs equipped with numbers were positioned opposite each other on the inside and outside of the cabinet . A rod could rotate the discs to the desired number , which acted as a code between the two . 
 = = Exhibition = = 
 The Turk made its debut in 1770 at Schönbrunn Palace , about six months after Pelletier 's act . Kempelen addressed the court , presenting what he had built , and began the demonstration of the machine and its parts . With every showing of the Turk , Kempelen began by opening the doors and drawers of the cabinet , allowing members of the audience to inspect the machine . Following this display , Kempelen would announce that the machine was ready for a challenger . 
 Kempelen would inform the player that the Turk would use the white pieces and have the first move . Between moves the Turk kept its left arm on the cushion . The Turk could nod twice if it threatened its opponent 's queen , and three times upon placing the king in check . If an opponent made an illegal move , the Turk would shake its head , move the piece back and make its own move , thus forcing a forfeit of its opponent 's move . Louis <unk> , a traveller who observed a showing of the Turk , attempted to trick the machine " by giving the Queen the move of a Knight , but my mechanic opponent was not to be so imposed upon ; he took up my Queen and replaced her in the square from which I had moved her " . Kempelen made it a point to traverse the room during the match , and invited observers to bring magnets , irons , and <unk> to the cabinet to test whether the machine was run by a form of magnetism or weights . The first person to play against the Turk was Count Ludwig von <unk> , an Austrian courtier at the palace . Along with other challengers that day , he was quickly defeated , with observers of the match stating that the machine played aggressively , and typically beat its opponents within thirty minutes . 
 Another part of the machine 's exhibition was the completion of the knight 's tour , a famed chess puzzle . The puzzle requires the player to move a knight around a chessboard , touching each square once along the way . While most experienced chess players of the time still struggled with the puzzle , the Turk was capable of completing the tour without any difficulty from any starting point via a <unk> used by the director with a mapping of the puzzle laid out . 
 The Turk also had the ability to converse with spectators using a letter board . The director , whose identity during the period when Kempelen presented the machine at Schönbrunn Palace is unknown , was able to do this in English , French , and German . Carl Friedrich Hindenburg , a university mathematician , kept a record of the conversations during the Turk 's time in Leipzig and published it in 1789 as Über den Schachspieler des Herrn von Kempelen und <unk> <unk> ( or On the <unk> of Mr. von Kempelen And Its Replica ) . Topics of questions put to and answered by the Turk included its age , marital status , and its secret workings . 
 = = Tour of Europe = = 
 Following word of its debut , interest in the machine grew across Europe . Kempelen , however , was more interested in his other projects and avoided exhibiting the Turk , often lying about the machine 's repair status to prospective challengers . Von Windisch wrote at one point that Kempelen " refused the entreaties of his friends , and a crowd of curious persons from all countries , the satisfaction of seeing this far @-@ famed machine " . In the decade following its debut at Schönbrunn Palace the Turk only played one opponent , Sir Robert Murray Keith , a Scottish noble , and Kempelen went as far as dismantling the Turk entirely following the match . Kempelen was quoted as referring to the invention as a " mere bagatelle " , as he was not pleased with its popularity and would rather continue work on steam engines and machines that replicated human speech . 
 In 1781 , Kempelen was ordered by Emperor Joseph II to reconstruct the Turk and deliver it to Vienna for a state visit from Grand Duke Paul of Russia and his wife . The appearance was so successful that Grand Duke Paul suggested a tour of Europe for the Turk , a request to which Kempelen reluctantly agreed . 
 The Turk began its European tour in 1783 , beginning with an appearance in France in April . A stop at Versailles preceded an exhibition in Paris , where the Turk lost a match to Charles Godefroy de La Tour d 'Auvergne , the Duc de Bouillon . Upon arrival in Paris in May 1783 , it was displayed to the public and played a variety of opponents , including a lawyer named Mr. Bernard who was a second rank in chess ability . Following the sessions at Versailles , demands increased for a match with François @-@ André Danican Philidor , who was considered the best chess player of his time . Moving to the Café de la Régence , the machine played many of the most skilled players , often losing ( e.g. against Bernard and <unk> ) , until securing a match with Philidor at the Académie des Sciences . While Philidor won his match with the Turk , Philidor 's son noted that his father called it " his most fatiguing game of chess ever ! " The Turk 's final game in Paris was against Benjamin Franklin , who was serving as ambassador to France from the United States . Franklin reportedly enjoyed the game with the Turk and was interested in the machine for the rest of his life , keeping a copy of Philip Thicknesse 's book The Speaking Figure and the Automaton Chess Player , Exposed and Detected in his personal library . 
 Following his tour of Paris , Kempelen moved the Turk to London , where it was exhibited daily for five shillings . Thicknesse , known in his time as a skeptic , sought out the Turk in an attempt to expose the inner workings of the machine . While he respected Kempelen as " a very ingenious man " , he asserted that the Turk was an elaborate hoax with a small child inside the machine , describing the machine as " a complicated piece of clockwork ... which is nothing more , than one , of many other ingenious devices , to <unk> and delude the observers " . 
 After a year in London , Kempelen and the Turk travelled to Leipzig , stopping in various European cities along the way . From Leipzig , it went to Dresden , where Joseph Friedrich Freiherr von <unk> viewed the Turk and published his findings in Über den Schachspieler des Herrn von Kempelen und <unk> <unk> , along with illustrations showing his beliefs about how the machine operated . It then moved to Amsterdam , after which Kempelen is said to have accepted an invitation to the Sanssouci palace in Potsdam of Frederick the Great , King of Prussia . The story goes that Frederick enjoyed the Turk so much that he paid a large sum of money to Kempelen in exchange for the Turk 's secrets . Frederick never gave the secret away , but was reportedly disappointed to learn how the machine worked . ( This story is almost certainly apocryphal ; there is no evidence of the Turk 's encounter with Frederick , the first mention of which comes in the early 19th century , by which time the Turk was also incorrectly said to have played against George III of England . ) It seems most likely that the machine stayed dormant at Schönbrunn Palace for over two decades , although Kempelen attempted unsuccessfully to sell it in his final years . Kempelen died at age 70 on 26 March 1804 . 
 = = Mälzel and the machine = = 
 Following the death of Kempelen , the Turk remained <unk> until some time before 1804 when Kempelen 's son decided to sell it to Johann Nepomuk Mälzel , a Bavarian musician with an interest in various machines and devices . Mälzel , whose successes included patenting a form of metronome , had tried to purchase the Turk once before , before Kempelen 's death . The original attempt had failed , owing to Kempelen 's asking price of 20 @,@ 000 francs ; Kempelen 's son sold the machine to Mälzel for half this sum . 
 Upon acquiring the Turk , Mälzel had to learn its secrets and make some repairs to get it back in working order . His stated goal was to make explaining the Turk a greater challenge . While the completion of this goal took ten years , the Turk still made appearances , most notably with Napoleon Bonaparte . 
 In 1809 , Napoleon I of France arrived at Schönbrunn Palace to play the Turk . According to an eyewitness report , Mälzel took responsibility for the construction of the machine while preparing the game , and the Turk ( Johann Baptist <unk> ) saluted Napoleon before the start of the match . The details of the match have been published over the years in numerous accounts , many of them contradictory . According to Bradley Ewart , it is believed that the Turk sat at its cabinet , and Napoleon sat at a separate chess table . Napoleon 's table was in a roped @-@ off area and he was not allowed to cross into the Turk 's area , with Mälzel crossing back and forth to make each player 's move and allowing a clear view for the spectators . In a surprise move , Napoleon took the first turn instead of allowing the Turk to make the first move , as was usual ; but Mälzel allowed the game to continue . Shortly thereafter , Napoleon attempted an illegal move . Upon noticing the move , the Turk returned the piece to its original spot and continued the game . Napoleon attempted the illegal move a second time , and the Turk responded by removing the piece from the board entirely and taking its turn . Napoleon then attempted the move a third time , the Turk responding with a sweep of its arm , knocking all the pieces off the board . Napoleon was reportedly amused , and then played a real game with the machine , completing nineteen moves before tipping over his king in surrender . Alternate versions of the story include Napoleon being unhappy about losing to the machine , playing the machine at a later time , playing one match with a magnet on the board , and playing a match with a shawl around the head and body of the Turk in an attempt to obscure its vision . 
 In 1811 , Mälzel brought the Turk to Milan for a performance with Eugène de Beauharnais , the Prince of Venice and Viceroy of Italy . Beauharnais enjoyed the machine so much that he offered to purchase it from Mälzel . After some serious bargaining , Beauharnais acquired the Turk for 30 @,@ 000 francs – three times what Mälzel had paid – and kept it for four years . In 1815 , Mälzel returned to Beauharnais in Munich and asked to buy the Turk back . Two versions of how much he had to pay exist , eventually working out an agreement . One version appeared in the France Letter <unk> . The complete story does not make a lot of sense since Mälzel visited Paris again , and he also could import his " Conflagration of Moscow " . 
 Following the repurchase , Mälzel brought the Turk back to Paris where he made acquaintances of many of the leading chess players at Café de la Régence . Mälzel stayed in France with the machine until 1818 , when he moved to London and held a number of performances with the Turk and many of his other machines . In London , Mälzel and his act received a large amount of press , and he continued improving the machine , ultimately installing a voice box so the machine could say " <unk> ! " when placing a player in check . 
 In 1819 , Mälzel took the Turk on a tour of the United Kingdom . There were several new developments in the act , such as allowing the opponent the first move and eliminating the king 's bishop 's pawn from the Turk 's pieces . This pawn handicap created further interest in the Turk , and spawned a book by W. J. <unk> chronicling the matches played with this handicap . Despite the handicap , the Turk ( operated by <unk> at the time ) ended up with forty @-@ five victories , three losses , and two stalemates . 
 = = Mälzel in America = = 
 The appearances of the Turk were profitable for Mälzel , and he continued by taking it and his other machines to the United States . In 1826 , he opened an exhibition in New York City that slowly grew in popularity , giving rise to many newspaper stories and anonymous threats of exposure of the secret . Mälzel 's problem was finding a proper director for the machine , having trained an unknown woman in France before coming to the United States . He ended up recalling a former director , William Schlumberger , from Alsace in Europe to come to America and work for him again once Mälzel was able to provide the money for Schlumberger 's transport . 
 Upon Schlumberger 's arrival , the Turk debuted in Boston , Mälzel spinning a story that the New York chess players could not handle full games and that the Boston players were much better opponents . This was a success for many weeks , and the tour moved to Philadelphia for three months . Following Philadelphia , the Turk moved to Baltimore , where it played for a number of months , including losing a match against Charles Carroll , a signer of the Declaration of Independence . The exhibition in Baltimore brought news that two brothers had constructed their own machine , the Walker Chess @-@ player . Mälzel viewed the competing machine and attempted to buy it , but the offer was declined and the duplicate machine toured for a number of years , never receiving the fame that Mälzel 's machine did and eventually falling into obscurity . 
 Mälzel continued with exhibitions around the United States until 1828 , when he took some time off and visited Europe , returning in 1829 . Throughout the 1830s , he continued to tour the United States , exhibiting the machine as far west as the Mississippi River and visiting Canada . In Richmond , Virginia , the Turk was observed by Edgar Allan Poe , who was writing for the Southern Literary Messenger . Poe 's essay " <unk> 's Chess Player " was published in April 1836 and is the most famous essay on the Turk , even though many of Poe 's hypotheses were incorrect ( such as that a chess @-@ playing machine must always win ) . 
 Mälzel eventually took the Turk on his second tour to Havana , Cuba . In Cuba , Schlumberger died of yellow fever , leaving Mälzel without a director for his machine . Dejected , Mälzel died at sea in 1838 at age 66 during his return trip , leaving his machinery with the ship captain . 
 = = Final years and beyond = = 
 Upon the return of the ship on which Mälzel died , his various machines , including the Turk , fell into the hands of a friend of Mälzel 's , the businessman John Ohl . He attempted to auction off the Turk , but owing to low bidding ultimately bought it himself for $ 400 . Only when John Kearsley Mitchell from Philadelphia , Edgar Allan Poe 's personal physician and an admirer of the Turk , approached Ohl did the Turk change hands again . Mitchell formed a restoration club and went about the business of repairing the Turk for public appearances , completing the restoration in 1840 . 
 As interest in the Turk outgrew its location , Mitchell and his club chose to donate the machine to the Chinese Museum of Charles Willson Peale . While the Turk still occasionally gave performances , it was eventually relegated to the corners of the museum and forgotten about until 5 July 1854 , when a fire that started at the National Theater in Philadelphia reached the Museum and destroyed the Turk . Mitchell believed he had heard " through the struggling flames ... the last words of our departed friend , the sternly whispered , oft repeated syllables , ' <unk> ! <unk> ! ! ' " 
 John Gaughan , an American manufacturer of equipment for magicians based in Los Angeles , spent $ 120 @,@ 000 building his own version of Kempelen 's machine over a five @-@ year period from 1984 . The machine uses the original chessboard , which was stored separately from the original Turk and was not destroyed in the fire . The first public display of Gaughan 's Turk was in November 1989 at a history of magic conference . The machine was presented much as Kempelen presented the original , except that the opponent was replaced by a computer running a chess program . 
 = = Revealing the secrets = = 
 While many books and articles were written during the Turk 's life about how it worked , most were inaccurate , drawing incorrect inferences from external observation . 
 It was not until Dr. Silas Mitchell 's series of articles for The Chess Monthly that the secret was fully revealed . Mitchell , son of the final private owner of the Turk , wrote that " no secret was ever kept as the Turk 's has been . <unk> at , in part , many times , no one of the several explanations ... ever solved this amusing puzzle " . As the Turk was lost to fire at the time of this publication , Silas Mitchell felt that there were " no longer any reasons for concealing from the amateurs of chess , the solution to this ancient enigma " . 
 The most important biographical history about the Chess @-@ player and Mälzel was presented in The Book of the First American Chess Congress , published by Daniel Willard Fiske in 1857 . The account , " The Automaton Chess @-@ Player in America , " was written by Professor George Allen of Philadelphia , in the form of a letter to William Lewis , one of the former operators of the chess automaton . 
 In 1859 , a letter published in the Philadelphia Sunday Dispatch by William F. Kummer , who worked as a director under John Mitchell , revealed another piece of the secret : a candle inside the cabinet . A series of tubes led from the lamp to the turban of the Turk for ventilation . The smoke rising from the turban would be disguised by the smoke coming from the other candelabra in the area where the game was played . 
 Later in 1859 , an uncredited article appeared in Littell 's Living Age that purported to be the story of the Turk from French magician Jean Eugène Robert @-@ Houdin . This was rife with errors ranging from dates of events to a story of a Polish officer whose legs were amputated , but ended up being rescued by Kempelen and smuggled back to Russia inside the machine . 
 A new article about the Turk did not turn up until 1899 , when The American Chess Magazine published an account of the Turk 's match with Napoleon Bonaparte . The story was basically a review of previous accounts , and a substantive published account would not appear until 1947 , when Chess Review published articles by Kenneth Harkness and Jack Straley Battell that amounted to a comprehensive history and description of the Turk , complete with new diagrams that synthesized information from previous publications . Another article written in 1960 for American Heritage by Ernest Wittenberg provided new diagrams describing how the director sat inside the cabinet . 
 In Henry A. Davidson 's 1945 publication A Short History of Chess , significant weight is given to Poe 's essay which erroneously suggested that the player sat inside the Turk figure , rather than on a moving seat inside the cabinet . A similar error would occur in Alex G. Bell 's 1978 book The Machine Plays Chess , which falsely asserted that " the operator was a trained boy ( or very small adult ) who followed the directions of the chess player who was hidden elsewhere on stage or in the theater … " 
 More books were published about the Turk toward the end of the 20th century . Along with Bell 's book , Charles Michael Carroll 's The Great Chess Automaton ( 1975 ) focused more on the studies of the Turk . Bradley Ewart 's Chess : Man vs. Machine ( 1980 ) discussed the Turk as well as other purported chess @-@ playing automatons . 
 It was not until the creation of Deep Blue , IBM 's attempt at a computer that could challenge the world 's best players , that interest increased again , and two more books were published : Gerald M. Levitt 's The Turk , Chess Automaton ( 2000 ) , and Tom Standage 's The Turk : The Life and Times of the Famous Eighteenth @-@ Century Chess @-@ Playing Machine , published in 2002 . The Turk was used as a personification of Deep Blue in the 2003 documentary Game Over : Kasparov and the Machine . 
 = = Legacy and popular culture = = 
 Owing to the Turk 's popularity and mystery , its construction inspired a number of inventions and imitations , including <unk> , or " The Egyptian " , an American imitation built by Charles Hopper that President Grover Cleveland played in 1885 , and Mephisto , the self @-@ described " most famous " machine , of which little is known . The first imitation was made while Mälzel was in Baltimore . Created by the Brothers Walker , the " American Chess Player " made its debut in May 1827 in New York . El <unk> was built in 1912 by Leonardo Torres y Quevedo as a chess @-@ playing automaton and made its public debut during the Paris World Fair of 1914 . Capable of playing rook and king versus king endgames using electromagnets , it was the first true chess @-@ playing automaton , and a precursor of sorts to Deep Blue . 
 The Turk was visited in London by Rev. Edmund Cartwright in 1784 . He was so intrigued by the Turk that he would later question whether " it is more difficult to construct a machine that shall weave than one which shall make all the variety of moves required in that complicated game " . Cartwright would patent the prototype for a power loom within the year . Sir Charles Wheatstone , an inventor , saw a later appearance of the Turk while it was owned by Mälzel . He also saw some of Mälzel 's speaking machines , and Mälzel later presented a demonstration of the speaking machines to the researcher and his teenage son . Alexander Graham Bell obtained a copy of a book by Kempelen on speaking machines after being inspired by seeing a similar machine built by Wheatstone ; Bell went on to file the first successful patent for the telephone . 
 A play , The Automaton Chess Player , was presented in New York City in 1845 . The advertising , as well as an article that appeared in The Illustrated London News , claimed that the play featured Kempelen 's Turk , but it was in fact a copy of the Turk created by J. Walker , who had earlier presented the Walker Chess @-@ player . 
 Raymond Bernard 's silent feature film The Chess Player ( The Chess Player , France 1927 ) weaves elements from the real story of the Turk into an adventure tale set in the aftermath of the first of the Partitions of Poland in 1772 . The film 's " Baron von Kempelen " helps a dashing young Polish nationalist on the run from the occupying Russians , who also happens to be an expert chess player , by hiding him inside a chess playing automaton called the Turk , closely based on the real Kempelen model . Just as they are about to escape over the border , the Baron is summoned to Saint Petersburg to present the Turk to the empress Catherine II . In an echo of the Napoleon incident , Catherine attempts to cheat the Turk , who wipes all the pieces from the board in response . 
 The Turk has also inspired works of literary fiction . In 1849 , just a few years before the Turk was destroyed , Edgar Allan Poe published a tale " Von Kempelen and His Discovery " . Ambrose Bierce 's short story " Moxon 's Master " , published in 1909 , is a morbid tale about a chess @-@ playing automaton that resembles the Turk . In 1938 , John Dickson Carr published The Crooked Hinge , a locked room mystery in his line of Dr. Gideon Fell detective novels . Among the puzzles presented included an automaton that operates in a way that is unexplainable to the characters . Gene Wolfe 's 1977 science fiction short story " The Marvellous Brass <unk> Automaton " also features a device very similar to the Turk . Robert <unk> 's 2007 novel " The Chess Machine " ( published in the UK as " The Secrets of the Chess Machine " ) focusses on the man inside the machine . F. Gwynplaine MacIntyre 's 2007 story " The Clockwork Horror " reconstructs Edgar Allan Poe 's original encounter with Mälzel 's chess @-@ player , and also establishes ( from contemporary advertisements in a Richmond newspaper ) precisely when and where this encounter took place . 
 Walter Benjamin alludes to the Mechanical Turk in the first thesis of his Theses on the Philosophy of History ( Über den <unk> der Geschichte ) , written in 1940 . 
 In 2005 , Amazon.com launched the Amazon Mechanical Turk . The web @-@ based software application coordinates programming tasks with human intelligence , inspired in part by the way Kempelen 's Turk operated . The program is designed to have humans perform tasks , such as color comparisons , that computers struggle with . 
 = Kami , Perempuan = 
 Kami , Perempoean ( Perfected Spelling : Kami , Perempuan ; Indonesian for We , the Women ) is a 1943 stage play in one act by Armijn Pane . The six @-@ character drama revolves around a conflict between two couples , with the women considering the men cowards for not wanting to join the Defenders of the Homeland and the men afraid of how the women will react to them having secretly joined . Despite warnings from the women 's mother and father , the men prepare to leave for their training , with their partner 's blessings . 
 Written during the Japanese occupation of the Dutch East Indies ( now Indonesia ) , while Pane was an employee of the Cultural Centre in Jakarta , Kami , Perempuan is similar to contemporary plays owing to its openly pro @-@ Japanese message and emphasis on everyday issues experienced by average people . Discussions of the play have found it to be pro @-@ Japanese propaganda , suggesting that men should join the military to please their women , though it has also been suggested that the play is in fact a warning against accepting the Defenders of the Homeland as being for Indonesia . Kami , Perempuan was performed numerous times in 1943 , and its script has been compiled in a book . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Mahmud is sitting in his living room , lost in thought , as a newspaper hangs upside @-@ down in his hands . His wife , Aminah , enters , and asks him what he is doing . When he answers that he is reading the newspaper , Aminah turns it right @-@ side up and ridicules him . After she again interrupts him , Mahmud leaves the home . 
 Aminah 's parents come in soon afterwards and ask where Mahmud has gone , to which she replies " out " . Their discussion is interrupted when Aminah 's younger sister Sri comes in , upset , and tells them that she has just broken up with her fiance , Supono . Upon questioning her , the family learns that Pono had likewise been pushed to join the recently established Pembela Tanah Air ( PETA ; Protectors of the Homeland ) , and refused ; Sri had broken off their engagement rather than marry a coward , saying that if she were a man she would have certainly joined . Aminah implies that Mahmud has likewise refused to join . 
 Sri is left in the living room as Aminah and their mother go to tend to Aminah 's child , while their father goes to read the newspaper . Mahmud comes in , and quietly asks Sri to help him . He reveals that he had registered to join PETA several weeks prior and was to leave for training that very night , but was unsure of how Aminah would accept it . Sri tells him that she will ask her sister and has Mahmud hide in a wardrobe . After she leaves the room , Supono and Aminah enter from other doors . Supono , unknown to him , is in a similar situation to Mahmud , and Aminah convinces him to hide beneath a table as she asks Sri . 
 The sisters meet in the living room and discuss how they would feel if each of their partners were – hypothetically – to leave for PETA training . Sri insults Supono 's bravery , saying that he would never do it ; Aminah feels the same about Mahmud . Ultimately the sisters decide to answer together , both expressing approval . Hearing this , Mahmud and Supono leave their hiding places and shout " Live , Srikandi of Indonesia ! " The four are excited , and Sri and Supono prepare for a quick wedding . Aminah and Sri 's parents , however , are frightened upon hearing that the men will join PETA . 
 = = Characters = = 
 Mahmud , Aminah 's husband 
 Aminah , wife of Mahmud and sister of Sri 
 Sri , sister of Aminah and fiancée of Supono 
 Supono , fiancé of Sri 
 Aminah and Sri 's mother and father 
 = = Writing and publication = = 
 Kami , Perempuan was written by Armijn Pane , a Sumatra @-@ born journalist and man of letters . Before the Japanese occupation of the Dutch East Indies had begun in 1942 , Pane had made a name for himself in helping to establish the magazine Poedjangga Baroe in 1933 and with his novel Belenggu ( Shackles ; 1940 ) . His first stage play , <unk> Masa ( Portrait of the Times ) , had been performed and published in May 1937 . 
 By 1942 Pane was one of the most prominent playwrights in Java , together with El Hakim ( <unk> . <unk> <unk> ) and Usmar Ismail . Their works often dealt with politics , a sense of nationalism , and the influence of one 's environment — particularly tradition , ethics , and religion . As with Kami , Perempuan , these works were oriented around everyday events and featured average people , as opposed to the earlier stories based in mythology and telling of gods and goddesses . 
 After the Cultural Centre ( in Indonesian , <unk> <unk> ; in Japanese , <unk> Bunka <unk> ( <unk> ) ) opened in Jakarta on 1 April 1943 , Pane served as the head of its literature desk . This office was tasked with the establishment of a pro @-@ Japanese and pro @-@ Greater Asia culture . Numerous stage plays were written which promoted these ideals of the Empire of Japan , including Rd Ariffien 's <unk> Asia and various works by <unk> <unk> and D. <unk> . 
 Kami , Perempuan premiered in 1943 in Jakarta . It received multiple performances that year , some in Jakarta , some in other parts of Java . In 1950 Pane included Kami , Perempuan in his book <unk> @-@ <unk> Merpati dengan <unk> <unk> Lain , a collection of his stage plays . For this publication Pane removed a scene in which two neighbours came to visit the family , which included further conversation . Pane considered this scene to be anti @-@ climactic , whereas without it the play 's title became more appropriate . Another , smaller , change to the play was the removal of the names of Japan 's enemies during World War II . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Indonesian literary critic Boen Sri Oemarjati finds Kami , Perempuan to be a romance which also shows the strength and virility of the Indonesian people . She concludes , however , that it is a work of propaganda , summarising its message as " Women with the spirit of Srikandi want their husbands to be as strong and virile as their own hearts " , and to do so they must join PETA . M. <unk> of the University of Indonesia likewise categorises the play as propaganda vehicle , emphasising the theme of women willing to surrender their lovers to PETA , for the good of the nation . 
 Chris Woodrich of Gadjah Mada University , meanwhile , argues that the play is a veiled warning against considering PETA as a nationalistic . Considering Pane 's position at the Cultural Bureau , Woodrich suggests that Pane would have been aware of the Japanese occupation government 's ultimate goal for PETA : to help defend the Indonesian archipelago against the Allies if necessary , a message which had to be conveyed implicitly owing to Pane 's own position and the Japanese occupation government 's strict censorship . Woodrich points to Aminah 's father , a former employee of the Dutch colonial government , and suggests that the character 's protests about joining PETA , seemingly in order to promote the safety and comfort of home , are actually based on an understanding of the colonial mindset and the accompanying manipulation ; in @-@ text , these protests can only be conveyed in implicit terms owing to the father 's fear of the Japanese government . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = Cry Me a River ( Justin Timberlake song ) = 
 " Cry Me a River " is a song recorded by American singer and songwriter Justin Timberlake for his debut studio album , Justified ( 2002 ) . It was written by Timberlake and Scott Storch with producer Timbaland and was inspired by Timberlake 's former relationship with singer Britney Spears . Jive Records released the song to contemporary hit and rhythmic radio in the United States on November 25 , 2002 , as the album 's second single . Accompanied by an electric piano , beatbox , guitars , synthesizers , Arabian @-@ inspired riffs and Gregorian chants , " Cry Me a River " is an R & B song about a brokenhearted man who moves on from his last girlfriend , who had cheated on him with another man . 
 " Cry Me a River " received acclaim from music critics , who considered it a stand @-@ out track on Justified and praised Timbaland 's production . The song earned several lists of best of the year and the decade ( 2000s ) , while Rolling Stone included it on their 500 Greatest Songs of All Time at 484 . It won a Grammy Award for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance at the 2004 ceremony . The song peaked at number three on the US Billboard Hot 100 and Pop Songs charts and charted in the top ten in other countries . It was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) and the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) . 
 Filmmaker Francis Lawrence directed the music video for " Cry Me a River " in Malibu , California . In the controversial video , Timberlake 's character invades the home of his ex @-@ lover and films himself having sexual relations with another woman . Spears alleged that the video was a publicity stunt , but Timberlake maintained that she did not inspire the production . The clip won the awards for Best Male Video and Best Pop Video at the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards . Timberlake performed " Cry Me a River " on his four major concert tours : The Justified World Tour ( 2003 – 04 ) , Justified / Stripped Tour ( 2003 ) , FutureSex / LoveShow ( 2007 ) , and The 20 / 20 Experience World Tour ( 2013 – 15 ) . The song has been covered by various recording artists , including Leona Lewis and Taylor Swift . 
 = = Writing and production = = 
 Timberlake and Scott Storch wrote " Cry Me a River " with Timbaland , who produced the song . Storch found working with Timberlake easy because of the song 's meaning . Reporters believed its lyrics were inspired by Timberlake 's romantic relationship with American recording artist Britney Spears , which ended in 2002 . Timberlake told MTV News , " I 'm not going to specifically say if any song is about anybody . I will say writing a couple of songs on the record helped me deal with a couple of things . To me songs are songs . They can stem from things that completely happened to you personally or they can stem from ideas that you think could happen to you . " In December 2011 , Timberlake admitted that he had written " Cry Me a River " after an argument with Spears : " I was on a phone call that was not the most enjoyable phone call . I walked into the studio and he [ Timbaland ] could tell I was visibly angry . " Timbaland recalled , " I was like , ' Man , don 't worry about it ' and he was like , ' I can 't believe she did that to me ' and he was like , ' You were my sun , you were my earth ' " . 
 " Cry Me a River " was recorded at Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles by Senator Jimmy D , while Carlos " Storm " Martinez served as the assistant engineer . Jimmy Douglass and Timbaland mixed the song at Manhattan Center Studios in New York City . Timberlake arranged the vocals and was a backup singer alongside Timbaland , Marsha Ambrosius , Tye Tribbett and Greater Anointing . Storch compared Timberlake 's vocals on " Cry Me a River " to R & B and rock singer Daryl Hall . Larry Gold provided the string arrangement and conducting , while Storch and Bill Pettaway played the clavinet and guitar , respectively . 
 = = Release and response = = 
 " Cry Me a River " was released as the second single from Justified . Jive Records serviced the song to contemporary and rhythmic radio in the United States on November 25 , 2002 . On December 23 , three remixes were released as a 12 @-@ inch single in Canada and France . On January 5 , 2003 , the song was sent to urban contemporary radio stations in the US . It was released as a CD single in Germany on January 23 . The single contains the album version of the song and the remixes on its 12 @-@ inch single release . A CD single , which included Johnny Fiasco 's remix of the song and two additional remixes of " Like I Love You " , was released on February 3 and 6 in the United Kingdom and Canada , respectively . " Cry Me a River " was released as a CD single in the US on February 18 . The single features the album version of the song , its instrumental and four remixes . 
 Following its release , there was media speculation that Spears had written a song as a response to " Cry Me a River " ; she denied the rumors , explaining , " You know , it 's funny . I read that I wrote this song and I wrote these lyrics and that 's not my style . I would never do that . " Annet Artani , who co @-@ wrote Spears ' 2003 song " Everytime " , stated that the song was written as a response to " Cry Me a River " . When asked during an interview with Diane Sawyer on PrimeTime in 2003 , if " Everytime " was about Timberlake , Spears responded , " I 'll let the song speak for itself . " 
 = = Composition and lyrical interpretation = = 
 " Cry Me a River " is an R & B song with an instrumentation that features clavinet , guitars , beatboxing , synthesizers , Arabian @-@ inspired riffs and Gregorian chants . The instruments are arranged into what critics described as a graceful and mysterious melody . Jane Stevenson of Jam ! said the single combines gospel and opera . Tyler Martin of Stylus Magazine enjoyed the way that the song unconventionally mixed a range of experimental sounds . According to Martin , the wave synth affects the real strings to create an unusual dissonance . The song 's chorus devolves into a choral reading in which Timberlake pleads over the group . " Cry Me a River " finishes with a Timbaland vocal sample . 
 " Cry Me a River " is written in the key of G ♯ minor , in alla breve , with a tempo of 74 beats per minute . The song 's vocal range spans from C ♯ 4 to B5 . Billboard magazine critics called " Cry Me a River " a bittersweet song , in which Timberlake 's " familiar tenor belting " is tempered with a soulful falsetto and a " convincingly aggressive rock @-@ spiked baritone " rasp . David Browne of Entertainment Weekly labeled the song " a haunted , pained farewell " . 
 Lyrically , the song is about a brokenhearted man who moves on from his past . A Rolling Stone reviewer called the song a " breakup aria " . According to Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian , " Cry Me a River " stands out for its " slow @-@ building sense of drama " , which highlights Timberlake at his " husky best " . The song begins with the phrase " You were my sun , you were my earth " , which according to Timbaland was Timberlake 's inspiration to write the song . Tanya L. Edwards of MTV News observed that Timberlake was wronged and said this is demonstrated by the lyrics : " You don 't have to say <unk> did / I already know , I found out from him / Now there 's just no chance . " The chorus contains the lines : " Told me you loved me , why did you leave me all alone / Now you tell me you need me when you call me on the phone . " Slant Magazine 's Sal Cinquemani called Timberlake 's 2007 single " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " an ostensible sequel to " Cry Me a River " both lyrically and musically . Jason Lipshutz of Billboard stated that aside from the presence of Timbaland 's " fantastically cluttered production " , the difference between " Cry Me a River " and Timberlake 's 2013 single " Mirrors " is clear : " 10 years ago , Timberlake was broken , and now he is whole " . 
 = = Reception and accolades = = 
 " Cry Me a River " received acclaim from critics . Jane Stevenson of Jam ! and Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine regarded it as a stand @-@ out track from Justified . Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic selected the song as a highlight in his review of Justified . Peter Robinson of NME called it a " twisted epic " and " an acidic , filthy little song teeming with spite and retribution , with Timbaland 's pounding . " Rolling Stone 's Ben Ratliff viewed his production of " Cry Me a River " as exceptional . Denise Boyd of BBC Music felt that the song 's lyrics play as large a role as Timbaland 's production , unlike other songs on Justified . David Browne of Entertainment Weekly concluded that the song is " a genuine stunner " that should leave Timberlake 's fellow ' N <unk> concerned that he truly may not need them any more . John Mitchell of MTV News called " Cry Me a River " and " What Goes Around ... Comes Around " " kiss @-@ off songs " , with Timberlake 's revenge on Spears present throughout the lyrics . For Pitchfork Media it was the 3rd best song of 2003 . According to Complex , the song " made people completely forget about ' N Sync and start asking what Timberlake would do next . " The single won a Grammy Award for Best Male Pop Vocal Performance at the 2004 award ceremony . It was nominated for Song of the Year at the 2003 MTV Europe Music Awards . 
 Rolling Stone ranked " Cry Me a River " at number 20 on their list of the 100 Best Songs of the 2000s ; a columnist for the magazine wrote that the real inspiration behind the song was the formation of the Timberlake – Timbaland team , " a match made in pop heaven " . In 2012 , the magazine placed it at number 484 on their list of " The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time " . VH1 ranked " Cry Me a River " at number 59 on their list of the 100 Greatest Songs of the 2000s . The Daily Telegraph listed the song at number 40 on the " 100 songs that defined the Noughties . " 
 In 2015 , Spotify re @-@ ranked Rolling Stone 's 500 Greatest Songs in two different lists . " Cry Me a River " ranked at number 14 on " by all Spotify users " and 10 on " streams from millennial users " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Cry Me a River " debuted at number 44 on the US Billboard Hot 100 in the issue dated December 21 , 2002 , earning the Hot Shot Debut honor with 29 @.@ 6 million audience impressions . On February 1 , 2003 , the single reached a peak of number three , becoming Timberlake 's first solo single to reach that position . The song debuted on the US Pop Songs chart at number 37 in the issue dated December 14 , 2002 and reached a peak of three on February 1 , 2003 . For the issue dated December 28 , 2002 , " Cry Me a River " debuted at number 75 on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart . It reached a peak of 11 on March 8 , 2003 . It also peaked at number two on the US Hot Dance Club Songs , becoming Timberlake 's second top @-@ three song , after his debut single " Like I Love You " reached number one . As of August 2003 , remixes of the single have sold more than 61 @,@ 000 units in the United States . 
 The song debuted at number two on the Australian Singles Chart on March 9 , 2003 . It fell to number six in the following week . " Cry Me a River " became Timberlake 's first top @-@ three solo single on the chart . The song remained on the chart for 12 consecutive weeks . It was certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipments of 35 @,@ 000 units . The single debuted at number 44 in New Zealand on March 9 , 2003 . After two weeks on the chart , it reached a peak of 11 . It remained on the chart for 11 weeks . 
 In the United Kingdom , " Cry Me a River " , debuted at number two on February 15 , 2003 . The next week it fell to number three , before returning to its original peak on March 1 , 2003 ; it stayed on the chart for 13 weeks . The song has sold over 365 @,@ 000 copies in the country as of 2015 . It debuted at number 14 on the French Singles Chart on April 5 , 2003 . After three weeks , " Cry Me a River " peaked at number six , and it stayed on the chart for 21 weeks . It was less successful on the Italian Singles Chart , where it peaked at number 14 and stayed on the chart for four weeks . " Cry Me a River " also peaked at number five in Belgium ( Wallonia ) , at number six in the Republic of Ireland and the Netherlands , at number seven in Belgium ( Flanders ) , and at number 10 in Germany , Norway , and Sweden . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Development and synopsis = = = 
 The music video for " Cry Me a River " was directed by Francis Lawrence in Malibu , California , during the week of October 29 , 2002 . Lawrence created the video 's concept and told MTV News , " [ Justin and I ] had a conversation on the phone and all he said was he wanted to have some dancing in it , but to do my thing . He told me what the song was about , but in a [ general way ] as well . He just said it was a kiss @-@ off song and so I came up with this idea and he went for it " . Lawrence added that he also included some details in the video , including a reference to Spears 's tattoo , which Timberlake enjoyed . He explained that he and Timberlake did not mention names while creating the video , only discussing the song 's general beats . Lawrence also revealed that executives of Jive Records were nervous about some aspects of the video , such as Timberlake 's representation of a voyeur and the tone of some scenes he was portraying with a girl . " That 's the thing I liked most about this project , was that he was coming into it with a super clean @-@ cut image with ' N Sync and he 's such a nice guy and so handsome and what I was into doing was making him be a bit scary . Lurking around the house in the rain , throwing a rock through her window , being a peeping Tom , getting revenge and doing stuff that 's not really what a nice guy does . " The music video for " Cry Me a River " was released onto the iTunes Store on April 28 , 2003 . 
 The video begins with a blonde woman , played by model and actress Lauren Hastings ( allegedly portraying Britney Spears ) , walking out of her house hand @-@ in @-@ hand with an unidentified man . The couple leaves in the woman 's car ( a silver Porsche ) as Timberlake rolls down the window of a black Mercedes , from which he and his friend have been watching the woman . Timberlake breaks into the house by throwing a rock through a window and proceeds through the woman 's house , with anti @-@ gravity jumps and slides , not causing any other visible damage , except for kicking a picture frame of the woman across the living room . Then he searches some drawers and finds a video camera , while the driver of the car , Timbaland , signals for his female accomplice in the back of the car , played by model Kiana Bessa , to go in . She enters the house and goes with Timberlake to a bedroom , where she starts to undress and kiss him while being filmed . They stay in the bedroom for a moment ; then the accomplice exits the house but Timberlake stays . As the blonde woman returns , he follows her around the house and hides in a closet as she showers . He gets closer to her and touches the glass surrounding the shower . The blonde woman senses someone in the room and turns around , but Timberlake is gone . She leaves the bathroom and goes into her bedroom , where the video he made with his new lover plays on the television . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Peter Robinson of NME wrote that the video shows " what Justin looks like after he 's had sex . Clue : he looks pretty good . " According to Virginia Heffernan of The New York Times , Timberlake channels the character Neo from The Matrix film series , " pacing anxiously around wet and metallic interiors " . At the 2003 MTV Video Music Awards , the video for " Cry Me a River " won in the categories of Best Male Video and Best Pop Video . It had also been nominated for Video of the Year , Best Direction in a Video and Viewer 's Choice . 
 Following the release of the music video , Us Weekly ran a cover story titled Britney Vs . Justin : The War Is On . Timberlake denied that Spears inspired the video , saying , " The video is not about her . The video is about me . " However , Spears told Rolling Stone in October 2003 that she received a call from Timberlake saying there would be a look @-@ alike of her would be in a music video with him . She states that he reassured her by saying , " Don 't worry about it . It 's not a big deal " . Spears , who had not seen the video , says she allowed him to do so but became infuriated after watching it . She recalled that when she asked why he had made a video about her , he replied , " Well , I got a controversial video . " She stated that it was a great publicity stunt , commenting , " So he got what he wanted . I think it looks like such a desperate attempt , personally . " After the release of Spears ' video for " Toxic " ( 2003 ) , Jennifer Vineyard of MTV News said her video " [ made ] " Cry Me a River " look like child 's play " . 
 In 2013 , Billboard editor Jason Lipshutz opined the clip was " one of the more brilliant musical moments in pop music since the dawn of the century . The visual is JT 's most controversial music video to date . " He added , " The " Cry Me a River " video served a dual purpose for Timberlake : to court controversy , and to make its star seem more grown @-@ up . " 
 = = Live performances and cover versions = = 
 Timberlake performed " Cry Me a River " for the first time at the 13th annual Billboard Music Awards , held on December 9 , 2002 , at the MGM Grand Garden Arena in Las Vegas . He was accompanied by a string section and a 20 @-@ member choir . He also performed the song on the Justified World Tour ( 2003 – 04 ) , his first worldwide tour . The song was eighth on the set list of Justified / Stripped Tour ( 2003 ) , his joint North American tour with Christina Aguilera . Timberlake performed " Cry Me a River " on a promotional concert held at House of Blues in West Hollywood , California on June 17 , 2003 . He performed a rock @-@ inspired version of the song on Saturday Night Live on October 11 , 2003 ; and it was fourteenth on the set list of his second worldwide tour , FutureSex / LoveShow ( 2007 ) . 
 On October 23 , 2010 , while performing at the annual charity gig " Justin Timberlake and Friends " in Las Vegas , Timberlake began the show with a slow and " sultry " performance of " Cry Me a River " and segued into a cover of Bill Withers ' 1971 single " Ain 't No Sunshine " . He later resumed " Cry Me a River " before segueing into a cover of Drake 's 2010 song " Over " . Jillian Mapes of Billboard described the performance as " completely lovely in an effortless sort of way . " Timberlake performed " Cry Me a River " at concert he held during the 2013 Super Bowl weekend in New Orleans . Timberlake performed " Cry Me a River " in a medley with other of his songs at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards . After the performance he accepted a Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award at the ceremony . Timberlake included the single on the set list of his fifth worldwide concert tour , The 20 / 20 Experience World Tour ( 2013 – 15 ) . 
 The song was first covered by Welsh alternative metal band Lostprophets , recorded in a BBC Radio One session . It appears as a b @-@ side of the single Last Train Home , released in 2004 . American singer @-@ songwriter Taylor Swift performed a cover of " Cry Me a River " in Memphis , Tennessee , during the Speak Now World Tour ( 2011 – 12 ) . Justin Bieber recorded a cover of the song together with Kanye West 's 2007 single " Stronger " , which he posted on his YouTube account . Canadian rock band The <unk> also covered the song for their 2007 album <unk> . British singer Leona Lewis covered " Cry Me a River " during her debut concert tour The Labyrinth ( 2010 ) . The Sheffield Star described the version as a " beautifully , sitting quietly , almost a capella " . American indie pop duo Jack and White covered the song on their 2012 extended play Undercover . Recording artist Kelly Clarkson covered the song on September 1 , 2012 , as a fan request during her 2012 Summer Tour with The Fray . Alternative rock band Coldplay revealed that the single was an inspiration for the drumbeat of their song " Lost ! " . In January 2013 , American singer Selena Gomez performed an acoustic version of " Cry Me a River " at the UNICEF charity concert in New York City . In February 2015 , Scottish synthpop band Chvrches performed a cover of " Cry Me a River " on BBC Radio 1 's Live Lounge . American alternative metal band 40 Below Summer performed a cover of the song in their 2015 album Transmission Infrared . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording and mixing 
 Recorded at Westlake Recording Studios , Los Angeles , California ; mixed at Manhattan Center Studios , New York City , New York ; strings recorded at The Studio , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Justified , Jive Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Radio and release history = = 
 = Beyond Blunderdome = 
 " Beyond Blunderdome " is the eleventh season premiere of the American animated sitcom The Simpsons . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on September 26 , 1999 , and was watched in around 8 @.@ 1 million homes during the broadcast . In the episode , the Simpsons are given free tickets to a preview screening of Mel Gibson 's new film , a remake of Mr. Smith Goes to Washington . Gibson laments his current non @-@ violent role and wants someone to give him criticism . When Homer sees Gibson talking with Marge , he gives him a brutal review , leading Gibson to believe that Homer is the only man brave enough to give suggestions . As a result , he hires him to create a better ending . However , when the ending proves to be too controversial , Gibson and Homer end up on the run from studio executives with the film . 
 The episode was written by then @-@ showrunner Mike Scully and directed by Steven Dean Moore . The story was a parody of the film industry and its practice with test screenings and overly violent films . It featured several references to various films as well as other popular culture . Gibson guest starred as himself , and Jack Burns voiced a film studio executive named Edward Christian . 
 Since airing , the episode has received generally mixed reviews from critics , but Gibson was praised for his performance . It was released on the DVD collection The Simpsons Film Festival in 2002 , and The Simpsons – The Complete Eleventh Season in 2008 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Homer test drives a new electric car so he can get a free gift . After destroying the car by driving into an ocean due to Homer thinking it is the same as an amphibious vehicle , the family returns to the dealer to receive the gift , which Homer forgets to open until he is in bed with Marge . It turns out to be free tickets to a preview screening of a new Mel Gibson film , a remake of Mr. Smith Goes to Washington , which makes Homer jealous as Marge expresses an attraction to Gibson . The audience members are given comment cards to fill and the filmmakers can change the film based on their reactions . The film is enjoyed by everyone but Homer , who only likes comedy or action movies . During the screening , Gibson , having come to the test screening unannounced due to being worried that the audience won 't like him playing a dramatic role , is assured by the producers that the film is wonderful . When Gibson flirts with Marge after the showing , Homer writes a negative review of the film . While reading the mostly positive comment cards after the movie , Gibson is certain that everyone loves him too much to tell him how to improve the film , but when he reads Homer 's comments , he is convinced that Homer was the only person brave enough to tell him the truth . 
 Gibson shows up at the Simpsons ' door and invites Homer and his family to come with him to Hollywood to change the film , while Homer thinks that he is out to take Marge from him . Homer and Gibson begin work on the film while the rest of the family explores Hollywood , where they encounter celebrities such as Ellen DeGeneres , Eddie , the dog from Frasier , and also spot Robert Downey Jr in a shoot @-@ out with police . When Homer 's ideas prove to be stupid and pointless , including giving a random dog a close @-@ up of its eyes shifting back and forth to show that he is evil , Gibson begins to wonder whether he made a mistake . However , he is enthusiastic when Homer tells him his ideas for the famous " filibuster " scene at the end . The next day , they present the new ending to the producers . In the new version , Mr. Smith goes berserk and slaughters every member of the United States Congress and the President in a mindless action movie sequence . The producers are horrified at this , saying that the film was meant to be the studio 's prestige picture . They attempt to burn the film reel , but Homer and Gibson , determined to save their film , run away with it . 
 They meet up with the rest of the family at Hollywood memorabilia museum . They steal a replica of the main villain 's car from The Road Warrior and engage in a ludicrous car chase through the streets of Hollywood , with the film executives on their trail . They attempt to distract the producers by throwing the Mel Gibson mannequin that was occupying the car at the producers , with Mel switching to his old Mad Max costume in the process , but this only works temporarily . Homer , taking an idea he believes to be from Braveheart , moons the executives along with Gibson so that they will stop their car out of disgust , but this fails and Homer 's buttocks is caught in the car 's hood . Homer and Gibson then attend the film 's premiere back in Springfield , but the entire audience walks out disgusted by the new ending , and the two men are even threatened with legal action from Jimmy Stewart 's granddaughter . Homer then tries to apologize to Gibson , but he does not blame him , arriving to the conclusion there is no place for violence @-@ lovers like them in Hollywood ; however , as soon as Homer suggests more nonsensical film ideas , Gibson kicks him out of his limousine and he lies on the ground shouting towards him that he fell out . The episode ends with a random dog given a close up of his eyes shifting back and forth . 
 = = Production and themes = = 
 " Beyond Blunderdome " was written by then @-@ showrunner Mike Scully and directed by Steven Dean Moore , airing as part of the eleventh season of The Simpsons ( 1999 – 2000 ) . It was Scully 's first writing credit since he took over as showrunner for the show . In comparison with other episode scripts , the staff writers did not change much of the original writing . The plot revolves around Mel Gibson doing a remake of the 1939 film Mr. Smith Goes to Washington . Karma Waltonen and Denise Du Vernay analysed the episode and wrote in the book The Simpsons in the Classroom : <unk> the Learning Experience with the Wisdom of Springfield that " the episode is able to critique the practice of test screening , violence in film , and one of movies ' favorite standards – the car chase " , calling it " a ridiculous parody of an action @-@ film violence orgy " . Staff writer Tom Gammill came up with the idea for the violent version of Mr. Smith Goes to Washington , and Gibson throwing his Senator badge away at the end of the film , is a reference to the ending of the film Dirty Harry from 1971 . The idea for the set piece with electric cars at the beginning of the episode came from Kevin Nealon , who was a friend of former showrunner David Mirkin . One day , he came by and demonstrated his electric car for the writing staff . 
 The episode featured Mel Gibson as a guest voice . Scully had previously met him while writing jokes for a school fundraiser along with his wife Julie Thacker . Gibson and Daniel Stern were the hosts and needed jokes for the event . It turned out that Gibson was a fan of the show and watched it with his children . With that knowledge , it did not take Scully long to invite him to do a part . Gibson was willing to do the job and even came in on three separate occasions to do retakes – mostly because he knew his children would be watching . Unlike most guest voices , Gibson recorded the show along with the cast . On one occasion , it turned out that a joke written for Gibson actually did happen in real life . The writing staff wanted Gibson to say that he would urinate behind a dumpster , because it sounded like it would not be a classy thing to do for a movie star . He had , however , already done that during a couple of film premieres because he can feel trapped in a public toilet with a lot of fans . Gibson was surprised the writers knew about the story , but it turned out to be a coincidence . Otherwise , the episode frequently references films Gibson appeared in . After the studio cart crashes , Gibson says to Homer , " I 'm getting too old for this crap , " a reference to a line said by Danny Glover 's character Roger Murtaugh to Gibson 's character Martin Riggs in the Lethal Weapon film series . A poster for his film Braveheart is on the wall in the editing room and the Road Warrior car from the 1981 film Mad Max 2 is also featured . In addition to Gibson , Jack Burns guest starred in the episode , voicing a film studio executive named Edward Christian . His frequent use of the terms " Huh ? " and " You know what I mean ? " is a reference to a comedy routine performed by Burns and Avery Schreiber . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 In the episode , there are many references to popular culture . The character Rainier Wolfcastle is seen filming Saving Irene Ryan , which is a reference to the 1998 film Saving Private Ryan and actress Irene Ryan from the sitcom The Beverly Hillbillies . Homer says , " you had me at ' hello ' , " a quote from the film Jerry Maguire ( 1996 ) , when Gibson asks for his help on his film . The airport is called " George Kennedy Airport " , which is a reference to actor George Kennedy , and his role in the film Airport ( 1970 ) and its three sequels ; Airport 1975 ( 1974 ) , Airport ' 77 ( 1977 ) , and The Concorde ... Airport ' 79 ( 1979 ) . When Homer and Gibson are being hunted by the executives they enter a car museum . The museum features the Batmobile from the television series Batman , General Lee from the series The Dukes of Hazzard , Herbie the Love Bug from the 1968 film The Love Bug and later films , the <unk> from the series The Monkees , the Munster <unk> from the series The Munsters , and the car from the series The Flintstones . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The episode originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on September 26 , 1999 , as the premiere of the eleventh season of The Simpsons . In its original broadcast , " Beyond Blunderdome " finished 48th in the ratings for the week of September 20 – 26 , 1999 , with a Nielsen rating of 8 @.@ 0 — equivalent to approximately 8 @.@ 1 million viewing households . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , beating shows such as Futurama and King of the Hill . In comparison , the previous season premiere episode , " Lard of the Dance " , drew a Nielsen rating of 7 @.@ 2 points with 7 @.@ 1 million households watching . The episode had a lower rating than the overall rating for the entire eleventh season , which averaged 8 @.@ 2 million households . On March 12 , 2002 , the episode was released in the United States on a DVD collection titled The Simpsons Film Festival , along with the season four episode " Itchy & Scratchy : The Movie " , the season seven episode " 22 Short Films About Springfield " , and the season six episode " A Star is Burns " . On October 7 , 2008 , " Beyond Blunderdome " was released on DVD as part of the box set The Simpsons – The Complete Eleventh Season . Staff members Mike Scully , George Meyer , Ron Hauge , Matt Selman , and Steven Dean Moore participated in the DVD audio commentary for the episode . The episode had an alternate ending in which Apu suggests that they sell the failed film to India , since the people of India love violent , action @-@ packed American films . This ending was included on the eleventh season DVD set . 
 Since airing , the episode has received generally mixed reception from critics . The day after the premiere , Mark <unk> of The Times @-@ Picayune wrote that while it was " not the laugh riot The Simpsons have spoiled us to expect – our appetite for showbiz parodies is waning – the episode did have its moments . " He further added that he especially liked " the sign posted outside the movie studio gate : ' No Artistic Integrity Beyond This Point . ' " While reviewing the eleventh season of The Simpsons , DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson commented on the episode , writing that " Gibson actually does a good job here , and it ’ s amusing to see Homer ’ s terrible movie ideas . This isn ’ t classic Simpsons , but it starts the season on a pretty good note . " However , an article in Salon magazine from 2000 points to " Beyond Blunderdome " as the greatest precursor to that Homer would be more predominant as “ Jerkass Homer ” in the Scully era as showrunner , a Homer who " is not only dumb , but [ has also become ] disgusting and semi @-@ sociopathic . This is the Homer who , in the season opener [ ' Beyond Blunderdome ' ] , showed Marge 's wedding ring to Mel Gibson and stated , ' This is a symbol that as per our marriage , she 's my property and I own her . ' " Gibson 's performance has generally been praised . Simon Crerar of The Times listed his performance as one of the thirty @-@ three funniest cameos in the history of the show . Similarly , Total Film 's Nathan Ditum ranked Gibson 's performance as the seventh best guest appearance in the show 's history in a list of twenty people , calling it " Another ace self @-@ effacing appearance from a Hollywood high @-@ flyer " . 
 = Japanese aircraft carrier Jun 'yō = 
 Jun 'yō ( <unk> , " Peregrine Falcon " ) was a Hiyō @-@ class aircraft carrier of the Imperial Japanese Navy ( IJN ) . She was laid down as the passenger liner Kashiwara Maru ( <unk> ) , but was purchased by the IJN in 1941 while under construction and converted into an aircraft carrier . Completed in May 1942 , the ship participated in the Aleutian Islands Campaign the following month and in several battles during the Guadalcanal Campaign later in the year . Her aircraft were used from land bases during several battles in the New Guinea and Solomon Islands Campaigns . 
 Jun 'yō was torpedoed in November 1943 and spent three months under repair . She was damaged by several bombs during the Battle of the Philippine Sea in mid @-@ 1944 , but quickly returned to service . Lacking aircraft , she was used as a transport in late 1944 and was torpedoed in December . Jun 'yō was under repair until March 1945 when the repairs were cancelled as uneconomical . She was then effectively hulked for the rest of the war . After the surrender of Japan in September , the Americans also deemed her not worth the cost to make her serviceable for use as a repatriation ship and she was broken up in 1946 – 47 . 
 = = Design and description = = 
 The ship was ordered in late 1938 as the fast luxury passenger liner Kashiwara Maru by Nippon Yusen Kaisha ( the Japan Mail Steamship Company ) in late 1938 . In exchange for a 60 % subsidy of her building costs by the Navy Ministry , she was designed to be converted to an auxiliary aircraft carrier , one of 10 such ships subsidized by the IJN . 
 Jun 'yō had a length of 219 @.@ 32 meters ( 719 ft 7 in ) overall . She had a beam of 26 @.@ 7 meters ( 87 ft 7 in ) and a draft of 8 @.@ 15 meters ( 26 ft 9 in ) . She displaced 24 @,@ 150 metric tons ( 23 @,@ 770 long tons ) at standard load . Her crew ranged from 1 @,@ 187 to 1 @,@ 224 officers and men . The ship was fitted with two Mitsubishi @-@ Curtis geared steam turbine sets with a total of 56 @,@ 250 shaft horsepower ( 41 @,@ 950 kW ) , each driving one propeller shaft , using steam provided by six Mitsubishi three @-@ drum water @-@ tube boilers . Jun 'yō had a designed speed of 25 @.@ 5 knots ( 47 @.@ 2 km / h ; 29 @.@ 3 mph ) , but reached 26 knots ( 48 km / h ; 30 mph ) during her sea trials . The ship carried 4 @,@ 100 metric tons ( 4 @,@ 000 long tons ) of fuel oil which gave her a range of 12 @,@ 251 nautical miles ( 22 @,@ 689 km ; 14 @,@ 098 mi ) at 18 knots ( 33 km / h ; 21 mph ) . 
 = = = Flight deck arrangements = = = 
 Jun 'yō 's flight deck was 210 @.@ 3 meters ( 690 ft 0 in ) long and had a maximum width of 27 @.@ 3 meters ( 89 ft 7 in ) . A large island was fitted on the starboard side that was integrated with , for the first time in a Japanese carrier , the ship 's funnel . The ship was designed with two superimposed hangars , each approximately 153 meters ( 502 ft 0 in ) long , 15 meters ( 49 ft 3 in ) wide and 5 meters ( 16 ft 5 in ) high . Each hangar could be subdivided by four fire curtains and they were fitted with fire fighting foam dispensers on each side . The hangars were served by two square aircraft elevators with rounded corners , 14 @.@ 03 meters ( 46 ft 0 in ) on each side . 
 The ship 's air group was originally intended to consist of 12 Mitsubishi A5M " Claude " fighters , plus 4 in storage , 18 Aichi D3A " Val " dive bombers , plus 2 in reserve , and 18 Nakajima B5N " Kate " torpedo bombers . This was revised to substitute a dozen Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighters , together with 3 more in storage , for the A5Ms by the time the ship commissioned in 1942 . As a result of the lessons learned from the Battle of Midway in June , the ship 's fighter complement was strengthened to 21 Zeros , and the other aircraft reduced to 12 D3As and 9 B5Ns . By the end of the year , 6 more Zeros replaced an equal number of D3As . Although it was possible to fit all these aircraft into the hangars , 8 or 9 were usually stored on the flight deck to reduce cramping below decks . 
 = = = Armor , armament and sensors = = = 
 As a conversion from an ocean liner , it was not possible to add much armor , although the ship had a double bottom . Two plates of Ducol steel , each 25 mm ( 0 @.@ 98 in ) thick , protected the sides of the ship 's machinery spaces . The ship 's aviation gasoline tanks and magazines were protected by one layer of Ducol steel . In addition , her machinery spaces were further subdivided by transverse and longitudinal bulkheads to limit any flooding . 
 The ship 's primary armament consisted of a dozen 40 @-@ caliber 12 @.@ 7 cm ( 5 @.@ 0 in ) Type 89 anti @-@ aircraft ( AA ) guns in six twin @-@ gun mounts on sponsons along the sides of the hull . Jun 'yō was also initially equipped with eight triple mounts for 25 mm Type 96 light AA guns , also in sponsons along the sides of the hull . In mid @-@ 1943 , four more triple mounts were added and another four triple mounts in late 1943 – early 1944 . Two of these last four mounts were mounted on the stern and the others were placed in front of and behind the island . A dozen single mounts were also added , some of which were portable and could be mounted on the flight deck . After the Battle of the Philippine Sea in June 1944 , the ship 's anti @-@ aircraft armament was reinforced with three more triple mounts , two twin mounts and eighteen single mounts for the 25 mm Type 96 gun . These guns were supplemented by six 28 @-@ round AA rocket launchers . In October 1944 , Jun 'yō had a total of 91 Type 96 guns ; 57 in nineteen triple mounts , 4 in two twin mounts , and 30 single mounts . 
 Two Type 94 high @-@ angle fire @-@ control directors , one on each side of the ship , were fitted to control the Type 89 guns . Each director mounted a 4 @.@ 5 @-@ meter ( 14 ft 9 in ) rangefinder . When Jun 'yō was first commissioned only the rangefinders were fitted and the directors were added later . Four Type 95 directors controlled the 25 mm guns and another pair were added in early 1943 . Early warning was provided by two Type 2 , Mark 2 , Model 1 early @-@ warning radars . The first of these was mounted on the top of the island in July 1942 , shortly after she was completed , and the other was added later in the year on the port side of the hull , outboard of the rear elevator . A smaller Type 3 , Mark 1 , Model 3 air search radar was added in 1944 . 
 = = Career = = 
 Jun 'yō 's keel was laid down by Mitsubishi on Slipway No. 3 at their shipyard in Nagasaki on 20 March 1939 . She was yard number 900 and had the name Kashiwara Maru at that time . The ship was purchased on 10 February 1941 by the Navy Ministry and she was temporarily referred to as No. 1001 Ship ( Dai 1001 bankan ) to keep her conversion secret . She was launched on 26 June 1941 and commissioned on 3 May 1942 as Jun 'yō . 
 Upon commissioning , the ship was assigned to the Fourth Carrier Division of the 1st Air Fleet , together with Ryūjō , under the command of Rear Admiral Kakuji Kakuta . She was tasked to support Operation AL , an attack planned to seize several Aleutian Islands to provide advance warning in case of an American attack from the Aleutians down the Kurile Islands while the main body of the American fleet was occupied defending Midway . Jun 'yō carried 18 A6M2 Zeros and 18 D3As for this operation . At dawn on 3 June , she launched 9 Zeros and a dozen D3As to attack Dutch Harbor on Unalaska Island . They had to turn back due to bad weather , although an American PBY Catalina reconnaissance aircraft was shot down by a Zero . A second airstrike was launched later in the day to attack a group of destroyers discovered by aircraft from the first attack , but they failed to find the targets . Another airstrike was launched on the following day by the two carriers that consisted of 15 Zeros , 11 D3As , and 6 B5Ns and successfully bombed Dutch Harbor . As the aircraft from Jun 'yō were regrouping after the attack , they were attacked by 8 Curtiss P @-@ 40 fighters that shot down 2 Zeros and a pair of D3As while losing 2 of their own . One more D3A got lost and failed to make it back to the carrier . Shortly after the aircraft were launched , the Americans attacked the carriers , but failed to inflict any damage . A Martin B @-@ 26 Marauder bomber and a PBY were shot down by Zeros , and a Boeing B @-@ 17 Flying Fortress bomber was shot down by flak during the attack . 
 Jun 'yō had initially been designated as an auxiliary aircraft carrier ( <unk> <unk> ) , but following the loss of four Japanese fleet carriers in the Battle of Midway , she was redesignated as a regular carrier ( <unk> ) in July . Captain Okada <unk> assumed command on 20 July 1942 . Upon arrival at Truk on 9 October , together with her sister ship Hiyō , the ship was assigned to the Second Carrier Division to begin operations against American forces in the Guadalcanal area as part of the 3rd Fleet . On 15 October , the two carriers reached the vicinity of Malaita Island in the Solomon Islands and their aircraft discovered a resupply convoy for Guadalcanal that was escorted by the destroyer Meredith . The A6M Zeros and D3As from the sisters attacked and sank the destroyer . The next day , they found the small seaplane tender , McFarland , in Lunga Roads offloading avgas into barges . Nine D3As attacked , blowing the ship 's stern off and destroying the barge . McFarland was not sunk , but required months of repairs . The two carriers were intended to play a prominent role in the Japanese effort to retake Guadalcanal Island and were assigned to the Advance Force for this operation . Their aircraft were supposed to provide air cover for a planned Japanese night attack to retake Henderson Field , and then be flown ashore . 
 In late October 1942 , during the Guadalcanal Campaign , Jun 'yō took part in the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands . At this time , her air group consisted of eighteen Zeros , eighteen D3As and nine B5Ns . On 05 : 00 on 26 October 1942 , she had launched fourteen Zeros and a few D3As to land at Henderson Field on Guadalcanal , which had been falsely reported by the Imperial Japanese Army as in their hands , but they were greeted by Marine Grumman F4F Wildcats and all were shot down . At 09 : 30 , Jun 'yō launched another air strike that attacked the carrier Enterprise , the battleship South Dakota and the light cruiser San Juan , scoring hits on the latter two , but inflicting little substantial damage . Three D3As and a B5N were shot down by returning Douglas SBD Dauntless dive bombers . Kakuta ordered another air strike to be launched at 14 : 15 , using six B5Ns from the damaged Shōkaku and nine D3As from both carriers . Shortly afterwards , more aircraft were launched to attack the American ships , including six B5Ns and six D3As which were escorted by half a dozen Zeros . All of these aircraft attacked the carrier Hornet , which had been badly damaged by the attacks earlier in the day . American damage control measures had been partially successful , but one torpedo hit by a B5N from Shōkaku increased her list from 7 @.@ 5 ° to 14 @.@ 5 ° and near @-@ misses by the dive bombers started enough seams in her plating that her list increased to 18 ° . The Americans finally ordered the ship abandoned and the last wave of dive bombers hit Hornet twice more , but inflicted little further damage . 
 In mid @-@ November 1942 , Jun 'yō was tasked to provide air cover for the convoy bringing reinforcements for the Japanese forces on Guadalcanal during the three @-@ day @-@ long Naval Battle of Guadalcanal . The ship had twenty @-@ seven A6M3 Zeros , a dozen <unk> and nine <unk> for this task . Six of her Zeros were on Combat Air Patrol when the convoy was discovered by two SBDs from Enterprise and shot down one dive bomber after it had made its spot report . They were unable to protect the convoy against further attacks by aircraft based at Henderson Field ; seven transports were sunk and the remaining four transports were damaged before the end of the day . That afternoon , Enterprise had been discovered by a searching B5N and Junyo launched an air strike with her remaining aircraft , but they failed to locate the American carrier . In December 1942 – January 1943 , the carrier covered several convoys that brought reinforcements to Wewak , New Guinea and her air group was based there for several days to protect the forces there before returning to Truk on 20 January . The ship then covered the evacuation of forces from Guadalcanal through early February . 
 Jun 'yō briefly returned to Japan in February before she sailed for Truk on 22 March together with Hiyō . Her air group was detached to Rabaul on 2 April to participate in Operation I @-@ Go , a land @-@ based aerial offensive against Allied bases in the Solomon Islands and New Guinea . Before returning to Truk in the middle of the month , Jun 'yō 's aircraft claimed to have shot down sixteen American aircraft for the loss of seven A6Ms and two D3As and they sank the destroyer USS Aaron Ward . The ship 's air group was deployed to Buin , Papua New Guinea on 2 July in response to the American attack on Rendova Island on 30 June . Her fighters claimed 37 victories for the loss of nine aircraft before disbanding on 1 September . Leaving her aircraft behind , the carrier returned to Japan in late July . 
 Jun 'yō ferried aircraft to Sumatra in mid @-@ August and troops and equipment to the Caroline Islands in September and October . En route from Truk to Kure on 5 November 1943 , Jun 'yō was hit off Bungo Suido by a torpedo from the submarine Halibut . Four men were killed , but the damage was light , other than the disabled rudder . The ship was under repair and refit until 29 February 1944 at Kure . Meanwhile , her air group had been reconstituted at Singapore on 1 November with 24 Zeros , 18 D3As and 9 B5Ns . The aircraft transferred to Truk on 1 December and then to Kavieng at the end of December before reaching Rabaul on 25 January 1944 . Her fighters claimed 40 Allied aircraft shot down and an additional 30 probably destroyed , but the air group was virtually annihilated . The survivors were back at Truk on 20 February and the air group was disbanded . 
 In the meantime , the Japanese Navy had restructured its carrier air groups so that one air group was assigned to one carrier division and Air Group 652 was assigned to the 2nd Carrier Division with Hiyō , Jun 'yō and Ryūhō on 1 March . The air group was last in priority to be rebuilt and only had 30 Model 21 Zeros , 13 Model 52 Zeros and four D3As on hand on 1 April of its authorized 81 fighters , 36 dive bombers and 27 torpedo bombers . The ship conducted training for her aircraft in the Inland Sea until 11 May when she sailed for Tawi @-@ Tawi in the Philippines . The new base was closer to the oil wells in Borneo on which the Navy relied and also to the Palau and western Caroline Islands where the Japanese expected the next American attack . However , the location lacked an airfield on which to train the green pilots and American submarines were very active in the vicinity which restricted the ships to the anchorage . 
 = = = Battle of the Philippine Sea = = = 
 The Japanese fleet was en route to Guimares Island in the central Philippines on 13 June , where they intended to practice carrier operations in an area better protected from submarines , when Vice Admiral Jisaburō Ozawa learned of the American attack on the Mariana Islands the previous day . Upon reaching Guimares , the fleet refuelled and sortied into the Philippine Sea where they spotted Task Force 58 on 18 June . The Americans failed to locate Ozawa 's ships that day and the Japanese turned south to maintain a constant distance between them and the American carriers as Ozawa had decided on launching his air strikes early the following morning . At this time , Air Group 652 consisted of 81 Zeros , 27 D3As , 9 Yokosuka D4Y " Judy " dive bombers and 18 Nakajima B6N " Jill " torpedo bombers , roughly evenly divided among the three ships . The three carriers began launching their first air strike of 26 bomb @-@ carrying A6M2 Zeros , 16 A6M5 Zeros to escort the other aircraft and 7 B6Ns at about 09 : 30 . Most of these aircraft were misdirected and failed to find any American ships , although a dozen persisted in their search and found one of the American task groups . A B6N , 5 bomb @-@ carrying Zeros , and an escorting Zero were shot down by the defending fighters and no damage was inflicted on any American ships . 
 A second air strike of 27 D3As , 9 D4Ys , 2 B6Ns and 26 escorting Zeros was launched around 11 : 00 , accompanied by at least 18 A6Ms and B6Ns from Shōkaku and Zuikaku . They had also been given an erroneous spot report and could not find any American ships . The <unk> aircraft headed for airfield at Rota and Guam to refuel while those from the other two carriers headed back to them . A pair of Zeros and 6 D4Ys bound for Rota spotted the carriers Wasp and Bunker Hill en route and failed to inflict any damage on the American ships while losing 5 D4Ys to anti @-@ aircraft fire . Radar had spotted those aircraft headed for Guam and they were intercepted by 41 Grumman F6F Hellcats . Only a single A6M5 , 1 D4Y and 7 D3As of the 49 Japanese aircraft survived the encounter and landed . 
 At dusk , the Japanese turned away to the northwest to regroup and to refuel and the Americans turned west to close the distance . They discovered the retiring Japanese fleet during the afternoon of the following day and Vice Admiral Marc Mitscher ordered an air strike launched . They discovered the ships of the Second Carrier Division and hit Jun 'yō with two bombs near her island . The ship was not badly damaged , but the damage did stop flight operations . Air Group 652 claimed seven American aircraft shot down and four more probably shot down , but lost eleven Zeros , plus another three that had to ditch . The air group was disbanded on 10 July with many of its remaining personnel being assigned to Air Group 653 . 
 After repairs at Kure , Jun 'yō remained in the Inland Sea without aircraft until 27 October when she was tasked to transport material to Borneo . On 3 November , she was attacked by the submarine Pintado near Makung , but her escorting destroyer , <unk> , deliberately intercepted the torpedoes and sank with no survivors . On her return voyage , the ship was unsuccessfully attacked by the submarines Barb and <unk> . On 25 November , she sailed for Manila via Makung to rendezvous with the battleship Haruna and the destroyers Suzutsuki , Fuyutsuki , and Maki . Having loaded 200 survivors of the battleship Musashi , Jun 'yō was attacked by the submarines Sea Devil , Plaice and Redfish early in the morning of 9 December 1944 . She was hit by three torpedoes that flooded several compartments and killed 19 men . These gave her a 10 ° – 12 ° list to starboard , but she was able to proceed on one engine . She reached Sasebo the following day and began repairs on 18 December . 
 The repairs were abandoned in March 1945 for lack of materials and the ship was moved from the dock to Ebisu Bay , Sasebo on 1 April . Efforts to camouflage the ship began on 23 April and she was reclassified as a guard ship on 20 June . Jun 'yō 's armament was ordered removed on 5 August and the ship was surrendered to the Allies on 2 September . An American technical team evaluated the ship 's condition on 8 October and deemed her a constructive total loss . Jun 'yō was stricken from the Navy List on 30 November and scrapped between 1 June 1946 and 1 August 1947 by the Sasebo Ship Company . 
 = Jan Karol Chodkiewicz = 
 Jan Karol Chodkiewicz ( c . 1560 – 24 September 1621 ; Belarusian : <unk> <unk> <unk> , Jan <unk> <unk> , Lithuanian : Jonas <unk> <unk> ) was a military commander of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth army who was from 1601 Field Hetman of Lithuania , and from 1605 Grand Hetman of Lithuania , and was one of the most prominent noblemen and military commanders of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth of his era . His coat of arms was Chodkiewicz , as was his family name . 
 He played a major role , often as the top commander of the Commonwealth forces , in the Wallachian campaign of 1599 – 1600 , the Polish – Swedish War of 1600 – 11 , the Polish – Muscovite War of 1605 – 18 , and the Polish – Ottoman War of 1620 – 21 . His most famous victory was the Battle of Kircholm in 1605 , in which he dealt a major defeat to a Swedish army three time the size of his own . He died on the front lines during the battle of Chocim , in the besieged Khotyn Fortress , a few days before the Ottomans gave up on the siege and agreed to negotiate . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
 Chodkiewicz was born around 1560 ( exact date of his birth is unknown ) as the son of Jan <unk> Chodkiewicz , Grand Marshal of Lithuania , castellan of Vilnius and Krystyna <unk> , daughter of a Polish magnate family of <unk> . From 1573 he was a student at the Vilnius Jesuit College and the Vilnius University , and from 1586 to 1589 , together with his brother Aleksander , he continued his studies abroad at the University of Ingolstadt . He visited Padua before returning to the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth in 1590 . 
 He started his military career soon after returning to the Commonwealth , raising a rota of 50 to 100 men . He gained military experience in the fight against the rebellious Cossacks during the Severyn Nalyvaiko 's uprising under Field Crown Hetman Stanisław Żółkiewski . During that conflict he participated in the battle of Kaniów on April 14 , 1596 , and in the siege of the Cossack tabor near Lubny . In 1599 , he was appointed the Elder ( starost ) of Samogitia . 
 Chodkiewicz subsequently assisted Chancellor and Great Crown Hetman Jan Zamoyski in his victorious Wallachian campaign , in which Chodkiewicz participated in the battle of Ploiești on 15 October 1600 . For that campaign , he was given that year the high office of the Field Lithuanian Hetman , the second commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the Lithuanian detachment of the Polish – Lithuanian Commonwealth army . 
 = = = War in the North = = = 
 A year later , in 1601 , Chodkiewicz accompanied Zamoyski north , to the Duchy of Livonia ( Inflanty ) , where he commanded Lithuanian units on the right wing of the Commonwealth army in a victorious battle of Kokenhausen in late July that year in the war against Sweden . He oversaw the fighting in the Livonia theater after Zamoyski 's return to Poland in 1602 . In April 1603 , he captured Dorpat ( modern Tartu ) and defeated the Swedish forces at Biały Kamień ( the Battle of <unk> ) on 23 September 1604 . His crowning achievement was the great victory near the Dvina River in the Battle of Kircholm ( modern <unk> ) on 27 September 1605 , when , with barely 4000 troops , mostly the heavy cavalry of Polish hussars , he annihilated a Swedish army three times the size of his force . For that feat he received letters of congratulation from Pope Paul V , most of the Catholic royalty of Europe , and even the sultan of Turkey and the shah of Persia . Soon afterward , he was rewarded with the rank of Grand Lithuanian Hetman , in addition to a number of royal land grants and leases . 
 Yet this great victory was virtually fruitless , owing to the domestic dissensions ; the Sejm ( Commonwealth parliament ) failed to agree on raising the funds needed for the war effort . Chodkiewicz was one of the magnates who remained loyal to king Sigismund III , and helped him to defeat the Sandomierz rebellion ( rokosz of Zebrzydowski ) in 1606 – 1607 . He commanded the right wing of the royal army during the Battle of Guzów on 6 – 7 July 1607 , in which the insurgents were defeated , and then quelled the unrest in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania , fighting against another rebellious magnate , Janusz Radziwiłł , until Radziwiłł negotiated a settlement with the king in 1608 . A fresh invasion of Livonia by the Swedes recalled him thither once more , and in 1609 he relieved Riga and recaptured Pernau . He improvised a small fleet and dealt a surprise blow to the Swedish Navy at the Battle of Salis . 
 = = = Wars in the East and South = = = 
 Meanwhile , the <unk> wars with Muscovy broke out . Instigated by King Zygmunt , the war was unpopular among Lithuanian magnates , and Chodkiewicz was no exception ; in fact his displeasure was so public and significant that he lost the royal favor for a time . Eventually their differences subsided , and Chodkiewicz was sent against the Muscovites , operating first near Smolensk and Pskov . Soon , the Polish – Lithuanian forces started garnering victories , such as the capture of Smolensk , and some , like Grand Crown Hetman Żółkiewski , planned for a grand Polish – Lithuanian – Muscovite Commonwealth . Chodkiewicz was tasked by the king with an advance on Moscow . However , the Sejm neglected to pay for the maintenance of the Army once more , with the result that some units mutinied . Chodkiewicz fought several inconclusive battles against the Muscovites in the fall of 1611 , and then retreated . Disappointed with that outcome , he became once again estranged from the king , and criticized the campaign at the Sejm of 1613 . Over the next few years , in the period of 1613 – 15 , Chodkiewicz defended the Commonwealth gains in the Smolensk area , and dealt with unrest in Lithuania . Not till the crown prince , Władysław arrived with tardy reinforcements did the war could assume a more offensive character once again . The army , nominally commanded by Władysław , but in practice under the experienced command of Chodkiewicz , took the fortress of Dorogobuzh on 11 October 1617 . The siege of Mozhaysk in December of subsequent year did not prove successful , and this marked the end of the conflict . 
 The Polish @-@ Muscovite War had no sooner been ended by the treaty of Deulino than Chodkiewicz was hastily dispatched southwards to defend the southern frontier against the Turks , who , in the opening phase of the Polish – Ottoman War , defeated Polish forces at Cecora , killing Hetman <unk> . An army of 160 @,@ 000 Turks and 60 @,@ 000 Tatars led by Sultan Osman II in person advanced on the Polish frontier . Opposed it were the Commonwealth forces , numbering about 70 @,@ 000 , half of them a Cossack detachment under Cossack hetman Petro Konashevych @-@ Sahaidachny . Chodkiewicz crossed the Dnieper in September 1621 , and entrenched himself in the Khotyn Fortress , directly in the path of the Ottoman advance . During the Battle of Chocim <unk> resisted the sultan 's 200 @-@ thousand army for a whole month , . but the cost of victory was his life . A few days before the siege was raised and the Ottomans decided to open negotiations , the aged Grand Lithuanian Hetman , already suffering from illness since the very start of this campaign , died in the fortress on 24 September 1621 . 
 <unk> 's body was transported to Kamianets @-@ Podilskyi , where he was buried on 14 October 1621 . A few years later , in the summer of 1622 , his widow arranged for exhumation , and Chodkiewicz was reburied in Ostróg in June that year . In 1627 he was moved to a new chapel in Ostróg , where he reburied again . His body was evacuated from Ostróg during the Chmielnicki Uprising in 1648 , and returned there in 1654 . It was reburied yet again in a new tomb in Ostróg in 1722 . 
 = = Assessment and remembrance = = 
 In 1937 , Polish historian Wanda <unk> , wrote in her Polish Biographical Dictionary entry on Chodkiewicz that he was one of the chief members of the " Great Hetman era " , renowned for his talent as a strategist and organizer . She notes that Chodkiewicz possessed an iron will , which he was able to impose on the troops under his command , and that he was an efficient commander , although more respected and feared than beloved by his troops . <unk> notes that he was an energetic and explosive antithesis of the composed Żółkiewski , another great hetman of this era , whom Chodkiewicz disliked and competed with throughout his life . 
 Chodkiewicz was not particularly involved in the politics of the Commonwealth , although his high office and wealth gave him significant influence ; for the most part he used his political influence , and base of support in Lithuania , to gather support for his military plans , increased the size of the army , and personal <unk> . His life was dominated by warfare , if not on the front lines , then on the political scene against other Lithuanian magnates , particularly the Radziwiłł family and the Sejm politicians whom he held responsible for not passing enough taxes to support the army he wanted . 
 Over his career he acquired significant wealth , and funded a number of churches and other prestigious buildings . He often worked with the Jesuits , including funding their College in <unk> . He strongly believed his service for the state should be rewarded with land grants , but at the same time he would often use his own money to pay for the army 's military expenses . In his private life he is remembered as a very proud individual , and for stressing his identity as a member of the Lithuanian nobility . He was a family man , devoted to his family , but his only son , from his marriage in 1593 to Zofia <unk> , died aged 16 in 1613 , and she died in 1618 . He remarried in 1620 , wedding Anna <unk> <unk> in November 1620 , shortly before departing on his final campaign . Also that year his daughter Anna married a Lithuanian magnate , Jan Stanisław Sapieha . 
 Some poems and other works praising him were written during his lifetime , and a religious work was dedicated to him by the Jesuit Piotr Skarga . More works on Chodkiewicz were written in the years after his death . He was one of Wacław Potocki 's characters in his epic novel on the Chocim war ( Polish : <unk> wojny <unk> ) , and he also appeared in the works of Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz and Zofia Kossak @-@ Szczucka , usually portrayed as a patriot and military genius . 
 = Last Gasp ( Inside No. 9 ) = 
 " Last Gasp " is the fourth episode of the first series of British dark comedy anthology television programme Inside No. 9 . It first aired on 26 February 2014 on BBC Two . The story revolves around the ninth birthday of the severely ill Tamsin ( Lucy Hutchinson ) . Tamsin 's parents Jan ( Sophie Thompson ) and Graham ( Steve Pemberton ) have arranged with charity WishmakerUK for singer Frankie J Parsons ( David Bedella ) to visit as a treat for their daughter . Frankie dies after blowing up a balloon , leading to arguments between Graham , WishmakerUK representative Sally ( Tamsin Greig ) and Frankie 's assistant Si ( Adam Deacon ) over the now @-@ valuable balloon containing Frankie 's last breath . The story , written by Pemberton and Reece Shearsmith , was inspired by someone Pemberton had seen on television who collected air from different places . The episode is more comedic than others in the series , and critiques celebrity culture and human greed . 
 " Last Gasp " received a fairly negative critical response ; in retrospect , Shearsmith claimed that " people hated " the episode . Several critics , including Gerard Gilbert of The Independent , Jack Seale of Radio Times and comedy critic Bruce Dessau — though complimentary of Inside No. 9 generally — considered " Last Gasp " to be weaker than the previous three episodes , but not unwatchable . Other reviewers gave a more positive response , but a particularly scathing review by columnist Virginia Blackburn was published in the Daily Express . On its first showing , " Last Gasp " drew 872 @,@ 000 viewers , lower than any previous episode . Pemberton subsequently sold a balloon containing his own breath on eBay , with proceeds going to a Sport Relief charity . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Last Gasp " was inspired by someone Pemberton had seen on children 's programme Multi @-@ Coloured Swap Shop who collected apparently empty jars which actually contained air taken from different places . The idea , which he considered " bizarre " but " very special " , had " haunted " him . This gave him the idea of collecting the breath of celebrities . The death of Michael Jackson and the death of Amy Winehouse , along with the associated collecting of memorabilia , also served as inspiration . For Pemberton , the family and house in " Last Gasp " were very " normal " . The episode was filmed on location in what director David Kerr called an " utterly freezing " house . The finished episode , for Kerr , had a degree of " suburban darkness " in that , though the events unfold in a relatively unremarkable setting , the darker side of human nature is revealed . At the same time , the characters ' arguments lead to humour . Shearsmith described " Last Gasp " as like a My Family episode " gone wrong " . 
 As the format of Inside No. 9 requires new characters each week , the writers were able to attract actors who may have been unwilling to commit to an entire series . In addition to Pemberton — who played Graham , the father — " Last Gasp " starred Sophie Thompson as Jan , the mother ; Lucy Hutchinson as 9 @-@ year @-@ old Tamsin ; David Bedella as popstar Frankie J Parsons ; Tamsin Greig as Sally , of WishmakerUK ; and Adam Deacon as Si , Parsons 's assistant . It was the first episode of the programme not to star Shearsmith . For Kerr , the typical difficulty associated with the use of child actors was not present in " Last Gasp " ; for him , Hutchinson " was superb . She was brilliant ; she had maturity beyond her years . " Pemberton and Shearsmith had been keen to use Inside No. 9 as a vehicle to work with new people , and had been keen to collaborate with Greig for some time . Kerr said that " one of the real joys of Inside No. 9 " was the opportunity to see actors in very different roles to those in which they had previously starred . He used Greig as his example , saying that the character of Sally was somewhat different from the roles in which Greig had previously performed . 
 = = Plot = = 
 On the ninth birthday of the severely ill Tamsin , parents Graham and Jan struggle with a camcorder and blow up balloons . A charity called WishmakerUK has arranged for pop star Frankie J Parsons to visit Tamsin . Frankie arrives , much to the excitement of Jan , accompanied by his personal assistant Si and WishmakerUK representative Sally . Frankie visits Tamsin in her bedroom , and blows up a purple balloon for her . He begins to struggle for breath and then collapses from an intracranial aneurysm . Later , Graham makes tea for Jan and Sally . Jan is upset about Frankie 's death . Si says that no one can touch anything or call an ambulance until Frankie 's manager arrives . Tamsin , sitting in her wheelchair , holds the balloon ; and Graham and Si realise that it may be valuable . Si takes the balloon from Tamsin , and Graham ties it . Sally takes a call from her boss , but does not mention Frankie 's death . She makes excuses to have a colleague cover for her on her next assignment so that she can stay at the house . Graham and Si argue over the balloon , and Graham gives it to Sally , as he considers her " a neutral " . He looks online to work out how much the balloon and accompanying footage may be worth . 
 Later , Jan starts playing one of Frankie 's CDs , but Graham turns it off to talk about money with Si and Sally . Jan takes Tamsin outside . Tamsin worries that Frankie 's death is her fault because she asked him to blow up the balloon . She asks if Frankie 's soul will go to Heaven , and Jan says that it will . Inside , Si , Sally and Graham argue about how to split the money they will make from the balloon . The argument gets heated after Sally argues that the fact Tamsin will soon die should preclude her from getting a share . As Graham threatens to pop the balloon , Jan reappears and chastises him . Tamsin , who is now considered neutral , takes the balloon . Graham says they should all settle down and have lunch . In the kitchen , Sally and Jan talk about Sally 's work , and , in Tamsin 's bedroom , Graham and Si talk about Parsons , with Si revealing that Parsons was actually unpleasant to work for . There is a loud bang from outside , and everyone goes back into the lounge , erroneously thinking that the balloon has burst . Graham and Si take the balloon to an upstairs bedroom and tuck it into a bed , while Jan turns the music back on . 
 Everyone sits in silence , waiting for Parsons 's manager to arrive . Jan suggests that Graham blow up another balloon for Tamsin . Sally , Si and Graham realise that , with the camera footage they have , they can blow up all the purple balloons and sell them to multiple bidders . Jan screams when she sees movement in Tamsin 's bedroom , and it is realised that Frankie is still alive . Jan takes Tamsin out of the room and the remaining three agree , after panicked discussion , that they should kill Frankie . Si loses a coin toss and smothers Frankie with a cushion . Later , out on the street , Frankie 's body is put into an ambulance . Si says to Sally and Graham that he will be in touch and leaves . Sally and Graham discuss selling the camcorder footage , and Jan runs inside to see that Tamsin is not in her chair or room . Upstairs , Tamsin crawls onto the bed containing the balloon , carrying a heart @-@ shaped helium balloon . On the street , Sally , Graham and Jan see Tamsin opening the upstairs window . She releases the helium balloon with the balloon containing Frankie 's breath attached . The two float skyward as Graham films . 
 = = Themes and analysis = = 
 Comedy critic Bruce Dessau described the episode as containing " a nice if not very subtle critique " of the value of celebrity , and noted that there was " a flicker " of " The Pardoner 's Tale " , a story from writer Geoffrey Chaucer 's collection The Canterbury Tales . Rebecca McQuillan , writing in The Herald , felt the episode captures the " sheer unctuousness " of fandom . She added that , as the plot advances , the venal and vulgar attitudes which are initially hidden behind the characters ' fake grins are revealed . For her , the story takes place around Tamsin , who looks " worldly and disappointed with the human race " . David Chater , of The Times , identified celebrity worship and greed as the episode 's themes . 
 In South African newspaper The Star , the episode was identified as the most cynical of the first series . For the reviewer , it " parades before us the depravity to which the human animal will stoop , and explores how agendas can be furthered under the noble cover of altruism " . David Upton , writing for PopMatters , called it " easily the most acerbic and most overtly comic " episode of the series . He listed three reasons that the episode does not seem like something produced by Pemberton and Shearsmith : its avoidance of the horrific ; the fact that it does not star Shearsmith ; and its direct focus on celebrity culture , which Upton considers a modern phenomenon . Instead , he suggested that it feels closer to a story from Charlie Brooker 's anthology programme Black Mirror . The focus of " Last Gasp " on comedy to the exclusion of horror , for Upton , leaves it " stranded " when compared to the other episodes . 
 Some critics questioned the plausibility of the premise . Daily Express columnist Virginia Blackburn felt that there was potential for a comedic critique of the celebrity memorabilia market . Such a story , she suggested , would be based around selling the balloon — not the breath — something she felt may have happened . Paddy Shennan , writing for the Liverpool Echo , questioned the extent to which the ending would actually impact the characters , asking whether they could have nonetheless sold the fake balloons . For freelance journalist Dan Owen the premise " riff [ s ] on the fact [ that ] online auction sites like eBay often sell ludicrous items for huge amounts of money " . Owen argued that the episode 's plot offers an amusing way that such a sale could come about . Though not fraudulent , the sale would nonetheless be " highly disrespectful and money @-@ grabbing " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Gerard Gilbert of The Independent , Jack Seale of Radio Times , Dessau and Owen all stressed that " Last Gasp " was weaker than the three previous episodes of Inside No. 9 . Seale claimed that there were " several sublime moments – but no knockout blow " , while Dessau wrote that " it doesn 't really go anywhere and it resolves itself a little too simplistically " , and Owen felt that the episode " didn 't manage to go anywhere very unexpected ... and just sort of ended " . All three suggested , however , that the episode still had its strengths ; for Seale , it was as " brilliantly acted and constructed as you 'd expect " , Dessau considered it watchable , and Owen felt it was enjoyable to watch with a number of funny moments . Shennan , writing for the Liverpool Echo , wrote that " perhaps there had to be a dud – or , at least , disappointing – episode sooner or later " , noting that you " can 't win ' em all " . 
 The acting in the episode was praised by Michael Hogan and Rachel Ward , who wrote in The Daily Telegraph that " with their gift for comedy , vulnerability and pathos , Tamsin Grieg [ sic ] and Sophie Thompson ... deliver excellent performances " . Similarly , Owen wrote that " the performances were good — especially from Thompson as the mousy housewife , and I liked the sour expressions from child star Hutchinson " . Nonetheless , he thought it regrettable than a real @-@ world musician had not been cast , especially as he considered it unlikely that Tamsin would admire Parsons . Awarding the episode three and a half out of five , he thought " the set @-@ up ... sublime , the central dilemma amusing , and the execution typically brilliant " . In the review published in The Star , " Last Gasp " was described as " hilarious " . The title , it was suggested , is appropriate , " as I caught myself gasping more than once as its foul contents unfolded " . Upton called the episode " a clever little piece " . 
 On the day it was shown , " Last Gasp " was selected as comedy " pick of the day " in the Daily Express , but , the following day , an extremely critical review of the episode by Virginia Blackburn was published in the newspaper . She felt that the episode was disappointing and wasted the talent of the actors , and that the concept was " the sort of idea you can imagine two students coming up with after the sixth pint ... and then feeling slightly embarrassed about it when they wake up the next morning " . She summed up the episode by saying that it was neither funny nor clever , and " is so utterly , irredeemably , naffly silly that it ends up being incredibly irritating and nothing else " . 
 An interview with Shearsmith and Pemberton was published on British comedy website <unk> after Inside No. 9 won the Chortle Award for best TV show . The pair were asked if they would ever consider writing an episode with a happy ending . Shearsmith responded by saying " Yes , because that would be the biggest surprise of all ... But last year we had the Last Gasp , and that had quite a happy ending - and people hated that one ! " Similarly , Pemberton suggested that " people are disappointed if we don 't deliver something horrible " . 
 = = = Viewing figures = = = 
 Based on overnight viewing figures , " Last Gasp " drew a lower viewership than any previous episode of Inside No. 9 , with 872 @,@ 000 viewers . In most UK listings , it was preceded by Line of Duty , which drew 2 @.@ 2 million viewers ( 9 @.@ 7 % of the audience ) . However , the following episode of Inside No. 9 , " The Understudy " , drew a lower number of viewers still , with 720 @,@ 000 viewers . The final episode of the first series , " The Harrowing " , saw an increase in viewing figures , leaving " Last Gasp " with the second @-@ lowest viewership of the series , below the series average of 904 @,@ 000 people , and the slot average of 970 @,@ 000 people . 
 = = Charity auction = = 
 Pemberton listed a balloon containing his breath which had appeared on " Last Gasp " on eBay . Listed with the balloon was a copy of the episode 's poster signed by Pemberton and Shearsmith . The auction was held to raise money for Give It Up , a Sport Relief charity founded by comedian Russell Brand to help those recovering from alcoholism and drug addiction . The winning bid on the auction was for £ 265 @.@ 00 . 
 = Qualifying Industrial Zone = 
 Qualifying Industrial Zones ( QIZ ) are industrial parks that house manufacturing operations in Jordan and Egypt . They are special free trade zones established in collaboration with neighboring Israel to take advantage of the free trade agreements between the United States and Israel . Under the trade agreements with Jordan as laid down by the United States , goods produced in QIZ @-@ notified areas can directly access US markets without tariff or quota restrictions , subject to certain conditions . To qualify , goods produced in these zones must contain a small portion of Israeli input . In addition , a minimum 35 % value to the goods must be added to the finished product . The concept was invented by Jordanian businessman Omar Salah . 
 The first QIZ , Al @-@ Hassan Industrial Estate in Irbid in northern Jordan , was authorized by the United States Congress in 1997 . As of January 2009 , there are five Qualifying Industrial Zones in Jordan and four QIZ designated regions in Egypt . The idea behind the establishment of QIZs was to foster a sense of prosperity and stability in Middle East through economic cooperation and employment . 
 The zones differ from other trade zones as they are stand @-@ alone entities within one country and not directly connected to other countries . In addition , their products are for exports and domestic consumption in any country , not limited to specific countries , and most importantly operate only under the authority and conditions laid down by the host government . 
 = = History = = 
 The concept behind a Qualifying Industrial Zone is credited to Omar Salah , a Jordanian businessman . In 1993 , in anticipation of the Israel – Jordan peace treaty , Salah traveled to Israel with the intention of doing business with Israeli businessmen . He was also interested in business ventures that could take advantage of the eight @-@ year @-@ old free trade agreement between the United States and Israel that allowed Israeli goods to enter the US markets duty @-@ free . After the treaty was signed in 1994 , a business venture was struck between Salah and Delta Galil , where labor was transferred to Irbid in northern Jordan , to take advantage of low labor costs that were forty to seventy percent lower than in Israel . Salah had envisioned that by exploiting Israeli resources such as labor , finances , and contacts , and then leveraging it to produce value @-@ added goods , the economy of Jordan would be benefited . In addition , he surmised that economic cooperation between the two nations would help foster peace in the region . 
 Salah set up a public share @-@ holding company Century Investments . For doing business with Israel , many Jordanian organizations criticized Salah and boycotted the purchase of output in Jordan . Despite the heavy criticism , Salah nevertheless received tacit support from King Abdullah of Jordan . To combat the boycott , Salah began to work with multinationals with a larger international stake . He then actively lobbied the Jordanian government to set negotiate a free trade agreement with the United States on the lines of the United States @-@ Israel Free Trade Area Implementation Act of 1985 . Faced with little enthusiasm by the Jordanian government , Salah scrutinized the Presidential Proclamation ( No. 6955 ) that was part of the Palestinian agreement signed between the Palestine Liberation Organization and Israel in 1993 . In the agreement , the areas on the border between Israel and Jordan were designated as " Qualifying Industrial Zones " , and goods produced here would not have tariff and quota restrictions to the US markets . Since the Hassan industrial estate in Irbid , where Salah had factories located , was situated far from the bordering areas , it did not qualify for QIZ status . 
 Salah then lobbied the Jordanian government for extending these regions into other parts of Jordan . Government officials were <unk> @-@ warm to the idea and told him that it would be " naive to assume " that the United States would give Jordan this status . Unfazed by this response , Salah traveled to the United States and lobbied hard with the US State Department , the White House , and the US Trade Representative that it was in US interests to extend the QIZ into Jordan 's interiors . Lawyers in the United States then told Salah that even if a small portion of Israeli territory was associated with a QIZ , the proposal might materialize . Soon , USTR officials began to travel to Jordan to work on the deal . 
 Finally , in 1997 , an agreement was signed at the Middle East and North Africa ( <unk> ) conference at Doha that established a QIZ agreement with Jordan . On 6 March 1998 , the Al @-@ Hassan Zone in Irbid was designated the first QIZ in Jordan . 
 After the setting up of the first QIZ , few Jordanian companies took advantage of QIZ benefits due to the general hostility in doing business with Israel . Instead , Chinese and Indian companies quickly took advantage of the vacuum to set up business establishments . The lack of local enthusiasm was criticized by the Jordan Times for missing the " golden opportunity " . Gradually though , more Jordanian businesses began to set up business establishments as political hostilities began to be overshadowed by business economics . Soon after 1998 , an additional twelve sites were given QIZ status by USTR . 
 Positive results from the Jordanian QIZ led to the Government of Egypt negotiating a separate QIZ protocol with the United States in Cairo on 24 December 2004 . The protocol came into effect in February 2005 . 
 = = Regulations = = 
 Under the agreement ( P.L. 104 – 234 ) requires that articles eligible for QIZ status must be manufactured in or directly imported from the areas administered by the Palestine Authority or another notified QIZ and meet the several conditions . 
 To quality for this scheme a product must be substantially transformed in the manufacturing process . Material and processing costs incurred in a QIZ must total not less than 35 % of the appraised value of the product when imported into the United States . Of this 35 % , 15 % must be either US materials or materials from Israel , and / or Jordan or Egypt depending on the program . The remaining 20 % of the 35 % input must come from Israel and Jordan or Egypt . The remaining 65 % can come from any part of the world . All importers must also certify that the article meet conditions for duty exemption . 
 Under the sharing agreements , the manufacturer from the Jordanian side must contribute at least 11 @.@ 7 % of the final produce , and the manufacturer on the Israeli side must contribute 8 % ( 7 % on high @-@ tech products ) . Under the Israeli @-@ Egyptian agreement , 11 @.@ 7 % of the inputs must be made in Israel . 
 The clothing and textile industry has benefited most from this arrangement . As tariffs on these goods into the United States are relatively high , exporters have used the duty @-@ free benefits of QIZs to gain quick access to markets in the United States . 
 = = Jordan = = 
 On 6 March 1998 , the United States Trade Representative ( USTR ) designated the Al @-@ Hassan Industrial Estate in the northern city of Irbid as the first QIZ . Since then , an addition twelve QIZs have been also designated across the country . Prominent QIZs include the Al @-@ Hussein Ibn Abdullah II Industrial Estate at Al Karak , owned and operated by the Jordan Industrial Estate Corporation , the Jordan Cyber City in Irbid , the privately owned Al @-@ <unk> Industrial Estate at Amman , Ad @-@ <unk> Industrial Park and El @-@ Zai Ready @-@ wear Manufacturing Company near Zarqa . Upcoming industrial parks include the Gateway QIZ on the northern border with Israel , Aqaba Industrial Estate at Aqaba , and the <unk> International complex in Amman . 
 Jordan has seen a substantial economic growth since the QIZ were set up . Exports from Jordan to the United States grew from 15 million USD to over 1 billion USD in 2004 . Government sources have estimated that over 40 @,@ 000 jobs have been created with the set up of QIZs . Investment is currently valued at USD 85 – 100 million and expected to grow to $ 180 to $ 200 million . The success of QIZ have led to the United States and Jordan signing a Free Trade Agreement in 2001 that was approved by the US Congress . 
 Between 1998 and 2005 Jordan moved up from the United States ' thirteenth to eight largest trading partner among the 20 Middle @-@ East @-@ North African ( <unk> ) entities . In 2005 , US exports to and imports from Jordan totalled an estimated $ 1 @.@ 9 billion : U.S. exports , at an estimated $ 646 million , were 1 @.@ 8 times their 1998 level ; US imports , at $ 1 @.@ 3 billion , were 80 times their 1998 level . Despite the 2001 FTA between the United States and Jordan , 75 % of Jordanian articles enter the United States through the QIZ program . 
 The apparel industry dominates both Jordan 's QIZs and total exports to the United States , accounting for 99 @.@ 9 % of all QIZ exports and 86 % of all Jordanian exports to the United States . The reason for this dominance is that QIZ products enter the United States free of duty , whereas , under the US – Jordan FTA , tariffs will not be fully eliminated until the end of the ten @-@ year phase @-@ in period , in 2011 . 
 = = Egypt = = 
 After the WTO phased out quantitative quotas on textile in 2004 under the Agreement on Textile and Clothing ( ATC ) . Egyptian textile and garment producers feared that their industry would be threatened by global competition from China and India . The flood of similar articles from these two nations to the United States could edge out Egyptian exports , and possibly result in the loss of 150 @,@ 000 job opportunities . This was estimated to cost some of the $ 3 @.@ 2 billion in US foreign direct investment in Egypt . Further , Egypt was in search of sources for increased economic growth and trade to provide jobs for its rapidly growing labor force . 
 Positive results from the Jordanian led to the Government of Egypt negotiating a QIZ protocol in Cairo on 24 December 2004 that came into effect in February 2005 . USTR has designated three QIZs in Egypt – the Greater Cairo Zone , the Alexandria Zone , and the Suez Canal Zone ( 69 CFR <unk> ) . On 4 November 2005 , the USTR designated a fourth zone in the Central Delta region and expanded the Greater Cairo and Suez Canal zones . 
 The protocol signed between the two nations is a non @-@ reciprocal arrangement and is expected to be a step towards the establishment of a Free Trade Agreement ( FTA ) between the two countries . However negotiations toward a US – Egyptian free trade agreement have recently been suspended over human rights issues . 
 The results have been positive . Israeli exports to Egypt rose over 30 % from USD 29 million in 2004 to USD 93 @.@ 2 million and exceeded USD 125 million in 2006 . As of 2008 ten QIZs have been set up in Egypt . Some estimate that approximately 20 % of companies based in QIZs are wholly owned by Jordanians . 
 = = Social impact = = 
 Although most experts note that companies based in QIZs hire foreign laborers , thousands of Jordanians , particularly women from the rural countryside , have found jobs at garment factories in QIZs . In a traditional society such as Jordan , many of these women had little previous work experience and were largely caretakers of their home . Despite the low wages paid by apparel factories in the QIZs , some women have been able to support their families . However , traditional attitudes toward a woman ’ s place in the home persist , and many families continue to prohibit female members from working in QIZs . ( See Women in Jordan ) In response , the Jordanian Ministry of Labor has worked to ease the adjustment of women moving from the home to a new job by providing free transportation to work , subsidizing the cost of food in QIZs , and paying for dormitories near factories to cut commuting <unk> and providing childcare The long @-@ term effect of female employment in QIZs are yet to be quantified , and there is some concern that over time , Jordanian women may have difficulty in achieving higher wages in a global economy where apparel manufacturers can easily relocate to cheaper labor markets . 
 When the QIZ program came into being in 1996 , observers regarded it as a vehicle to support the development of peaceful relations and normalization of commercial ties between Israel and the two Arab states ( Jordan and Egypt ) with which it had signed peace treaties . In both cases , however , a tenuous peace continues to prevail between Israel and the two Arab states . Since the conclusion of the Jordan – Israel peace treaty in October 1994 , large numbers of Jordanians , particularly fundamentalists , those of Palestinian origin , and members of the professional unions continue to oppose normalization with Israel and resist the expansion of commercial relations . With the establishment of 13 QIZs in Jordan , there has been an increase in the volume of bilateral trade , though the overall totals remain modest . 
 = = Criticisms = = 
 By far the biggest international criticism of QIZs in Jordan is the humanitarian crisis within the factories . A comprehensive report by the Institute for Global Labour and Human Rights found that Sri Lankan migrant workers were subject to " routine sexual abuse and rape . " 
 The United States Trade Representative ( USTR ) designation of 13 factories throughout Jordan ( under the US @-@ Jordan Free Trade Agreement ) has led to disastrous realities , gender inequality and gender based violence : 
 " There are over 30 @,@ 000 poor , mostly young women , foreign guest workers toiling in Jordan ‘ s largely foreign @-@ owned garment factories sewing clothing for export to the United States . Under the Free Trade Agreement , those garments enter the U.S. duty @-@ free . 
 " The guest workers are from Sri Lanka , Bangladesh , India , China , Nepal and Egypt . They earn less than three @-@ quarters the wage of Jordanian garment workers , who account for only 15 to 25 percent of the total garment workforce . Jordanians earn $ 1 @.@ 02 an hour while the foreign guest workers take home 74 ½ cents an hour . The Jordanians work eight hours a day , while the guest workers toil an average of 12 hours a day . " 
 = Nigella Lawson = 
 Nigella Lucy Lawson ( born 6 January 1960 ) is an English journalist , broadcaster , television personality , gourmet , and food writer . She is the daughter of Nigel Lawson , a former Chancellor of the Exchequer , and Vanessa ( née Salmon ) Lawson , whose family owned the J. Lyons and Co. food and catering business . After graduating from Lady Margaret Hall , Oxford University , Lawson started work as a book reviewer and restaurant critic , later becoming the deputy literary editor of The Sunday Times in 1986 . She then embarked upon a career as a freelance journalist , writing for a number of newspapers and magazines . In 1998 , she brought out her first cookery book , How to Eat , which sold 300 @,@ 000 copies and became a best @-@ seller . She wrote her second book in 2000 , How to Be a Domestic Goddess , which won her the British Book Award for Author of the Year . 
 In 1999 , she hosted her own cooking show series , Nigella Bites , on Channel 4 , accompanied by another best @-@ selling cookbook . Nigella Bites won Lawson a Guild of Food Writers Award ; her 2005 ITV daytime chat show Nigella was met with a negative critical reaction and was cancelled after attracting low ratings . She hosted the Food Network 's Nigella Feasts in the United States in 2006 , followed by a three @-@ part BBC Two series , Nigella 's Christmas Kitchen , in the UK , which led to the commissioning of Nigella Express on BBC Two in 2007 . Her own cookware range , Living Kitchen , has a value of £ 7 million , and she has sold more than 3 million cookery books worldwide to date . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Lawson was born in Wandsworth , London , one of the daughters of Nigel Lawson , Baron Lawson of <unk> , a former Conservative MP , and a former Chancellor of the Exchequer in Margaret Thatcher 's government , and his first wife , Vanessa ( née Salmon ; 1936 – 1985 ) , a socialite , " celebrated beauty " and heiress to the J. Lyons and Co. fortune . Her parents both came from Jewish families . Her given name was originally suggested by her grandmother . Her family kept homes in Kensington and Chelsea . 
 Nigel and Vanessa Lawson divorced in 1980 . They both remarried : her father in 1980 to a House of Commons researcher , Therese <unk> ( to whom he was married until 2008 ) , and her mother , in the early 1980s , to philosopher A. J. Ayer ( they remained married until her mother 's death ) . As her father , Nigel , is a prominent political figure , some of the things she found frustrating were the judgements and pre @-@ conceptions about her . She has attributed her unhappiness as a child , in part , to the problematic relationship she had with her mother . 
 Lawson 's mother died of liver cancer in Westminster , London at the age of 48 . Lawson 's full @-@ blood siblings are her brother , Dominic , former editor of The Sunday Telegraph , sister Horatia , and sister <unk> , who died of breast cancer in 1993 during her early thirties ; She has a half @-@ brother , Tom , and a half @-@ sister , Emily , her father 's children by his second wife . Lawson is a cousin to both George Monbiot and Fiona Shackleton through the Salmon family . 
 = = = Ancestry = = = 
 Taking part in the third series of the BBC family @-@ history documentary series , Who Do You Think You Are ? , Lawson sought to uncover some of her family 's ancestry . She traced her ancestors to Ashkenazi Jews who originate from eastern Europe and Germany , leaving Lawson surprised not to have Iberian @-@ Sephardi ancestry in the family as she had believed . She also uncovered that her maternal great @-@ great @-@ great grandfather , Coenraad Sammes ( later Coleman Joseph ) , had fled to England from Amsterdam in 1830 to escape a prison sentence following a conviction for theft . It was his daughter , Hannah , who married Samuel Gluckstein , father @-@ in @-@ law and business partner of Barnett Salmon and father of Isidore and Montague Gluckstein , who together with Barnett founded J. Lyons and Co. in 1887 . 
 = = = Education = = = 
 Lawson spent some of her childhood in the Welsh village of Higher Kinnerton . She had to move schools nine times between the ages of 9 and 18 , and consequently she described her school years as difficult . " I was just difficult , disruptive , good at school work , but rude , I suspect , and too highly @-@ strung " , Lawson reflected . She was educated at several independent schools , at among other places , <unk> Place School , Queen 's Gate School and Godolphin and Latymer School . She worked for many department stores in London , and went on to graduate from the University of Oxford with a degree in medieval and modern languages . She lived in Florence , Italy for a period of time . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Early work = = = 
 Lawson originally worked in publishing , first taking a job under publisher Naim Attallah . At 23 , she began her career in journalism after Charles Moore had invited her to write for The Spectator . Her initial work at the magazine consisted of writing book reviews , after which period she became a restaurant critic there in 1985 . She became the deputy literary editor of The Sunday Times in 1986 at the age of 26 . 
 She occasionally drifted into the public 's eye , attracting publicity in 1989 when she admitted voting for Labour in an election as opposed to her father 's Conservative Party , and then criticised Margaret Thatcher in print . Regarding her political relationship with her father , Lawson has stated , " My father would never expect me to agree with him about anything in particular and , to be honest , we never talk about politics much . " 
 After her stint at The Sunday Times , she embarked upon a freelance writing career , realising that " I was on the wrong ladder . I didn 't want to be an executive , being paid to worry rather than think " . In the United Kingdom , she wrote for The Daily Telegraph , the Evening Standard , The Observer and The Times Literary Supplement , and penned a food column for Vogue and a makeup column for The Times Magazine , as well as working with Gourmet and Bon Appétit in the United States . After two weeks working on Talk Radio in 1995 , Lawson was sacked after she had stated her shopping was done for her , which was deemed incompatible with the radio station 's desired " common touch " . 
 = = = 1998 – 2002 : Cook book writing and Nigella Bites = = = 
 Lawson had an established sense of cooking from her childhood , having had a mother who enjoyed cooking . She conceived the idea of writing a cookbook after she observed a dinner party host in tears because of an unset crème caramel . How to Eat ( 1998 ) , featuring culinary tips on preparation and saving time , sold 300 @,@ 000 copies in the UK . The Sunday Telegraph dubbed it " the most valuable culinary guide published this decade . " 
 Its successor , How to be a Domestic Goddess ( 2000 ) , focuses primarily on baking . Of this second bestseller , The Times wrote of Lawson 's book , that it " is defined by its intimate , companionable approach . She is not issuing matronly instructions like Delia ; she is merely making sisterly suggestions " . Lawson rejected feminist criticism of her book , adding that " [ s ] ome people did take the domestic goddess title literally rather than ironically . It was about the pleasures of feeling like one rather than actually being one . " The book sold 180 @,@ 000 copies in four months , and won Lawson the title of Author of the Year at the British Book Awards in 2001 , fending off competition from authors such as J. K. Rowling . How to Eat and How to be a Domestic Goddess were published in the U.S. in 2000 and 2001 . As a result of the book 's success , The Observer took her on as a social affairs columnist . 
 Lawson next hosted her own cooking show television series , Nigella Bites , which ran from 1999 to 2001 on Channel 4 , followed by a Christmas special in 2001 . Victor Lewis @-@ Smith , a critic usually known for his biting comments , praised Lawson for being " formidably charismatic " . The first series of Nigella Bites averaged 1 @.@ 9 million viewers , and won her the Television Broadcast of the Year at the Guild of Food Writers Awards and the Best Television Food Show at the World Food Media Awards in 2001 . The show yielded an accompanying best @-@ selling recipe book , also called Nigella Bites , for which Waterstone 's book stores reported UK sales of over 300 @,@ 000 . The book won a W H Smith Award for Lifestyle Book of the Year . 
 The Nigella Bites series , which was filmed in her home in west London , was later broadcast on American television channels E ! and Style Network . Lawson said of the US release , " In the UK , my viewers have responded to the fact I 'm trying to reduce , not add to , their burden and I 'm looking forward to making that connection with Style viewers across the US " . Overall , Lawson was well received in the United States . Those who did criticise her often suggested she was too flirtatious ; a commentator from The New York Times said , " Lawson 's sexy roundness mixed with her speed @-@ demon technique makes cooking dinner with Nigella look like a prelude to an orgy " . The book of Nigella Bites became the second bestselling cook book of Christmas 2002 in America . The series was followed by Forever Summer with Nigella in 2002 on Channel 4 , the concept being , " that you cook to make you still feel as though you 're on holiday " . 
 In 2002 she also began to write a fortnightly cooking articles for The New York Times , and brought out a profitable line of kitchenware , called the Living Kitchen range , which is sold by numerous retailers . Her range 's value has continued to grow , starting at an estimated £ 2 million in 2003 . 
 = = = 2003 – 2006 : Nigella Feasts and BBC contract = = = 
 In November 2003 , Lawson oversaw the menu and preparations for a lunch hosted by Tony Blair at Downing Street for George W. Bush and his wife during their state visit to the UK . Laura Bush is said to be a fan of Lawson 's recipes and once included one of her soups as the starter for the 2002 presidential Christmas dinner . Lawson 's fifth book , Feast : Food that Celebrates Life , released in 2004 , made sales worth £ 3 million . London 's Evening Standard wrote that the book " works both as a practical manual and an engrossing read . ... Nobody else writes so openly about the emotional significance of food . " Lawson appeared frequently on American television in 2004 , conducting cookery slots on talk shows such as The Ellen DeGeneres Show . 
 In the UK in 2005 , Lawson started to host a daytime television chat show on ITV1 called Nigella , on which celebrity guests joined her in a studio kitchen . The first episode debuted with a disappointing 800 @,@ 000 viewers . The show was met with a largely negative critical reaction , and after losing 40 % of its viewers in the first week , the show was cancelled . She later commented to Radio Times that on her first show , she was almost too frightened to come out of her dressing room . Lawson added that having to pretend to be interested in the lives of the celebrities on her show became too much of an effort . 
 Her third food @-@ based television series , called Nigella Feasts , debuted on the USA 's Food Network in Autumn 2006 for a 13 @-@ week run . Time magazine wrote a favorable review of the show ; " the real appeal of Feasts ... is her unfussy , wry , practical approach to entertaining and quality comfort food . ... between the luscious camera shots and Lawson 's sensual enjoyment of eating , Feasts will leave you wishing for an invite " . 
 Lawson was next signed to BBC Two to host a three @-@ part cookery show entitled Nigella 's Christmas Kitchen , which began on 6 December 2006 and aired weekly . The first two episodes secured the second highest ratings of the week for BBC Two , with the first episode debuting with a strong 3 @.@ 5 million . The final episode went on to become the top show on BBC Two the week that it was aired . Nigella 's Christmas Kitchen won Lawson a second World Food Media Award in 2007 . Her influence as a food commentator was also demonstrated in late 2006 , when after she had lauded goose fat as being an essential ingredient for Christmas , sales percentages of the product increased significantly in the UK . Waitrose and Tesco both stated that goose fat sales had more than doubled , as well as Asda 's goose fat sales increasing by 65 % from the previous week . Similarly , after she advised using prunes in a recipe on Nigella 's Christmas Kitchen , Waitrose had increased sales of 30 % year on year . 
 = = = 2007 – 2009 : Nigella Express and Nigella 's Christmas = = = 
 Nigella 's Christmas Kitchen led to the commissioning of a 13 @-@ part cookery series entitled Nigella Express . She said " I wouldn 't describe them as junk " . The show became another ratings success and one of BBC Two 's top @-@ rated shows each week . The first episode debuted with 2 @.@ 85 million viewers , a high percentage above the channel 's slot average . The second episode 's viewing figures rose to 3 @.@ 3 million , and the series peaked at 3 @.@ 4 million on 22 October 2007 . 
 Her influence with the public was again demonstrated when sales of Riesling wine increased by 30 % in the UK after she had incorporated it into her Coq au Riesling recipe on Nigella Express . In December 2007 she appeared on BBC 's The Graham Norton Show and revealed that she had once eaten 30 pickled eggs for a £ 1 @,@ 000 bet , saying " How stupid to challenge me ! I made them all put their money on the table in front of me . The next day I had scrambled eggs for breakfast . " 
 Lawson came under criticism when viewers complained that she had gained weight since the debut episode of the series . The Guardian however , noted , " the food matches her appearance – flawless , polished and sexy " . The rights to Nigella Express were sold to Discovery Asia . The series was nominated at the 35th Daytime Emmy Awards in the United States for Outstanding Lifestyle Program , and Lawson herself for the Outstanding Lifestyle Host . 
 The accompanying book to Nigella Express was released in the UK in September 2007 , US in November 2007 , and in Australia in 2008 . Sharing the same name as the television series , the book became another best @-@ seller in the UK , and was outselling television chef Jamie Oliver by 100 @,@ 000 copies , according to Waterstone 's . It was reported that over 490 @,@ 000 copies had been sold by mid @-@ December in the UK . Furthermore , the book was number one for a period on Amazon UK 's bestselling books , and was ninth on their overall list of Christmas bestsellers in any category . Paul Levy of The Guardian wrote that the tone of the recipes was " just right . One of the appealing things about Nigella 's brief introductions to each of them is that she thinks not just as cook , but as eater , and tells you whether they 're messy , sticky or fussy . " In January 2008 , Lawson was estimated to have sold more than 3 million books worldwide . Her Christmas book was released in October 2008 and the television show in December of the same year . An American edition of the book " Nigella Christmas " with a different cover photograph was released in November 2009 with an accompanying book tour of several US cities and a special on the USA 's Food Network . 
 = = = 2010 – 2014 , Nigellissima and The Taste = = = 
 Lawson was featured as one of the three judges on a special battle of Iron Chef America , titled " The Super Chef Battle " , which pitted White House Executive Chef <unk> <unk> and Iron Chef Bobby Flay against chef <unk> <unk> and Iron Chef Mario Batali . This episode was originally broadcast on 3 January 2010 . Lawson 's cookbook Kitchen : Recipes from the Heart of the Home ( 2010 ) is a tie @-@ in with the TV series " Nigella Kitchen . " This was shown in the UK and on the Food Network in the United States . 
 Nigellissima : Instant Italian Inspiration was released in 2012 . The 8 part TV series entitled Nigellissima was broadcast by the BBC . Nigella Lawson obtained work experience in Italy during her gap year . 
 Lawson travelled to the United States in 2013 and starred alongside Anthony Bourdain in the reality cooking show The Taste . The UK version of the show began airing on 7 January 2014 on Channel 4 . Lawson was granted a visa to travel to the United States and traveled there for a continuation of the series . In 2014 Lawson was hired by a chocolate company to appear in an advertisement , the advertisement was filmed in New Zealand in May for a local confection manufacturer Whittaker 's . 
 = = = <unk> , Simply Nigella , Eurovision and MasterChef Australia = = = 
 The UK and US series of The Taste were both completed and in autumn 2015 Lawson began " Simply Nigella " , a BBC 2 show showing viewers how to cook a range of dishes that were simple to cook and similar to what viewers would make themselves . Lawson featured comfort food and dishes that were quick to prepare . She featured food that would make viewers feel better while they cooked it and also when they ate it . 
 On the 23rd May , Lawson was spokesperson for the United Kingdom revealing the voting results during the final of the Eurovision Song Contest 2015 . Lawson commented , " Yes , it 's true . Oui , c 'est <unk> . Ja , das ist wahr . " 
 It was reported on 18 January 2016 , that Lawson would make a return to Australian television , joining series 8 of MasterChef Australia as a guest judge , alongside the returning judges . 
 = = Presenting style and image = = 
 Though Lawson has enjoyed a successful career in cookery , she is not a trained chef , and does not like being referred to as a " celebrity chef " . Furthermore , she does not see herself as a cook or an expert in her field . Throughout Lawson 's television programmes , she emphasises that she cooks for her own pleasure , for enjoyment , and that she finds cooking therapeutic . When deciding upon which recipes to feature in her books , she takes the view of the eater , stating , " If it 's something I don 't want to carry on eating once I 'm full , then I don 't want the recipe ... I have to feel that I want to cook the thing again " . 
 Lawson has adopted a casual approach to cooking , stating , " I think cooking should be about fun and family . ... I think part of my appeal is that my approach to cooking is really relaxed and not rigid . There are no rules in my kitchen . " One editor , highlighting the technical simplicity of Lawson 's recipes , noted that " her dishes require none of the elaborate preparation called for by most TV chefs " . 
 Lawson has become renowned for her flirtatious manner of presenting , although she argues " It 's not meant to be flirtatious . ... I don 't have the talent to adopt a different persona . It 's intimate , not flirtatious " . The perceived overt sexuality of her presentation style has led to Lawson 's being called the " queen of food porn " . Many commentators have alluded to Lawson 's attractiveness , and she was once named as one of the world 's most beautiful women . She has been referred to as " stunningly beautiful , warm , honest , likeable and amazingly normal " , as well as being described as having " flawless skin , perfect white teeth , a voluptuous body , ample height and lots of lush , brown hair " . Nigella Lawson has been voted , Sexiest Celebrity Chef . The media have also noted Lawson 's ability to engage with both male and female viewers ; The Guardian wrote , " Men love her because they want to be with her . Women love her because they want to be her " . The chef , Gary Rhodes , spoke out against Lawson by suggesting that her viewers are attracted to her smile rather than the cooking itself . Despite often being labelled as a domestic goddess , she insists that she exhibits very few of the qualities associated with the title . 
 One critic summarised , " her descriptions of food can be a tangle of adjectives " . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Relationships and children = = = 
 Lawson was in a relationship with human rights lawyer Geoffrey Robertson QC until 1988 , when he left her for novelist Kathy Lette . 
 Lawson met journalist John Diamond in 1986 , when they were both writing for The Sunday Times . They married in Venice in 1992 and have a daughter , Cosima and a son , Bruno . Diamond was diagnosed with throat cancer in 1997 and died in March 2001 , aged 47 . One of his last messages to Lawson was , " How proud I am of you and what you have become . The great thing about us is that we have made us who we are . " His death occurred during the filming of Nigella Bites ; " I took a fortnight off . But I 'm not a great believer in breaks " , Lawson explained ; she suffered a bout of depression following the funeral . After Diamond 's death , Lawson kept all of the press clippings in what she called her " <unk> " . 
 = = = Charles Saatchi = = = 
 Lawson married art collector Charles Saatchi in September 2003 . Lawson was not always happy for unspecified reasons and admitted in 2012 that she sometimes said , " Please God , get me through the ordeal that is today . " 
 In June 2013 , photographs were published by The Sunday People of Lawson being grabbed around the neck by Saatchi , during an argument outside a London seafood restaurant . According to a witness , Lawson was very distressed by the incident . Saatchi later described the pictures as showing only a " playful tiff " and his trying to emphasise a point . After a police investigation of the incident , Saatchi was cautioned for assault , and it was reported that Lawson had left the family home . Lawson said in court Saatchi subjected her to " intimate terrorism " , that he threatened to finish her unless she cleared him in court . Subsequently while giving evidence Lawson claimed casual cruelty and controlling behaviour by Saatchi which made her unhappy and drove her to occasional drug use . She cited as examples that Saatchi prevented her entertaining at home and punished her for going to a birthday party of a woman friend . She was not beaten but was left emotionally scarred . 
 Saatchi announced his divorce from Lawson in early July , stating that he had " clearly been a disappointment to Nigella during the last year or so " and the couple had " become estranged and drifted apart " . Lawson made no public comment in response ; however , court papers showed that it was Lawson who filed for divorce , citing ongoing unreasonable behaviour . On 31 July 2013 , seven weeks after the incident , the pair was granted a decree nisi , ending their ten @-@ year marriage . They reached a private financial settlement . 
 = = = Assistants ' fraud trial = = = 
 On 27 November 2013 , a trial of the former couple 's two personal assistants , Italian @-@ born sisters Elisabetta and Francesca Grillo , began in R v Grillo and Grillo . The <unk> were accused of fraudulently using the credit cards of Saatchi 's private company . During court proceedings in early December , the sisters claimed that Lawson had permitted their use of the credit cards in exchange for their silence regarding her drug use . Questions regarding Lawson 's drug use were allowed by the judge as part of the sisters ' " bad character " defence . Lawson admitted to taking cocaine and cannabis but denied she had been addicted , stating , " I found it made an intolerable situation tolerable . " On 20 December 2013 , the two sisters were acquitted . Scotland Yard confirmed that Lawson would not be the subject of an investigation based on claims made in court that she consumed cocaine . The decision will be reviewed if new evidence comes to light . 
 It has been alleged that Charles Saatchi started a smear campaign against Lawson in the British media , through PR man Richard Hillgrove , relating to her drug use that began even before the trial was over . Lawyers for Lawson have demanded that Hillgrove remove comments about her made in his blog . By contrast Nigella Lawson claimed in court that ending her marriage to Saatchi and creating tolerable conditions for herself and her family was the answer . Since she freed herself from , " a brilliant but brutal man . " Lawson maintains she is " totally cannabis , cocaine , any drug , free . " 
 = = = Interests and beliefs = = = 
 Saatchi was worth a reputed £ 100 million . It widely began circulating in the media in early 2008 that Lawson had been quoted as saying her two children should not inherit any of the fortune . 
 Although both of Lawson 's parents are Jewish , her upbringing was non observant and Lawson herself identifies as an atheist . In one of her newspaper articles , she has shown a liberal attitude to sexuality ( " most [ women ] simply have , somewhere , a fantasy about having sex , in a non @-@ defining , non @-@ exclusive way , with other women . " ) 
 Lawson is a supporter of the Lavender Trust which gives support to young women with breast cancer . She first became involved with the charity in 2002 when she baked some lavender cupcakes to be auctioned at a fundraising event , which sold for a significant amount of money . She subsequently featured the recipe in her book Forever Summer with Nigella . 
 In December 2008 , Lawson caused controversy and was featured in various newspapers for publicly advocating wearing fur . She also remarked that she would love to kill a bear and then wear it . 
 It was revealed by leaked Whitehall documents in 2003 that Lawson declined an OBE from Queen Elizabeth II in 2001 . As the daughter of a life peer , Lawson is entitled to the courtesy style of " The Honourable " , and is thus named The Hon. Nigella Lawson ; however , she does not use this courtesy style . 
 Lawson has stated that she believes cooking is " a metaphor for life " , in the sense that " When you cook , you need structure [ ... ] but just as importantly you need to be able to loosen up and go with the flow [ ... ] you must not strive for perfection but , rather , acknowledge your mistakes and work out how you can rectify them " . She has described cooking as " a way of strengthening oneself " , in the sense that " being able to sustain oneself is the skill of the survivor " . 
 = = Television credits = = 
 = = Awards = = 
 2000 : British Book Award – Author of the Year for How to be a Domestic Goddess 
 2001 : WH Smith Book Award – How To Be A Domestic Goddess shortlisted for Lifestyle Book of the Year 
 2001 : Guild of Food Writers – Television Broadcast of the Year for Nigella Bites 
 2001 : World Food Media Award – Gold <unk> Best Television Food Show for Nigella Bites 
 2002 : WH Smith Book Awards – Lifestyle Book of the Year for Nigella Bites 
 2007 : World Food Media Award – Gold <unk> Best Food And / Or Drink Television Show for Nigella 's Christmas Kitchen 
 = Isbul = 
 Isbul ( Bulgarian : <unk> ) ( fl . 820s – 830s ) was the kavhan , or first minister , of the First Bulgarian Empire during the reigns of Omurtag , Malamir and Presian I. Appointed to the kavhan office under Omurtag , Isbul was a regent or co @-@ ruler of the underage Malamir and his successor Presian . 
 Under Malamir and Presian , Isbul headed Bulgaria 's successful campaigns against the Byzantines in southern Thrace and Macedonia , which led to a significant territorial expansion of the Bulgarian realm . As a co @-@ ruler of Malamir , Isbul also financed the construction of a water conduit in the capital Pliska . As second @-@ in @-@ command , Isbul held enormous power and wealth , and was unusually often mentioned beside the name of the ruler in inscriptions . Due to his merits , Isbul has been described as an architect of medieval Bulgarian statehood by historians . 
 = = Biography = = 
 The office of the kavhan was a hereditary title in the First Bulgarian Empire , monopolised by the members of the tentatively known " <unk> family " . In order to accede to that position , Isbul must have belonged to the <unk> family , which is indirectly evidenced by his Bulgar name . Historian Plamen Pavlov theorises that Isbul may have begun his career under the ruler Krum ( r . 803 – 814 ) , and by the time of Krum 's son Omurtag ( r . 815 – 831 ) , Isbul was already an influential noble . As he is referred to as a kavhan and regent of the next ruler , Malamir ( r . 831 – 836 ) , it is conjectured that he had been appointed to the office at some point during Omurtag 's rule . 
 The earliest record of Isbul is the stone epigraph known as the Malamir Chronicle , which states that Malamir " ruled together with kavhan Isbul " . Malamir was the youngest son of Omurtag and must have been considered too young to rule by himself , so that a regent had to be appointed . Omurtag specified Malamir as his heir because his eldest son , <unk> , was a Christian . The Byzantines hoped to take advantage of Bulgaria 's instability at the time , caused by the presence of the underage Malamir on the throne , and broke the long @-@ lasting peace established with the Byzantine – Bulgarian Treaty of 815 , which they had initially reaffirmed upon Malamir 's accession . In 836 , Isbul was in charge of the Bulgarian forces which repulsed the Byzantine invasion and proceeded to raid into Byzantine territory . 
 As part of this campaign , Isbul and Malamir captured the Thracian fortresses of <unk> ( near Adrianople , modern Edirne ) and <unk> ( modern <unk> ) . After conquering these two fortresses , the Bulgarian troops reached Philippopolis ( now Plovdiv ) . As the defence forces of the city had fled , Isbul and Malamir entered negotiations with the population in order to persuade them to cede the fortress . Pavlov is of the opinion that the war ended with a continuation of the peace of 815 . He believes that Byzantine Emperor Theophilos ( r . 829 – 842 ) was forced to make concessions to Bulgaria , which may have included the incorporation of Philippopolis and its close surroundings into the Bulgarian Empire . 
 During his time as co @-@ ruler and kavhan of Malamir , Isbul financed the construction of a water conduit ( aqueduct ) or fountain in Pliska , which he donated to Malamir . That construction was the occasion for a great feast , which the ruler organised , and for gifts to the nobility , all of it testifying to Isbul 's affluence . In the source about the construction , Isbul is hailed alongside Malamir : " May God let the God @-@ appointed ruler live a hundred years together with the kavhan Isbul " . Normally , such blessings were only directed at the ruler , and this is the only case from the First Bulgarian Empire which references another person . The inscription also mentions Isbul 's old age at the time . 
 After the surprise death of Malamir in 836 , the Bulgarian throne passed to Presian I ( 836 – 852 ) , who too was likely underage . As evidenced by the Presian Inscription from Philippi , Isbul retained his position as kavhan and his decisive influence in the Bulgarian court . In 837 , the Slavic tribe of the <unk> ( <unk> ) , who inhabited the lower Nestos ( Mesta ) River and Western Thrace near Drama , rose against their Byzantine rulers . The inscription of Philippi mentions large @-@ scale Bulgarian activity in the lands of the <unk> . The Bulgarian forces were led by Isbul , as well as the <unk> @-@ boil ( commander of the capital garrison ) and the head priest . As the inscription is damaged , it is unclear who Presian and Isbul supported in that conflict . However , during this campaign the Bulgarian army conquered most of Macedonia including Philippi , where the inscription was found . From that point on , Isbul disappears from the sources , and there is no information about the date and circumstances of his death . 
 = = Assessment and legacy = = 
 In his biography of Isbul , Pavlov underlines his " extraordinary merits for the development of the Bulgarian state " and describes him as " one of the architects of medieval Bulgarian statehood during the years of its rise " . Romanian historian Florin Curta emphasises the similarity of Isbul 's role to that of 8th @-@ century Mayors of the Palace in the Frankish lands under the Merovingian dynasty . 
 Isbul Point on Livingston Island of the South Shetland Islands , Antarctica , was named in honour of kavhan Isbul by the Antarctic Place @-@ names Commission of Bulgaria . Isbul also features as a character in Aleksandar <unk> 's opera Khan <unk> , which debuted at the Ruse Opera House in 1981 . In the opera , however , Isbul is erroneously described as the kavhan of the first Bulgarian ruler , <unk> . 
 = Courtney Love = 
 Courtney Michelle Love ( born Courtney Michelle Harrison , July 9 , 1964 ) is an American musician , actress , and visual artist . Prolific in the punk and grunge scenes of the 1990s , Love 's career has spanned over four decades . She became a fixture in alternative music as the frontwoman of Hole , drawing public attention for her uninhibited stage presence and confrontational lyrics , as well as her highly publicized personal life following her marriage to Kurt Cobain . 
 The daughter of psychotherapist Linda Carroll and Hank Harrison , Love had a nomadic early life ; she mainly grew up in Oregon and California , where she was in a series of short @-@ lived bands before landing roles in films by British director Alex Cox . After forming Hole in 1989 , she received substantial attention from underground rock press for the group 's debut album , produced by Kim Gordon , while the group 's second release , Live Through This ( 1994 ) , lent her a more high @-@ profile renown , receiving critical accolades and going multi @-@ platinum . In 1995 , she returned to acting , earning a Golden Globe Award nomination for her performance in Miloš Forman 's The People vs. Larry Flynt ( 1996 ) . Shortly after , Hole 's third release , Celebrity Skin ( 1998 ) , earned Love recognition as a mainstream musician and was nominated for multiple Grammy Awards . 
 Love continued to work as an actress , appearing in big @-@ budget pictures such as Man on the Moon ( 1999 ) and Trapped ( 2002 ) , and released her first solo album , America 's Sweetheart , in 2004 . In 2010 , she released Nobody 's Daughter as Hole , with a reformed band . Love debuted a new solo single in early 2014 , and also saw a return to acting in multiple TV series , including Empire . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Love was born Courtney Michelle Harrison on July 9 , 1964 , in San Francisco , California . Her mother , Linda Carroll ( née Risi ) , was employed at the UC San Francisco Hospital , and her father , Hank Harrison , was a publisher and road manager for the Grateful Dead . Love 's godfather is the founding Grateful Dead bassist Phil Lesh . Love 's mother , who was adopted as a child , was later revealed to be the biological daughter of novelist Paula Fox . Love 's great @-@ grandmother was screenwriter Elsie Fox , and Love learned in 2002 that , through marriage , her great uncle was actor Douglas Fairbanks . Love is of Cuban , Welsh , Irish , German , and English descent . 
 Love spent her early years in the Haight @-@ Ashbury district of San Francisco until her parents ' 1969 divorce , after which her father 's custody was withdrawn when her mother alleged that he had fed LSD to Love as a toddler . Love described her parents ' household as being full of " hairy , <unk> @-@ ass hippies running around naked . " According to sources , Love 's mother , who was studying to be a psychologist , had Love in therapy by the age of two . In 1970 , her mother moved the family to the rural community of <unk> , Oregon where they lived on a commune along the Mohawk River , while her mother completed her degree at the University of Oregon . Love was legally adopted by her then @-@ stepfather , Frank Rodriguez , with whom her mother had Love 's two half @-@ sisters , <unk> and Nicole , and adopted a brother Joshua , at three years old , from an African American family ; another half @-@ brother died in infancy of a heart defect when Love was ten . Love attended a Montessori school in Eugene , where she struggled academically and had trouble making friends . At age nine , she was diagnosed with mild autism . 
 In 1972 , Love 's mother divorced Rodriguez , remarried , and moved the family to New Zealand ; there , she enrolled Love at Nelson College for Girls , from which Love was eventually expelled . Love 's mother then sent her back to the United States , where she was raised in Portland , Oregon by her former stepfather and other family friends ; during this time , her mother gave birth to two of Love 's other half @-@ brothers , Tobias and Daniel . At age fourteen , Love was arrested for shoplifting a T @-@ shirt and was sent to Hillcrest Correctional Facility . She spent the following several years in foster care before becoming legally emancipated at age sixteen . She supported herself by working illegally as a stripper , adopting the last name " Love " to conceal her identity , which she came to use thereafter . She also worked various odd jobs , including picking berries at a farm in Troutdale , Oregon , and as a disc jockey . During this time , she enrolled at Portland State University , studying English and philosophy . Love has said that she " didn 't have a lot of social skills , " and that she learned them while frequenting gay clubs in Portland . 
 In 1981 , Love was granted a small trust fund that had been left by her adoptive grandparents , which she used to travel to Dublin , Ireland , where her biological father was living . While there , she enrolled in courses at Trinity College , studying theology for two semesters . She would later receive honorary patronage from Trinity 's University Philosophical Society in 2010 . In the United Kingdom , she became acquainted with musician Julian Cope and his band , The Teardrop Explodes , in Liverpool and briefly lived in his house . " They kind of took me in , " she recalled . " I was sort of a mascot ; I would get them coffee or tea during rehearsal . " In Cope 's autobiography , Head @-@ On , Love is referred to as " the adolescent . " After spending a year abroad , Love returned to Portland . In 1983 , she took a short @-@ lived job working as an erotic dancer in Taiwan , but was deported after the club was shut down by the government . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1981 – 1987 : Early projects = = = 
 Love initially began several music projects in the 1980s , first forming Sugar Babylon ( later Sugar Babydoll ) in Portland with friends Ursula Wehr and Robin Barbur . In 1982 , Love attended a Faith No More concert in San Francisco , and convinced the members to let her join as a singer . The group recorded material with Love as a vocalist , but , according to the band 's keyboardist Roddy Bottum , wanted a " male energy , " and Love was subsequently kicked out of the band ; she and Bottum , however , maintained a friendship in the years after . Love later formed the Pagan Babies with friend Kat Bjelland , whom she met at the Satyricon club in Portland in 1984 : " The best thing that ever happened to me in a way , was Kat , " Love said . Love asked Bjelland to start a band with her as a guitarist , and the two moved to San Francisco in June 1985 , where they recruited Love 's friend , bassist Jennifer Finch , and drummer Janis Tanaka . According to Bjelland , " [ Courtney ] didn 't play an instrument at the time " aside from keyboards , so Bjelland would transpose Love 's musical ideas on guitar for her . The group played several house shows and recorded one 4 @-@ track demo before disbanding in late 1985 . Following Pagan Babies , Love moved to Minneapolis where Bjelland had formed the group Babes in Toyland , and briefly worked as a concert promoter before returning to California . 
 Deciding to shift her focus to acting , Love enrolled at the San Francisco Art Institute , where she studied film with George Kuchar and was featured in one of his short films , titled Club Vatican . In 1985 , she submitted an audition tape for the role of Nancy Spungen in the Sid Vicious biopic Sid and Nancy ( 1986 ) , and was given a minor supporting role by director Alex Cox . After filming Sid and Nancy in New York City , Love worked at a peep show in Times Square and squatted at the ABC No Rio social center and Pyramid Club in the East Village . The same year , Cox cast her in a leading role in his following film , Straight to Hell ( 1987 ) , a spaghetti western starring Joe Strummer and Grace Jones , which was filmed in Spain in 1986 . The film caught the attention of Andy Warhol , who featured Love in an episode of Andy Warhol 's Fifteen Minutes with Robbie Nevil in a segment titled " C 'est la Vie . " She also had a part in the 1988 Ramones music video for " I Wanna Be Sedated " , appearing as a bride among dozens of party guests . 
 In 1988 , Love aborted her acting career and left New York , returning to the west coast , citing the " celebutante " fame she 'd attained as the central reason . " I hated it , " she recalled . " It was misery itself . " She returned to stripping in the small town of McMinnville , Oregon , where she was recognized by customers at the bar ; this prompted Love to go into isolation , and she relocated to Anchorage , Alaska : " I decided to move to Alaska because I needed to get my shit together and learn how to work , " Love said in retrospect . " So I went on this sort of vision quest . I got rid of all my earthly possessions . I had my bad little strip clothes and some big sweaters , and I moved into a trailer with a bunch of other strippers . " 
 = = = 1988 – 1991 : Beginnings of Hole = = = 
 At the end of 1988 , Love taught herself to play guitar and relocated to Los Angeles , where she placed an ad in a local music zine , reading : " I want to start a band . My influences are Big Black , Sonic Youth , and Fleetwood Mac . " Love recruited lead guitarist Eric Erlandson ; Lisa Roberts , her neighbor , as bassist ; and drummer Caroline Rue , whom she met at a Gwar concert . Love named the band Hole after a line from Euripedes ' Medea , as well as a conversation she had had with her mother , in which she told her that she " couldn 't walk around with a hole inside herself . " 
 Love continued to work at strip clubs in the band 's formative stages , saving money to purchase a backline and a touring van , and rehearsed at a studio in Hollywood that was loaned to her by the Red Hot Chili Peppers . Hole played their first show in November 1989 at Raji 's , a rock club in central Hollywood . The band 's debut single , " Retard Girl " , was issued in April 1990 through the Long Beach indie label Sympathy for the Record Industry , and was given air @-@ time by Rodney Bingenheimer 's local station , KROQ . That fall , the band appeared on the cover of Flipside , a Los Angeles @-@ based punk fanzine . In the spring of 1991 , the band released their second single , " Dicknail " , through Sub Pop Records . 
 With no wave , noise rock and grindcore bands being major influences on Love , Hole 's first studio album , Pretty on the Inside , captured a particularly abrasive sound and contained disturbing lyrics , described by Q magazine as " confrontational [ and ] genuinely uninhibited . " The record was released in September 1991 on Caroline Records , produced by Kim Gordon of Sonic Youth , with assistant production from Gumball 's Don Fleming . Though Love would later say it was " unlistenable " and " [ un ] melodic , " the album received generally positive critical reception from indie and punk rock critics and was labeled one of the twenty best albums of the year by Spin magazine . It also gained a following in the United Kingdom , charting at 59 on the UK Albums Chart , and its lead single , " Teenage Whore " , entered the country 's indie chart at number one . The underlying feminist slant of the album 's songs led many to mistakenly tag the band as being part of the riot <unk> movement , a movement that Love did not associate with . In support of the record , the band toured in Europe headlining with Mudhoney , and opening in the United States for The Smashing Pumpkins . They also performed at the Whisky a Go Go opening for Sonic Youth , and at CBGB in New York City . Love designed and distributed flyers promoting the shows , which included cutouts of women and young girls , as well as scattered lyrics and quotes from poems . 
 = = = 1992 – 1995 : Breakthrough = = = 
 After the release of Pretty on the Inside , Love began dating Kurt Cobain and became pregnant . During Love 's pregnancy , Hole recorded a cover of " Over the Edge " for a Wipers tribute album , and recorded their fourth single , " Beautiful Son , " which was released in April 1993 . Love and Cobain married in February 1992 , and after the birth of the couple 's daughter , Frances Bean Cobain , relocated to Carnation , Washington , and then to Seattle . On September 8 , 1993 , Love and Cobain made their only public performance together at the Rock Against Rape benefit in Hollywood , performing two duets , both acoustic versions , of " Pennyroyal Tea " and " Where Did You Sleep Last Night . " Love also performed electric versions of two new Hole songs , " Doll Parts " and " Miss World " , both of which were written for the band 's upcoming second release . 
 In October 1993 , Hole recorded their second album , titled Live Through This , in Atlanta , Georgia . The album featured a new lineup , with bassist Kristen Pfaff and drummer Patty Schemel . Live Through This was released on Geffen 's subsidiary DGC label in April 1994 , four days after Love 's husband , Cobain , was found dead of a self @-@ inflicted shotgun wound in their home . Two months later , in June 1994 , bassist Kristen Pfaff died of a heroin overdose , and Love recruited Melissa Auf der Maur for the band 's impending tour . Throughout the months preceding the tour , Love was rarely seen in public , spending time at her Seattle home , or visiting the Namgyal Buddhist Monastery in New York . 
 Live Through This was a commercial and critical success , hitting platinum sales in April 1995 and receiving numerous critical accolades . The success of the record combined with Cobain 's suicide resulted in a high level of publicity for Love , and she was featured on Barbara Walters ' 10 Most Fascinating People in 1995 . At Hole 's performance on August 26 , 1994 at the Reading Festival — Love 's first public performance following her husband 's death — she appeared onstage , tear @-@ drenched , with outstretched arms , mimicking crucifixion . John Peel wrote in The Guardian that Love 's disheveled appearance " would have drawn whistles of astonishment in Bedlam , " and that her performance " verged on the heroic ... Love steered her band through a set which dared you to pity either her recent history or that of the band ... the band teetered on the edge of chaos , generating a tension which I cannot remember having felt before from any stage . " The band performed a series of riotous concerts during the tour , with Love frequently appearing hysterical onstage , flashing crowds , stage diving , and getting into fights with audience members . In retrospect , Love said she " couldn 't remember much " of the shows as she was using drugs heavily at the time . 
 In February 1995 , Hole performed a well @-@ reviewed acoustic set on MTV Unplugged at the Brooklyn Academy of Music , and continued to tour late into the year , concluding their world tour with an appearance at the 1995 MTV Video Music Awards , where they were nominated for Best Alternative Video for " Doll Parts " . 
 = = = 1996 – 2000 : Acting and mainstream success = = = 
 After Hole 's world tour concluded in 1996 , Love made a return to acting , first in small roles in the Jean @-@ Michel Basquiat biopic Basquiat , and the drama Feeling Minnesota ( 1996 ) , before landing the co @-@ starring role of Larry Flynt 's wife , Althea , in Miloš Forman 's critically acclaimed 1996 film The People vs. Larry Flynt . 
 " I went for that part so hard , " she recalled , " because I felt a need for atonement for some cultural damage that had arisen out of me and things that I had done . By doing that role , I felt that , personally and creatively , I could exemplify why this was the most un @-@ glorious , unglamorous , fucked @-@ up thing . And then , bang ! , I was done with all that . I could fuck off and do something else . " 
 Despite Columbia Pictures ' reluctance to hire Love due to her troubled past , she received critical acclaim for her performance in the film after its release in December 1996 , earning a Golden Globe nomination for Best Actress , and a New York Film Critics Circle Award for Best Supporting Actress . Critic Roger Ebert called her work in the film " quite a performance ; Love proves she is not a rock star pretending to act , but a true actress . " She won several other awards from various film critic associations for the film , and consequently adopted a more polished public image ; during this time , she also had endeavors in fashion , modeling for Versace advertisements and appearing in Vogue Italia . 
 In late 1997 , Hole released a compilation album , My Body , the Hand Grenade , featuring rare singles and b @-@ sides , and an EP titled The First Session which consisted of the band 's first recording session in 1990 . In September 1998 , Hole released their third studio album , Celebrity Skin , which marked something of a transformation for Love , featuring a stark power pop sound as opposed to the group 's earlier punk rock influences . Love divulged her ambition of making an album where " art meets commerce ... there are no compromises made , it has commercial appeal , and it sticks to [ our ] original vision . " She said she was influenced by Neil Young , Fleetwood Mac , and My Bloody Valentine when writing the album . The Smashing Pumpkins ' Billy Corgan helped co @-@ write several songs on the album . Celebrity Skin was well received by critics ; Rolling Stone called the album " accessible , fiery and intimate — often at the same time ... a basic guitar record that 's anything but basic . " Celebrity Skin went on to go multi @-@ platinum , and topped " Best of Year " lists at Spin and the The Village Voice . The album garnered the band their only No. 1 hit single on the Modern Rock Tracks chart with the title track " Celebrity Skin . " The band promoted the album through MTV performances and at the 1998 Billboard Music Awards . Hole toured with Marilyn Manson on the Beautiful Monsters Tour in 1999 , but dropped out of the tour nine dates in after a dispute over production costs between Love and Manson ; Hole resumed touring with Imperial Teen . 
 Before the release and promotion of Celebrity Skin , Love and Fender designed a low @-@ priced Squier brand guitar , called Vista Venus . The instrument featured a shape inspired by Mercury , a little @-@ known independent guitar manufacturer ; Stratocaster , and Rickenbacker 's solid body guitars and had a single @-@ coil and a humbucker pickup , and was available in 6 @-@ string and 12 @-@ string versions . In an early 1999 interview , Love said about the Venus : " I wanted a guitar that sounded really warm and pop , but which required just one box to go dirty ... And something that could also be your first band guitar . I didn 't want it all <unk> out . I wanted it real simple , with just one pickup switch . " In 1999 , Love was awarded an Orville H. Gibson award for Best Female Rock Guitarist . During this time , she also starred opposite Jim Carrey in the Andy Kaufman biopic Man on the Moon ( 1999 ) , which was followed with a role as William S. Burroughs 's wife Joan Vollmer in Beat ( 2000 ) alongside Kiefer Sutherland . 
 After touring for Celebrity Skin finished , Auf der Maur left the band to tour with The Smashing Pumpkins ; Hole 's touring drummer Samantha Maloney left soon after . Love and Erlandson released the single " Be A Man " — an outtake from the Celebrity Skin sessions — for the soundtrack of the Oliver Stone film Any Given Sunday ( 1999 ) . The group became dormant in the following two years , and Love starred in several more films , including in Julie Johnson ( 2001 ) as Lili Taylor 's lesbian lover , for which she won an Outstanding Actress award at L.A. ' s <unk> , and in the thriller Trapped ( 2002 ) , alongside Kevin Bacon and Charlize Theron . In May 2002 , Hole officially announced their breakup amid continuing litigation with Universal Music Group over their record contract . 
 = = = 2001 – 2011 : Solo work , Hole revival = = = 
 With Hole in disarray , Love began a " punk rock femme supergroup " called Bastard during autumn 2001 , enlisting Schemel , Veruca Salt co @-@ frontwoman Louise Post , and bassist Gina Crosley . Though a demo was completed , the project never reached fruition . 
 In 2002 , Love began composing an album with songwriter Linda Perry of 4 Non @-@ Blondes , titled America 's Sweetheart , also reuniting with drummer Patty Schemel . Love signed with Virgin Records to release it , and initially recorded it in France , but was forced by the label to re @-@ record the entire album in the summer of 2003 . America 's Sweetheart was released in February 2004 , and received mixed reviews from critics . Charles Aaron of Spin called it a " jaw @-@ dropping act of artistic will and a fiery , proper follow @-@ up to 1994 's Live Through This " and awarded it eight out of ten stars , while The Village Voice said : " [ Love is ] willing to act out the dream of every teenage brat who ever wanted to have a glamorous , high @-@ profile <unk> , and she turns those egocentric nervous breakdowns into art . Sure , the art becomes less compelling when you 've been pulling the same stunts for a decade . But , honestly , is there anybody out there who fucks up better ? " The album sold less than 100 @,@ 000 copies . Love has publicly expressed her regret over the record several times , calling it " a crap record " and reasoning that her drug issues at the time were to blame . Shortly after the record was released , Love told Kurt Loder on TRL : " I cannot exist as a solo artist . It 's a joke . " Love also collaborated on a manga comic titled Princess Ai , illustrated by <unk> <unk> and Ai <unk> , which was released in July 2004 . 
 In 2006 , Love released a memoir , titled Dirty Blonde , and started recording what was going to be her second solo album , How Dirty Girls Get Clean , collaborating again with Perry and Smashing Pumpkins vocalist / guitarist Billy Corgan in the writing and recording . Love had written several songs , including an anti @-@ cocaine song titled " Loser Dust " , during her time in rehab in 2005 . She told Billboard : " My hand @-@ eye coordination was so bad [ after the drug use ] , I didn 't even know chords anymore . It was like my fingers were frozen . And I wasn 't allowed to make noise [ in rehab ] ... I never thought I would work again . " Some tracks and demos from the album ( initially planned for release in 2008 ) were leaked on the internet in 2006 , and a documentary entitled The Return of Courtney Love , detailing the making of the album , aired on the British television network in the fall of that year . A rough acoustic version of " Never Go Hungry Again " , recorded during an interview for The Times in November , was also released . Incomplete audio clips of the song " Samantha " , originating from an interview with NPR , were also distributed on the internet in 2007 . 
 In June 2009 , NME published an article detailing Love 's plan to reunite Hole and release a new album , Nobody 's Daughter . In response , former Hole guitarist Eric Erlandson stated in Spin magazine that contractually no reunion could take place without his involvement ; therefore Nobody 's Daughter would remain Love 's solo record , as opposed to a " Hole " record . Love responded to Erlandson 's comments in a Twitter post , claiming " he 's out of his mind , Hole is my band , my name , and my Trademark " . Nobody 's Daughter was released worldwide as a Hole album on April 27 , 2010 . For the new line @-@ up , Love recruited guitarist <unk> Larkin , Shawn Dailey ( bass guitar ) , and Stu Fisher ( drums , percussion ) . Nobody 's Daughter featured material written and recorded for Love 's unfinished solo album , How Dirty Girls Get Clean , including " Pacific Coast Highway " , " Letter to God " , " Samantha " , and " Never Go Hungry " , although they were re @-@ produced in the studio with Larkin and engineer Michael Beinhorn . The album 's subject matter was largely centered on Love 's tumultuous life between 2003 and 2007 , and featured a polished folk @-@ rock sound , and featuring more acoustic guitar work than found on previous Hole albums . 
 The first single from Nobody 's Daughter was " Skinny Little Bitch " , released in promotion of the album in March 2010 . The album received mixed reviews . Robert Sheffield of Rolling Stone gave the album three out of five stars , saying that Love " worked hard on these songs , instead of just babbling a bunch of druggy bullshit and assuming people would buy it , the way she did on her 2004 flop , America 's Sweetheart . " Sal Cinquemani of Slant Magazine also gave the album three out of five stars , saying " It 's Marianne Faithfull 's substance @-@ ravaged voice that comes to mind most often while listening to songs like " Honey " and " For Once in Your Life . " The latter track is , in fact , one of Love 's most raw and vulnerable vocal performances to date ... the song offers a rare glimpse into the mind of a woman who , for the last 15 years , has been as famous for being a rock star as she 's been for being a victim . " Love and the band toured internationally from 2010 into late 2012 promoting the record , after which she dropped the Hole name and returned to a solo career . 
 = = = 2012 – present : Career expansion = = = 
 In May 2012 , Love debuted an art collection at Fred Torres Collaborations in New York titled " And She 's Not Even Pretty " , which contained over forty drawings and paintings by Love composed in ink , colored pencil , pastels , and watercolors . She then collaborated with Michael Stipe on the track " Rio Grande " for Johnny Depp 's sea shanty album Son of Rogues Gallery and also contributed guest vocals and co @-@ wrote a track on Fall Out Boy 's album , Save Rock and Roll ( 2013 ) . 
 After solo performances in December 2012 and January 2013 , Love appeared in advertisements for Yves Saint Laurent alongside Kim Gordon and Ariel Pink . Love completed a solo tour of North America in the summer of 2013 , which was purported to be in promotion of an upcoming solo album ; however , it was ultimately dubbed a " greatest hits " tour , and featured songs from Love 's and Hole 's back catalogue . Love told Billboard at the time that she had recorded eight songs in the studio . " [ These songs ] are not my usual ( style ) , " Love said . " I don 't have any Fleetwood Mac references on it . Usually I always have a Fleetwood Mac reference as well as having , like , Big Black references . These are very unique songs that sort of magically happened . " 
 On April 22 , 2014 , Love debuted the song " You Know My Name " on BBC Radio 6 to promote her tour of the United Kingdom . It was released as a double A @-@ side single with the song " Wedding Day " on May 4 , 2014 on her own label Cherry Forever Records via Kobalt Label Services . The tracks were produced by Michael Beinhorn , and feature Tommy Lee on drums . In an interview with the BBC , Love revealed that she and former Hole guitarist Eric Erlandson had reconciled , and had been rehearsing new material together , along with former bassist Melissa Auf der Maur and drummer Patty Schemel , though did not confirm a reunion of the band . On May 1 , 2014 , in an interview with Pitchfork , Love commented further on the possibility of Hole reuniting , saying : " I 'm not going to commit to it happening , because we want an element of surprise . There 's a lot of i 's to be dotted and t 's to be crossed . " 
 In 2014 , Love was cast in several television series in supporting parts , including the FX series Sons of Anarchy , Revenge , and in Lee Daniels ' network series Empire in a recurring guest role as Elle Dallas . The track " Walk Out on Me " featuring Love was included on the Empire : Original Soundtrack from Season 1 album , which debuted at number 1 on the Billboard 200 . Love 's contribution to the album was critically acclaimed . Alexis Petridis of The Guardian praised the track , saying : " The idea of Courtney Love singing a ballad with a group of gospel singers seems faintly terrifying ... the reality is brilliant . Love ’ s voice fits the careworn lyrics , effortlessly summoning the kind of ravaged darkness that Lana Del Rey nearly ruptures herself trying to conjure up . " 
 In addition to television acting , Love collaborated with theater producer Todd Almond , starring in Kansas City Choir Boy , a collaborative " pop opera " which showed at the Manhattan arts center Here during their annual Prototype festival in January 2015 . The show toured later in the year , with performances in Boston and Los Angeles . 
 In the spring of 2015 , Love joined Lana Del Rey on her Endless Summer Tour , performing as an opener on the tour 's eight west coast shows . During her tenure on Del Rey 's tour , Love debuted a new single , " Miss Narcissist , " released on <unk> ' independent label Ghost Ramp . She also was cast in a supporting role in James Franco 's film The Long Home , based on William Gay 's novel of the same name , marking her first film role in over ten years . In January 2016 , Love released a clothing line in collaboration with Sophia <unk> titled " Love , Courtney , " featuring eighteen pieces reflecting Love 's style over the course of her career . In May 2016 , it was announced that Love was cast in a lead role in The Possibility of Fireflies , an adaptation of the novel by Dominique Paul , directed by Deborah Chow . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 = = = Songwriting and lyrics = = = 
 Spin 's October 1991 review of Hole 's first album noted Love 's layering of harsh and abrasive riffs buried more sophisticated musical arrangements . In 1998 , Love stated that Hole had " always been a pop band . We always had a subtext of pop . I always talked about it , if you go back ... what 'll sound like some weird Sonic Youth tuning back then to you was sounding like the Raspberries to me , in my demented pop framework " . 
 Love writes from a female 's point of view , and her lyrics have been described as " literate and mordant " and noted by scholars for " articulating a third @-@ wave feminist consciousness . " She has repeatedly stated that lyrics are the most important component of songwriting for her , saying : " I want it to look just as good on the page as it would if it was in a poetry book " . A great deal of her songwriting has been <unk> in nature . Common themes present in Love 's songs during her early career included body image , rape , suicide , conformity , elitism , pregnancy , prostitution , and death . In a 1991 interview with Everett True , Love said : " I try to place [ beautiful imagery ] next to fucked up imagery , because that 's how I view things ... I sometimes feel that no one 's taken the time to write about certain things in rock , that there 's a certain female point of view that 's never been given space " . Her later work was more lyrically introspective . Celebrity Skin and America 's Sweetheart deal with celebrity life , Hollywood , and drug addiction , while continuing Love 's interest in vanity and body image . Nobody 's Daughter was lyrically reflective of Love 's past relationships and her struggle to sobriety , with the majority of its lyrics written while she was in rehab in 2006 . Poetry has often been a major influence on her writing ; Love said she had " always wanted to be a poet , but there was no money in it . " She has named the works of T.S. Eliot and Charles Baudelaire as influential . 
 = = = Voice and instruments = = = 
 Love possesses a contralto vocal range , and her vocal style has been described as " raw and distinctive . " She has referred to herself as " a shit guitar player " , further commenting : " I can write a song , but I have trouble with the execution of it " . According to Love , she never wanted to be a singer , but rather aspired to be a skilled guitarist : " I 'm such a lazy bastard though that I never did that " , Love said . " I was always the only person with the nerve to sing , and so I got stuck with it " . She has been regularly noted by critics for her husky vocals as well as her " banshee [ -like ] " screaming abilities . Her vocals have been compared to those of Johnny Rotten , and David Fricke of Rolling Stone described them as " lung @-@ busting " and " a corrosive , lunatic wail " . Upon the release of Hole 's 2010 album , Nobody 's Daughter , Amanda Petrusich of Pitchfork compared Love 's raspy , unpolished vocals to those of Bob Dylan . 
 Love has often played Fender guitars throughout her career , including a Jaguar and a vintage 1965 Jazzmaster , the latter of which was purchased by the Hard Rock Cafe and is on display in New York City . Love is seen playing her Jazzmaster in the music video for " Miss World . " Earlier in Hole 's career , between 1989 and 1991 , Love primarily played a Rickenbacker 425 because she " preferred the 3 / 4 neck " , but she destroyed the guitar onstage at a 1991 concert opening for The Smashing Pumpkins . She also often played a guitar made by Mercury , an obscure company that manufactured custom guitars , which she purchased in 1992 . Fender 's Vista Venus , designed by Love in 1998 , was partially inspired by Rickenbacker guitars as well as her Mercury . Love 's setup has included Fender tube gear , Matchless , Ampeg , Silvertone and a solid @-@ state 1976 Randall Commander . During her 2010 and more recent tours , Love has played a Rickenbacker 360 onstage . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Love has been candid about her diverse musical influences , the earliest being Patti Smith and the Pretenders , whom she discovered while in juvenile hall . As a teenager , she named Flipper , Kate Bush , Soft Cell , Joni Mitchell , Lou Reed , and Dead Kennedys among her favorite artists , as well as several new wave and post @-@ punk bands , such as Echo and the Bunnymen , The Smiths , Siouxsie and the Banshees , Television , Bauhaus , and Joy Division . While in Ireland at age fifteen , she saw The Virgin Prunes perform live in Dublin , and said the experience " framed her [ music career ] . " Her varying genre interests were illustrated in a 1991 interview with Flipside , in which she stated : " There 's a part of me that wants to have a grindcore band and another that wants to have a Raspberries @-@ type pop band " . Love also embraced the influence of experimental artists and punk rock groups , including Sonic Youth , Swans , Big Black , <unk> <unk> , the Germs , and The Stooges . While writing Celebrity Skin , Love was mainly influenced by Neil Young and My Bloody Valentine . She also cited her contemporary PJ Harvey as an influence , saying , " The one rock star that makes me know I 'm shit is Polly Harvey . I 'm nothing next to the purity that she experiences . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 = = = Relationships and marriages = = = 
 She was briefly married to James Moreland ( vocalist of The Leaving Trains ) in 1989 for several months , but has said that Moreland was a transvestite and that their marriage was " a joke " , ending in an annulment filed by Love . After forming Hole in 1989 , Love and bandmate Eric Erlandson had a romantic relationship for over a year , and she also briefly dated Billy Corgan in 1991 , with whom she has maintained a volatile friendship over the years . 
 Her most documented romantic relationship was with Kurt Cobain . It is uncertain when they first met ; according to Love , she first met Cobain at a Dharma Bums show in Portland where she was doing a spoken word performance . According to Michael Azerrad , the two met at the Satyricon nightclub in Portland in 1989 , though Cobain biographer Charles Cross stated the date was actually February 12 , 1990 , and that Cobain playfully wrestled Love to the floor after she commented to him in passing that he looked like Dave <unk> of Soul Asylum . Love 's bandmate Eric Erlandson stated that both he and Love were formally introduced to Cobain in a parking lot after a Butthole Surfers concert at the Hollywood Palladium in 1991 . The two later became reacquainted through Jennifer Finch , one of Love 's longtime friends and former bandmates . 
 Love and Cobain began dating in the fall of 1991 , and were married on Waikiki Beach in Honolulu , Hawaii , on February 24 , 1992 . Love wore a satin and lace dress once owned by actress Frances Farmer , and Cobain wore green pajamas . Six months later , on August 18 , the couple 's only child , a daughter , Frances Bean Cobain , was born . In April 1994 , Cobain died of a self @-@ inflicted gunshot wound in their Seattle home while Love was in rehab in Los Angeles . During their marriage , and after Cobain 's death , Love became something of a hate @-@ figure among some of Cobain 's fans . In reflecting on their relationship , Love said : " I think that it looked like it was headed for doom , but it didn 't feel like it was headed for doom on a daily basis . We went mountain biking ; we would go camping . We were damn normal . " After his cremation , Love divided portions of Cobain 's ashes , some of which she kept in a teddy bear and in an urn . Another portion of his ashes was taken by Love to the Namgyal Buddhist Monastery in Ithaca , New York in 1994 , where they were ceremonially blessed by Buddhist monks and mixed into clay which was made into memorial sculptures . 
 Between 1996 and 1999 , Love dated her The People vs. Larry Flynt co @-@ star Edward Norton , and was also linked to comedian Steve Coogan in the early 2000s . 
 = = = Health = = = 
 Love has struggled with substance abuse problems throughout her life . She took numerous opiates in her early adult years , and tried cocaine at age 19 . She became addicted to heroin in the early 1990s , and her addiction was thrust into media spotlight in 1992 when Vanity Fair published an article by journalist Lynn Hirschberg which stated that Love was addicted to heroin during her pregnancy ; this resulted in the custody of Love and Cobain 's newborn daughter , Frances , being temporarily withdrawn in a Los Angeles County court and placed with Love 's sister . Love claimed she was misquoted in the piece , and asserted that she had immediately quit using the drug during her first trimester after she discovered she was pregnant . 
 Love quit using heroin in 1996 at the insistence of director Miloš Forman when she was cast in a leading role in The People vs. Larry Flynt . Love was ordered to take multiple urine tests under the supervision of Columbia Pictures while filming the movie , and passed all of them . On July 9 , 2004 , Love 's 40th birthday , she attempted to commit suicide at her Manhattan apartment , and was taken to Bellevue Hospital , allegedly incoherent , and put on a 72 @-@ hour watch . According to police , she was believed to be a potential " danger to herself , " but was deemed mentally sound and released to a rehab facility two days later . In 2005 and 2006 , after making several public appearances clearly intoxicated ( namely on the Late Show with David Letterman and the Comedy Central Roast of Pamela Anderson ) and suffering drug @-@ related arrests and probation violations , Love was sentenced to six months in lockdown rehab due to struggles with prescription drugs and cocaine . She has stated she has been sober since 2007 , and in May 2011 , confirmed her sobriety . 
 = = = Legal troubles = = = 
 Love 's legal troubles have been widely publicized throughout her career . On July 4 , 1995 , at the Lollapalooza Festival in George , Washington , Love punched musician Kathleen Hanna in the face after alleging she had made a joke about her daughter . Love was charged with assault , to which she pleaded guilty , and was sentenced to anger management classes . The same year , she was arrested in Melbourne after disrupting a Qantas Airlines flight after getting into an argument with a stewardess . In 1998 , Love punched Los Angeles Times journalist <unk> Cohen in the face after she attempted to take a photo of her at a party , though the suit was settled out of court for an undisclosed sum . 
 Several years later , in February 2003 , Love was banned from Virgin Airlines by founder Richard Branson after being arrested at Heathrow Airport for disrupting a flight . The same year , in October , in the midst of what Love would later admit was a serious cocaine and prescription drug addiction , she was arrested in Los Angeles after breaking several windows of her producer and then @-@ boyfriend James Barber 's home , and was charged with being under the influence of a controlled substance . The ordeal resulted in custody of daughter Frances Bean being withdrawn from Love . In 2004 , Love was arrested in New York City for allegedly striking a fan with a microphone stand at a concert . 
 In 2009 , fashion designer Dawn <unk> brought a libel suit against Love concerning a defamatory post Love made on her Twitter account , which was settled for $ 450 @,@ 000 . Six years later , <unk> filed another lawsuit against Love for further defamatory Twitter posts , and Love paid a further $ 350 @,@ 000 in recompense . A similar suit was brought against Love by her former attorney Rhonda Holmes in 2014 , who also accused Love of online defamation , seeking $ 8 million in damages . It was the first case of alleged Twitter @-@ based libel in U.S. history to make it to trial . The jury , however , found in Love 's favor . 
 On June 17 , 2015 , Deadline.com reported that Courtney Love , Kurt Cobain 's widow , had sent cease and desist letters against theaters showing <unk> in Bleach claiming , “ A false accusation of criminal behavior is defamatory … which entitles Ms. Cobain to both actual and presumed damages " . The letter also states " We hereby demand again that you immediately cease any and all plans for exhibition or promotion of the Film . If we do not hear from you within five days , we are required to immediately pursue all available civil legal remedies on behalf of our client against you . " To date no lawsuit has been filed on Ms. Cobain 's behalf . The producers of the film responded to the letters by — in part — stating , “ Courtney Love ’ s uninformed accusations and efforts to discredit the film are totally off base . Courtney Love and her lawyers clearly don ’ t like that the film presents a compelling case for re @-@ opening the investigation into Kurt ’ s death . They should respect the First Amendment and let people decide for themselves . ” 
 = = = Religious and political views = = = 
 Love has practiced several religions , including Catholicism , Episcopalianism and New Age religions , but has said that Buddhism is the " most transcendent " path for her . She has studied and practiced both Tibetan and Nichiren Buddhism since 1989 , and is a member of the Soka Gakkai International , a global lay Buddhist organization . 
 Love is a Democrat . In 2000 , she gave a speech at the Million Mom March to advocate stricter gun control laws in the United States , calling the country 's gun laws " nihilistic and barbaric " , and urging stringent registration of guns , licensing of gun owners , and thorough evaluation of legal and mental health records . In 2016 , Love endorsed Hillary Clinton 's presidential campaign . 
 In 2000 , Love also publicly advocated for reform of the record industry in a personal letter published by Salon . In the letter , Love stated : " It 's not piracy when kids swap music over the Internet using Napster or <unk> or <unk> or <unk> or beaming their CDs into a <unk> or <unk> music locker . It 's piracy when those guys that run those companies make side deals with the cartel lawyers and label heads so that they can be " the labels ' friend , " and not the artists . " In a subsequent interview with Carrie Fisher , Love divulged that she was interested in starting a union for recording artists , and also discussed race relations in the music industry , advocating for record companies to " put money back into the black community [ whom ] white people have been stealing from for years . " She also cited Limp Bizkit 's Fred Durst as an example of " a white guy [ getting ] to express a black man 's rage with all the privileges of [ being ] a white guy . " Love has also consistently advocated for LGBT rights , and identifies as a feminist . 
 = = Philanthropy = = 
 In 1993 , Love and husband Kurt Cobain performed an acoustic set together at the Rock Against Rape benefit in Los Angeles , which raised awareness and provided resources for victims of sexual abuse . Love has also contributed to amfAR 's AIDS research benefits and held live musical performances at their events . In 2009 , Love performed a benefit concert for the RED Campaign at Carnegie Hall alongside Laurie Anderson , Rufus Wainwright , and Scarlett Johansson , with proceeds going to AIDS research . In May 2011 , she attended Mariska Hargitay 's Joyful Heart Foundation event for victims of child abuse , rape , and domestic violence , donating six of husband Kurt Cobain 's personal vinyl records for auction . 
 Love has also participated with LGBT youth charities , specifically with the Los Angeles Gay and Lesbian Center , where she has taken part in performances at the center 's " An Evening with Women " events . The proceeds of the event help provide food and shelter for homeless youth ; services for seniors ; legal assistance ; domestic violence services ; health and mental health services , and cultural arts programs . Love participated with Linda Perry for the event again in 2012 , relating her experiences as a nomadic teenager and having to live on the street : 
 This really resonates with me , [ because ] I was a kid from Oregon , and I came to Hollywood like a lot of people do , and you know , what happens is that we end up on the street ... and if you 're gay , or lesbian , or transgendered — the more " outside " you are , the more screwed you are in a lot of ways ... Seven thousand kids in Los Angeles a year go out on the street , and forty percent of those kids are gay , lesbian , or transgendered . They come out to their parents , and become homeless . [ The charity helps them ] get sent to the right foster care , they can get medical help , food , clothing ... and for whatever reason , I don 't really know why , but gay men have a lot of foundations , I 've played many of them — but the lesbian side of it doesn 't have as much money and / or donors , so we 're excited that this has grown to cover women and women 's affairs . 
 = = Cultural impact = = 
 Love had a significant impact on female @-@ fronted alternative acts and performers , particularly the Riot grrrl movement , with Hole 's first album , Pretty on the Inside . She has been cited as particularly influential to young female instrumentalists , once infamously proclaiming : " I want every girl in the world to pick up a guitar and start screaming . " " I strap on that motherfucking guitar and you cannot fuck with me . That 's my feeling , " she said . In The Electric Guitar : A History of an American Icon , it is noted that , 
 " [ Love ] truly lived up to Paul Westerberg 's ( The Replacements ) assessment of pretty girls ' playing makeup / wearing guitar ' ... She frequently stood on stage , microphone in hand and foot on monitor , and simply let her Fender guitar dangle around her neck . She truly embodied the empowerment that came with playing the electric guitar ... Love depended heavily upon her male lead guitar foil Eric Erlandson , but the rest of her band remained exclusively female throughout several lineup changes . " 
 Time deemed Hole 's Live Through This to be supplemented by " primal guitar riffs and high @-@ IQ lyrics . " Having sold over 3 million records in the United States alone , Hole became one of the most successful rock bands of all time fronted by a woman . In 2015 , the Phoenix New Times declared Love the number one greatest female rock star of all time , saying : " To build a perfect rock star , there are several crucial ingredients : musical talent , physical attractiveness , tumultuous relationships , substance abuse , and public meltdowns , just to name a few . These days , Love seems to have rebounded from her epic tailspin and has leveled out in a slightly more normal manner , but there 's no doubt that her life to date is the type of story people wouldn 't believe in a novel or a movie . " Simon Castles of The Sydney Morning Herald commented on Love 's cultural status and media ridicule , writing : " [ She ] has been painted as part grunge Baby Jane , part Yoko Ono for Generation X , and part Lady Macbeth ... what Courtney Love did do was live wild . She took drugs and trusted others could look after themselves . She flirted with self @-@ destruction . She got into fights . She burned with ambition . She flaunted her sexuality and was upfront with her desire . " 
 Among the alternative musicians who have cited Love as an influence are : Scout Niblett ; Brody Dalle of The Distillers ; Dee Dee Penny of Dum Dum Girls ; and Nine Black Alps . Contemporary female pop artists Lana Del Rey , Avril Lavigne , Tove Lo , and Sky Ferreira have also cited Love as an influence . Love has frequently been recognized as the most high @-@ profile contributor of feminist music during the 1990s , and for " subverting [ the ] mainstream expectations of how a woman should look , act , and sound . " According to music journalist Maria Raha , " Whether you love Courtney [ Love ] or hate her , Hole was the highest @-@ profile female @-@ fronted band of the ' 90s to openly and directly sing about feminism . " She has also been noted as a gay icon since the mid @-@ 1990s , and has jokingly referred to her fanbase as consisting of " females , gay guys , and a few advanced , evolved heterosexual men " . 
 Love 's aesthetic image , particularly in the early 1990s , also became influential , and was dubbed " <unk> " by critics and media . The subversive fashion mainly consisted of thrift shop <unk> dresses accompanied by smeared makeup and red lipstick ; MTV reporter Kurt Loder described Love as looking like " a debauched rag doll " onstage . Love later said she had been influenced by the fashion of Chrissy Amphlett of the Divinyls . 
 The artist Barbara Kruger used one of Love 's quotes on her NYC bus project . Indie pop punk band The Muffs named their second album , Blonder and Blonder ( 1995 ) after a quote by Love , and a recording of Love talking about a stolen dress appears as the track " Love " on the band 's 2000 compilation album Hamburger . There is also a band named after her . 
 = = Discography = = 
 Hole 
 Pretty on the Inside ( 1991 ) 
 Live Through This ( 1994 ) 
 Celebrity Skin ( 1998 ) 
 Nobody 's Daughter ( 2010 ) 
 Courtney Love 
 America 's Sweetheart ( 2004 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = Jupiter trojan = 
 The Jupiter trojans , commonly called Trojan asteroids or just Trojans , are a large group of asteroids that share the orbit of the planet Jupiter around the Sun . Relative to Jupiter , each trojan <unk> around one of Jupiter 's two stable Lagrangian points , L4 , lying 60 ° ahead of the planet in its orbit , and L5 , 60 ° behind . Jupiter trojans are distributed in two elongated , curved regions around these Lagrangian points with an average semi @-@ major axis of about 5 @.@ 2 AU . 
 The first Jupiter trojan discovered , 588 Achilles , was spotted in 1906 by German astronomer Max Wolf . A total of 6 @,@ 178 Jupiter trojans have been found as of January 2015 . By convention they are each named after a mythological figure from the Trojan War , hence the name " Trojan " . The total number of Jupiter trojans larger than 1 km in diameter is believed to be about 1 million , approximately equal to the number of asteroids larger than 1 km in the asteroid belt . Like main @-@ belt asteroids , Jupiter trojans form families . 
 Jupiter trojans are dark bodies with reddish , featureless spectra . No firm evidence of the presence of water , or any other specific compound on their surface has been obtained , but it is thought that they are coated in tholins , organic polymers formed by the Sun 's radiation . The Jupiter trojans ' densities ( as measured by studying binaries or rotational <unk> ) vary from 0 @.@ 8 to 2 @.@ 5 g · cm − 3 . Jupiter trojans are thought to have been captured into their orbits during the early stages of the Solar System 's formation or slightly later , during the migration of giant planets . 
 The term " trojan " has come to be used more generally to refer to other small Solar System bodies with similar relationships to larger bodies : for example , there are both Mars trojans and Neptune trojans , and Saturn has trojan moons . NASA has announced the discovery of an Earth trojan . The term " Trojan asteroid " is normally understood to specifically mean the Jupiter trojans because the first Trojans were discovered near Jupiter 's orbit and Jupiter currently has by far the most known Trojans . 
 = = Observational history = = 
 In 1772 , Italian @-@ born mathematician Joseph @-@ Louis Lagrange , in studying the restricted three @-@ body problem , predicted that a small body sharing an orbit with a planet but lying 60 ° ahead or behind it will be trapped near these points . The trapped body will librate slowly around the point of equilibrium in a tadpole or horseshoe orbit . These leading and trailing points are called the L4 and L5 Lagrange points . However , no asteroids trapped in Lagrange points were observed until more than a century after Lagrange 's hypothesis . Those associated with Jupiter were the first to be discovered . 
 E. E. Barnard made the first recorded observation of a trojan , ( <unk> ) 1999 <unk> ( identified as <unk> RD at the time ) , in 1904 , but neither he nor others appreciated its significance at the time . Barnard believed he saw the recently discovered Saturnian satellite Phoebe , which was only two arc @-@ minutes away in the sky at the time , or possibly an asteroid . The object 's identity was not realized until its orbit was calculated in 1999 . 
 The first recognized discovery of a trojan occurred in February 1906 , when astronomer Max Wolf of Heidelberg @-@ <unk> State Observatory discovered an asteroid at the L4 Lagrangian point of the Sun – Jupiter system , later named 588 Achilles . In 1906 – 1907 two more Jupiter trojans were found by fellow German astronomer August <unk> ( 624 Hektor and 617 Patroclus ) . Hektor , like Achilles , belonged to the L4 swarm ( " ahead " of the planet in its orbit ) , whereas Patroclus was the first asteroid known to reside at the L5 Lagrangian point ( " behind " the planet ) . By 1938 , 11 Jupiter trojans had been detected . This number increased to 14 only in 1961 . As instruments improved , the rate of discovery grew rapidly : by January 2000 , a total of 257 had been discovered ; by May 2003 , the number had grown to 1 @,@ 600 . As of February 2014 there are 3 @,@ 898 known Jupiter trojans at L4 and 2 @,@ 049 at <unk> 
 = = Nomenclature = = 
 The custom of naming all asteroids in Jupiter 's L4 and L5 points after famous heroes of the Trojan War was suggested by Johann Palisa of Vienna , who was the first to accurately calculate their orbits . Asteroids in the L4 group are named after Greek heroes ( the " Greek node or camp " or " Achilles group " ) , and those at the L5 point are named after the heroes of Troy ( the " Trojan node or camp " ) . Confusingly , 617 Patroclus was named before the Greece / Troy rule was devised , and a Greek name thus appears in the Trojan node . The Greek node also has one " misplaced " asteroid , 624 Hektor , named after a Trojan hero . 
 = = Numbers and mass = = 
 Estimates of the total number of Jupiter trojans are based on deep surveys of limited areas of the sky . The L4 swarm is believed to hold between 160 – 240 @,@ 000 asteroids with diameters larger than 2 km and about 600 @,@ 000 with diameters larger than 1 km . If the L5 swarm contains a comparable number of objects , there are more than 1 million Jupiter trojans 1 km in size or larger . For the objects brighter than absolute magnitude 9 @.@ 0 the population is probably complete . These numbers are similar to that of comparable asteroids in the asteroid belt . The total mass of the Jupiter trojans is estimated at 0 @.@ 0001 of the mass of Earth or one @-@ fifth of the mass of the asteroid belt . 
 Two more recent studies indicate , however , that the above numbers may overestimate the number of Jupiter trojans by several @-@ fold . This overestimate is caused by ( 1 ) the assumption that all Jupiter trojans have a low albedo of about 0 @.@ 04 , whereas small bodies may actually have an average albedo as high as 0 @.@ 12 ; ( 2 ) an incorrect assumption about the distribution of Jupiter trojans in the sky . According to the new estimates , the total number of Jupiter trojans with a diameter larger than 2 km is 6 @.@ 3 ± 1 @.@ 0 × 104 and 3 @.@ 4 ± 0 @.@ 5 × 104 in the L4 and L5 swarms , respectively . These numbers would be reduced by a factor of 2 if small Jupiter trojans are more reflective than large ones . 
 The number of Jupiter trojans observed in the L4 swarm is slightly larger than that observed in L5 . However , because the brightest Jupiter trojans show little variation in numbers between the two populations , this disparity is probably due to observational bias . However , some models indicate that the L4 swarm may be slightly more stable than the L5 swarm . 
 The largest Jupiter trojan is 624 Hektor , which has an average diameter of 203 ± 3 @.@ 6 km . There are few large Jupiter trojans in comparison to the overall population . With decreasing size , the number of Jupiter trojans grows very quickly down to 84 km , much more so than in the asteroid belt . A diameter of 84 km corresponds to an absolute magnitude of 9 @.@ 5 , assuming an albedo of 0 @.@ 04 . Within the 4 @.@ 4 – 40 km range the Jupiter trojans ' size distribution resembles that of the main @-@ belt asteroids . An absence of data means that nothing is known about the masses of the smaller Jupiter trojans . The size distribution suggests that the smaller Trojans are the products of collisions by larger Jupiter trojans . 
 = = Orbits = = 
 Jupiter Trojans have orbits with radii between 5 @.@ 05 and 5 @.@ 35 AU ( the mean semi @-@ major axis is 5 @.@ 2 ± 0 @.@ 15 AU ) , and are distributed throughout elongated , curved regions around the two Lagrangian points ; each swarm stretches for about 26 ° along the orbit of Jupiter , amounting to a total distance of about 2 @.@ 5 AU . The width of the swarms approximately equals two Hill 's radii , which in the case of Jupiter amounts to about 0 @.@ 6 AU . Many of Jupiter trojans have large orbital inclinations relative to Jupiter 's orbital plane — up to 40 ° . 
 Jupiter trojans do not maintain a fixed separation from Jupiter . They slowly librate around their respective equilibrium points , periodically moving closer to Jupiter or farther from it . Jupiter trojans generally follow paths called tadpole orbits around the Lagrangian points ; the average period of their libration is about 150 years . The amplitude of the libration ( along the Jovian orbit ) varies from 0 @.@ 6 ° to 88 ° , with the average being about 33 ° . Simulations show that Jupiter trojans can follow even more complicated trajectories when moving from one Lagrangian point to another — these are called horseshoe orbits ( currently no Jupiter Trojan with such an orbit is known ) . 
 = = = Dynamical families and binaries = = = 
 <unk> dynamical families within the Jupiter Trojan population is more difficult than it is in the asteroid belt , because the Jupiter trojans are locked within a far narrower range of possible positions . This means that clusters tend to overlap and merge with the overall swarm . However , by 2003 roughly a dozen dynamical families were identified . Jupiter @-@ trojan families are much smaller in size than families in the asteroid belt ; the largest identified family , the Menelaus group , consists of only eight members . 
 In 2001 , 617 Patroclus was the first Jupiter Trojan to be identified as a binary asteroid . The binary 's orbit is extremely close , at 650 km , compared to 35 @,@ 000 km for the primary 's Hill sphere . The largest Jupiter Trojan — 624 Hektor — likely is a contact binary with a moonlet . 
 = = Physical properties = = 
 Jupiter trojans are dark bodies of irregular shape . Their geometric albedos generally vary between 3 and 10 % . The average value is 0 @.@ 056 ± 0 @.@ 003 for the objects larger than 57 km , and 0 @.@ 121 ± 0 @.@ 003 ( R @-@ band ) for those smaller than 25 km . The asteroid <unk> <unk> has the highest albedo ( 0 @.@ 18 ) of all known Jupiter trojans . Little is known about the masses , chemical composition , rotation or other physical properties of the Jupiter trojans . 
 = = = Rotation = = = 
 The rotational properties of Jupiter trojans are not well known . Analysis of the rotational light curves of 72 Jupiter trojans gave an average rotational period of about 11 @.@ 2 hours , whereas the average period of the control sample of asteroids in the asteroid belt was 10 @.@ 6 hours . The distribution of the rotational periods of Jupiter trojans appeared to be well approximated by a Maxwellian function , whereas the distribution for main @-@ belt asteroids was found to be non @-@ Maxwellian , with a deficit of periods in the range 8 – 10 hours . The Maxwellian distribution of the rotational periods of Jupiter trojans may indicate that they have undergone a stronger collisional evolution compared to the asteroid belt . 
 However , in 2008 a team from Calvin College analyzed the light curves of a <unk> sample of ten Jupiter trojans , and found a median spin period of 18 @.@ 9 hours . This value was significantly higher than that for main @-@ belt asteroids of similar size ( 11 @.@ 5 hours ) . The difference could mean that the Jupiter trojans possess a lower average density , which may imply that they formed in the Kuiper belt ( see below ) . 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 <unk> , the Jupiter trojans mostly are D @-@ type asteroids , which predominate in the outer regions of the asteroid belt . A small number are classified as P or C @-@ type asteroids . Their spectra are red ( meaning that they reflect more light at longer wavelengths ) or neutral and featureless . No firm evidence of water , organics or other chemical compounds has been obtained as of 2007 . However , <unk> <unk> has an albedo slightly higher than the Jupiter @-@ trojan average , which may indicate the presence of water ice . In addition , a number of other Jupiter Trojans , such as 911 Agamemnon and 617 Patroclus , have shown very weak absorptions at 1 @.@ 7 and 2 @.@ 3 μm , which might indicate the presence of organics . The Jupiter trojans ' spectra are similar to those of the irregular moons of Jupiter and , to certain extent , comet nuclei , though Jupiter trojans are spectrally very different from the redder Kuiper belt objects . A Jupiter trojan 's spectrum can be matched to a mixture of water ice , a large amount of carbon @-@ rich material ( charcoal ) , and possibly magnesium @-@ rich silicates . The composition of the Jupiter trojan population appears to be markedly uniform , with little or no differentiation between the two swarms . 
 A team from the Keck Observatory in Hawaii announced in 2006 that it had measured the density of the binary Jupiter trojan 617 Patroclus as being less than that of water ice ( 0 @.@ 8 g / cm3 ) , suggesting that the pair , and possibly many other Trojan objects , more closely resemble comets or Kuiper belt objects in composition — water ice with a layer of dust — than they do the main @-@ belt asteroids . Countering this argument , the density of Hektor as determined from its rotational lightcurve ( 2 @.@ 480 g / cm3 ) is significantly higher than that of 617 Patroclus . Such a difference in densities is puzzling and indicates that density may not be a good indicator of asteroid origin . 
 = = Origin and evolution = = 
 Two main theories have emerged to explain the formation and evolution of the Jupiter trojans . The first suggests that the Jupiter trojans formed in the same part of the Solar System as Jupiter and entered their orbits while it was forming . The last stage of Jupiter 's formation involved runaway growth of its mass through the accretion of large amounts of hydrogen and helium from the protoplanetary disk ; during this growth , which lasted for only about 10 @,@ 000 years , the mass of Jupiter increased by a factor of ten . The planetesimals that had approximately the same orbits as Jupiter were caught by the increased gravity of the planet . The capture mechanism was very efficient — about 50 % of all remaining planetesimals were trapped . This hypothesis has two major problems : the number of trapped bodies exceeds the observed population of Jupiter trojans by four orders of magnitude , and the present Jupiter trojan asteroids have larger orbital inclinations than are predicted by the capture model . However , simulations of this scenario show that such a mode of formation also would inhibit the creation of similar trojans for Saturn , and this has been borne out by observation : to date no trojans have been found near Saturn . 
 The second theory , part of the Nice model , proposes that the Jupiter trojans were captured during planetary migration , which happened about 500 – 600 million years after the Solar System 's formation . The migration was triggered by the passage of Jupiter and Saturn through the 1 : 2 mean @-@ motion resonance . During this period Uranus , Neptune and to some extent Saturn moved outward , whereas Jupiter moved slightly inward . Migrating giant planets destabilized the primordial Kuiper belt , throwing millions of objects into the inner Solar System . In addition , their combined gravitational influence would have quickly disturbed any pre @-@ existing Jupiter trojans . In this theory , the present Jupiter trojan population eventually accumulated from runaway Kuiper belt objects as Jupiter and Saturn moved away from the resonance . 
 The long @-@ term future of the Jupiter trojans is open to question , because multiple weak resonances with Jupiter and Saturn cause them to behave chaotically over time . In addition , collisional shattering slowly depletes the Jupiter trojan population as fragments are ejected . <unk> Jupiter trojans could become temporary satellites of Jupiter or Jupiter @-@ family comets . Simulations show that the orbits of up to 17 % of Jupiter trojans are unstable over the age of the Solar System . Levison et al. believe that roughly 200 ejected Jupiter trojans greater than 1 km in diameter might be traveling the Solar System , with a few possibly on Earth @-@ crossing orbits . Some of the escaped Jupiter trojans may become Jupiter @-@ family comets as they approach the Sun and their surface ice begins evaporating . 
 = Kulintang = 
 Kulintang is a modern term for an ancient instrumental form of music composed on a row of small , horizontally laid gongs that function melodically , accompanied by larger , suspended gongs and drums . As part of the larger gong @-@ chime culture of Southeast Asia , kulintang music ensembles have been playing for many centuries in regions of the Eastern Malay Archipelago — the Southern Philippines , Eastern Indonesia , Eastern Malaysia , Brunei and Timor , although this article has a focus on the Philippine Kulintang traditions of the Maranao and Maguindanao peoples in particular . Kulintang evolved from a simple native signaling tradition , and developed into its present form with the incorporation of knobbed gongs from Sunda . Its importance stems from its association with the indigenous cultures that inhabited these islands prior to the influences of Hinduism , Buddhism , Islam , Christianity or the West , making Kulintang the most developed tradition of Southeast Asian archaic gong @-@ chime ensembles . 
 Technically , kulintang is the Maguindanao , Ternate and Timor term for the idiophone of metal gong kettles which are laid horizontally upon a rack to create an entire kulintang set . It is played by striking the bosses of the gongs with two wooden beaters . Due to its use across a wide variety groups and languages , the kulintang is also called kolintang by the Maranao and those in Sulawesi , kulintangan , <unk> by those in Sabah and the Sulu Archipelago and totobuang by those in central Maluku . 
 By the twentieth century , the term kulintang had also come to denote an entire Maguindanao ensemble of five to six instruments . Traditionally the Maguindanao term for the entire ensemble is <unk> or <unk> , the latter term meaning “ an ensemble of loud instruments ” or “ music @-@ making ” or in this case “ music @-@ making using a kulintang . ” 
 = = Geographic extent = = 
 Kulintang belongs to the larger unit / stratum of “ knobbed gong @-@ chime culture ” prevalent in Southeast Asia . It is considered one of the region ’ s three major gong ensembles , alongside the gamelan of western Indonesia and <unk> of Thailand , Burma , Cambodia and Laos , which use gongs and not wind or string instruments to carry the melodic part of the ensemble . Like the other two , kulintang music is primarily orchestral with several rhythmic parts orderly stacked one upon another . It is also based upon the pentatonic scale . However , kulintang music differs in many aspects from gamelan music , primarily in the way the latter constructs melodies within a framework of skeletal tones and prescribed time interval of entry for each instruments . The framework of kulintang music is more flexible and time intervals are nonexistent , allowing for such things as improvisations to be more prevalent . 
 Because kulintang @-@ like ensembles extended over various groups with various languages , the term used for the horizontal set of gongs varied widely . Along with it begin called kulintang , it is also called kolintang , <unk> , kulintangan , <unk> , k ’ <unk> , gong <unk> , gong <unk> , momo , totobuang , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> / <unk> and recently <unk> / <unk> <unk> . Kulintang @-@ like instruments are played by the Maguindanao , Maranao , Iranun , <unk> , <unk> and more recently the <unk> , <unk> and <unk> of Mindanao , the Tausug , Samal , Sama / Badjao , Yakan and the <unk> / <unk> of the Sulu , the Ambon , Banda , Seram , Ternate , Tidore , and Kei of Maluku , the Bajau , Suluk , Murut , Kadazan @-@ Dusun , <unk> and <unk> Peoples of Sabah , the Malays of Brunei , the Bidayuh and Iban / Sea Dayak of Sarawak , the <unk> <unk> and <unk> / <unk> @-@ <unk> of Sulawesi and other groups in Banjarmasin and Tanjung in Kalimantan and Timor . 
 = = Instrument = = 
 = = = Description = = = 
 The instrument called the “ kulintang ” ( or its other derivative terms ) consist of a row / set of 5 to 9 graduated pot gongs , horizontally laid upon a frame arranged in order of pitch with the lowest gong found on the players ’ left . The gongs are laid in the instrument face side up atop two cords / strings running parallel to the entire length of the frame , with bamboo / wooden sticks / bars resting perpendicular across the frame , creating an entire kulintang set called a " <unk> " . 
 The gongs weigh roughly from two pounds to three pounds each , and have dimensions of 6 to 10 inches for their diameters and 3 to 5 inches for their height . Traditionally they were made from bronze but due to the disruption and loss of trade routes between the islands of Borneo and Mindanao during World War II , resulting in loss of access to necessary metal ores , and the subsequent post @-@ war use of scrap metal , brass gongs with shorter decaying tones are now commonplace . 
 The kulintang frame is known as an " <unk> " by the Maguindanao ( which means to “ arrange ” ) and " <unk> " by the Maranao . The frame can be crude , made from simple bamboo / wooden poles , or it can be highly decorated and rich with traditional <unk> / <unk> motifs or arabesque designs . The frame is a necessary part of the instrument , and functions as a resonator . 
 It is considered taboo to step or cross over the <unk> while the kulintang gongs are placed on it . 
 = = = Technique = = = 
 The kulintang is played by striking the bosses of the gongs with two wooden beaters . When playing the kulintang , the Maguindanao and Maranao would always sit on chairs while for the Tausug / Suluk and other groups that who play the kulintangan , they would commonly sit on the floor . Modern techniques include twirling the beaters , juggling them in midair , changing the arrangement of the gongs either before or while playing , crossings hands during play or adding very rapid fire strokes all in an effort to show off a player ’ s grace and virtuosity . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Kulintang gongs are made using the <unk> <unk> method , a lost @-@ wax process used for casting the individual gongs . The first phase is the creation of wax molds of the gongs . In the past , before the availability of standardized wax sheets made specifically for foundry use , the molds were made out of either beeswax ( <unk> ) or candle wax ( <unk> ) . The wax mold is covered with a special mixture of finely powdered coal / mud , which is applied on the wax surface using a brush . 
 The layers are then left to dry under the sun , after which the entire mold is heated in a furnace to melt away the wax and hardening the coal / mud mixture , leaving behind a hollowed shell . With this hardened mold , molten bronze is poured down the mold ’ s mouth cavity , cooled to a certain degree , then the coal / mud is broken apart , revealing a new gong . The gong is then refined , cleaned , and properly identified by the blacksmith ( <unk> ) . Finally , the gongs are refined using the <unk> process , tuning these either by hammering the boss from the inside to slightly raise its pitch , or by hammering the boss from the outside to lower the pitch . The correct tuning is found by ear , with players striking a sequence of gongs , looking for a melodic contour they are familiar with . 
 = = = Tuning = = = 
 Unlike westernized instrumentation , there is no set tuning for kulintang sets throughout the Philippines . Great variation exist between each set due to differences in make , size and shape , alloy used giving each kulintang set a unique pitch level , intervals and timbre . Though the tuning varies greatly , there does exist some uniformity to contour when same melody heard on different kulintang sets . This common counter results in similar interval relationships of more or less equidistant steps between each of the gongs . This tuning system , not based upon equal temperament or upon a system of standard pitches but on a similar / certain pattern of large and small intervals , could also be found among the gamelan orchestras of western Indonesia . In fact , though the Maguindanao , Maranao and Tausug artists technically have no concept of scale ( because emphasis placed on the concept of “ rhythmic modes ” ) , the <unk> and <unk> scales of Java were found to be most satisfactory to their own varying pentatonic / <unk> scales . 
 = = = Notation system = = = 
 Because this music was catered for by acephalous societies , kulintang repertory was unfettered by an indigenous notation system . Compositions were passed down orally from generation to generation negating the need for notation for the pieces . Recent attempts have been made to transcribe the music using cipher notation , with gongs indicated by a numbering system for example , starting from 1 to 8 with the lowest gong starting at number 1 for an eight gong kulintang set . 
 = = = Feminine instrument = = = 
 The kulintang is traditionally considered a women ’ s instrument by many groups : the Maguindanao , Maranao , <unk> / Suluk , Samal , Badjao / Sama , Iranun , Kadazan , Murut , Bidayuh and Iban . Traditionally , the playing of the kulintang was associated with graceful , slow , frail and relaxed movements that showed elegance and decorum common among females . Nowadays , the traditional view of kulintang as strictly for women has waned as both women and men play all five instruments , with some of the more renowned kulintang players being men . 
 = = Performance = = 
 The main purpose for kulintang music in the community is to function as social entertainment at a nonprofessional , folk level . This music is unique in that it is considered a public music in the sense everyone is allowed to participate . Not only do the players play , but audience members are also expected to participate . These performances are important in that they bring people in the community and adjacent regions together , helping unify communities that otherwise may not have interacted with one another . Traditionally , when performers play kulintang music , their participation is voluntary . Musicians see performances as an opportunity to receive recognition , prestige and respect from the community and nothing more . 
 Generally , performances can be classified as either formal ones or informal . During formal performances adherents follow a traditional set of rules that would govern playing and it usually involved people from outside the home . Informal performances are quite the opposite . The strict rules that normally govern play are often ignored and the performers are usually between people well acquainted with one another , usually close family members . These performances usually were times when amateurs practiced on the instruments , young boys and girls gathered the instruments , substituting the kulintang with the <unk> and <unk> . Ensembles didn ’ t necessary have to have five instruments like formal performances : they could be composed of only four instruments ( three gandingan gongs , a kulintang , an agung , and a dabakan ) , three instruments ( a kulintang , a dabakan , and either an agung or three gandingan gongs ) or simply just one instrument ( kulintang solo ) . 
 = = Social functions = = 
 Kulintang music generally could be found as the social entertainment at a host of different occasions . It is used during large feasts , festive / harvest gatherings , for entertainment of visiting friends and relatives , and at parades . Kulintang music also accompanies ceremonies marking significant life events , such as weddings and returnees from the Hajj . Kulintang music also plays a significant role during state functions , used during official celebrations , entertaining of foreign dignitaries and important visitors of distant lands , court ceremonies of either the sultanate or village chieftains , <unk> / coronations of a new leader and the transferral of a sultanate from one family to another . 
 Kulintang music is prohibited from being played inside mosques and during Islamic rites / observances / holidays , such as the fasting month of Ramadan , where playing is only allowed at night when people are allowed to eat after <unk> . It is also prohibited during the mourning period of the death of important person , during funerals , and during the peak times of the planting and harvest season . 
 = = = Other uses = = = 
 Kulintang instrument has uses other than public performances . It also is used to accompany healing ceremonies / rituals ( <unk> ) / animistic religious ceremonies . Though this practice has died out among the Maranao due to its non @-@ Islamic nature , some areas in Mindanao , Sabah and Maluku still practice this ancient tradition . 
 Kulintang music can be used for communicating long distance messages from one village or longhouse to another . Called apad , these renditions mimic the normal speaking tones of the Maguindanao language , creating a specific message or , through the use of double entendre , a social commentary understood by nearly any adult native Maguindanao speaker . However , apad is falling into disuse because times have changed , and the necessity of its use for long @-@ distance communication purposes has faded away . <unk> as a music without a message , is used instead to express sentiments and feelings , and has come more and more into use due to its compatibility with the musical elaborations and idiosyncratic styles of the times . 
 Kulintang music was also crucial in relation to courtships due to the very nature of Islamic custom , which did not allow for unmarried men and women to intermingle . Traditionally , unmarried daughters were kept in a special chamber in the attic called a lamin , off @-@ limit to visitors and suitors . It was only when she was allowed to play during kulintang performances that suitors were allowed to view her . Because of this , kulintang music was rare socially approved vehicles for interaction among the sexes . 
 Musical contest , particularly among the Maguindanao , have become a unique feature of these kulintang performances . They occur at almost all the formal occasions mentioned above , particularly weddings . What has made the Maguindanao stand out from the other groups is that they practice solo gong contest – with individual players showcasing their skill on the various ensemble instruments – the agung , gandingan and the kulintang – as opposed to only group contest , where performers from one town and another town are pitted against each other . 
 = = Compositions = = 
 = = = Rhythmic modes = = = 
 Kulintang music has no set compositions due to its concept of rhythmic modes . A rhythmic mode ( or designation or genre or pattern ) is defined as a musical unit that binds together the entire five instrument ensemble . By adding together the various rhythms of each instrument , one could create music and by changing one of the rhythms , one could create different music . This is the basis of the rhythmic mode . 
 = = = Improvisation = = = 
 The kulintang player ’ s ability to improvise within the parameters of a rhythmic mode is a must . As with gamelan orchestras , each kulintang mode has a kind of theme the kulintang player “ dresses up ” by variations of ornamentation , manipulating segments by inserting repetitions , extensions , insertions , suspensions , variations and transpositions . This occurs at the discretion of the kulintang player . Therefore , the kulintang player functions not only as the one carrying the melody , but also as the conductor of the entire ensemble . She determines the length of each rendition and could change the rhythm at any time , speeding up or slowing down , accord to her personal taste and the composition she plays . 
 This emphasis on improvisation was essential due traditional role of the music as entertainment for the entire community . Listeners in the audience expected players to surprise and astound them by playing in their own unique style , and by incorporating improvisation to make newer versions of the piece . If a player simply imitated a preceding player , playing patterns without any improvisation , the audience members would believe she / he to be repetitious and mundane . This also explains why set performance pieces for musical productions are different in some respect — young men / women would be practicing before an event , therefore rarely relying on improvisations . 
 = = = Maguindanao and Maranao compositions = = = 
 Though allowing such a variety of rhythms would lead to an innumerable amount of patterns , generally one could categorize these rhythmic modes on the basis on various criteria such as the number of beats in a recurring musical phrase , differences in the melodic and rhythmic groups with the musical phrase , differences in the rhythmic emphasis , and differences in the opening formulas and cadential patterns . For the Maguindanao , three to five typical genres can be distinguished : <unk> , Sinulog , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . The Maranao on the other hand have only three typical genres — <unk> / <unk> , <unk> / Onor , and <unk> Pandai / <unk> . 
 These general genres could be further grouped among each other into styles / subcategories / stylistic modifiers , which are differentiated from one another based on instrumentation , playing techniques , function and the average age and gender of the musicians as well . Generally , these styles are differentiated by what is considered traditional or “ old , ” and more contemporary or “ new . ” 
 Old styles are considered slow , well @-@ pronounced and dignified like the Maguindanao ’ s kamamatuan and the Maranao ’ s <unk> . Genres classified under this style have moderate tempos , are rhythmically oriented , balanced , lack many improvisations and are usually played by the older folks and are therefore always played first , to give due respect to the older generation . 
 New styles such as the Maguindanao ’ s <unk> and the Maranao ’ s <unk> , are considered fast , rhythmic and showy . Generally genres under this classification have faster tempos with an emphasis on power and speed , are highly rhythmic and pulsating , and are highly improvised with musicians employing different rhythmic / melodic formulae not used with old patterns . “ Young ” musicians , specifically young men , gravitate toward this style because of its emphasis on virtuosity and one ’ s individualism . Generally played after all kamamatuan pieces have been played to give younger musicians the opportunity to participate . <unk> not classified under one of these styles , being more ritualistic than recreational in nature . <unk> is a rhythmic mode often used to accompany trance and dance rituals such as <unk> . During the playing of these pieces , a ritual specialist would dance in rhythm with the music calling on the help of ancestral spirits ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = Sulu @-@ type kulintangan compositions = = = 
 Sulu @-@ type compositions on the kulintangan are found among the Tausug , Samal , Yakan , Sama / Badjao , Iranun and Kadazan @-@ Dusun . Though there exist no identifiable rhythmic or melodic differences between patterns with names such as the Maguindanao , each group has their own music compositions . For instance , the Tausug have three identifiable compositions — Kuriri , <unk> , and <unk> @-@ <unk> — the Yakan have two — Tini @-@ id and Kuriri — and the Dusun have three — <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . Though these melodies vary even within groups like the Maguindanao and Maranao , one theme which characterizes the Sulu @-@ type is the exchange of short melodic phrases between the kulintangan and the <unk> , where both instruments imitate and duplicate each other 's rhythms very quickly . This is clearly seen in the Tausug <unk> and Yakan Tini @-@ id and Kuriri compositions where this sort of jousting becomes a game of skill and virtuoso playing . 
 = = = Composition titles = = = 
 The kulintang repertoire has no fixed labels because the music itself is not considered a fixed entity . Due to the fact it is orally transmitted , the repertoire itself is considered something always in a state of flux due to two primary reasons . First , standardized titles weren ’ t considered a priority . Though to the musicians themselves the melodies would sound similar , the labels they would place on a particular rhythmic mode or style could vary even from household to household within that same village . For the musicians , the emphasis is on the excitement and pleasure of playing the music without much regard to what the piece was referred to as . Secondly , because musicians improvised their pieces regularly , modes and styles were continually revised and changed as they were passed on to a newer generation of musicians , making the pieces and therefore the labels attached to them relevant only during a certain frame of time . 
 Such issues made attempts to codify the compositions in a uniform manner impossible . An example of this could be found among the Maguindanao where the word <unk> is used by contemporary musicians as a name for one of the rhythmic modes associated with <unk> but it has also been used as a term designating a “ new ” style . Another example concerns the discrepancy among “ old ” and “ new ” genres . With “ new pieces ” continuously proliferating even up till now , pieces only created decades ago are now considered “ old ” even though this is considered a tradition spanning many centuries . These differences could sometimes make discussing this repertoire and the modes and styles within it a bit confounding . 
 = = History = = 
 Kulintang music is considered an ancient tradition that predates the influences of Hinduism , Buddhism , Islam , Christianity , and the West . In the Philippines , it represents the highest form of gong music attained by Filipinos and in North Maluku , it is said to have existed for centuries . 
 As ancient as this music is , there has never been substantial data recorded regarding the kulintang ’ s origins . The earliest historical accounts of instruments resembling those of the present day kulintang are in the writings of various European explorers from the 16th century who would have seen such instruments used in passing . 
 Because of limited data concerning gong music prior to European exploration , theories abound as to when the prototypes of what is now the present day kulintang came to be . One theory suggest that the bronze gong had an ancient history in Southeast Asia , arriving in the Malay archipelago two or even three thousand years ago , making its way to the Philippines from China in the 3rd century AD . Another theory lays doubt to the former claim , suggesting the kulintang could not have existed prior to the 15th century due to the belief that Javanese gong tradition , which is what the kulintang was believed to be derived from , developed only by the 15th century . 
 Though different theories abound as to the exact centuries the kulintang was finally realized , there is a consensus that kulintang music developed from a foreign musical tradition which was borrowed and adapted to the indigenous music tradition already present in the area . It ’ s likely the earliest gongs used among the indigenous populace had no recreational value but were simply used for making signals and sending messages . 
 Kulintang music likely evolved from this simple signaling tradition , transitioning into a period consisting of one player , one @-@ gong type ensembles ( like those found among the Ifugao of Luzon or Tiruray of Mindanao ) , developing into a multi @-@ gong , multiplayer ensemble with the incorporation of concepts originating from Sunda and finally transforming into the present day kulintang ensemble , with the addition of the d ’ <unk> , <unk> and musical concepts of Islam via Islam traders . 
 = = = Origin of the gong = = = 
 The kulintang gong itself is believed to have been one of those foreign musical elements incorporated into kulintang music , derived from the Sundanese kolenang due to its striking similarities . Along with the fact that they play important roles in their respectively ensembles , both the kulintang and kolenang show striking homogeneity in tapered rims ( as opposed to pronouncedly tapered Javanese <unk> and non @-@ tapered Laotian <unk> <unk> gongs ) . Even the word kulintang is believed to be just an altered form of the Sundanese word kolenang . 
 It was these similarities that lead theorists to conclude that the kulintang was originally imported to the Philippines during the migration of the kolenang through the Malay Archipelago . Based on the etymology , two routes have been proposed as the route for the kulintang to Mindanao : One from Sunda , through <unk> , Brunei and the Sulu Archipelago , a route where the word “ kulintangan ” is commonly used for the horizontal row of gongs ; The other from Sunda , thru , Timor , Sulawesi , Moluccas and Mindanao where the word kolintang / kulintang is commonly seen . 
 = = = Future = = = 
 The tradition of kulintang music has been waning throughout the Eastern Malay Archipelago , and has become extinct in some places . Sets of five bronze gong @-@ chimes and a gong making up the totobuang ensembles of Buru island in Central Maluku have also come to disuse . <unk> sets of bossed kettle gongs were once played in <unk> , North Sulawesi long ago but that has all but disappeared , replaced by what locals are presently familiar with — a slab @-@ key instrument known as a kolintang . 
 The extent of past kulintang tradition in the Philippines , particularly in the Northern and Central islands of Luzon and the Visayas , will never be fully known due to the harsh realities of three hundred years of Spanish colonization . The fact that there are areas which were able to keep kulintang tradition alive during European colonization has caused some observers to aptly term this music “ the music of resistance . ” 
 Today , the existence of kulintang music is threatened by the influence of globalization , and the introduction of Western and foreign ideals into the region . Younger generations would rather listen to American music , or bike in the streets with other children than spend time practicing and imitating on the traditional instruments of their parents . 
 However , Philippine kulintang music has had a revival of sorts due to the work of Philippine @-@ born , <unk> musicians / ethnomusicologists Master <unk> " Danny " Kalanduyan and <unk> Cadar , as well as their predecessor Professor José <unk> . Through the work of Professor Robert <unk> , both Cadar and Kalanduyan began teaching and performing traditional kulintang music in the United States during the late 20th century ; quite unexpectedly , the music became a bridge between contemporary Filipino American culture and ancient Philippine tribal traditions . 
 Both Kalanduyan and Cadar have been impressed that so many people lacking <unk> or Maranao background , and some who are not even Filipino , have become dedicated students and supporters of their cultural heritage . An additional surprise came after a decade @-@ long series of American @-@ based kulintang students traveled to Mindanao to perform , sparking a kulintang renaissance in the Philippines . The groundwork for this Renaissance originated as early as 1978 through the work of one of the early cultural pioneers and activists amongst Filipino Americans , Robert Kikuchi @-@ <unk> . It was his dedication in the early 80 's that created the cultural awareness in the Fil @-@ Am community of San <unk> that sparked a cultural movement . The knowledge of outsiders playing traditional kulintang has encouraged the younger generation of musicians in the Philippines , both in Mindanao and in Taguig , Metro Manila . Enthusiastic appreciation by foreigners has given life to a dying tradition , and the music has become a unifying force in the Philippine diaspora . For the first time in history , kulintang music is now formally taught to music students at several universities located throughout Metro Manila . 
 = = Composition of various ensembles = = 
 The makeup of kulintang ensembles throughout the region varies between the various cultural groups . Generally , they consist of five to six instruments dominated of course by a melody @-@ playing gong row that functions as a lead / central melodic instrument for the entire ensemble . 
 = Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara = 
 Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara ( English : Will Not Get Second Life ) is a 2011 Indian coming @-@ of @-@ age comedy @-@ drama film directed by Zoya Akhtar and produced by Farhan Akhtar and Ritesh Sidhwani of Excel Entertainment . The film features an ensemble cast including Hrithik Roshan as Arjun , Abhay Deol as Kabir and Farhan Akhtar as Imraan . It also stars Katrina Kaif as Laila , Kalki Koechlin as Natasha , and Ariadna Cabrol as Nuria along with Naseeruddin Shah making a special appearance . Made on a budget of ₹ 550 million ( US $ 8 @.@ 2 million ) , the film was shot in Spain , India , Egypt and the United Kingdom . 
 The story follows three friends , Arjun , Kabir , and Imraan who have been inseparable since childhood . They set off to Spain on a bachelor trip and meet Laila , who falls in love with Arjun and helps him overcome his problem of workaholism . Kabir and his fiancée experience significant misunderstanding in the meanwhile , which they soon overcome . As part of the trip , each friend chooses a dangerous sport for the group to partake . 
 The music and score was composed by Shankar @-@ Ehsaan @-@ Loy with lyrics by Javed Akhtar . Initially expected to hit theatres on 27 May 2011 , the release of the film was pushed back to 24 June , and once again to 15 July due to technical glitches in post @-@ production . The film had a worldwide release in 1800 screens and was a critical and commercial success . It grossed ₹ 1 @.@ 53 billion ( US $ 23 million ) worldwide . After its theatrical run , the film was nominated for and won several awards in various categories . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The film opens with Kabir ( Abhay Deol ) proposing to Natasha ( Kalki Koechlin ) . Their families meet at the engagement party where Natasha learns that Kabir is planning a three @-@ week bachelor road trip to Spain with his school friends Imran ( Farhan Akhtar ) and Arjun ( Hrithik Roshan ) . Kabir explains that the three have a long @-@ standing pact , and that during the road trip , each of them will have to pick an adventure sport which all three will try together . Initially , Arjun is reluctant to take trip as he does not want to lose his pay for missing work . It is later revealed that Arjun 's former girlfriend left him due to his workaholism and his obsession with money . Imran has an additional personal agenda on the trip , to find his biological father Salman Habib ( Naseeruddin Shah ) , an artist in Spain . 
 They fly to Spain separately , where they plan to visit Costa Brava , Seville , and Pamplona . On the way to Costa Brava , Imran and Kabir find it annoying that Arjun works even during the trip . Imran nonchalantly throws Arjun 's mobile phone out of their car while he is in the middle of an official call . This leads to a heated argument . Arjun , in a fit of rage , accuses Imran of having an affair , four years prior , with Arjun 's previous girlfriend Sonali ( a topic which was very sensitive both to Arjun and Imraan ) . After being pacified by Kabir and reaching their destination , they meet an Anglo Indian named Laila ( Katrina Kaif ) on a beach . Imran flirts with her and makes Arjun jealous . Kabir reveals that he has chosen deep sea diving as their first sport , and they later find that Laila is their diving instructor . Arjun , who cannot swim and is <unk> , receives assistance from Laila . She helps him overcome his fears and finish the sport successfully . Upon a request by Laila , they attend the La Tomatina festival with her in Buñol and meet Nuria ( Ariadna Cabrol ) , who falls in love with Imraan . Meanwhile , Natasha becomes suspicious of Kabir 's involvement with Laila when she sees them via webcam and crashes his bachelor party trip , much to Kabir 's discomfort in front of his friends . Imran spends time with Nuria , and Arjun with Laila . After the boys leave , Laila realises she has fallen in love with Arjun and chases them on a bike , not wanting to regret their partition if they do not meet in future . She and Arjun express their feelings for each other with a passionate kiss . 
 On the way to Seville , Kabir drops Natasha at the airport , while Arjun and Imran notice that something is wrong between them . The trio visit Seville for sky diving , Arjun 's choice . During the task , Imraan is forced to confront his <unk> and hesitates to take part . However , they complete it without any obstacles . After skydiving , the three men go to a bar and get into a fight with a stranger on whom they had tried to pull a prank . They are jailed after the fight . Salman Habib bails them out and takes them to his home . While speaking to Imraan , Salman reveals that he never wanted the responsibility of a married life with kids , while Imran 's mother did , which is why he never contacted Imran . Imran , heartbroken , realises how his actions must have hurt Arjun four years back . He apologises to Arjun . Arjun , realising that Imran 's apology is heartfelt , hugs him and forgives him . 
 The trio learn of the bull run in Pamplona , which is Imran 's choice — baffling Kabir and Arjun . Imran calls up Laila , who comes along , surprising Arjun . When confronted by his friends , Kabir confesses to the other two that he is still not ready for a marriage , and that Natasha had gotten the wrong idea ( of him proposing to her ) on seeing the ring that he had bought for his mother as a birthday present . On the morning of the bull run , Imran suggests they make a pact to make a promise if they survive the event . Imran vows to publish his poetry ( he is secretly a poet ) , Arjun vows to go to Morocco with Laila , and Kabir promises to tell Natasha that he does not want to marry her . As they complete the event , the friends gain a renewed sense of their relationships with each other , with others they know , and with themselves . 
 During the credits , Imran , Kabir , Nuria and Natasha are shown attending the wedding of Arjun and Laila in Morocco and the song Sooraj ki <unk> Me plays . Natasha is seen with a new man , and Kabir and Natasha are still friends . Imran 's poems are revealed throughout the story after each sporting event showing that he had published them . 
 = = Cast = = 
 Hrithik Roshan as Arjun <unk> , a financial broker 
 Abhay Deol as Kabir Dewan , an architect 
 Farhan Akhtar as Imraan Qureshi , a show @-@ tunes writer 
 Katrina Kaif as Laila 
 Kalki Koechlin as Natasha Aurora , an interior designer 
 Ariadna Cabrol as Nuria 
 Naseeruddin Shah as Salman Habib 
 Deepti Naval as <unk> Qureshi 
 <unk> Butt as Tanya Aurora 
 Ravi <unk> as Kabir 's Father 
 <unk> Seth as Natasha 's Father 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 The scripting of the film , tentatively titled as Running with the bulls , was completed in November 2009 after three months of work . Zoya and Kagti incorporated real life observations , and specially wrote the character of Imraan for her brother Farhan Akhtar . Akhtar wrote the dialogues for the film . The theme of the film was " about three guys on the verge of making commitments in life " , according to him . They used Javed Akhtar 's poetry as a voice @-@ over because they felt the poetry adds depth to the character and lends voice to their feelings . A special poem was penned down for Katrina 's character , after she was cast in the project . The first choice for the location of principal filming was Mexico , but was later changed to Spain since the climax features running with the bulls and Zoya wanted a country that blended history , culture and sports . The release date of the film was rescheduled thrice because the originally selected editor , Chandan Arora , fell ill and they had to redo the editing . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Initially , Imran Khan and Ranbir Kapoor were supposed to play two of the three leads , but they declined because they wished to star together in their own production . Farhan Akhtar , Zoya 's brother had worked with her in her debut film Luck By Chance , and was also the dialogue writer of the film , hence Zoya felt that he would know what she exactly wanted from the film . He was the first actor to be cast in the film . He defined his role as a " fun character " and a " guy who for the longest time takes nothing seriously . " Hrithik was chosen for another lead role , since he was a favourite actor of hers . After finalizing the two , she needed someone " who could not just fit in with them visually but also bring something new to the table . " She sought Abhay for the role , as he was her friend and had worked with her before in Reema Kagti 's Honeymoon Travels Pvt. Ltd . 
 For the role of Laila , Zoya wanted someone with an " accent " , who would be willing to do scuba diving , and was a half Indian and half Caucasian girl . A lot of girls were auditioned for it in New York and London . Later , in a party , she met Katrina Kaif , and chose her . Her role was reportedly described as " a <unk> spirited girl , a wanderer at heart and a bohemian gypsy by nature . " Zoya had wanted to work with Kalki ever since seeing her in Dev D and That Girl in Yellow Boots . She felt that Kalki would fit the bill for the character of Natasha , since she had " the sense of comedy , but not over the top . " Ariadna was chosen for the role of Nuria , since she was liked for her work in the 2009 Spanish film Eloise . The full cast of the film was confirmed by April 2010 . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The principal shooting of Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara , which began in June 2010 , took place in Barcelona , Pamplona , Buñol , and Andalusia in Spain , the UK , Egypt and Mumbai . Cinematographer Carlos Catalan , who had worked with Zoya in Luck By Chance , wanted all three actors to appear tanned because he " didn 't want everything glossed over " and wanted to make the film as realistic as possible . 
 Katrina 's introduction scene was shot on a nudist beach . During the filming , they requested that beach @-@ goers stay out of the frame so that the film would not face objections from the Indian censor board . The La Tomatina festival of Buñol was re @-@ created for the song " Ik Junoon " . Almost sixteen tons of tomatoes worth ₹ 10 million ( US $ 150 @,@ 000 ) were flown in from Portugal for the shoot . A scene involving a kiss between Hrithik and Katrina was shot even though the couple were initially reluctant to do so . The filming of the song " Señorita " took place in <unk> , a town in the province of Huelva . The crew warned the locals about the song 's volume because the shooting took place at night . In the third day of shooting , the locals came dressed in costumes , and the mayor of <unk> joined them for the shoot . The climax of the film , which features the <unk> , was shot at Pamplona . The final schedules were at <unk> and <unk> in Mumbai in December 2010 . 
 = = Soundtrack = = 
 Composer trio Shankar @-@ Ehsaan @-@ Loy composed the soundtrack for the film , who had also collaborated with Akhtar in Rock On ! ! and Karthik Calling Karthik . The lyrics were written by Javed Akhtar . For the vocals of the flamenco song " Señorita " , the trio roped in Maria del Mar Fernández , a Spanish flamenco singer , in what was her film singing debut . The song also marked the singing debut of Abhay Deol , who rendered the song along with the other two leads , Hrithik Roshan and Farhan Akhtar . The soundtrack met with positive response following its launch from critics , and garnered a significant notice in the music charts . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 The trailer of the film was revealed with the prints of Ready , and released online on 15 May 2011 . Excel Entertainment teamed up with Aircel to make promos of the film available on mobile and Internet . The trailer got over 55 million views within 48 hours of its release . Two more promos , one for the song Ik Junoon and one for the song Senorita , were released on 27 May . The music launch and promotion event took place at Nirmal Lifestyle , Mulund , Mumbai . The promos of <unk> Kay <unk> and Dil Dhadakne Do were released the following week . Farhan Akhtar and Ritesh Sidhwani visited Facebook India to promote the movie . A press conference promoting the film was held on 1 July at Chandigarh . Two dialogue promos of the movie were released on 3 July . The cast and crew embarked on a road trip from Mumbai to Delhi on 7 July via Surat , <unk> , Ahmedabad , Udaipur , Ajmer and Jaipur that culminated with a concert at Gurgaon . It is believed that British Auto manufacturer Land Rover , which is now owned by Tata Motors , sponsored the Land Rover Discovery driven by the cast members during the trip . A premier at the 12th IIFA Awards was planned before the worldwide release , but it was not executed . 
 The film 's marketers released branded promotions with Mountain Dew , Gillette and ING Vysya Bank . 
 The official game for Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara , based on the La Tomatina festival , was released by Jump Games on 19 July 2011 and made available for all leading mobile platforms . 
 = = Release = = 
 Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara was initially scheduled to release on 27 May , but was postponed to 24 June and further to 15 July 2011 . It released in 1800 screens worldwide . A special screening of the film was shown at the residence of Shahrukh Khan on 16 July , the birthday of Katrina Kaif . The event was attended by several celebrities besides the film 's cast and crew themselves . However , the Shiv Sena criticised the event as it was held three days after the 2011 Mumbai bombings . The producers of the film donated a cheque containing the collections of the film from around 10 theatres in Mumbai to the Maharashtra government as a mark of charity to the victims of the blasts . On 24 March 2012 , ZNMD was screened exclusively at the Bucks New University in High Wycombe , UK . 
 The DVD of the film was released on 30 August 2011 . It is available in Dolby Digital 5 @.@ 1 and Stereo formats with English and Arabic subtitles . The Blu @-@ ray disc is also available . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The film garnered mostly positive reviews from critics . Based on 81 reviews , review aggregate site <unk> gave the film the verdict , " A feel good film with a glittering star cast and amazing camera work . Funny dialogues and the chemistry between the three leads make ZNMD an enjoyable experience . " The site 's average audience rating is 3 @.@ 5 / 5 . 
 Pratim D. Gupta of The Telegraph called Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara " a beautifully scripted journey of catharsis " and praised director Zoya Akhtar for being " fearless in the way she shoots " . In his review for Hindustan Times , Mayank Shekhar praised the film as " a game @-@ changer for Hindi films since Dil Chahta Hai , and wrote " What you take home are memorable , amusing moments of three truly adventurous <unk> we 've all grown up with . And will continue to " giving it 4 stars . <unk> Kumar of <unk> awarded the movie 4 stars . Taran Adarsh of Bollywood Hungama gave the film 3 @.@ 5 / 5 stars , calling it a film for " a more evolved , mature and cinema @-@ literate audience that 's geared up to embrace and support newer genres of cinema . " Nikhat Kazmi of The Times of India gave the film 3 @.@ 5 / 5 stars and lauded its lead performances : " If Abhay is the anchor of the group , Farhan 's <unk> role is full of beans and Hrithik 's metamorphosis from uptight , money @-@ minded stock broker to carefree vagabond is a class act . " 
 S Chatterjee of NDTV , gave the film 3 / 5 stars and maintained that the film 's philosophy is quite old and praised Zoya Akhtar 's direction , stating " Zoya Akhtar , by investing the tale with a delightful lightness of touch and dollops of gentle wit , brings a degree of freshness to bear upon the plot . " Shaikh Ayaz of Rediff rated the film 3 @.@ 5 / 5 stars and felt that Zoya Akhtar had put together a familiar plot but the film 's fresh energy is entertaining . He wrote , " Akhtar 's invigorating characters pump in fresh energy into a film that could have been strictly mediocre " . Kaveree Bamzai of India Today , too was full of praise for Akhtar 's direction and said " By the time I finished watching Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara I was convinced that no one can make a romance as beautifully as a woman " , giving the film 4 stars . 
 Film critic Subhash K Jha rated it 3 @.@ 5 / 5 and quoted : " Zoya , God bless her aesthetics , sucks us into the beauty of the moment , not giving us any reason to believe that life 's most precious truths are swathed in squalor . " <unk> Chettiar of DNA India , noted the music of the film and Farhan Akhtar 's acting as highlights of the film : " For all this , the <unk> use heavy doses of symbolism . Deep @-@ sea diving at Costa Brava , sky @-@ diving in Sevilla and the San Fermin bull run in Pamplona , not to forget the Tomatina festival in <unk> , where Arjun finally lets go . Fears are drowned , let open in the sky and finally at the mercy of raging bulls " , he wrote , giving it 3 stars . Rajeev Masand of CNN @-@ IBN stated , " Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara takes the light @-@ hearted tone of a fun , all @-@ boys road trip through Spain to give you a deep and heartfelt message on why we should live life by seizing the moment and following our hearts . " He also praised the performance of the cast , highlighting it as one of the main positives of the film , but points out that the film 's length " sucks some fun of out of the ride " and gave a rating of 3 @.@ 5 stars . On the contrary , Raja Sen of Rediff held that the film " tried too hard to be cool " and gave it 1 @.@ 5 / 5 stars . 
 Ryan Gilbey of The Guardian was broadly positive about the film : " It 's still playing to full houses , and you can see why . Slick it may be . But tourist board employees representing the various Spanish cities flattered in the movie are not the only ones who will come out grinning . " , though he found the movie " stubbornly un @-@ macho " for a buddy film . The National reviewer Kaleem Aftab , in his 4 star review , noted " Throwing together road trip , romcom and buddy @-@ buddy action in a single picture may sound like an ill @-@ conceived masala mash @-@ up , but like any good dish , the ingredients are blended together with affection to create one of the best feel @-@ good movies of the year . " 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 In India , the film was released along with Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 . It opened well in the multiplexes , as the occupancy ranged from 70 to 100 percent , despite receiving average opening in the single screens except in the metro cities . The film grossed ₹ 525 million ( US $ 7 @.@ 8 million ) in its opening three @-@ day weekend , including ₹ 73 @.@ 9 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 1 million ) its first day , and a net total of ₹ 265 million ( US $ 3 @.@ 9 million ) on the third day . After ten days of worldwide run , it grossed ₹ 1 @.@ 08 billion ( US $ 16 million ) . In 17 days , it grossed over ₹ 700 million ( US $ 10 million ) in India . With no significant competition other than Singham , Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara remained No. 2 at the box office for 4 weeks after its release . It was one of the highest grossing Bollywood films of 2011 in India and internationally . The film was declared a super @-@ hit in India and Overseas territories . 
 Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara grossed ₹ 120 million ( US $ 1 @.@ 8 million ) overseas in three days , which made it the biggest opening for an Indian film in 2011 . The film reached top @-@ twenty lists in the US and UK . It grossed £ 896 @,@ 289 in UK , $ 3 @,@ 103 @,@ 656 in USA , $ 387 @,@ 384 in Australia and $ 136 @,@ 380 in New Zealand . As of January 2012 , the film has grossed $ 7 @.@ 25 million overseas . 
 The film grossed ₹ 1 @.@ 53 billion ( US $ 23 million ) worldwide , surpassing Hrithik 's Dhoom 2 in the worldwide gross , becoming the ninth highest worldwide grosser of all time for a Bollywood film , as of October 2011 . 
 = = = Legal issues = = = 
 After the release of the film , PETA objected to the bull running scene in the film and sought support from fans via their Twitter page to ban the film . PETA spokesperson <unk> <unk> spoke about the event and said " We will now be contacting the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and Central Board of Film Certification to take action . " The film 's producer Ritesh Sidhwani , retorted by saying " We had submitted all the papers to the Animal Welfare Board India that stated that none of the animals were injured or hurt in any way and only then , the censor board cleared the movie . We are only showing the culture of Spain . " Spanish @-@ American artist <unk> sent a letter to Zoya Akhtar on behalf of PETA requesting her to remove all the scenes which related to the running of the bulls . 
 = = Accolades = = 
 Post theatrical run , Zindagi Na Milegi Dobara won two awards at the 59th National Film Awards in the Best Audiography and Best Choreography categories . Noted regional ceremonies had the film winning several awards , mainly for the ' Best Film ' and ' Best Director ' . These included the Filmfare Awards , Stardust Awards , Zee Cine Awards , IIFA Awards , NDTV Indian of the Year Awards , Screen Awards , Apsara Film & Television Producers Guild Awards and the Asian Film Awards . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 Following the film 's release , Zoya Akhtar expressed an idea to make a sequel of the film . Speaking about it , she said " You never know , I might or may not make a sequel . It all depends on the right content . " It has been reported that the characters are expected to reprise their roles in the sequel , if it is officially launched . In an interview with the Hindustan Times , Hrithik expressed an idea for the basic plot of the sequel . He said that it could be set five years after ZNMD and that the original characters would have grown older , having a reason to go on another trip . It has also been agreed upon that a proper script is required , as it is not a part of the " commercial field " of cinema . However , no official confirmations have been made regarding the sequel , despite requests from many viewers . After the IIFA ceremony , Farhan Akhtar commented that there was " no necessity " for the sequel . Later in 2013 , in an interview with <unk> , Zoya expressed interest in scripting for the sequel after completing the shooting of her second movie Dil Dhadakne Do released in June 2015 . 
 = Baby Not on Board = 
 " Baby Not on Board " is the fourth entry in the seventh season of the animated television series Family Guy . It premiered on the Fox network in the United States on November 2 , 2008 . The episode features Stewie ( voiced by Seth MacFarlane ) after he is accidentally left at home when the Griffins head for the Grand Canyon . The family soon notice his absence , and they rush home ; however , Peter ( also voiced by MacFarlane ) makes it more difficult for his family because of his immature behavior . Meanwhile , Stewie realizes how much he depends on his family while he is alone . 
 The episode was written by Mark Hentemann and directed by Julius Wu . It received mixed reviews from critics for its storyline and cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 9 @.@ 97 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured a guest performance by Jon Benjamin , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . " Baby Not on Board " was released on DVD along with eight other episodes from the season on June 16 , 2009 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Peter visits the Quahog Mini @-@ Mart where Chris works after a visit to the local spa . After he threatens to sue the store for Chris ' " sexual remarks " ( in fact a legitimate medical question regarding one of his testicles ) , Peter is given an unlimited gas coupon for a year by Carl . Peter begins to take advantage of the card , even taking a trip into space , until Lois suggests that the family travel to the Grand Canyon . They leave early the next morning but inadvertently leave Stewie behind at home , only realizing that when they visit the site of 9 / 11 . They first contact Joe but cannot get a hold of him . They then contact Cleveland and Quagmire to look after Stewie . After not receiving any calls from either of them , Lois insists that the family return home to Stewie . While driving the car , Peter somehow enters the car next to them , causing the Griffins ' car to crash . When the family attempts to ride a train home , Peter spends the last of the money that they saved on curtain rings . Lois becomes angered and blames all their misfortunes on Peter 's stupidity , only to feel ashamed when he informs her that everyone else respects him for who he is . Eventually , Brian is able to get the family a ride in a pickup truck bound for Quahog . 
 Meanwhile , Stewie finds out that he has been left alone , and takes his solitude to his advantage . When Cleveland and Quagmire arrive , Stewie believes that they are intruders and sprays tear gas all around them to knock them out . Stewie realizes his mistake , however , and he chains them to the Griffins ' basement wall of his house and forcing them to watch the DirecTV help channel on a continuous loop . When Stewie consumes all of the food in the house , he applies for a job at <unk> the local Fast food restaurant , but is fired for stealing food ( despite his insistence it was due to be thrown out anyway ) . Eventually , Stewie realizes how much he depends on his family and is thrilled to see them return . The episode ends with a scene of Cleveland and Quagmire reciting what is said on TV , and Cleveland telling Quagmire , " Did I tell you I 'm getting a spinoff ? " . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Baby Not on Board " was written by eventual series showrunner and executive producer Mark Hentemann , who joined the show as a writer in its third season . It was directed by Julius Wu on his first episode of the season , although he would go on to direct the episode " 420 " later in the season . Series regulars Peter Shin and James Purdum served as supervising directors for the episode . The episode marked the first time since the show 's creation that celebrities do not feature wide , circular eyes . The staff wanted to make the celebrities look more realistic in contrast to the regular characters ; a good example of this can be seen on Patrick Swayze 's character design for the episode . The Standards and Practices had a problem with Peter saying " masturbate " , so staff writers edited it to " rub one out " . The episode revealed that the character Cleveland Brown was going to start in his own show , which turned out to be the Family Guy spin @-@ off , The Cleveland Show , which later premiered in September 2009 . 
 " Baby Not on Board " , along with the first eight episodes of the seventh season , were released on DVD by 20th Century Fox in the United States and Canada on June 16 , 2009 , one month after it had completed broadcast on television . The " Volume 7 " DVD release features bonus material including deleted scenes , animatics , and commentaries for every episode . 
 In addition to the regular cast , voice actor Jon Benjamin , actor Joe Flaherty , and actor Jacob Pressman guest starred in the episode . Recurring voice actors Alexandra Breckenridge , writer Steve Callaghan , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin , and writer John Viener made minor appearances . Recurring guest voice actors Adam West and Patrick Warburton made guest appearances as well . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 " Baby Not on Board " makes several media references . The plot itself is inspired by the film Home Alone . At the Quahog Day Spa , Peter mentions that he needs the sauna 's treatment after a stressful morning ; the scene cuts to a non @-@ sequitur that parodies the opening scene of Back to the Future . Another scene in the spa references the film Ghost ; representations of the film 's stars , Patrick Swayze and Demi Moore , are on top of Peter 's back giving him a massage . After Lois chastises Peter , he recites the speech John Candy made in Planes , Trains , and Automobiles nearly verbatim . Chris asks his friend why in the Lord of the Rings films Frodo and Gandalf walk to get to Mordor instead of taking the Eagle that was used at the end of the story . When driving to the Grand Canyon , the family sings Bette Midler 's " The Rose " . When Stewie chains Cleveland and Quagmire to the basement wall , he forces them to watch the DirecTV help channel . 
 When Lois says they haven 't heard from Joe , he is seen screaming the Rifleman 's Creed at his wheelchair like marines do with their rifles in the movie Apocalypse Now and the bootcamp sequence in Full Metal Jacket . When the Griffins return home to Stewie , the background music is an instrumental of " Somewhere In My Memory " by John Williams , which scores a similar scene in Home Alone . When Stewie is exploring the house he finds a Hustler magazine under his brother 's bed , curious of what a vagina looks <unk> after seeing a page of the magazine , however , he instantly becomes disgusted by the sight of a vagina on one of the pages , retrieves a submachine gun from <unk> , and shoots the magazine , reducing the it to scraps of paper with the whole magazine of the weapon . Stewie mentions that Aquaman is pretty useless if the crime does not take place on water . Other references included jokes about the television series Lost and actors Robin Williams and Sean Connery . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast on Fox in the United States on November 2 , 2008 , " Baby Not on Board " was watched by 9 @.@ 97 million homes and acquired a 5 @.@ 0 Nielsen rating , the audience measurement systems developed to determine the audience size and composition of television programming in the United States , making it the highest rated episode of the season . 
 The episode received mixed reviews from television sources and critics . Steve Heisler of The A.V. Club gave the episode a C , calling it " without a doubt , the most meta episode I 've seen in quite some time " and said that " if Family Guy wants to make the show itself the butt of every joke , it needs to ramp up the conflict and tone down on the flights of fancy – most of those are funny for a bit , but excess can ruin just about anything . " Another complaint of the episode were the Back to the Future references and the storyline . 
 Ahsan Haque of IGN gave the episode a much more negative review , calling it " definitely one of the worst Family Guy episodes in years " . He criticized the jokes , calling some pointless and most of them tasteless , saying that the funnier moments of the episode were not enough to make it a worthwhile episode . Robin Pierson of The TV Critic also gave the episode a negative review , calling it " pointless television " , but said that it did feature some entertaining jokes . 
 = The Sopranos = 
 The Sopranos is an American crime drama television series created by David Chase . Revolving around the fictional character and family of New Jersey @-@ based Italian American mobster Tony Soprano ( James Gandolfini ) , the show portrays the difficulties he faces as he tries to balance the conflicting requirements of his home life and his criminal organization . These are often highlighted during his therapy sessions with psychiatrist Jennifer Melfi ( Lorraine Bracco ) . The series features Tony 's family members , mafia colleagues , and rivals in prominent roles and story arcs , most notably his wife Carmela ( Edie Falco ) and protégé Christopher Moltisanti ( Michael Imperioli ) . 
 After the pilot was ordered in 1997 , the show premiered on the premium cable network HBO in the United States on January 10 , 1999 , and ran its six seasons with 86 episodes to June 10 , 2007 . The series then went through syndication and has been broadcast on A & E in the United States and internationally . The Sopranos was produced by HBO , Chase Films , and Brad Grey Television . It was primarily filmed at Silvercup Studios , New York City , and on location in New Jersey . The executive producers throughout the show 's run were David Chase , Brad Grey , Robin Green , Mitchell Burgess , Ilene S. <unk> , Terence Winter , and Matthew Weiner . 
 The Sopranos is widely regarded as the greatest television series of all time . The series also won a multitude of awards , including Peabody Awards for its first two seasons , 21 Primetime Emmy Awards and five Golden Globe Awards . A staple of 2000s American popular culture , the series has been the subject of critical analysis , controversy , and parody . It has spawned books , a video game , high @-@ charting soundtrack albums , and a large amount of assorted merchandise . Several members of the show 's cast and crew who were previously largely unknown to the public have had successful careers after The Sopranos . In 2013 , the Writers Guild of America named The Sopranos the best @-@ written TV series of all time , while TV Guide ranked it the best television series of all time . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Conception = = = 
 Before creating The Sopranos , David Chase had worked as a television producer for more than 20 years . He had been employed as a staff writer / producer for several television series ( including Kolchak : The Night Stalker , Switch , The Rockford Files , I 'll Fly Away , and Northern Exposure ) and had co @-@ created one short @-@ lived original series , Almost Grown , in 1988 . He made his television directorial debut in 1986 with the " Enough Rope for Two " episode of Alfred Hitchcock Presents revival . He also directed episodes of Almost Grown and I 'll Fly Away in 1988 and 1992 , respectively . In 1996 , he wrote and directed the television film The Rockford Files : Punishment and Crime . He served as showrunner for I 'll Fly Away and Northern Exposure in the 1990s . Chase won his first Emmy Award in 1978 for his work on The Rockford Files ( shared with fellow producers ) and his second for writing the 1980 television film Off the Minnesota Strip . By 1996 , he was a coveted showrunner . 
 The story of The Sopranos was initially conceived as a feature film about " a mobster in therapy having problems with his mother . " After some input from his manager , Lloyd Braun , Chase decided to adapt it into a television series . In 1995 , Chase signed a development deal with production company Brillstein @-@ Grey and wrote the original pilot script . 
 Drawing heavily from his personal life and his experiences growing up in New Jersey , Chase has stated that he tried to " apply [ his own ] family dynamic to mobsters . " For instance , the tumultuous relationship between series protagonist Tony Soprano and his mother , Livia , is partially based on Chase 's relationship with his own mother . Chase was also in therapy at the time and modeled the character of Dr. Jennifer Melfi after his own psychiatrist . Chase had been fascinated by organized crime and the mafia from an early age , witnessing such people growing up , and having been raised on classic gangster films like The Public Enemy and the crime series The Untouchables . The series is partly inspired by the <unk> family , a prominent New Jersey organized crime family when Chase was growing up , and partly on New Jersey 's <unk> family . Chase has mentioned American playwrights Arthur Miller and Tennessee Williams as influences on his and the show 's writing and Italian director Federico Fellini as an important influence on the show 's cinematic style . The series was named after high school friends of his . Like the majority of the characters on the show , Chase is Italian @-@ American . His original family name is DeCesare . 
 Chase and producer Brad Grey , then of Brillstein @-@ Grey , pitched The Sopranos to several networks ; Fox showed interest but passed on it after Chase presented them the pilot script . Chase and Grey eventually pitched the show to Chris Albrecht , at the time president of HBO Original Programming , who decided to finance the shooting of a pilot episode . 
 The pilot episode — originally referred to as " Pilot " but renamed to " The Sopranos " on the DVD release — was shot in 1997 ; Chase directed it himself . After the pilot was finished and shown to the HBO executives , the show was put on hold for several months . During this time , Chase considered asking HBO for additional funding to shoot 45 more minutes of footage and release The Sopranos as a feature film . In December 1997 , HBO decided to produce the series and ordered 12 more episodes for a 13 @-@ episode season . The show premiered on HBO on January 10 , 1999 with the pilot episode . The Sopranos was the second hour @-@ long television drama series produced by HBO , the first being the prison drama Oz . 
 = = = = Baer v. Chase = = = = 
 Robert Baer ( a former North Jersey prosecutor and municipal judge ) lost a breach of contract lawsuit he filed against Chase in federal court in Trenton , New Jersey , alleging he helped create the show , but Baer won a ruling that a jury should decide if and how much Baer should be paid for services as a location scout , researcher , and consultant . The gist of Baer 's argument : in addition to Chase 's own sources and ideas , some characters , settings , and storylines portrayed in The Sopranos were allegedly inspired by tours and conversations the series creator had with Tony Spirito ( " a restaurateur and admitted gambler who says he often did ' favors ' such as chauffeuring for <unk> he had known all his life . His old pals included reputed notorious figure John ' Uncle Johnny ' Riggi and Louis ' Fat Lou ' <unk> , a late underboss of the <unk> crime family " ) , Thomas Koczur ( a homicide detective for the Elizabeth Police Department ) , and people Spirito and Koczur introduced Chase to , in addition to communications and input provided by Baer , who 'd introduced Chase to Spirito and Koczur in the first place . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Like the characters they portray on the show , many of the actors on The Sopranos are Italian @-@ American . Many cast members had appeared together in films and television series before joining the cast of The Sopranos . The series shares a total of 27 actors with the 1990 Martin Scorsese gangster film , Goodfellas , including main cast members Lorraine Bracco , Michael Imperioli , and Tony Sirico . 
 The main cast was put together through a process of auditions and readings . Actors often did not know whether Chase liked their performances or not . Michael Imperioli , who beat out several actors for the part of Christopher Moltisanti , recalls " He 's got a poker face , so I thought he wasn 't into me , and he kept giving me notes and having me try it again , which often is a sign that you 're not doing it right . I thought , I 'm not getting this . So he said , ' Thank you , ' and I left . I didn 't expect to hear back . And then they called . " Chase also said he wanted Imperioli because he had been in Goodfellas . James Gandolfini was invited to audition for the part of Tony Soprano after casting director Susan Fitzgerald saw a short clip of his performance in the 1993 film True Romance . Lorraine Bracco , who had played the role of mob wife Karen Hill in Goodfellas , was originally asked to play the role of Carmela Soprano . She took the role of Dr. Jennifer Melfi instead because she wanted to try something different and felt the part of the highly educated Dr. Melfi would be more of a challenge for her . Tony Sirico , who has a criminal background , signed on to play Paulie Walnuts as long as his character was not to be a " rat " . Chase invited musician " Little Steven " Van Zandt ( known as the guitarist of Bruce Springsteen 's E Street Band ) to audition for a part in his series after seeing him live at the 1997 Rock & Roll Hall of Fame ceremony and being impressed with his appearance and presence . Van Zandt , who had never acted before , originally auditioned for the role of Tony Soprano but felt the role should go to an experienced actor . Van Zandt eventually agreed to star on the show as mob consigliere Silvio Dante and his real @-@ life spouse Maureen was cast as his on @-@ screen wife , Gabriella . 
 With the exception of Oscar nominee Bracco ( Goodfellas ) , Dominic Chianese ( The Godfather Part II , along with stage work ) and Emmy @-@ winner Nancy Marchand ( Lou Grant ) , the cast of the debut season of the series consisted of largely unknown actors . After the breakthrough success of the show , many cast members were noted for their acting ability and received mainstream attention for their performances . Subsequent seasons saw some established actors ( Joe Pantoliano , Robert Loggia , Steve Buscemi , Frank Vincent ) join the starring cast along with well @-@ known actors in recurring roles such as Peter Bogdanovich , John Heard , Robert Patrick , Peter Riegert , Annabella Sciorra , and David Strathairn . Several well @-@ known actors appeared in just one or two episodes , such as Lauren Bacall , Daniel Baldwin , Annette Bening , Polly Bergen , Sandra Bernhard , Charles S. Dutton , Jon Favreau , Janeane Garofalo , Hal Holbrook , Tim Kang , Elias Koteas , Ben Kingsley , Linda Lavin , Ken Leung , Julianna Margulies , Sydney Pollack , Wilmer <unk> , Alicia Witt and Burt Young . 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 Series creator and executive producer David Chase served as showrunner and head writer for the production of all six seasons of the show . He was deeply involved with the general production of every episode and is noted for being a very controlling , demanding and specific producer . In addition to writing or co @-@ writing 2 – 7 episodes per season , Chase would oversee all the editing , consult with episode directors , give actors character motivation , approve casting choices and set designs and do extensive but uncredited re @-@ writes of episodes written by other writers . Brad Grey served as executive producer alongside Chase , but had no creative input on the show . Many members of the creative team behind The Sopranos were handpicked by Chase , some being old friends and colleagues of his ; others were selected after interviews conducted by producers of the show . 
 Many of the show 's writers worked in television prior to joining the writing staff of The Sopranos . Writing team and married couple Robin Green and Mitchell Burgess , who worked on the series as writers and producers from the first to the fifth season , had previously worked with Chase on Northern Exposure . Terence Winter , who joined the writing staff during the production of the second season and served as executive producer from season five onwards , practiced law for two years before deciding to pursue a career as a screenwriter . He eventually caught the attention of Chase through writer Frank Renzulli . Matthew Weiner , who served as staff writer and producer for the show 's fifth and sixth seasons , wrote a spec script for the series Mad Men in 2000 . The script was passed on to Chase who , after reading it , was so impressed that he immediately offered Weiner a job as a writer for The Sopranos . Cast members Michael Imperioli and Toni Kalem , who portray Christopher Moltisanti and Angie Bonpensiero , respectively , also wrote episodes for the show . Imperioli wrote five episodes of seasons two through five and Kalem wrote one episode of season five . Other writers the show employed throughout its run include Frank Renzulli , Todd A. Kessler ( known as the co @-@ creator of Damages ) , writing team Diane Frolov and Andrew Schneider ( worked with Chase on Northern Exposure ) and Lawrence Konner , who co @-@ created Almost Grown with Chase in 1988 . In total , 20 writers or writing teams ( 22 people ) are credited with writing episodes of The Sopranos . Of these , two ( Tim Van Patten and Maria <unk> ) receive a single story credit and eight are credited with writing a sole episode . The most prolific writers of the series were Chase ( 30 credited episodes , including story credits ) , Winter ( 25 episodes ) , Green and Burgess ( 22 episodes ) , Weiner ( 12 episodes ) and Renzulli ( 9 episodes ) . 
 Before directing The Sopranos , many of the directors had worked on other television series and in independent films . The most frequent directors of the series were Tim Van Patten ( 20 episodes ) , John Patterson ( 13 episodes ) , Allen Coulter ( 12 episodes ) , and Alan Taylor ( 9 episodes ) , all of whom have a background in television . Recurring cast members Steve Buscemi and Peter Bogdanovich also directed episodes of the series intermittently . Chase directed two episodes himself , the pilot episode and the series finale . Both episodes were photographed by the show 's original director of photography Alik Sakharov ; he later alternated episodes with Phil Abraham . The show 's photography and directing is noted for its feature film @-@ quality . This look was achieved by Chase collaborating with Sakharov : " David wanted a look that would have its own two feet . [ ... ] From the pilot , we would sit down with the whole script and break the scenes down into shots . That 's what you do with feature films . " 
