 = = = Music = = = 
 The Sopranos is noted for its eclectic music selections and has received considerable critical attention for its effective use of previously recorded songs . Chase personally selected all of the show 's music with producer Martin <unk> and music editor Kathryn Dayak , sometimes also consulting Steven Van Zandt . The music was usually selected once the production and editing of an episode was completed , but on occasion sequences were filmed to match preselected pieces of music . 
 The show 's opening theme is " Woke Up This Morning " ( Chosen One Mix ) , written by , remixed and performed by British band Alabama 3 . With few exceptions , a different song plays over the closing credits of each episode . Many songs are repeated multiple times through an episode , such as " Living on a Thin Line " by The Kinks in the season three episode " University " and " Glad Tidings " by Van Morrison in the season five finale " All Due Respect " . Other songs are heard several times throughout the series . A notable example is " Con te partirò " , performed by Italian singer Andrea Bocelli , which plays several times in relation to the character of Carmela Soprano . While the show utilizes a wealth of previously recorded music , it is also notable for its lack of originally composed incidental music , compared to other television programs . 
 Two soundtrack albums containing music from the series have been released . The first , titled The Sopranos : Music from the HBO Original Series , was released in 1999 . It contains selections from the show 's first two seasons and reached # 54 on the U.S. Billboard 200 . A second soundtrack compilation , titled The Sopranos - Peppers and Eggs : Music From The HBO Series , was released in 2001 . This double @-@ disc album contains songs and selected dialogue from the show 's first three seasons . It reached # 38 on the U.S. Billboard 200 . 
 = = = Sets and locations = = = 
 The majority of the exterior scenes taking place in New Jersey were filmed on location , with the majority of the interior shots — including most indoor shots of the Soprano residence , the back room of the strip club Bada Bing ! , and Dr. Melfi 's psychiatrist 's office — filmed at Silvercup Studios in New York City . 
 The pork store , a frequent hangout for the mobsters on the show , was in the pilot episode known as <unk> 's Meat Market , an actual butchery in Elizabeth , New Jersey . After the series was picked up by HBO , the producers leased a building with a store front in Kearny , New Jersey . For the remainder of the production period , this building served as the shooting location for scenes outside and inside the pork store , now renamed <unk> 's . After the series ended , the building was demolished . 
 Bada Bing ! , a strip club owned and operated by the character Silvio Dante on the show , is an actual strip club on Route 17 in Lodi , New Jersey . Exteriors and interiors ( except for the back room ) were shot on location . The club is called Satin Dolls and was an existing business before the show started . The club continued to operate during the eight years the show was filmed there . As such , a business arrangement was worked out with the owner . Locations manager Mark <unk> recalls that the owner was " very gracious " as long as the shooting did not " conflict with his business time . " Scenes set at the restaurant Vesuvio , owned and operated in the series by character Artie <unk> , were in the first episode filmed at a restaurant called Manolo 's located in Elizabeth . After the destruction of Vesuvio within the context of the series , Artie opened a new restaurant called Nuovo Vesuvio ; exterior scenes set there were filmed at an Italian restaurant called Punta Dura located in Long Island City . All the exterior and some interior shots of the Soprano residence were filmed on location at a private residence in North Caldwell , New Jersey . 
 = = = Title sequence = = = 
 Tony Soprano is seen emerging from the Lincoln Tunnel and passes through the tollbooth for the New Jersey Turnpike . Numerous landmarks in and around Newark and Elizabeth , New Jersey , are then shown passing by the camera as Tony drives down the highway . The sequence ends with Tony pulling into the driveway of his suburban home . Chase has said that the goal of the title sequence was to show that this particular mafia show was about New Jersey , as opposed to New York , where most similar dramas have been set . 
 In the first three seasons , between Tony leaving the tunnel and entering the Turnpike , an image of the World Trade Center towers is visible in his side rear @-@ view mirror . After the September 11 , 2001 attacks , this shot was removed , beginning with the show 's fourth season . 
 In a 2010 issue of TV Guide , the show ’ s opening title sequence ranked # 10 on a list of TV 's top 10 credits sequences , as selected by readers . 
 = = Cast and characters = = 
 The Sopranos features a large cast of characters , many of whom get significant amounts of character development — regardless of level of importance . Some only appear in certain seasons , while others appear ( sporadically or constantly ) throughout the entire series . All characters were created by David Chase , unless otherwise noted . 
 Tony Soprano ( James Gandolfini ) is the series ' protagonist . Tony is one of the capos ( and the unofficial underboss ) of the New Jersey @-@ based DiMeo crime family , at the beginning of the series ; he eventually becomes its undisputed boss . He is also the patriarch of the Soprano household . Throughout the series , Tony struggles to balance the conflicting requirements of his family — wife Carmela , daughter Meadow , son A. J. , and mother Livia — with those of the Mafia family he controls . Because he is prone to bouts of clinical depression , after a fainting spell ( triggered by a panic attack ) , Tony 's physician refers him for treatment from psychiatrist Dr. Jennifer Melfi ( Lorraine Bracco ) , in the show 's first episode . She treats Tony to the best of her ability despite the fact that they routinely clash over various issues . Melfi is usually thoughtful , rational and humane — a stark contrast to Tony 's personality . Tony , a serial womanizer , occasionally divulges his sexual attraction to Dr. Melfi ; Melfi harbors some degree of attraction to Tony , too , but never admits or acts on it . Melfi is far more attracted to Tony 's dangerousness and power . She is drawn to the challenge of helping such an unusual client , and naively assumes that their doctor @-@ patient relationship will not affect her personal life in any way . 
 Adding to Tony 's complicated life is his relationship with his wife Carmela ( Edie Falco ) , which is strained by his constant infidelity and her struggle to reconcile the reality of Tony 's business ( which she is often in denial of ) , with the affluent lifestyle and higher social status it brings her . Both have up @-@ and @-@ down relationships with their two children : the intelligent @-@ but @-@ rebellious Meadow ( Jamie @-@ Lynn Sigler ) , and underachiever A.J. ( i.e. , Anthony , Jr . ) ( Robert <unk> ) , whose everyday teenage issues are further complicated by their eventual knowledge of their father 's criminal activities and reputation . 
 The starring cast includes members of Tony 's extended family , including : his disapproving , manipulative mother , Olivia " ' Livia " Soprano ( Nancy Marchand ) ; his aimless , histrionic older sister , Janice ( Aida Turturro ) ; his paternal uncle Corrado " Junior " Soprano ( Dominic Chianese ) , nominal boss of the crime family following the death of then @-@ acting boss Jackie Aprile , Sr. ; cousin Tony Blundetto ( Steve Buscemi ) ; and , Christopher Moltisanti ( Michael Imperioli ) , often referred to as Tony 's " nephew " ( but is actually his cousin by marriage ) . Both ' Livia and Janice are scheming , treacherous , shrewd manipulators with major @-@ yet @-@ unaddressed psychological issues of their own . The single @-@ mindedly ambitious Uncle Junior is chronically frustrated by having not been made boss of the DiMeo family , despite old @-@ school mob traditions entitling him to the position by virtue of seniority . He feels his authority is perpetually undermined by Tony 's greater influence in the organization , and barely contains his seething jealousy at having to watch both his younger brother ( Tony 's father ) and now Tony , himself , leapfrog him in the organization . As their professional tensions escalate , Uncle Junior employs increasingly desperate , behind @-@ the @-@ scenes measures to solve his problems with Tony , who still idolizes his uncle , and wants to retain Junior 's affection and approval . Uncle Junior and Christopher are fixtures in Tony 's real family , as well as his crime family , so their actions in one realm often create further conflicts in the other . Christopher , an entitled , insecure DiMeo associate who is as ambitious as he is insubordinate and incompetent , is also a chronic substance abuser . Tony Blundetto is a well @-@ respected DiMeo family soldier who returns after completing a lengthy prison sentence ; he leaves prison committed to " going straight " ( to Tony 's dismay ) , but also has an intense violent streak . 
 Tony 's close circle within the DiMeo crime family includes : Silvio Dante ( Steven Van Zandt ) , who runs the family 's strip club headquarters , and other businesses ; Paulie " Walnuts " Gualtieri ( Tony Sirico ) , a tough , short @-@ tempered , aging soldier who is fiercely loyal to Tony ; and , Salvatore " Big Pussy " Bonpensiero ( Vincent Pastore ) , a veteran gangster who runs an automotive body shop . Silvio is Tony 's consigliere and best friend . Paulie " Walnuts " and " Big Pussy " ( often called just , " Pussy " ) have worked with Tony and his father ; Also in Tony 's criminal organization are : Patsy Parisi ( Dan Grimaldi ) , and Furio Giunta ( Federico <unk> ) . Patsy is a soft @-@ spoken soldier with a head for figures ; Furio , an Italian national who joins the family later in the series , serves as Tony 's violent enforcer and bodyguard . 
 Other significant characters in the DiMeo family include : Bobby " <unk> " Baccalieri ( Steven R. Schirripa ) ; Richie Aprile ( David Proval ) ; Ralph Cifaretto ( Joe Pantoliano ) ; Eugene Pontecorvo ( Robert <unk> ) ; and Vito Spatafore ( Joseph R. <unk> ) . Bobby is a subordinate of Uncle Junior 's whom Tony initially bullies , but later accepts into his inner circle . Ralph is a clever , ambitious top @-@ earner ; but , his arrogance and obnoxious , disrespectful , and unpredictably violent tendencies turn Tony resentful . Richie Aprile is released from prison in season 2 , and quickly makes waves . Pontecorvo is a young soldier who becomes a " made " man alongside Christopher . Spatafore works his way up through the ranks to become top earner of the Aprile crew , but is secretly gay . 
 Friends of the Soprano family include : Herman " Hesh " Rabkin ( Jerry Adler ) ; Adriana La Cerva ( Drea de Matteo ) ; Rosalie Aprile ( Sharon Angela ) ; Angie Bonpensiero ( Toni Kalem ) , along with Artie ( John Ventimiglia ) and Charmaine <unk> ( Kathrine Narducci ) . Hesh is an invaluable adviser and friend to Tony , as he was when Tony 's father ran things . Adriana is Christopher 's loyal and long @-@ suffering girlfriend ; the two have a volatile relationship , but appear destined to stay together . Christopher often ignores Adriana 's advice , and winds up regretting it . Rosalie is the widow of previous DiMeo boss Jackie Aprile , Sr. , and a very close friend of Carmela . Angie is Salvatore Bonpensiero 's wife ; she later goes into " business " for herself , and quite successfully . Artie & Charmaine are childhood friends of the Sopranos , and owners of the popular restaurant , Vesuvio . Charmaine wishes to have no association with Tony and his crew due to fears that Tony 's criminal ways will ultimately ruin everything she and Artie have achieved . Artie , however — a law @-@ abiding , hard @-@ working man — is drawn to his childhood friend Tony 's glamorous , seemingly carefree lifestyle . Charmaine bitterly resents Artie 's chronic tendency to disregard her wishes while catering to Tony 's ; their marriage suffers greatly , as a result . Charmaine also had a brief sexual encounter with Tony ( when he and Carmela had temporarily broken @-@ up ) when all four were teenagers . 
 John " Johnny Sack " <unk> ( Vince <unk> ) , Phil Leotardo ( Frank Vincent ) and " Little " Carmine Lupertazzi , Jr . ( Ray Abruzzo ) are all significant characters from the New York City @-@ based Lupertazzi crime family , which shares a good amount of its business with the Soprano organization . Although the <unk> ' and <unk> ' interests are often at odds , Tony maintains a cordial , business @-@ like relationship with " Johnny Sack " , preferring to make mutually @-@ beneficial deals , not war . Johnny Sack 's second @-@ in @-@ command and eventual successor , Phil Leotardo , is less friendly and harder for Tony to do business with . Little Carmine is the son of the family 's first boss , and vies for power with its other members . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = = Season 1 = = = 
 When Tony Soprano collapses after suffering a panic attack , he begins therapy with Dr. Jennifer Melfi . Details of Tony 's upbringing — with his father 's influence looming large on his development as a gangster , but more so that Tony 's mother , Livia , was vengeful and possibly psychopathic — are revealed . His complicated relationship with his wife Carmela is also explored , as well as her feelings regarding her husband 's cosa nostra ties . Meadow and Anthony Jr . — Tony 's children — gain increasing knowledge of their father 's mob dealings . Later , federal indictments are brought as a result of someone in his organization talking to the FBI . 
 After ordering the execution of Brendan <unk> and the mock execution of Chris Moltisanti , Tony 's uncle Corrado " Junior " Soprano is installed as boss of the family ( following the death of previous boss Jackie Aprile , Sr. from cancer ) , even though Tony actually controls most things from behind the scenes . Furious at Corrado 's plan to have him killed , Tony responds to the attempt on his life with a violent reprisal , and confronts his mother for her role in plotting his downfall ; she appears to have a psychologically @-@ triggered stroke . " Junior " is arrested by the FBI on non @-@ related charges . 
 = = = Season 2 = = = 
 Jackie 's brother Richie Aprile is released from prison at the beginning of the second season , and proves to be uncontrollable in the business arena ; he also starts a relationship with Tony 's sister Janice , who has arrived from Seattle . Tony 's friend " Big Pussy " returns to New Jersey after a conspicuous absence . 
 Christopher Moltisanti becomes engaged to his girlfriend Adriana La Cerva . Matthew <unk> and Sean <unk> , two low @-@ level associates dissatisfied with their perceived lack of success in the Soprano crew , try to make a name for themselves by attempting to kill Christopher . Their plan backfires ; Christopher kills Sean and , though critically wounded , survives their attack . Tony and Big Pussy locate Matthew and assassinate him . However , a witness goes to the FBI and identifies Tony . 
 Junior is placed under house arrest as he awaits trial . Richie , frustrated with Tony 's authority over him , entreats Junior to have Tony killed . Junior feigns interest , then informs Tony of Richie 's intentions , leaving Tony with another problem to address . However , the situation is defused unexpectedly when Janice kills Richie in a violent argument ; Tony and his men conceal all evidence of the murder , and Janice returns to Seattle . 
 Tony , realizing Big Pussy is an FBI informant , murders him on board a boat ( with assistance from Silvio Dante and Paulie Gualtieri ) , then wraps his corpse in chains and throws it overboard . 
 = = = Season 3 = = = 
 Following the " disappearance " of Aprile crew capo Richie Aprile , the return of the ambitious Ralph Cifaretto , having spent an extended period of leisure time in Miami , marks the third season . He renews a relationship with Rosalie Aprile , the widow of the deceased acting boss Jackie Aprile , Sr. , and former capo of the Aprile crew , which bears his name . With Richie assumed to have joined the Witness Protection Program , Ralph unofficially usurps control over the Aprile crew , proving to be an exceptionally dexterous earner for the crew . While Ralph 's competitive merit would seemingly have him next in line to ascend to capo , his insubordination inclines Tony not to promote him and instead gives the promotion to the unqualified , but complacent , Gigi <unk> , causing much resentment and tension between him and Ralph . Livia dies of a stroke . 
 Jackie Aprile , Jr. becomes involved with Meadow and then descends into a downward spiral of recklessness , drugs and crime . Tony initially attempts to act as a mentor to Jackie but becomes increasingly impatient with his escalating misbehavior , particularly as Jackie 's relationship with Meadow begins to become serious . Inspired by a story from Ralph about how Tony , Jackie Sr. , and Silvio Dante got made , Jackie and his friends Dino <unk> and Carlo Renzi make a similar move and attempt to rob Eugene Pontecorvo 's Saturday night card game , so they can gain recognition from the family , possibly getting them respected and made as well . The plan takes a turn for the worse when Jackie panics due to the heckling of the card dealer " Sunshine " and shoots him to death . Dino and Carlo are killed during the robbery , but Jackie manages to escape . Tony decides to give Ralph the decision regarding Jackie Jr . ' s punishment . Despite his role as a surrogate father , Ralph decides to have Jackie Jr. killed . 
 Ralph ultimately crosses the line when , in a cocaine @-@ induced rage , he gets into a confrontation with girlfriend <unk> and beats her to death . She may have been pregnant with his child at the time . This infuriates Tony to the point where he violates traditional mafia code by striking him repeatedly in front of the entire family . Bad blood temporarily surfaces between the two but is shortly resolved after Gigi <unk> dies of an aneurysm , thereby forcing Tony to reluctantly promote Ralph to capo . 
 Tony begins an affair with Gloria Trillo , who is also a patient of Dr. Melfi . Their relationship is brief and tumultuous . Meanwhile , Dr. Melfi is raped . Junior is diagnosed with stomach cancer ; following chemotherapy , it goes into remission . A.J. continues to get in trouble at school — despite success on the football team — which culminates in his expulsion . 
 = = = Season 4 = = = 
 Tony and Christopher stake out the retirement party of Detective Lieutenant Barry Haydu , the man who murdered Christopher 's father . Tony gives Christopher Haydu 's address . When Christopher asks why he had been allowed to live all these years , Tony says that he had been valuable , but that he has outlived his worth . Christopher waits inside Haydu 's home and ambushes him as he returns from his party . Haydu vehemently denies murdering Christopher 's father , but struggles to get away , yelling " I 'm sorry ! " when Christopher goes to shoot him . 
 New York underboss Johnny Sack becomes enraged after learning Ralph Cifaretto made an inappropriate joke about his wife 's weight . He seeks permission from boss Carmine Lupertazzi to have Ralph clipped , but is denied . Johnny orders the hit anyway . Tony receives the okay from Carmine to hit Johnny Sack for insubordination . Junior Soprano tips Tony to use an old outfit in Providence for the work . After catching his wife eating sweets secretly , instead of following the diet plan , Johnny Sack gives in , and bloodshed is averted . 
 Tony and Ralph invest in a race horse named Pie @-@ O @-@ My , who wins several races and makes them both a great deal of money . However , when Ralph 's 12 @-@ year @-@ old son Justin is severely injured when an arrow plunges into his chest , Tony comes to believe Ralph burned Pie @-@ O @-@ My in a stable fire to collect $ 200 @,@ 000 in insurance money . Tony confronts Ralph the following morning and Ralph denies setting the fire . The two engage in a violent brawl , culminating in Tony strangling Ralph to death . Tony and Christopher dispose of the body ; they bury his head and hands at Mikey <unk> 's father 's farm and throw his body into a quarry . 
 While he is leaving court , Uncle Junior is hit in the head with a boom mic and falls down several steps . Tony advises him to take advantage of the opportunity , act mentally incompetent , and employ it as a ruse for not continuing the trial . Later , Eugene Pontecorvo intimidates a juror , resulting in a deadlocked jury , forcing the judge to declare a mistrial . 
 Following the death of Bobby Baccalieri 's wife , Janice pursues a romantic relationship with him . Christopher 's addiction to heroin deepens , prompting his associates and family to organize an intervention , after which he enters a drug rehabilitation center . Adriana befriends a woman who is an undercover FBI agent . When the friendship ends , the woman reveals herself as an FBI agent and tells Adriana the only way to stay out of prison is to become an informant . Adriana agrees and starts sharing information with the FBI . 
 Carmela , whose relationship with Tony is tense due to financial worries and Tony 's infidelities , develops a mutual infatuation with Furio Giunta . Furio , incapable of breaking his own moral codes and that of the Neapolitan mafia , clandestinely returns home to Italy . After Tony 's former mistress calls their home , Carmela throws Tony out . Tony is approached by Johnny Sack with a proposal to murder Carmine , which Tony turns down . 
 = = = Season 5 = = = 
 A string of new characters are introduced , including Tony 's cousin Tony Blundetto , who simultaneously along with other mafiosi , is released from prison . Among the others released are former DiMeo crime family capo Michele " <unk> " La Manna , Lupertazzi family capo Phil Leotardo , and semi @-@ retired Lupertazzi consigliere Angelo <unk> . Tony offers Tony B. a job , but he respectfully declines , as he is determined to lead a straight life . He initially begins to take courses to earn a degree in massage therapy and aspires to open up his own massage parlor . After Carmine Lupertazzi dies of a stroke , his death leaves a vacancy for boss of the Lupertazzi family , which will soon be fought over by underboss Johnny Sack and Carmine 's son Carmine Lupertazzi , Jr .. After <unk> proves to be an insubordinate presence , Tony arranges for him to be sent back to prison by setting him up with stolen property , violating his parole . 
 The war between Johnny Sack and Carmine , Jr. begins when Johnny has Phil kill " lady <unk> " Lorraine <unk> . Tony B. ' s attempt to stay straight comes to a head when he gets into a brawl with his employer <unk> Kim . Tony informs Tony B. that " it 's hard working with strangers . " Angelo , who was a good friend to Tony B. in prison , and Lupertazzi capo Rusty <unk> offer Tony B. the job of taking out Joey <unk> in retaliation for Lorraine 's death . Tony B. initially declines but , desperate to earn , accepts the job . He catches Joey outside a bordello , shoots him , and quickly flees the scene . Johnny believes Tony B. is involved , and retaliates by having Phil and his brother Billy Leotardo kill Angelo . Tony B. finds the Leotardo brothers and opens fire , killing Billy and wounding Phil . 
 Still separated from Carmela , Tony is living at his parents ' house . Carmela , now the sole authority figure in the home , becomes frustrated as her rules lead A.J. to resent her ; eventually she allows him to live with his father . She has a brief relationship with Robert <unk> , A.J. ' s guidance counselor ; he breaks it off abruptly when he suspects that she is manipulating him to improve A.J. ' s grades . Tony and Carmela reconcile ; Tony promises to be more loyal and agrees to pay for a piece of real estate Carmela wishes to develop . 
 Tony gets Meadow 's boyfriend Finn De <unk> a summer job at a construction site , which is run by Aprile crew capo Vito Spatafore . Finn comes in early one morning and catches Vito performing fellatio on a security guard . Vito tries to buddy up to Finn so that he does not say anything to anybody else . He even asks Finn to a Yankees game , which Finn does not attend . Finn soon quits the job out of fear . 
 After covering up a murder that occurred at The Crazy Horse , Adriana is arrested and pressured by the FBI to wear a wire to avoid being charged as an accomplice . She refuses to wear a wire and informs the FBI that she may be able to persuade her fiancé Christopher to co @-@ operate and become an informant against Tony . She confesses to Christopher that she has been informing and that the FBI would give them new identities if they would testify . Christopher is grief @-@ stricken and nearly kills her . He leaves the apartment , saying he needs time to think . Tony has Silvio pick up Adriana under the pretense of taking her to see Christopher , but instead drives her out to the woods and executes her . Adriana ’ s betrayal and subsequent execution is too much for Christopher to handle and he briefly returns to drug abuse to deal with the pain . 
 Phil Leotardo and his henchmen beat Benny Fazio while trying to acquire the whereabouts of Tony B. ; Phil also threatens to have Christopher taken out if Tony B. ' s whereabouts are not disclosed soon . To avoid any more of his guys getting hurt and to pacify New York , Tony tracks Tony B. to their Uncle Pat 's farm and shoots him . Phil , however , is furious that he did not get the opportunity to do it himself . Tony and Johnny meet at Johnny 's house in a reconciliatory manner , but Johnny is arrested by Federal agents , while Tony escapes . 
 = = = Season 6 = = = 
 Uncle Junior , now senile and confused , shoots Tony at the beginning of the season . Rendered comatose , Tony dreams he is a salesman on a business trip , where he mistakenly exchanges his briefcase and identification with a man named Kevin Finnerty . Tony 's recovery from the shooting changes his outlook , and he tries to mend his ways . However , he is faced with more problems in his business life . 
 Once out of the hospital , Johnny Sack 's daughter gets married and the Soprano family attends . There , Tony is shown very exhausted when taking off his shoes through security . In the process , he collapses to the ground , but is not hurt . Before the wedding , Johnny Sack is approved to leave prison for six hours to see his daughter get married , but has to pay for the metal detectors and the presence of the U.S. marshals at the event . As his daughter is about to drive away , the SUV that was escorting Johnny to the wedding blocks the car from leaving and an altercation begins in the driveway . In a moment of weakness and despair , Johnny Sack cries as he is put back into handcuffs and driven back to prison , greatly diminishing the respect his crew and Tony 's crew have for him . 
 Vito Spatafore is outed as homosexual after running into a friend at a New York night club . The rumor spreads quickly , and once word gets to Meadow that everyone else knows , she tells Tony and Carmela about the incident between Finn and Vito with the security guard . Finn then has to sit in front of Tony 's entire crew and tell them what happened with the guard , solidifying their thoughts on Vito 's sexuality . Tony is urged to deal with the problem by Phil Leotardo , now acting boss of New York with Johnny Sack in prison . Once Vito is outed , he runs away from the city and hides out in a New Hampshire town where he claims to be writing a book and meets with the locals . Vito also starts a romantic relationship with a male cook at a local diner . Eventually , Vito returns to New Jersey and asks Tony to allow him to return to work , albeit in Atlantic City . He continues to maintain that he is not a homosexual . Tony mulls over the decision to let him work , as well as whether to let him live . When Tony fails to act , Phil intervenes and kills Spatafore . When one of the members of the New York family , Fat Dom <unk> , pays a visit to the Jersey office and won 't stop making jokes about Vito and his death , the two members of Tony 's crime family who are present kill Fat Dom out of anger at the disrespect he has shown . Once more , it appears that the families are on the verge of all @-@ out war . 
 During the first half of the season Chris and Carmine head to Los Angeles to try to sign Ben Kingsley for a film they are trying to make called Cleaver , which is basically a mix of The Godfather and Saw . But Kingsley passes on the picture . While in Los Angeles Chris goes back to using cocaine for a short period of time . 
 Tony considers killing several of his associates for relatively minor infractions . Christopher is unable to leave the mob , deflecting his problems by relapsing into drug addiction and kills his friend from Narcotics Anonymous , J. T. Dolan . He is then seriously injured in a car accident while driving under the influence of narcotics . Tony , the sole passenger , is not badly hurt , and suffocates Christopher to death . A.J. is dumped by his fiancée and slips into depression , culminating in a failed suicide attempt in the backyard pool . Dr. Melfi is convinced by friends that Tony is making no progress and may even be using talking therapy for his own sociopathic benefit . She drops him as a patient . 
 Johnny Sack dies from lung cancer while imprisoned , and Leotardo then consolidates his position in the Lupertazzi family by having his rivals for the leadership killed . Phil then officially takes over , igniting a resumption of the past feud with Tony and refusing to compromise with Tony on a garbage deal . When Tony assaults a Lupertazzi soldier for harassing Meadow while she is on a date , Phil decides it 's time to decapitate the Soprano crew . He orders the executions of Bobby Baccalieri , who is shot to death ; Silvio , who ends up comatose ; and Tony , who goes into hiding . A deal is brokered whereby the rest of the Lupertazzi family agrees to ignore the order to kill Tony , giving Tony an opportunity to go after Phil . An FBI agent informs Tony of Phil 's location , allowing Tony to have him killed . Tony suspects that Carlo , a capo from New Jersey , has become an informant in an attempt to help out his son , who has recently been caught for dealing ecstasy . Tony meets his lawyer , who informs him that subpoenas are being given to New Jersey and New York crews alike . 
 Tony , Carmela , and AJ meet for dinner , while the Journey song " Don 't Stop Believin ' " plays in the background . The camera cuts away from the Soprano family and presents vignettes of other diners . As the tension increases , Meadow is shown struggling with parking then crossing the street to the restaurant . A man , who had been previously shown at the counter specifically taking notice of Tony , is shown entering the restroom , the door of which is directly facing and approximately 90 degrees to the table at which Tony and his family are sitting . As Meadow walks up to the door , the screen goes to Tony . The diner door opens with a bell ringing , Tony looks up and the show smash cuts to black and after a few seconds the credits roll in silence . 
 Chase 's decision to end the last episode abruptly with just a black screen was controversial . While Chase has insisted that it was not his intention to stir controversy , the ambiguity over the ending and question of whether Tony was murdered has continued for years after the finale 's original broadcast and has spawned numerous websites devoted to finding out his true intention . 
 = = Reception , effect and legacy = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The Sopranos was a major ratings success . Despite being aired on premium cable network HBO , which is available in significantly fewer American homes than regular networks , the show frequently attracted equal or larger audiences than most popular network shows of the time . Nielsen ratings for the show 's first four seasons are not entirely accurate , however , as prior to January 2004 Nielsen reported aggregate numbers for cable networks , meaning people watching other HBO channels than the main one , on which The Sopranos aired , would be included in the ratings estimates . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Many critics have asserted that The Sopranos is the greatest and most groundbreaking television series of all time . The writing , acting , and directing have often been singled out for praise . The show has also received considerable attention from critics and journalists for its mature and artistic content , technical merit , music selections , cinematography , and willingness to deal with difficult and controversial subjects including crime , family , gender roles , mental illness , and American and Italian American culture . The Sopranos is credited for creating a new era in the mafia genre deviating from the traditional dramatized image of the gangster in favor of a simpler , more accurate reflection of mob life . The series sheds light on Italian family dynamics through the depiction of Tony 's tumultuous relationship with his mother . Edie Falco 's character Carmela Soprano is praised in <unk> Gorton 's essay " Why I Love Carmela Soprano " for challenging Italian @-@ American gender roles . New Yorker editor David Remnick described The Sopranos as mirroring the " mindless commerce and consumption " of modern America . 
 The Sopranos has been called " perhaps the greatest pop @-@ culture masterpiece of its day " by Vanity Fair contributor Peter Biskind . Remnick called the show " the richest achievement in the history of television . " In 2002 , TV Guide ranked The Sopranos fifth on their list of the " Top 50 TV Shows of All Time , " while the series was only in its fourth season . In 2007 , Channel 4 ( UK ) named The Sopranos the greatest television series of all time . 
 The first season of the series received overwhelmingly positive reviews . Following its initial airing in 1999 , The New York Times stated , " [ The Sopranos ] just may be the greatest work of American popular culture of the last quarter century . " In 2007 , Roger Holland of PopMatters wrote , " the debut season of The Sopranos remains the crowning achievement of American television . " 
 Time Out New York ' s Andrew Johnston had high praise for the series , stating : " Together , Chase and his fellow writers ( including Terence Winter and Mad Men creator Matthew Weiner ) produced the legendary Great American Novel , and it ’ s 86 episodes long . " Johnston asserted the preeminence of The Sopranos as opposed to Deadwood and The Wire in a debate with critics Alan Sepinwall and Matt Zoller Seitz . 
 In November and December 2009 , a large number of television critics named The Sopranos the best series of the decade and all time in articles summarizing the decade in television . In numbered lists over the best television programs , The Sopranos frequently ranked first or second , almost always competing with The Wire . In 2013 , TV Guide ranked The Sopranos No. 2 in its list of The 60 Greatest Dramas of All Time , In the same year , the Writers Guild of America named it the best @-@ written television series of all time and TV Guide ranked it as the greatest show of all time . 
 Certain episodes have frequently been singled out by critics as the show 's best . These include the pilot , titled " The Sopranos " , " College " and " I Dream of Jeannie <unk> " of the first season ; " The Knight in White Satin Armor " and " Funhouse " of the second ; " Employee of the Month " , " Pine Barrens " and " Amour Fou " of the third ; " Whoever Did This " and " Whitecaps " of the fourth ; " Irregular Around the Margins " and " Long Term Parking " of the fifth and " Members Only " , " Join the Club " , " Kennedy and Heidi " , " The Second Coming " and " The Blue Comet " of the sixth season . 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 The Sopranos won and was nominated for a large number of awards over the course of its original broadcast . It was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series in every year it was eligible , and is the first cable TV series to receive a nomination for the award . After being nominated for and losing the award in 1999 , 2000 , 2001 , and 2003 ( losing the first time to The Practice and the last three to The West Wing ) , The Sopranos won the award in 2004 , and again in 2007 . Its 2004 win made The Sopranos the first series on a cable network to win the award , while its 2007 win made the show the first drama series since Upstairs , Downstairs in 1977 to win the award after it had finished airing . The show earned 21 nominations for Outstanding Writing for a Drama Series and won the award six times , with creator David Chase receiving three awards . 
 The Sopranos won at least one Emmy Award for acting in every eligible year except 2006 and 2007 . James Gandolfini and Edie Falco were each nominated six times for Outstanding Lead Actor and Actress , respectively , both winning a total of three awards . Joe Pantoliano won an Emmy for Outstanding Supporting Actor in 2003 , and Michael Imperioli and Drea de Matteo also won Emmys in 2004 for their supporting roles on the show . Other actors who have received Emmy nominations for the series include Lorraine Bracco ( in the Lead Actress and Supporting Actress categories ) , Dominic Chianese , Nancy Marchand , Aida Turturro , Tim Daly , John Heard , Annabella Sciorra and Steve Buscemi , who was also nominated for directing the episode " Pine Barrens " . 
 In 1999 and 2000 , The Sopranos earned two consecutive George Foster Peabody Awards . Only three other series have won the award in consecutive years : Northern Exposure , The West Wing , and Breaking Bad . The show also received numerous nominations at the Golden Globe Awards ( winning the award for Best Drama Series in 2000 ) and the major guild awards ( Directors , Producers , Writers , and Actors ) . 
 = = = Influence on television industry = = = 
 The Sopranos had a significant impact on the shape of the American television industry . It has been characterized by critics as one of the most influential artistic works of the 2000s ( decade ) and is credited with allowing other drama series with similarly mature content to achieve mainstream recognition . It has also often been cited as one of the television series that helped turn serial television into a legitimate art form on the same level as feature films , literature and theater . TIME editor James Poniewozik wrote in 2007 , " This mafia saga showed just how complex and involving TV storytelling could be , inspiring an explosion of ambitious dramas on cable and off . " Also in 2007 , Maureen Ryan of PopMatters described The Sopranos as " the most influential television drama ever " and wrote " No one @-@ hour drama series has had a bigger impact on how stories are told on the small screen , or more influence on what kind of fare we ’ ve been offered by an ever @-@ growing array of television networks . " Hal Boedeker , also writing for PopMatters in 2007 , stated that the series was " widely influential for revealing that cable would accommodate complex series about dark characters . The Sopranos ushered in Six Feet Under , The Shield , Rescue Me and Big Love . " 
 The series helped establish HBO as producers of critically acclaimed and commercially successful original television series . Michael Flaherty of The Hollywood Reporter has stated that The Sopranos " helped launch [ HBO 's ] reputation as a destination for talent looking for cutting @-@ edge original series work . " 
 = = = Depiction of stereotypes = = = 
 The show has been frequently criticized for perpetuating negative stereotypes about Italian Americans . Virtually all major Italian American organizations , including the National Italian American Foundation , Order Sons of Italy in America , <unk> National and the Italic Institute of America voiced their concern that The Sopranos presents , as reality , a very distorted and harmful stereotype of Italian Americans and their cultural values . 
 In 2000 , Essex County officials denied producers permission to film on county @-@ owned property , arguing that the show depicts Italian Americans in a " less than favorable light . " In 2002 , organizers of the New York City Columbus Day Parade won an injunction to keep Mayor Michael Bloomberg from inviting cast members of The Sopranos to participate in the parade . 
 Fairleigh Dickinson University 's PublicMind found , in an August 2001 national survey , that 37 % of the 800 people polled said they watched the show regularly , and 65 % of this group ( 192 people , or 24 % of the total ) disagreed that the show portrayed Italian Americans in a negative way . Professor William Roberts , an academic associated with the poll , and author of several books on modern Italian history commented that : " The show 's inflated image of organized crime casts a shadow over both the state and its Italian @-@ American community . " 
 At the end of the series the PublicMind conducted a second national survey on the Soprano series . In this poll 41 % of the 776 people polled said they watched the show regularly , and 61 % of this group ( 194 people , or 25 % of the total ) disagreed with the idea that the show portrayed Italian Americans in a negative light . Professor Roberts , by then chair of Fairleigh Dickinson 's Public Administration Institute , stated that : " The show helped to perpetuate one of the more problematic and stereotypical images of Italian Americans . Both Italian and Italian @-@ American cultures have much more diverse and interesting heritages than the American public generally realizes . " 
 Humanities professor Camille Paglia , herself an Italian American , has spoken negatively about The Sopranos , arguing that its depiction of Italian @-@ Americans was inaccurate , inauthentic , dated and racist . 
 Chase has defended his show , saying that it is not meant to stereotype all Italian Americans , only to depict a small criminal subculture . 
 = = DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc releases = = 
 All six seasons were released as DVD box sets , with the final season released in two parts ; two different versions of the complete series were also released . 
 In addition , the sixth season ( both parts 1 and 2 ) were also released on Blu @-@ ray Disc and HD DVD in 2006 and 2007 , respectively . The first season was released on Blu @-@ ray in 2009 . A complete series box set was released on Blu @-@ ray on November 4 , 2014 . 
 = Pale Blue Dot = 
 Pale Blue Dot is a photograph of planet Earth taken on February 14 , 1990 , by the Voyager 1 space probe from a record distance of about 6 billion kilometers ( 3 @.@ 7 billion miles , 40 @.@ 5 AU ) , as part of the Family Portrait series of images of the Solar System . 
 In the photograph , Earth 's apparent size is less than a pixel ; the planet appears as a tiny dot against the vastness of space , among bands of sunlight scattered by the camera 's optics . 
 Voyager 1 , which had completed its primary mission and was leaving the Solar System , was commanded by NASA to turn its camera around and take one last photograph of Earth across a great expanse of space , at the request of astronomer and author Carl Sagan . 
 = = Background = = 
 In September 1977 , NASA launched Voyager 1 , a 722 @-@ kilogram ( 1 @,@ 592 lb ) robotic spacecraft on a mission to study the outer Solar System and eventually interstellar space . After encountering the Jovian system in 1979 and the Saturnian system in 1980 , the primary mission was declared complete in November of the same year . Voyager 1 was the first space probe to provide detailed images of the two largest planets and their major moons . 
 The spacecraft , travelling at 40 @,@ 000 miles per hour ( 64 @,@ 000 km / h ) , is the farthest man @-@ made object from Earth and the first one to leave the Solar System . Its mission has been extended and continues to this day , with the aim of investigating the boundaries of the Solar system , including the Kuiper belt , the heliosphere and interstellar space . Operating for 38 years , 10 months and 17 days as of today ( July 24 , 2016 ) , it receives routine commands and transmits data back to the Deep Space Network . 
 Voyager 1 was initially expected to work only through the Saturn encounter . When the spacecraft passed the planet in 1980 , Sagan proposed the idea of the space probe taking one last picture of Earth . He pointed out that such a picture would not have had much scientific value , as the Earth would appear too small for Voyager 's cameras to make out any detail , but it could have been meaningful nevertheless as a perspective on our place in the universe . 
 Although many in NASA 's Voyager program were supportive of the idea , there were doubts that taking a picture of Earth so close to the Sun risked damaging the spacecraft 's imaging system irreparably . It was not until 1989 that Sagan 's idea was put into practice , but then instrument calibrations delayed the process further , and the personnel who devised and transmitted the radio commands to Voyager 1 were also being laid off or transferred to other projects . Finally , NASA Administrator Richard Truly interceded to ensure that the photograph was taken . 
 = = Camera = = 
 Voyager 1 's Imaging Science Subsystem ( ISS ) , now disabled , consisted of two cameras : a 200 mm focal length , low @-@ resolution wide @-@ angle camera ( WA ) , used for spatially extended imaging , and a 1500 mm high @-@ resolution narrow @-@ angle camera ( NA ) – the one that took Pale Blue Dot – intended for detailed imaging of specific targets . Both cameras were of the slow @-@ scan vidicon tube type and were fitted with eight colored filters , mounted on a filter wheel placed in front of the tube . 
 The challenge for NASA 's imaging team was that , as the mission progressed , the objects being photographed were getting farther away from the spacecraft , therefore appearing fainter and requiring longer exposures and even <unk> ( panning ) of the cameras to achieve good quality . The telecommunication capability also decreased with distance , limiting the number of data modes that could be used by the imaging system . 
 After taking the Family Portrait series of images , which included Pale Blue Dot , NASA mission managers commanded Voyager 1 to power its cameras down , as the spacecraft was not going to fly near anything else of significance for the rest of its mission , while other instruments that were still collecting data needed power for the long journey to interstellar space . 
 = = Photograph = = 
 The design of the command sequence to be relayed to the spacecraft and the calculations for each photograph 's exposure time were developed by space scientists Candy Hansen of NASA 's Jet Propulsion Laboratory ( JPL ) and Carolyn Porco of the University of Arizona . After the planned imaging sequence was taken on February 14 , 1990 , the data from the camera was stored initially in an on @-@ board tape recorder . Transmission to Earth was also delayed by the Magellan and Galileo missions being given priority over the use of the Deep Space Network . Then , between March and May 1990 , Voyager 1 returned 60 frames back to Earth , with the radio signal travelling at the speed of light for nearly five and a half hours to cover the distance . 
 Three of the frames received showed the Earth as a tiny point of light in empty space . Each frame had been taken using a different color filter : blue , green and violet , with exposure times of 0 @.@ 72 , 0 @.@ 48 and 0 @.@ 72 seconds respectively . The three frames were then recombined to produce the image that became Pale Blue Dot . 
 Of the 640 @,@ 000 individual pixels that compose each frame , Earth takes up less than one ( 0 @.@ 12 pixels , according to NASA ) . The light bands across the photograph are an artifact , the result of sunlight scattering off parts of the camera and its sunshade , due to the relative proximity between the Sun and the Earth . Voyager 's point of view was approximately 32 ° above the ecliptic . Detailed analysis suggested that the camera also detected the Moon , although it is too faint to be visible without special processing . 
 The pale blue color of the dot is the result of polarization and scattering of the light reflected from Earth . The polarization in turn depends on various factors such as cloud cover , exposed areas of oceans , forests , deserts , snow fields etc . 
 Pale Blue Dot , which was taken with the narrow @-@ angle camera , was also published as part of a composite picture created from a wide @-@ angle camera photograph showing the Sun and the region of space containing the Earth and Venus . The wide @-@ angle image was inset with two narrow @-@ angle pictures : Pale Blue Dot and a similar photograph of Venus . The wide @-@ angle photograph was taken with the darkest filter ( a methane absorption band ) and the shortest possible exposure ( 5 milliseconds ) , to avoid saturating the camera 's vidicon tube with scattered sunlight . Even so , the result was a bright burned @-@ out image with multiple reflections from the optics in the camera and the Sun that appears far larger than the actual dimension of the solar disk . The rays around the Sun are a diffraction pattern of the calibration lamp which is mounted in front of the wide @-@ angle lens . 
 = = Distance = = 
 According to NASA 's Jet Propulsion Laboratory 's <unk> tool , the distances between Voyager 1 and the Earth on February 14 and May 15 , 1990 , were as follows : 
 = = Reflections by Sagan = = 
 During a public lecture held at his Cornell University on October 13 , 1994 , Carl Sagan presented the image to the audience and shared his reflections on the deeper meaning behind the idea of the pale blue dot : 
 We succeeded in taking that picture , and , if you look at it , you see a dot . That 's here . That 's home . That 's us . On it , everyone you ever heard of , every human being who ever lived , lived out their lives . The aggregate of all our joys and sufferings , thousands of confident religions , ideologies and economic doctrines , every hunter and forager , every hero and coward , every creator and destroyer of civilizations , every king and peasant , every young couple in love , every hopeful child , every mother and father , every inventor and explorer , every teacher of morals , every corrupt politician , every superstar , every supreme leader , every saint and sinner in the history of our species , lived there – on a mote of dust , suspended in a sunbeam . 
 The earth is a very small stage in a vast cosmic arena . Think of the rivers of blood spilled by all those generals and emperors so that in glory and in triumph they could become the momentary masters of a fraction of a dot . Think of the endless cruelties visited by the inhabitants of one corner of the dot on scarcely distinguishable inhabitants of some other corner of the dot . How frequent their misunderstandings , how eager they are to kill one another , how fervent their hatreds . Our posturings , our imagined self @-@ importance , the delusion that we have some privileged position in the universe , are challenged by this point of pale light . 
 [ ... ] To my mind , there is perhaps no better demonstration of the folly of human conceits than this distant image of our tiny world . To me , it underscores our responsibility to deal more kindly and compassionately with one another and to preserve and cherish that pale blue dot , the only home we 've ever known . 
 Sagan also titled his 1994 book Pale Blue Dot : A Vision of the Human Future in Space after the photograph . 
 = Ralph Merrifield = 
 Ralph Merrifield ( 22 August 1913 – 9 January 1995 ) was an English museum curator and archaeologist . Described as " the father of London 's modern archaeology " , Merrifield was a specialist in both the archaeology of Roman London and the archaeology of magical practices , publishing six books on these subjects over the course of his life . 
 Born in Brighton , Merrifield began his archaeological career as an assistant at Brighton Museum while attaining an external degree in anthropology from the University of London . He served in the Royal Air Force during World War II , and then in 1950 became the Assistant Keeper of the Guildhall Museum in London . In 1956 , he relocated to Accra to organise the opening of the new National Museum of Ghana , before returning to work at the Guildhall Museum . Here he produced a synthesis of known material on the archaeology of Roman London , published as The Roman City of London in 1965 . 
 In 1975 , following the amalgamation of the Guildhall Museum with the London Museum to establish the new Museum of London , Merrifield was appointed Senior Keeper , and soon after was promoted to the position of Deputy Director . In 1978 , he retired from this position but remained active within the archaeological community , publishing both The Archaeology of Ritual and Magic in 1987 as well as further studies of Roman London . Also giving public lectures across the country , he was a keen supporter of the Standing Conference on London Archaeology , a body designed to monitor what he saw as the negative impact that English Heritage was having on the city 's archaeology . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life and the Guildhall Museum : 1913 – 74 = = = 
 Merrifield was born on 22 August 1913 in the Southern English coastal city of Brighton . He was raised primarily by his mother , his father having died when Merrifield was three years old . He undertook his sixth form studies at the Municipal School for Boys , and it was whilst doing , in 1930 , that he began working at the Brighton Museum as an assistant to the museum curator H. S. Toms , himself a former assistant of the archaeologist Augustus Pitt Rivers . Inspired by the museum 's ethnographic collection which he had helped catalogue , Merrifield embarked on a University of London external degree which he completed in 1935 ; although its main focus was in anthropology , the degree had also allowed him to take intermediate courses in botany . It was during this that he developed a keen interest in the archaeological evidence for both religion and for the magical practices that took place in Britain 's past . 
 Following the outbreak of the Second World War , in 1940 Merrifield was conscripted into the Royal Air Force and in 1943 he was transferred to its intelligence division , specialising in the interpretation of aerial photographs . As a result of this , he was posted to both India and Java . After the conflict ended in 1945 , he returned to work at Brighton Museum . 
 In 1950 , Merrifield took a post as Assistant Keeper of the Guildhall Museum in London , a job that he would retain until 1975 . At the time the museum lacked a premises , with Merrifield assisting the Keeper Norman Cook in establishing an exhibit at the Royal Exchange in 1954 . During these post @-@ war years the city 's archaeological community was largely preoccupied with salvaging the Roman and Medieval structures that were damaged by The Blitz and the subsequent urban redevelopment . In 1951 Merrifield married Lysbeth Webb , a colleague at the Guildhall Museum , and together they went on to have one son and one daughter . 
 In November 1956 , Merrifield was sent to Accra in Ghana to establish the National Museum of Ghana . The museum was due to be constructed in time for the day of Ghana 's officially achieved independence in April 1957 , with its exhibits having previously been part of the University Museum of Ghana , however upon arrival Merrifield found that the construction was delayed . Returning to the Guildhall after six months , he campaigned for the archaeological excavation of sites prior to their redevelopment , resulting in the establishment of the Department of Urban Archaeology at the Guildhall Museum in 1973 . 
 In 1962 , he published his first important academic paper , a study of Roman coins found at the bottom of the River Walbrook . Although not a specialist in any one particular aspect of Romano @-@ British archaeology , he was able to synthesise a wide range of evidence to develop a picture of life in Londinium , the Roman settlement located in the City of London , publishing The Roman City of London in 1965 . The project had been suggested to him two years previously by the publisher Ernest Benn , and represented the first detailed study of Roman London to be published for 35 years . To produce it , Merrifield had catalogued all known Romano @-@ British remains in the city , further providing suggestions for where additional archaeological remains were likely located . The archaeologist W. F. Grimes described it as " a landmark in the study of Roman London " while the later archaeologist Harvey Sheldon called it " a masterful historical synthesis " . The book established Merrifield 's reputation to a wider audience . He followed this with two works aimed at a general audience , Roman London ( 1969 ) , in which he looked at evidence for Romano @-@ British occupation across the wider Greater London area , and then The Archaeology of London ( 1975 ) , in which he surveyed the archaeological evidence of the region from the Palaeolithic through to the Early Middle Ages . 
 = = = Museum of London and retirement : 1975 – 95 = = = 
 In 1975 he became the Senior Keeper of the Museum of London , being promoted to the position of Deputy Director in 1977 , and being responsible for designing the Museum 's first Roman gallery . From 1976 to 1978 he served as President of the London and Middlesex Archaeological Society . Merrifield retired in 1978 , and a festschrift , entitled Collectanea <unk> : Studies in London Archaeology and History Presented to Ralph Merrifield , was published in his honour . Recognising his many years service to the archaeological field , the University of London awarded him an <unk> doctorate . 
 During his retirement , he continued to take an active role in researching London 's past . In 1983 , he published London : City of the Romans , in which he updated his account of Londinium with information obtained over the previous decade and a half . His book The Archaeology of Ritual and Magic appeared in 1987 , and was written to combat what Merrifield identified as a widespread neglect of ritual aspects in the archaeological record . Concurring with Merrifield 's assessment about this widespread neglect , the later archaeologist Roberta Gilchrist described it as a " rare contribution " to the discipline . The historian of religion Hilda Ellis Davidson praised the " cautious and balanced arguments " of Merrifield 's work , opining that it should be read by every archaeologist as a corrective to what she thought was their widespread ignorance of folklore . 
 Merrifield was uneasy with the changes made to London 's archaeological establishment by English Heritage during the early 1990s , strongly supporting the establishment of the Standing Conference on London Archaeology to monitor English Heritage 's actions . He also continued to talk on archaeological subjects , with his final lecture , " Magic Protection of the Home " , being given to extra @-@ mural students in Northampton in December 1994 . Following a short illness , he died of cardiac arrest in King 's College Hospital , London , on 9 January 1995 , leaving behind his wife , children , and grandchildren . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Merrifield came to be known as the " father of London 's modern archaeology " , with Harvey Sheldon describing him as the " father figure " of London archaeology . According to fellow archaeologist W. F. Grimes , it was Merrifield 's " work in and about London " which earned him " an honoured place in British Archaeology " . In Merrifield 's obituary in British Archaeology magazine , Max <unk> , the Director of the Museum of London , described him as being both " generous with his knowledge and friendship " and " energetic and active to the end " . Sheldon stated that he was " universally loved and admired " , having done " more than anyone else , both by example and influence " , to place London 's archaeology on a firm footing . Writing in The Independent , Peter Marsden commented on Merrifield 's " quiet manner " which " obscured a steely determination " to advance scholarship . 
 = Half @-@ Life 2 : Episode Two = 
 Half @-@ Life 2 : Episode Two is a first @-@ person shooter video game , the second episode in a series of sequels to the 2004 Half @-@ Life 2 . It was developed by Valve Corporation in tandem with Episode One , the first game in the series , and released in 2007 via Valve 's Steam content distribution platform . The episode was released both separately and as a part of a bundled package , The Orange Box . 
 Episode Two gameplay consists of expansive environments , travel and reduced linear play , continuing Valve 's policy of orienting each episode around a particular theme or set of technologies . Following the closing events of Episode One , it sees Gordon Freeman and the series ' other major characters moving away from City 17 to the surrounding countryside . 
 The retail version was released on October 10 , 2007 , in North America and Russia for Windows and Microsoft 's Xbox 360 after repeated delays . The version for the PlayStation 3 was to be released " around two or three weeks later , " as it was produced separately at the Electronic Arts UK studio , according to Valve marketing director Doug Lombardi . This version was further delayed . For the rest of the world , the release date was October 18 . The Steam version was released worldwide on October 10 , 2007 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 As with its predecessors , the game is played in the first person as series protagonist Gordon Freeman against transhuman troops , known as the Combine , and other hostile alien creatures . Levels are linear but add a more open environment , consisting of puzzles and first @-@ person shooter game @-@ play . Sequences involving vehicles are interspersed throughout the game , breaking up moments of combat . 
 One of the focal points of Episode Two was meant to be increased use of vehicles in open areas . However , the game retains its original linear style until the final battle . Episode Two has more puzzles than Episode One , including the biggest physical puzzle yet in the series — a damaged unstable bridge . The game features numerous " achievements " ( similar to PlayStation 3 's Trophies and Xbox Live 's Achievements ) for carrying out certain tasks . Some are essential to game progress , such as helping fight off an antlion invasion , or defeating the first Hunters . Others are optional tricks or feats the player can perform , such as killing a Combine soldier with their own grenade or running down a certain number of enemies with the car . 
 = = = Enemies = = = 
 Episode Two featured a new Hunter enemy , which had just been seen briefly in a recorded message in Episode One . The Hunter serves as one of the most dangerous enemies within the game and as means of emotional development for Alyx Vance . The Hunter is a powerful and resilient enemy which players must often run from while seeking a means to fight back ; Episode Two 's environments are designed with this in mind . 
 An interview in the August 2006 issue of PC Gamer magazine revealed that the Hunter stands 8 feet ( 2 @.@ 4 m ) tall . Erik Johnson , the game 's project lead , states that the Hunters are " big and impressive , but they can go anywhere the player can go , " as the player can encounter them both indoors and outdoors . Ted Backman , senior artist for Valve , talks about how the Hunter can express emotions , being a somewhat non @-@ human character . " We want the Hunter to be able to express nervousness or aggression , [ to show you ] whether it 's aggressive , hurt , or mad . " Hunters are very aggressive and they tend to operate in packs , but can also be found supporting other Combine troops . Late in the game , they can be found escorting Striders , using their flechette guns to protect the Striders that the player is trying to attack . 
 Hunters primarily attack the player by bracing themselves and firing bursts from their flechette cannon . Four flechettes can vaporize an ordinary human soldier . If they do not strike a living target , the flechette charge up for several seconds and then explode , dealing minor damage to everything nearby . Hunters may also conduct a charging attack or strike with their legs if the player gets too close . Hunters are vulnerable to all weapons , but to compensate , are still quite resilient , making explosives and the pulse rifle 's charged energy ball the most attractive options . Objects thrown with the gravity gun are also effective , especially if the player catches some of their flechettes with the object before hurling it ( one of the in @-@ game Achievements ) . In outdoor environments , they can be run over with a vehicle . 
 Two new forms of antlion appear in the game . The first is the glow @-@ in @-@ the @-@ dark antlion grub , a harmless , worm @-@ like creature which functions as a minor health pickup and a light source . Killing all 333 of these earns an Achievement . The second is the worker antlion ( or ' <unk> ' ) whose body produces a powerful and poisonous acid . In addition to a ranged acid spit attack , they also explode when killed , launching acid around them in a short radius , making them dangerous close @-@ combat opponents . Although they are thematically similar to the <unk> of the original Half @-@ Life , they are functionally closer to the poison headcrab — as an enemy that the player will instinctively prioritize as a target . A new antlion guardian , which has glow @-@ in @-@ the @-@ dark features , was also added . This " Guardian " hunts and attacks Gordon Freeman as the player endeavors to take the larval extract the Guardian protects . The vortigaunt that accompanies the player forbids him from harming the guardian , fearing the extract will be ruined if he does . The player must therefore accomplish his goal while being harried by a creature he cannot eliminate , though the player is eventually given the chance to kill it . 
 = = = Weapons = = = 
 Episode Two features no new additions to Gordon Freeman 's inventory , but introduces a new form of Gravity Gun ' ammunition ' , the ' Magnusson Device ' , named after the egotistical head of the White Forest base rocket project , Dr. Magnusson . Prior to the game 's release , this weapon had been referred to as the ' Strider Buster ' . The item is useless on its own — it must be deployed via the gravity gun . Level designer Dario <unk> describes it as a ' sticky bomb that you fire at a Strider 's underbelly that will draw power from the Strider 's internal power source . ' In @-@ game , the device will stick so long as it contacts the Strider 's body , and will instantly destroy it when fired upon with any other of the player 's weapons . However , Hunter escorts will prioritize them as targets , either destroying them in the player 's grasp or shooting already @-@ attached ones off . 
 Valve 's developers said new weapons were not a priority . The gravity gun was the direction of innovation they were most interested in , and objects like saw blades and flares were more interesting additions to the game . This policy was implemented with the Magnusson Device and more varied Gravity Gun ' ammunition ' such as logs and half @-@ height butane tanks , which are easier to aim than full @-@ size fuel drums . 
 = = = Vehicles = = = 
 Large sections of the game feature a car which resembles a gutted @-@ and @-@ rebuilt 1969 Dodge Charger . It appears to have been tuned for performance . A radar system is installed later in the game , allowing the player to locate Rebel supply caches . In the final battle , a rear @-@ mounted storage rack for Magnusson Devices is added and the radar is adjusted to track enemies and Magnusson Device dispensers . A homing unit is also installed so the player can quickly locate the car in the chaos of the final battle via a readout in the Hazardous Environment suit . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 In contrast to Episode One 's entirely urban setting , Episode Two sets the action in rural areas , villages , forests , as well as mining facilities and mountain caves . The exact location remains vague , with signs in Russian still hinting at a Eastern European setting , although gas pumps with the prices displayed in Swedish have added to the confusion . The gameplay is in parts , and , to an extent less geographically linear than in the previous games , with the climactic fight in particular taking place across an entire map rather than in an enclosed arena . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 Continuing the plot of Half @-@ Life 2 and Episode One , Episode Two consists of seven chapters telling the story of Gordon Freeman and Alyx Vance 's journey to a large Lambda Resistance base called White Forest . The Combine 's Earth occupation forces have used the destruction of the Citadel to begin opening a massive super portal which , if allowed to reach critical size , would allow the Combine to call in reinforcements from their homeworld and destroy the Resistance . However , as explained by Dr. Kleiner 's broadcast in Episode One , it has also caused a communications blackout , leaving the Combine isolated and disorganized in the meantime . In addition , Combine Advisors , some of them still unhatched from their pods , are scattered about the region after evacuating the Citadel . A crucial part of the plot is the Combine 's message home , which was copied by Alyx and Gordon before making their escape , that the Combine sacrificed the Citadel to send . It contains data on the Combine portal code , which the Resistance can use to collapse the portal before it forms completely . 
 After Gordon and Alyx climb out of the wreckage of the train they used to escape City 17 , they proceed away from the former city on foot . At an old transmission station , the duo temporarily establish communication with Dr. Kleiner and Eli Vance , who are currently at White Forest . After an update of events at the now @-@ destroyed Citadel , as well discovering the importance of the transmission packet copy that Alyx had made , they are cut off as Combine sweep the area , forcing them to move . At an abandoned mine , Alyx is critically wounded by a Hunter . A vortigaunt discovers them , and leads them to an underground Resistance shelter . The vortigaunts there have the power to heal Alyx ; however , Gordon must first venture into the nearby antlion colony to recover the larval extract necessary for the healing procedure . 
 Gordon retrieves the extract and the vortigaunts begin to heal Alyx . While they are distracted , the G @-@ Man is able to contact Gordon for the first time since the start of Episode One . He hints at Alyx 's importance to his own long @-@ term plans , revealing that he saved Alyx 's life at Black Mesa despite objections from an unspecified third party . The G @-@ Man then instructs an unconscious Alyx to tell her father to " prepare for unforeseen consequences . " 
 After Alyx has recovered , she and Gordon proceed to White Forest . They arrive before a convoy of Combine troops , despite being slowed by multiple ambushes , road blocks , and a near @-@ death encounter with an Advisor . There , Alyx and Gordon are reunited with D0g , Dr. Kleiner , and Eli Vance . The player is also formally introduced to Dr. Arne Magnusson , another former Black Mesa scientist who is egotistical , verbose , and authoritarian . The team of scientists are preparing a rocket , which they plan to use in conjunction with the Combine portal code and the satellite array launched by Gordon in Half @-@ Life , to close the Combine <unk> . 
 After Gordon fends off an initial Combine attack on the base , Alyx gives Dr. Kleiner the message from Judith Mossman which she recovered at the Citadel in Episode One . It contains footage and the current coordinates of the Borealis , an Aperture Science research vessel which , as Kleiner explains , one day suddenly vanished into thin air along with part of the surrounding drydock . Although it is not explained what technology the ship contains , Kleiner insists that it should be used to aid the Resistance effort , while Eli counters that it is impossible to control and must be destroyed . Regardless , they agree that Alyx and Gordon will travel to the Borealis and attempt to find Mossman . Alyx then unconsciously delivers the G @-@ Man 's message to her father , who is physically shaken . After having Alyx leave temporarily , Eli reveals to Gordon that it was the G @-@ Man , whom he refers to as " our mutual friend , " who provided Black Mesa with the test sample that caused the " resonance cascade " ( the Black Mesa incident ) in Half @-@ Life , and whispered that same strange warning to him just as Gordon entered the test chamber . He promises to further discuss this with Gordon after the <unk> is closed . 
 While the rocket is being prepared , White Forest comes under attack by a dozen Striders escorted by Hunters . Gordon engages and destroys them using experimental explosive charges created by Magnusson . The rocket is successfully launched and the super portal is closed , isolating Combine forces on Earth from their homeworld . Alyx and Gordon then prepare to leave for the Borealis , at which point Eli again warns Gordon about the ship 's " cargo " . The three of them head into a hangar , intending to board an old helicopter which Alyx has restored . However , a pair of Advisors burst into the hangar and restrain them . Alyx and Gordon watch helplessly as Eli is killed by one of the Advisors , but as the second Advisor prepares to kill Alyx , D0g bursts in through the roof and attacks it , causing both Advisors to flee . The game fades out slowly as Alyx , sobbing , clutches her father 's body . 
 = = Development = = 
 Episode Two was developed simultaneously with Episode One by a development team led by David <unk> . This schedule of simultaneous development aided them in streamlining the story between the two games to create an immersive storyline . The technology used was the same for both games , allowing the development teams to quickly fix any technical problems that might arise from either game ; this happened often because of the multi @-@ platform release . 
 An announcement was made on July 13 , 2006 stating that Episode Two would be released on Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 in addition to the PC , where previous iterations of the series separated . It was originally rumored that Episode Two would be delayed until 2008 . On June 14 , 2007 , however , Valve confirmed the release date for Episode Two to be October 9 , 2007 for all announced platforms . Valve handled the development of the game for the PC and Xbox 360 , while Electronic Arts British office in Chertsey worked on the PlayStation 3 version of the game . It was announced on September 7 , 2007 that the PlayStation 3 version of the game would be delayed because the development studio behind the game was in the United Kingdom , away from Valve 's development team , and therefore lagged behind in its schedule . Valve 's marketing director , Doug Lombardi , gave assurance that the Xbox 360 , PlayStation 3 , and PC versions of the game would be identical in functionality and performance . 
 = = = Audio = = = 
 Episode Two 's soundtrack was composed by Kelly Bailey , who also composed the music for the Half @-@ Life series ' other installments . The music is used sparingly throughout , played primarily during scenes of major plot development or particularly important action sequences , such as an early fight with a massive wave of Antlions or speeding down train tracks while being fired on by a helicopter . The soundtrack is included in the Russian edition of The Orange Box and is also sold separately . An audio commentary is also featured , as in Episode One and Lost Coast . 
 A notable change to the vocal cast is the inclusion of actor Tony Todd as the voice of the Vortigaunts . He replaces Louis Gossett , Jr. in the role . Actor Adam Baldwin voices several of the civilian and rebel NPCs , most notably the character who informs the player of the Striders ' locations in the penultimate chapter . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Half @-@ Life 2 : Episode 2 received critical acclaim . The game had an average score of 90 @.@ 68 % based on 22 reviews on the review aggregator GameRankings . On Metacritic , the game had an average score of 90 out of 100 , based on 21 reviews . 
 Dan Adams of IGN rated the game 9 @.@ 4 out of 10 and praised its improved visuals and expansive environments , but cited the short six @-@ hour length as a drawback . He said : " Any way you look at it , Episode Two stands out , even among the Half @-@ Life series , as something special ... a burly experience packed into roughly six hours or so that offers up all the diversity , level design , and thoughtful gameplay we 've known while making sure to propel the story forward and leave us wanting more . " Bit @-@ <unk> awarded the game a 10 out of 10 score , citing approval of how the story turns and the introduction of side stories and new characters . 1UP.com praised the game , noting that the game 's " entire five @-@ hour experience " was " vivid , emotionally engaging , and virtually unsurpassed . " PC Gamer UK also applauded Episode Two , noting it " is the most sumptuous chapter of the Half @-@ Life saga , and by a country mile . " The New York Times enjoyed the gameplay , saying , " The battles in Episode 2 of Half @-@ Life 2 often require as much ingenuity as they do fast reflexes . " 
 Computer and Video Games commented on the game 's graphics , saying that although the game 's engine was " starting to look its age , " its " wonderful art design and the odd bit of technical spit @-@ shine ensure that Episode Two [ ... ] doesn 't lose any of its wow factor . " They also noticed that the game " goes about fixing a lot of the niggling complaints we had about Episode One , " especially applauding the open forests and rocky hills from Episode Two . 
 Several reviewers noted shortcomings . The New York Times commented on the story for Episode Two , noting , " While it sows a few seeds for the final episode of the trilogy , the game lacks the driving force of the previous episode . " GameSpy criticized the game , saying it is " a little more inconsistent than its predecessors , " and that the opening segments of the game were " arguably the weakest " parts . 
 = Bay duiker = 
 The bay duiker ( Cephalophus dorsalis ) , also known as the black @-@ striped duiker and the black @-@ backed duiker , is a forest @-@ dwelling duiker native to western and southern Africa . It was first described by British zoologist John Edward Gray in 1846 . Two subspecies are identified . The bay duiker is reddish brown and has a moderate size . Both sexes reach 44 – 49 centimetres ( 17 – 19 in ) at the shoulder . The sexes do not vary considerably in their weights either ; the typical weight range for this duiker is 18 – 23 kilograms ( 40 – 51 lb ) . Both sexes possess a pair of spiky horns , measuring 5 – 8 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 1 in ) . A notable feature of this duiker is the well @-@ pronounced solid stripe of black extending from the back of the head to the tail . 
 The bay duiker is a nocturnal animal . It tends to remain solitary , but pairs can also be observed . The leopard is the main predator of this duiker . The bay duiker mainly prefers fruits , but may also feed on animal matter such as bird eggs . Females may conceive by the age of eighteen months . Breeding occurs throughout the year . Gestation lasts for about 240 days , following which generally a single offspring is born . The lifespan of the bay duiker averages 17 to 18 years . 
 The bay duiker prefers old @-@ growth or primary forests . It has been historically overhunted across its range for bushmeat . The survival of the bay duiker is also threatened by human settlement and agricultural expansion due to this duiker 's preference for old @-@ growth forests , and habitat degradation . The bay duiker is , however , still a common duiker species , and is classified as Near Threatened by the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) . 
 = = Taxonomy and etymology = = 
 The scientific name of the bay duiker is Cephalophus dorsalis . The bay duiker is classified under the genus Cephalophus and the family Bovidae . It was first described by British zoologist John Edward Gray in 1846 . The generic name probably comes from the combination of the New Latin word <unk> , meaning head , and the Greek word lophos , meaning crest . The specific name dorsalis is a Latin word referring to the back surface of an object . The common name " duiker " comes from the Afrikaans word <unk> , or Dutch <unk> ( both mean " diver " ) owing to the tendency of this antelope to seek cover in bushes . The bay duiker is also known as the black @-@ striped duiker and the black @-@ backed duiker . 
 A 2001 phylogenetic study divided Cephalophus into three distinct lineages : the giant duikers , east African red duikers and west African red duikers . The bay duiker was classified as a giant duiker along with the yellow @-@ backed duiker ( C. <unk> ) , Abbott 's duiker ( C. <unk> ) , and Jentink 's duiker ( C. jentinki ) . In 2012 , Anne R. Johnston ( of the University of Orleans ) and colleagues constructed a cladogram of the subfamily Cephalophinae ( duiker ) based on mitochondrial analysis . They showed that within the " giant duiker " group , the bay duiker formed a clade with Jentink 's duiker , and the zebra duiker is sister to this clade . Similarly , Abbott 's duiker and yellow @-@ backed duiker form a clade sister to Sylvicapra . The bay duiker and Jentink 's duiker probably evolved during the Pleistocene , less than 2 @.@ 5 million years ago . 
 Although it is possible that the species is monotypic , a 2003 paper identified two subspecies of the bay duiker : 
 C. d. dorsalis ( Gray , 1846 ) : Western bay duiker , found in western Africa 
 C. d. castaneus { Thomas , 1892 ) : Eastern bay duiker , found in central Africa 
 = = Description = = 
 The bay duiker is a moderately sized antelope ; the typical head @-@ and @-@ body length is 76 – 103 centimetres ( 30 – 41 in ) . Both sexes reach 44 – 49 centimetres ( 17 – 19 in ) at the shoulder . The sexes do not vary considerably in their weights either ; the typical weight range for this duiker is 18 – 23 kilograms ( 40 – 51 lb ) . Hence , sexual dimorphism in this species is not as remarkable as in other bovids , though females are often larger than males . The tail , black on the outside but white in the inner parts , is 9 – 11 centimetres ( 3 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 3 in ) long . The tail of the eastern bay duiker terminates in a white tuft . Both sexes possess a pair of spiky horns , measuring 5 – 8 centimetres ( 2 @.@ 0 – 3 @.@ 1 in ) . Rowland Ward , however , recorded a maximum horn length of 12 @.@ 3 centimetres ( 4 @.@ 8 in ) from Yokadouma ( Cameroon ) . The horns of females are generally narrower . 
 Both sexes have a bright reddish brown coat . The ventral parts and the flanks are all reddish brown , and the legs dark brown . A notable feature of this duiker is the well @-@ pronounced solid stripe of black extending from the back of the head to the tail . This stripe is narrower in females . Due to its nocturnal nature , the bay duiker has large conspicuous eyes . Whiskers can be observed above the eyes and around the nostrils . The patches of white fur around the whiskers are in sharp contrast to the dark reddish face . Juveniles have a dark coat , that develops the stripes and chestnut to reddish brown colour gradually . The face is marked by a dark region from the nose to the forehead , separated from the rest of the face by two light brown furrows extending above or circling its eyes . Above the eyes and on the lips and chin white spots can be seen . The head has a diminutive crest ( a tuft of hair ) , and is dark brown . The eastern bay duiker is larger and heavier than the western bay duiker , with larger ears and darker colouration . The dorsal stripe is wider and lighter in colour in the eastern bay duiker . 
 The bay duiker is similar to several other duikers . The red duiker can not be readily distinguished from the bay duiker . Though Ogilby 's duiker resembles the bay duiker in size and pelage colour , the ventral side is paler and the dorsal stripe starts from the shoulders instead of the back of the head . Additionally , the body posture and horn characteristics of the two species differ to a large extent . The bay duiker as well as the Ogilby 's duiker are remarkably similar to the black duiker , except for the pelage colouration . The dorsal stripe of Peters 's duiker also begins at the shoulders but widens to cover the whole of the rump , as does the fainter stripe on the white @-@ bellied duiker . The bay duiker can be easily told apart from the black @-@ fronted duiker and <unk> 's duiker , that lack stripes . 
 = = Ecology and behaviour = = 
 The bay duiker is a nocturnal animal , and consequently little is known of its behavioural patterns . During the day , the bay duiker rests against trees or in thickets . It tends to remain solitary , but pairs can also be observed . The bay duiker exhibits remarkable alertness . It depends heavily on its sense of smell for foraging and detecting potential danger . Individuals communicate through preorbital gland secretions and excrement . The leopard is the main predator of this duiker . Eagles and <unk> may also prey on the bay duiker . An alarmed individual becomes motionless , and might leap to flee . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 The bay duiker mainly prefers fruits . It feeds on the large fruits of <unk> species ( wild mango ) , <unk> <unk> and the spherical fruits of <unk> africana . Other fruits the duiker may eat are those of <unk> <unk> and oil @-@ palms , the orange ones of <unk> <unk> , the olive @-@ like ones of <unk> longifolia , the green plums of Panda oleosa and those of Cola rostrata , that resemble cocoa pods . The bay duiker extracts the pulp from the seeds , making a grating sound . If the seeds are large , the duiker spits them out . Smaller seeds such as those of <unk> species may be ingested . A 1989 study found that the soft seeds of plants such as <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> , <unk> gore , <unk> <unk> , <unk> <unk> and <unk> macrophylla are preferred . There have been reports of the bay duiker preying on birds ( without feeding on the legs and wings ) and the embryo of unhatched eggs , carrion , remains of African porcupines and <unk> , termites , beetles and ants . Dog food may serve as supplement for captive individuals . 
 = = = Reproduction = = = 
 Females may conceive by the age of eighteen months . Breeding occurs throughout the year , and no clear peaks are known . A study in Gabon recorded birth peaks before or during maximum abundance of fruits . In central Africa , births peak in January and February . Oestrus lasts for just eighteen hours . The rutting male pursues a female in oestrus continuously . The male might be humming and may move its foreleg outward . If receptive , the female will allow the male to mount by shifting her tail to a side . 
 Gestation lasts for about 240 days , following which generally a single offspring is born . The infant weighs nearly 1 @,@ 600 – 1 @,@ 690 grams ( 56 – 60 oz ) , and its coat is dark reddish brown . The brighter reddish brown to chestnut colour develops by five to six months . For the first few weeks after its birth , the infant is kept concealed in dense vegetation when the mother is away . The offspring can start taking solid food within a few weeks . Weaning occurs at around three @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half months . The lifespan of the bay duiker averages 17 to 18 years . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The bay duiker prefers old @-@ growth or primary forests . Home ranges of females are around 0 @.@ 2 – 0 @.@ 4 square kilometres ( 0 @.@ 077 – 0 @.@ 154 sq mi ) large , and those of males are twice the size of those of females . This duiker formerly occurred in the lowland forested areas ( warm , moist rainforests ) of Guinea . Nowadays , the bay duiker can be found in moist forested islands and riparian forests in the savannas of Guinea and northeastern Sudan . The bay duiker is native to several countries in western and southern Africa : Angola , Cameroon , Central African Republic , The Democratic Republic of the Congo , Côte d 'Ivoire , Equatorial Guinea , Gabon , Ghana , Guinea , Guinea @-@ Bissau , Liberia , Nigeria , Sierra Leone and Togo . It is feared to be extinct in Uganda . 
 = = Threats and conservation = = 
 The bay duiker has been historically overhunted across its range for bushmeat . A 2007 study of the extinction of the bay duiker in the <unk> <unk> Biosphere Reserve ( Gabon ) held overhunting responsible for the elimination of the species from the reserve . The survival of the bay duiker is also threatened by human settlement and agricultural expansion due to this duiker 's preference for old @-@ growth forests , and habitat degradation . 
 The habitat of the bay duiker has depleted to a large extent due to deforestation . The bay duiker , unlike the other duiker species , is still found in significant numbers , and is classified as Near Threatened by the International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources ( IUCN ) . The Washington Convention ( CITES ) enlists the species in Appendix II . In 1999 , Rod East of the IUCN SSC Antelope Specialist Group estimated the total population at 725 @,@ 000 . The most significant population occurs only in the Taï National Park ( Côte d 'Ivoire ) . Protected areas where bay duikers occur include : Sapo National Park ( Liberia ) ; <unk> National Park ( Ghana ) ; Campo Ma 'an National Park , Dja Faunal Reserve and Lobéké National Park ( Cameroon ) ; Dzanga @-@ Sangha Special Reserve and Bangassou ( Central African Republic ) ; Monte Alén National Park ( Equatorial Guinea ) ; Lopé National Park and <unk> National Park ( Gabon ) ; Odzala National Park and <unk> @-@ Ndoki National Park ( Congo @-@ Brazzaville ) ; Ituri Rainforest , <unk> @-@ <unk> , Maiko and Salonga National Parks ( Congo @-@ Kinshasa ) . 
 = Len Boyd = 
 Leonard Arthur Miller " Len " Boyd ( 11 November 1923 − 14 February 2008 ) was an English professional footballer who played 333 games in the Football League in the 1940s and 1950s . After serving in the Royal Navy during the Second World War , Boyd signed for Second Division club Plymouth Argyle , where he spent two seasons playing as an inside forward . When he began playing as a wing half , a position to which he was better suited , he attracted attention , and soon secured a transfer to the First Division with Birmingham City for what was for Plymouth a record fee . 
 Though his club was soon relegated , Boyd established himself in the first team and was appointed captain . He was chosen to represent England at " B " international level . An industrious , dynamic player , described by his goalkeeper Gil Merrick as " a good player and a bloody good captain " , Boyd led the team to the championship of the Second Division in the 1954 – 55 season and to the FA Cup Final and sixth place in the league , still , as of 2013 , Birmingham 's record league placing , the following year . He played only once more for Birmingham , forced to retire by the back injury which had disrupted his final season with the club . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 Boyd was born in Plaistow , east London . He played for the West Ham Schools team alongside Ken Green , who was later to be a Birmingham team @-@ mate , and as a youth played for Ilford F.C. The outbreak of the Second World War when Boyd was 15 delayed his entry into football as a career . He joined the Royal Navy , and while serving in Malta was spotted playing for a Navy team by a Plymouth Argyle supporter , who recommended him to the club . After a trial , Boyd signed professional forms in December 1945 . 
 He made his debut on 12 October 1946 , taking over at centre @-@ half from Alf Miller for a Second Division game away at Leicester City which Plymouth lost 4 – 1 . In his first season , Boyd played 16 league games , mainly in the inside left position , and scored four of his five Plymouth goals . He played regularly on the right side of the forward line in the following season , but failed to score , and was regarded as " a promising but not exceptional inside @-@ forward " . When manager Jack <unk> switched him to right half for the 1948 – 49 season , it became clear he was better suited to that position . After three consecutive seasons helping the Devon club avoid relegation from the Second Division , Boyd was sold to First Division club Birmingham City in January 1949 for a fee of £ 17 @,@ 500 , the first five @-@ figure fee ever received by Plymouth for a player . 
 = = = Birmingham City = = = 
 He went straight into the first team as replacement for Frank Mitchell who had joined Chelsea earlier that month , and made his debut in a goalless draw away at Preston North End . In the 1949 – 50 season , his first full season with Birmingham , he established himself in the first team but was unable to prevent his new team 's relegation to the Second Division . When Fred Harris retired at the end of that season , manager Bob Brocklebank appointed Boyd as his successor as club captain , a post which he retained for the remainder of his Birmingham career . 
 Under Boyd 's captaincy Birmingham reached the semifinals of the 1950 – 51 FA Cup , when they were defeated by the powerful Blackpool side of Stanley Matthews and Stan Mortensen only after a replay . They twice came close to winning promotion , missing out by three points in the 1950 – 51 season and then on goal average the following year . Boyd 's performances were rewarded with selection for England B against Netherlands B , a match played in front of a crowd of 60 @,@ 000 at the Olympic Stadium in Amsterdam , but this , and a selection as reserve for a Football League representative side in 1954 , was as close as he came to full international honours . 
 Manager Brocklebank significantly strengthened Birmingham 's playing staff , but although the club nearly reached another semifinal in the 1952 – 53 FA Cup , losing in the sixth round to Tottenham Hotspur after two replays , their league results failed to improve . In late 1954 , Arthur Turner was appointed manager , and his ability to instil a positive approach in the players transformed a team stagnating in mid @-@ table into one needing to win the last game of the season , away at Doncaster Rovers , in order to be promoted as champions on goal average . Boyd led the team to a 5 – 1 win , later recalling : 
 The ground was packed and alive with supporters wearing the colours of Birmingham City . We knew we would win – and so too did those fans – and our performance that day was quite brilliant . 
 The same squad of players carried their promotion form into the 1955 – 56 season in the First Division , achieving the club 's highest league finish of sixth place , and reaching the FA Cup final . They became attractive to the media ; after the FA Cup semifinal victory , Boyd signed an exclusive contract committing himself and his team @-@ mates to appearing only on BBC programmes in the weeks leading up to the final . 
 Fellow wing half Roy Warhurst injured a thigh in the sixth round at Arsenal and played no further part in the season . Boyd himself had for some time been suffering from a debilitating back problem , and relied on injections to keep him playing ; he missed five of the last seven games of the season , but was passed fit on the Wednesday before the game . In the event , Boyd played , in Warhurst 's position at left @-@ half , and the 22 @-@ year @-@ old Johnny Newman came in on the right . With Warhurst missing and Boyd out of position and not fully match @-@ fit , Birmingham 's strength and balance was disrupted , leaving them particularly vulnerable to Manchester City 's unconventional style of play , known as the " Revie Plan " . At half @-@ time , a row erupted between the manager and some of the players , Boyd included , about their fitness ; in the second half , whether due to physical and mental exhaustion or the effects of the row , Birmingham were soundly beaten . 
 On their return to Birmingham , the team received a civic welcome ; Boyd told the thousands outside the Council House that the team felt they had let the supporters down . Though the crowd roared " No ! " , recriminations followed . Speaking fifty years later , goalkeeper Gil Merrick refused to attribute blame for the loss to Boyd 's lack of fitness : 
 The reason why we lost , in my opinion , was nothing to do with <unk> who some claimed was unfit . Why we didn 't perform in the second half was mainly because nothing was said in the dressing room at half time about stopping the damage caused by Don Revie . He was a good player and ran the game but at half time we should have talked about stopping him . Tackles should have been talked about , but they weren 't . It was a lack of tackles that caused us to fold in the second half , and that 's all I 'm going to say . Don 't put all the onus on Len Boyd . Len was a good player and a bloody good captain . 
 Boyd played only one more game for the club , two weeks after the Cup Final . Not risked in their first game in the Inter @-@ Cities Fairs Cup , against Internazionale on a hard pitch in the San Siro , he played in their next , a 1 – 0 win against a Zagreb Select XI in Yugoslavia . Following a favourable specialist 's report during the close season , Boyd took part in pre @-@ season training , but his back still troubled him . On 17 August 1956 , the day before Birmingham were to open their 1956 – 57 League campaign , Boyd 's contract with the club was terminated at his own request . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Boyd was a tall man with a long stride . He was hard @-@ working , combining industry with composure and skill on the ball . His dynamism was regularly mentioned ; The Times ' match report of the 1953 FA Cup sixth round replay against Tottenham Hotspur , a 2 – 2 draw in which Boyd scored the equalising goal and had his name taken , attributed Birmingham 's second @-@ half comeback to their captain 's performance : 
 And behind it all there was the constant driving force of Boyd , their captain , at right @-@ half . Boyd , in fact , one would say , was the final hero of a desperate day . Up in attack and back in defence he played a magnificent game to inspire and keep his colleagues going . 
 Against Arsenal in the 1956 cup run he was " a champion who covered every inch of Highbury 's mud , a dynamo and a man of steel " , and , later the same season , The Times ' correspondent wondered rhetorically " was there ever such a human dynamo at wing @-@ half ? " 
 Birmingham based their success of the 1950s on " their acutely drilled and disciplined defence – founded upon the authority of their half @-@ backs Boyd , Smith and Warhurst " , though these three did much more than protect their defenders . 
 ... the towering young Smith , centre @-@ half in the England Intermediate ( Under 23 ) XI , is flanked by two men , Boyd and Warhurst , who keep the ball flowing forward quickly all the time . There are no superfluous frills about them . Their accent is on a quick release along the lines of longitude . They are the real driving force . 
 They acquired a fearsome reputation : Boyd himself once played four matches carrying an injury which turned out to be a hairline fracture of his leg . Team @-@ mate Alex Govan , preferring to describe Boyd as " hard , very hard " rather than a " dirty player " , recalled : 
 I used to think ' thank God I 'm playing in front of them and not against them ' ! Birmingham probably had the hardest defenders in the First Division in those days , with Len , Trevor Smith , Roy Warhurst , Jeff Hall and Ken Green – no one liked the idea of playing against them . 
 = = Life outside football = = 
 Boyd was married to Dolly , and had two children . He enjoyed oil @-@ painting as a hobby . According to Govan , " Len was a typical cockney really . He was hard on the pitch but soft off the field , he wouldn 't do anybody a bad turn . " 
 Boyd suffered from a fear of flying , which had on occasion caused difficulties in his football career . Chosen by the Birmingham County Football Association for a representative match in Hamburg in 1953 , the players were already at the airport when he requested to be omitted from the side . While his teammates flew to Birmingham 's Fairs Cup match in Milan , Boyd travelled across the English Channel by boat and then across France and into Italy by train . 
 When Boyd retired from professional football , the Birmingham City directors " had stated their readiness to help him in any venture he decided to take up " . He chose to enter the licensed trade , and kept a public house in Birmingham . Having once said that " if I can 't play in first @-@ class football , I don 't want to play any football at all " , after two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half years out of the game he changed his mind . In early 1959 he attempted a comeback with Leicestershire side Hinckley Athletic , but found himself unable to play a full game . He remained involved with football for a few more years , acting as coach and scout for Redditch of the West Midlands ( Regional ) League between 1960 and 1965 . Settling in Melton Mowbray , Leicestershire , he went on to become one of the town 's first traffic wardens . In later life he moved into a care home in Melton , where he died in February 2008 at the age of 84 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 with Birmingham City 
 Football League Second Division champions : 1954 – 55 
 FA Cup finalists : 1956 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = The Jersey Devil ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " The Jersey Devil " is the fifth episode of the first season of the American science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on October 8 , 1993 . It was written by series creator Chris Carter , directed by Joe Napolitano , and featured guest appearances by Gregory Sierra , Wayne Tippit and Claire Stansfield . Although the episode is the series ' second " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story — after the earlier " Squeeze " — it was the first to have been written by Carter . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In this episode , Mulder and Scully investigate seemingly cannibalistic murders in New Jersey . The two later come across what seems to be an evolutionary relict which may have inspired tales of the Jersey Devil . 
 Chris Carter was inspired to write " The Jersey Devil " after reading an essay by E. O. Wilson regarding ants ; Carter , in turn , wrote a story that posed whether mankind was hellbent on its own extinction . The concept of mankind being carnivores and eating its own tail evolved into the idea of using an evolutionary mutation that was a throwback to the Neanderthal . The purpose of the scenes with Scully going on a date were to show the life she was passing on to work on the X @-@ Files and to open up Scully to the audience . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In New Jersey in 1947 , a man is attacked while fixing a flat tire on the road near the woods . His corpse is later found with his leg chewed off , and a hairy humanoid is killed nearby . 
 Back in present @-@ day Washington D.C. , Scully brings to Mulder 's attention news about a body found in New Jersey with its arm and shoulder missing . Upon arriving at the Atlantic City morgue , Scully and Mulder discover that the body was eaten by a human . However , the local detective , Thompson , denies the agents access to the investigation . Scully returns to Washington to attend her godson 's birthday party , while Mulder stays in New Jersey . At the party , Scully meets Rob , the divorced father of one of the guests . Meanwhile , Mulder questions homeless people about the case . A man shows him a drawing of a humanoid and tells him that he saw it and that the other homeless people and cops know about it . Mulder gives his hotel room key to the man and sleeps in the alley , where he sees a shadowy , human @-@ like creature . He chases the creature , but is arrested before he can catch it . 
 The next morning , Mulder calls Scully to come bail him out . Afterwards , Scully brings Mulder to meet with Dr. Diamond , a professor of anthropology at the University of Maryland , before going on a date with Rob . The local park ranger contacts Mulder after finding the corpse of a wild man in the woods who he believes could be the Jersey Devil . Scully and Mulder bring the ranger and Dr. Diamond to the morgue , where the body has mysteriously vanished . Mulder believes that the Jersey Devil they are hunting is actually the creature 's mate who has headed into Atlantic City in search of food after her mate 's death . The agents , along with the ranger and Dr. Diamond , search for the creature in an abandoned building . While they are searching the building , Detective Thompson arrives with a SWAT team . 
 Mulder spots the creature and chases after her . He is attacked by the creature , which wounds him before Scully scares her away . The creature then escapes into the woods . Scully , Mulder , Dr. Diamond and the ranger manage to find the creature , which again escapes after being shot with a tranquilizer dart . However , the SWAT team soon finds and kills her . Mulder asks Detective Thompson why he killed the creature ; he responds that it is the same reason one would kill a rabid animal . The autopsy reveals no prehistoric bone structure , although human bones are located within her digestive tract . The autopsies of the male and female creatures also reveals that they likely had children . Mulder leaves to talk to an <unk> at the Smithsonian ; Scully turns down a second date with Rob to join him . Meanwhile in the woods , the child of the creatures appears , watching a father and son hiking . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer and series creator Chris Carter decided that rather than trying to present a typical Bigfoot @-@ like creature , he would present the Jersey Devil as a missing link . Carter was inspired to write the episode by an essay by E. O. Wilson regarding ants and a story he wrote that posed whether mankind was hellbent on its own extinction . The concept of mankind being carnivores and eating its own tail evolved into the idea of using an evolutionary mutation that was a throwback to the Neanderthal . A Greg Cannom werewolf outfit from a previous project was used for the costume of the creature . 
 The purpose of the scenes with Scully going on a date were to show the life she was passing on to work on the X @-@ Files and to open up Scully to the audience . Carter explained that he " tried to develop a love interest for Scully only to heighten the sexual tension between her and Mulder " . The scenes with Mulder in Atlantic City were shot against a blue screen in Vancouver , with stock casino footage added in in post @-@ production . 
 During filming , Claire Stansfield , who played the titular creature , was intended to appear nude , necessitating several solutions to be found for different scenes — some were shot with the actress wearing a nude @-@ colored outfit , while others were shot with her hair tied in such a manner as to keep her breasts covered . Several scenes for the episode were filmed in a Vancouver mansion , which served as an office , town @-@ house and restaurant . This same mansion was used for exterior shots in the later first season episode " Fire " . The forest scenes were filmed in a remote area accessible only by large trucks , while all of the exterior city scenes were filmed in and around a sheet metal store . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " The Jersey Devil " premiered on the Fox network on October 8 , 1993 , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on October 17 , 1994 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 6 @.@ 6 with a 12 share — meaning that in the US , 6 @.@ 6 percent of television @-@ equipped households , and 12 percent of all households actively watching television , were watching the program . It was viewed by 6 @.@ 2 million households . 
 In a retrospective of the first season in Entertainment Weekly , " The Jersey Devil " was rated a C , with the episode being called " corny " , and full of " needless philosophizing " ; it was noted however that the sub @-@ plot concerning Scully 's private life set the stage for the series ' future . Keith Phipps , writing for The A.V. Club , had mixed feeling about the episode , rating it a C. He felt that the scenes featuring Scully 's private life and Mulder speaking to a group of homeless people were effectively done , although the episode overall was " pretty silly " and took " a decent idea to a dead end " . Producer James Wong was critical of the episode , feeling that it " ran out of steam in the middle . It didn 't go anywhere ; there weren 't enough complications to it " , though he added that it had been " beautifully shot " . 
 = William S. Sadler = 
 William Samuel Sadler ( June 24 , 1875 – April 26 , 1969 ) was an American surgeon , self @-@ trained psychiatrist and author who helped publish The Urantia Book . The book is said to have resulted from Sadler 's relationship with a man through whom he believed celestial beings spoke at night . It drew a following of people who studied its teachings . 
 A native of Indiana , Sadler moved to Michigan as a teenager to work at the Battle Creek Sanitarium . There he met the physician and health @-@ food promoter John Harvey Kellogg , co @-@ inventor of corn flakes breakfast cereal , who became his mentor . Sadler married Kellogg 's niece , Lena Celestia Kellogg , in 1897 . He worked for several Christian organizations and attended medical school , graduating in 1906 . Sadler practiced medicine in Chicago with his wife , who was also a physician . He joined several medical associations and taught at the McCormick Theological Seminary . Although he was a committed member of the Seventh @-@ day Adventist Church for almost twenty years , he left the denomination after it disfellowshipped his wife 's uncle in 1907 . Sadler and his wife became speakers on the Chautauqua adult education circuit in 1907 , and he became a highly paid , popular orator . He eventually wrote over 40 books on a variety of medical and spiritual topics advocating a holistic approach to health . Sadler extolled the value of prayer and religion but was skeptical of mediums , assisting <unk> Howard Thurston , and embraced the scientific consensus on evolution . 
 In 1910 , Sadler went to Europe and studied psychiatry for a year under Sigmund Freud . Sometime between 1906 and 1911 , Sadler attempted to treat a patient with an unusual sleep condition . While the patient was sleeping he spoke to Sadler and claimed to be an extraterrestrial . Sadler spent years observing the sleeping man in an effort to explain the phenomenon , and eventually decided the man had no mental illness and that his words were genuine . The man 's identity was never publicized , but speculation has focused on Sadler 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Wilfred Kellogg . Over the course of several years , Sadler and his assistants visited the man while he slept , conversing with him about spirituality , history , and cosmology , and asking him questions . A larger number of interested people met at Sadler 's home to discuss the man 's responses and to suggest additional questions . The man 's words were eventually published in The Urantia Book , and the Urantia Foundation was created to assist Sadler in spreading the book 's message . It is not known who wrote and edited the book , but several commentators have speculated that Sadler played a guiding role in its publication . Although it never became the basis of an organized religion , the book attracted followers who devoted themselves to its study , and the movement continued after Sadler 's death . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Sadler was born June 24 , 1875 , in Spencer , Indiana , to Samuel <unk> Sadler and Sarah Isabelle Wilson . Of English and Irish descent , he was raised in Wabash , Indiana . Samuel did not enroll his son in public schools . Despite his lack of formal education , Sadler read many books about history as a child and became a skilled public speaker at a young age . Samuel was a convert to the Seventh @-@ day Adventist Church , and William was baptized into the denomination in 1888 and became devoutly religious . 
 In 1889 , William Sadler moved to Battle Creek , Michigan , to work at the Battle Creek Sanitarium , where he served as a bellhop and helped in the kitchen . He also attended Battle Creek College for one year when he was 16 . Both institutions had strong ties to his church and Sadler was mentored by local Adventist businessman John Harvey Kellogg , who heavily influenced Sadler 's views . Sadler 's early writings about health are similar to ideas advanced by John Kellogg , including the concept of <unk> , and the idea that caffeine has negative health effects . He similarly condemned the consumption of tobacco , meat , and alcohol . Although Sadler did drink later in his life . 
 Sadler graduated from Battle Creek College in 1894 and subsequently worked for John Kellogg 's brother , William K. Kellogg as a health @-@ food salesman . Sadler , a skilled salesman , persuaded William Kellogg to market his products through demonstrations in retail stores . In 1894 , he oversaw the establishment of Life Boat Mission , a mission that Kellogg founded on State Street in Chicago . Sadler operated the mission and published Life Boat Magazine ; its sales were intended to provide funds for Kellogg 's Chicago Medical Mission . Sadler also contributed articles to other Adventist publications , including the Review and Herald . Around 1895 , Sadler attended Moody Bible Institute in Chicago , Illinois , where he trained to be an evangelist , ultimately becoming an ordained minister in 1901 . 
 In 1897 , Sadler married John Kellogg 's niece , Lena Celestia Kellogg , a nurse whom he had met four years previously . Their first child , William , called Willis , born in 1899 , died a ten months later . Their second child , William S. Sadler Jr . , was born in 1907 . The couple had been interested in medicine for several years , but the loss of their child inspired them to pursue medical careers . In 1901 , they moved to San Francisco to attend medical school at Cooper Medical College . In San Francisco , he served as the " superintendent of young people 's work " for the church 's California conference and the president of a local Medical Missionary society . The couple also operated a home for Christian medical students . In 1904 , they returned to the Midwest , where they attended medical school , each earning a Doctor of Medicine degree two years later . Sadler was an early adopter of Freudian psychoanalysis , and believed that experiences individuals have as infants play a key role in their minds as adults , although he did not accept many of Freud 's ideas about sexuality or religion . 
 Although Sadler was a committed Adventist for much of his early life , he stayed less involved after John Kellogg was excommunicated in 1907 in the wake of a conflict with Ellen G. White , the church 's founder . The <unk> became disenchanted with the church and subsequently criticized it . Sadler rejected some Adventist teachings , such as White 's status as a prophetess and the importance of Saturday as Sabbath . He retained a positive view of White and rejected allegations that she was a charlatan . 
 = = Career = = 
 By 1912 , Sadler and his wife , both doctors by then , operated a joint practice in Chicago that catered to children 's and women 's health issues . Sadler initially focused on surgery , performing surgeries with his wife , but widened his practice to include psychiatric counseling in 1930 and became a consulting psychiatrist at Columbus Hospital . As a psychiatrist , Sadler advocated an eclectic mix of techniques , applying the theories of Sigmund Freud , Carl Jung , Alfred Adler , and Adolf Meyer . Sadler believed that religious faith was beneficial to mental health , and specifically promoted prayer , which he believed to be most effective in the context of Christian faith . However , he thought that religious beliefs were deleterious to mental health if based on fear . 
 Sadler and his wife moved into an Art Nouveau @-@ style house — the first steel @-@ frame residence in Chicago — on <unk> Parkway in 1912 . The couple operated their medical practice in the building . He was a member of the American Association for the Advancement of Science and of medical associations including the American Medical Association , the American Psychiatric Association , the American Pathological Society , and the American College of Surgeons . Sadler was also a member of the faculty of McCormick Theological Seminary , and taught pastoral psychology . He argued that pastors should be educated in basic psychiatry so they could recognize symptoms of mental illness in congregants . His students later recalled him as an engaging and humorous public speaker . 
 Sadler wrote about many topics . In 1909 , he published his first book , an evangelical work , titled Self @-@ Winning Texts , or Bible Helps for Personal Work . In the 1910s , he regularly worked all night on his writing projects . In addition to 42 books , most of which were about personal health issues , he wrote magazine articles . Many of Sadler 's books focused on popular self @-@ help topics ; historian Jonathan Spiro deems Sadler 's The Elements of Pep a " quintessential book of the 1920s " . In 1936 , Sadler published Theory and Practice of Psychiatry , a 1 @,@ 200 @-@ page work in which he attempted to provide a comprehensive outline of psychiatry . 
 Sadler also wrote about race : he had an interest in eugenics , likely owing to Kellogg 's interest in the concept , and Madison Grant 's book The Passing of the Great Race . Sadler wrote several works about eugenics , endorsing and heavily borrowing from Grant 's views , which posited that the " Nordic race " was superior to others . In his writings , Sadler contended that some races were at a lower stage of evolution — closer to Neanderthals than were other races — and were consequently less civilized and more aggressive . Sadler argued that alcoholism and " <unk> , insanity , and delinquency " were hereditary traits and that those who possessed them were breeding at a much faster rate than " superior human beings " . He feared that this issue could threaten the " civilization we bequeath our descendants " . He also believed that the majority of criminals were mentally ill . 
 In 1907 , Sadler began giving lectures on the Chautauqua adult @-@ education circuit , which featured itinerant speakers discussing self @-@ help and morality . Sadler often spoke about attaining physical and mental health without drugs . He also promoted hydrotherapy and discussed moral issues that related to men . Sadler , his wife , her sister , and a friend , formed a four @-@ member lecture company that gave two- or three @-@ day engagements , sometimes accompanied by an orchestra . Newspapers published favorable reviews of the productions . The lectures proved to be a lucrative endeavor : it was rumored that he became one of the best @-@ paid Chautauqua speakers . 
 Sadler believed that mediums were a source of false comfort and , after World War I ended , fought against the increased popularity of communication with the dead . In the 1910s and 1920s , attempting to expose purported <unk> became one of Sadler 's favorite pastimes and he regularly worked with a Northwestern University psychologist and Howard Thurston , then a prominent magician , while investigating psychics . Sadler may have met the magician Harry Houdini ( who was also a skeptic ) around this time . 
 = = Urantia revelation = = 
 According to the origin story of The Urantia Book , sometime between 1906 and 1911 , a woman consulted Sadler about her husband 's deep sleeping , prompting Sadler to observe him while he slept . He noticed that the sleeping man made unusual movements ; the man then purportedly spoke to Sadler in an unusual voice and claimed to be a " visitor ... from another planet " . Observers related that the man later claimed to carry messages from several celestial beings . Sadler suspected that the man 's words were drawn from his mind and sought a scientific explanation for the phenomenon . Although he examined the man for psychiatric problems , he was unable to make a satisfactory diagnosis . Sadler and five others subsequently visited the man on a regular basis , speaking with him as he slept . In 1925 , a large handwritten document was discovered in the patient 's house ; papers were said to appear in the house for years afterwards . Sadler brought the papers to his house and did not allow anyone to take them away , although some were allowed to read them on site . Sadler presumed that the documents were the product of automatic handwriting from the man 's subconscious , but changed his mind after further analysis . He made no public statements about their authenticity for years . 
 In 1924 , Sadler began hosting Sunday tea gatherings at his home , which could accommodate fifty guests . Many attendees worked in the medical establishment , and typically adhered to a progressive ideology . The group often held a forum to discuss the patient with the sleep issue and devise questions for him . The observers withheld the man 's name from the group , but relayed some of his statements . In 1925 , the forum , which then had thirty members , closed their meetings to visitors and began to require a pledge of secrecy . Sadler instructed forum members not to publicize what they learned , telling them that they had an incomplete picture of what was occurring . He also feared that the patient would face criticism if his identity were known . His identity has never been confirmed ; Joscelyn Godwin , of Colgate University , and skeptic Martin Gardner posit that the sleeping man was Wilfred Kellogg , the husband of Lena 's sister Anna . 
 In 1935 , Sadler concluded that the papers found in the sleeping patient 's house were not a hoax , citing their " genuineness and insight " , and arguing that the sleeping man was not a medium for the dead , but was used by living beings to communicate . Papers ceased appearing in the sleeping man 's house in the 1930s ; Sadler then took a clear role as leader of the discussion group . The forum discontinued their discussion meetings in 1942 , and The Urantia Book was published in 1955 ; it purportedly contained information from the celestial beings who had spoken through the sleeping man . The Urantia Book presents itself as the fifth " epochal " revelation God has given to humanity , and states that its purpose is to help humanity evolve to a higher form of life . It has four sections . The first section covers the nature of God and the universe , the second describes the portions of the universe nearest to Earth and Lucifer 's rebellion , the third details the history of Earth and human religions , and the fourth provides an account of Jesus 's life and accompanying doctrines . Sadler maintained that the teachings of the book were " essentially Christian " and " entirely harmonious with ... known scientific facts " . Although Sadler had left the Adventist church by the time The Urantia Book was published , its teachings are broadly consistent with some aspects of Adventist theology , such as soul sleep and <unk> . Journalist Brook <unk> @-@ Lanford argues in her 2011 profile of the Urantia movement that Sadler 's departure from the Adventist church gave him the desire to build a new religious movement , citing the emphasis that Sadler placed on the discussion of the Garden of Eden in The Urantia Book as evidence of his desire to start anew . Sadler hoped that the content of the revelation would convince people of its worth , and did not attempt to win supporters by emphasizing its author . <unk> @-@ Lanford argues that Sadler attempted to avoid placing an individual at the center of his beliefs owing to his disappointment in Ellen White ; however , Gardner believes that Sadler placed his faith in Wilfred Kellogg as he had in White . 
 Until her death in 1939 , Sadler 's wife Lena was a regular forum participant . One member subsequently objected to Sadler 's leadership , alleging that he became hungry for power after his wife 's death . In the early 1950s , the Urantia Foundation was established to publish The Urantia Book . Hubert Wilkins , a friend of Sadler who had a keen interest in the book , contributed the initial funding for publication costs . Rather than create an organized religion , the foundation 's leadership opted for what they called " slow growth " ; early adherents sought to educate people about the book 's teachings rather than found a church @-@ like organization . Sadler also disavowed proselytizing and publicity , although he wrote several works about the content of The Urantia Book . In 1958 , Sadler published a defense of the book , citing his experience exposing frauds and maintaining that the book was free of contradictions . Since his death , several reading groups , seminars , and churches have been established to study the book and to spread its message . 
 The authorship of the Urantia papers is disputed . Journalist Brad Gooch argues in his 2002 profile of the Urantia movement that Sadler was the author of The Urantia Book , citing similarities between some of its passages and contents of Sadler 's earlier writings . Gardner believes that Sadler wrote part of the papers , but heavily edited and revised most of them . He also contends that Sadler refused to include some material provided to him for inclusion in the book , and that he plagiarized from other works . Ken <unk> , a supporter of the Urantia Foundation , contends that statistical evidence of the text and Sadler 's other works indicates that he did not write , or extensively edit , The Urantia Book . 
 = = Final years = = 
 In 1952 , Sadler 's final book , Courtship and Love , was published by Macmillan Publishers . He wrote another title , A Doctor Talks With His Patient , but after it was rejected by a publisher , he decided to stop writing . In March 1957 , Sadler was appointed as the superintendent of Barboursville State Hospital in Barboursville , West Virginia , where he stayed until July 1958 . 
 As he grew older , Sadler generally remained in good health , with the exception of a condition that led to the removal of an eye . He died on April 26 , 1969 , at 93 years of age . Christensen recalls that Sadler was visited by friends and family while on his deathbed ; he spoke to them of his confidence in a joyful life after death . He received a full @-@ column obituary in the Chicago Tribune , which discussed his success as a doctor but not his association with The Urantia Book . 
 = = Reception = = 
 By the time of his death , Sadler was acclaimed for his accurate prediction of the advent of organ transplantation decades before the practice became commonplace . Members of the Urantia movement have also held high opinions of Sadler , sometimes idolizing him . In her 2003 profile of the Urantia movement , Lewis states that descriptions of Sadler by members of the movement could suggest that he possessed charismatic authority and is revered as " the chosen " . Gooch deems Sadler the " Moses of the Urantia movement " and casts him as " one of America 's homegrown religious leaders , an original along the lines of Joseph Smith " . He also applauds Sadler 's writings about mediums , describing Sadler 's book The Truth About Spiritualism as " one of the strongest attacks ever written on fraudulent mediums and their methods " . 
 Gooch believes there is a contradiction between Sadler 's advocacy of science and reason and his support of the avant @-@ garde theological , " inter @-@ planetary " contents of The Urantia Book . Gardner describes Sadler 's life story as " riveting " and summarizes him as an " intelligent , gifted " person who proved to be " gullible " about alleged supernatural revelations . He contends that Sadler eventually developed megalomania that was unrecognized by those around him and argues that Sadler succumbed to hubris and began to believe that he was a prophet , divinely chosen as the founder and leader of a new religion . Lewis disputes this characterization , maintaining that Sadler and those around him sought only to clarify and explain the teachings of the Bible . 
 = = Selected works = = 
 — — ( 1909 ) . Self @-@ Winning Texts , or Bible Helps for Personal Work . Central Bible Supply Company . OCLC <unk> . 
 — — ( 1914 ) . Worry and nervousness : or , The Science of Self @-@ Mastery . A. C. McClurg . OCLC <unk> . 
 — — ( 1915 ) . Physiology of Faith and Fear , or , The Mind in Health and Disease . A. C. McClurg . OCLC <unk> . 
 — — ( 1918 ) . Long heads and round heads ; or , What 's the matter with Germany . A.C. McClurg . OCLC <unk> . 
 — — ( 1922 ) . Race Decadence . A. C. McClurg . OCLC <unk> . 
 — — ( 1925 ) . The Elements of Pep . American Publishers Corporation . OCLC <unk> . 
 — — ( 1929 ) . The Mind at Mischief . Funk and Wagnalls . OCLC <unk> . 
 — — ( 1936 ) . Theory and Practice of Psychiatry . Mosby . OCLC <unk> . 
 — — ( 1938 ) . Living a Sane Sex Life . American Publishers Corporation . OCLC <unk> . 
 — — ( 1945 ) . Modern Psychiatry . Mosby . OCLC <unk> . 
 — — ( 1952 ) . Courtship and Love . Macmillan . OCLC <unk> . 
 = Fountain of the Great Lakes = 
 Fountain of the Great Lakes or Spirit of the Great Lakes Fountain is an allegorical sculpture by Lorado Taft in the Art Institute of Chicago South Stanley McCormick Memorial Court south of the Art Institute of Chicago Building in the Loop community area of Chicago in Cook County , Illinois , United States . It is a bronze work of art created between 1907 @-@ 1913 . The fountain depicts five women arranged so that the water flows through them in the same way water passes through the Great Lakes . Note that the Great Lakes waterflow starts in Lake Superior at 600 feet ( 180 m ) above sea level and continues eastward through each lake until it reaches Lake Ontario and then passes into the St. Lawrence River . The Fountain is one of Taft 's best known works . 
 The fountain was originally installed facing south where it remained until 1963 when it was moved next to the Morton Wing addition facing west where it sits today . In its original location it was visible from the Jackson and Michigan Avenue intersection once known as " route center " to the south . The fountain was commissioned by the Benjamin Ferguson fund and one surface references the title B. F. Ferguson Fountain of the Great Lakes . There is a relief sculpture of Benjamin Ferguson on the rear panel that has been hidden from view since the fountain was moved . 
 As the first commission from the Ferguson Fund , it experienced various funding delays . Additionally , the legal environment for land use in Grant Park was in flux at the time the commission was made , which caused delays in location selection . Once erected , the fountain received largely positive reviews , but a few critics questioned symbolism of the sculpture . Others were caught up in sociopolitical subtexts of the day , with regard to obscenity laws as it related to public art and this semi @-@ nude work . 
 = = Background = = 
 Benjamin Ferguson 's 1905 $ 1 million charitable trust gift to " memorialize events in American History " funded The Fountain , and many other public works in Chicago . As the city attempted to determine a policy for the fund 's use , Taft argued for fountains , allegorical statuary , discreetly placed portrait busts , and the adornment of bridges and park entrances in order to create long @-@ lasting beauty in addition to supporting the style of art he pursued . By September 1905 his name was linked in the press to the fund as a possible deserving recipient of its first commission . During the 1905 – 1906 year he began to place greater emphasis on sculpture in the classes he taught at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago , while simultaneously refining earlier allegorical . 
 The fountain is Taft 's response to Daniel Burnham 's complaint at the Columbian Exposition in 1893 that the sculptors charged with ornamenting the fairgrounds failed to produce anything that represented the great natural resources of the west , especially the Great Lakes . In Spring 1902 , Taft had assigned his students a work entitled Spirit of the Great Lakes . Five women had molded individual figures in response to an assignment and joined them in a tiered group with an imagined waterflow from the containers that they held . By mid @-@ January 1906 , Taft cast a plaster version , which he exhibited to Ferguson Fund <unk> Charles L. <unk> on January 17 at Taft 's Midway Studios . By the end of January , The Art Institute of Chicago displayed the work during its annual local works exhibition . It gained support during its four @-@ week display and won the Chicago Municipal Art League top sculpture award , and along with two other bust works he won the Society of Chicago Artists ' Medal for general excellence . The Municipal art League exhibition Chairperson , Mrs. William F. Grower , decided to form a subcommittee to help satisfy public support for the work to be the first Ferguson fund commission . However , even after the probate court released the bequest to the trustees on May 23 , 1906 , no commission was made because the trustees were undecided between a statuary and a portrait commission . 
 Additionally , Grant Park has been protected since 1836 by " forever open , clear and free " legislation that has been affirmed by several Illinois Supreme Court rulings . Aaron Montgomery Ward twice sued the city of Chicago to force it to remove buildings and structures from Grant Park and to keep it from building new ones . The second suit was still pending in 1906 and the legal cloud regarding deliberations of architectural limitations in Grant Park caused inaction . While the trustees remained silent , Taft sought wider public support by publishing a picture of Spirit of the Great Lakes in Century Magazine , which drew interest from Buffalo , New York as a host of the final work . By February 1907 , Buffalo Illustrated Times published a cover with an image of the work and a caption describing the anticipation of the <unk> Buffalo Society for obtaining the work for the city . However , by the end of 1907 Taft and his connections with the Trust Fund resolved his commission . 
 On October 31 , 1907 , the Ferguson Trust Board voted Taft a commission , and on December 16 , he signed a $ 38 @,@ 000 contract to commence work . The commission was the first commission from the Ferguson fund . Despite the financial agreement it would be some time before a determination of a site for the work . Ward 's suit continued to loom over the deliberations . One proposal was to locate it in Grant Park south of the Art Institute and another was to locate it at the 35th Street and Grand Boulevard ( Now Martin Luther King , Jr . Drive ) intersection that now hosts the Chicago Landmark and National Register of Historic Places @-@ listed Victory Monument . The 1909 Art Institute annual report mentioned a proposal for a sunken garden with a focal fountain south of the Institute . Legal issues regarding land use intensified in 1910 , and the Art Institute began to make modest plans for the fountain almost attached to the south wall of its own building . For the next few years there was little mention of the fountain as Taft focused on other work . Then in May 1913 , the fountain model at Taft 's Midway Studios was disassembled and taken to Jules Berchem 's foundry for bronze casting . Shepley , Rutan and Coolidge designed the base for the sculpture . It was subsequently assembled by mid @-@ August in preparation for a September 9 , 1913 dedication date . 
 In 1963 with the construction of the new Morton wing of the Art Institute of Chicago Building , the fountain was moved from its south facing position adjacent to the original building that was visible from the Historic Michigan Boulevard District to the west wall of the new wing in a position facing westward . The sculpture was positioned so that the plaque on the back , which reads that the " fund must be used for erecting and maintaining enduring statuary and monuments " , is no longer legible . 
 Although Taft is now better remembered for his books such as The History of American Sculpture , which is regarded as the first comprehensive work on the subject in the title , he was in his day well known for portraits and allegorical public sculpture , especially public fountains . The fountain was produced in the period following his assignment to design sculptures for William Le Baron Jenney 's Horticultural Building when he designed several large @-@ scale public works , including Fountain of Time . 
 At the time of the dedication , Taft described the Ferguson Fund commission to sculpt the fountain as a turning point in his career that led to increased publicity , more commissions , and growing recognition in the community , which combined to give him the encouragement for further commitment to the arts . He hoped that the Fountain of the Great Lakes would mark a new era of civic beautification and that it would also mark the beginning of the Chicago school of sculpture . The dream that Chicago would be the epicenter of the sculpting universe had been bred during the World 's Columbian Exposition twenty years earlier and rekindled with the Ferguson bequest . Fountain of the Great Lakes was a major career accomplishment for Taft , which propelled him beyond the level of a portraitist . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 The general opinion of Fountain of the Great Lakes was positive with some describing it as a cultural achievement for Taft and Chicago . The detractors conceded that as a figural composition , it was ideal in an Old World way . Critics voiced concern over the sculpture 's confusion and decorum . One of the basic problems for the critics was the propriety of the symbolism of artistic and attractive bronze figures posed as bodies of water . There had for some time been discussion of the depictions representing relative elevations and the flows of the waters as they seem to do . There were grumblings for closer association of the figures to the lakes by use of physical features , directional orientation and definite contours . Harriet Monroe , a general supporter of Taft 's artistic efforts , was disappointed in the lack of representative geographic configuration and the lack of spirit of the lakes as inland seas . With respect to this specific piece she had gone from being an ardent supporter who felt the model was " stupendous " to finding herself in " doubt " about the work . Taft 's human form depictions of the lake failed to capture the imagery of contemporary literature as it related to the power and fury of nature and the heroism of those struggling against those forces in works such as those of Hamlin Garland , Charles Eugene Banks , Willa Cather , or Robert Morss Lovett . Taft 's representations of Lakes with quiet trickling water was in keeping with his general theme of quiet dignity for public sculpture . On the day of the dedication the Chicago Daily News expressed this point with a photomontage juxtaposition of Taft 's fountain and Lake Michigan in all its fury . 
 After one got past the symbolism of the ladies as lakes , complaints existed about the lack of recognition of the contemporary form of female representation in art and literature which had gone from the Lillian Russell @-@ type to the Gibson Girl to the Lillie Langtry image while Taft had apparently chosen " packing house ladies " as his female form . When Taft presented live depictions of his sculptures with quintets of women , he faced complaints that three of his five sculptural compositions had nude upper torsos , while his live representations were fully clothed . The degree to which nudity in public art was more for the " sake of nudity than for the sake of art . " was a contemporary issue involving confiscated Paul Chabas fully nude painting , the Roman Catholic Church , critics , art dealers and collectors . All this led to a 1913 amendment to the Chicago municipal obscenity laws proposed by Mayor of Chicago Carter Harrison , Jr. to the Chicago City Council , which passed three months before the dedication of Taft 's partially nude fountain . Chicago Tribune writers stood behind Taft 's fountain using humor against what they described as a " streak of over @-@ accentuated puritanism " that could adversely affect public art . 
 Taft had Beaux @-@ Arts training that lent itself well to allegorical sculpture . For Fountain of the Great Lakes , Taft claimed an inspiration from the Greek mythology . Danaus ordered his 49 daughters to kill their husbands and condemned them to delivering water to a bottomless vessel in Hades . This was in keeping with Taft 's penchant for classical inspiration although this was a loose association where the number of daughters was reduced from 49 to 5 and the artist 's task did not seem to be nearly as cruel as the mythological one . 
 = Cannibal Holocaust = 
 Cannibal Holocaust is a 1980 Italian cannibal exploitation horror film directed by Ruggero Deodato from a screenplay by Gianfranco Clerici . It stars Carl Gabriel Yorke , Robert Kerman , Francesca Ciardi , Perry Pirkanen , and Luca Barbareschi . Influenced by the works of Mondo director Gualtiero Jacopetti , the film was inspired by Italian media reporting of Red Brigade terrorism . The coverage included news reports Deodato believed to be staged , an idea which became an integral aspect of the film 's story . Cannibal Holocaust was filmed primarily in the Amazon rainforest of Colombia with indigenous tribes interacting with American and Italian actors . 
 The film tells the story of a missing documentary film crew who had gone to the Amazon to film cannibal tribes . A rescue mission , led by the New York University anthropologist Harold Monroe , recovers the film crew 's lost cans of film , which an American television station wishes to broadcast . Upon viewing the reels , Monroe is appalled by the team 's actions , and after learning their fate , he objects to the station 's intent to air the documentary . The presentation of the film team 's lost footage , functioning similar to a flashback , revolutionized the found footage style of narrative filmmaking , later popularized by such films as The Blair Witch Project . 
 Cannibal Holocaust achieved notoriety as its graphic violence aroused a great deal of controversy . After its premiere in Italy , it was ordered to be seized by a local magistrate , and Deodato was arrested on obscenity charges . He was later charged with making a snuff film due to rumors that claimed some actors were killed on camera . Although Deodato was later cleared , the film was banned in Italy , Australia , and several other countries due to its portrayal of graphic brutality , sexual assault , and real depictions of violence toward animals . Some nations have since revoked the ban , though it is still upheld in several countries . Critics have suggested that the film is a commentary about civilized versus uncivilized society . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1979 , an American film crew disappears in the Amazon rainforest while on an expedition to film a documentary about indigenous cannibal tribes . The team consists of Alan Yates , the director ; Faye Daniels , his girlfriend and script girl ; and two cameramen , Jack Anders and Mark Tomaso . Harold Monroe , an anthropologist at New York University , agrees to lead a rescue team in hopes of finding the missing filmmakers alive . In anticipation of his arrival , the military conducts a raid on a local tribe known as the Yacumo and takes a young Yacumo male hostage in order to help negotiate with the natives . Monroe flies in via floatplane and is introduced to his guides , Chaco and his assistant , Miguel . 
 After several days of trekking through the jungle , the group encounters the Yacumo tribe . They arrange the release of their hostage in exchange for being taken to the Yacumo village . Once there , the group initially meets hostility and learns that the film team had caused great unrest among the people . The next day , Monroe and his guides head deeper into the rainforest to locate two warring cannibal tribes , the Ya ̧ nomamö and the Shamatari . They encounter a group of Shamatari warriors and follow them to a riverbank where they save a smaller group of Ya ̧ nomamö from certain death . Grateful , the Ya ̧ nomamö invite Monroe and his team back to their village , yet they treat the outsiders with suspicion . To gain their trust , Monroe bathes naked in a river . A group of friendly Ya ̧ nomamö women emerge to join him and playfully bathe with him . After , they take him to a shrine where he discovers the rotting remains of the missing American filmmakers . Upset and angered , Monroe decides it is of utmost importance to recover the films . He confronts the Ya ̧ nomamö , during which time he plays a tape recorder of tribal music for them . The intrigued natives agree to trade it for the first team 's surviving reels of film during a cannibalistic ceremony , in which Monroe has to take part . 
 Back in New York , executives of the Pan American Broadcasting System invite Monroe to host a broadcast of the documentary to be made from the recovered film . Monroe insists on viewing the raw footage first . The executives first introduce him to Alan 's work by showing an excerpt from his previous documentary , The Last Road to Hell . One of the executives tells Monroe that Alan staged the scene to get more exciting footage . Monroe then views the recovered footage , which first follows the group 's trek through the jungle . After walking for days , their guide , Felipe , is bitten by a venomous snake . The group <unk> Felipe 's leg with a machete in an attempt to save his life , but he quickly dies and is left behind . The remaining four succeed in locating the Yacumo . Jack shoots one in the leg so they can easily follow him to the village . Once they arrive , the film crew forces the entire tribe into a hut and burn it down in order to stage a massacre for their film . Monroe expresses concern over the staged scenes and poor treatment of the natives , but his worries are ignored . 
 Monroe finishes viewing the footage and expresses his disgust to station executives about their decision to air the documentary . To convince them otherwise , he shows the remaining , unedited footage , which only he has seen . The final two reels begin with the team locating a young Ya ̧ nomamö girl , whom the men film and gang @-@ rape as Faye tries to intervene . Afterward , they encounter the same girl impaled on a wooden pole by a riverbank , where they claim the natives killed her . They move on and are attacked by the Ya ̧ nomamö in revenge for the girl 's rape and death . Jack is hit by a spear , and Alan shoots him so the team can film how the natives mutilate his corpse . As the three surviving team members try to escape the scene , Faye is captured . Alan insists that they try to rescue her . Mark continues to film as she is raped , beaten to death and beheaded . The Ya ̧ nomamö immediately locate the last two team members as the footage ends with Alan 's bloody face . Disturbed by what they have seen , the executives order the footage destroyed . As Monroe leaves the station , he ponders to himself , wondering " who the real cannibals are . " 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 Production began in 1979 , when Deodato was contacted by German film producers to make a film similar to Jungle Holocaust , which was also directed by Deodato . He accepted the project and immediately went in search of a producer , choosing his friend Francesco <unk> . The two first flew to Colombia to scout for filming locations . Leticia was chosen as the principal filming location after Deodato met a Colombian documentary filmmaker at the airport in Bogotá , who suggested the town as a location ideal for filming . Other locations had been considered , specifically the locations where the film Burn ! , directed by Gillo Pontecorvo , had been shot , but Deodato rejected these locations due to lack of suitable rainforest . Leticia was only accessible by aircraft , and from there , the cast and crew had to travel by boat to reach the set . The locale presented many problems for the production , in particular the heat and sudden rain storms , which sporadically delayed filming . 
 = = = Development and writing = = = 
 Deodato said he conceived of the film while talking to his son about news coverage of the terrorism of the Red Brigades . Deodato thought that the media focused on portraying violence with little regard for journalistic integrity and believed that the media staged certain news angles in order to obtain more sensational footage . He reflected this behavior in the film team in Cannibal Holocaust , whom he said symbolized the Italian media . 
 The Italian screenwriter Gianfranco Clerici wrote the script under the working title Green Inferno . He had collaborated with Deodato in his previous films Ultimo mondo <unk> and The House on the Edge of the Park , the latter of which was filmed before Cannibal Holocaust but released afterward . The names of certain characters in the film were changed from Clerici 's screenplay : the name " Mark Williams " was changed to " Mark Tomaso " , and " <unk> Tommaso " was changed to " Faye Daniels " . 
 Clerici also wrote several scenes that did not make the film 's final cut . One of which depicted a group of Ya ̧ nomamö cutting off the leg of a Shamatari warrior and feeding him to piranhas in the river . This scene was to take place directly after Monroe 's team rescues a smaller group of Ya ̧ nomamö from the Shamatari . Attempts were made to film this scene , but the underwater camera did not operate properly , and the piranha were difficult to control . As a result , Deodato abandoned his efforts , and still photographs taken during the scene are its only known depiction . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 For the film , Deodato cast several inexperienced actors from the Actors Studio in New York City . Luca Giorgio Barbareschi and Francesca Ciardi were cast in part because they were Italian actors who also spoke English . Deodato decided to make the film in English to appeal to a wider audience and to lend the film credibility . However , he also needed to establish a European nationality so the film could be more easily distributed among European countries . Under Italian law , for the film to be recognized as Italian , Deodato had to have at least two native Italian @-@ speaking actors to star in the film . 
 Deodato also hired Perry Pirkanen and another actor from the Actors Studio to play Jack Anders and Alan Yates respectively . The latter dropped out shortly before the production team left for the Amazon ( he appears in the film as an ex @-@ colleague of Yates ) . Casting director Bill Williams chose Carl Gabriel Yorke for the role . Yorke , a stage actor who had studied under Uta Hagen and appeared in three national tours of One Flew Over the Cuckoo 's Nest , was chosen in part because he was the right size for the costumes and boots , which had already been purchased . Because Cannibal Holocaust was a non @-@ Union production , Yorke originally wanted to be credited under the alias Christopher Savage . 
 Robert Kerman had years of experience working in adult films under the pseudonym R. Bolla , including the well @-@ known Debbie Does Dallas . Kerman was recommended to Deodato for his previous film , The Concorde Affair , in which Kerman played an air traffic controller . Kerman went on to star in the Italian cannibal films Eaten Alive ! and Cannibal Ferox , both directed by Umberto Lenzi . Kerman 's then @-@ girlfriend , Kate ( last name unknown ) , was cast as one of the station executives , as the production needed an actress to be available in both New York City and Rome . 
 = = = Direction = = = 
 Deodato drew influence from the works of Paolo <unk> , Gualtiero Jacopetti , and Franco Prosperi , documentary filmmakers of whom Deodato was a fan . Prosperi and Jacopetti produced several Mondo films , which are documentaries similar to the one made in Cannibal Holocaust . These documentaries focused on sensationalistic and graphic content from around the world , including bizarre local customs , death , and general cruelty . Deodato followed suit in ways of similar content , such as graphic violence and animal slayings . Although fictional , Deodato created a similar exposé of worldly violence , such as <unk> 's , Prosperi 's and Jacopetti 's Mondo Cane . 
 Deodato filmed Cannibal Holocaust using the cinéma vérité technique he learned from his mentor Roberto Rossellini , a style which production designer Massimo Antonello <unk> called " hyperrealistic . " Film historian David Kerekes contends that the film 's sense of reality is based on the direction and the treatment of the film team 's recovered footage , noting that the " shaky hand @-@ held camerawork commands a certain realism , and ' The Green Inferno , ' the ill @-@ fated team 's film @-@ within @-@ a @-@ film here , is no exception , " and that " this very instability gives the ' Green Inferno ' film its authentic quality . " David Carter of the cult horror webzine Savage Cinema says that Deodato 's methods added a first @-@ person quality to the film team 's footage , claiming , " The viewer feels as if they are there with the crew , experiencing the horrors with them . " Deodato was proud of other aspects of the cinematography , namely the numerous moving shots using a standard , shoulder @-@ mounted camera ( that is , without the use of a steadicam ) . 
 Kerekes noted the animal slaughter and inclusion of footage from The Last Road to Hell as adding to the sense of reality of the film . Lloyd Kaufman of Troma Entertainment compares these scenes to Vsevolod Pudovkin 's theory of montage , saying , " In Cannibal Holocaust , we see the actors kill and rip apart a giant sea turtle and other animals . [ ... ] The brain has been conditioned to accept that which it 's now seeing as real . This mixture of real and staged violence , combined with the handheld camerawork and the rough , unedited quality of the second half of the movie , is certainly enough to convince someone that what they are watching is real . " Deodato says he included the execution footage in The Last Road to Hell to draw further similarities to Cannibal Holocaust and the Mondo filmmaking of Gualtiero Jacopetti . 
 Certain scenes in Cannibal Holocaust have also been noted as being similar to scenes in Antonio Climati 's Mondo film Savana violenta , specifically the scene in which Monroe bathes naked in the river and the scene of the forced abortion rite . The cinéma vérité style used heavily in Cannibal Holocaust was also used before in Climati 's first Mondo film , Ultime grida dalla savana , in a scene where a tourist is attacked and killed by a pride of lions . Another scene , in which a native man is captured , tortured , and murdered by mercenaries in South America , uses a similar filming style , and both scenes may have been influential on Deodato 's direction . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Principal photography began on 4 June 1979 . The scenes featuring the film team were shot first with handheld 16mm cameras in a cinéma vérité style that mimicked an observational documentary . After shooting with the film team was completed , Kerman flew down to film his scenes in the rainforest and then to New York to film exterior shots in the city . The interior shots of New York were later filmed in a studio in Rome . Production on the film was delayed numerous times while filming in the Amazon . After the original actor to play Alan Yates dropped out , filming was halted for two weeks as new casting calls began , and the crew awaited the arrival of Yorke from New York City . During principal filming with Kerman , the father of the actor who played Miguel was murdered , and production was again halted as the actor flew back to Bogotá to attend his father 's funeral . 
 Tensions on the Amazonian set were high , due in part to the location and to the content of the film itself . Yorke describes the set as having " a level of cruelty unknown to me , " while Kerman described Deodato as remorseless and uncaring ; he and Deodato got into long , drawn @-@ out arguments every day of shooting , usually because of remarks made by Deodato . These tensions were further heightened by unscrupulous payment practices . Yorke 's first payment for the film came in the form of Colombian pesos and was less than what had been agreed upon . Yorke refused to continue shooting until he was paid fairly in United States dollars . The native extras also went unpaid for their work despite their involvement in numerous dangerous scenes , including a scene in which they were forced to stay inside a burning hut for a prolonged period of time . Robert Kerman also noted unfair treatment of the natives by Deodato , stating , " He was a sadist . He was particularly sadistic to people that couldn 't answer back , people that were Colombian , [ and ] people that were Italian but could be sent home " . 
 One particular aspect that led to disagreement amongst the crew was the genuine killing of animals . Kerman stormed off the set while the death of the <unk> was filmed , and Yorke refused to participate in the killing of the pig , which he was originally scripted to execute , leaving the duty to Luca Barbareschi . When it was shot , the squeal of the pig subsequently caused Yorke to botch a long monologue , and retakes were not an option because they had no access to additional pigs . Perry Pirkanen cried after filming the butchering of a turtle , and crew members vomited off camera when a squirrel monkey was killed for the film . Actress Francesca Ciardi also objected to the film 's sexual content and did not want to bare her breasts during the sex scene between her and Carl Yorke . When she refused to comply with Deodato 's direction , he dragged her off the set and screamed at her in Italian . She had earlier suggested that she and Yorke actually have sex in the jungle before filming , in order to relieve the tension of the upcoming scene . When Yorke declined , she grew upset with him , alienating him for the rest of the shoot . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The film 's soundtrack was composed entirely by Italian composer Riz Ortolani , whom Deodato specifically requested because of Ortolani 's work in Mondo Cane , particularly the film 's main theme , " Ti <unk> nel cuore " ( also known as " More " ) . The music itself is a variety of styles , from a gentle melody in the " Main Theme " , to a sad and flowing score in " Crucified Woman " , and faster and more upbeat tracks in " Cameraman 's Recreation " , " <unk> in the Savannah " , and " Drinking Coco " . The instrumentals are equally mixed , ranging from full orchestras to electronics and synthesizers . Mondo Records and Death Waltz released the Official Soundtrack ( OST ) on vinyl in 2015 . 
 = = Reaction = = 
 Cannibal Holocaust premiered on 7 February 1980 in the Italian city of Milan . Although the courts confiscated the film based on a citizen 's complaint , the initial audience reaction was positive . After seeing the film , director Sergio Leone wrote a letter to Deodato , which stated ( translated ) , " Dear Ruggero , what a movie ! The second part is a masterpiece of cinematographic realism , but everything seems so real that I think you will get in trouble with all the world . " In the ten days before it was seized , the film had grossed approximately $ 200 million ; in Japan it grossed $ 21 <unk> , becoming the second highest @-@ grossing film of that time after E.T. the Extraterrestrial . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Critics remain split on their stances of Cannibal Holocaust . Supporters of the film cite it as a serious and well @-@ made social commentary on the modern world . Sean Axmaker praised the structure and set @-@ up of the film , saying , " It 's a weird movie with an awkward narrative , which Deodato makes all the more effective with his grimy sheen of documentary realism , while Riz Ortolani 's unsettlingly lovely , elegiac score provides a weird undercurrent . " Jason Buchanan of Allmovie said , " While it 's hard to defend the director for some of the truly repugnant images with which he has chosen to convey his message , there is indeed an underlying point to the film , if one is able to look beyond the sometimes unwatchable images that assault the viewer . " 
 Detractors , however , criticize the over @-@ the @-@ top gore and the genuine animal slayings ; they also point to an alleged hypocrisy that the film presents . Nick Schager criticized the brutality of the film , saying , " As clearly elucidated by its shocking gruesomeness — as well as its unabashedly racist portrait of indigenous folks it purports to sympathize with [ the real indigenous peoples in Brazil whose names were used in the film — the Ya ̧ nomamö and Shamatari — are not fierce enemies as portrayed in the film , nor is either tribe truly cannibalistic , although the Ya ̧ nomamö do partake in a form of post @-@ mortem ritual cannibalism ] — the actual savages involved with Cannibal Holocaust are the ones behind the camera . " 
 Robert Firsching of Allmovie made similar criticisms of the film 's content , saying , " While the film is undoubtedly gruesome enough to satisfy fans , its mixture of nauseating mondo animal slaughter , repulsive sexual violence , and pie @-@ faced attempts at socially conscious moralizing make it rather distasteful morally as well . " Slant Magazine 's Eric Henderson said it is " artful enough to demand serious critical consideration , yet foul enough to christen you a pervert for even bothering . " Cannibal Holocaust currently holds a 65 % " Fresh " rating on the film review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes , with an average rating of 5 @.@ 1 / 10 . 
 In recent years , Cannibal Holocaust has received accolades in various publications as well as a cult following . The British film magazine Total Film ranked Cannibal Holocaust as the tenth greatest horror film of all time , and the film was included in a similar list of the top 25 horror films compiled by Wired . The film also came in eighth on IGN 's list of the ten greatest grindhouse films . 
 = = = Interpretations = = = 
 Cannibal Holocaust is seen by some as social commentary on various aspects of modern civilization by comparing Western society to that of the cannibals . David Carter says " Cannibal Holocaust is not merely focused on the societal taboo of flesh eating . The greater theme of the film is the difference between the civilized and the uncivilized . Though the graphic violence can be hard for most to stomach , the most disturbing aspect of the film is what Deodato is saying about modern society . The film asks the questions ' What is it to be ' civilized ' ? ' and ' Is it a good thing ? ' " Mark Goodall , author of Sweet & Savage : The World Through the Shockumentary Film Lens , also contends the film 's message is " the rape of the natural world by the unnatural ; the exploitation of ' primitive ' cultures for western entertainment . " 
 Deodato 's intentions regarding the Italian media coverage of the Red Brigades have also fallen under critical examination and has been expanded to include all sensationalism . Carter explores this , claiming that " [ The lack of journalistic integrity ] is shown through the interaction between Professor Monroe and the news agency that had backed the documentary crew . They continually push Monroe to finish editing the footage because blood and guts equal ratings . " Lloyd Kaufman claims that this form of exploitative journalism can still be seen in the media today and in programming such as reality television . Goodall and film historians David Slater and David Kerekes have also suggested that Deodato was attempting to comment on the documentary works of Antonio Climati with his film . 
 Despite these interpretations , Deodato has said in interviews that he had no intentions in Cannibal Holocaust but to make a film about cannibals . Actor Luca Barbareschi asserts this as well and believes that Deodato only uses his films to " put on a show " . Robert Kerman contradicts these assertions , however , stating that Deodato did tell him of political concerns involving the media in the making of this film . 
 These interpretations have also been criticized as hypocritical and poor justification for the film 's content , as Cannibal Holocaust itself is highly sensationalized . Firsching claims that " The fact that the film 's sole spokesperson for the anti @-@ exploitation perspective is played by porn star Robert Kerman should give an indication of where its sympathies lie " , while Schager says Deodato is " pathetically justifying the unrepentant carnage by posthumously damning his eaten filmmaker protagonists with a ' who are the real monsters – the cannibals or us ? ' anti @-@ imperialism morale " . 
 = = Controversy = = 
 Since its original release , Cannibal Holocaust has been the target of censorship by moral and animal activists . Other than graphic gore , the film contains several scenes of sexual violence and genuine cruelty to animals , issues which find Cannibal Holocaust in the midst of controversy to this day . Due to this notoriety , Cannibal Holocaust has been marketed as having been banned in over 50 countries . In 2006 , Entertainment Weekly magazine named Cannibal Holocaust as the 20th most controversial film of all time . 
 = = = Snuff film allegations = = = 
 Ten days after its premiere in Milan , Cannibal Holocaust was confiscated under the orders of a local magistrate , and Ruggero Deodato was arrested and charged with obscenity . As all copies were to be turned over to the authorities , the film was distributed internationally via subterfuge . In January 1981 , during the film 's theatrical run in France , the magazine Photo suggested that certain deaths depicted in the film were real , which would have made Cannibal Holocaust a snuff film . Following the publication of the Photo article , the charges against Deodato were amended to include murder . The courts believed that the actors who portrayed the missing film crew and the native actress featured in the impalement scene were killed for the camera . 
 Compounding matters was the fact that the supposedly deceased actors had signed contracts with the production which ensured that they would not appear in any type of media , motion pictures , or commercials for one year following the film 's release . This was done in order to promote the idea that Cannibal Holocaust was truly the recovered footage of missing documentarians . During the subsequent court proceedings , questions arose as to why the actors were in no other media if they were alive as Deodato claimed . 
 To prove his innocence , Deodato had Luca Barbareschi get in contact with the other three actors , and the four of them were interviewed for an Italian television show . Deodato also explained in court how the special effect in the impalement scene was achieved : a bicycle seat was attached to the end of an iron pole , upon which the actress sat . She then held a short length of balsa wood in her mouth and looked skyward , thus giving the appearance of impalement . Deodato also provided the court with pictures of the girl interacting with the crew after the scene had been filmed . After they were presented with this evidence , the courts dropped all murder charges against Deodato . 
 = = = Censorship = = = 
 Although the snuff film allegations were disproven , the courts decided to ban Cannibal Holocaust due to the genuine animal slayings , citing animal cruelty laws . Deodato , Franco <unk> , Franco Di Nunzio , Gianfranco Clerici , producer Alda Pia and United Artists Europa representative Sandro <unk> each received a four @-@ month suspended sentence after they were all convicted of obscenity and violence . Deodato fought in the courts for three additional years to get his film <unk> . In 1984 , the courts ruled in favor of Deodato , and Cannibal Holocaust was granted a rating certificate of VM18 for a cut print . It would later be re @-@ released uncut . 
 Cannibal Holocaust also faced censorship issues in other countries around the world . In 1981 , video releases were not required to pass before the British Board of Film Censors ( BBFC ) , which had power to ban films in the United Kingdom . Cannibal Holocaust was released straight @-@ to @-@ video there , thus circumventing the possible banning of the film . In 1983 , the Department of Public Prosecutions compiled a list of 72 video releases that were not brought before the BBFC for certification and declared them prosecutable for obscenity . This list of " video nasties " included Cannibal Holocaust , which was successfully prosecuted and banned . The film was not approved for release in the UK until 2001 , albeit with nearly six minutes of mandated cuts . In 2011 , the BBFC waived all but one of these previous edits and passed Cannibal Holocaust with fifteen seconds of cuts . It was determined that the only scene that breached the BBFC 's guidelines was the killing of a <unk> , and the BBFC acknowledged that previous cuts were reactionary to the film 's reputation . 
 The film was also banned in Australia , Norway , Finland , New Zealand , and several other countries in 1984 . In 2005 , the Office of Film and Literature Classification in Australia revoked the ban , passing Cannibal Holocaust with an R18 + rating for the uncut print , including the consumer advice , " High level sexual violence , high level violence , animal cruelty . " In 2006 , the film was rejected for classification and banned in its entirety by the OFLC in New Zealand . Cuts to retain an R18 classification were offered by the Office , but they were eventually refused . 
 = = = Animal cruelty = = = 
 Many of the censorship issues with Cannibal Holocaust concern the on @-@ screen killings of animals , which remains a controversial issue . Deodato himself has condemned his past actions , saying " I was stupid to introduce animals . " Although six animal deaths appear onscreen , seven animals were killed for the production , as the scene depicting the monkey 's death was shot twice , resulting in the death of two monkeys . Both of the animals were eaten by indigenous cast members , who consider monkey brains a delicacy . The animals killed onscreen were : 
 A <unk> ( mistaken for a muskrat in the film ) , killed with a knife . 
 A large turtle , decapitated and its limbs , shell , and entrails removed . 
 A tarantula , killed with a machete . 
 A boa constrictor , killed with a machete . 
 A squirrel monkey , decapitated with a machete . 
 A pig , shot in the head with a shotgun at point blank range . 
 Film historian Andrew DeVos has argued that the animal deaths have been harshly condemned because of the film 's classification as exploitation , whereas animal mutilations in films perceived by critics to be classics or art films are often ignored . DeVos cites several examples of this double standard , including Rules of the Game , El Topo , and Apocalypse Now . The BBFC made a similar conclusion regarding the censorship of scenes in which the deaths were quick and painless , noting , " Removing these sequences would be inconsistent with the BBFC 's decisions to permit quick clean kills in several other films , such as Apocalypse Now . " 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Cannibal Holocaust was innovative in its plot structure , specifically with the concept of the " found footage " being brought back to civilization and later viewed to determine the fate of the crew that shot it . This was later popularized as a distinct style in Hollywood cinema by The Last Broadcast and The Blair Witch Project , both of which use similar storytelling devices . Each film uses the idea of a lost film team making a documentary in the wilderness , and their footage returned . Advertisements for The Blair Witch Project also promoted the idea that the footage is genuine . Deodato has acknowledged the similarities between his film and The Blair Witch Project , and though he holds no malice against the producers , he is frustrated at the publicity that The Blair Witch Project received for being an original production . The producers of The Last Broadcast have denied that Cannibal Holocaust was a major influence . Nonetheless , the film was cited by director Paco Plaza as a source of inspiration for the found footage films REC and REC 2 . 
 Cannibal Holocaust has been regarded as the apex of the cannibal genre , and it bears similarities to subsequent cannibal films made during the same time period . Cannibal Ferox also stars Kerman and Pirkanen , and star Giovanni Lombardo Radice says it was made based on the success of Cannibal Holocaust . Cannibal ferox has also been noted as containing similar themes to Cannibal Holocaust , such as comparison of Western violence to perceived uncivilized cultures and anti @-@ imperialism . In a mixed review , film journalist Jay Slater claims , " Certainly a tough customer , Cannibal Ferox still fails where Deodato succeeds . [ ... ] Lenzi attempts to tackle cultural defilement and racial issues , but Cannibal Ferox is nothing more than a shoddy exercise in sadism and animal cruelty . " Reviewer Andrew Parkinson also notes , " At the end , there is a basic attempt to validate Cannibal Ferox , posing that old chestnut of whether civilised man is actually more savage than the uncivilised tribespeople . " 
 Cannibal Holocaust also spawned numerous and similar unofficial sequels within the genre . These films were originally released under different titles that were then changed for various releases , although none have been directed by or associated with Deodato . The first of said films came in 1985 with Mario <unk> 's <unk> <unk> : <unk> in <unk> . Known in English as Amazonia : The Catherine Miles Story , it has also been released as Cannibal Holocaust 2 : The Catherine Miles Story . Slater also notes similarities between the score in Amazonia and Riz Ortolani 's score in Cannibal Holocaust . In 1988 , mondo director Antonio Climati made his film Natura <unk> , which was released as Cannibal Holocaust II in Thailand and the United Kingdom . Italian director Bruno Mattei also made two straight @-@ to @-@ video films back to back in 2003 , which have been released as Cannibal Holocaust sequels in Japan . 
 In 2005 , Deodato officially announced that he planned to make a companion piece to Cannibal Holocaust entitled Cannibals . Deodato was originally hesitant about directing his new film , as he thought that he would make it too violent for American audiences . While in Prague filming his cameo appearance in Hostel : Part II , however , Deodato viewed the first film and decided that he would direct after all , citing Hostel as a similarly violent film that made a mainstream release in America . Although the screenplay , written by Christine <unk> , was completed , a financial conflict between Deodato and the film 's producer led to the project 's cancellation . 
 Eli Roth 's 2013 film The Green Inferno takes its title from the fictional film in Cannibal Holocaust and is an homage to this and other grindhouse cannibal films of the era . 
 The film 's influence has extended to other media as well . In 2001 , Death metal band <unk> released a song entitled " Cannibal Holocaust " from the eponymous record . British Author <unk> Dutt also published Cannibal Metropolis , a novel inspired by Cannibal Holocaust set in an urban location . Like Cannibal Holocaust , the novelization features explicit scenes of violence , horror , and rape . 
 = = Alternate versions = = 
 Due to its graphic content , there are several different versions of Cannibal Holocaust in circulation which are edited to varying degrees . In the UK , the film was originally released on VHS by Go Video in 1982 with approximately six minutes of cuts . These cuts were self @-@ imposed by the distributor , possibly due to technical limitations of the tape . In 2001 , the film was passed for release on DVD by the BBFC with 5 minutes and 44 seconds of cuts to remove scenes of animal cruelty and sexual violence ; all but 15 seconds of these cuts were waived for a re @-@ release in 2011 . The latter release also includes a new edit sponsored by Deodato which reduces the violence toward animals . The DVD released by Grindhouse Releasing contains a " Cruelty Free " version of the film . Other versions also contain alternate footage shot specifically for Middle Eastern markets that does not depict nudity . 
 There are multiple versions of the Last Road to Hell segment of the film , which causes variances even among uncensored releases . An extended version of The Last Road to Hell includes approximately ten seconds of footage not seen in an alternate , shorter version . This additional footage includes a wide @-@ angle shot of firing @-@ squad executions , a close @-@ up of a dead victim , and extended footage of bodies being carried into the back of a truck . The longer version also includes different titles that correctly name the film team as they appear in the final film , while the shorter version gives the names of the film team that originally appear in the script . 
 The longer version of The Last Road to Hell is no longer found in the film 's negatives , but it was included in the original Dutch <unk> DVD release by EC Entertainment in 1999 . This digital version has since been re @-@ released and licensed for other various DVD releases in Europe . The Grindhouse Releasing DVD release in the United States and the Siren Visual release in Australia have the shorter version of The Last Road to Hell within the feature film but include the extended version in the special features on the first disc . 
 = History of the Jews in Mauritius = 
 Judaism is a minor religion in Mauritius . The first Jews arrived from Haifa , British Palestine ( now Israel ) , in the 1940s because they were denied entry to Palestine by the British Government . There currently are about 43 Jews in total in Mauritius . There is a synagogue in Curepipe , and a Jewish cemetery in <unk> . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Patria and World War II = = = 
 In September 1940 , the Atlantic , Milos , and Pacific , picked up 3 @,@ 600 Jews from Vienna , Gdańsk and Prague in Tulcea , Romania , to be sent to Palestine . The Jews that arrived in Palestine came without entry permits and were subsequently denied entry by the British government , specifically Sir Harold MacMichael , who was the High Commissioner . The British decided to deport the immigrants to either Trinidad and Tobago or Mauritius , both British colonies . On 25 November 1940 , the first ship carrying the 1 @,@ 800 Jews to Mauritius , the Patria , was accidentally bombed by the Haganah , who wanted the Jews to stay in Palestine . Their intentions were to cripple the ship . There were 260 fatalities and 172 injuries . There were only enough lifeboats for 805 , since the capacity was 805 when the Patria was a French ship . When the British repossessed the boat , they increased the capacity to 1 @,@ 800 but still had the same number of lifeboats . 
 The surviving Jews were sent to Atlit detainee camp . The remaining 1 @,@ 584 refugees from the Atlantic who were not on the Patria were initially also imprisoned in Atlit , but were sent to Mauritius on 9 December 1940 . When they arrived , they were sent to a detainment camp in Beau @-@ Bassin . 
 In the camp , the detainees suffered from tropical diseases and inadequate food and clothing . Jewish organizations such as the South African Jewish Board of Deputies , the Jewish Agency , and the Zionist Federation , sent food , clothing , medicine , and religious items to the detainees . Initially , a ban on interaction between the sexes was enforced ; the men were held in a former jailhouse and the women in adjacent iron huts . After the ban was lifted , 60 children were born in the camp . In total , 128 prisoners died in the camp , and were buried in the Jewish section of St. Martin Cemetery . At the end of World War II , the detainees were given the choice of returning to their former homes in Europe or immigrating to Palestine . Most chose Palestine , and on August 6 , 1945 , 1 @,@ 320 landed in Haifa . 
 = = = Present = = = 
 According to the population census of 2011 , there are 43 Jews in Mauritius . The current community is unrelated to the 1940s fugitives . The first Bar Mitzvah in Mauritius since World War II took place in 2000 . 
 There is also one synagogue in Curepipe , the Amicale Maurice Israel Center , which was opened in 2005 . The Saint Martin Cemetery in Saint Martin near Beau @-@ Bassin , is the only Jewish cemetery in <unk> . The bodies of the 127 died detainees as well as other Jewish people are buried there . Part of this has been fictionalised in Natacha <unk> 's ' The Last Brother ' . It relates the childhood experiences of Raj and David , a little boy from Prague . 
 Many , if not most Mauritians are unaware of the existence of such a graveyard in Mauritius . Each grave recalls the story of <unk> life in an alien country , the result of mass deportation from Haifa by the British of refugees who escaped Nazi barbarity , only to find themselves in jail in a tiny British island colony where they died of disease instead of creating new lives for themselves in Palestine / Israel . 
 = House sparrow = 
 The house sparrow ( Passer domesticus ) is a bird of the sparrow family Passeridae , found in most parts of the world . A small bird , it has a typical length of 16 centimetres ( 6 @.@ 3 inches ) and a mass of 24 – 39 @.@ 5 grams ( 0 @.@ 85 – 1 @.@ 39 ounces ) . Females and young birds are coloured pale brown and grey , and males have brighter black , white , and brown markings . One of about 25 species in the genus Passer , the house sparrow is native to most of Europe , the Mediterranean region , and much of Asia . Its intentional or accidental introductions to many regions , including parts of Australia , Africa , and the Americas , make it the most widely distributed wild bird . 
 The house sparrow is strongly associated with human habitations , and can live in urban or rural settings . Though found in widely varied habitats and climates , it typically avoids extensive woodlands , grasslands , and deserts away from human development . It feeds mostly on the seeds of grains and weeds , but it is an opportunistic eater and commonly eats insects and many other foods . Its predators include domestic cats , hawks , owls , and many other predatory birds and mammals . 
 Because of its numbers , ubiquity and association with human settlements , the house sparrow is culturally prominent . It is extensively , and usually unsuccessfully , persecuted as an agricultural pest , but it has also often been kept as a pet as well as being a food item and a symbol of lust and sexual potency , as well as of <unk> and vulgarity . Though it is widespread and abundant , its numbers have declined in some areas . The animal 's conservation status is listed as least concern on the IUCN Red List . 
 = = Description = = 
 = = = Measurements and shape = = = 
 The house sparrow is typically about 16 cm ( 6 @.@ 3 in ) long , ranging from 14 to 18 cm ( 5 @.@ 5 to 7 @.@ 1 in ) . It is a compact bird with a full chest and a large rounded head . Its bill is stout and conical with a culmen length of 1 @.@ 1 – 1 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 43 – 0 @.@ 59 in ) , strongly built as an adaptation for eating seeds . Its tail is short , at 5 @.@ 2 – 6 @.@ 5 cm ( 2 @.@ 0 – 2 @.@ 6 in ) long . The wing chord is 6 @.@ 7 – 8 @.@ 9 cm ( 2 @.@ 6 – 3 @.@ 5 in ) , and the tarsus is 1 @.@ 6 – 2 @.@ 5 cm ( 0 @.@ 63 – 0 @.@ 98 in ) . In mass , the house sparrow ranges from 24 to 39 @.@ 5 g ( 0 @.@ 85 to 1 @.@ 39 oz ) . Females usually are slightly smaller than males . The median mass on the European continent for both sexes is about 30 g ( 1 @.@ 1 oz ) , and in more southerly subspecies is around 26 g ( 0 @.@ 92 oz ) . Younger birds are smaller , males are larger during the winter , and females are larger during the breeding season . Birds at higher latitudes , colder climates , and sometimes higher altitudes are larger ( under Bergmann 's rule ) , both between and within subspecies . 
 = = = Plumage = = = 
 The plumage of the house sparrow is mostly different shades of grey and brown . The sexes exhibit strong dimorphism : the female is mostly buffish above and below , while the male has boldly coloured head markings , a reddish back , and grey underparts . The male has a dark grey crown from the top of its bill to its back , and chestnut brown flanking its crown on the sides of its head . It has black around its bill , on its throat , and on the spaces between its bill and eyes ( lores ) . It has a small white stripe between the lores and crown and small white spots immediately behind the eyes ( <unk> ) , with black patches below and above them . The underparts are pale grey or white , as are the cheeks , ear coverts , and stripes at the base of the head . The upper back and mantle are a warm brown , with broad black streaks , while the lower back , rump and uppertail coverts are greyish @-@ brown . 
 The male is duller in fresh non @-@ breeding plumage , with whitish tips on many feathers . Wear and preening expose many of the bright brown and black markings , including most of the black throat and chest patch , called the " bib " or " badge " . The badge is variable in width and general size , and some scientists have suggested that patches signal social status or fitness . This hypothesis has led to a " veritable ' cottage industry ' " of studies , which have only conclusively shown that patches increase in size with age . The male 's bill is black in the breeding season and horn ( dark grey ) during the rest of the year . 
 The female has no black markings or grey crown . Its upperparts and head are brown with darker streaks around the mantle and a distinct pale supercilium . Its underparts are pale grey @-@ brown . The female 's bill is brownish @-@ grey and becomes darker in breeding plumage approaching the black of the male 's bill . 
 Juveniles are similar to the adult female but deeper brown below and paler above , with paler and less defined <unk> . Juveniles have broader buff feather edges , and tend to have looser , scruffier plumage , like moulting adults . Juvenile males tend to have darker throats and white <unk> like adult males , while juvenile female tend to have white throats . However , juveniles cannot be reliably sexed by plumage : some juvenile males lack any markings of the adult male , and some juvenile females have male features . The bills of young birds are light yellow to straw , paler than the female 's bill . Immature males have paler versions of the adult male 's markings , which can be very indistinct in fresh plumage . By their first breeding season , young birds generally are indistinguishable from other adults , though they may still be paler during their first year . 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 Most house sparrow vocalisations are variations on its short and incessant chirping call . Transcribed as chirrup , <unk> , or <unk> , this note is made as a contact call by flocking or resting birds , or by males to proclaim nest ownership and invite pairing . In the breeding season the male gives this call repetitively , with emphasis and speed but not much rhythm , forming what is described either as a song or an " ecstatic call " similar to a song . Young birds also give a true song , especially in captivity , a warbling similar to that of the European <unk> . 
 Aggressive males give a trilled version of their call , transcribed as " chur @-@ chur @-@ r @-@ r @-@ it @-@ it @-@ it @-@ it " . This call is also used by females in the breeding season , to establish dominance over males while displacing them to feed young or incubate eggs . House sparrows give a nasal alarm call , the basic sound of which is transcribed as <unk> , and a shrill <unk> call in great distress . Another vocalisation is the " appeasement call " , a soft quee given to inhibit aggression , usually given between birds of a mated pair . These vocalisations are not unique to the house sparrow , but are shared , with small variations , by all sparrows . 
 = = = Variation = = = 
 There is some variation in the twelve subspecies of house sparrow , which are divided into two groups , the Oriental indicus group , and the Palaearctic domesticus group . Birds of the domesticus group have grey cheeks , while indicus group birds have white cheeks as well as bright colouration on the crown , a smaller bill , and a longer black bib . The subspecies Passer domesticus <unk> differs little from the nominate subspecies , except in the worn breeding plumage of the male , in which the head is speckled with black and underparts are paler . P. d. <unk> is slightly paler than the nominate but darker than P. d. bibilicus . P. d. bibilicus is paler than most subspecies , but has the grey cheeks of domesticus group birds . The similar P. d. persicus is paler and smaller , and P. d. niloticus is nearly identical but smaller . Of the less widespread indicus group subspecies , P. d. hyrcanus is larger than P. d. indicus , P. d. <unk> is paler , P. d. bactrianus is larger and paler , and P. d. parkini is larger and darker with more black on the breast than any other subspecies . 
 = = = Identification = = = 
 The house sparrow can be confused with a number of other seed @-@ eating birds , especially its relatives in the genus Passer . Many of these relatives are smaller , with an appearance that is neater or " cuter " , as with the Dead Sea sparrow . The dull @-@ coloured female can often not be distinguished from other females , and is nearly identical to the those of the Spanish and Italian sparrows . The Eurasian tree sparrow is smaller and more slender with a chestnut crown and a black patch on each cheek . The male Spanish sparrow and Italian sparrow are distinguished by their chestnut crowns . The Sind sparrow is very similar but smaller , with less black on the male 's throat and a distinct pale supercilium on the female . 
 = = Taxonomy and systematics = = 
 = = = Names = = = 
 The house sparrow was among the first animals to be given a scientific name in the modern system of biological classification , since it was described by Carl Linnaeus , in the 1758 10th edition of Systema Naturae . It was described from a type specimen collected in Sweden , with the name Fringilla domestica . Later the genus name Fringilla came to be used only for the common chaffinch and its relatives , and the house sparrow has usually been placed in the genus Passer created by French zoologist Mathurin Jacques Brisson in 1760 . 
 The bird 's scientific name and its usual English name have the same meaning . The Latin word passer , like the English word " sparrow " , is a term for small active birds , coming from a root word referring to speed . The Latin word domesticus means " belonging to the house " , like the common name a reference to its association with humans . The house sparrow is also called by a number of alternative English names , including English sparrow , chiefly in North America ; and Indian sparrow or Indian house sparrow , for the birds of the Indian subcontinent and Central Asia . <unk> names include <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> , mainly in southern England ; <unk> and <unk> , mainly in northern England ; spur and sprig , mainly in Scotland ; and <unk> or <unk> , from the German Spatz , in North America . 
 = = = Taxonomy = = = 
 The genus Passer contains about 25 species , depending on the authority , 26 according to the Handbook of the Birds of the World . Most Passer species are dull @-@ coloured birds with short square tails and stubby conical beaks , between 11 and 18 cm ( 4 @.@ 3 and 7 @.@ 1 in ) long . Mitochondrial DNA studies suggest that speciation in the genus occurred during the Pleistocene and earlier , while other evidence suggests speciation occurred 25 @,@ 000 to 15 @,@ 000 years ago . Within Passer , the house sparrow is part of the " Palaearctic black @-@ bibbed sparrows " group and a close relative of the Mediterranean " willow sparrows " . 
 The taxonomy of the house sparrow and its Mediterranean relatives is highly complicated . The common type of " willow sparrow " is the Spanish sparrow , which resembles the house sparrow in many respects . It frequently prefers wetter habitats than the house sparrow , and it is often colonial and nomadic . In most of the Mediterranean , one or both species occur , with some degree of hybridisation . In North Africa , the two species hybridise extensively , forming highly variable mixed populations with a full range of characters from pure house sparrows to pure Spanish sparrows . 
 In much of Italy there is a form apparently intermediate between the house and Spanish sparrows , known as the Italian sparrow . It resembles a hybrid between the two species , and is in other respects intermediate . Its specific status and origin are the subject of much debate . In the Alps , the Italian sparrow intergrades over a roughly 20 km ( 12 mi ) strip with the house sparrow , but to the south it intergrades over the southern half of Italy and some Mediterranean islands with the Spanish sparrow . On the Mediterranean islands of Malta , Gozo , Crete , Rhodes , and Karpathos , there are other apparently intermediate birds of unknown status . 
 = = = Subspecies = = = 
 A large number of subspecies have been named , of which twelve were recognised in the Handbook of the Birds of the World . These subspecies are divided into two groups , the Palaearctic domesticus group , and the Oriental indicus group . Several Middle Eastern subspecies , including Passer domesticus <unk> , are sometimes considered a third , intermediate group . The subspecies P. d. indicus was described as a species , and was considered to be distinct by many ornithologists during the nineteenth century . 
 Migratory birds of the subspecies P. d. bactrianus in the indicus group were recorded overlapping with P. d. domesticus birds without hybridising in the 1970s , so the Soviet scientists Edward I. <unk> and M. N. <unk> proposed the separation of the indicus group as a separate species . However , indicus @-@ group and domesticus @-@ group birds intergrade in a large part of Iran , so this split is rarely recognised . 
 In North America , house sparrow populations are more differentiated than those in Europe . This variation follows predictable patterns , with birds at higher latitudes being larger and those in arid areas being paler . However , it is not clear how much this is caused by evolution or by environment . Similar observations have been made in New Zealand , and in South Africa . The introduced house sparrow populations may be distinct enough to merit subspecies status , especially in North America and southern Africa , and American ornithologist Harry Church Oberholser even gave the subspecies name <unk> to the paler birds of western North America . 
 domesticus group 
 P. d. domesticus , the nominate subspecies , is found in most of Europe , across northern Asia to Sakhalin and Kamchatka . It is the most widely introduced subspecies . 
 P. d. <unk> von Jordans , 1923 , described from Majorca , is found in the Balearic Islands , southern France , the Balkans , and Anatolia . 
 P. d. <unk> ( Loche , 1867 ) , described from Algeria , is found in the Maghreb from Ajdabiya in Libya to <unk> Abbès in Algeria , and to Morocco 's Atlantic coast . It hybridises extensively with the Spanish sparrow , especially in the eastern part of its range . 
 P. d. niloticus Nicoll and <unk> , 1909 , described from Faiyum , Egypt , is found along the Nile north of Wadi Halfa , Sudan . It intergrades with bibilicus in the Sinai , and with <unk> in a narrow zone around Wadi Halfa . It has been recorded in Somaliland . 
 P. d. persicus Zarudny and Kudashev , 1916 , described from the Karun River in Khuzestan , Iran , is found in the western and central Iran south of the Alborz mountains , intergrading with indicus in eastern Iran , and Afghanistan . 
 P. d. <unk> Hartert , 1910 , described from Palestine , is found in the Middle East from Cyprus and south @-@ eastern Turkey to the Sinai in the west and from Azerbaijan to Kuwait in the east . 
 indicus group 
 P. d. hyrcanus Zarudny and Kudashev , 1916 , described from Gorgan , Iran , is found along the southern coast of the Caspian Sea from Gorgan to south @-@ eastern Azerbaijan . It intergrades with persicus in the Alborz mountains , and with bibilicus to the west . It is the subspecies with the smallest range . 
 P. d. bactrianus Zarudny and Kudashev , 1916 , described from Tashkent , is found in southern Kazakhstan to the Tian Shan and northern Iran and Afghanistan . It intergrades with persicus in Baluchistan and with indicus across central Afghanistan . Unlike most other house sparrow subspecies , it is almost entirely migratory , wintering in the plains of the northern Indian subcontinent . It is found in open country rather than in settlements , which are occupied by the Eurasian tree sparrow in its range . There is an exceptional record from Sudan . 
 P. d. parkini Whistler , 1920 , described from Srinagar , Kashmir , is found in the western Himalayas from the Pamir Mountains to south @-@ eastern Nepal . It is migratory , like bactrianus . 
 P. d. indicus Jardine and Selby , 1831 , described from Bangalore , is found in the Indian subcontinent south of the Himalayas , in Sri Lanka , western Southeast Asia , eastern Iran , south @-@ western Arabia and southern Israel . 
 P. d. <unk> Ticehurst and Cheeseman , 1924 , described from <unk> in Saudi Arabia , is found in north @-@ eastern Arabia . 
 P. d. <unk> C. L. Brehm , 1855 , described from Khartoum , Sudan , is found in the Nile valley from Wadi Halfa south to <unk> in northern South Sudan , and in eastern Sudan , northern Ethiopia to the Red Sea coast in Eritrea . It has also been introduced to Mohéli in the Comoros . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 The house sparrow originated in the Middle East and spread , along with agriculture , to most of Eurasia and parts of North Africa . Since the mid @-@ nineteenth century , it has reached most of the world , chiefly due to deliberate introductions , but also through natural and shipborne dispersal . Its introduced range encompasses most of North America , Central America , southern South America , southern Africa , part of West Africa , Australia , New Zealand , and islands throughout the world . It has greatly extended its range in northern Eurasia since the 1850s , and continues to do so , as was shown by the colonisations around 1990 of Iceland and <unk> Island , Japan . The extent of its range makes it the most widely distributed wild bird on the planet . 
 = = = Introductions = = = 
 The house sparrow has become highly successful in most parts of the world where it has been introduced . This is mostly due to its early adaptation to living with humans , and its adaptability to a wide range of conditions . Other factors may include its robust immune response , compared to the Eurasian tree sparrow . Where introduced , it can extend its range quickly , sometimes at a rate of over 230 km ( 140 mi ) per year . In many parts of the world it has been characterised as a pest , and poses a threat to native birds . A few introductions have died out or been of limited success , such as those to Greenland and Cape Verde . 
 The first of many successful introductions to North America occurred when birds from England were released in New York City , in 1852 in order to control the ravages of the linden moth . The house sparrow now occurs from the Northwest Territories to southern Panama , and it is one of the most abundant birds in North America . The house sparrow was first introduced to Australia in 1863 at Melbourne and is common throughout the eastern part of the continent , but has been prevented from establishing itself in Western Australia , where every house sparrow found in the state is killed . House sparrows were introduced in New Zealand in 1859 , and from there reached many of the Pacific islands , including Hawaii . 
 In southern Africa birds of both the European subspecies domesticus and the Indian subspecies indicus were introduced around 1900 . Birds of domesticus ancestry are confined to a few towns , while indicus birds have spread rapidly , reaching Tanzania in the 1980s . Despite this success , native relatives such as the Cape sparrow also occur in towns , competing successfully with it . In South America , it was first introduced near Buenos Aires around 1870 , and quickly became common in most of the southern part of the continent . It now occurs almost continuously from Tierra del Fuego to the fringes of Amazonia , with isolated populations as far north as coastal Venezuela . 
 = = = Habitat = = = 
 The house sparrow is closely associated with human habitation and cultivation . It is not an obligate commensal of humans as some have suggested : Central Asian house sparrows usually breed away from humans in open country , and birds elsewhere are occasionally found away from humans . The only terrestrial habitats that the house sparrow does not inhabit are dense forest and tundra . Well adapted to living around humans , it frequently lives and even breeds indoors , especially in factories , warehouses and zoos . It has been recorded breeding in an English coal mine 640 m ( 2 @,@ 100 ft ) below ground , and feeding on the Empire State Building 's observation deck at night . It reaches its greatest densities in urban centres , but its reproductive success is greater in suburbs , where insects are more abundant . On a larger scale , it is most abundant in wheat @-@ growing areas such as the Midwestern United States . 
 It tolerates a variety of climates , but prefers drier conditions , especially in moist tropical climates . It has several adaptations to dry areas , including a high salt tolerance and an ability to survive without water by ingesting berries . In most of eastern Asia the house sparrow is entirely absent , replaced by the Eurasian tree sparrow . Where these two species overlap , the house sparrow is usually more common than the Eurasian tree sparrow , but one species may replace the other in a manner that ornithologist Maud Doria Haviland described as " random , or even capricious " . In most of its range the house sparrow is extremely common , despite some declines , but in marginal habitats such as rainforest or mountain ranges , its distribution can be spotty . 
 = = Behaviour = = 
 = = = Social behaviour = = = 
 The house sparrow is a very social bird . It is gregarious at all seasons when feeding , often forming flocks with other types of bird . It roosts communally , its nests are usually grouped together in clumps , and it engages in social activities such as dust or water bathing and " social singing " , in which birds call together in bushes . The house sparrow feeds mostly on the ground , but it flocks in trees and bushes . At feeding stations and nests , female house sparrows are dominant despite their smaller size , and in the reproductive period ( usually spring or summer ) , being dominant , they can fight for males . 
 = = = Sleep and roosting = = = 
 House sparrows sleep with the bill tucked underneath the scapular feathers . Outside of the reproductive season , they often roost communally in trees or shrubs . There is much communal chirping before and after the birds settle in the roost in the evening , as well as before the birds leave the roost in the morning . Some congregating sites separate from the roost may be visited by the birds prior to settling in for the night . 
 = = = Body maintenance = = = 
 Dust or water bathing is common and often occurs in groups . Anting is rare . Head scratching is done with the leg over the drooped wing . 
 = = = Feeding = = = 
 As an adult , the house sparrow mostly feeds on the seeds of grains and weeds , but it is opportunistic and adaptable , and eats whatever foods are available . In towns and cities it often scavenges for food in garbage containers and congregates in the outdoors of restaurants and other eating establishments to feed on leftover food and crumbs . It can perform complex tasks to obtain food , such as opening automatic doors to enter supermarkets , clinging to hotel walls to watch vacationers on their balconies , and nectar robbing <unk> flowers . In common with many other birds , the house sparrow requires grit to digest the harder items in its diet . Grit can be either stone , often grains of masonry , or the shells of eggs or snails ; oblong and rough grains are preferred . 
 Several studies of the house sparrow in temperate agricultural areas have found the proportion of seeds in its diet to be about 90 % . It will eat almost any seeds , but where it has a choice , it prefers oats and wheat . In urban areas , the house sparrow feeds largely on food provided directly or indirectly by humans , such as bread , though it prefers raw seeds . The house sparrow also eats some plant matter besides seeds , including buds , berries , and fruits such as grapes and cherries . In temperate areas , the house sparrow has an unusual habit of tearing flowers , especially yellow ones , in the spring . 
 Animals form another important part of the house sparrow 's diet , chiefly insects , of which beetles , caterpillars , dipteran flies , and aphids are especially important . Various non @-@ insect arthropods are eaten , as are molluscs and crustaceans where available , earthworms , and even vertebrates such as lizards and frogs . Young house sparrows are fed mostly on insects until about fifteen days after hatching . They are also given small quantities of seeds , spiders , and grit . In most places , grasshoppers and crickets are the most abundant foods of nestlings . True bugs , ants , sawflies , and beetles are also important , but house sparrows will take advantage of whatever foods are abundant to feed their young . House sparrows have been observed stealing prey from other birds , including American robins . 
 = = = Locomotion = = = 
 The house sparrow 's flight is direct ( not undulating ) and flapping , averaging 45 @.@ 5 kilometres per hour ( 28 @.@ 3 miles per hour ) and about 15 wingbeats per second . On the ground , the house sparrow typically hops rather than walks . It can swim when pressed to do so , by pursuit from predators . Captive birds have been recorded diving and swimming short distances underwater . 
 = = = Dispersal and migration = = = 
 Most house sparrows do not move more than a few kilometres during their lifetime . However , there is limited migration in all regions . Some young birds disperse long distances , especially on coasts , and mountain birds move to lower elevations in winter . Two subspecies , bactrianus and parkini , are predominantly migratory . Unlike the birds in sedentary populations that migrate , birds of migratory subspecies prepare for migration by putting on weight . 
 = = = Breeding = = = 
 House sparrows can breed in the breeding season immediately following their hatching , and sometimes attempt to do so . Some birds breeding for the first time in tropical areas are only a few months old and still have juvenile plumage . Birds breeding for the first time are rarely successful in raising young , and reproductive success increases with age , as older birds breed earlier in the breeding season , and fledge more young . As the breeding season approaches , hormone releases trigger enormous increases in the size of the sexual organs and changes in day length lead males to start calling by nesting sites . The timing of mating and egg @-@ laying varies geographically , and between specific locations and years . This is because a sufficient supply of insects is needed for egg formation and feeding nestlings . 
 Males take up nesting sites before the breeding season , by frequently calling beside them . Unmated males start nest construction and call particularly frequently to attract females . When a female approaches a male during this period , the male displays by moving up and down while drooping and shivering his wings , pushing up his head , raising and spreading his tail , and showing his bib . Males may try to mate with females while calling or displaying . In response , a female will adopt a threatening posture and attack a male before flying away , pursued by the male . The male displays in front of her , attracting other males , who also pursue and display to the female . This group display usually does not immediately result in copulations . Other males usually do not copulate with the female . Copulation is typically initiated by the female giving a soft dee @-@ dee @-@ dee call to the male . Birds of a pair copulate frequently until the female is laying eggs , and the male mounts the female repeatedly each time a pair mates . 
 The house sparrow is monogamous , and typically mates for life . Birds from pairs often engage in extra @-@ pair copulations , so about 15 % of house sparrow fledglings are unrelated to their mother 's mate . Male house sparrows guard their mates carefully to avoid being cuckolded , and most extra @-@ pair copulation occurs away from nest sites . Males may sometimes have multiple mates , and bigamy is mostly limited by aggression between females . Many birds do not find a nest and a mate , and instead may serve as helpers around the nest for mated pairs , a role which increases the chances of being chosen to replace a lost mate . Lost mates of both sexes can be replaced quickly during the breeding season . The formation of a pair and the bond between the two birds is tied to the holding of a nest site , though paired house sparrows can recognise each other away from the nest . 
 = = = = Nesting = = = = 
 Nest sites are varied , though cavities are preferred . Nests are most frequently built in the eaves and other crevices of houses . Holes in cliffs and banks , or tree hollows , are also used . A sparrow sometimes excavates its own nests in sandy banks or rotten branches , but more frequently uses the nests of other birds such as those of swallows in banks and cliffs , and old tree cavity nests . It usually uses deserted nests , though sometimes it usurps active ones . Tree hollows are more commonly used in North America than in Europe , putting the sparrows in competition with bluebirds and other North American cavity nesters , and thereby contributing to their population declines . 
 Especially in warmer areas , the house sparrow may build its nests in the open , on the branches of trees , especially evergreens and hawthorns , or in the nests of large birds such as storks or magpies . In open nesting sites , breeding success tends to be lower , since breeding begins late and the nest can easily be destroyed or damaged by storms . Less common nesting sites include street lights and neon signs , favoured for their warmth ; and the old open @-@ topped nests of other songbirds , which are then domed over . 
 The nest is usually domed , though it may lack a roof in enclosed sites . It has an outer layer of stems and roots , a middle layer of dead grass and leaves , and a lining of feathers , as well as of paper and other soft materials . Nests typically have external dimensions of 20 × 30 cm ( 8 × 12 in ) , but their size varies greatly . The building of the nest is initiated by the unmated male while displaying to females . The female assists in building , but is less active than the male . Some nest building occurs throughout the year , especially after moult in autumn . In colder areas house sparrows build specially created roost nests , or roost in street lights , to avoid losing heat during the winter . House sparrows do not hold territories , but they defend their nests aggressively against intruders of the same sex . 
 House sparrows ' nests support a wide range of scavenging insects , including nest flies such as <unk> <unk> , Protocalliphora blowflies , and over 1 @,@ 400 species of beetle . 
 = = = = Eggs and young = = = = 
 Clutches usually comprise four or five eggs , though numbers from one to ten have been recorded . At least two clutches are usually laid , and up to seven a year may be laid in the tropics or four a year in temperate latitudes . When fewer clutches are laid in a year , especially at higher latitudes , the number of eggs per clutch is greater . Central Asian house sparrows , which migrate and have only one clutch a year , average 6 @.@ 5 eggs in a clutch . Clutch size is also affected by environmental and seasonal conditions , female age , and breeding density . 
 Some intraspecific brood parasitism occurs , and instances of unusually large numbers of eggs in a nest may be the result of females laying eggs in the nests of their neighbours . Such foreign eggs are sometimes recognised and ejected by females . The house sparrow is a victim of interspecific brood parasites , but only rarely , since it usually uses nests in holes too small for parasites to enter , and it feeds its young foods unsuitable for young parasites . In turn , the house sparrow has once been recorded as a brood parasite of the American cliff swallow . 
 The eggs are white , bluish @-@ white , or greenish @-@ white , spotted with brown or grey . <unk> in shape , they range from 20 to 22 mm ( 0 @.@ 79 to 0 @.@ 87 in ) in length and 14 to 16 mm ( 0 @.@ 55 to 0 @.@ 63 in ) in width , have an average mass of 2 @.@ 9 g ( 0 @.@ 10 oz ) , and an average surface area of 9 @.@ 18 cm2 ( 1 @.@ 423 in2 ) . Eggs from the tropical subspecies are distinctly smaller . Eggs begin to develop with the deposition of yolk in the ovary a few days before ovulation . In the day between ovulation and laying , egg white forms , followed by eggshell . Eggs laid later in a clutch are larger , as are those laid by larger females , and egg size is hereditary . Eggs decrease slightly in size from laying to hatching . The yolk comprises 25 % of the egg , the egg white 68 % , and the shell 7 % . Eggs are watery , being 79 % liquid , and otherwise mostly protein . 
 The female develops a brood patch of bare skin and plays the main part in incubating the eggs . The male helps , but can only cover the eggs rather than truly incubate them . The female spends the night incubating during this period , while the male roosts near the nest . Eggs hatch at the same time , after a short incubation period lasting 11 – 14 days , and exceptionally for as many as 17 or as few as 9 . The length of the incubation period decreases as ambient temperature increases later in the breeding season . 
 Young house sparrows remain in the nest for 11 to 23 days , normally 14 to 16 days . During this time , they are fed by both parents . As newly hatched house sparrows do not have sufficient insulation they are brooded for a few days , or longer in cold conditions . The parents swallow the droppings produced by the hatchlings during the first few days ; later , the droppings are moved up to 20 m ( 66 ft ) away from the nest . 
 The chicks ' eyes open after about four days and , at an age of about eight days , the young birds get their first down . If both parents perish , the ensuing intensive begging sounds of the young will often attract replacement parents who feed them until they can sustain themselves . All the young in the nest leave it during the same period of a few hours . At this stage they are normally able to fly . They start feeding themselves partly after one or two days , and sustain themselves completely after 7 to 10 days , 14 at the latest . 
 = = Survival = = 
 In adult house sparrows , annual survival is 45 – 65 % . After fledging and leaving the care of their parents , young sparrows have a high mortality rate , which lessens as they grow older and more experienced . Only about 20 – 25 % of birds hatched survive to their first breeding season . The oldest known wild house sparrow lived for nearly two decades ; it was found dead 19 years and 9 months after it was ringed in Denmark . The oldest recorded captive house sparrow lived for 23 years . The typical ratio of males to females in a population is uncertain due to problems in collecting data , but a very slight preponderance of males at all ages is usual . 
 = = = Predation = = = 
 The house sparrow 's main predators are cats and birds of prey , but many other animals prey on them , including corvids , squirrels , and even humans — the house sparrow has been consumed in the past by people in many parts of the world , and it still is in parts of the Mediterranean . Most species of bird of prey have been recorded preying on the house sparrow in places where there are extensive records . Accipiters and the merlin in particular are major predators , though cats are likely to have a greater impact on house sparrow populations . The house sparrow is also a common victim of roadkill ; on European roads , it is the bird most frequently found dead . 
 = = = Parasites and disease = = = 
 The house sparrow is host to a huge number of parasites and diseases , and the effect of most is unknown . Ornithologist Ted R. Anderson listed thousands , noting that his list was incomplete . The commonly recorded bacterial pathogens of the house sparrow are often those common in humans , and include Salmonella and Escherichia coli . Salmonella is common in the house sparrow , and a comprehensive study of house sparrow disease found it in 13 % of sparrows tested . Salmonella epidemics in the spring and winter can kill large numbers of sparrows . The house sparrow hosts avian pox and avian malaria , which it has spread to the native forest birds of Hawaii . Many of the diseases hosted by the house sparrow are also present in humans and domestic animals , for which the house sparrow acts as a reservoir host . <unk> such as the West Nile virus , which most commonly infect insects and mammals , survive winters in temperate areas by going dormant in birds such as the house sparrow . There are a few records of disease extirpating house sparrow populations , especially from Scottish islands , but this seems to be rare . 
 The house sparrow is infested by a number of external parasites , which usually cause little harm to adult sparrows . In Europe , the most common mite found on sparrows is Proctophyllodes , the most common ticks are Argas <unk> and Ixodes <unk> , and the most common flea on the house sparrow is Ceratophyllus gallinae . A number of chewing lice occupy different niches on the house sparrow 's body . Menacanthus lice occur across the house sparrow 's body , where they feed on blood and feathers , while Brueelia lice feed on feathers and Philopterus <unk> occurs on the head . 
 = = Physiology = = 
 House sparrows express strong circadian rhythms of activity in the laboratory . They were among the first bird species to be seriously studied in terms of their circadian activity and <unk> , in part because of their availability and adaptability in captivity , but also because they can " find their way " and remain rhythmic in constant darkness . Such studies have found that the pineal gland is a central part of the house sparrow 's circadian system : removal of the pineal eliminates the circadian rhythm of activity , and transplant of the pineal into another individual confers to this individual the rhythm phase of the donor bird . The suprachiasmatic nuclei of the hypothalamus have also been shown to be an important component of the circadian system of house sparrows . The photoreceptors involved in the synchronisation of the circadian clock to the external light @-@ dark cycle are located in the brain and can be stimulated by light reaching them directly though the skull , as revealed by experiments in which blind sparrows , which normally can still synchronise to the light @-@ dark cycle , failed to do so once India ink was injected as a screen under the skin on top of their skull . 
 Similarly , even when blind , house sparrows continue to be <unk> , i.e. show reproductive development when the days are long but not when the days are short . This response is stronger when the feathers on top of the head are plucked , and is eliminated when India ink is injected under the skin at the top of the head , showing that the photoreceptors involved in the <unk> response to <unk> are located inside the brain . 
 House sparrows have also been used in studies of <unk> entrainment ( i.e. synchronisation to an external cycle other than light and dark ) : for example , in constant darkness , a situation in which the birds would normally reveal their endogenous , non @-@ 24 @-@ hour , " free @-@ running " rhythms of activity , they instead show 24 @-@ hour periodicity if they are exposed to two hours of chirp playbacks every 24 hours , matching their daily activity onsets with the daily playback onsets . House sparrows in constant dim light can also be entrained to a daily cycle based on the presence of food . Finally , house sparrows in constant darkness can be entrained to a cycle of high and low temperature , but only if the difference between the two temperatures is large ( 38 versus 6 degrees Celsius ) ; some of the tested sparrows matched their activity to the warm phase , and others to the cold phase . 
 = = Relationships with humans = = 
 The house sparrow is closely associated with humans . They are believed to have become associated with humans around 10 @,@ 000 years ago . Subspecies bactrianus is least associated with humans and considered to be evolutionarily closer to the ancestral non @-@ commensal populations . Usually , it is regarded as a pest , since it consumes agricultural products and spreads disease to humans and their domestic animals . Even birdwatchers often hold it in little regard because of its molestation of other birds . In most of the world the house sparrow is not protected by law . Attempts to control house sparrows include the trapping , poisoning , or shooting of adults ; the destruction of their nests and eggs ; or less directly , blocking nest holes and scaring off sparrows with noise , glue , or porcupine wire . However , the house sparrow can be beneficial to humans as well , especially by eating insect pests , and attempts at the large @-@ scale control of the house sparrow have failed . 
 The house sparrow has long been used as a food item . From around 1560 to at least the nineteenth century in northern Europe , earthenware " sparrow pots " were hung from eaves to attract nesting birds so that the young could be readily harvested . Wild birds were trapped in nets in large numbers , and sparrow pie was a traditional dish , thought , because of the association of sparrows with lechery , to have aphrodisiac properties . Sparrows were also trapped as food for falconers ' birds and zoo animals . In the early part of the twentieth century , sparrow clubs culled many millions of birds and eggs in an attempt to control numbers of this perceived pest , but with only a localised impact on numbers . House sparrows have been kept as pets at many times in history , though they have no bright plumage or attractive songs , and raising them is difficult . 
 = = = Status = = = 
 The house sparrow has an extremely large range and population , and is not seriously threatened by human activities , so it is assessed as least concern for conservation on the IUCN Red List . However , populations have been declining in many parts of the world . These declines were first noticed in North America , where they were initially attributed to the spread of the house finch , but have been most severe in Western Europe . Declines have not been universal , as no serious declines have been reported from Eastern Europe , but have even occurred in Australia , where the house sparrow was introduced recently . 
 In Great Britain , populations peaked in the early 1970s , but have since declined by 68 % overall , and about 90 % in some regions . In London , the house sparrow almost disappeared from the central city . The numbers of house sparrows in the Netherlands have dropped in half since the 1980s , so the house sparrow is even considered an endangered species . This status came to widespread attention after a female house sparrow , referred to as the " <unk> " , was killed after knocking down dominoes arranged as part of an attempt to set a world record . These declines are not unprecedented , as similar reductions in population occurred when the internal combustion engine replaced horses in the 1920s and a major source of food in the form of grain spillage was lost . 
 Various causes for the dramatic decreases in population have been proposed , including predation , in particular by Eurasian sparrowhawks ; electromagnetic radiation from mobile phones ; and diseases . A shortage of nesting sites caused by changes in urban building design is probably a factor , and conservation organisations have encouraged the use of special nest boxes for sparrows . A primary cause of the decline seems to be an insufficient supply of insect food for nestling sparrows . Declines in insect populations result from an increase of monoculture crops , the heavy use of pesticides , the replacement of native plants in cities with introduced plants and parking areas , and possibly the introduction of unleaded petrol , which produces toxic compounds such as methyl nitrite . 
 Protecting insect habitats on farms , and planting native plants in cities benefit the house sparrow , as does establishing urban green spaces . To raise awareness of threats to the house sparrow , World Sparrow Day has been celebrated on 20 March across the world since 2010 . Over the recent years , the house sparrow population has been on the decline in many Asian countries and this decline is quite evident in <unk> promote the conservation of these birds , in 2012 , the then Chief Minister of Delhi , Ms. Sheila Dikshit , declared the house sparrow as the state bird of Delhi . 
 = = = Cultural associations = = = 
 To many people across the world , the house sparrow is the most familiar wild animal and , because of its association with humans and familiarity , it is frequently used to represent the common and vulgar , or the lewd . One of the reasons for the introduction of house sparrows throughout the world was their association with the European homeland of many immigrants . Birds usually described later as sparrows are referred to in many works of ancient literature and religious texts in Europe and western Asia . These references may not always refer specifically to the house sparrow , or even to small , seed @-@ eating birds , but later writers who were inspired by these texts often had the house sparrow in mind . In particular , sparrows were associated by the ancient Greeks with Aphrodite , the goddess of love , due to their perceived <unk> , an association echoed by later writers such as Chaucer and Shakespeare . Jesus 's use of " sparrows " as an example of divine providence in the Gospel of Matthew also inspired later references , such as that in Shakespeare 's Hamlet and the Gospel hymn His Eye Is on the Sparrow . 
 = Señorita ( Justin Timberlake song ) = 
 " Señorita " is a song recorded by American singer @-@ songwriter Justin Timberlake for his debut studio album , Justified ( 2002 ) . It was released on July 8 , 2003 by Jive Records as the fourth single from the album . The song was co @-@ written by Timberlake , and The Neptunes ' Pharrell Williams and Chad Hugo . It was also produced by the Neptunes . 
 According to Timberlake , the song was influenced by Stevie Wonder . Musically " Señorita " is an R & B , Pop , Jazz up @-@ tempo ballad , featuring an electric piano strut , cowbell in beat of the song , and a rhythm section . The song has been described as a Spanish " number " with a " Latin flavored " cut beat . In the track , Timberlake sings about a woman , whose attention he is trying to capture . " Señorita " received positive reviews from music critics , who commented on the track 's general sound and lyrics . 
 The song peaked at number five on Billboard 's Top 40 Mainstream chart . It also appeared on the Billboard Hot 100 at number twenty @-@ seven . Internationally , the single charted in Canada , New Zealand , Australia , and European countries including Belgium , the Netherlands , France , Austria , Switzerland , the United Kingdom and Ireland . The music video was nominated for an MTV Video Music Award in the category for Best Male Video in 2004 . 
 = = Background and recording = = 
 " Señorita " was co @-@ written by Justin Timberlake , and The Neptunes ' Pharrell Williams and Chad Hugo . Before the release of Timberlake 's solo album , Justified , Timberlake and the album 's producers , Williams and Hugo , gave MTV News a preview of the record in August 2002 . While in discussion of " Señorita " , Hugo said that he expected the song to make the track listing of Justified . In another interview , Timberlake revealed that the song was influenced by singer @-@ songwriter Stevie Wonder . Timberlake said that the song had " that groove that really fits into the summer " . While in development , Timberlake said he was " beatboxing the notes " . He wrote the song imagining a " dark @-@ skinned , voluptuous lady whose attention he is trying to capture . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Señorita " is a " Spanish number " infused with an R & B , up @-@ tempo ballad . The song has been described as a fast " hot mid @-@ tempo " and dance song . The song is composed in the key of Eb minor and is set in time signature of common time with a tempo of 96 beats per minute . The music begins with an electric piano strut , that provides the main chordal accompaniment . A cowbell chimes , in beat of the song , in the background . Timberlake sings in a " reasonable falsetto vamping " . The song 's musicscape also features hand claps , a rhythm section , and " cruises on an unconventional reedy rhythm and crackling beat " , according to Chuck <unk> of The Knoxville News @-@ Sentinel . The track is also considered a " blues inflected track " , and a dance jam . Kevin O 'Hare of the Sunday Republican said the song is " a Latin @-@ flavored cut with a pronounced beat " . Lisa Rose of The Star @-@ Ledger commented that the song has a " jazz @-@ funk ... embellished with a ground @-@ rumbling beat and horn section solos . " Fort Worth Star @-@ Telegram said that the song has a " minimalist funk strut " , while a contributor of the New Straits Times said that the single is " a funk song with an organic feel – and quite close to Stevie Wonder 's soulful style . " 
 According to Teresa Gubbins of The Dallas Morning News , she described the theme of the song as Timberlake singing about a girl with brown eyes . O 'Hare noted that there are " some very amusing " improvisations as Timberlake guides the " guys and the ladies though their background vocal segment . " Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic also reported that Timberlake exhorts " the fellas and ladies " in " Señorita " to sing separately " in a cringe @-@ worthy affectation " . He directs the men to sing , " It feels like something 's <unk> ' up . Can I leave with you ? " and the women to sing , " I don 't know what I 'm thinking bout / really leavin wit you . " 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Music critic David Browne of Entertainment Weekly , in review of the album , wrote : " In the latter category , he 's more engaging — the stud on the loose , making promises of romance and more in <unk> cuts like ' Senorita ' and ' Rock Your Body ' . " Denise Boyd of the BBC wrote : " The introduction [ of ] ' Senorita ' immediately grabs your attention . " Tyler Martin of Stylus said that the song 's rhythm section was " brilliant , a simple , yet distinctive beat that could only come from the Neptunes . The song allows for much amusement in the last minute and a half with a sing @-@ along that is more wonderful and surprising than most artists have offered us this year . " Jonathan Takiff of the Philadelphia Daily News wrote that the track and " Nothing Else " , another song from the album , reshape " Stevie Wonder @-@ style Latin pop " . Katie McDonald of Boston College wrote : " The album opens with the Latin and hip @-@ hop influenced ' Senorita ' . Although this reviewer was a little amused by Timberlake 's use of the word ' Momma ' in reference to a girl , this track is nothing to mock . Timberlake 's voice complements the dynamic beat ; and although the lyrics are in no way profound , at least he wrote them himself . " Lisa Verrico of The Times wrote that the song could be ' NSYNC " with a salsa flavour " . Christian <unk> of Iowa State Daily noted that Timberlake " cops classic Michael Jackson " throughout the album , and on the tracks " Señorita " and " Rock Your Body " . Howard Cohen of Knight Ridder said that in the album Timberlake " appropriates Jackson 's trademark ' Thriller ' -era falsetto squeals and staccato vocal style on the tuneless first single ' Like I Love You ' , ' Senorita ' and a couple other cuts . " 
 The song received criticism as well . Jane Stevenson of Jam ! wrote : " In the minus category is silly lead @-@ off track ' Senorita ' , which suffers from being too cute and has an awful call @-@ and @-@ answer ending featuring ' the guys and the ladies . ' " A music contributor from the Daily Free Press reported that The Neptunes appeared to have " recycled beats from their N.E.R.D. project " for Justified and that " Señorita " sounded like N.E.R.D. ' s song , " Run to the Sun " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 In North America , the single was officially solicited to radio in September 2003 . " Señorita " appeared on the Billboard Hot 100 and debuted at number 27 . It reached number 5 on the Mainstream Top 40 , number 10 on the Top 40 Tracks and number 29 on the Rhythmic . 
 The single performed averagely when it was released internationally . It debuted at number 13 in the United Kingdom for the week ending September 27 , 2003 . The song failed to achieve any higher position , and it fell for eight consecutive weeks until it left the charts completely . When it entered the Irish Singles Chart , it did so at number 15 . It spent seven weeks on the chart , and failed to earn a higher position . In New Zealand , it charted at number 9 on September 14 , 2003 . During the following four weeks , it peaked at number 4 and remained there for two weeks . The song spent 15 weeks on the chart . In Australia , it peaked at number 6 and retired after spending eleven weeks on the chart . The track charted in the Canadian Singles Chart , where it reached a peak position of 19 . The single charted in European countries , it peaked in the Top 10s and Top 20s . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video for " Señorita " was directed by Paul Hunter . The video was filmed in July 2003 and shot in a club in Los Angeles . The video also features cameo appearances by both Pharrell <unk> and Chad Hugo . In mid @-@ 2003 , Timberlake was asked about the concept of the video , but said that the video was still in development . He was asked whether he would be aiming his affection at a " lovely lady " , to which Timberlake responded , " No . Why would you limit yourself to just one ? " In the " Señorita " video , Timberlake performed with his live band . 
 The video begins , with the song playing , at an outside scenery of a bar . Inside , Timberlake is seen and goes directly to the bar . He looks at the stage area and immediately goes there . He takes the microphone and begins singing the song . Pharrell is shown playing the drums while Chad is at the keyboards throughout the video . Timberlake continues singing , but grabs the attention of a woman in a red dress . Elsewhere , Timberlake , not on stage , is shown dancing with a woman wearing a white blouse , while he sings the song . In another part of the video , Timberlake dances with a different woman . In the bridge , he sings to the two women and dances with them , in separate shots . Following the bridge he is then seen performing on stage . In part of the song , Timberlake directs the crowd of men and women , telling the men to sing , " It feels like something 's <unk> ' up . Can I leave with you ? " and the women to sing , " I don 't know what I 'm thinking bout / really leavin wit you . " Timberlake ends the song with " Gentlemen , good night / Ladies good morning " . 
 Actor Owen Wilson and his then @-@ girlfriend , Carolina <unk> , appear in the video . Lanford Beard of Middlebury College Student Weekly , in review of the video , wrote that Timberlake 's " Mexicali saloon setting " for the video " embraced a certain macho , trashy playa aesthetic " for him " so we 'll take it on the chin that this is the image he 's building for himself and – love it or hate it – we might as well get used to it . " In 2004 , the video was nominated for an MTV Video Music Award in the category of Best Male Video . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Timberlake performed the song live on the sketch comedy show Saturday Night Live in October 2003 , where he served as host and musical guest . At the 46th Grammy Awards in 2004 , he also performed the song live and was accompanied by Latin jazz trumpeter Arturo Sandoval . On August 25 , 2013 , he performed " Señorita " in a medley with other of his songs at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards . 
 " Señorita " was featured on Justin Timberlake : Live from London ( 2002 ) , Justified and Stripped Tour ( 2003 ) , FutureSex / LoveShow ( 2007 ) , Legends of the Summer ( 2013 ) and The 20 / 20 Experience World Tour ( 2013 / 14 ) . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 European CD Single 
 " Señorita " ( Album version ) – 4 : 54 
 " Señorita " ( Instrumental ) – 4 : 54 
 " Señorita " ( Eddie 's Extended Club Mix ) – 6 : 27 
 " Rock Your Body " ( Vasquez Club Anthem ) – 9 : 15 
 " Señorita " ( Video ) – 4 : 33 
 UK CD Single 
 " Señorita " ( Radio Edit Short Intro ) – 4 : 16 
 " Señorita " ( Eddie 's Crossover Rhythm Mix ) – 4 : 18 
 " Señorita " ( Eddie 's Extended Dance Mix ) – 6 : 27 
 " Señorita " ( Dr. Octavo 2 @-@ Step Mix ) – 3 : 50 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Kaleidoscope Dream = 
 Kaleidoscope Dream is the second studio album by American R & B recording artist Miguel , released on September 25 , 2012 , by RCA Records . After attaining commercial standing with his 2010 debut album All I Want Is You , Miguel wanted to play a larger creative role in his music and principally produced and wrote Kaleidoscope Dream . He recorded most of the album at Platinum Sound Recording Studios in New York City and MJP Studios in Los Angeles , and worked with producers Warren " Oak " Felder , Jerry " Wonda " Duplessis and Salaam Remi , among others . 
 The music on Kaleidoscope Dream draws on R & B , pop , funk , rock and soul styles , as well as elements from electronic and psychedelic music . The album 's producers incorporated dense bass lines , buzzing synthesizers , and hazy , reverbed sounds in the songs , which deal mostly with sex , romance , and existential ideas . Miguel titled Kaleidoscope Dream as a metaphor for life and wanted the songs to reflect his lifestyle and personality . 
 Before Kaleidoscope Dream was released , Miguel previewed its songs virally through a series of free EPs . It was also promoted with three singles , including his biggest hit to date " Adorn " , and his touring in North America and Europe during 2012 to 2013 . The album debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 with first @-@ week sales of 71 @,@ 000 copies , and by June 2015 , it had sold 535 @,@ 000 copies . Kaleidoscope Dream received rave reviews from critics , who praised its eccentric style and Miguel 's singing and songwriting . 
 = = Background = = 
 After it was shelved by Jive Records for two years , Miguel released his debut album All I Want Is You in November 2010 . It sold poorly at first and was underpromoted by Jive , amid the label 's dissolution . However , as its singles attained radio airplay and Miguel toured in its promotion , the album became a sleeper hit and helped him garner an audience and commercial standing . He also garnered a following with his fervent concert performances . After Jive was shut down and absorbed by RCA Records , Miguel acquired a new marketing team to develop himself as more than a typical urban artist , having felt pigeonholed into being marketed as one by Jive . He said that the experience of balancing creativity and business sense on his first album made him more confident in his approach on Kaleidoscope Dream . 
 Miguel sought to reintroduce himself artistically with the album . Inspired by his more alternative musical influences , he wanted to change the sound and expectations of R & B songs on urban radio . He explained the album 's title as " a metaphor for our life ; everyone has their own Kaleidoscope Dream , it is the life that they project and it is the life that they are solidifying with their conscious decision and their subconscious feelings . " Miguel also said that the album represents the fantasies that are conveyed through dreams , which he felt embody " the purest form of fantasy we unleash through our subconscious ... the truest freedom we can experience . Totally <unk> and totally creative . " 
 = = Writing and recording = = 
 Miguel worked on the album for approximately three months . He sought to play a larger creative role than he had on All I Want Is You , and produced most of Kaleidoscope Dream and either wrote or co @-@ wrote every song on the album . He recorded most of the album at Platinum Sound Recording Studios in New York City and MJP Studios in Los Angeles ; the songs " Arch & Point " and " Gravity " were recorded at Gustavo 's Golden Gloves Gymnasium in Los Angeles . He spent almost two years in New York City , which he felt let him explore " the edgy side " of his life and consequently made his sonical approach grittier , saying in an interview for The Village Voice , " I 'm not the ' go to the club and pop bottles ' kind of guy . That 's not my lifestyle . I really like to party , but it 's ... just darker . I 'm looking for the speakeasy on the Lower East Side that has a secret door and a password . " Miguel recorded " Adorn " in 2011 in the bedroom of his Los Angeles apartment , which he used as a makeshift studio at the time . Parts of the album were edited by Miguel and his engineers using Pro Tools . 
 Miguel wanted the album to be " a pure and honest projection of my lifestyle and my kaleidoscope dream " , and used the music 's pace and sound to represent his lifestyle and the lyrics to represent his personality . To sustain his creative approach , Miguel avoided media outlets that he usually visited for music , including radio and Internet blogs . He drew on musical influences from early in his life , including classic rock , country rock and funk , to incorporate rock flourishes on the album . He also incorporated the Roland TR @-@ 808 to give the music a distinct percussive feel . He enlisted an orchestra and incorporated string arrangements , along with a drum loop , to the album 's title track , which he felt aurally defined the moods of his personality . Miguel also worked with previous collaborators Salaam Remi and Nathan " Happy " Perez , among other producers . Recording artist Alicia Keys sang background vocals on the song " Where 's the Fun in Forever " , Elle Varner co @-@ wrote " Use Me " and Brook D <unk> of J * Davey played keyboards on " Candles in the Sun " . 
 Apart from sexual themes , Miguel wrote about conversational and existential topics . When writing " Pussy Is Mine " , he drew on his sexual behavior as a single man and " moments of power and vulnerability " with a sexually promiscuous woman . Miguel originally wrote " Where 's the Fun in Forever " with Alicia Keys for her 2012 album Girl on Fire at a recording studio in Jamaica . He conceived the song while spending time with Keys on the roof of the studio , which he recounted in an interview for MTV News : " [ A ] ll I had was this amazing blanket of stars in the sky and the sound of waves in the distance , great vibe ... So here I am trying to be creative for Alicia and it just dawned on me : Well , what if we did live forever ? Could we have accomplished all of these amazing things ? Would we have come so far ? ... Would we have come up with all these theories or built all of these amazing , amazing architectural beautiful things ... or would we have been lazy ? " The album 's title track was written by Miguel while he was working on All I Want Is You . In reaction to Jive 's request for more conventional R & B songs , he composed the song with unusual lyrics and without a hook , chorus , or form . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 According to The Independent 's Holly Rubenstein , Kaleidoscope Dream is " widely considered a leading example " of alternative R & B ; Miguel himself described it as " avant soul " . In the opinion of NPR 's Frannie Kelley , the record combined R & B , pop , funk , rock and soul genres . Its music features sparse production , eccentric details , thick bass lines , buzzing synthesizers , and hazy , reverbed sounds . Allmusic 's Andy Kellman found the album " funkier and weirder " than All I Want Is You and observed an " illusory atmosphere ... intensified by some unexpected touches " . Maura Johnston said much of it " sounds , as the title might suggest , fractal . " As an R & B album , The A.V. Club 's Evan Rytlewski said , Kaleidoscope Dream deviated from genre conventions by minimizing the influence of hip hop ; Jim DeRogatis believed it drew heavily on psychedelic rock and psychedelic pop . Music writers compared the album 's style to Prince , Alex Macpherson of The Guardian perceives a " <unk> aesthetic " than on All I Want Is You , with " faded psychedelia " and " intimate experiments in Purple Rain @-@ esque rock " . Writing about the record for WNYC , Gretta Cohn claimed Miguel was " redefining what contemporary R & B can be " . Miguel said he " definitely think it 's an R & B record , though other people may not ... [ Listeners ] are so conditioned to expect certain things out of current R & B , and it 's about following a formula . But R & B was once live music , it was psychedelic , it was rock , it was funk , and all these genres stem from soul music ... There would be no hip @-@ hop or rock without R & B. It was important for me to be true to what R & B is , and that is soulful . " 
 The album 's lyrics generally deal with themes of adult love , meaningful sex , and romance . Andrew Ryce from Pitchfork Media interprets its " overarching theme " to be " the highly sexualized seen through the lens of the eager and innocent . " Miguel 's lyrics express modesty , yearning , vulnerability , and cheeky humor . Kelley likens his songwriting to Tony ! Toni ! Toné ! and observes " Little Richard @-@ level insinuations " and " absurd provocations in the style of <unk> " . Music journalist Jim DeRogatis views that Miguel eschews braggadocio and is " man enough to admit his own insecurities and question whether he 's worthy of love — or lustful indulgence . " Kaleidoscope Dream also explores the anxiety and momentary nature of sex and clubbing . Consequence of Sound 's Jeremy D. Larson views that Miguel employs a " fangs @-@ out approach to R & B " similar to Frank Ocean and The Weeknd , writing that " nothing shrouds Miguel and his directives , and worries , and prayers , and cat calls – it 's all there , full of light and love , refracting through a kaleidoscope of rocks glasses , rainy windshields , and blood @-@ shot eyes . " 
 " Adorn " has both digital and analog sensibilities , with lyrics featuring brazen declarations of affection , and promises of adoration to a female subject . " Don 't Look Back " features amplified bass , bombastic drums , and metallic synths . Rob Markman of MTV News writes that the song " represents the morning after when the reality of the previous night 's efforts creep in . " Its closing interlude has Miguel crooning lyrics from The Zombies ' 1969 song " Time of the Season " over sentimental synths and musky , psychedelic music . " Use Me " features hollow , electronic sounds , heavily multitracked vocals , metronomic rhythms , and an industrialized mix of guitar and percussion . Its lyrics blur expressions of sexual nerves with gentle dominance , as the narrator instructs his lover how she can toy with him , An atmospheric pop rock song , " Do You ... " portrays a narcotic tryst and mixes <unk> come @-@ ons with drug imagery . The psychedelic title track incorporates synthesizer arpeggios , minor chords , oscillating blips , fuzzy guitar , and a bassline interpolation of Labi Siffre 's 1975 " I Got The " . The sample 's groove is played at a different tempo than other instruments on the song . The song 's lyrics feature <unk> imagery ( " I taste you , infinite colors " ) , and a boast by the narrator about kissing his subject 's third eye . 
 " The Thrill " has a sparse bass groove , layered keyboards , and existential lyrics with YOLO imagery . " How Many Drinks ? " has sardonic , swaggering lyrics and a rap verse by Miguel , who veers between seducer and user . " Where 's the Fun in Forever " features atmospheric drums and bass , an a cappella bridge , and rolling dynamics with measures that advance an argument . The song celebrates youthful bliss and <unk> a carpe diem philosophy . It transitions into the rock song " Arch & Point " , which has sexually charged ballet metaphors and bare power pop elements . " Pussy Is Mine " features a high vocal range by Miguel , a rudimentary chord progression played on electric guitar , and a stripped , demo quality . The song is about sexual jealousy and an ignoble man 's plea for exclusivity in a casual relationship . Its sexually explicit , bawdy lyrics eschew masculine hip hop tropes for feelings of insecurity . The song is bookended by background studio chatter . " Candles in the Sun " is a slow burning , political soul song . It touches on senseless killings , drug @-@ infested communities , and questions the existence of God and the motives of governments . Chris Kelly of Fact writes that , along with " Adorn " , " Candles in the Sun " " bookend [ s ] the album with another tribute to Marvin Gaye , a la ' What 's Going On ? ' " 
 = = Promotion = = 
 After pitching the strategy to RCA , Miguel first marketed Kaleidoscope Dream virally with a three @-@ volume series of EPs entitled Art Dealer Chic , which were released as free downloads during February to April 2012 and previewed songs from the album . He released two more EPs — Kaleidoscope Dream : Water Preview on July 31 and Air Preview on September 11 — to digital retailers . In an interview for The Village Voice , Miguel said that the strategy allowed listeners to absorb the songs at his desired pace and called it " a great way for me to reconnect with my peers ... the people that I hang out with — that go to the same shows , listen to the same music , read the same blogs , same magazines . " 
 " Adorn " was released as Kaleidoscope Dream 's lead single on August 7 , becoming a sleeper hit on urban radio . It was Miguel 's second number @-@ one single on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs , and his highest charting single on the Billboard Hot 100 at number 17 . By September , the single had sold 190 @,@ 000 copies . According to NPR 's Audie Cornish , Miguel " broke through to a national audience in 2012 " with both " Adorn " and Kaleidoscope Dream . The second single " Do You ... " was released on September 18 , and reached number 32 on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs . The album 's third and final single , " How Many Drinks ? " , was released on March 3 , 2013 . 
 In support of Kaleidoscope Dream , Miguel embarked on a short promotional tour in the United States on September 26 , 2012 . He also promoted the record with television performances on 106 & Park , The Wendy Williams Show , Late Show with David Letterman , and Jimmy Kimmel Live ! . He subsequently toured in support of the album for six months throughout North America and Europe , including concert dates as a supporting act on Trey Songz ' Chapter V World Tour during November 2012 to February 2013 , and a headlining tour in the UK and Ireland during January 2013 . Miguel opened for Alicia Keys on her Set The World On Fire Tour during March and April . Although he did not choreograph his shows , he routinely rehearsed in a dance studio and practiced singing in front of a mirror . In concert , he performed dramatic leaps , staggers , and other moves fashioned after Little Richard and James Brown . He started ripping his shirt off during performances after being inspired by Songz ' concerts . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Kaleidoscope Dream was first released in vinyl LP format on September 25 , in an effort by RCA to make the deadline for the Grammy Awards ' eligibility period without charting prematurely on lower sales . The following week , it debuted at number three on the Billboard 200 , selling 71 @,@ 000 copies in the US . It was Miguel 's first album to be released in the United Kingdom , where it spent 15 weeks on the country 's R & B chart , peaking at number 13 . By February 20 , 2013 , the record had charted for 20 weeks on the Billboard 200 and sold 321 @,@ 400 copies , according to Nielsen SoundScan . The album was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) in June 2015 , with 535 @,@ 000 copies sold in the US at that point . 
 Kaleidoscope Dream received widespread acclaim from critics . At Metacritic , which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications , the album received an average score of 86 , based on 20 reviews . AllMusic 's Andy Kellman hailed it as " 2012 's most pleasurable pop @-@ R & B album " . Greg Kot said Miguel " creates a fluid , dreamscape environment that floats across eras with a connoisseur 's discerning feel for the telling detail . " Macpherson wrote in The Guardian of Miguel 's occasional " appeal to indie tropes " balanced by " genuinely thoughtful songwriting " , while admiring his use of a commercial breakthrough " as a springboard to radically change course " . Sean McCarthy from PopMatters wrote that , along with Frank Ocean 's Channel Orange , it showed R & B as the innovative genre in mainstream music during 2012 , while Los Angeles Times critic Randall Roberts said it " offers further evidence of a genre being reborn in 2012 . " Pitchfork Media 's Andrew Ryce hailed Miguel as " the rare vocalist who makes you feel what he 's singing about , even when his lyrics can be transparent . " Alfred Soto of The Quietus was appreciated Miguel 's ability to " articulate how a love man can be louche without being a douche . " Ken Capobianco from The Boston Globe was more critical , finding some of the songs overworked and Miguel " too remote for a true soul singer " . New York Times critic Jon Caramanica said Kaleidoscope Dream sounds inconsistent and " a little washed @-@ out , a blend of Prince @-@ isms and slurry grooves " , while Kellman complained of the lyrics occasionally veering " too close to ' artsy ' teenage erotic poetry " . 
 At the end of 2012 , Kaleidoscope Dream appeared on several critics ' lists of the year 's best records . Ann Powers named it the best album of 2012 . It was also ranked number 26 by Robert Christgau , number eleven by The Guardian , number 10 by the Chicago Tribune , number eight by Slate , number six by the Los Angeles Times , number five by AllMusic , Okayplayer , and Spin , number four by Entertainment Weekly , number three by Billboard , New York , and Now , and number one by Idolator . Metacritic named it the 12th best @-@ reviewed album of 2012 . The album was voted the fifth best album of 2012 in the Pazz & Jop , an annual poll of American critics nationwide , published by The Village Voice . Kaleidoscope Dream was nominated for the 2013 Grammy Award for Best Urban Contemporary Album , while " Adorn " was nominated for Best R & B Performance and Song of the Year , winning in the Best R & B Song category . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 " Don 't Look Back " contains a portion of " Time of the Season " written by Rod Argent . 
 " Kaleidoscope Dream " contains a sample from " I Got The " written and performed by Labi Siffre . 
 " How Many Drinks ? " contains a sample from " We 've Only Just Begun " written by Roger Nichols and Paul Williams , as performed by O <unk> Levy . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits were adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Weekly charts = = = 
 = = = Year @-@ end charts = = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Episode 1 ( Twin Peaks ) = 
 " Episode 1 " , also known as " Traces to Nowhere " , is the second episode of the first season of the American mystery television series Twin Peaks . The episode was written by series creators David Lynch and Mark Frost , and directed by <unk> Dunham . " Episode 1 " features series regulars Kyle MacLachlan , Michael Ontkean , and Richard Beymer . 
 Dunham was offered the role of directing the episode by Lynch , who wanted Dunham to edit his next film project , 1990 's Wild at Heart . Dunham continued to use several stylistic elements in his direction that he had observed in Lynch 's work on " Pilot " , including largely static camera work and the use of reddish color tints . The episode also marks the first appearance of Killer Bob , who was played by set decorator Frank Silva after Silva had been accidentally caught on camera . 
 " Episode 1 " continued the investigation of the series ' main plotline , the murder of schoolgirl Laura Palmer ( Sheryl Lee ) , with Federal Bureau of Investigation agent Dale Cooper ( MacLachlan ) interviewing several suspects connected to the victim . The episode was viewed by approximately 14 @.@ 9 million households upon its initial airing , which represented over a quarter of the available audience . Since its broadcast , the episode has earned positive reviews from critics . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 The small town of Twin Peaks , Washington , has been shocked by the murder of schoolgirl Laura Palmer ( Sheryl Lee ) and the attempted murder of her classmate Ronette Pulaski ( Phoebe Augustine ) . Federal Bureau of Investigation special agent Dale Cooper ( Kyle MacLachlan ) has come to the town to investigate , and initial suspicion has fallen upon Palmer 's boyfriend Bobby Briggs ( Dana Ashbrook ) and the man with whom she was cheating on Briggs , James Hurley ( James Marshall ) . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 Cooper takes breakfast at the Great Northern Hotel , enjoying a " damn fine cup of coffee " as Audrey Horne ( Sherilyn Fenn ) introduces herself and begins flirting with him . He makes his way to the sheriff 's department , where he and Sheriff Truman ( Michael Ontkean ) discuss the day 's plans . They interview Dr Hayward ( Warren Frost ) who has had an autopsy conducted on Palmer 's body . They learn that Laura had had sex with at least three men the night she died . 
 Waitress Shelley Johnson ( Mädchen Amick ) is about to leave for work when her abusive husband Leo ( Eric Da Re ) demands she do more laundry . She finds a bloodstained shirt among Leo 's clothes and hides it before he notices . However , he later realizes that it has gone missing . When she returns home that night , he questions her about its whereabouts , and savagely beats her with a bar of soap in a sock . 
 Cooper interviews Hurley about a video of Laura and Donna Hayward ( Lara Flynn Boyle ) ; Hayward had denied him being present the day it was taken but Cooper notices a reflection of his motorcycle in the video . Cooper confronts Hurley about the affair he was having with Palmer , and about her cocaine habit . Hurley admits seeing Palmer the night she died but denies killing her . James ' uncle Ed Hurley ( Everett McGill ) comes to the sheriff 's department to pick his nephew up . Ed tells Truman that he was drugged the previous night at The Roadhouse , the town 's bar ; he suspects bartender Jacques Renault ( Walter Olkewicz ) was responsible . Cooper takes a telephone call from his colleague Albert Rosenfield , who is on his way to aid the investigation . Meanwhile , Briggs and his friend Mike Nelson ( Gary Hershberger ) are in a jail cell , discussing money they owe to Leo . The $ 10 @,@ 000 they were meant to pay him is in a safe deposit box owned by Palmer , which they can now no longer access . They are later released by Cooper , who warns them not to approach James Hurley . 
 Josie Packard ( Joan Chen ) and Pete Martell ( Jack Nance ) discuss Packard 's trouble with her sister @-@ in @-@ law Catherine Martell ( Piper Laurie ) . Truman and Cooper arrive to speak with Packard , who had employed Palmer as an English tutor . Packard admits to sensing that Palmer was troubled but cannot help further ; Cooper picks up on the fact that Truman has been having a relationship with Packard . Catherine calls Packard to tell her that the latter 's sawmill lost $ 87 @,@ 000 the day before ; Catherine is having an affair with Benjamin Horne ( Richard Beymer ) , with whom she is conspiring a hostile takeover of the mill . That same day , Hayward visits Palmer 's mother Sarah ( Grace Zabriskie ) , attempting to console her . However , Sarah has a vision of a sinister man ( Frank Silva ) crouching in the corner of the room , and panics . Meanwhile , Laurence Jacoby ( Russ Tamblyn ) , Laura 's psychiatrist , listens to an audio tape she had made for him , and sobs as he toys with half of a golden heart necklace , the other half of which was found at the scene of the crime . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Episode 1 " was written by the series creators David Lynch and Mark Frost . The pair had co @-@ written " Pilot " , and would also write " Episode 2 " together . Frost would pen a further eight scripts for the series after that , while Lynch would write just one episode — the second season opening installment , " Episode 8 " . The episode was the first in the series to be directed by <unk> Dunham , who would return to helm two further installments in the series ' second season . The episode features the first appearance of Frank Silva as Killer Bob , though the character is not yet identified at this point . Silva was the art director for the series , and had accidentally been caught on camera during a shot . Lynch was pleased with the result and decided to include Silva in the cast from then on . 
 Dunham had first met Lynch when he worked as the film editor for Lynch 's 1986 film Blue Velvet . Dunham then edited " Pilot " , and was about to look for another editing job elsewhere when he asked Lynch if the director had another film planned ; a week later Lynch decided to film Wild at Heart and asked Dunham to edit that as well . However , Dunham had committed to another project and felt uncomfortable leaving one editing job for another ; Lynch then offered him a directing position on Twin Peaks in the interim to justify cancelling his other project . Dunham finished principal photography on " Episode 1 " the same day that Lynch finished filming " Wild at Heart " . 
 The introduction of a sexual rapport between the characters of Audrey Horne and Dale Cooper was a suggestion of Dunham 's , who felt it would benefit both characters . Dunham felt that the central mystery in the series — the murder of schoolgirl Laura Palmer — was simply a " MacGuffin " to compel what he saw as the real focus , the interaction of the large ensemble cast . As such , he took care to introduce meaningful interactions between characters wherever possible . Dunham also spent time with each of the cast to help them develop their characters , having studied the scripts involved and basing his take on the characters on his experience with " Pilot " . 
 Dunham retained the frequent use of static cameras seen in " Pilot " , something he saw as a hallmark of Lynch 's directing style ; describing the result as " like framed pictures " . He also continued the use of a " warm " reddish tint to the footage , using soft coral filters and carefully selected props and costumes to obtain this coloring . This tint was considered important enough that Lynch sent a representative to the network to ensure they understood it was deliberate and not a mistake , for fear that they might correct the saturation to be more " realistic " before broadcasting it . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Episode 1 " was first broadcast on American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) on April 12 , 1990 . Upon its initial airing , it was seen by 14 @.@ 9 million households , or 27 percent of the available audience . It placed second in its timeslot after Cheers . This marked a decline from " Pilot " , which attracted 33 percent of the available audience . The following episode would be viewed by 21 percent of the available audience , representing a further drop in numbers . 
 Writing for The A.V. Club , Keith Phipps awarded the episode an " A − " rating . He felt that the scene showing Leo Johnson domestically abusing his wife was " among the show 's most disturbing moments " , comparing it to a scene from the 1990 film The Grifters . Phipps also felt the sound design in the episode was impressive , commenting positively on the blurred distinction between diegetic and non @-@ diegetic music . Writing for Allrovi , Andrea LeVasseur rated the episode four stars out of five . Television Without Pity 's Daniel J. Blau felt that the episode showed series composer Angelo Badalamenti to have limited range , repeating several similar musical cues throughout . He also considered Eric Da Re 's performance as Leo Johnson to be unconvincing , finding it difficult to believe that the character was as feared and menacing as was implied . However , Blau described the introduction of Killer Bob as still seeming powerful and frightening even several years after first being seen , considering it a potent and disturbing scene . 
 = The Legend of Zelda ( video game ) = 
 The Legend of Zelda ( Japanese : ゼルダの伝説 , Hepburn : Zeruda no Densetsu ) , subtitled The Hyrule Fantasy in its original Japanese release , is an action @-@ adventure video game developed and published by Nintendo and designed by Shigeru Miyamoto and Takashi Tezuka . Set in the fantasy land of Hyrule , the plot centers on a boy named Link , the playable protagonist , who aims to collect the eight fragments of the Triforce of Wisdom in order to rescue Princess Zelda from the antagonist , Ganon . During the course of the game , the player sees Link from a top @-@ down perspective and must navigate him through the overworld and several dungeons , defeating enemies and finding secrets along the way . 
 The inaugural game of the The Legend of Zelda series , it was originally released in Japan as a launch title for the Family Computer Disk System peripheral in 1986 . More than a year later , North America and Europe received releases on the Nintendo Entertainment System in cartridge format , making the game the first home console title to include an internal battery for saving data . This version was released in Japan in 1994 under the title The Legend of Zelda 1 ( <unk> , Zeruda no Densetsu Wan ) . The game was ported to the GameCube and Game Boy Advance , and is available in emulated form via the Virtual Console on the Wii , Nintendo 3DS and Wii U. 
 The Legend of Zelda was a bestseller for Nintendo , selling over 6 @.@ 5 million copies . It is often featured in lists of games considered the greatest or most influential and is regarded as a spiritual forerunner of the role @-@ playing video game genre . A solitary sequel , Zelda II : The Adventure of Link , was first released in Japan less than a year after its predecessor 's debut . The game spawned several prequels and a number of spin @-@ offs , establishing a series that has become one of Nintendo 's most popular . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 The Legend of Zelda incorporates elements of action , adventure , and role @-@ playing games . The player controls Link from a flip @-@ screen overhead perspective as he travels in the overworld , a large outdoor map with varied environments . Link begins the game armed only with a small shield , but a sword becomes available to Link after he ventures into a cave that is accessible from the game 's first map screen . Throughout the game , various characters aid Link by giving or selling equipment and clues . These people can be found in caves scattered throughout the overworld ; some are readily accessible , while others are hidden behind obstacles such as rocks , trees , and waterfalls . 
 Barring Link 's progress are creatures he must battle to locate the entrances to nine underground dungeons . Each dungeon is a unique , maze @-@ like collection of rooms connected by doors and secret passages , and guarded by monsters different from those found on the surface . Dungeons also contain useful items which Link can add to his arsenal , such as a boomerang for retrieving distant items and stunning enemies , and a recorder with magical properties . Link must successfully navigate through each of the first eight dungeons to obtain all eight pieces of the Triforce of Wisdom . Once he has completed the artifact , he can enter the ninth dungeon to rescue Zelda . Apart from this exception , the order of completing dungeons is somewhat left to the player , although they steadily increase in difficulty and some of them can only be reached or completed using items gained in a previous one . In addition , the entrances of the three highest @-@ level dungeons are hidden . Link can freely wander the overworld , finding and buying items at any point . This flexibility enables unusual ways of playing the game . For example , it is possible to reach the final boss of the game without ever receiving the sword . 
 After completing the game , the player has access to a more difficult quest , officially referred to as the " Second Quest " ( <unk> , Ura Zeruda , lit . " other Zelda " ) , with new dungeon locations / layouts , different item placements , and stronger enemies . Although this more difficult " replay " was not unique to Zelda , few games offered entirely different levels to complete on the second playthrough . The Second Quest can be replayed each time the game is completed and can also be accessed at any time by starting a new file with the name " <unk> " . 
 = = Plot and characters = = 
 The plot of The Legend of Zelda is described in the instruction booklet and in the short prologue after the title screen . A small kingdom in the land of Hyrule , the setting of the game , is engulfed in chaos after an army led by Ganon , the Prince of Darkness , invaded it and stole the Triforce of Power , a part of a magical artifact bestowing great strength . In an attempt to prevent Ganon from acquiring the Triforce of Wisdom , another of the pieces , Princess Zelda splits it and hides the eight fragments in secret dungeons throughout the land . Before the princess is eventually kidnapped by Ganon , she commands her nursemaid Impa to find someone courageous enough to save the kingdom . While wandering the land , the old woman is surrounded by Ganon 's henchmen , though a young boy named Link appears and rescues her . After hearing Impa 's plea , he resolves to save Zelda and sets out to reassemble the scattered fragments of the Triforce of Wisdom , to become powerful enough to defeat Ganon . 
 During the course of the game , Link locates the eight underground labyrinths , defeats several guardian monsters , and retrieves the fragments . With the completed Triforce of Wisdom , Link is able to infiltrate Ganon 's hideout , Death Mountain , eventually confronting the pig @-@ like enemy and destroying him with a Silver Arrow . Link picks up the Triforce of Power from Ganon 's ashes and returns both pieces of the Triforce to the rescued Princess Zelda , restoring peace to Hyrule . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Development for this game was directed and designed by Shigeru Miyamoto ( credited as S. <unk> ) and Takashi Tezuka ( credited as Ten Ten ) . Miyamoto produced the game , and Tezuka wrote the story and script . The development team worked on The Legend of Zelda and Super Mario Bros. concurrently , and tried to separate their ideas : Super Mario Bros. was to be linear , where the action occurred in a strict sequence , whereas The Legend of Zelda would be the opposite . In Mario , Miyamoto downplayed the importance of the high score in favor of simply completing the game . This concept was carried over to The Legend of Zelda . Miyamoto was also in charge of deciding which concepts were " Zelda ideas " or " Mario ideas . " Contrasting with Mario , Zelda was made non @-@ linear and forced the players to think about what they should do next . In the initial game designs , the player would start the game with the sword already in their inventory . According to Miyamoto , those in Japan were confused and had trouble finding their way through the multiple path dungeons . Rather than listening to the complaints , Miyamoto took away the sword , forcing players to communicate with each other and share their ideas to find the various secrets hidden in the game . This was a new form of game communication , and in this way , " Zelda became the inspiration for something very different : Animal Crossing . This was a game based solely on communication . " 
 With The Legend of Zelda , Miyamoto wanted to take the idea of a game " world " even further , giving players a " miniature garden that they can put inside their drawer . " He drew his inspiration from his experiences as a boy around Kyoto , where he explored nearby fields , woods , and caves , and through the Zelda titles he always tries to impart to players some of the sense of exploration and limitless wonder he felt . " When I was a child , " he said , " I went hiking and found a lake . It was quite a surprise for me to stumble upon it . When I traveled around the country without a map , trying to find my way , stumbling on amazing things as I went , I realized how it felt to go on an adventure like this . " The memory of being lost amid the maze of sliding doors in his family 's home in <unk> was recreated in Zelda 's labyrinth dungeons . 
 A " symbol of courage , strength , and wisdom " , Link was designed by Miyamoto as a coming of age motif for players to identify with : he begins the game an ordinary boy but strengthens to triumph over the ultimate evil . The name of the princess was inspired by Zelda Fitzgerald : " Zelda was the name of the wife of the famous novelist F. Scott Fitzgerald . She was a famous and beautiful woman from all accounts , and I liked the sound of her name . So I took the liberty of using her name for the very first Zelda title , " Miyamoto explained . 
 The Zelda story setting was initially supposed to include technological elements , such as a time @-@ travelling main character and a Triforce made of electronic circuits . While the final game follows a more traditional heroic fantasy setting , subsequent games in the series have used more technology @-@ based concepts . 
 Koji Kondo ( credited as <unk> ) composed the game 's music . He initially planned to use Maurice Ravel 's Boléro as the game 's title theme , but was forced to change it when he learned , late in the game 's development cycle , that the copyright for the orchestral piece had not yet expired . As a result , Kondo wrote a new arrangement of the overworld theme within one day . 
 = = = Japanese release = = = 
 In February 1986 , Nintendo released the game as the launch title for the Family Computer 's new Disk System peripheral . The Legend of Zelda was joined by a re @-@ release of Super Mario Bros. , Tennis , Baseball , Golf , Soccer , and Mahjong in its introduction of the Disk System . It made full use of the Disk Card media 's advantages over traditional ROM cartridges with a disk size of 128 kilobytes , which was expensive to produce on cartridge format . Due to the still @-@ limited amount of space on the disk , however , it was only in katakana . Rather than passwords , it used rewritable disks to save the game . It used the extra sound channel provided by the Disk System for certain sound effects ; most notable are the sounds of Link 's sword when his health is full , the roars and growls of dungeon bosses , and enemy death sounds . The sound effects used the Famicom 's PCM channel in the cartridge version . It also used the microphone built into the Famicom 's controller that was not included in the NES . This led to confusion in the U.S. as the instruction manual reads that Pols Voice , a rabbit @-@ like enemy in the game , " hates loud noise " . Blowing or shouting into the Famicom 's microphone kills these creatures . However , they cannot be killed through use of the recorder , and on the NES must be killed with weapons . The cartridge version made use of the Memory Management Controller chip , specifically the <unk> model . The MMC could use bank @-@ switching , allowing larger games than had been previously possible . They also allowed for battery @-@ powered RAM , which let players save progress for the first time on any cartridge @-@ based system or game . 
 = = = American release = = = 
 Contrary to the fears of Nintendo 's management , the game was popular and well received . Zelda had been available for a year and a half in Japan , and its sequel , Zelda II : The Adventure of Link had been released for six months before Nintendo brought this game to North America . 
 When Nintendo published the game in North America , the packaging design featured a small portion of the box cut away to reveal the unique gold @-@ colored cartridge . In 1988 , The Legend of Zelda sold two million copies . Nintendo of America sought to keep its strong base of fans ; anyone who purchased a game and sent in a warranty card became a member of the Fun Club , whose members got a four- , eight- and eventually 32 @-@ page newsletter . Seven hundred copies of the first issue were sent out free of charge , but the number grew as the data bank of names got larger . 
 From the success of magazines in Japan , Nintendo knew that game tips were a valued asset . Players enjoyed the bimonthly newsletter 's crossword puzzles and jokes , but game secrets were most valued . The Fun Club drew kids in by offering tips for the more complicated games , especially Zelda , with its hidden rooms , secret keys and passageways . The mailing list grew . By early 1988 , there were over 1 million Fun Club members , which led then @-@ Nintendo of America president Minoru Arakawa to start the Nintendo Power magazine . 
 Since Nintendo did not have many products , it made only a few commercials a year , meaning the quality had to be phenomenal . The budget for a single commercial could reach US $ 5 million , easily four or five times more than most companies spent . One of the first commercials made under Bill White , director of advertising and public relations , was the market introduction for The Legend of Zelda , which received a great deal of attention in the ad industry . In it , a wiry @-@ haired , nerdy guy ( John Kassir ) walks through the dark making goofy noises , yelling out the names of some enemies from the game , and screaming for Zelda . 
 Nintendo released a great deal of merchandise related to The Legend of Zelda , including toys , guidebooks , watches , apparel , trash cans and a breakfast cereal called Nintendo Cereal System . The game and its sequel , The Adventure of Link were adapted into an animated series , episodes of which were shown on television each Friday on The Super Mario Bros. Super Show ! . Link and Zelda appeared in several episodes of Captain N : The Game Master that revolved around themes from The Adventure of Link . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The Legend of Zelda was a bestseller for Nintendo , selling over 6 @.@ 5 million copies ; it was the first NES title to sell over 1 million . It was reissued in 1992 as part of Nintendo 's " Classic Series " and featured a grey cartridge . The game placed first in the player 's poll " Top 30 " in Nintendo Power 's first issue and continued to dominate the list into the early 1990s . The Legend of Zelda was also voted by Nintendo Power readers as the " Best Challenge " in the Nintendo Power Awards ' 88 . The magazine also listed it as the best Nintendo Entertainment System video game ever created , stating that it was fun despite its age and it showed them new ways to do things in the genre such as hidden dungeons and its various weapons . GamesRadar ranked it the third best NES game ever made . The staff praised its " mix of complexity , open world design , and timeless graphics " . 
 Computer Gaming World in 1988 named the game as the best adventure of the year for Nintendo , stating that Zelda had been a " sensational success " in translating a computer RPG to consoles . In 1990 the magazine stated that the game was a killer app , causing computer CRPG players who had dismissed consoles as " mere arcade toys " to buy the NES . Zelda was reviewed in 1992 by Total ! # 2 where it received a 78 % rating due in great part to mediocre <unk> for music and graphics . A 1993 review of the game was printed in Dragon # 198 by Sandy Petersen in the " Eye of the Monitor " column . Petersen gave the game 4 out of 5 stars . 
 The Legend of Zelda is often featured in lists of games considered the greatest or most influential . It placed first in Game Informer 's list of the " Top 100 Games of All Time " and " The Top 200 Games of All Time " ( in 2001 and 2009 respectively ) , fifth in Electronic Gaming Monthly 's 200th issue listing " The Greatest 200 Videogames of Their Time " , seventh in Nintendo Power 's list of the 200 Best Nintendo Games Ever , 77th in Official Nintendo Magazine 's 100 greatest Nintendo games of all time and 80th among IGN readers ' " Top 99 Games " . Zelda was inducted into GameSpy 's Hall of Fame in August 2000 and voted by GameSpy 's editors as the tenth best game of all time . Editors of the popular Japanese magazine Weekly Famitsu voted the game among the best on the Famicom . 
 The Game Boy Advance port of The Legend of Zelda is rated 79 % and 87 % respectively on GameRankings ' and Game Ratio 's rankings compilations . In individual ratings , IGN scored The Legend of Zelda with an 8 out of 10 , GamePro a 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 , Nintendo Power a 4 @.@ 5 out of 5 , and 1UP.com an A. 
 Guinness World Records has awarded The Legend of Zelda series five world records in Guinness World Records Gamer 's Edition , including " Highest @-@ Rated Game of All Time " and " First Game with a Battery Powered Save Feature " . 
 = = Impact and legacy = = 
 The Legend of Zelda is considered a spiritual forerunner of the role @-@ playing video game ( RPG ) genre . Though it is often not considered part of the genre since it lacked key RPG mechanics such as experience points , it had many features in common with RPGs and served as the template for the action role @-@ playing game genre . The game 's fantasy setting , musical style and action @-@ adventure gameplay were adopted by many RPGs . Its commercial success helped lay the groundwork for involved , non @-@ linear games in fantasy settings , such as those found in successful RPGs , including <unk> , Soul Blazer , Square 's Seiken Densetsu series , Alundra , and Brave Fencer Musashi . The popularity of the game also spawned several clones trying to emulate the game . 
 Zelda was largely responsible for the surge of action @-@ oriented computer RPGs released since the late 1980s , such as the Origin Systems game Times of Lore . The Legend of Zelda series would continue to exert an influence on the transition of both console and computer RPGs from stat @-@ heavy turn @-@ based combat towards real @-@ time action combat in the following decades . When it was released in North America , Zelda was seen as a new kind of RPG with action @-@ adventure elements , with Roe R. Adams ( who worked on the Wizardry series ) stating in 1990 that , although " it still had many action @-@ adventure features , it was definitely a CRPG . " In more recent years , however , there has been much debate regarding whether or not The Legend of Zelda qualifies as an action RPG . 
 The Legend of Zelda spawned a solitary sequel , many prequels and spin @-@ offs and is one of Nintendo 's most popular series . It established important characters and environments of the Zelda universe , including Link , Princess Zelda , Ganon , Impa , and the Triforce as the power that binds Hyrule together . The overworld theme and distinctive " secret found " jingle have appeared in nearly every subsequent Zelda game . The theme has also appeared in various other games featuring references to the Zelda series . 
 An arcade system board , called the Triforce , was developed jointly by Namco , Sega , and Nintendo , with the first games appearing in 2002 . The name " Triforce " is a reference to Nintendo 's The Legend of Zelda series of games , and symbolized the three companies ' involvement in the project . 
 GameSpot featured The Legend of Zelda as one of the 15 most influential games of all time , for being an early example of open world , nonlinear gameplay , and for its introduction of battery backup saving , laying the foundations for later action @-@ adventure games like Metroid and role @-@ playing video games like Final Fantasy , while influencing most modern games in general . In 2009 , Game Informer called The Legend of Zelda " no less than the greatest game of all time " on their list of " The Top 200 Games of All Time " , saying that it was " ahead of its time by years if not decades " . 
 In 2011 , Nintendo celebrated the game 's 25th anniversary in a similar vein to the Super Mario Bros. 25th anniversary celebration the previous year . This celebration included a free <unk> Club Nintendo offer of the Ocarina of Time soundtrack to owners of the 3DS version of that particular game , the first digital for Nintendo eShop release of Link 's Awakening DX , special posters that are mailed out as rewards through Club Nintendo , and a special stage inspired by the original Legend of Zelda in the video game Super Mario 3D Land for the Nintendo 3DS . 
 = = = Re @-@ releases = = = 
 The Legend of Zelda has been re @-@ released on multiple platforms since its original domestic and international releases . The game was first re @-@ released in cartridge format for the Famicom in 1994 . The cartridge version slightly modified the title screen of the Disk Card version of the game , such that it displayed the number 1 at the end of the title . In 2001 , the original game was re @-@ released in the GameCube game Animal Crossing . The only way to unlock the game is an Action Replay . An official re @-@ release was included in 2003 's The Legend of Zelda : Collector 's Edition for the GameCube , and the game was again re @-@ released on the Game Boy Advance in 2004 along with its sequel , The Adventure of Link , as part of the Famicom Mini / Classic NES Series . In 2006 , another rerelease was made available to players on the Wii 's Virtual Console , and most recently a timed demo of the game was released for the 2008 Wii game Super Smash Bros. Brawl , available in the Vault section . All re @-@ releases of the game are virtually identical to the original , though the GameCube , Game Boy Advance , and Virtual Console versions have been altered slightly to correct several instances of incorrect spelling from the original , most notably in the intro story . A tech demo called Classic Games was shown for the Nintendo 3DS at E3 2010 , showcasing more than a dozen classic games utilizing 3D effects , including The Legend of Zelda . It was announced by Reggie Fils @-@ Aimé , president of Nintendo of America , that the titles were slated for release on the 3DS , including The Legend of Zelda , Mega Man 2 , and Super Mario World 2 : Yoshi 's Island and would possibly make use of some of the 3DS 's features , such as 3D effects , analog control , or camera support . The Legend of Zelda standalone was released for 3DS Virtual Console on September 1 , 2011 for the Ambassador users while the full version was released on December 22 , 2011 in Japan , April 12 , 2012 in Europe and July 5 , 2012 in North America on the Nintendo eShop . 
 = = = Sequels = = = 
 There have also been a few substantially altered versions of the game that have been released as pseudo @-@ sequels , and <unk> or gaiden @-@ versions . As part of a promotional advertisement campaign for their <unk> ( <unk> ) noodles , <unk> Foods Co . , Ltd . ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) released a version of the original The Legend of Zelda in 1986 entitled Zelda no Densetsu : <unk> <unk> ( ゼルダの伝説 <unk> <unk> ) . This game is one of the rarest video games available on the second @-@ hand collector 's market , and copies have sold for over US $ 1 @,@ 000 . 
 From August 6 , 1995 , to September 2 , 1995 , Nintendo , in collaboration with the St.GIGA satellite radio network , began broadcasts of a substantially different version of the original The Hyrule Fantasy : Legend of Zelda for a Super Famicom peripheral , the Satellaview — a satellite modem add @-@ on . The game , titled BS Zelda no Densetsu ( BS ゼルダの伝説 ) , was released for download in four episodic , weekly installments which were rebroadcast at least four times between the game 's 1995 premier and January 1997 . BS Zelda was the first Satellaview game to feature a " SoundLink " soundtrack — a streaming audio track through which , every few minutes , players were cautioned to listen carefully as a voice actor narrator , broadcasting live from the St.GIGA studio , would give them plot and gameplay clues . In addition to the SoundLink elements , BS Zelda also featured updated 16 @-@ bit graphics , a smaller overworld , and different dungeons . Link was replaced by one of the two Satellaview avatars : a boy wearing a backward baseball cap or a girl with red hair . 
 Between December 30 , 1995 , and January 6 , 1996 , a second version of the game , BS Zelda no Densetsu MAP 2 ( BS <unk> ) , was broadcast to the Satellaview as the functional equivalent of the original The Legend of Zelda 's Second Quest . MAP 2 was rebroadcast only once , in March 1996 . 
 = Shandi Finnessey = 
 Shandi Ren Finnessey ( born June 9 , 1978 in Florissant , Missouri ) is an American actress , model , TV host and beauty queen . She is best known for winning the Miss USA title , as Miss Missouri USA . She previously held the title of Miss Missouri 2002 and competed in Miss America , where she won a preliminary award . She placed as first runner @-@ up at the Miss Universe 2004 competition . She is one of three women to have been both Miss Missouri USA and Miss Missouri and the only Missourian to have been Miss USA . Her first runner @-@ up finish at Miss Universe was the best placement in the 2000s and was the best United States placement between Brook <unk> Lee 's Miss Universe 1997 competition victory and Olivia <unk> 's Miss Universe 2012 pageant win . 
 In 2002 , Finnessey authored an award @-@ winning children ’ s book , The <unk> , on individuality and disabilities . In the mid @-@ 2000s , she was Chuck Woolery 's co @-@ host for the game show Lingo on the Game Show Network . <unk> has also hosted PlayMania as well as <unk> and has served as a sideline reporter for the CBS tournament blackjack series Ultimate Blackjack Tour . 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Finnessey was born to Patrick and Linda Finnessey , and she grew up in Florissant , Missouri . She attended McCluer North High School public high school for two years where , according to an interview with <unk> Magazine , she was teased a lot for her appearance . Finnessey recounted that she " had a mullet , tinted glasses , acne and braces . " The teasing made it difficult for her to focus on her studies , so for her junior year she transferred to the private all @-@ girls Incarnate Word Academy , where she graduated in 1996 . She completed a Bachelor of Science degree in psychology from Lindenwood University in December 1999 . Following graduation , she worked briefly as a full @-@ time substitute teacher in Jackson , Missouri before starting graduate school . She began working on her Masters in Counseling , also at Lindenwood , but postponed her studies after being crowned Miss USA in 2004 . 
 = = Pageants = = 
 = = = Participation = = = 
 Finnessey first competed in the Miss Missouri USA 2000 pageant in 1999 where , as Miss Saint Louis County in her senior year of college , she finished first runner @-@ up to <unk> Roderick . She competed the following year ( 2000 ) and placed second runner @-@ up behind first runner @-@ up <unk> <unk> and winner Larissa Meek in the Miss Missouri USA 2001 event . 
 In 2000 , Finnessey competed in the Miss Oktoberfest pageant and was 3rd runner @-@ up . The pageant was won by Jenna Edwards , who had previously been 1999 Miss Teen All @-@ American and would later hold the Miss Florida 2004 and Miss Florida USA 2007 titles . First runner @-@ up was Jennifer Glover , the previous Miss United States International 1999 and the future Miss California 2002 and Miss California USA 2001 . 
 On November 18 , 2000 , Finnessey won the Miss Jackson title in the Miss Missouri system and finished 2nd runner @-@ up to Jennifer Hover in the June 3 – 9 , 2001 Miss Missouri pageant held in Mexico , MO . Finnessey won the Miss St. Louis Metro local title in the Miss Missouri system and went on to win the 2002 Miss Missouri title , succeeding Hover . She won the contest despite having slammed her hand in a car door that weekend . During the contest , she performed an arrangement of " Flight of the Bumblebee " on the piano for her talent . During her on @-@ stage interview as one of the five finalists , she was asked what she learned having three brothers and she answered to be quick in the bathroom . 
 She represented Missouri in the Miss America 2003 pageant , where she won an evening gown preliminary award but did not place . For the talent portion of the competition in the Miss America system events ( which the Miss USA system does not use ) at times she played the violin and at other times the piano . In the competition to be Miss America , she played the piano . 
 Less than a year after giving up her Miss Missouri title , as Miss Metro St. Louis ( USA ) , Finnessey won the Miss Missouri USA pageant on her third attempt at Black River Coliseum in Poplar Bluff , Missouri . During her six @-@ month reign as Miss Missouri USA , Finnessey was involved in such charities as the Variety Club Telethon , St. Louis Cardinals Winter Warm Up for local charities , AIDS Foundation , Special Olympics in St. Louis , Missouri and Gilda 's Club . She joined Barbara Webster ( Miss Missouri 1983 and Miss Missouri USA 1986 ) and Robin Elizabeth Riley ( Miss Missouri 1987 and Miss Missouri USA 1983 ) as qualifiers to both of the nationally televised beauty pageants . 
 She represented Missouri in the April 12 , 2004 nationally televised Miss USA 2004 pageant at the Kodak Theater in Los Angeles in front of hosts Nancy O 'Dell and Billy Bush and judges Jeff Gordon , Jerry Buss , John Salley , Mekhi Phifer , Rocco <unk> and Jill Stuart . Her final question was whether experience or education serves a person better in life to which she answered " Definitely experience because you get your knowledge through experience . " She competed on the platform of integrating people with mental challenges into society . In the nationally televised pageant , she became the first woman from Missouri to win the Miss USA title . During her reign as Miss USA , Finnessey became an advocate for breast cancer and ovarian cancer awareness and research . She has also worked with Special Olympics , the National Down Syndrome Convention , American Cancer Society and Derek Jeter 's Turn 2 Foundation ( which helps at @-@ risk kids choose healthier lifestyles ) . Finnessey resided in a luxury Riverside Drive apartment in New York City provided by the Miss Universe Organization and pageant co @-@ owner Donald Trump . 
 As Miss USA Finnessey went on to represent the United States at the international Miss Universe competition held in Quito , Ecuador in May 2004 , culminating on June 1 , 2004 . She placed first runner @-@ up in the internationally broadcast competition , behind winner Jennifer Hawkins of Australia . The event was hosted by Bush and Daisy Fuentes and the judges included Petra <unk> , Emilio Estefan and Bo Derek . 
 As Miss USA , Finnessey represented the Miss Universe Organization . Her Miss Universe Organization " sister " 2004 titleholders were Jennifer Hawkins ( Miss Universe , of Australia ) and Shelley Hennig ( Miss Teen USA , of Louisiana ) . Her contemporary Miss America titleholder was Ericka Dunlap ( Florida ) . 
 = = = Ceremonial duties = = = 
 Finnessey provided color commentary at the Miss USA 2005 pageant live from Baltimore , Maryland on April 11 , where she was the outgoing titleholder . On July 23 , 2006 , she also co @-@ hosted the Miss Universe 2006 pageant live from Los Angeles , California as a commentator with Carson Kressley . The show 's main hosts were Carlos Ponce and Nancy O 'Dell . Finnessey has also co @-@ hosted subsequent Miss Missouri USA pageants . She again served as a commentator for the Miss Universe 2011 pageant in São Paulo , Brazil along with Jeannie Mai on September 12 , 2011 . 
 She joined a panel of celebrity judges to judged Miss USA 2009 pageant held at the Planet Hollywood Resort & Casino , Las Vegas , Nevada on April 19 , 2009 . That year when Miss California USA 2009 Carrie Prejean caused a notable controversy during her on @-@ stage finalist interview with a response that she was opposed to same @-@ sex marriage , Finnessey participated in a Miss California USA organization public service announcement promoting diversity along with several other Miss Universe Organization beauty pageant <unk> . 
