 = = Post @-@ pageants = = 
 After completing her reign as Miss USA , Finnessey became a co @-@ host of Lingo and PlayMania on GSN . She hosted Lingo from August 2005 at the start of the show 's fourth season until the show went on hiatus in 2008 . In April 2006 , she began her turn with the interactive series PlayMania , which broke into two shows on February 23 , 2007 . Finnessey became the co @-@ host of the <unk> spinoff , a revised but similar version of the original PlayMania . She remained a co @-@ host until October 21 , 2007 , several days before the show 's finale . She also was a sideline reporter for the CBS tournament blackjack series Ultimate Blackjack Tour . 
 She also has appeared in several documentaries produced by GSN . She has also appeared on the NBC reality show The Apprentice ( February 15 , 2005 , episode 3 @.@ 5 ) , in the November 13 , 2004 , 20 Sexiest Men and 20 Sexiest Women specials on CMT , and as Grand Marshal in the November 25 , 2004 Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade . She was named one of the Ten Outstanding Young Americans of 2006 by the Jaycees . She also appeared alongside Chris Myers as part of the coverage of the New Year 's Eve 2007 Festivities for Fox . On March 19 , 2007 , Finnessey debuted on the fourth season of Dancing with the Stars . Her professional dance partner was Brian Fortuna , and she was the second celebrity voted off the show . On October 31 and November 21 , 2007 , she appeared as a guest celebrity on NBC 's Phenomenon . She also hosted Hollywood Fast Track , a web based show about movies , music , and trends in Hollywood . She is also the host / co @-@ host of several TV Guide Network specials . On September 2 , 2008 , Shandi was on the season finale of Wanna Bet ? on ABC , where she made a record for the biggest successful bet on the show betting $ 20 @,@ 000 in the 1st best . Shandi lost in the end betting $ 40 @,@ 000 and guessing incorrectly . In August , 2010 , she appeared on a special " Girls of Summer " week airing of NBC 's Minute to Win It on an episode called " Last Beauty Standing . " The episode featured 10 beauty pageant winners competing for $ 100 @,@ 000 towards their chosen charities along with a chance to win a $ 1 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 challenge . At the Miss USA 2011 competition she was among the 31 former winners who were part of a photoshoot layout for Time Magazine . She played the role of Stephie in the Roger Corman @-@ produced <unk> ( 2010 ) which aired on the Syfy Channel three years before the same network made waves with its Sharknado movie franchise . 
 In January 2012 , she became one of the original reporters for <unk> News ( a branch of TVLine ) on a premium YouTube Channel . In March 2013 , she was selected as one of 36 <unk> to compete on the reality television show Ready For Love . Finnessey was the winner for bachelor Ernesto Arguello , but the relationship ended briefly after the show . 
 On August 8 , 2013 , she was named as one of five correspondents for the entertainment magazine , OK ! TV , that was scheduled to debut on September 9 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Her parents are Patrick and Linda Finnessey . She has three brothers ( Shane , Damion , and Paul ) , and her grandmothers ' names are Mildred Finnessey and Fern Miller . 
 According to the press release issued at the time of her first public appearance as Miss USA on April 17 , 2004 in New York City , she plays both the violin and piano . She also practices yoga , meditation and performs knitting and abstract painting . In 2003 , she dated August Busch IV and has also dated Italo <unk> . She is a Republican , and during her Miss USA reign , she attended the The Commander @-@ in @-@ Chief 's Ball at the Second inauguration of George W. Bush . 
 Her Miss USA press release also notes that she began her professional modelling career at the age of 6 . She modeled with Ford Models in Chicago and Talent Plus in St. Louis . According to the Miss USA website at the time of her reign , her modelling experience included television commercials , runway modelling , newspaper and magazine ads as well as upscale fashion store experience . She claims to have once wrestled a greased pig . As of 2011 , her parents still lived in the house that she grew up in Florissant . 
 In 2013 , Finnessey became a contestant on Ready for Love where she competed for the attention of Ernesto Arguello . She won Arguello 's heart on the show , but the relationship was short @-@ lived in real life . Later that year , she posed nude for a PETA anti @-@ fur campaign opposing the distribution of fur coats as prizes during beauty pageants . On September 24 , 2014 , Finnessey announced on Twitter that she is engaged to be married to Ben Higgins . They were married on July 11th , 2015 , according to another autobiographical tweet . Finnessey announced the June 10 , 2016 , home birth of her son Finn Arthur Higgins via Instagram . 
 = = = Scholarly work = = = 
 Finnessey authored an award @-@ winning children 's book . Her book , which was published on August 1 , 2002 , was entitled <unk> and helps the effort to integrate intellectually disabled children into regular classrooms and helps children appreciate individuality and understand their peers who have disabilities . She was recognized with an Authors Who Make a Difference award , known as <unk> , ( from Infinity Publishing ) and a Ryan <unk> Award for this work . She authored a second book entitled Suzanna the Banana . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = <unk> = = 
 = Jesus nahm zu sich die Zwölfe , BWV 22 = 
 Jesus nahm zu sich die Zwölfe ( Jesus gathered the twelve to Himself ) , BWV 22 , is a church cantata by Johann Sebastian Bach composed for Quinquagesima , the last Sunday before Lent . Bach composed it as an audition piece for the position of Thomaskantor in Leipzig and first performed it there on 7 February 1723 . 
 The work , which is in five movements , begins with a scene from the Gospel reading in which Jesus predicts his suffering in Jerusalem . The unknown poet of the cantata text took the scene as a starting point for a sequence of aria , recitative , and aria , in which the contemporary Christian takes the place of the disciples , who do not understand what Jesus is telling them about the events soon to unfold , but follow him nevertheless . The closing chorale is a stanza from Elisabeth Cruciger 's hymn " Herr Christ , der einig Gotts Sohn " . The music is scored for three vocal soloists , a four @-@ part choir , oboe , strings and continuo . The work shows that Bach had mastered the composition of a dramatic scene , an expressive aria with obbligato oboe , a recitative with strings , an exuberant dance , and a chorale in the style of his predecessor in the position as Thomaskantor , Johann Kuhnau . Bach directed the first performance of the cantata during a church service , together with another audition piece , Du wahrer Gott und Davids Sohn , BWV 23 . He performed the cantata again on the last Sunday before Lent a year later , after he had taken up office . 
 The cantata shows elements which became standards for Bach 's Leipzig cantatas and even the Passions , including a " frame of biblical text and chorale around the operatic forms of aria and recitative " , " the fugal setting of biblical words " and " the biblical narrative ... as a dramatic scena " . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background , Mühlhausen , Weimar and Köthen = = = 
 As far as we know , the earliest cantatas of Johann Sebastian Bach were performed in Mühlhausen from 1706 to 1708 . He was employed as an organist there , but he occasionally composed cantatas , mostly for special occasions . The cantatas were based mainly on biblical texts and hymns , such as Aus der Tiefen rufe ich , Herr , zu dir , BWV 131 ( a psalm setting ) , and the Easter chorale cantata Christ lag in Todes Banden , BWV 4 . 
 Bach was next appointed organist and chamber musician in Weimar on 25 June 1708 at the court of the co @-@ reigning dukes in Saxe @-@ Weimar , Wilhelm Ernst and his nephew Ernst August . He initially concentrated on the organ , composing major works for the instrument , including the Orgelbüchlein , the Toccata and Fugue in D minor , BWV 565 , and the Prelude and Fugue in E major , BWV 566 . He was promoted to Konzertmeister on 2 March 1714 , an honour that entailed performing a church cantata monthly in the Schlosskirche . The first cantatas he composed in the new position were Himmelskönig , sei willkommen , BWV 182 , for Palm Sunday , Weinen , Klagen , Sorgen , Zagen , BWV 12 for Jubilate Sunday , and Erschallet , ihr Lieder , BWV 172 , for Pentecost . Mostly inspired by texts by the court poet , Salomo Franck , they contain recitatives and arias . When Johann Samuel Drese , the Kapellmeister ( director of music ) , died in 1716 , Bach hoped in vain to become his successor . Bach looked for a better position and found it as Kapellmeister at the court of Leopold , Prince of Anhalt @-@ Köthen . However , the duke in Weimar did not dismiss him and arrested him for disobedience . He was released on 2 December 1717 . 
 In Köthen , Bach found an employer who was an enthusiastic musician himself . The court was Calvinist , therefore Bach 's work from this period was mostly secular , including the orchestral suites , the cello suites , the sonatas and partitas for solo violin , and the Brandenburg Concertos . He composed secular cantatas for the court for occasions such as New Year 's Day and the prince 's birthday , including Die Zeit , die Tag und Jahre macht , BWV 134a . He later parodied some of them as church cantatas without major changes , for example Ein Herz , das seinen Jesum <unk> weiß , BWV 134 . 
 = = = Audition in Leipzig = = = 
 Bach composed his cantata as part of his application for the position of Thomaskantor in Leipzig , the official title being Cantor et Director <unk> ( Cantor and Director of Music ) . As cantor , he was responsible for the music at four Lutheran churches , the main churches Thomaskirche ( St. Thomas ) and the Nikolaikirche ( St. Nicholas ) , but also the Neue Kirche ( New Church ) and the Peterskirche ( St. Peter ) . As director of music , the Thomaskantor was Leipzig 's " senior musician " , responsible for the music on official occasions such as town council elections and homages . Functions related to the university took place at the Paulinerkirche . The position became vacant when Johann Kuhnau died on 5 June 1722 . Bach was interested , mentioning as one reason that he saw more possibilities for future academic studies of his sons in Leipzig : " ... but this post was described to me in such favorable terms that finally ( particularly since my sons seemed inclined to [ university ] studies ) I cast my lot , in the name of the Lord , and made my journey to Leipzig , took my examination , and then made the change of position . " 
 = = = Audition in Leipzig = = = 
 By August 1722 , the town council had already chosen Georg Philipp Telemann as Kuhnau 's successor , but he declined in November . In a council meeting on 23 November , seven candidates were evaluated , but no agreement was reached on whether to prefer a candidate for academic teaching abilities or musical performance . The first council document with Bach named as a candidate dates from 21 December , together with Christoph Graupner . Of all candidates , Bach was the only one without a university education . 
 The decision to invite Bach was made by the council on 15 January 1723 . The council seemed to have preferred Bach and Graupner because they were invited to show two cantatas each , while other candidates were requested to show only one . Two candidates even had to present their work in the same service . Graupner 's performance took place on the last Sunday after Epiphany , 17 January 1723 . Two days before the event , the town council already agreed to offer him the position . 
 Christoph Wolff assumes that Bach received an invitation for the audition together with the texts , probably prescribed to the candidates and drawn from a printed collection , only weeks before the date . In Köthen Bach composed two cantatas on two different themes from the prescribed Gospel for the Sunday , Du wahrer Gott und Davids Sohn , BWV 23 , on the topic of healing the blind near Jericho and Jesus nahm zu sich die Zwölfe about Jesus announcing his suffering , which the disciples do not understand . 
 Bach had to travel to Leipzig early because he was not familiar with the location and the performers . Wolff assumes that Bach was in Leipzig already on 2 February for the Marian feast of Purification when candidate Georg Balthasar Schott presented his audition piece at the Nikolaikirche . Bach brought the scores and some parts , but additional parts had to be copied in Leipzig by students of the Thomasschule . Bach led the first performance of the two audition cantatas on 7 February 1723 as part of a church service at the Thomaskirche , this cantata before the sermon , and Du wahrer Gott und Davids Sohn after the sermon . The score of BWV 22 bears the note " This is the Leipzig audition piece " ( Das ist das Probe @-@ <unk> für Leipzig ) . 
 Wolff notes that Bach employed the three lower voices in BWV 22 and the upper three voices in BWV 23 , and presents a list of the different composition techniques Bach employed in the two audition cantatas ; they displayed " a broad and highly integrated spectrum of ... vocal art " . 
 A press review reads : " On Sunday last in the morning the Hon. Capellmeister of Cöthen , Mr. Bach , gave here his test at the church of St. Thomas 's for the hitherto vacant <unk> , the music of the same having been amply praised on that occasion by all knowledgeable persons ... " . 
 Bach left Leipzig without hope for the position because it had been offered to Graupner , but he was not dismissed by his employer , Ernst @-@ Ludwig of Hesse @-@ Darmstadt . After a meeting on 9 April 1723 , with incomplete documentation containing " ... since the best could not be obtained , a mediocre one would have to be accepted ... " , Bach received an offer to sign a preliminary contract . 
 = = = Assuming the position = = = 
 Bach assumed the position of Thomaskantor on 30 May 1723 , the first Sunday after Trinity , performing two ambitious cantatas in 14 movements each : Die Elenden sollen essen , BWV 75 , followed by Die Himmel erzählen die Ehre Gottes , BWV 76 . They form the beginning of his attempt to create several annual cycles of cantatas for the occasions of the liturgical year . 
 He performed Jesus nahm zu sich die Zwölfe again on 20 February 1724 , as a printed libretto shows , and probably did so again in later years . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Occasion and words = = = 
 Bach composed his cantata in 1723 for the Sunday Quinquagesima which Bach knew as Estomihi , the last Sunday before Lent . In the city of Leipzig , tempus clausum was observed during Lent , therefore it was the last Sunday with a cantata performance before a celebration of the Annunciation , Palm Sunday and the vespers service on Good Friday and Easter . The prescribed readings for the Sunday were taken from the First Epistle to the Corinthians , " praise of love " ( 1 Corinthians 13 : 1 – 13 ) , and from the Gospel of Luke , healing the blind near Jericho ( Luke 18 : 31 – 43 ) . The Gospel also contains the announcement by Jesus of his future suffering in Jerusalem , and that the disciples do not understand what he is saying . 
 The cantata text is the usual combination of Bible quotation , free contemporary poetry and as closing chorale a stanza from a hymn as an affirmation . An unknown poet chose from the Gospel verses 31 and 34 as the text for movement 1 , and wrote a sequence of aria , recitative and aria for the following movements . His poetic text places the Christian in general , including the listener at Bach 's time or any time , in the situation of the disciples : he is pictured as wanting to follow Jesus even in suffering , although he does not comprehend . The poetry ends on a prayer for " denial of the flesh " . The closing chorale is stanza 5 of Elisabeth Cruciger 's " Herr Christ , der einig Gotts Sohn " , intensifying the prayer , on a melody from the Lochamer @-@ Liederbuch . 
 Stylistic comparisons with other works by Bach suggest that the same poet wrote the texts for both audition cantatas and also for the two first cantatas which Bach performed when taking up his office . The poetry for the second aria has an unusually long first section , which Bach handled elegantly by repeating only part of it in the da capo . 
 = = = Scoring and structure = = = 
 The cantata has five movements and is scored for three vocal soloists ( an alto ( A ) , tenor ( T ) and bass ( B ) ) , a four @-@ part choir ( SATB ) , and for a Baroque orchestra of an oboe ( Ob ) , two violins ( Vl ) , viola ( Va ) and basso continuo . The duration is given as c . 20 minutes . 
 In the following table of movements , the scoring , divided in voices , winds and strings , follows the Neue Bach @-@ Ausgabe . The continuo group is not listed , because it plays throughout . The keys and time signatures are taken from Alfred Dürr . The symbol is used to denote common time ( 4 / 4 ) . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 = = = = 1 = = = = 
 The text of the first movement , " Jesus nahm zu sich die Zwölfe " ( Jesus gathered the Twelve to Himself ) is a quotation of two verses from the prescribed Gospel for the Sunday ( Luke 18 : 31 – 43 ) . The movement is a scene with different actors , narrated by the Evangelist ( tenor ) , in which Jesus ( bass , as the vox Christi or voice of Christ ) and his disciples ( the chorus ) interact . An " ever @-@ ascending " instrumental ritornello " evokes the image of the road of suffering embodied by going up to Jerusalem " . The Evangelist begins the narration ( Luke 18 : 31 ) . Jesus announces his future suffering in Jerusalem , Sehet , wir <unk> <unk> gen Jerusalem ( " Behold , we go up to Jerusalem " ) . He sings , while the ritornello is played several times . After another repeat of the ritornello as an interlude , a choral fugue illustrates the reaction of the disciples , following verse 34 from the Gospel ( Luke 18 : 34 ) : Sie aber <unk> der <unk> ( " However they understood nothing " ) . The voices are first accompanied only by the continuo , then doubled by the other instruments . Bach marks the voices in the autograph score as " <unk> " for the first section and " ripienists " when the instruments come in . 
 The movement is concluded by an instrumental postlude . The musicologist Julian Mincham notes that the fugue deviates from the " traditional alternating of tonic and dominant entries ... as a rather abstruse indication of the lack of clarity and expectation amongst the disciples , Bach is hinting at this in musical terms by having each voice enter on a different note , B @-@ flat , F , C and G and briefly touching upon various related keys . The music is , as always , lucid and focussed but the departure from traditional fugal procedure sends a fleeting message to those who appreciate the subtleties of the musical processes " . 
 The musicologist Richard D. P. Jones points out that " the biblical narrative is set as a dramatic scena worthy of the Bach Passions " and that the " vivid drama of that movement has no real counterpart in Bach 's Cycle I cantatas . " 
 = = = = 2 = = = = 
 In the first aria , " Mein Jesu , ziehe mich nach dir " ( " My Jesus , draw me after You " ) , the alto voice is accompanied by an obbligato oboe , which expressively intensifies the text . 
 An aria is , according to Johann Mattheson in Der <unk> Capellmeister ( Part II , chapter 13 , paragraph 10 ) , " correctly described as a well @-@ composed song , which has its own particular key and meter , is usually divided into two parts , and concisely expresses a great affection . Occasionally it closes with a repetition of the first part , occasionally without it . " 
 In this aria , an individual believer requests Jesus to make him follow , even without comprehending where and why . Mincham observes a mood or affekt of " deep involvement and pensive commitment " , with the oboe creating " an aura of suffering and a sense of struggling and reaching upwards in search of something indefinable in a way that only music can suggest . " 
 = = = = 3 = = = = 
 The recitative " Mein Jesu , ziehe mich , so werd ich laufen " ( " My Jesus , draw me , then I will run " ) is not a simple secco recitative , but is accompanied by the strings and leans towards an arioso , especially near the end . It is the first movement in a major mode , and illustrates in rapid runs the motion and the running mentioned . 
 = = = = 4 = = = = 
 The second aria , " Mein alles in allem , mein ewiges Gut " ( " My all in all , my eternal good " ) , again with strings , is a dance @-@ like movement in free da capo form , A B A ' . The unusually long text , of four lines for the A section and two for the B section , results in Bach 's solution to repeat the end of the first line ( my eternal good ) after all text of A , and then after the middle section B repeat only the first line as A ' , thus ending A and A ' the same way . In this modified repeat , the voice holds a long note on the word Friede ( " peace " ) , after which the same theme appears in the orchestra and again in the continuo . The musicologist Tadashi Isoyama notes the <unk> character of the music , reminiscent of secular Köthen cantatas . Mincham describes : " Bach 's expression of the joy of union with Christ can often seem quite worldly and uninhibited " , and summarises : " The 3 / 8 time signature , symmetrical phrasing and rapid string <unk> combine to create a sense of a dance of abandonment . " 
 = = = = 5 = = = = 
 The closing chorale is " Ertöt uns durch dein Güte " ( " Kill us through your goodness " or " Us mortify through kindness " ) , the fifth stanza of Elisabeth Cruciger 's " Herr Christ , der einig Gotts Sohn " . Its melody is based on one from Wolflein Lochamer 's Lochamer @-@ Liederbuch , printed in Nürnberg around 1455 . It first appears as a sacred tune in Johann Walter 's Wittenberg hymnal Eyn geystlich Gesangk Buchleyn ( 1524 ) . 
 The usual four @-@ part setting of the voices is brightened by continuous runs of the oboe and violin I. Isoyama thinks that Bach may have intentionally imitated the style of his predecessor Johann Kuhnau in the " elegantly flowing obbligato for oboe and first violin " . John Eliot Gardiner describes the movement 's bass line as a " walking bass as a symbol of the disciples ' journey to fulfilment . Mincham comments that Bach " chose to maintain the established mood of buoyancy and optimism with a chorale arrangement of almost unparalleled energy and gaiety " and concludes : 
 It would seem that Bach had not yet reached a conclusion , if indeed he ever did , as to the most appropriate way of utilising the chorales in his cantatas . Certainly the quiet , closing moments of reflection and introspection became the norm , particularly in the second cycle . But the chorale could , as here , act as a focus of bounding energy and positivity . 
 = = = Reception = = = 
 Jones summarises : " The audition cantatas ... show Bach feeling his way towards a compromise between the progressive , opera @-@ influenced and the conservative , ecclesiastical styles . " He acknowledges the standard BWV 22 sets for later church cantatas : 
 " places an ecclesiastical frame of biblical text and chorale around the operatic forms of aria and recitative , a frame that would become a standard in the cantatas of cycle I. Moreover , the impressive opening movement incorporates two modes of treatment that would recur regularly during Cycle I and beyond : the fugal setting of biblical words and the use as the bass voice as vox Christi , as in traditional Passion settings . " 
 Isoyama points out : " BWV 22 incorporates dance rhythms , and is written with a modern elegance . " Mincham interprets Bach 's approach in both audition works as " a fair example of the range of music which is suitable for worship and from which others might learn " , explaining the " sheer range of forms and musical expression in these two cantatas " . Gardiner , who conducted the Bach Cantata Pilgrimage with the Monteverdi Choir and wrote a diary on the project , comments on the disciples ' reaction ( " and they understood none of these things , neither knew they the things which were spoken " ) : 
 " One could read into this an ironic prophecy of the way Bach 's new Leipzig audience would react to his creative outpourings over the next twenty @-@ six years – in the absence , that is , of any tangible or proven signs of appreciation : neither wild enthusiasm , deep understanding nor overt dissatisfaction " . 
 = = = Recordings = = = 
 The sortable table follows the selection on the Bach @-@ Cantatas website . Choirs and orchestras are roughly grouped : 
 Large choirs ( red background ) : Boys ( choir of all male voices ) 
 Medium @-@ size choirs , such as Chamber 
 Large orchestras ( red background ) : Symphony 
 Chamber orchestra 
 Orchestra on period instruments ( green background ) 
 = = Arrangement = = 
 In the 1930s Harriet Cohen 's piano arrangement of the cantata 's closing chorale was published by Oxford University Press under the title " Sanctify us by the goodness " . It was in the repertoire of , for example , Alicia de Larrocha . 
 = Scar ( The Lion King ) = 
 Scar is a fictional character who appears in Walt Disney Pictures ' 32nd animated feature film , The Lion King ( 1994 ) . The character is voiced by English actor Jeremy Irons , while his singing voice is provided by both Irons and American actor Jim Cummings , the latter of whom was hired to replace Irons when the former damaged his singing voice . Subsequently , Scar makes minor appearances in the film 's sequel The Lion King II : Simba 's Pride ( 1998 ) and The Lion King 1 ½ ( 2004 ) , in both of which he is voiced entirely by Cummings , as well as appearing in the Broadway musical adaptation of the film , in which the role of Scar was originated by American actor John Vickery . 
 Scar was created by screenwriters Irene Mecchi , Jonathan Roberts and Linda Woolverton , and animated by Andreas Deja . The Pride Lands ' reclusive heir presumptive , Scar is introduced in the first film as the conniving uncle of Simba and jealous younger brother of Mufasa . Originally first @-@ in @-@ line to Mufasa 's throne until he is suddenly replaced by nephew Simba , Scar decides to lead an army of hyenas in his plot to usurp the throne by murdering Mufasa and exiling Simba , ultimately blaming his brother 's death on his innocent nephew . Loosely based on King Claudius , the antagonist of William Shakespeare 's play Hamlet , Scar 's villainy was additionally inspired by German politician Adolf Hitler . As the character 's supervising animator , Deja based Scar 's appearance on that of Irons himself , as well as the actor 's Academy Award @-@ winning performance as Claus von Bülow in the film Reversal of Fortune ( 1990 ) . Before Irons was cast , the directors had considered offering the role to actors Tim Curry and Malcolm McDowell . 
 As a character , Scar has garnered widespread acclaim from film critics , who greeted Irons ' performance with equal enthusiasm . However , Scar 's violence , dark color palette and allegedly effeminate mannerisms were initially met with mild controversy , perceived by some as racist and homophobic . Nevertheless , Scar continues to be revered as one of Disney 's greatest villains by various media publications , topping The Huffington Post 's list and ranking within the top ten of similar lists published by Yahoo ! Movies , the Orlando Sentinel , E ! and CNN . Scar has also been ranked among the greatest villains in film history by Digital Spy and Entertainment Weekly . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Conception and influences = = = 
 The Lion King was first conceived in 1988 . The film was eventually pitched to Disney executives , one of whom was among the first to observe similarities between author Thomas M. Disch 's treatment and William Shakespeare 's play Hamlet . Although first citing these similarities as initially unintentional , director Rob Minkoff always felt that it was essential " to anchor [ the film ] with something familiar " . As directors , Minkoff and Roger Allers aspired to create " an animal picture based in a more natural setting , " describing the film as " More true @-@ life adventure than mythical epic . " Although not the first Disney film to have been inspired by Shakespeare 's work , The Lion King remains the studio 's most prominent example due to close parallels between its characters and Hamlet , while both stories revolve around main characters who struggle to come to terms with the reality that they must confront their treacherous uncles and avenge their fathers ' deaths . Scar is based on King Claudius , the antagonist of Hamlet . According to Slate , while Claudius is mostly " a second @-@ rate schemer ... consumed by anxiety and guilt , " Scar very much " delight [ s ] in his monstrosity ; " both characters are motivated by jealousy . Meanwhile , The Week observed that although both characters ultimately die , Claudius is killed by protagonist Hamlet while Scar dies " at the hand of his former hyena minions , and not Simba himself . " Additionally , the character shares similarities with Iago from Shakespeare 's play Othello ; both antagonists are skilled in exploiting their victims ' fears . 
 The original plot of The Lion King revolved around an ongoing rivalry between lions and baboons ; Scar , a baboon himself , was their leader . When this plot was abandoned , Scar was re @-@ written into a rogue lion , thus lacking any blood relation to Mufasa and Simba . Eventually , the writers felt that making Scar and Mufasa brothers would ultimately enhance the story by making it more interesting . An abandoned character , at one point Scar owned a pet python as a sidekick . Because the film was originally intended to be much more adult @-@ oriented , Scar was to have become infatuated with Simba 's childhood friend and eventual love interest Nala , wanting the young lioness to rule alongside him as his queen and consequentially banishing the character when she refuses . This concept was to have been further explored during a reprise of Scar 's song " Be Prepared " , but both the idea and the song were ultimately completely removed from the film because they were deemed too " creepy " . To further emphasize the character 's villainy and tyranny , the writers loosely based Scar on German politician Adolf Hitler . According to The Jerusalem Post , Scar 's song " Be Prepared " " features goose @-@ stepping hyenas in a formation reminiscent of a Nuremberg rally . " This idea was first suggested by story artist Jorgen Klubien . 
 According to the directors , " [ a ] patronizing quality " was vital to Scar 's role in the film . Minkoff told the Los Angeles Times , " When Scar puts the guilt trip on Simba , that 's an intense idea ... probably something that is not typical of the other Disney pictures , in terms of what the villain does . " Additionally , Scar serves as a departure from previous Disney villains because they " came off at least as buffoonish as they were sinister " . Because Scar is the film 's main antagonist , supervising animator Andreas Deja believed that " villains work really well when they 're subtle " , explaining , " to see them think and scheme and plot is much more interesting than showing them beating somebody up . " By blaming Mufasa 's death on an innocent Simba , Scar ultimately triggers " a cycle of guilt , flight , denial and redemption , as the hero goes into self @-@ imposed exile before finally reconciling with his father 's memory , returning to face his wicked uncle and generally coming of age . " The character 's first line in The Lion King essentially summarizes the entire film , providing foreshadowing . It reads , " Life 's not fair is it ? You see I @-@ well , I ... shall never be King . And you ... shall never see light of another day , " subtly revealing the plot as well as " the reason why [ Scar ] decides to murder his own brother . " 
 = = = Voice = = = 
 English actors Tim Curry and Malcolm McDowell were originally considered for the role of Scar . However , the role was ultimately won by English actor Jeremy Irons because of his classical theatre training ; the directors had deliberately wanted Scar " to come across as a Shakespearean character . " Successfully recruiting Irons for the film was considered an unprecedented achievement for the studio because , at the time , it was rare for a dramatic actor of Irons ' caliber to agree to voice an animated character , especially immediately after winning an Academy Award . In fact , the Oscar @-@ winning actor nearly declined because , in fear of jeopardizing his successful career , he was " [ h ] <unk> to jump from a dramatic role to an animated feature . " Prior to The Lion King , Irons was famous for starring as several villains and antagonists in live @-@ action films " geared towards adults . " Although he had starred in a children 's film before , the actor admitted that it did not mirror the success of The Lion King , a film that has since gained notoriety for its cast of well known , award @-@ winning Hollywood actors , which animation historian Jerry Beck referred to in his book The Animated Movie Guide as " the most impressive list of actors ever to grace an animated film . " 
 As directors , Minkoff and Allers " work [ ed ] very closely with the actors to create their performance . " Describing Irons as " a gentleman and a brilliant actor , " Allers revealed that the actor was constantly offering " extra interpretations of lines which were fantastic . " Producer Don Hahn recalled that Irons " really wanted to play with the words and the pacing , " specifically referring to a scene in which Scar , voiced by Irons , coaxes Simba onto a rock and tricks the young cub to stay there and await his father 's arrival alone , dubbing it " a father and son ... thing . " According to Hahn , " The comedy in [ Irons ' ] inflection comes from Scar sounding so disdainful he can barely summon the will to finish the sentence . " Irons ' physical appearance and mannerisms served as inspiration for Scar 's supervising animator Andreas Deja , namely his flicking his paw in disgust . Critics have cited physical similarities between Irons and Scar . 
 In a reference to the role that earned Irons an Academy Award , Claus von Bülow in the film Reversal of Fortune ( 1990 ) , the writers gave Scar one of von Bülow 's lines , " You have no idea " , which is uttered by Irons in a similar tone . According to author Rachel Stein of New Perspectives on Environmental Justice : Gender , Sexuality , and Activism , Irons relies " on his history of playing sexually perverse , socially dangerous male characters to animate his depiction of Scar . " On the contrary , Irons revealed to Connect Savannah that the similarities between the voices of Scar and von Bülow were largely unintentional , explaining , " Whatever voice came was arrived at by looking at the initial sketches , and from the freedom the directors gave me to try anything . " Irons concluded , " The fact that he may occasionally remind you of Claus , comes from the fact that they both share the same voice box . " 
 While recording Scar 's song " Be Prepared , " Irons encountered challenges with his voice . The actor reportedly " blew out his voice " upon belting the line " you won 't get a sniff without me , " rendering him incapable of completing the musical number . Consequently , Disney was forced to recruit American voice actor Jim Cummings , who had also been providing the voice of The Lion King 's laughing hyena Ed at the time , to impersonate Irons and record the remainder of the song . Cummings told The Huffington Post that " [ s ] <unk> singing " is actually something the actor continues to do regularly , having done the same for American actor Russel Means , voice of Chief Powhatan in Disney 's Pocahontas ( 1995 ) . Critics observed that Irons " fakes his way ... through ' Be Prepared ' in the grand tradition of talk @-@ singing , " drawing similarities between him and American actor James Cagney and English actor Rex Harrison . Deja revealed that , during a recording session , Irons ' stomach was grumbling . Deja joked , " The growling sound could be heard in his recording , so we had to record that part of his dialog all over again . " As a result of Irons ' prominent British accent , critics have compared both the actor and Scar to Shere Khan , the villain of Disney 's The Jungle Book ( 1967 ) , voiced by English actor George Sanders . 
 = = = Design and characterization = = = 
 The studio originally dismissed The Lion King as a risk because , at the time , it was believed that the greatest films starred people . Concerned about the novelty of the film , Disney CEO Jeffrey Katzenberg decided to divide the studio into two separate animated films , The Lion King and Pocahontas , the latter of which was dubbed " the home run " because it was expected to be the more successful of the two projects . Naturally , Disney 's more seasoned and experienced animators gravitated towards Pocahontas , while the studio 's newer animators were relegated to working on The Lion King , dubbing themselves the " B @-@ team " . However , Allers received Katzenberg 's decision positively as an opportunity for " newer animators ... to step up to leadership roles " , among them Andreas Deja , who became Scar 's supervising animator . Well known for animating several Disney villains , Deja summarized the experience as " more fun than drawing heroes " because " You have so much more to work with in terms of expressions and acting and drawing @-@ wise than you would have with a nice princess or a prince ... where you have to be ever so careful with the draftsmanship " . 
 Before becoming involved with The Lion King , Deja had already developed a reputation for animating Disney villains . Prior to animating Scar , Deja had just recently served as the supervising animator of Gaston and Jafar , the villains in Disney 's Beauty and the Beast ( 1991 ) and Aladdin ( 1992 ) , respectively . Initially , Deja had been considering the idea of animating a hero as opposed to a villain for a change , contemplating taking on the task of animating Simba instead . However , Deja soon relented upon learning that Scar would be voiced by Irons , feeling that it would be " fun " to animate a character voiced by such a prestigious actor . Meanwhile , Minkoff and Allers had already had Deja in mind for animating Scar long before the animator approached the directors about the position . The level anthropomorphism used in The Lion King exceeded that of any Disney animated film by which it was preceded . Because Scar is an animal as opposed to a human , Deja and the animators experienced certain challenges and limitations when it came to instilling movement in the character , and thus experimented with manipulating Scar 's facial expressions , specifically the way in which he tilts his head condescendingly , raises his eyebrows and lifts his chin . The animals were each drawn with certain human @-@ like attributes and characteristics in order to help convey emotions and tell the story . Meanwhile , the studio recruited live lions for the animators to study while drawing . As the film 's villain , Scar is the only lion drawn with claws . 
 Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly described Scar as " a figure of both pity and evil , and of treacherous comedy " with " Irons ... filling this devious coward with elegantly witty self @-@ loathing . " As an animator , Deja believes that " If you have a great voice to work with , your work is half done . " Enjoying the way in which Irons " has a way with words and phrasing , " Deja deliberately based much of Scar 's appearance on the actor himself , specifically the shape of his mouth and facial expressions . Several of the actor 's physical attributes were incorporated into Scar 's design , with Irons admitting to recognizing his own baggy eyes in his character . Additionally , Deja studied Irons ' performances in the films Reversal of Fortune ( 1990 ) and Damage ( 1992 ) for inspiration , while refusing to watch Disney 's The Jungle Book while working on The Lion King in order to avoid being influenced by the film 's villain Shere Khan , a tiger . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Scar sings the musical number " Be Prepared , " written by songwriters Elton John and Tim Rice , while contemplating Mufasa 's death plot and bringing the hyenas along . Described as the film 's " darkest " song , a " pompous , " " fascistic paean to usurpers , " the musical sequence depicts the lion " as a big @-@ cat fascist . " According to Business Insider , in addition to loosely basing the character on Adolf Hitler to further emphasize Scar 's tyranny , the filmmakers very much directly based his song " Be Prepared , " which references Nazism by having Scar 's army of hyenas <unk> while addressing them from a high ledge – similar to the way in which Hitler would have from a balcony – on the Nazi propaganda film Triumph of the Will ( 1935 ) , a film that documents Nazi Germany during 1934 . 
 According to Entertainment Weekly , the concept originated from a sketch by story artist Jorgen Klubien , in which Scar was depicted as Hitler . Although hesitant that Disney CEO Jeffrey Katzenberg would approve , the filmmakers ultimately decided to pursue it , describing the sequence as a " Triumph of the Will @-@ style mock @-@ Nuremberg rally . " The St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch reviewed , " those goose @-@ stepping hyenas seem a little much in hindsight , " while Film School Rejects coined it a " hellish gathering . " 
 = = Appearances = = 
 = = = Film = = = 
 Scar debuted in The Lion King ( 1994 ) . The jealous younger brother of Mufasa , Scar was next @-@ in @-@ line to inherit the throne until his nephew Simba , Mufasa 's son , was born , replacing him . Determined to usurp the throne and become king himself , Scar devises a plan to eliminate both Simba and Mufasa . <unk> trapping an unsuspecting Simba in a vast gorge , Scar signals his hyena minions Shenzi , Banzai and Ed to trigger a wildebeest stampede . Although Mufasa saves Simba , the king is greatly weakened , and thus unable to climb out of the gorge to safety . When a desperate Mufasa begs Scar for help , Scar instead throws his brother to his death below . Convincing Simba that he is to blame for Mufasa 's death , Scar advises the prince to run away and never return , then orders the hyenas to pursue and kill him . With his brother murdered and his nephew presumed dead , Scar returns to Pride Rock and tells the pride that both father and son are dead before becoming king . 
 Years go by as Scar squanders the kingdom 's resources and allows his army of hyenas to wreak havoc upon the Pride Lands , which turn barren . Meanwhile , an alive and young adult Simba is visited by Mufasa 's ghost , who encourages him to return to the Pride Lands and take his rightful place as king . Aided by his friends Nala , Timon and Pumbaa , Simba arrives at Pride Rock and witnesses Scar striking his mother Sarabi and confronts Scar , who demands that Simba admit to the pride that he killed Mufasa . As he prepares to throw Simba off Pride Rock and have him meet a similar fate to that of his father , Scar , having grown over @-@ confident , whispers that he was the one who killed Mufasa . Enraged , Simba tackles Scar and forces his uncle to admit the truth to the pride , initiating a ferocious battle between the pride , Timon , Pumbaa and Scar 's hyenas . Scar tries to escape , but is cornered by Simba on the top of Pride Rock ; Scar begs for mercy and even attempts to blame his crimes on the hyenas , unaware that they are listening nearby . Simba ignores Scar and gives him one last chance to run away and never return . When Simba 's back is turned , Scar attacks him and they fight . Simba bests Scar in combat and throws him over the cliff edge and into a pit . Scar survives the fall , but is attacked and killed by the vengeful hyenas . 
 = = = Broadway musical = = = 
 The success of The Lion King spawned a Broadway musical based on the film , directed by Julie Taylor with a book written by The Lion King co @-@ director Roger Allers and screenwriter Irene Mecchi . American actor John Vickery originated the role of Scar . In one scene in the musical , Scar , during the song " The Madness of King Scar " , tries to seduce a young adult Nala and make her his queen . Nala however , rejects Scar 's advances and leaves Pride Rock . 
 = = = The Lion King II : Simba 's Pride = = = 
 Having perished during The Lion King , Scar 's appearance and presence in its sequel The Lion King II : Simba 's Pride ( 1998 ) is , naturally , quite limited in comparison . Story @-@ wise , however , his role remains vital . Upon Scar 's demise , a rivaling pride of lions known as the Outsiders decide to remain loyal to him . The pride is led by Scar 's most faithful follower , Zira . Since Scar had no children of his own , Zira 's son Kovu is chosen to serve as Scar 's heir . Simba banishes the Outsiders to the Outlands , and forbids his daughter Kiara from going there . She goes there anyway , however , and meets and befriends Kovu . Meanwhile , Zira trains Kovu to murder Simba , but when he becomes a young adult , he has a change of heart as he begins to develop feelings for Kiara . 
 Scar makes a brief cameo appearance in the film in one of Simba 's nightmares . In the nightmare , an adult Simba runs down the cliffside where his father died , attempting to rescue him . Scar intervenes , however , and then turns into Kovu and throws Simba off the cliff . Scar makes another cameo appearance in a pool of water , as a reflection , after Kovu is exiled from Pride Rock . 
 = = = Miscellaneous = = = 
 Scar makes a brief cameo in Disney 's animated feature film Hercules ( 1997 ) in the form of a limp lion skin coat worn by Hercules , parodying the Nemean lion . Scar 's supervising animator Andreas Deja also served as the supervising animator of Hercules . The character appears in the 1994 video game The Lion King . According to AllGame , Scar appears towards the end of video game as Simba finally " must defeat his Uncle Scar " and " stop Scar and reclaim what is rightfully his . " Scar plays a similar role in the video game The Lion King : Simba 's Mighty Adventure ( 2000 ) ; Simba 's climactic " battle with Scar concludes the first six levels of the game . " According to IGN , the video game features the voices of the film 's cast , including Jeremy Irons as Scar . Voiced by James Horan , Scar appears as a non @-@ player character in Disney 's Extreme Skate Adventure ( 2003 ) and Kingdom Hearts II as a villain who ultimately transforms into a Heartless as a result of the character 's own " hatred and jealousy . " 
 Scar also makes a brief non @-@ speaking cameo appearance in an episode of Timon and Pumbaa . 
 = = = The Lion Guard = = = 
 Scar is briefly portrayed in The Lion Guard film and series , which explains some of his backstory . When Scar was younger — as per tradition to all second born children of the current reigning " Lion King " — he led The Lion Guard who protected " The Circle of Life " and was given a power called " The Roar of the Elders " which when used , causes the lions of Pride Lands past to roar with him . However , Scar vainly believed that with this power , he should be king instead of Mufasa and plotted to overthrow his elder brother . But when the previous members of The Lion Guard refused to help him do so , Scar used The Roar of the Elders to destroy them . Due to using The Roar of the Elders for evil , Scar lost his power completely and descended into madness and depression , becoming shriveled and horrible . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 Scar has garnered widespread acclaim from film critics , some of whom praised him as a better character than Simba . Author Peter M. Nichols wrote in his book New York Times Essential Library : Children 's Movies : A Critic 's Guide to the Best Films Available on Video and DVD that Scar " is the most interesting character in the film , " describing Simba and Mufasa " bores in comparison . " Janet Maslin of The New York Times called Scar a " delectably wicked " villain . Maslin went on to praise Irons ' voice acting , writing that the actor " slithers through the story in grandiose high style , with a green @-@ eyed malevolence that is one of film 's chief delights . " Leah Rozen of People described Scar as " a flawless realization of Irons ' special talent . " Gene Siskel of the Chicago Tribune lauded Scar as the film 's " best character , " jokingly describing him as " Irons ' Claus von Bulow with fur . " Similarly , ComingSoon.net 's Joshua Starnes hailed Scar as " the best part of the film . " Praising both Scar and Irons ' acting , Starnes continued , " He switches so quickly and easily from campy to deadly its like a showcase for how to do an over @-@ the @-@ top villain right . " Concluding that " Villains are often the most memorable characters in a Disney animated film , " Roger Ebert described Scar " one of the great ones . " James Berardinelli of ReelViews reviewed , " Gone is the buffoonery that has marked the recent trio of Ursula , Gaston , and Jafar , " writing , " Scar is a sinister figure , given to acid remarks and cunning villainy . " Berardinelli concluded , " The cold @-@ hearted manner in which he causes Mufasa 's death lets us know that this is not a lion to be trifled with . " 
 " Simba is also influenced by his delectably wicked uncle , Scar ( Jeremy Irons ) . Scar arranges Mufasa 's disturbing on @-@ screen death in a manner that both banishes Simba to the wilderness and raises questions about whether this film really warranted a G rating ... For the grown @-@ ups , there is Mr. Irons , who has been as devilishly well @-@ captured by Disney 's graphic artists ( Scar 's supervising animator : Andreas Deja ) as Robin Williams was in Aladdin . Bored , wicked and royally sarcastic , Mr. Irons 's Scar slithers through the story in grandiose high style , with a green @-@ eyed malevolence that is one of film 's chief delights . ' Oh , and just between us , you might want to work on that little roar of yours , hmm ? ' he purrs to Simba , while purporting to be a mentor to his young nephew . Scar , who also gives a reprise of Mr. Irons 's best @-@ known line from Reversal of Fortune , may not be much of a father figure , but he 's certainly great fun . " 
 A film that features the voices of several well @-@ known A @-@ list actors , namely Irons as Scar , Matthew Broderick as Simba , James Earl Jones as Mufasa and Whoopi Goldberg as Shenzi , The Lion King has since gone on to be acclaimed as " one of the most impressive arrays of voice talents ever utilized in an animated film . " Critics have repeatedly singled out Irons ' performance , praising it extensively : Cindy White of IGN called Irons ' performance " deliciously smarmy , " while Andy Patrizio of IGN wrote that Irons voices Scar " in perfect Shakespearean villain mode . " Rolling Stone 's Peter Travers hailed Irons for " deliver [ ing ] a triumphantly witty vocal performance that ranks with Robin Williams ' in Aladdin . " Peter Stack of the San Francisco Chronicle commended Disney for " nail [ ing ] the voice talents , " specifically Irons . The Philadelphia Daily News ' Bill <unk> described Irons ' voice as " silken , " while Graham Young of the Birmingham Mail hailed the actor 's performance as " magnificent . " Radio Times ' Tom Hutchinson wrote , " Jeremy Irons [ is ] a vocal standout as the evil uncle Scar . " Annette Basile of Filmink echoed Hutchinson 's statement , writing that Scar is " voiced with relish by stand @-@ out Jeremy Irons . " The Guardian 's Philip French opined , " Jeremy Irons is excellent as the suavely villainous lion Scar . " David Sterritt of The Christian Science Monitor exalted Irons ' acting , describing him as " positively brilliant . " Also hailing the film 's cast as " incredible , " Desson Howe of The Washington Post highlighted Irons as a " standout . " Praising the film for successfully combining " grand @-@ opera melodrama and low @-@ comedy hi @-@ jinks , " the Orlando Sentinel 's Jay Boyar concluded that " One reason they work so well together is that even most of the serious sections contain an undercurrent of humor , provided ... by the deliciously droll voice @-@ performance of Jeremy Irons as Scar . " Mathew <unk> of the St. Louis Post @-@ Dispatch felt that Irons successfully " handle [ s ] all of the dramatic heavy lifting . " 
 Even film critics who generally disliked the film tended to enjoy Scar 's characterization and Irons ' performance . Terrence Rafferty of The New Yorker wrote , " Among the celebrity voices on the soundtrack , two performances stand out , " namely , " Jeremy Irons , as the villainous lion Scar " who " does an elegant , funny George Sanders impersonation . " ( Sanders himself had voiced Shere Khan for Disney in their 1967 version of The Jungle Book ) . Stephen Hunter of The Baltimore Sun described Irons ' voice as " plummy @-@ rich with rancid irony . " Television Without Pity 's Ethan Alter admitted to enjoying Scar , praising the character as " a fantastic villain and easily the most fully realized of the film 's characters , thanks both to Jeremy Irons ' marvelously wicked vocal performance and some clever character flourishes on behalf of the animators . " David Denby of New York , who otherwise criticized the film , felt that " Irons ... sounds like he 's having a better time than he 's ever had in movies before . " In a rare lukewarm review , Anthony Quinn of The Independent felt that Irons ' performance was too campy : " more Liberace than George Sanders . " 
 = = = Accolades and legacy = = = 
 According to IGN , Scar , Simba and Mufasa have since become " household names thanks to the [ film 's ] enormous popularity ... but back in 1994 who could have predicted that these characters would enter the lexicon of Disney 's most popular creations ? " Scar is considered to be among Disney 's greatest villains . Desmond Ryan of The Philadelphia Inquirer reviewed Scar as " the most vivid villain in Disney features in generations . " On a broader scale , Scar is often revered as one of the greatest animated villains of all @-@ time . Entertainment Weekly included the character in the article " 10 Over @-@ the @-@ top Animated Movie Villains " , explaining , " you could only expect over @-@ the @-@ top when you pair such a grasping , conniving character with Jeremy Irons ' seductive voice . " Likewise , Digital Spy 's Alex Fletcher wrote of Scar in his article " Who is Disney 's greatest ever villain ? " that " The scene in which he lets Mufasa ... fall into a stampede of <unk> left lasting emotional trauma on an entire generation . " 
 The Huffington Post ranked Scar first in its " Definitive Ranking Of 25 Classic Disney Villains " countdown . Similarly , BuzzFeed also ranked Scar first in the website 's " Definitive Ranking Of The Top 20 Disney Villains " list , with author Javi Moreno accusing the character of removing " the innocence of an entire generation . " Scar also topped About.com 's " Top 10 Disney Villains " countdown ; author David Nusair concluded , " There are few figures within Disney 's body of work that are as deliciously reprehensible and vile as Scar ... heightened by Jeremy Irons ' gloriously smug voice work . " Nusair also included Irons among the " Top 5 Celebrity Voice Performances in Animated Films " , acknowledging the fact that although the actor " has played a lot of villains over the course of his career ... none have had the lasting impact as Scar from The Lion King . " The Orlando Sentinel ranked Scar the sixth " greatest Disney villain of all time " . Similarly , Babble.com also placed the character at number six . Included in the website 's " 12 most famous Disney villains from worst to best " countdown , Yahoo ! Movies ranked Scar second best , while Moviefone ranked the character sixth . E ! ranked Scar fifth , with author John Boone writing that the character " plotted one of the most painful deaths in Disney history , so you know he 'll never be forgotten . " Animation World Network ranked Scar the sixth best animated villain . 
 CNN considers Scar one of " Disney 's scariest characters . " While ranking the character fifth , The Stanford Daily wrote , " From his habit of sadistically toying with his prey to his dumb hyena coven to the way he leads the kingdom of Pride Rock into a period of starvation and sorrow , he 's a backstabbing dictator of an uncle . " Richard Crouse of Metro cited Scar 's " Long live the King " as the character 's " Most evil line . " Additionally , " Be Prepared " is often revered as one of the greatest Disney villain songs . Official Disney Blogs wrote that the song , with its " hyena backup singers , and the best bone @-@ rattling percussion of all the villains ' songs , " Scar proves himself " an expert crooner of villainous plots . " Aside from Disney and animation , Scar is often revered as one of the greatest movie villains of all @-@ time . Digital Spy featured the character who , according to author Simon Reynolds , " underlined the sheer blackness of his heart by ruthlessly killing Simba 's father , " among the " 25 greatest movie villains " . Similarly , in 2012 , Entertainment Weekly ranked the character the twenty @-@ fifth " Most Vile Movie Villain " ever , while Total Film ranked Scar sixty @-@ seventh in 2014 . 
 To @-@ date , Deja remains best known for animating several of Disney 's most famous villains , admitting to preferring animating villains over heroes . However , after The Lion King , Deja finally decided to take a break from animating villains in order to avoid repeating himself , subsequently refusing to animate villain Judge Claude Frollo in The Hunchback of Notre Dame ( 1996 ) in favor of working on Hercules from Hercules ( 1997 ) , along with Mickey Mouse in the animated short Runaway Brain ( 1995 ) . Comparing Scar to other villains that he has played , Irons said that he " measures very highly , " having " charm , " " Machiavellian qualities " and being " iconic in some of the things he says . " 
 = = Criticism and controversy = = 
 Scar became the first Disney villain to successfully explicitly kill someone . Like Disney 's Bambi before it , The Lion King – dubbed the studio 's " darkest " film at the time of its release – was unprecedented in terms of its serious themes , namely guilt , murder , treachery , revenge and death , specifically the on @-@ screen assassination of one of the film 's heroes . According to IGN , " The film 's story concepts of morality and mortality ... was new for Disney , " with The Washington Post predicting that " the death of the heroic Mufasa will be the most widely debated aspect of The Lion King , with people taking sides as to whether such things are good or bad for kids just as they did over the killing of Bambi 's mother . " Similarly , Variety opined , " a generation that remembers the death of Bambi 's mother as traumatizing should bear that experience in mind when deciding who goes to The Lion King . " Film critics and parents alike expressed concern that Scar 's violent ways would frighten and disturb younger viewers . Referring to Scar 's murdering of Mufasa , The New York Times questioned " whether this film really warranted a G rating . " Critics also cautioned Scar 's death ; Movieline warned audiences that the film " shows a fairy tale 's dark sense of justice , " for example when " Scar was eaten by his hyena allies after betraying them . " ReelViews ' James Berardinelli commented : 
 " Death , something not really touched on in the last three animated Disney tales , is very much at the forefront of The Lion King . In a scene that could disturb younger viewers , Mufasa 's demise is shown . It is a chilling moment that is reminiscent of a certain incident in Bambi . The film also contains a fair share of violence , including a rather graphic battle between two lions . Parents should carefully consider before automatically taking a child of , say , under seven years of age , to this movie . " 
 The Los Angeles Times warned that " The on @-@ screen death of Mufasa and a violent battle at the finale may disturb small children , " echoed by The Philadelphia Inquirer . However , film critics also felt that Disney 's treatment of Scar was at times too light @-@ hearted and comedic , with the Deseret News complaining , " a climactic battle between Simba and his evil Uncle Scar ... is [ a ] very bad choice near the end , as Simba and Scar battle in slow @-@ motion , a serious moment that seems unintentionally comic . " According to The Seattle Times , " Some critics have complained that the movie is too funny and good @-@ natured to accommodate the rather grim story it 's telling . " Considered " an odd mix of deadly seriousness and slapstick humor ... Simba fights Scar to the death " while " intercut with ... <unk> [ sic ] ... doing a parody of Travis Bickel . " 
 Although universally acclaimed , Scar has sparked considerable controversy regarding the character 's appearance and personality , specifically his darker @-@ colored fur and alleged sexuality . The general public , however , appears to have remained largely oblivious to such concerns according to David Parkinson , author of The Rough Guide to Film Musicals . The Washington Post felt that " Scar clearly is meant to represent an evil African American because ' while Simba 's mane is gloriously red , Scar 's is , of course , black . " Meanwhile , Scar 's mannerisms and voice which , according to Nightmare on Main Street : Angels , Sadomasochism , and the Culture of Gothic 's author Mark <unk> , resemble " a cultivated , word @-@ weary , gay man , " has been deemed homophobic by some commentators because , according to The Independent , " the arch @-@ villain 's gestures are effeminate " while , in addition to the film being " full of stereotypes , " the character " speaks in supposed gay cliches . " Susan Mackey @-@ Kallis , author of The Hero and the Perennial Journey Home in American Film , observed that Scar is " more effeminate [ and ] less brawny ... than " both Mufasa and Simba . Additionally , " Even though [ Scar ] would be expected to mate with one of the lioness , he is never seen intimated by any . " While Disney executives ignored these accusations , Slant Magazine defended the studio , explaining that Scar 's black mane is simply an example of " the animators ' elementary attempts to color @-@ code evil for the film 's target audience . " Similarly , author Edward <unk> wrote in his book Beyond Representational Correctness : Rethinking Criticism of Popular Media that Scar 's voice was simply meant " to convey the sort of upper @-@ class snobbishness evinced by George Sanders 's performance as Shere Khan in The Jungle Book . " More recently , the possibility of an incestuous relationship involving Simba , his mate Nala , Scar and Mufasa has surfaced . According to Johnson Cheu , author of Diversity in Disney Films : Critical Essays on Race , Ethnicity , Gender , Sexuality and Disability , the fact that Scar , Mufasa and Simba appear to be the only male lions present in The Lion King suggests the possibility that either Scar or Mufasa is Nala 's father , which would in turn make Nala either Simba 's half @-@ sister or cousin . 
 = California State Route 75 = 
 State Route 75 ( SR 75 ) is a short , 13 @-@ mile ( 21 km ) expressway in San Diego County , California . It is a loop route of Interstate 5 ( I @-@ 5 ) that begins near Imperial Beach , heading west on Palm Avenue . The route continues north along the Silver Strand , a thin strip of land , through Silver Strand State Beach . SR 75 passes through the city of Coronado as Orange Avenue and continues onto the San Diego – Coronado Bay Bridge , which traverses the San Diego Bay , before joining back with I @-@ 5 near downtown San Diego at a freeway interchange . 
 The Silver Strand Highway was constructed and open to the public by 1924 . What would become SR 75 was added to the state highway system in 1933 , and designated Legislative Route 199 in 1935 . SR 75 was not officially designated until the 1964 state highway renumbering . The Coronado Bay Bridge opened in 1969 , and provided a direct connection between San Diego and Coronado . Since then , various proposals have taken place to relieve commuter traffic between San Diego and Naval Air Station North Island that traverses the city of Coronado . However , none of these proposals have gained support , including an attempt in 2010 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 SR 75 begins as Palm Avenue at I @-@ 5 in the San Ysidro neighborhood of San Diego , heading westbound from the Southland Plaza mall . The route travels between the communities of Palm City and Nestor before entering the city limits of Imperial Beach . There , SR 75 curves to the north , becoming Silver Strand Boulevard and crossing into Coronado . SR 75 continues onto the peninsula containing Coronado Island , separated from the mainland by San Diego Bay . The highway passes through the Silver Strand Training Complex and the South Bay Study Area before entering the Coronado Cays subdivision and paralleling Silver Strand State Beach . 
 After this , SR 75 passes through the United States Naval Amphibious Base for a few miles before entering downtown Coronado . The highway becomes Orange Avenue and turns north @-@ northeast as the main street through Coronado . SR 75 intersects SR 282 at the one @-@ way couplet of Third and Fourth Streets ; SR 282 continues west on Third Street and returns to SR 75 on Fourth Street , while SR 75 continues east on Fourth Street and heads west towards Orange Avenue on Third Street . The one @-@ way couplet is brief , and SR 75 becomes a divided highway before crossing the Coronado Bridge . While on the bridge , SR 75 crosses into the city of San Diego again . 
 Once on the mainland , SR 75 has a northbound exit to National Avenue and a southbound entrance from Cesar E. Chavez Parkway . Through traffic is directed onto I @-@ 5 south or north in Logan Heights , where SR 75 ends . 
 SR 75 is eligible for the State Scenic Highway System . It is signed as a scenic route for nearly its entire length , from the Imperial Beach city limit to Avenida del Sol in Coronado , meaning that it is a substantial section of highway passing through a " memorable landscape " with no " visual intrusions " , where the potential designation has gained popular favor with the community . SR 75 is also part of the National Highway System , a network of highways that are essential to the country 's economy , defense , and mobility . In 2013 , SR 75 had an annual average daily traffic ( AADT ) of 66 @,@ 000 on the Coronado Bay Bridge ( the highest AADT for the highway ) , and 16 @,@ 000 between Rainbow Drive and 7th Street in Imperial Beach ( the lowest AADT for the highway ) . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Construction = = = 
 The intersection of Third Street and Orange Avenue dates back to at least 1890 . The process of paving portions of Orange Avenue began in 1893 , with an estimated cost of $ 50 @,@ 000 ( about $ 12 million in 2015 dollars ) ; three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) of sidewalks were also included . The plan was to make the avenue " one of the most beautiful in Southern California . " From Palm City to Imperial Beach , the road was paved by 1920 . The Silver Strand Highway opened in 1924 during a festival at the Tent City summer resort in Coronado , and went from Coronado to Palm City . By 1928 , all streets in the city of Coronado had been paved , which was expected to encourage people to visit Tent City . 
 Plans to transfer the Silver Strand Highway to state maintenance were in place as early as November 1931 , and were to take effect once Silver Strand State Park was completed and open . In 1933 , the highway from the San Diego – Coronado Ferry to Route 2 ( now I @-@ 5 ) was added to the state highway system , and was designated as Legislative Route 199 two years later . By that same year , Sign Route 75 was posted from U.S. Route 101 ( US 101 ) in Palm City to the ferry landing . After a subsequent highway project around 1939 , SR 75 passed through Tent City and , according to William Cecil , the city 's public works director in 1998 , " contributed to its demise . " 
 The first contract for widening the highway between Coronado and Coronado Heights was awarded in 1944 , as this part of the road was " now too narrow and dilapidated to meet traffic requirements . " The State Highway Commission allocated $ 25 @,@ 000 ( about $ 619 @,@ 000 in 2015 dollars ) to install traffic signals at the intersection of SR 75 and US 101 in March 1951 . Plans to widen the road to four lanes were put on hold in July . 
 By July 1952 , it had been disclosed that some local businesses near Palm City had lodged opposition to the widening of the highway after $ 500 @,@ 000 ( about $ 11 @.@ 9 million in 2015 dollars ) had been allocated to the project . Following protests from local businessmen regarding the design of the median , the planned removal of access to intersecting streets , and the planned changes to street parking , Governor Earl Warren wrote to the San Diego Public Safety Committee , hoping to have the dispute resolved . In November , funds were allocated to acquire land for the construction in the 1953 – 1954 state budget . A year later , $ 430 @,@ 000 ( about $ 9 @.@ 82 million in 2015 dollars ) had been allocated to the widening project . A contract was given to the Daley Corporation to carry out the construction in 1955 . The highway was to be widened to four lanes , and would add three pedestrian crossings . The completion of the widening project was announced on August 10 , 1956 . The final cost of the project was $ 850 @,@ 000 ( about $ 17 @.@ 7 million in 2015 dollars ) , with money from the City of Coronado and the state . 
 = = = Designation and bridge construction = = = 
 Discussion regarding a bridge dates back to 1926 ; however , the Navy opposed the plan over concerns that an enemy could destroy the bridge and trap ships in the harbor . In 1955 , the California Senate approved $ 200 @,@ 000 ( about $ 4 @.@ 33 million in 2015 dollars ) to conduct a study regarding a possible vehicular tunnel from San Diego to Coronado . Later , in June 1961 , a proposal for an underwater tube along SR 75 was formally proposed , and would not have needed the approval of the residents of Coronado . Interviews of commuters were planned in August , to determine the traffic patterns along SR 75 . The survey took place on October 2 along Silver Strand Boulevard . 
 The SR 75 designation was originally established in 1963 with two segments : from I @-@ 5 to the ferry across San Diego Bay from Coronado to downtown , and from SR 125 to I @-@ 5 . In 1967 , the Coronado Bridge was scheduled to be added to the route once it was completed , and the portion from Fourth Street to the ferry was deemed as temporary until the bridge opened . Construction began in February . Coronado residents largely opposed the bridge , but Governor Pat Brown " overrode their wishes " according to former city councilman Bob <unk> , who also claimed that the opposition caused the city to lose opportunities to move the approaches to the bridge away from residential areas . Following attempts from Barbara Hutchinson , the vice president of the Kearny Mesa Town Council , to ask the Coronado and San Diego city councils to intervene in the construction , San Diego city attorney Edward Butler stated that the state had the ultimate authority to decide whether or not to build the bridge , and that the City of San Diego could not interfere . Before the bridge opened , in 1968 , the changes originally proposed by the Legislature in 1967 were made to the law ; the designation came into effect on February 21 , 1969 . The bridge eventually opened on August 3 , 1969 . 
 By 1969 , Palm Avenue was the primary commercial street in Imperial Beach , and was described by the San Diego Union as " a strip of large signs and businesses . It is not a ' downtown . ' " Plans were under way to add an interchange at Silver Strand State Beach for the Coronado Cays development . In September , the City of Coronado added Orange Avenue south of Third Street as a truck route leading to the base . By May 1970 , the part of SR 75 on the Coronado Bridge had been declared a scenic highway . President Richard Nixon and Mexican president Díaz Ordaz used Orange Avenue as a motorcade route on September 3 , 1970 , en route to the Hotel del Coronado . 
 = = = Proposals and renumbering = = = 
 Proposition N was proposed in 1974 to attempt to resolve concerns regarding traffic in Coronado . The plan was to build another highway along the northern and eastern shore of Coronado Island , to bypass the busy residential and commercial districts and provide easy access to the Silver Strand from the western end of the bridge . The proposition asked voters whether the City Council should " actively pursue " the matter . Critics contended that the highway would block the view of the San Diego Bay , and that the city would be unable to alter traffic patterns in the meantime . Coronado mayor Rolland McNeely opposed the proposal in early November 1974 as it would require approval from over thirty government agencies and would force the city to continue with building this road , although some declared it " impossible to build . " The voters rejected this plan . 
 The portion of SR 75 from Pomona Avenue in Coronado to Imperial Beach was also recommended to become a scenic highway in February 1974 . Future improvements to the Imperial Beach – Coronado portion were cancelled in April . In 1976 , the California State Legislature renumbered the portion from I @-@ 5 to SR 125 as SR 117 , which later became SR 905 . The change took effect at the beginning of 1977 . The renumbering was to reduce confusion with the Coronado portion , according to Caltrans regional director Jacob Dekema ; new signs were to be put into place shortly thereafter . The bridge and the resulting traffic continued to be a hotly debated issue in the early 1980s . A plan in 1981 to convert Fourth Street into an expressway leading to the naval station was strongly opposed by the public due to the required demolition of structures and a lack of evidence that the plan would succeed in reducing traffic ; by this time , Third and Fourth streets had been converted into one @-@ way streets between the bridge and the naval station . A major renovation of the bridge was scheduled for late 1992 , which would include a movable barrier to prevent head @-@ on collisions and necessary resurfacing of the roadway . Work was underway in January 1993 on the $ 4 million project ( about $ 8 million in 2015 dollars ) , but it was behind the three @-@ month schedule by 11 days due to rainfall and was expected to be completed by March . 
 When the Coronado Bridge opened , a toll of 60 cents was charged to use the bridge . In 1980 , the toll became $ 1 @.@ 20 , charged only in the westbound direction towards Coronado . A seventh toll booth was to be constructed in September 1987 . The toll dropped to $ 1 in 1988 . The bridge tolls ended at 10 p.m. on June 27 , 2002 , after the San Diego Association of Governments decided to stop collecting tolls ; drivers paid a total of $ 197 million throughout the years . The speed limit was decreased to 25 miles per hour ( 40 km / h ) in October 2005 along Third and Fourth streets , after traffic increased by 20 percent following the removal of the toll . Traffic barriers along Third Street to block traffic from turning onto intersecting streets were removed in November 2004 , following voter approval . 
 The City of Coronado has attempted to have a tunnel built from the Coronado bridge to the San Diego Naval Base numerous times , and hired Ledford Enterprises to help with the lobbying process in 2002 and 2006 . The city endorsed a proposed study in 2004 to determine possible alternatives to resolve the traffic issues , which included keeping the status quo . On June 8 , 2010 , Coronado voters decided against Proposition H , which would have advised the city to undergo further investigation into building the tunnel . This concluded ten years of studies and proposals by the city of Coronado to find a way to reduce traffic to the naval station during rush hour . Critics of the proposal did not believe that the tunnel would resolve the traffic issues on the northern part of SR 75 or on SR 282 . Following this , the Coronado City Council voted to abolish the Tunnel Commission that had been formed to study the issue . 
 Efforts were underway by Imperial Beach city officials to improve the reputation and economic standing of the Palm Avenue area in the first decade of the 21st century . The area was described by the San Diego Union @-@ Tribune as a " hodgepodge of vacant land and aging apartment buildings and businesses , many in need of a coat of paint " in 2003 . Residents hoped to revitalize the area , providing commerce right next to an entrance to the beach . City officials offered local business owners loans for necessary construction or rehabilitation in 2005 . The Imperial Beach city council approved the redevelopment of the Palm Avenue corridor in 2008 , following a study in 2003 . A Palm Avenue Commercial Corridor Master Plan was endorsed in February 2009 , in efforts to improve the commercial area . In September 2012 , the Imperial Beach city council raised objections over the Caltrans decision to increase the speed limit on SR 75 to 45 miles per hour ( 72 km / h ) from 40 miles per hour ( 64 km / h ) on the portion of the highway from Delaware Street to the western Imperial Beach city limit due to concerns about safety . The rest of the highway was to retain the 40 miles per hour ( 64 km / h ) speed limit . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 Except where prefixed with a letter , postmiles were measured on the road as it was in 1964 , based on the alignment that existed at the time , and do not necessarily reflect current mileage . R reflects a realignment in the route since then , M indicates a second realignment , L refers an overlap due to a correction or change , and T indicates postmiles classified as temporary ( for a full list of prefixes , see the list of postmile definitions ) . Segments that remain unconstructed or have been relinquished to local control may be omitted . The entire route is in San Diego County . 
 = 2009 North Korean nuclear test = 
 The 2009 North Korean nuclear test was the underground detonation of a nuclear device conducted on Monday , May 25 , 2009 by the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea . This was its second nuclear test , the first test , a fizzle , having taken place in October 2006 . Following the nuclear test , Pyongyang also conducted several missile tests . A scientific paper later estimated the yield as 2 @.@ 35 kilotons . 
 The test was nearly universally condemned by the international community . Following the test , the United Nations Security Council passed Resolution 1874 condemning the test and tightening sanctions on the country . 
 It was widely believed that the test was conducted as a result of a succession crisis in the country . After Kim Jong @-@ Il suffered a stroke in the summer of 2008 , arrangements were made for his third son , Kim Jong @-@ un , to take power upon his death . It is believed the North Koreans conducted the nuclear test to show that , even in a time of possible weakness , it did not intend to give up its nuclear weapons program . 
 = = Background = = 
 North Korea ( officially the Democratic People 's Republic of Korea , or DPRK ) had threatened to conduct a second nuclear test in protest after the United Nations Security Council adopted a presidential statement condemning the country after it launched a rocket , which it claimed was carrying the <unk> @-@ 2 satellite , on 5 April 2009 . The launch was condemned by several nations , describing it as an intercontinental ballistic missile test . 
 The test also came after recent messages stating that North Korea had miniaturized nuclear warheads for medium @-@ range missiles and that the country had been recognized by analysts as a fully fledged nuclear power . 
 In June 2009 , after it was announced that Kim Jong @-@ un was to be the intended successor of North Korean leader Kim Jong @-@ il , U.S. government analysts speculated that the purpose of the nuclear test was to establish North Korea as a nuclear power within Kim Jong @-@ il 's lifetime . 
 = = North Korean statements = = 
 Without citing a specific time , Pyongyang notified both Washington , D.C. and Beijing of the test about an hour before the actual detonation , which occurred around 10 : 00 Korea Standard Time ( KST ) Monday ; the U.S. State Department promptly contacted the four other six @-@ party talks members . 
 The state @-@ run Korean Central News Agency ( KCNA ) released an announcement claiming , in part , that : 
 The Democratic People 's Republic of Korea successfully conducted one more underground nuclear test on May 25 as part of the measures to bolster up its nuclear deterrent for self @-@ defence in every way as requested by its scientists and technicians . The current nuclear test was safely conducted on a new higher level in terms of its explosive power and technology of its control and the results of the test helped satisfactorily settle the scientific and technological problems arising in further increasing the power of nuclear weapons and steadily developing nuclear technology . 
 This was interpreted as referring to the disputes over the low yield of the 2006 test . 
 = = Seismic activity = = 
 South Korea and Japan reported seismic activity at 09 : 50 KST ( 00 : 50 UTC ) . The United States Geological Survey reported a magnitude 4 @.@ 7 earthquake at a depth of zero and put the center of the tremor about 70 kilometres ( 43 mi ) northwest of <unk> and 375 kilometres ( 233 mi ) northeast of Pyongyang , within a few kilometres of the country 's 2006 nuclear test site . The Japan Meteorological Agency measured the seismic activity at magnitude 5 @.@ 3 . The Korea Institute of Geoscience & Mineral Resources reported seismic activity in the same area but far stronger than in 2006 . 
 The Russian Defence Ministry confirmed it had detected a nuclear detonation in North Korea and was analysing the data to determine the yield . Geophysical Service of the Russian Academy of Sciences has registered underground nuclear explosion conducted in North Korea on May 25 , 2009 . Registration time of this explosion was 0 : 54 a.m. GMT ( 4 : 54 a.m. Moscow time ) with magnitude 5 @.@ 0 . 
 In China , tremors were felt in the prefecture of <unk> , which borders North Korea , and forced students in some local schools to be evacuated . The test is believed to have taken place at <unk> in the vicinity of P ’ <unk> ( Korean : <unk> ) , which was the site of the nuclear test held in 2006 . 
 = = Analysis of test = = 
 = = = Yield = = = 
 Analysts have generally agreed that the nuclear test was successful , despite uncertainty of the exact yield . 
 The U.S. intelligence community assessed that North Korea " probably " had conducted a nuclear test with a yield of " a few kilotons " . The Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty Organization Preparatory Commission assessed the yield at only slightly larger than the 2006 test , which was one kiloton . Based on readings from 23 seismic stations , the Preparatory Commission estimated the blast to have a seismic magnitude of 4 @.@ 52 , corresponding to an explosive yield of 2 @.@ 4 kilotons , compared to a seismic magnitude of 4 @.@ 1 , corresponding to a yield of 0 @.@ 8 kilotons , for the 2006 blast . 
 Russia placed the yield of the test significantly higher at 10 to 20 kilotons . This was approximately the yield of the Fat Man and Trinity bombs developed by the United States during World War II . After the 2006 test the Russians estimated a far higher yield of 5 to 10 kilotons when other sources estimated a yield of 0 @.@ 5 to 0 @.@ 9 kilotons . Defense Minister Lee Sang @-@ Hee of South Korea said that more data were needed but that the yield might be between 1 and 20 kilotons . 
 Analyst Martin Kalinowski at the University of Hamburg estimated the yield at being from 3 to 8 kilotons , still a very successful test when compared with the 2006 test . Hans M. Kristensen of the Federation of American Scientists cautioned that " early news media reports about a ' Hiroshima @-@ size ' nuclear explosion seem to be overblown " . The Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists asserted that the blast was more powerful than the 2006 test , though put the yield between 2 and 6 kilotons , but likely less than 4 kilotons and far short of a Hiroshima @-@ type device . The group concluded that the bomb failed to detonate correctly , but that still in that case the potential of this weapon should not be dismissed . 
 However , after the subsequent nuclear test in 2013 , the Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources , a state @-@ run geology research institute in Germany , estimated the yield ranging from a minimum of 5 kilotons to the maximum of 12 kilotons and the 2006 test ranging from minimum of 700 tons to the maximum of 2 kilotons instead with relevant statistics . 
 = = = Lack of radionuclide confirmation = = = 
 In June 2009 , the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear @-@ Test @-@ Ban Treaty Organization ( <unk> ) announced that no radionuclides had been detected that could be associated with the 25 May event . At the time of the test , the <unk> global network included 40 radionuclide sampling stations . In addition , the United States reported that no radionuclides were detected by aircraft over the Sea of Japan ( East Sea of Korea ) , and South Korea also reported that no radionuclides were detected . By contrast , radionuclides were detected in at least two locations after the 2006 event . Lack of detection does not mean that the event was non @-@ nuclear : it is reasonable for a nuclear test with this yield , buried deep enough in the appropriate rock , to not yield remotely detectable radionuclides , but it makes it more difficult to prove whether the test was nuclear . 
 = = Missile tests = = 
 On the same day , North Korea also conducted short @-@ range surface @-@ to @-@ air missile tests . The number of fired missiles was first reported as three , but corrected to two by the South Korean defense ministry on 27 May 2009 . The first missile had a range of 130 km ( 81 mi ) . The South Korean news agency Yonhap cited military officials as saying that the launches seemed to be aimed at keeping U.S. and Japanese surveillance planes away from the site . 
 On 26 May 2009 , South Korea 's Yonhap news agency reported , citing officials , that North Korea fired three more short @-@ range missiles off an east @-@ coast base , one ground @-@ to @-@ ship missile and one surface @-@ to @-@ air missile . The move came as UN diplomats began work on a resolution to punish North Korea for its underground nuclear test . 
 By 27 May 2009 , at least five short range missiles were launched by North Korea . A military spokesman quoted by official media said that North Korea could no longer guarantee the safety of shipping off its west coast , suggesting a missile could also be fired in that direction . 
 Another short @-@ range missile was fired off North Korea 's east coast on 28 May 2009 . 
 On 29 May 2009 , U.S. officials said that satellite photos revealed vehicle activity at two sites in North Korea suggesting that North Korean military might be preparing to launch a long @-@ range ballistic missile . This was reaffirmed on 1 June 2009 by Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates who said at a news conference with his Philippine counterpart during a brief visit to Manila " We have seen some signs that they may be doing something with another <unk> @-@ 2 missile , but at this point it 's not clear what they 're doing " . 
 Yonhap news agency reported on 2 June 2009 that North Korea was readying as many as three medium @-@ range missiles ( according to some analysts , Rodong missiles ) at a missile base in <unk> region , Gangwon Province , northeast of the capital of Pyongyang . In addition , a South Korean defence ministry spokesman said that signs that North Korea was preparing to fire an intercontinental ballistic missile ( ICBM ) had been <unk> verifying US defense officials ' reports and Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates 's statement made on 1 June . North Korea apparently has moved the ICBM to a new base in <unk> @-@ ri along its west coast and a launch could take place in one or two weeks , according to Yonhap . 
 = = International reaction = = 
 The North Korean news agency KCNA confirmed the test as " successful " . The agency also said the test was " aimed at strengthening its self @-@ defense nuclear deterrent in every way " . South Korea 's Yonhap news agency reported citing KCNA that citizens of Pyongyang held a rally to celebrate the country 's second successful nuclear test on 26 May . 
 In general the International reactions to the 2009 North Korean nuclear test have been almost uniformly negative . 
 = = = Members of the six @-@ party talks = = = 
 South Korea : President Lee Myung @-@ bak called an emergency cabinet meeting . The decision was made to join the Proliferation Security Initiative , a move which the North has repeatedly warned would be construed as a declaration of war . The ROK @-@ US Combined Forces Command raised its surveillance condition from <unk> ( important indications of threat ) to <unk> ( vital indications of threat ) . President Lee Myung @-@ bak made another statement at the beginning of the ASEAN @-@ Republic of Korea Commemorative Summit saying " We will continue to work to have North Korea observe UN Security Council resolutions " . On 27 May , North Korea 's permanent military mission to the North @-@ South joint security area reacted to S. Korea 's decision to join the Proliferation Security Initiative saying it no longer is bound to the Korean War armistice and will militarily respond to any foreign attempt to inspect its ships . 
 People 's Republic of China : The Foreign Ministry released a statement : " The DPRK ignored universal opposition of the international community and once more conducted the nuclear test . The Chinese government is resolutely opposed to it " . The statement also strongly demanded that North Korea " return to the tracks of the six @-@ party talks " . 
 Japan : Japan said the test was " unacceptable " and a violation of UN Security Council resolutions . It was also considering tightening sanctions in response . 
 Russia : The Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated that " The latest steps of the DPRK escalate tensions in Northeast Asia and endanger regional security and stability " and violated UN Security Council Resolution 1718 , but added that " We still think that the nuclear problem of the Korean Peninsula may be resolved only at the six @-@ nation negotiations " . Natalya <unk> , the Press Attaché to the Russian President said Russia “ is seriously concerned ” about North Korea ’ s nuclear test and that “ Russian competent services express regret and voice serious concern about North Korea ’ s nuclear test in the area adjacent to the Russian Federation ” . 
 United States : The White House condemned the test , saying " North Korea is directly and recklessly challenging the international community . The danger posed by North Korea 's threatening activities warrants action by the international community . " President Barack Obama 's official statement promised that North Korea would not find " international acceptance " unless it complied . He also said that the country 's actions " pose a grave threat to the peace and stability of the world " . Susan Rice , US ambassador to the UN , added that , " North Korea needs to understand that its actions have consequences " and that they would " pay a price for their action , " in the form of further sanctions . Robert Gates , the US Defense Secretary , delivered a stark warning to North Korea , on 30 May 2009 " The policy of the United States has not changed , " he said . " Our goal is complete and verifiable <unk> of the Korean peninsula , and we will not accept North Korea as a nuclear weapons state . " 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 News of the tests immediately affected South Korean markets , sending the main <unk> share index down 4 % , while the South Korean won dropped by 1 % against the US $ on the day of the nuclear test , 25 May . The yen fell to 95 @.@ 10 per dollar from its level of 94 @.@ 78 on 22 May . 
 On 28 May , North Korea threatened to end the Korean War armistice , stating that " the Korean peninsula will go back to a state of war " , whereupon the joint military command of South Korea and the United States increased its surveillance alert level from <unk> 3 to <unk> 2 , the second @-@ highest level of surveillance alert . However , the five @-@ stage combat alert level remained at <unk> 4 , the second @-@ lowest level . Russia undertook security measures in case the war of nerves on the Korean peninsula erupted into a nuclear war . 
 North Korea also threatened on 29 May to attack South Korean and US warships near its coast if its sovereignty were infringed . In Japan a policy debate ensued regarding strengthening its military up to and including the possibility of an independent pre @-@ emptive strike capability and even nuclear armaments , subjects hitherto taboo . 
 On 30 May , the United Kingdom 's Ministry of Defence confirmed that a VC10 tanker plane , which is used for air @-@ to @-@ air refueling , had been sent to Kadena Air Base in Okinawa , Japan to help support the investigations , led by the U.S. military , to determine the power of the nuclear explosion and the type of material that was used . A Ministry spokesman said : “ Following the recent events in North Korea and to support the international community ’ s efforts during this time of increased political tension , we can confirm that the UK is supporting in the associated verification efforts . ” On the same day , a U.S. F @-@ 22 fighter jet arrived on Kadena Air Base , the first of twelve F @-@ 22 's and approximately 280 Langley Air Force Base Airmen from the 94th Fighter Squadron , along with members of the Virginia Air National Guard 's 192nd Fighter Wing , that are being deployed to Kadena Air Base as part of a theatre security package . 
 U.S. Deputy Secretary of State Jim Steinberg accompanied by Stephen Bosworth , the U.S. special envoy on North Korea , led a U.S. delegation to Asia on 1 June 2009 to consult regional forces on how to respond to North Korea 's latest nuclear test . The delegation also includes Stuart Levy , the Treasury under @-@ secretary for terrorism and financial intelligence , and Admiral James Winnefeld of the Joint Chiefs of Staff . 
 Japan approved on 2 June 2009 plans for a satellite missile early warning system as part of a new space policy document , a year after Japan dropped a decades @-@ old ban on military use of space with some ruling party lawmakers suggesting Japan should inspect North Korean ships , in the wake of reports that N. Korea was preparing to fire more mid @-@ range missiles . On the same day , as a response to the increased activity of the N. Korean military and after reports that North Koreans have stepped up naval drills near the western sea border , the site of deadly skirmishes between the two Koreas in 1999 and 2002 , South Korea deployed a high @-@ speed naval vessel , the Yoon <unk> guided missile patrol boat , to the area and vowed to " punish " any attacking forces . 
 After the North Korean nuclear test the U.S. has approved the sale of a number of weapon systems to South Korea , including GBU @-@ 28 " bunker buster " bombs , SM @-@ 2 Standard surface @-@ to @-@ air Missiles and F @-@ 16 Block 32 Aircraft Upgrades improving the aircraft and increasing the South Korean military 's operational abilities . The South Korean military has prepared plans for a counter @-@ attack in the event of a first strike by North Korea . 
 = = = UNSC Resolution 1874 = = = 
 The United Nations Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 1874 in response to the test , imposing further economic sanctions on the country and authorising UN member states to inspect North Korean cargo and destroy any that may be involved in the nuclear weapons program . In response to the sanctions , an unidentified spokesman for the North Korean Foreign Ministry released a statement through the official Korean Central News Agency saying that the country would begin to " weaponize " its plutonium stockpiles . The spokesman also said the country " will start uranium enrichment " and would view any US @-@ led attempts to " blockade " it as an " act of war " . The statement was said to have lacked the usual bitterness of most North Korean statements . 
 = Sheila Varian = 
 Sheila Varian ( August 8 , 1937 – March 6 , 2016 ) was a breeder of Arabian horses who lived and worked at the Varian Arabians Ranch near Arroyo Grande , California . She grew up with a strong interest in horses , and was mentored in horsemanship by Mary " Sid " Spencer , a local rancher and Morgan horse breeder who also introduced Varian to the vaquero or " Californio " tradition of western riding . She started her horse ranch , Varian Arabians , in 1954 with the assistance of her parents . Raising and training horses was her full @-@ time occupation beginning in 1963 . She used vaquero @-@ influenced methods of training horses , although she adapted her technique over the years to fit the character of the Arabian horse , which she viewed as a horse breed requiring a smart yet gentle approach . 
 Varian produced a number of influential Arabian horses whose bloodlines are found in a significant number of winning Arabian show horses in the United States . She began her breeding program with a small number of mares whom she bred to her national champion stallion , Bay Abi . She then acquired three mares from Arabian farms in Poland at a time when that nation was still behind the Iron Curtain and importation of horses to the United States was very difficult . These mares and Bay Abi formed her foundation bloodstock . As of 2016 , the Varian horses at stud represent the sixth generation of her stallion breeding line , and her foundation mare lines have produced nine generations of offspring . For her accomplishments , Varian received recognition from the United States Equestrian Federation , as well as several awards from various organizations within the Arabian horse industry . For her contributions as breeder and as a horse trainer in the vaquero tradition , she was inducted into the National Cowgirl Museum and Hall of Fame in 2003 . 
 After she was diagnosed with ovarian cancer in 2013 , she sought to place the 230 @-@ acre Varian Ranch into a conservation easement to protect the land from development , and in 2015 announced that the California Rangeland Trust would partner with her to purchase the development rights and to allow her long @-@ time ranch manager , Angela <unk> , to operate the horse breeding program after Varian . After Alvarez , the property would be gifted to the Trust to be sold , the conservation easement running with the land , and the Trust would try to find a buyer that would maintain the Arabian horse breeding program as well . Varian died on March 6 , 2016 at age 78 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Varian grew up in Halcyon , California with a strong interest in horses , combined with a fondness for horse books such as the works of Marguerite Henry and The Black Stallion series written by Walter Farley . She credited Farley 's books as the origin of her interest in Arabian horses . She was given her first horse , a Morgan @-@ Percheron crossbred , at the age of eight , and rode bareback until she obtained her first saddle at age 12 . Although her parents , Eric and Wenonah Varian , did not have an equestrian background , they always supported her interest in horses , allowing both her and her older sister the freedom to ride horses as much as they wanted . Varian matured to be 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) tall , and has stated that while she " struggled " with her height as a young person , she found comfort in riding horses : " all my troubles went away . " 
 Varian and her parents began using the farm name " Varian Arabians " in 1954 . She credited her parents for helping her believe that she could do whatever she wanted to do and for trusting her own judgement , which gave her confidence in her own ability to work with horses . They worked as a team to build a horse business ; Eric , an electrical contractor , built fences and managed the land , Wenonah studied pedigrees , and Sheila handled the horses . In time , their ranch expanded from 21 to 150 acres . As a young adult , Varian completed college at Cal Poly San Luis Obispo and taught high school physical education for three years , until 1963 , when running the Varian Arabian ranch became her full @-@ time job . The ranch was self @-@ supporting from 1963 on , with the short @-@ term assistance of loans from Sheila 's aunt , Dorothy Varian , which were promptly repaid . Ultimately , the ranch grew to 230 acres . 
 = = The Varian horses = = 
 Varian preferred the Arabian breed because " their instinctual interest in and appreciation for people runs deep in their genes . The Arabian 's lightness and responsiveness are wonderful , as is their willingness to be your partner . And ... they are beautiful . Arabian horses have never let me down . " She valued horses with good dispositions and athletic ability as well as attractive appearance . She does not breed Arabians for a specific discipline , instead describes her breeding philosophy as “ consistently continuing to breed for more quality and never losing disposition or athletic ability . ” Following these principles , Varian has produced some of the most influential Arabian stallions in the breed . 
 When she was young , Varian developed an interest in finding the " perfect " horse . She soon realized that the way to achieve her goal was to begin breeding horses . Her first Arabian was the mare Farlotta ( <unk> × <unk> ) , obtained in 1952 . Farlotta became a finished spade bit horse who won both stock horse ( reining ) and western pleasure championships . Although loved and cared for by Varian , the mare had been neglected in her first two years prior to being purchased by Varian , and as a result of underlying health damage died at the age of seven . 
 In 1959 , Varian and her mother Wenonah purchased a two @-@ year @-@ old bay stallion named Bay @-@ Abi ( <unk> × <unk> ) . Trained and shown by Varian , he was the judges ' unanimous choice for U.S. National Champion Arabian Stallion in 1962 , later won U.S. National Top Ten awards in both Arabian English pleasure and Western pleasure , and thereafter was awarded the Legion of Merit . Even though he was not bred to any mares until after he was fully trained , and thus his first foals did not appear in the show ring until he was 7 , he sired 275 registered Arabians , including 65 champions and 24 national winners . 
 By 1961 , Varian Arabians had a small number of mares . The most notable of her early champions was Ronteza , a daughter of the stallion <unk> II out of the mare Ronna . Ronteza was the second Arabian Varian purchased , and she trained the mare herself . The pair , undefeated in competition against other Arabian horses , went on to beat 50 horses of all breeds to win the 1961 <unk> Cow Horse championship at the Cow Palace in San Francisco , California . Varian was aware that both Farlotta and Ronteza were sired by stallions imported from Poland , out of American @-@ bred mares , and believed this bloodline cross was a major source for the good qualities of these mares . Thus , Varian looked for Polish @-@ bred Arabian mares to breed to her American @-@ bred Bay @-@ Abi . However , Poland was at that time an Iron Curtain nation , and importing horses from there directly to America was quite complicated . 
 To accomplish her goal , Varian sought the assistance of British horse breeder Patricia Lindsay , who traveled to Poland and purchased three mares on Varian 's behalf . The mares arrived in California in December 1961 . They were Bachantka ( sired by Wielki <unk> out of <unk> , who was by <unk> Sahib ) , purchased from the <unk> stud ; <unk> ( Duch × Orda by Omar 11 ) , from the Nowy Dwór stud ; and Naganka ( Bad <unk> × <unk> by <unk> ) , from the Michalow stud . Bachantka and Naganka had been trained and raced in Poland . Bachantka had a record of 2 / 15 ( 0 @-@ 1 @-@ 3 ) , and Naganka a record of 2 / 12 ( 3 @-@ 4 @-@ 1 ) . After her arrival in the USA , Bachantka also had a brief but successful horse show career . 
 Crossing Bay @-@ Abi on these imported Polish mares proved particularly successful for Varian . As of 2016 , the Varian ranch bred nine generations of horses descended from these foundation mares , and stood six successive generations of stallions descended from Bay Abi . The cross produced , among other champions , Varian 's successor to Bay @-@ Abi , the 1969 colt Bay el Bey ( Bay Abi × Naganka ) , who was U.S. Reserve National Champion stallion twice , 1977 Canadian National Champion stallion , and a regional champion in English pleasure . At the time , the Arabian industry had little interest in western disciplines , so Varian competed with her horses in English riding classes . Of Bay el Bey , she commented , " He could easily have been an open reining horse , but I made him into an English pleasure horse because he could do it , he was so athletic . " Her English champions also included Bay el Bey 's full brother , Mikado , a gray stallion who was a champion park horse . 
 Bay el Bey was best known for his offspring , who collectively earned him the nickname , " The Kingmaker . " He sired 441 foals including three sons considered his finest : his own successor at Varian Arabians , Huckleberry Bey ( whose dam was <unk> , a daughter of <unk> ) ; U.S. Reserve National Champion Bey Shah ( out of Star of <unk> , who was by Bask ) ; and Barbary ( out of <unk> ( Bask x Bachantka ) ) , who won a total of seven national titles in halter and park horse competition . Barbary was purchased from Varian as a yearling by film producer and Arabian owner Mike Nichols . These three sons of Bay el Bey alone sired a combined total of 650 champions . 
 Subsequent generations of Varian stallions continued the pattern of winning in the show ring and then producing champion show horses across multiple disciplines . Huckleberry Bey was 1979 U.S. National Reserve Champion Futurity Stallion , 1981 U.S. National Top Ten Stallion , and 1984 U.S. National Reserve Champion English Pleasure . He then became the leading sire of US National Champions for five years , and in 1999 his likeness was reproduced as a Breyer horse model . In turn , his son , Desperado V ( × <unk> by Dar ) became a leading sire of champions . In 2004 and 2005 , Desperado V was ranked the leading Arabian sire by the United States Equestrian Federation ( USEF ) , and was second in 2008 and 2009 . By 2009 , Desperado V had sired 75 national winners . In addition , another Huckleberry Bey son , Bravado Bey V ( × <unk> V ) was USEF 's 10th @-@ ranked leading Arabian sire in 2008 . 
 In 2010 , of the top 25 leading sires of winning Arabian dressage horses since 1960 , Desperado V was ranked number 2 ( following <unk> ) , Bey Shah was number 4 , Huckleberry Bey was tied for fifth , and Barbary was also on the list , in addition to five other grandsons of Bay El Bey . 
 Over the years , she made use of outside bloodlines . She leased the young , then unproven stallion <unk> for his first breeding season in 1969 . She also made use of horses owned by other ranches , such as the Polish import Bask , whom she <unk> to his 3 / 4 sister , Varian 's Polish import Bachantka , producing another significant foundation mare , <unk> , dam of Barbary . In 2002 , requiring an outcross stallion not closely related to her own horses , she purchased the Brazilian @-@ foaled <unk> El Jamaal , who has bloodlines not previously incorporated into the Varian program , as well as a line tracing back to Bay el Bey via Bey Shah . Varian continued to seek performance ability in her mares ; in the Varian program , every mare is trained under saddle and must prove suitable as a riding animal . 
 Varian did not originally work her ranch name into the names of her horses , but today all Varian @-@ bred horses have a registered name suffixed with the capital letter " V " . The Varian ranch also acknowledges the importance of the mares by using the first letter of each mare ’ s name to start the name of their foals . Varian @-@ bred horses are freeze branded with the Varian " V " logo . 
 = = Training philosophy and vaquero tradition = = 
 <unk> were the horsemen and cattle herders of Spanish Mexico , who first came to California with the Jesuit priest Eusebio Kino in 1687 , with two expeditions in 1769 , and the Juan de Anza expedition in 1774 . They were the first cowboys in the region . She learned horse training methods that derived from this tradition . In her teens , she was mentored in horsemanship by Morgan horse breeder and cattle rancher Mary " Sid " Spencer . The Spencer property , called Forsyth Ranch , was near Arroyo Grande on land that is now under Lopez Lake . Spencer helped Varian learn the underlying principles of training and riding horses , how to work cattle in the mountains , and introduced her to vaquero training methods . Spencer also did all of her own ranch work including shoeing , gelding , horse training , baling hay , and truck repairs . She learned how to handle well @-@ trained horses by riding one of the Spencer family 's finished Morgans , a gelding named Little Horse . With Spencer 's help , she also learned to recognize correct conformation and balance in horses . 
 After learning traditional vaquero methods of training from Spencer and others , Varian modified her training methods in her twenties , after meeting Tom Dorrance . He introduced her to his “ soft approach ” of working with horses , and his methods were an additional influence on Varian 's training philosophy . Varian utilized vaquero @-@ influenced methods in training her horses , but believed that modern well @-@ bred horses need a gentler approach , stating , “ All good horses , like smart children , need good instruction , but they don ’ t need harsh instruction . " 
 Varian was one of a very few experts in the 21st century who was still teaching about vaquero equipment , methods , and history . She had a strong interest in the history of the spade bit horse in California . The spade is an elaborate , complex bit that can only be properly used on a highly trained horse handled by a skilled rider . In the vaquero tradition , its use represents the highest level of trust and communication between horse and rider . The process of training the spade bit horse takes five to seven years to complete . Its emphasis has always been on producing a finely tuned working horse and partner , emphasizing quality rather than on how quickly the goal is reached . The conformation of the horse is also a factor ; to become a spade bit horse , the animal must be bred to have a higher neck set and well @-@ carried head . Varian compared the ride and handling of a horse trained in this manner to that of a Jaguar automobile . 
 Traditionally , the vaquero method starts a young horse using a hackamore , which is headgear that uses a heavy <unk> <unk> , called a bosal instead of a bit to control the horse . As the horse gains skill with a rider , it moves to lighter <unk> , and next into a transitional period in its training ; carrying a bridle with a type of curb bit called a " half breed " which is a modified spade bit worn in conjunction with a light bosal . The rider carries two sets of reins , one set on the bosal and one on the curb , giving this gear its name , the " two @-@ rein . " After several years in a two @-@ rein , the horse graduates into the spade bit . 
 Varian departed slightly from tradition . She started young horses under saddle at the age of three , beginning with a bridle and a snaffle bit because it sends clearer signals to a young horse , particularly one of sensitive disposition . She then introduced the traditional hackamore , and , after a couple of months to transition between the hackamore and the snaffle , began teaching neck reining , which allows a horse to be ridden one @-@ handed . After a year or two , when the horse became light in the hackamore , she introduced the young horse to the two @-@ rein , using a light bosal with either a " half @-@ breed " or a low @-@ port curb bit . Once the horse understood the bit , the bosal was removed and the horse was ridden in just the curb bit for a while until ready to go into the full spade bit , at which point the horse went back into the two @-@ rein when the spade is first introduced . She introduced horses to the spade bit at the age of seven or eight , if they had suitable conformation and temperament to carry it . When she selected and fully trained a spade bit horse for her own personal use , that particular horse stayed with her for life and was never sold . 
 Varian considered Arabians the most " people @-@ oriented " of any horse breed . " No other horse will leave his food to come and see you . " Noting that they are a " hot @-@ blooded " breed , she viewed them as sensitive horses that will not tolerate harsh handling , but strongly disagreed with those who considered Arabians to be too high @-@ spirited to be good trail horses . She emphasized teaching horses to have good manners . She roped off of her horses and took them into the mountains . 
 She viewed Arabians as requiring a smart and gentle approach . She advocated for trainers who used the methods of master horsemen such as Ray Hunt and Tom Dorrance , with Dorrance 's philosophy being especially suitable for Arabians . She considered the breed to be inherently gentle , and pointed out that any horse can become " hot " if they are kept in a stall 24 hours a day , fed a lot of grain , and never ridden . Varian explained the nature of Arabian horses by analogy , comparing them to precocious children who show their ability with delight , but cannot be bullied or pushed around . 
 = = Legacy and awards = = 
 The Varian Arabian Ranch has been ranked multiple times as one of the leading Arabian breeders of winning horses by the United States Equestrian Federation ( USEF ) , which since 2004 has ranked breeders based on points earned by horses shown in <unk> USEF competitions . The ranch was first in calendar year 2008 , and in the top ten from 2006 through 2010 . In 2013 , the Varian breeding program was ranked by Arabian Horse World magazine as the all time number one breeder of both English @-@ type and Western @-@ type Arabian horses . Sheila Varian as an individual was honored by the USEF with the 2001 Ellen Scripps Davis Memorial Breeders ’ Cup , awarded to an individual who consistently breeds outstanding show horses . Within the Arabian industry itself , Varian was honored in 2005 with the Arabian Breeders Association 's lifetime achievement award , and was the Arabian Professional & Amateur Horseman 's Association 2009 Breeder of the Year . 
 Varian was inducted into the Cowgirl Hall of Fame in 2003 . She was honored for both her contributions as a horse breeder and as a trainer , but the honor represented , in many ways , her roots in the vaquero tradition . Other inductees that year included western artist Glenna Goodacre ; musician , artist , cowboy poet and pickup rider Ann Secrest Hanson ; and classic cowgirl trick rider and barrel racer <unk> Tindall Smith ( 1908 – 1990 ) . 
 In November 2015 , Varian announced that she would be working with the California Rangeland Trust to place her ranch into a conservation easement to protect it from development . She had begun the project with the intent that her longtime ranch manager , Angela Alvarez , would operate the horse breeding program after Varian was no longer able to do so , and then once Alvarez was no longer able to run the ranch , the property would be gifted to the Trust to be sold , the conservation easement running with the land , and attempts made to find a buyer that would also be interested in maintaining the Arabian horse breeding program . 
 Varian was diagnosed with ovarian cancer in 2013 and died on March 6 , 2016 , at the age of 78 . At news of her death , the web site for the California Rangeland Trust crashed due to the high amount of web traffic , necessitating supporters of the trust to set up a backup crowdfunding site for donations to the conservation effort . 
 = Tropical Storm Flossie ( 2013 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Flossie yielded stormy weather to Hawaii in late July 2013 . The sixth tropical cyclone and named storm of the annual hurricane season , Flossie originated from a tropical wave that emerged off the western coast of Africa on July 9 . Tracking westward across the Atlantic with little development , it passed over Central America and into the eastern Pacific Ocean on July 18 , where favorable environmental conditions promoted steady organization . By 0600 UTC on July 25 , the wave acquired enough organization to be deemed a tropical depression ; it intensified into a tropical storm six hours later . Continuing westward , Flossie attained peak winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) on July 27 before entering the central Pacific Ocean . There , unfavorable upper @-@ level winds established a weakening trend ; on July 30 , Flossie weakened to a tropical depression , and by 1200 UTC that same day , the storm degenerated into a remnant low , northeast of Kauai . 
 In advance of Flossie , tropical cyclone warnings and watches were placed into effect for various Hawaiian Islands . In addition , numerous flash flood watches were issued in fear of over a foot of precipitation . Ports and numerous facilities were closed to the public , and authorities opened shelters for refuge . Upon approach , Flossie threatened to become the first tropical storm to make a direct hit on Hawaii in two decades ; however , the system weakened prior to doing so . Flossie brought high surf to the state , leading to minor beach erosion . Gusty winds exceeded tropical storm threshold , downing numerous power poles and trees ; as a result , several thousand locals were without power for a few days . The storm produced several inches of rainfall across the island , with a peak of 9 @.@ 27 inches ( 235 mm ) on Mount Waialeale . Though one man was injured due to <unk> , no fatalities were reported in association with Flossie . Damage totaled to $ 24 @,@ 000 ( 2013 USD ) as a consequence of lightning . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On July 9 , 2013 , a tropical wave emerged off the western coast of Africa . Tracking swiftly westward across the Atlantic , it passed across Central America on July 18 and emerged into the eastern Pacific Ocean shortly thereafter . Early on July 21 , a broad low @-@ pressure area formed in association with the wave , and the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) began monitoring the disturbance for slow development into a tropical cyclone accordingly . Shower and thunderstorm activity coalesced over the subsequent days , prompting the NHC to increase its chances for development to the high category ; despite this , satellite data from early on July 24 did not reveal a well @-@ defined circulation necessary for classification . By that evening , a combination of visible and microwave satellite imagery depicted an improvement of the vortex , and the system was upgraded to a tropical depression at 0000 UTC on July 25 , while situated 980 miles ( 1 @,@ 575 km ) west @-@ southwest of the southern tip of the Baja California peninsula . 
 The depression tracked west to west @-@ northwest upon classification , steered by a mid @-@ level ridge centered over the southwestern United States . Deep convection increased in coverage and intensity over the following hours , leading to an increase in satellite intensity estimates ; at 0600 UTC , the depression was upgraded to Tropical Storm Flossie . Within an environment of low wind shear and warm sea surface temperatures , Flossie gradually intensified over the next two days ; a mid @-@ level eye became observable in microwave imagery and intermittently on visible satellite imagery by early on July 27 . At 1200 UTC , the system attained its peak intensity with maximum sustained winds of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) and a minimum barometric pressure of 994 mb ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 35 inHg ) . Thereafter , Flossie crossed the 140th meridian west into the central Pacific Ocean , where the Central Pacific Hurricane Center ( CPHC ) assumed responsibility of the system . Unfavorable upper @-@ level winds in association with an upper @-@ level trough began to impede the system 's organization around this time , and it began a slow weakening trend . 
 In conjunction with high wind shear , marginal ocean temperatures caused deep convection in association with Flossie to weaken and become ragged ; as a result , the forecast called for continued weakening . Instead , a brief reprieve in upper @-@ level winds allowed the system to intensify to a secondary peak of 65 mph ( 100 km / h ) by 1200 UTC on July 28 . An anticyclone northwest of the system increased shear atop the system once again by the following day , and dry air began to become ingested into the circulation . The low @-@ level vortex became exposed to view and progressively ill @-@ defined as outflow boundaries in association with a previous convective burst impeded on the low . At 0000 UTC on July 30 , Flossie was downgraded to a tropical depression ; after the circulation became indistinguishable on satellite imagery twelve hours later , the system was declared a remnant area of low pressure . At this time , the vortex was centered near the northern coast of Kauai . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 Upon entering the central Pacific Ocean , Flossie prompted the issuance of a tropical storm watch for Hawaii and Maui counties on July 27 . This was upgraded to a tropical storm warning hours later , while Oahu was placed under a tropical storm watch . Due to the threat of heavy rain , forecast to reach 15 inches ( 380 mm ) in localized areas , a flash flood watch was issued for all of Hawaii , valid between July 29 and 30 . All Maui County parks were closed due to the storm as county authorities activated emergency operations . Along the Big Island , all courts and colleges were closed . Hawaii Governor Neil Abercrombie signed an emergency proclamation . Three ports were closed , including two on the Big Island and one on Maui . Under the anticipation that Flossie would become the first tropical storm to make landfall in the state since 1992 , authorities opened 11 shelters across the state , including four on Maui and seven on Oahu . In total , 177 persons used these shelters . A scheduled water outage in Hanalei and <unk> was postponed due to the storm . 
 While still offshore , Flossie brought high surf to much of the state . Upon passing narrowly by the island , gusty winds downed trees and power lines : Kahului reported a peak wind gust of 47 mph ( 76 km / h ) during Flossie . More than 10 @,@ 000 residences were without electricity across the state , with most outages concentrated in Maui and Big Island . Heavy rains impacted several islands ; rainfall rates of 3 to 4 inches ( 76 to 102 mm ) an hour were recorded in <unk> . Along the eastern side of Maui , a total of 5 @.@ 3 inches ( 130 mm ) was reported in the Kaupo Gap , while a storm @-@ total peak of 9 @.@ 27 inches ( 235 mm ) was observed on Mount Waialeale . One man was injured in Maui due to lightning . Damage from lightning across the state amounted to $ 24 @,@ 000 . Six vehicle accidents were reported and several roads required closure , but overall , damage from Flossie was relatively minor . 
 = Beonna of East Anglia = 
 Beonna ( also known as <unk> ) was King of East Anglia from 749 . He is notable for being the first East Anglian king whose coinage included both the ruler 's name and his title . The end @-@ date of Beonna 's reign is not known , but may have been around 760 . It is thought that he shared the kingdom with another ruler called Alberht and possibly with a third man , named Hun . Not all experts agree with these regnal dates , or the nature of his kingship : it has been suggested that he may have ruled alone ( and free of Mercian domination ) from around 758 . 
 Little is known of Beonna 's life or his reign , as nothing in written form has survived from this period of East Anglian history . The very few primary sources for Beonna consist of bare references to his accession or rule written by late chroniclers , that until quite recently were impossible to verify . Since 1980 , a sufficient number of coins have been found to show that he was indeed a historical figure . They have allowed scholars to make deductions about economic and linguistic links that existed between East Anglia and other parts of both England and northern Europe during his reign , as well as aspects of his own identity and rule . 
 = = Background = = 
 In contrast to the kingdoms of Northumbria , Mercia and Wessex , little reliable evidence about the kingdom of the East Angles has survived . The historian Barbara Yorke has maintained that this is due to the destruction of the kingdom 's monasteries and the disappearance of both of the East Anglian sees , which were caused by Viking raids and later settlement . 
 Ælfwald of East Anglia died in 749 after ruling for thirty @-@ six years . During Ælfwald 's rule , his kingdom enjoyed sustained growth and stability , albeit under the senior authority of the Mercian king Æthelbald , who ruled his kingdom from 716 until he was murdered by his own men in 757 . Ælfwald was the last of the Wuffingas dynasty , who had ruled East Anglia since the 6th century . A pedigree in the Anglian collection that lists Ælfwald and his descendants , includes many earlier Wuffingas kings . 
 = = Identity and joint rule = = 
 The identification of Beonna as a king of the East Angles is based upon a few written sources . One source is a statement in the twelfth century Historia Regum , that after Ælfwald 's death , " regnum ... ... <unk> et <unk> sibi <unk> " ( ' Hunbeanna and Alberht divided the kingdom of the East Angles between themselves ' ) . The Historia Regum is believed to have been compiled by Symeon of Durham , but it is now generally accepted that much of it was written by Byrhtferth of Ramsey around the end of the 10th century . Another source is a passage in the 12th century Chronicon ex chronicis , once thought to have been written by Florence of Worcester , which stated that " <unk> " was king of the East Angles . A third source is a regnal list in the Chronicon ex chronicis which states that " <unk> autem Merciorum rege Offa , Beonna <unk> in East @-@ Anglia , et post <unk> <unk> " ( ' During the reign of Offa , king of the Mercians , Beonna reigned in East @-@ Anglia , and after him Æthelred ... ' ) . 
 The annal for 749 in The Flowers of History , written by the chronicler Matthew Paris in the 13th @-@ century , also relates that " Ethelwold , king of the East Angles , died , and Beonna and Ethelbert divided his dominions between them " . The historians H. M. Chadwick and Dorothy Whitelock both suggested that the name Hunbeanna should be divided into two names , Hun and <unk> , and that a tripartite division of the kingdom might have existed . According to Steven Plunkett , the name <unk> may have been created by means of a scribal error . 
 The kingdom might never have been ruled jointly by Alberht and Beonna . It is generally accepted that Alberht and the later Æthelberht II , who ruled East Anglia until his death in 794 , are different kings , but the historian D. P. Kirby has identified them as being one person . According to Kirby , Beonna might have ascended the throne in around 758 and the issuing of his coins could indicate that East Anglia broke free of Mercian domination for a time , so linking Beonna 's reign with the eventual disintegration of Mercian hegemony that occurred after Æthelbald 's death . 
 = = = The <unk> element ' Hun ' = = = 
 The recognition of Beonna as a historical figure leaves the ' Hun ' element in the word Hunbeanna detached . <unk> is itself a hypocoristic form of a two @-@ part name , and the ' nn ' in the name has been interpreted as representing a geminate <unk> . 
 Hun is familiar in 8th and 9th century England , for instance as part of a name with two elements . During the 9th century there were East Anglian bishops of <unk> named <unk> , <unk> and <unk> and a bishop of Worcester called <unk> . Hun also occurred as part of a moneyer 's name . There are several placenames in England that contain the term as a personal name element , such as Hunsdon , Hertfordshire and <unk> , West Sussex ( but not <unk> , Suffolk ) . It is possible that Hun was a historical figure , whose name was run together with Beonna 's by a scribe . 
 An alternative theory is that the Latin annal that mentioned Hunbeanna was derived from an Old English source and that the translator scribe misread the opening word here for part of the name of Beonna . " Her " - ' in this year ' - is the usual opening for an Old English annal and the typical form of the letter ' r ' might easily be misread for an ' n ' . 
 = = = Beornred of Mercia = = = 
 Charles Oman proposed that <unk> , who in 757 emerged for a short time as ruler of Mercia before being driven out by Offa , could be the same person as Beonna . An alternative theory suggests that Beonna and Beornred may perhaps have been kinsmen from the same dynasty with ambitions to rule in both Mercia and East Anglia . No known member of the Wuffingas dynasty had a name commencing with B , but several Mercian rulers , including Beornred , used the letter . 
 In 1996 , Marion Archibald and Valerie Fenwick proposed an alternative hypothesis , based on the evidence of East Anglian coins and post @-@ Conquest documents . Acknowledging that Beonna and Beornred were the same person , they suggested that after Ælfwald 's death in 749 , Æthelwald of Mercia installed Beornred / Beonna to rule northern East Anglia and Alberht ( who probably belonged to the Wuffingas dynasty ) to rule in the south . According to Archibald and Fenwick , after Æthelbald was murdered in 757 , Beornred / Beonna became king of Mercia , during which his coinage was increased in East Anglia , perhaps to meet “ military requirements ” . Then , after a reign of only a few months , he was deposed by Offa and forced to flee from him back into East Anglia . Alberht , who had attempted to re @-@ establish East Anglia as an independent kingdom and rule alone , and had succeeded for a short time , was deposed by Beornred / Beonna when he arrived as an exile in about 760 . Soon afterwards , Offa asserted his authority over the East Angles in around 760 @-@ 5 and removed Beonna . 
 = = Coinage = = 
 Anglo @-@ Saxons kings produced coins from the 620s onwards , initially in gold , but then in electrum ( an alloy of gold and silver ) and eventually pure silver . Little is known of the organisation of coinage during the reign of Beonna , but it can be presumed that the moneyers who struck coins during this period acted under the auspices of the king , who would to some extent have supervised the design of his coins . A growing shortage of available bullion in north @-@ western Europe during the first half of the 8th century was probably the main cause for a deterioration in the proportion of precious metal found in locally produced sceattas . In around 740 , Eadberht of Northumbria became the first king to respond to this crisis by issuing a remodelled coinage , of a consistent weight and a high proportion of silver , which eventually replaced the debased currency . Other kings followed his example , including Beonna and the Frankish king Pepin the Short , who appears to have been strongly influenced by the newly introduced coins of both Beonna and Eadberht . 
 Examples of Beonna 's coins are known from two separate hoards , as well as from a number of individual finds . Until 1968 , only five of his coins were known . Several more coins came to light over the next decade , before a hoard of sceattas and other coins were discovered in 1980 at Middle Harling , north @-@ east of Thetford and close to the border between the counties of Norfolk and Suffolk . In all , fifty @-@ eight coins have been excavated from Middle Harling , fourteen were found at Burrow Hill ( Suffolk ) and thirty @-@ five from other places in East Anglia and elsewhere . Over a hundred ' <unk> ' are now known : most of them have been acquired by the British Museum . 
 Beonna was the first of the East Anglian kings whose coinage named both the ruler and his title . His coins are larger than the earlier sceattas , but are small when compared with the pennies produced in Anglo @-@ Saxon England several decades later . As a whole , they provide an important dateable runic corpus and may reflect a distinctive East Anglian preference for runic lettering . Beonna had three moneyers whose names are known : Werferth , Efe and Wilred . The coins struck by Werferth are considered to be the earliest . His coins and those struck under the authority of Eadberht of Northumbria both contained 70 % silver and were similar in type and detail , which suggests the possibility of producing a chronology for Beonna 's coins , using the established sequence for the Northumbrian coins of Eadberht . However , as Eadberht 's reign began in 738 , several years before Beonna became king in East Anglia , the coins cannot be related to each other closely enough to construct a reliable chronology . 
 Produced later than Werferth 's coins are those by Efe : these , by far the most numerous , have dies which change in time . Distribution analysis suggests that Efe 's mint was possibly located in northern Suffolk or southern Norfolk . It is possible that the name of the village of Euston , Suffolk , a little southeast of Thetford , is derived from Efe . 
 Efe 's obverse dies show the king 's name and title , usually spelt with a mixture of runes and Latin script , with some aspects of the coins occasionally ill @-@ drawn or omitted altogether . The king 's name is generally arranged around the central motif of a pellet ( or a cross ) within a circle of pellets : this layout probably derived from Northumbrian coins . The reverse dies consisted of a cross and the letters E F E , placed in four sectors that were divided off by lines . It can be shown that Efe did not use his dies in any particular or consistent order . Calculations have been made that suggest that few of his dies remain undiscovered . 
 The coins struck by Beonna 's last known moneyer , Wilred , are so different from Efe 's that it is highly unlikely that they were produced at the same mint or at the same time . It can also be assumed that Wilred is the same moneyer who struck coins for Offa of Mercia , possibly at Ipswich . Wilred 's coins can be used to demonstrate that Offa 's influence over the East Angles occurred at an earlier date than has previously been supposed , but are of little use in determining a secure chronology for Beonna 's reign . Wilred 's name is always depicted in runes . Nearly all his reverse dies have two crosses placed between the elements of his name ( + wil + red ) : most of the obverse dies show crosses and the king 's name in a similar design , but also include an extra rune . This unique rune , similar to <unk> , possibly meant <unk> ( ' ruler ' ) . 
 One type of coin for Beonna has no named moneyer and depicts an interlace motif on its reverse . A specimen of this type ( now lost ) was found at Dorestad , which was during Beonna 's time an important trading centre : these coins resemble Frankish or Frisian deniers that were issued from the Maastricht area during this period . 
 Beonna 's rule coincided with the anointing of Pippin III as king of the Franks after 742 and the subsequent disempowerment of the Merovingian dynasty , and also with the martyrdom of Saint Boniface and his followers in Frisia in 754 . A runic ' a ' in the name Beonna on two coins , which has only been found elsewhere in Fresia , implies that there were both trading and language links between the two regions during the 8th century . 
 = When Christmas Comes = 
 " When Christmas Comes " is a song by American singer and songwriter Mariah Carey from her second Christmas album / thirteenth studio album , Merry Christmas II You ( 2010 ) . Carey wrote and produced the song in collaboration with James Poyser . A soul song with an influence of R & B , the lyrics are about giving the gift of love . In November 2011 , Carey re @-@ recorded the song as duet with John Legend , which was later released as a single . Both versions of the track were a hit in South Korea , with the duet debuting at number one with sales in excess of 80 @,@ 000 copies . The song 's accompanying music video features Carey and Legend at a hosting a Christmas house party . It has been performed by Carey at her ABC 2010 Christmas special and during her 2014 Beacon Theatre residency All I Want For Christmas Is You , A Night of Joy & Festivity in December 2014 . 
 = = Background and composition = = 
 " When Christmas Comes " was written and produced by Mariah Carey and James Poyser for the former 's second Christmas album / thirteenth studio album , Merry Christmas II You ( 2010 ) . Her vocals were recorded by Brian Garten at Guardian Angel Studios in Bel Air , Westlake Recording Studios and Hensons Studios , both located in Los Angeles , and Germano Studios in New York City . Carey performed her own background vocals along with Melonie Daniels , Sharlotte Gibson and Nicki Richards . The music for the song was recorded by Garten and Kevin Guarnieri ; Alex Evans played the drums , while John " <unk> " Smith played the guitar . On November 7 , 2011 , Carey revealed that she would be releasing " When Christmas Comes " as a duet with John Legend . The duet was released in the United States on November 21 and the United Kingdom on November 28 . 
 It as an R & B @-@ influenced soul song with a " simple groove " that lasts for a duration of four minutes and forty @-@ six seconds . The single release version with Legend lasts for additional second . The instrumental consists of horns , including the trumpet performed by Rick Baptist and Greg Adams , and the trombone by Nick Lane . Other brass instruments include Dan Higgins on the sax and flute . In addition to being a producer , Poyser performs the keyboard . Lyrically , the song is about " giving the gift of love " , as Carey and Legend harmonize the lyrics " And me and you gon ' have ourselves a holiday / And we don 't need nobody else to celebrate / And we 're gon ' kiss our worries and our cares away / I can 't wait / Because this Christmas time , get together / It 's gonna be so nice , better than ever / And baby you ’ re the one , special treasure . " Prior to the final chorus , the pair freelance the a portion of the lyrics from " Jingle Bells " . As noted by Scott Shelter of PopCrush , " listeners are treated to notes from the upper reaches of Mariah ’ s five @-@ octave range , which she rarely shows off anymore . " In an interview for Vevo , Carey stated that she felt that Legend was the " perfect choice " to re @-@ create the song as a duet with , and that his " soulful " creative decisions " took it up several notches " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Mike Diver for BBC was complimentary of " When Christmas Comes " , writing although the effect is " less instant " compared to the first single , " Oh Santa ! " , it fits in well with the rest of the album and is " perfectly formed " . The Village Voice writer Rich Juzwiak thought that the use of a full band was a " retread " of the songs Carey recorded for her tenth studio album , The Emancipation of Mimi ( 2005 ) . Of the duet , Shelter described it as " sultry " , awarded it four stars out of a possible five , and labelled it as being superior to the original version with vocals solely by Carey included on the album . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 The original version of " When Christmas Comes " peaked at number seven on both the South Korea International Digital Singles chart and Download Singles chart , respectively , on November 20 , 2010 . The single version with Legend debuted at number one on South Korean Download chart on November 27 , 2011 , with sales of 81 @,@ 624 . The following week , it fell to number eight with 32 @,@ 952 copes sold . It sold a further 18 @,@ 947 and 13 @,@ 339 copies in its third and fourth weeks , respectively . Despite debuting atop Download chart with 81 @,@ 624 copies sold , it peaked at number two on the Digital chart . In the United States , the duet debuted at number twenty @-@ five on the Adult R & B Songs chart , and climbed to number seventeen the following week . It dropped one position to number eighteen in its third week , but resurged to a peak of number fifteen the week after on January 7 , 2012 . " When Christmas Comes " debuted at number seventy on the Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , becoming the " Hot Shot Debut " for the week dated December 17 , 2011 , and the first song from Merry Christmas II You to enter the chart . It is Carey 's fifty @-@ third entry overall . The track peaked at number fifty @-@ seven on the Japan Hot 100 in 2012 . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 An accompanying music video directed by Sanaa Hamri for " When Christmas Comes " was filmed at Carey 's Los Angeles home and features Carey and Legend throwing a celebratory Christmas house party , which includes a cameo by Nick Cannon . It features footage from the film A Charlie Brown Christmas . On November 15 , Carey posted images of the video shoot on her website , one of which shows the two singers sitting at piano . It premiered on December 13 , 2011 . Carey has performed the track live on her ABC Christmas Special in December 2010 , and at her Beacon Theatre residency called All I Want For Christmas Is You , A Night of Joy & Festivity in December 2014 . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 ; Digital download ( 2010 album version ) 
 " When Christmas Comes " – 4 : 46 
 ; Digital download ( 2011 single release ) 
 " When Christmas Comes " with John Legend – 4 : 45 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Lose My Breath = 
 " Lose My Breath " is a song by American group Destiny 's Child . It was written by Beyoncé , Kelly Rowland , Michelle Williams , Rodney " Darkchild " Jerkins , LaShawn Daniels , Fred Jerkins III , Sean Garrett , and Shawn Corey " Jay @-@ Z " Carter for the group 's fourth studio album , Destiny Fulfilled ( 2004 ) . Columbia Records released " Lose My Breath " as the first single from the album in late 2004 . The song was partially developed by Jerkins before being presented to Destiny 's Child and its chorus was afterwards written by Jay @-@ Z. 
 An uptempo R & B and dance song , " Lose My Breath " has a marching , military percussion @-@ led instrumentation with different sound effects in its backing track . It received positive reviews from music critics who generally praised its melody and instrumentation . The track further received a Grammy Award nomination in the category for Best R & B Vocal Performance by a Duo or Group . " Lose My Breath " was commercially successful peaking at number three on the US Billboard Hot 100 and reaching the top spot on many charts in Europe as well as appearing in the top ten in almost every chart . 
 The single 's music video directed by Marc Klasfeld and filmed in Los Angeles , California , featured Destiny 's Child performing dance choreographies portraying three different characters . The song was performed during the group 's tour Destiny Fulfilled ... and Lovin ' It ( 2005 ) and on numerous televised appearances and awards ceremonies in 2004 and 2005 . The American Broadcasting Company used " Lose My Breath " as the official song for the NBA playoffs in 2004 and 2005 . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 " Lose My Breath " was written by Beyoncé , Kelly Rowland , Michelle Williams , Rodney " Darkchild " Jerkins , Fred Jerkins , Sean Garrett , LaShawn Daniels and Jay @-@ Z. The production of the song was handled by Jerkins , Beyoncé , Rowland and Garrett . Record producer Jerkins , who had previously collaborated with the group for " Say My Name " ( 2000 ) , had worked on " Lose My Breath " without informing Destiny 's Child . Beyoncé and Williams heard the drum instrumentation of the track and they enjoyed it with the latter feeling that the song was nothing like the mainstream radio sound . They went to their band mate Kelly Rowland presenting the song . Alongside Jerkins , the group asked for help from American rapper Jay @-@ Z who immediately created a chorus including the lines " Can you keep up " without hearing the track . The group took his chorus and wrote the verses and bridge around it . During an interview with Complex , Garrett recalled the time he worked with Williams on the song , saying , " There was so much magic going on in the studio . We probably recorded all the songs in about a month and every day it was a new song coming out . ' Lose My Breath ' was towards the latter part of the album and that was an amazing song that we felt could not only be big on the radio but big with bands and marching bands . I was on a natural high after that . " 
 Following the three @-@ year hiatus of the group , " Lose My Breath " was considered as their comeback release . It premiered on September 9 , 2004 on AOL Music . In the US , the single was released in different versions ; " Lose My Breath " itself was available for digital purchase on October 5 , 2004 . On November 2 , it was released along with " Soldier " and " Game Over " separately , the former being an EP with several remixes of " Lose My Breath " being also available . A 12 @-@ inch vinyl single of the song was released on the same date . A dance mixes EP was released on December 7 , while a Remix 2 Pak containing two remixes by Peter Rauhofer was released on August 16 , 2005 . The single was released to markets in different dates . On October 29 , 2004 , a maxi single was released in Australia , featuring the album version of the track , two remixes and a new song " Why You Actin ' " . The song was included on the group 's compilation albums # 1 's ( 2005 ) and Playlist : The Very Best of Destiny 's Child ( 2012 ) . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Lose My Breath " is an uptempo R & B and dance song with elements of dancehall music . It is performed with a <unk> beat and a tempo of 120 beats per minute . The song is set in common time , composed in the key of E ♭ major with the vocal elements spanning from the low note of C4 to the high note of D5 . The band members ' vocals in " Lose My Breath " were described as " breathy " . The song features fast snare drum sequences , choppy beats with hand @-@ clappy percussion , cymbal crashes , and itchy hi @-@ hats , creating a military sound reminiscent to a drumline of a marching band . The opening drum sequence is sampled from the drumline of " Taps " performed by the University of Michigan Marching Band . Synthesizer blips are also utilized in the song 's melody . Along with those instruments , the complex backing track of the song uses various sound effects such as ripple of claps , stomps , thumps , snare rolls , and gasps . 
 Lyrically , the female protagonists challenge their male " suitors " to keep up instead of being full of empty promises ; the women further feel that " He 's not fulfilling you like he says " . Williams further explained the meaning of the song during an interview with MTV News , " We 've had experiences with men doing a lot of talking but they can ’ t back it up . You said you could do this , but you can 't , whether that 's on the dance floor or wherever else . He said what he could do for you , but ... " The lyrics are constructed in the chorus @-@ verse pattern . The song opens with the lines " Hit me " and the first verses sang by Beyoncé follow : " I put it right there made it easy for you to get to / Now you want to act like you don 't know what to do " . The chorus follows during which the group repeatedly sings the lines " Can you keep up ? " . Rowland 's second verses follow where she sings the lines " Put it on me deep in the right direction " . The chorus is repeated twice before the bridge by Williams . After the bridge , the group sings the lines " Here 's your papers , baby you are dismissed " letting their man know that he is not good enough for them . Rowland sings a short ad lib , and then the trio ends with a repeated chorus . Nick Reynolds from BBC compared the song Missy Elliott 's " Pass That Dutch " and to songs by The Supremes . He further found a name check of Public Enemy 's " Bring the Noise " . Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine also compared " Lose My Breath with " Pass That Dutch " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Jenny Eliscu of Rolling Stone referred to " Lose My Breath " a " sweat @-@ soaked " track and a " percussive sex romp " where Destiny 's Child " pant in time to a marching @-@ band beat . " Nick Reynolds of the BBC called the military drumming of the " fantastic " track " exciting " and its keyboard stabs " nasty " . A writer for Vibe hailed it as a " pounding , animalistic piece of music - as urgent as a war cry " with a " thunderous tribal beat " . In an album review of Destiny Fulfilled , Tom Sinclair of Entertainment Weekly felt that " Lose My Breath " opened the record with " a brisk enough start " and concluded , " While it 's no ' Bootylicious , ' it 's got more nervous energy and verve than almost anything else here . " . A writer of Billboard magazine felt that the song was " love 's exhilarating start " . Kelefa Sanneh of The New York Times described it as " suitably calisthenic " . AllMusic 's Stephen Thomas Erlewine considered the song to be an album highlight . Eric Henderson of Slant Magazine called the song a " thigh @-@ snapper " and said it responsible for the " increased use of <unk> drumsticks as sex toys " . Barbara Ellen of The Observer felt that " Lose My Breath " was " of the exemplary standard " of the band 's previous albums , Survivor and The Writing 's on the Wall . In his review , Alex MacPherson of Stylus Magazine chose the song as one of the album 's best and wrote , 
 It [ Destiny Fulfilled ] shoots its load quickly , although just as effectively : " Lose My Breath " and " Soldier " are stunning , both displaying the Beyoncé trademark of creepily submissive lyrics matched with dominatrix vocals and arrangements to superb effect . The former kicks off with a martial beat and a call of " hit me ! " which sounds like a military command , and proceeds to put you through a series of moves without pause for breath , Beyoncé and her minions cracking the whip every time you even think of flagging . 
 The A.V. Club 's Andy Battaglia felt that " Lose My Breath " gave the album an " opening charge by way of a raucous marching @-@ band beat and panting attempts to squeeze a lot of words into closing musical corners " . Caroline Sullivan of The Guardian described the song as " fantastic , legs @-@ in @-@ the @-@ air " . Paul Flynn of the same publication wrote that it " further relegated the other members of Destiny 's Child to the position of Beyoncé 's backing singers " . Tom Breihan of Pitchfork Media who complimented Jerkin 's " incredible " drum programming and the " mind @-@ boggling " backing track felt that it lacked a tune : " The vocals are too breathy , too whiny , and too processed , and the song 's one thrilling <unk> near the end , where the harmonies get a bit of room to play off each other with Abba @-@ esque rococo <unk> lasts only for a second . " Los Angeles Times writer Natalie Nichols deemed its production " nifty " with a " rat @-@ a @-@ tat drum line percussion propelling " but felt that it contained a single hook expanded into an entire song . Lindsey Weber from Vulture criticized Williams ' contribution to the bridge , describing it as " weak " . 
 = = = Recognition and accolades = = = 
 In 2005 , " Lose My Breath " was nominated in the category for Best R & B Vocal Performance by a Duo Or Group at the 47th Annual Grammy Awards . At the 23rd Annual ASCAP Pop Music Awards , " Lose My Breath " was recognized as one of the Most Performed Songs in 2005 along with the group 's other song " Soldier " . Sean Garrett won a BMI Urban Award at the 2006 BMI Awards for the song . 
 Clem Bastow from Stylus Magazine put " Lose My Breath " at number ten on his list Top Ten Drum Beats You Are Powerless To Resist . He wrote , " Rodney Jerkins ' masterstroke of a production technique ... propels this ... penultimate ... Destiny 's Child gem into the stratosphere " . The song was ranked at number 39 in the annual Pazz & Jop mass critics poll of the year 's best in music in 2004 . In 2013 , Weber from Vulture included " Lose My Breath " at number 19 on her list of the 25 best songs by the group . Houston Chronicle 's Joey Guerra also included the song in <unk> list of the band 's best songs writing that it gave a chance to Rowland and Williams to " shine vocally " . The same year , Erika Ramirez and Jason Lipshutz of Billboard magazine put it at number nine on their list of " Beyonce 's 30 Biggest Billboard Hits " . In 2014 , Official Charts Company writer Justin Myers listed the song as one of the essential " pop gems " in the UK , praising the group for coming back in 2004 with " classic DC [ elements ] : super @-@ speedy singing , a frantic beat and dramatic melody " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Lose My Breath " entered the top ten of the Billboard Hot 100 prior to its physical release debuting at number 30 for the week ending October 2 , 2004 . The next week it moved to number 12 due to being the fastest @-@ growing song on the radio . After its release as a single , " Lose My Breath " moved from number four to number three on November 6 which also became its peak position making it Destiny 's Child 's ninth top ten single . Staying at the third spot for four weeks , the single enjoyed a total of 23 weeks charting . Similarly , " Lose My Breath " performed well on other Billboard charts in the US ; it peaked at number one on the Hot Dance Club Songs chart for the week ending January 8 , 2005 and numbers three and ten on the Mainstream Top 40 and Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs respectively . On the latter chart , it became the band 's ninth top ten entry in their career by then . It was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on April 28 , 2005 for shipment of 500 @,@ 000 copies in the US . 
 " Lose My Breath " was also successful in different European charts . On the UK Singles Chart , the song debuted at number two on November 13 , 2004 , a spot which also became its peak position in that country . The single was held from the top by Eminem 's " Just Lose It " which sold 2 @,@ 000 more than " Lose My Breath " It remained at the second place for three consecutive weeks , within the top ten for seven consecutive weeks and spent a total of eleven weeks on the chart . As of September 2014 , " Lose My Breath " is the group 's third best @-@ selling single in that country with 340 @,@ 000 copies sold . The single topped the Ultratop chart in the Flanders region of Belgium and the singles charts in Ireland , Italy and Switzerland . It was certified Gold by the Belgian Entertainment Association ( BEA ) and the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry ( IFPI ) in Switzerland for sales of 25 @,@ 000 and 20 @,@ 000 copies in the countries respectively . " Lose My Breath " also entered the top ten in ten other countries across Europe . In Germany , it became the band 's best @-@ charting single , reaching number three on the singles chart . " Lose My Breath " further peaked at number one on the European Hot 100 Singles chart for the week ending December 4 , 2004 spending four consecutive weeks on top until the end of 2004 . 
 Across Oceania , the single had similar reception debuting at number five on the ARIA Charts in Australia on November 15 , 2004 . It peaked at number three , three weeks after its debut and stayed at that position for another week . " Lose My Breath " remained on the chart for a total of 17 weeks being seen for the last time at number 43 on March 6 , 2005 . The Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) awarded the single with a Platinum certification for shipment of 70 @,@ 000 copies in that region . On the New Zealand Singles Chart , the single debuted at number 16 on November 15 , 2004 . It spent seven weeks there peaking at number four in its fourth week of charting , on November 29 . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and synopsis = = = 
 The music video for " Lose My Breath " was directed by Marc Klasfeld and was shot in Los Angeles , California on October 8 , 2004 . Destiny 's Child had dance rehearsals for the video in late September and continued the following month . During the rehearsals , Beyoncé tore her right hamstring , while overdoing the choreography . Following the injury , she was advised by a specialist to avoid dancing and other physical activities for a week ; MTV News further reported that the injury could further postpone the filming of the video . However , the next week , the group revealed in an interview with the publication that the video would be filmed as originally planned as Beyoncé 's leg healed fast . She said , " My leg was actually a blessing in disguise because it gave us more time to prepare for the video " . Speaking about the concept of the video , Beyoncé revealed 
 It 's really a dance @-@ off between a more sophisticated ' in @-@ fashion ' Destiny 's Child versus a more ' street ' Destiny 's Child . And in the end a third Destiny 's Child even more fierce takes over . It 's a lot of hard work for us because we have to learn three routines for the same song . People will be shocked because it 's different for us . They 've never seen us really dance . 
 The video mainly takes place in an alleyway , where the members of Destiny 's Child are having a dance @-@ off . As the song opens , it begins with Beyoncé , Williams and Rowland walking , representing the " fierce Destiny 's Child " dressed in stilettos and fur . It transitions to the group being dressed in @-@ fashion with red burgundy suits as they meet their identical street @-@ styled , hip hop copies with hoodies and Timberland boots , starting to perform a dance @-@ off ; the camera focuses on each member of the group performing a separate choreography with their rival in front of them during their solo lines . As the song progresses , Beyoncé , Williams and Rowland are joined by other male and female dancers at the start of the song 's chorus . During her lines , Rowland performs a dance sequence with two male dancers . Following the song 's bridge , the two different groups head towards another place where they are welcomed by more dancers and their third " fierce " rivals appear for the final chorus . The video ends in the same way it opened , with the " fierce " group members walking . 
 = = = Release and reception = = = 
 The music video of " Lose My Breath " premiered on MTV 's Total Request Live ( TRL ) . It debuted on the video program on October 26 , 2004 at number eight remaining for 36 days . On <unk> 's Top 30 countdown , the video debuted on November 6 , 2004 at number 26 . It peaked at number seven on January 15 , 2005 , stayed there for another week , and charted for a total of twelve weeks . The music video was featured on the DualDisc editions of the albums # 1 's and Destiny Fulfilled as well as on the bonus DVD of the Destiny Fulfilled Tour edition . It was also included on the Destiny 's Child Video Anthology , a video anthology album released in 2013 . 
 Erika Ramirez and Jason Lipshutz writing on behalf of Billboard magazine felt that Destiny 's Child " came back strong after a three @-@ year hiatus , showing off their dance skills in the video " for " Lose My Breath " . Jess Harvell of the website Pitchfork Media criticized the " weird mink stole " Beyoncé wore in the clip . A writer of People felt that the group borrowed from their old looks for their outfits in the video " glammed up in stilettos and fur " . Justin Myers from the Official Charts Company considered it to be a proof that the group was back in 2004 , and showed them being " totally kick @-@ ass – so pretty autobiographical " . The music video was nominated for the Best Dance Video category at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards , but lost to Missy Elliott 's " Lose Control " ( 2005 ) . In 2014 , The Guardian editor Michael Cragg ranked the video for " Lose My Breath " in his list of the ten best videos by Beyoncé . He remarked that the clip featured bigger budget than the group 's previous visual efforts and praised the concept , saying , " It 's a simple idea executed perfectly , especially when Beyoncé gives herself side @-@ eye , flicks her hair and then watches while one of the other Beyoncé 's dances like a creature possessed . " 
 = = Live performances = = 
 The first live performance of " Lose My Breath " was during the opening of the 2004 NFL season on September 9 for which Destiny 's Child was surrounded by smoke from fog machines . Chicago Tribune writer Chris Malcolm reported , " I think what I love most is the blank look on some of the hard @-@ core Boston football fans who showed up early to watch kickers practice and instead got a live version of ' Lose My Breath . ' " On October 25 , 2004 , the group performed " Lose My Breath " during the Radio Music Awards in Las Vegas , Nevada starting with an a cappella jazz harmony . Destiny 's Child appeared on The Oprah Winfrey Show in November 2004 where they closed their performance with a rendition of the song . On November 8 , 2004 , the trio appeared on Total Request Live ( TRL ) and performed the song along with " Say My Name " . They went to the German entertainment TV show Wetten , dass .. ? on November 13 , 2004 performing " Lose My Breath " . The group " Soldier " and " Lose My Breath " at the 2005 NBA All @-@ Star Game on February 20 , 2005 . They performed the song again at the 2005 ESPY Awards on July 13 with the ceremony being aired on ESPN four days later . Destiny 's Child performed " Lose My Breath " at the Fashion Rocks benefit concert at New York 's Radio City Music Hall in February 2006 which marked their last televised appearance as a group . 
 In 2005 , the song was part of the set list of the group 's tour Destiny Fulfilled ... and Lovin ' It where it was performed during the concert 's encore . The singers wore white T @-@ shirts and jeans and during the end of the performance went under cascading water on stage . While reviewing a show by the group in the UK , Adenike Adenitire writing for MTV News found the performance to be somehow casual : " It was like watching three young girls and their friends practicing their moves at a slumber party . It was a perfect note of DC harmony to end a night that celebrated both the group and the individuals within it . " Barbara Ellen from The Observer felt that the song worked as a " stupendous encore " . The song was included on the track listing of the group 's live album Destiny 's Child : Live in Atlanta ( 2006 ) chronicling a concert from the tour . Beyoncé performed " Lose My Breath " at the 2007 Houston Livestock Show and Rodeo on March 15 as part of a Destiny 's Child medley during the concert . 
 = = Cover versions and usage in media = = 
 Rihanna , Teairra Marí and Amerie performed " Lose My Breath " at the 2005 World Music Awards on August 31 as a tribute to Destiny 's Child . Starting with the Christmas Day 2004 Miami Heat @-@ Los Angeles Lakers telecast , the American Broadcasting Company ( ABC ) used the song as the music for their introductory montage for the 2004 NBA Playoffs . The song was used through the rest of the regular season , and through the first few weeks of the 2005 NBA Playoffs . During that time , it also served as part of many commercials until the playoffs . In February 2015 the song was performed by one of the Glee characters . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits are adapted from the liner notes of Destiny Fulfilled . 
 Lead vocals : Beyoncé Knowles , Kelly Rowland , Michelle Williams 
 Vocal production : Beyoncé Knowles , Kelly Rowland , Sean Garrett 
 Recorded by : Jeff Villanueva , Jim Caruna at Sony Music Studios , New York City 
 Audio mixing by : Tony Maserati 
 Master recording by : Tom Coyne 
 Introduction by : Michigan Marching Band Drumline 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = Craigmillar Castle = 
 Craigmillar Castle is a ruined medieval castle in Edinburgh , Scotland . It is situated 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) south @-@ east of the city centre , on a low hill to the south of the modern suburb of Craigmillar . The Preston family of Craigmillar , the local feudal barons , began building the castle in the late 14th century and building works continued through the 15th and 16th centuries . In 1660 the castle was sold to Sir John Gilmour , Lord President of the Court of Session , who made further alterations . The Gilmours left Craigmillar in the 18th century , and the castle fell into ruin . It is now in the care of Historic Environment Scotland . 
 Craigmillar Castle is best known for its association with Mary , Queen of Scots . Following an illness after the birth of her son , the future James VI , Mary arrived at Craigmillar on 20 November 1566 to convalesce . Before she left on 7 December 1566 , a pact known as the " Craigmillar Bond " was made , with or without her knowledge , to dispose of her husband Henry Stuart , Lord Darnley . 
 Craigmillar is one of the best @-@ preserved medieval castles in Scotland . The central tower house , or keep , is surrounded by a 15th @-@ century courtyard wall with " particularly fine " defensive features . Within this are additional ranges , and the whole is enclosed by an outer courtyard wall containing a chapel and a doocot . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 The lands of Craigmillar were granted to the monks of Dunfermline Abbey by King David I in the 12th century . The Preston family were first granted land in the area by King David II in 1342 and held 2 / 3 of the estate . In a further grant of 1374 , King Robert II gave the remaining lands of Craigmillar to Sir Simon de Preston , Sheriff of Midlothian . It was Simon 's son , Simon Preston , or his grandson , Sir George Preston , who began work on the tower house which now forms the core of the castle . This was in place by 1425 , when a charter was sealed at Craigmillar by Sir John Preston . The courtyard wall was probably added by Sir William Preston ( d . 1453 ) , who had travelled in France , and drew on continental inspiration for his new work . He also brought back the arm of Saint Giles , which he presented to the High Kirk of Edinburgh , where the Preston Aisle is named for him . In the late 1470s , John Stewart , Earl of Mar , brother of King James III was held prisoner at Craigmillar , accused of practising witchcraft against the King . He later died in suspicious circumstances . 
 = = = 16th century = = = 
 In 1511 Craigmillar was erected into a barony , and the outer courtyard was built around this time , possibly by another Simon Preston ( <unk> ) , Member of Parliament for Edinburgh in 1487 , who had succeeded in 1478 . In September 1517 , during an outbreak of plague in Edinburgh , the infant James V of Scotland moved to safety at Craigmillar . His French guardian De la <unk> had new locks made for his chamber and the two iron gates , and a stable was built for the king 's mule . The family chapel within the outer court was first recorded in 1523 . In 1544 , during the so @-@ called Rough Wooing of Henry VIII of England , the English attempted to impose , by military force , a marriage alliance between Edward , Prince of Wales , and the young Mary , Queen of Scots . Craigmillar Castle was burned by English troops under the Earl of Hertford . The baron , Sir Simon Preston ( <unk> ) had the castle repaired , with domestic ranges in the courtyard being remodelled . Sir Simon served as Lord Provost of Edinburgh for several years , and was a loyal supporter of Queen Mary , who appointed him to her Privy Council . 
 Queen Mary stayed at Craigmillar twice , in September 1563 and from 20 November to 7 December 1566 . She is traditionally said to have slept in the small former kitchen within the tower house , although it is more likely that she occupied larger accommodation in the relatively new east range . On her second stay , Mary was still in poor health following a serious illness in October . Several of her noblemen were with her , and suggested to her that her unpopular husband , Henry Stuart , Lord Darnley , could be removed , either by divorce or by other means . An agreement , the " Craigmillar Bond " , was signed by Mary 's Secretary of State William Maitland of Lethington , and several nobles including the earls of Bothwell , Argyll and Huntly . The bond does not survive , but set out the conspirator 's intent to remove Darnley . Although Mary made it clear that she was unhappy with Darnley , she was not part of the conspiracy , and was probably unaware of the plot to kill her husband . It was initially intended that Darnley would lodge at Craigmillar when he returned to Edinburgh , although he opted to stay at Kirk o ' Field in the town , where he was murdered on 10 February 1567 . In 1572 , after Queen Mary 's flight into England , the Regent Mar used Craigmillar as a base during his siege of Edinburgh Castle , which was being held by supporters of the exiled Queen . King James VI later visited Craigmillar himself , in 1589 , when he was the guest of Sir David Preston . 
 = = = The Gilmours = = = 
 On the death of Sir Robert Preston in 1639 , Craigmillar passed to a distant cousin , David Preston of Whitehill . His son sold the castle out of the family , and it was bought by Sir John Gilmour ( <unk> ) in 1660 , who purchased the neighbouring estate of The Inch at the same time . A Royalist , Gilmour was rewarded following the Restoration of King Charles II , becoming Lord President of the Court of Session in 1661 . He remodelled the west range to provide more modern accommodation in the 1660s , but in the early 18th century , the Gilmours left the castle for Inch House , just west of Craigmillar . It was claimed that two of the laird 's daughters continued to live in Craigmillar Castle after the rest of the family had left . Afterwards , Craigmillar Castle formed a romantic feature in the park of the Inch estate . It was ruined by 1775 , when the antiquarian and poet John Pinkerton wrote Craigmillar Castle : an Elegy . The castle became a popular tourist attraction from the late 18th century , and was drawn by numerous artists . A proposal to renovate the building for the use of Queen Victoria was put forward in 1842 , but came to nothing . Victoria herself visited the castle in 1886 , and much restoration work was undertaken by its then owner , Walter James Little Gilmour ( <unk> ) . 
 Craigmillar Castle has been in state care since 1946 , and is now maintained by Historic Environment Scotland . The castle is a category A listed building , the highest level of protection for a historic building in Scotland , and is also a Scheduled Ancient Monument . The grounds of the castle are included on the Inventory of Gardens and Designed Landscapes , the national register of historic gardens . 
 = = Description = = 
 At the core of Craigmillar Castle is the 14th @-@ century L @-@ plan tower house , built on a rocky outcrop . Wrapped around this is the 15th @-@ century courtyard wall , with ranges of buildings at the south @-@ east , east , and west . Beyond the wall is a lower outer wall , enclosing a broad outer courtyard . This contained gardens and a chapel . Further gardens lay to the south , where the outline of a fish pond can be seen . 
 = = = The tower house = = = 
 The four @-@ storey tower forms the keep of the castle , although it originally stood alone . It measures 15 @.@ 8 metres ( 52 ft ) by 11 @.@ 6 metres ( 38 ft ) , with a projecting wing , or jamb , of 8 @.@ 5 metres ( 28 ft ) by 3 @.@ 5 metres ( 11 ft ) , to the south . The walls are up to 3 @.@ 3 metres ( 11 ft ) thick , and the second and fourth storeys have vaulted ceilings . The tower is built on the edge of a rock outcrop , with the original entrance door protected by a natural cleft in the rock . This would have been spanned by a wooden bridge , until it was filled in when the curtain wall was built . Above the door are the arms of the Preston family . A stair leads up from the entrance to a guard room in the jamb , which would probably have had " murder holes " through which missiles could be dropped on any attackers who gained entry . At ground floor level are cellars , which formerly had a timber loft above . The dividing wall and doors at either end are later additions . 
 On the second floor is the hall , with a kitchen occupying the jamb , and later passages connecting to the east and west ranges . The hall has a large carved stone fireplace of around 1500 , and once had a timber ceiling , probably painted . The kitchen was replaced by a larger one in the 16th @-@ century east range , and converted into a bedroom . A smaller fireplace was inserted into the large kitchen hearth , and larger windows added . The next storey , accessed via a spiral stair , contained a windowless room in the vault above the hall ceiling . Above the kitchen is the lord 's bedroom , the only original private chamber in the building . The stairs continue to give access to parapet walks around the stone @-@ flagged roof . A further storey was added to the jamb in the sixteenth century , containing a single chamber . The exterior of the castle formerly had two timber balconies , or viewing platforms , one overlooking the gardens to the south , and one looking east across the Lothian countryside . 
 = = = The inner courtyard = = = 
 The mid @-@ 15th @-@ century curtain wall encloses a courtyard around 10 metres ( 33 ft ) across , and is up to 1 @.@ 8 metres ( 5 @.@ 9 ft ) thick . Externally , the curtain wall measures 40 metres ( 130 ft ) by 27 metres ( 89 ft ) . Round towers are located at each corner , with a postern , or side gate , located in the base of the south @-@ east tower . The towers have keyhole @-@ shaped gun holes , intended for decoration as well as defence . The round @-@ arched gate is in the north wall . Over it are the arms of the Preston family , with the royal arms of Scotland above . The walls are defended by machicolations , spaces through which missiles could be dropped on attackers , and battlement walks give access to the entire length of the wall . On the inside of the wall , traces of windows suggest that there was once a south range of buildings in the courtyard . There is no well in the courtyard , but a stone trough runs through the curtain wall , allowing water to be brought into the castle . 
 = = = = The east range = = = = 
 The east range occupies the south @-@ east and east sides of the inner courtyard . The original east range , contemporary with the courtyard wall , was rebuilt in the 16th century and linked to the tower house by a new , broad spiral stair . The building at the south @-@ east adjoins the tower house , and comprises two chambers on the first floor . Cellars below were occupied by a bakehouse and a possible prison . A corridor connects the tower to large , vaulted kitchens in the east range , also accessible via a straight stair from the courtyard . Another depiction of the Preston family arms , supported by monkeys , appears above the door to the east range . Below the kitchens are vaulted cellars , containing a blocked @-@ up postern gate through the courtyard wall . Above , a long gallery occupied the second floor , although only the lower walls of the gallery survive . 
 = = = = The west range = = = = 
 The west range was entirely rebuilt by the Gilmours , in the 1660s , to provide a spacious suite of modern accommodation , to suit Sir John 's position as a senior judge . The ground floor contained a large central drawing room dining room , with large windows , and a carved stone fireplace . This room would also have had plaster ceilings and other decorative features . To the north was a kitchen , and to the south a chamber , with a wine cellar below . The first floor had four bedrooms . Another new stair was built , connecting the west range with the tower house . The door to this tower has a classical pediment , above which is a 20th @-@ century plaque , erected by a descendant of the Gilmours , and bearing the arms of Sir John Gilmour and his wife . The west range is now roofless , the internal floor is also gone , and the large windows have been blocked up . 
 = = = The outer court and gardens = = = 
 The outer walls , dating from the early @-@ mid 16th century , are smaller and less formidable than the inner walls , but they enclose a much larger area . A round tower at the north @-@ east corner has gun holes and a doocot , or pigeon house , upstairs . The family chapel was built around 1520 , and dedicated to St Thomas Becket . It is now a roofless burial aisle , still used by the Gilmour family . Gardens occupied the east and west parts of the courtyard , with the western terrace overlooked by the large windows of the west range . The barn at the north @-@ west of the courtyard was converted into a Presbyterian church , for the village of Liberton , in 1687 . South of the castle were informal gardens and orchards , with the bases of 16th @-@ century viewing towers remaining at the corners of this drystone @-@ walled enclosure . The former fish pond , shaped like a letter P for Preston , is a nationally @-@ significant archaeological garden feature , due to its rarity . In the 1820s , a plan was drawn up to lay out picturesque landscape gardens between Inch House and the castle , which would have incorporated " Queen Mary 's Tree " , a Sycamore supposedly planted by Mary , Queen of Scots . Much of the woodland within the castle estate dates from the early to mid 19th century . 
 = Madonna Live : The Virgin Tour = 
 Madonna Live : The Virgin Tour is the second video album and the first live release by American singer @-@ songwriter Madonna . It was released by Warner Music Video and Sire Records on November 13 , 1985 and contains the concert footage from The Virgin Tour , filmed at Cobo Arena in Detroit , Michigan on May 25 , 1985 . Director Daniel Kleinman , who presided over the shooting of the tour on video , submitted the footage to Warner Bros. Records , who decided to release it as a video album . Madonna wanted to have a proper introduction added before the concert footage and asked director James Foley to shoot one , which portrayed her with her first image makeover , reciting lines related to how she became famous . 
 After its release , Madonna Live : The Virgin Tour received mixed reviews from critics , but went on to become a commercial success , topping the Music Video Sales chart of Billboard and becoming the top selling music video cassette of 1986 . The video was certified two @-@ times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of 100 @,@ 000 copies and in September 1986 , it received a " Video Software Dealers Award " for the Most Popular Music Video . The live performances of " Like a Virgin " and " Dress You Up " were released as music videos on MTV to promote the video album . Both videos were nominated for " Best Choreography " at the 1986 MTV Video Music Awards . 
 = = Background = = 
 Madonna 's first concert tour , The Virgin Tour , promoted her first two studio albums , Madonna and Like a Virgin . The tour was a commercial success , with Billboard Boxscore reporting a gross of US $ 3 @.@ 3 million . After the tour was over , Madonna started recording her third studio album , True Blue . Film director Daniel Kleinman , who presided over the shooting of the tour on video , submitted the footage to Warner Bros. Records , who decided to release it as a video album . Madonna Live : The Virgin Tour chronicled The Virgin Tour as shot at Cobo Arena in Detroit , Michigan on May 25 , 1985 . 
 Madonna , who was busy with True Blue and shooting for the comedy film Shanghai Surprise , was contacted by Kleinman to ask about her approval of the shot footage . She felt that the video " needed a proper introduction . I asked [ James ] Foley darling to shoot me saying something for adding it before the concert starts . " Foley , who directed the music video of her song " Live to Tell " , shot an introduction which was added at the beginning of the video . It portrayed Madonna in her first image makeover , with platinum blond curls , and conservative wardrobe . Madonna wanted to include a summation of her biography — which was used at the beginning of The Virgin Tour — to be added with the footage . Hence , with the footage , Madonna 's voice was heard , declaring , 
 " I went to New York . I had a dream . I wanted to be a big star , I didn 't know anybody , I wanted to dance , I wanted to sing , I wanted to do all those things , I wanted to make people happy , I wanted to be famous , I wanted everybody to love me . I wanted to be a star . I worked really hard , and my dream came true . " 
 This was followed by the concert , beginning with " Dress You Up " . The performances of " Angel " , " Borderline " and " Burning Up " were removed from the track list of the video , as Kleinman believed that Madonna 's performance was not her best in them . While shooting the tour on May 25 , during the performance of " Like a Virgin " , a fan suddenly came up on the stage and tried to get hold of Madonna , but was swiftly whisked away by security . Kleinman decided to keep the shot , as he felt that it illustrated the fanaticism which had grown around Madonna , and her popularity . The live performances of " Like a Virgin " and " Dress You Up " were released as music video on MTV to promote the video album . Both videos were nominated for " Best Choreography " at the 1986 MTV Video Music Awards . However , Madonna lost the award to Prince and The Revolution with their video " Raspberry Beret . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 The video received mixed reviews from critics . Annie Temple from Philadelphia Daily News said that the release was " not so flattering " and " was a sloppy job " . Dennis Hunt from Los Angeles Times said that " the video is sometimes distracting and blurry , wonder what went wrong during recording . The angles are awkward , especially when the audience members are shown touching Madonna 's hand . Was it really necessary to show a fan coming unannounced on the stage ? " Terry Atkinson from the same paper said , " This follows the typical concert video format of putting you in the best seat in the hall and letting the aura of a superior performer <unk> your senses . " Sylvia Chase from The Wichita Eagle said that " seeing Madonna live in an arena and seeing her up , close and personal in the tour cassette is totally different . The energy , the movements , the provocation — all captures you more . " Stephen Holden from The New York Times gave it a positive review , stating " filmed with abrupt , swooping camera movements that accentuate the singer 's flouncing , slightly ungainly style of dancing , Madonna Live vividly captures the contradictory elements that have made the performer into a cultural icon in spite of a shrill , limited singing voice . In close @-@ up , Madonna 's provocative pouts , wiggles and come @-@ hither glances become a more than half @-@ deliberate burlesque of erotic centerfold photography . Both her post @-@ disco music and defiant strut suggest a child 's parody of grown @-@ up posturing . " 
 = = = Commercial performance = = = 
 The release debuted at 14 on Billboard 's Top Music Videocassettes chart , on December 7 , 1985 and reached a peak of 11 , the next week . The video started a slow climb on the chart , and on the issue dated January 18 , 1986 , it reached the top of the chart , replacing Prince & The Revolution : Live by The Revolution . On May 24 , 1986 , the video again climbed back in the top ten of the chart , at position two . It was present on the chart for a total of 65 weeks . Madonna Live : The Virgin Tour was the top selling music videocassette for 1986 . The video was certified two times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of 200 @,@ 000 copies and received a " Video Software Dealers Award " for the Most Popular Music Video , in September 1986 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = = Formats = = = 
 It was released on VHS and later on Laserdisc , to this date no DVD release has been announced . It was also released as part of a three VHS box set The Madonna Collection in 2000 . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Daniel Kleinman – director 
 James Foley – director ( opening sequence ) 
 Simon Fields – producer 
 Jerry Watson – cinematography 
 Jan de Bont – cinematography ( opening sequence ) 
 Mitchell <unk> – editor 
 Kenneth C. Barrows – camera operator 
 Brad Jeffries – choreographer 
 Rick Uber – online editor 
 Limelight Productions – production company 
 Credits adapted from the video 's liner notes . 
 = New York State Route 317 = 
 New York State Route 317 ( NY 317 ) is a 3 @.@ 12 @-@ mile ( 5 @.@ 02 km ) long state highway within the town of Elbridge in Onondaga County , New York , in the United States . It begins at an intersection with NY 5 in the village of Elbridge and ends at a junction with NY 31 in the village of Jordan . The highway is known locally as Jordan Road and Main Street . 
 The route was once part of the Jordan and Skaneateles Plank Road , a plank road established by a New York State Legislature charter in the 1850s . It spanned a short distance from Jordan to the village of Skaneateles and was a successor to the Auburn and Syracuse Railroad , which ceased operations in 1834 . However , the plank road lasted less than two decades . In 1866 , the Legislature granted another charter , this time creating the Skaneateles Railroad and its corporation , which bought out most of the plank road company . 
 The alignment of Route 317 south of Jordan was originally County Route 105 ( CR 105 ) , a highway maintained by Onondaga County . The highway paralleled Valley Drive , which was designated as New York State Route 31C in the 1930s and located on the opposite ( western ) side of Skaneateles Creek . In 2002 , heavy flooding of the creek washed out a portion of Valley Drive . A bill to transfer maintenance of most of Valley Drive from the state of New York to local governments in exchange for maintenance of CR 105 was subsequently passed by the New York State Legislature and took effect April 1 , 2003 , at which time the NY 31C designation was removed . The former CR 105 and the portion of former NY 31C in Jordan were designated as NY 317 at the same time . 
 = = Route description = = 
 NY 317 begins at an intersection with NY 5 ( Main Street ) and South Street ( CR 122 ) in the Onondaga County village of Elbridge . The route heads northward from the central intersection , passing a small commercial lot to the west and several residential homes to the north and west . Just to the west of the highway is Valley Drive , formerly NY 31C , which parallels NY 317 for its entire length . Separating NY 317 and Valley Drive is Skaneateles Creek , which runs between the two highways . 
 After a short distance in the village , NY 317 , known as Jordan Road , continues northwest into the surrounding town of Elbridge , where roadside development ends and the highway passes through predominantly open fields . It loosely parallels Skaneateles Creek , turning slightly northward and northwestward to match curves in the waterway . It is during the latter northwest – southeast stretch that Valley Drive ends at a cul @-@ de @-@ sac amongst the woods that line the creek . 
 A short distance to the northwest , Valley Drive resumes near Crego Road . On NY 317 , the highway passes Maple Grove Cemetery , a small graveyard located in Elbridge . After this comes the intersection with Crego Road , one of two connectors between Valley Road and NY 317 . NY 317 then intersects with Whiting Road ( CR 183 ) , which heads to the east , before entering the village of Jordan . 
 In Jordan , NY 317 becomes Elbridge Street and turns west to intersect the northern terminus of Valley Drive . The highway proceeds through the southern portion of the village and crosses Skaneateles Creek to reach a junction with South Main Street . NY 317 turns north onto Main Street and has intersections with Mechanic Street ( CR 60 ) and North Hamilton Street ( designated as CR 271 south of Jordan ) before it terminates at a junction with NY 31 north of the village center but within the village limits . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Jordan and Skaneateles Plank Road = = = 
 The modern routing of NY 317 was originally the northern part of the Jordan and Skaneateles Plank Road . Chartered in 1855 , the Jordan and Skaneateles Plank Road Company was set to provide a plank road from Jordan southward to Skaneateles . This plank road was constructed in the 1850s in place of the Syracuse and Auburn Railroad and a small railroad from Skaneateles to Skaneateles Junction , two crude railroads that were in the area which had ended service in 1836 and 1850 respectively . On March 25 , 1853 , the New York State Assembly proposed an additional toll gate to be constructed in Elbridge along the plank road . On June 15 , 1853 , the bill was passed by the Legislature and went into effect . 
 Although the plank road company lasted less than two decades , it had its share of controversy . In the January 1853 case of Wilson v. Rochester and Syracuse Railroad Company , Wilson , the plaintiff , was traveling southbound along the plank road through Elbridge . At a grade crossing with railroad tracks , Wilson fell off his horses and wagon upon hitting the tracks . He then fell onto the tracks below and was permanently injured as a result . In 1861 , during Jordan & Skaneateles Plank Road Company vs. Morley , the company sued Morley for evading the toll in Elbridge . Morley countered that the road was in disrepair . However , on the plaintiff 's side , the toll collector was aware that Morley had passed through the toll gate but took no action to enforce the toll . If Morley had paid , he would have been liable for $ 62 @.@ 50 ( equivalent to $ 1646 in 2016 ) . 
 On April 17 , 1866 , the plank road company was bought out by the Skaneateles Railroad Company . The state chartered the bill , the railroad was constructed and tolls were to be collected by the railroad company rather than the plank road company . 
 = = = Designation = = = 
 In 1908 , Valley Drive , a narrow , winding road along the western bank of Skaneateles Creek in the town of Elbridge , was included in Route 20 , an unsigned legislative route extending from Rochester in the west to Elbridge in the east . The highway was gradually taken over by the state of New York , beginning with the segment between the Elbridge and Jordan village lines . This section of Valley Drive was legislatively designated as part of State Highway 487 ( SH 487 ) and added to the state highway system on November 2 , 1908 . The portion within Elbridge was included in the state highway system on December 7 , 1911 , as part of SH 5080 . The Jordan segment was added to the state highway system as part of SH <unk> sometime after 1920 . 
 Valley Drive received its first posted designation in the mid @-@ 1920s when it was designated as NY 31A , a spur route of NY 31 that linked NY 31 in Jordan to NY 5 in Elbridge . The designation was short @-@ lived , however , as the route became the northernmost portion of NY 41 in the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . NY 41 was truncated to its present northern terminus in Skaneateles c . 1933 . Its former routing between Elbridge and Jordan was redesignated as NY 31C . 
 NY 31C remained unchanged until 2002 when part of Valley Drive was washed out by flooding from the nearby creek . A bill ( <unk> , 2002 ) was introduced in the New York State Senate on March 18 , 2002 , that would transfer ownership and maintenance of CR 105 , an alternate route between Jordan and Elbridge on the eastern bank of Skaneateles Creek , from Onondaga County to the New York State Department of Transportation and give Valley Drive to the town of Elbridge and the villages of Jordan and Elbridge . <unk> was passed by the State Senate on April 29 and by the Assembly on June 20 . It was signed into law by Governor George Pataki on August 6 , 2002 , and took effect April 1 , 2003 . 
 On April 1 , 2003 , NY 31C was effectively renumbered to NY 317 and rerouted south of the intersection of Valley Drive and Elbridge Street in Jordan to follow the former CR 105 to Elbridge . The washed @-@ out section of Valley Drive was never repaired , leaving Valley Drive as two separate dead end streets . The New York State Department of Transportation has made plans to remove the bridge carrying Valley Drive ( former NY 31C ) over Skaneateles Creek in the town of Elbridge . Demolition of the structure is scheduled to begin in mid @-@ 2014 and cost $ 300 @,@ 000 . Once removed , the bridge , built in 1921 , will not be replaced . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Onondaga County . 
 = Lysergic Acid Diethylamide ( Fringe ) = 
 " Lysergic Acid Diethylamide " is the 19th episode of the third season of the American science fiction drama television series Fringe , and the 62nd episode overall . The narrative followed the Fringe team 's attempts to extract William Bell from Olivia 's brain by entering her mind with the help of LSD . 
 The episode 's teleplay was co @-@ written by J.H. Wyman and Jeff Pinkner , while Wyman and Pinkner co @-@ wrote the story with Akiva Goldsman . Joe Chappelle served as director . It marked the return of previous guest actor Leonard Nimoy , who had announced his retirement the previous year . Production of the animated portions was completed by Zoic Studios in an eight @-@ week effort , the longest amount of man hours placed into a Fringe episode . 
 The episode first aired on April 15 , 2011 in the United States on the Fox network . An estimated 3 @.@ 6 million viewers tuned in , helping the episode earn a 1 @.@ 4 ratings share for those 18 – 49 , tying a series low . Critical reception was generally positive , as multiple reviewers praised the creativity of the writers . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The mind of William Bell ( Leonard Nimoy ) still possesses Olivia 's ( Anna Torv ) body after several failed attempts to extract it to recently deceased corpses . Walter ( John Noble ) and William believe that they have less than a day before Olivia 's mind will be lost . They realize that Olivia is unaware that she has been possessed by William 's mind , and instead has likely locked her ego away , making it difficult to contact her by normal means . Walter comes up with a plan : he and Peter ( Joshua Jackson ) will enter Olivia 's mind with the aid of LSD to locate her ego and help it to regain dominance in her mind , while Walter hopes to download William 's mind into a computer . 
 Inside Olivia 's mind , Walter and Peter find they stand out as invaders , and the people that populate her mind , including a vision of her step @-@ father ( Chris Bradford ) , seek to stop them . Walter sees someone sending a Morse code signal from William Bell 's office in one of the World Trade Center buildings . After evading a crowd and a trap set by a false vision of Nina Sharp ( Blair Brown ) , they arrive at Bell 's office , where they find William waiting for them as an animated cartoon . 
 The three are unable to find clues to Olivia 's ego , something that William thought would be present if Olivia was looking to be found . Peter realizes that when Olivia is scared , she retreats to somewhere safe , and suggests they search her mind 's version of Jacksonville , her childhood home . As they travel by zeppelin , William tries to encourage Walter that he no longer needs Bell 's guidance . They are soon attacked by a man ( Ulrich Thomsen ) wearing an X @-@ marked t @-@ shirt , who tears open the side of the zeppelin ; Walter is pulled out by the rush of air and falls to his death — waking him back in the real world . 
 William and Peter safely land in Jacksonville , and Peter directs them to find the home among the military housing where Olivia stayed at as a child , marked by a red @-@ painted door by her birth @-@ father . Once there , Peter finds the adult Olivia waiting for him , but realizes by her eyes that this is not her . A younger Olivia reveals herself as Olivia 's true ego ; assured of Peter 's identity , she willingly goes with him and Bell . However , they are attacked by the image of her step @-@ father and several military personnel . Peter sacrifices himself to protect her , waking back up in the real world . Olivia is able to stand up against her past fears and stops their advance . William explains that she will be able to return to possession of her body as Walter , in the real world , attempts to extract William 's mind . 
 Olivia wakes back up to the real world , free of William 's mind . Walter find that his effort to store William 's mind has failed , and takes time to consider William 's last message he gave to Olivia : " I knew the dog wouldn 't hunt " . Later , Peter visits Olivia to rekindle their relationship when he notices a drawing of the same man in the X t @-@ shirt he saw in her mind . Olivia cannot name the man , but nonchalantly refers to him as the person who is going to kill her . 
 = = Production = = 
 The episode 's teleplay was co @-@ written by co @-@ showrunners Jeff Pinkner and J.H. Wyman , while Pinkner , Wyman , and consulting producer Akiva Goldsman co @-@ wrote the story . Executive producer Joe Chappelle served as director . 
 " Lysergic Acid Diethylamide " features the return of guest actor Leonard Nimoy to television , as he had previously announced his intention to retire from acting . Nimoy stated that when the writers approached him about the role , he jokingly commented on having experience playing characters returning from the dead — referring to the death of Spock in the Star Trek movies — but expressed interest because of his appreciation of the show and its writing in general . Nimoy has stated that if the writers wanted to use him in future episodes , he would be happy to continue to help . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The cast found out a couple of weeks before filming the episode that parts would be in animation . The animated portions were produced with Zoic Studios . Over an eight @-@ week period , the studio defined the primary Fringe characters into their animated counterparts , and used footage of the actors and fight scene choreography to provide motion for the characters . The animators used a stand @-@ in for Nimoy so that he did not have to fly to Vancouver from Los Angeles . The studio aimed to achieve a mixed look between stylized and authenticity to allow them to focus on animating the characters ' emotions . The work also include recreating some of the settings already established from Fringe , such as Bell 's office . Other parts of Olivia 's dreamscape were handpainted scenes , projected onto 3D plates and used within the animation software . Andrew Orloff , Zoic 's creative director commented , " This project was one of the most intensive and rewarding we have worked on in Zoic ’ s history . It was an incredible undertaking , from the amazing writers at Fringe to the animation production that is both steeped in tradition and groundbreaking . " The episode ultimately contained sixteen minutes of animation ; executive producer Jeff Pinkner noted that the amount of man hours placed into the episode was " by far " the longest the series has had to date . The writers have cited Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band and Waltz with Bashir as influences for the episode . 
 John Noble talked about the episode in an interview with A.V. Club , " This is part of the risk @-@ taking that our creators will go for . It hadn ’ t been done before . We wanted to find a solution to a plot problem . And we still had Leonard Nimoy ’ s presence there , even though he [ William Bell ] was dead . So they came up with the bizarre idea of putting his presence into Anna Torv , which is outrageous . Outrageous , and yet we did it , and had a lot of fun doing it . Then we had to get him out of it . Because Leonard ’ s officially retired , so we did the animation to use his voice . " 
 " Lysergic Acid Diethylamide " concluded Anna Torv 's " Bellivia " arc . Pinkner defended the storyline against some critical fans , " We understand that some people were frustrated , just like some people were frustrated with the idea of Bolivia having a baby . But there are things that we feel are entertaining to us , and that allow us to explore themes that ... we can ’ t otherwise access . And we think that if it ’ s entertaining , and it allows Anna a chance to stretch , and it gives Walter Bishop his old partner back for an episode so we can see what they were like together ... those are also perfectly valid reasons for doing those episodes . " Wyman added , " Yeah , it was important . I mean , you know , for people that say it was just a diversion , well , there was something really important involved in that Walter / William relationship . That was part of Walter ’ s self @-@ actualization , that moment when William Bell says , ' Look , you have to be on your own . You have to walk the path that you believe in . You gain some humility where there once was hubris , and it ’ s really important that you depend on yourself . ' Part of our plan has always been to get Walter to embrace his flaws and uniqueness as strengths , rather than thinking of them inhibiting his performance as a scientist and as a character . We were really anxious to get that across , and the best person to do that for us was William Bell , because Walter depended so much on William in so many different ways . So that story came around at a time where we really needed to have it . " Because the season finale did not resolve the plotline of Olivia and the man from the blimp , Pinkner commented in a post @-@ finale interview that " It ’ s definitely still in play . Without being too <unk> , there are things you think you have time to explore in any given season , but don ’ t . But yes , we are very interested in that moment and the implications of that . " 
 The live action parts of " Lysergic Acid Diethylamide " were shot along west Hastings Street in Vancouver during the latter part of February 2011 . 
 = = = Marketing = = = 
 A fourth season of Fringe was announced on March 25 , 2011 . To celebrate this , Fox began a promotion the day " Lysergic Acid Diethylamide " aired , lasting four weeks until the season finale . Fans of the series were given the opportunity to win unique replicas of certain Fringe props at Fox 's website or at the Facebook account for Fringe . 
 As with other Fringe episodes , Fox released a science lesson plan in collaboration with Science Olympiad for grade school children , focusing on the science seen in " Lysergic Acid Diethylamide " , with the intention of having " students learn about wind power and turbine design . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Astrid downloads the 1972 version of the PBS children 's show <unk> for Walter on his tablet . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Lysergic Acid Diethylamide " was watched by 3 @.@ 6 million viewers on initial broadcast , with a 1 @.@ 4 rating in the target 18 – 49 age demographic , tying its previous season low . The episode lost 100 @,@ 000 viewers between the first half and the second . SFScope Fringe reviewer Sarah Stegall noted that the episode 's ratings were not surprising , considering the series had just returned from a three @-@ week break . Time shifted viewing led to an increase of 69 percent in the all @-@ important 18 @-@ 49 demographic , a 2 @.@ 2 rating share . This was the largest percent increase of the week . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Writing for the Los Angeles Times , Andrew Hanson questioned whether the writers had been using drugs lately because of the surge of drug @-@ related episodes ; though he loved it , he acknowledged that the episode was one " you are either going to love or hate " , explaining that it " got a little crazy using Olivia ’ s mind as a setting , [ but ] it stays grounded through the emotional current running underneath ... you have to give Fringe credit for taking a risky , bold move . " SFScope writer Sarah Stegall called the episode " brilliant , risky , fascinating , and dangerous . It 's not a tack this show can afford to take very often , but I like it when it does . " 
 A.V. Club 's Noel Murray graded the episode with an A- , admitting that despite its faults , he " enjoyed the hell out of " it . He loved it for several reasons : he is a big fan of Anna Torv 's Bellivia performance and its plotline , the drugs incorporated into the plot , its Inception @-@ like qualities , the animation , and Bell 's final goodbye . IGN Fringe reviewer Ramsey Isler rated the episode 8 @.@ 0 / 10 , calling it " one of the most memorable Fringe episodes to date . " Like Murray , Isler also noted the similarities to Inception as well as to the 1968 film Yellow Submarine and the 1977 science fiction novel A Scanner Darkly . Isler did however remark that " Lysergic Acid Diethylamide " " end [ ed ] a string of episodes that didn 't really have much point " , though it was a " beautiful episode that doesn 't really do much for the mythology of the series ... it sure was a blast to watch . " 
 TV Guide ranked " Lysergic Acid Diethylamide " the 24th best television episode of the year , while The A.V. Club staff highlighted the episode in their review of the best television shows of 2011 . Jeff Jensen of Entertainment Weekly named " Lysergic Acid Diethylamide " the fourteenth best episode of the series , explaining " Another nutty number 19 , another loony LSD trip , another chance for Fringe to get innovative : With William Bell occupying Olivia 's body and Olivia 's mind hidden away within her dense and tumultuous subconscious , Walter and Peter dropped acid and download into Olivia 's brain to rescue her . Among many memorable bits : The lengthy animated sequence ( Belly , why are you a cartoon ? ) , buttoned @-@ up Broyles loopy reaction to LSD exposure , and the mysterious Max X ( now believed to be a riff on Bell ) , the Zeppelin saboteur whom Olivia predicted would one day kill her . " 
 = = = Awards and nominations = = = 
 " Lysergic Acid Diethylamide " was nominated for Best Episode at the 2011 Portal Awards , given annually by Airlock Alpha . It lost to the Game of Thrones episode " Winter Is Coming " . 
 = Baron Munchausen = 
 Baron Munchausen / <unk> / is a fictional German nobleman created by the German writer Rudolf Erich Raspe in his 1785 book Baron Munchausen 's Narrative of his Marvellous Travels and Campaigns in Russia . The character is loosely based on a real baron , Hieronymus Karl Friedrich , Freiherr von Münchhausen ( 1720 – 1797 , German pronunciation : [ <unk> ( h ) <unk> ] ) . 
 Born in Bodenwerder , Electorate of Brunswick @-@ <unk> , the real @-@ life Münchhausen fought for the Russian Empire in the Russo @-@ Turkish War . On retiring in 1760 , he became a minor celebrity within German aristocratic circles for telling outrageous tall tales based on his military career . After hearing some of Münchhausen 's stories , Raspe adapted them anonymously into literary form , first in German as ephemeral magazine pieces and then in English as the 1785 book , which was first published in Oxford by a bookseller named Smith . The book was soon translated into other European languages , including a German version expanded by the poet Gottfried August Bürger . The real @-@ life Münchhausen was deeply upset at the development of a fictional character bearing his name , and threatened legal proceedings against the book 's publisher . Perhaps fearing a libel suit , Raspe never acknowledged his authorship of the work , which was only established posthumously . 
 The fictional Baron 's exploits , narrated in the first @-@ person , focus on his impossible achievements as a sportsman , soldier , and traveller , for instance riding on a cannonball , fighting a forty @-@ foot crocodile , and travelling to the Moon . Intentionally comedic , the stories play on the absurdity and inconsistency of Munchausen 's claims , containing an undercurrent of social satire . The earliest illustrations of the character , perhaps created by Raspe himself , depict Munchausen as slim and youthful , although later illustrators have depicted him as an older man , and have added the sharply beaked nose and twirled moustache that have become part of the character 's definitive visual representation . Raspe 's book was a major international success , becoming the core text for numerous English , continental European , and American editions that were expanded and rewritten by other writers . The book in its various revised forms remained widely read throughout the nineteenth century , especially in editions for young readers . 
 Versions of the fictional Baron have appeared on stage , screen , radio , and television , as well as in other literary works . Though the Baron Munchausen stories are no longer well @-@ known in English @-@ speaking countries , they are still popular in continental Europe . The character has inspired numerous memorials and museums , and several medical conditions and other concepts are named after him , including Munchausen syndrome , the Münchhausen <unk> , and Munchausen numbers . 
 = = Historical figure = = 
 Hieronymus Karl Friedrich von Münchhausen was born on 11 May 1720 in Bodenwerder , Electorate of Brunswick @-@ Lüneburg . He was a younger son of the " Black Line " of <unk> @-@ Bodenwerder , an aristocratic family in the Duchy of Brunswick @-@ Lüneburg . His cousin , Gerlach Adolph von Münchhausen , was the founder of the University of Göttingen and later the Prime Minister of the Electorate of Hanover . Münchhausen started as a page to Anthony Ulrich II of Brunswick @-@ Wolfenbüttel , and followed his employer to the Russian Empire during the Austro @-@ Russian – Turkish War ( 1735 – 39 ) . In 1739 , he was appointed a cornet in the Russian cavalry regiment , the Brunswick @-@ Cuirassiers . On 27 November 1740 , he was promoted to lieutenant . He was stationed in Riga , but participated in two campaigns against the Turks in 1740 and 1741 . In 1744 he married <unk> von <unk> , and in 1750 he was promoted to Rittmeister ( cavalry captain ) . 
 In 1760 Münchhausen retired to live as a Freiherr at his estates in Bodenwerder , where he remained until his death in 1797 . It was there , especially at parties given for the area 's aristocrats , that he developed a reputation as an imaginative after @-@ dinner storyteller , creating witty and highly exaggerated accounts of his adventures in Russia . Over the ensuing thirty years , his storytelling abilities gained such renown that he frequently received visits from travelling nobles wanting to hear his stories . One guest described Münchhausen as telling his stories " cavalierly , indeed with military emphasis , yet without any concession to the whimsicality of the man of the world ; describing his adventures as one would incidents which were in the natural course of events " . Rather than being considered a liar , Münchhausen was seen as an honest man . As another contemporary put it , Münchhausen 's unbelievable narratives were designed not to deceive , but " to ridicule the disposition for the marvellous which he observed in some of his acquaintances " . 
 Münchhausen 's wife <unk> von <unk> died in 1790 . In January 1794 , Münchhausen married Bernardine von Brunn , fifty @-@ seven years his junior . Von Brunn reportedly took ill soon after the marriage and spent the summer of 1794 in the spa town of Bad Pyrmont , although contemporary gossip claimed that she spent her time dancing and flirting . Von Brunn gave birth to a daughter , Maria <unk> , on 16 February 1795 , nine months after her summer trip . Münchhausen filed an official complaint that the child was not his , and spent the last years of his life in divorce proceedings and alimony litigation . Münchhausen died childless on 22 February 1797 . 
 = = <unk> = = 
 The fictionalized character was created by a German writer , scientist , and con artist , Rudolf Erich Raspe . Raspe probably met Hieronymus von Münchhausen while studying at the University of Göttingen , and may even have been invited to dine with him at the mansion at Bodenwerder . Raspe 's later career mixed writing and scientific scholarship with theft and swindling ; when the German police issued advertisements for his arrest in 1775 , he fled continental Europe and settled in England . 
 In his native German language , Raspe wrote a collection of anecdotes inspired by Münchhausen 's tales , calling the collection " M @-@ h @-@ s @-@ <unk> Geschichten " ( " M @-@ h @-@ s @-@ n Stories " ) . It remains unclear how much of Raspe 's material comes directly from the Baron , but the majority of the stories are derived from older sources , including Heinrich Bebel 's <unk> ( 1508 ) and Samuel Gotthold Lange 's <unk> <unk> ( 1765 ) . " M @-@ h @-@ s @-@ <unk> Geschichten " appeared as a feature in the eighth issue of the Vade mecum für <unk> Leute ( Handbook for Fun @-@ loving People ) , a Berlin humor magazine , in 1781 . Raspe published a sequel , " Noch zwei M @-@ <unk> " ( " Two more M @-@ <unk> " ) , in the tenth issue of the same magazine in 1783 . The hero and narrator of these stories was identified only as " M @-@ h @-@ s @-@ n " , keeping Raspe 's inspiration partly obscured while still allowing knowledgeable German readers to make the connection to Münchhausen . Raspe 's name did not appear at all . 
 In 1785 , while supervising mines at Dolcoath in Cornwall , Raspe adapted the Vade mecum anecdotes into a short English @-@ language book , this time identifying the narrator of the book as " Baron Munchausen " . Other than the <unk> of Münchhausen to " Munchausen " , Raspe this time made no attempt to hide the identity of the man who had inspired him , though he still withheld his own name . 
 This English edition , the first version of the text in which Munchausen appeared as a fully developed literary character , had a circuitous publication history . It first appeared anonymously as Baron Munchausen 's Narrative of his Marvellous Travels and Campaigns in Russia , a 49 @-@ page book in <unk> size , published in Oxford by the bookseller Smith in late 1785 and sold for a shilling . A second edition released early the following year , retitled Singular Travels , Campaigns , Voyages , and Sporting Adventures of Baron <unk> , commonly pronounced Munchausen , added five more stories and four illustrations ; though the book was still anonymous , the new text was probably by Raspe , and the illustrations may have been his work as well . 
 By May 1786 , Raspe no longer had control over the book , which was taken over by a different publisher , G. Kearsley . Kearsley , intending the book for a higher @-@ class audience than the original editions had been , commissioned extensive additions and revisions from other hands , including new stories , twelve new engravings , and much rewriting of Raspe 's prose . This third edition was sold at two shillings , twice the price of the original , as Gulliver Revived , or the Singular Travels , Campaigns , Voyages , and Adventures of Baron <unk> , commonly pronounced Munchausen . 
 Kearsley 's version was a marked popular success . Over the next few years , the publishing house issued further editions in quick succession , adding still more non @-@ Raspe material along the way ; even the full @-@ length Sequel to the Adventures of Baron Munchausen , again not by Raspe and originally published in 1792 by a rival printer , was quickly subsumed into the body of stories . In the process of revision , Raspe 's prose style was heavily modified ; instead of his conversational language and sportsmanlike turns of phrase , Kearsley 's writers opted for a blander and more formal tone imitating Augustan prose . Most ensuing English @-@ language editions , including even the major editions produced by Thomas <unk> in 1895 and F. J. Harvey Darton in 1930 , reproduce one of the rewritten Kearsley versions rather than Raspe 's original text . 
 At least ten editions or translations of the book appeared before Raspe 's death in 1794 . Translations of the book into French , Spanish , and German were published in 1786 . The text reached the United States in 1805 , expanded to include American topical satire by an anonymous Federalist writer , probably Thomas Green Fessenden . 
 The first German translation , <unk> <unk> zu Wasser und Lande , was made by the German Romantic poet Gottfried August Bürger . Bürger 's text is a close translation of Smith 's second edition , but also includes an interpolated story , based on a German legend called " The Six Wonderful Servants " . Two new engravings were added to illustrate the interpolated material . The German version of the stories proved to be even more popular than the English one . A second German edition in 1788 included heavily altered material from an expanded Kearsley edition , and an original German sequel , <unk> zu den <unk> <unk> zu Wasser und Lande , was published in 1789 . After these publications , the English and Continental versions of the Raspe text continued to diverge , following increasingly different traditions of included material . 
 Raspe , probably for fear of a libel suit from the real @-@ life Baron von Münchhausen , never admitted his authorship of the book . It was often credited to Bürger , sometimes with an accompanying rumor that the real @-@ life Baron von Münchhausen had met Bürger in Pyrmont and dictated the entire work to him . Another rumor , which circulated widely soon after the German translation was published , claimed that it was a competitive collaboration by three University of Göttingen scholars — Bürger , Abraham Gotthelf <unk> , and Georg Christoph Lichtenberg — with each of the three trying to outdo one another by writing the most unbelievable tale . The scholar Johann Georg Meusel correctly credited Raspe for the core text , but mistakenly asserted that Raspe had written it in German and that an anonymous translator was responsible for the English version . Raspe 's authorship was finally proven in 1824 by Bürger 's biographer , Karl Reinhard . 
 In the first few years after publication , German readers widely assumed that the real @-@ life Baron von Münchhausen was responsible for the stories . According to witnesses , Münchhausen was deeply angry that the book had dragged his name into public consciousness and insulted his honor as a nobleman . Münchhausen became a recluse , refusing to host parties or tell any more stories , and he attempted without success to bring legal proceedings against Bürger and the publisher of the translation . 
 = = = Publication history = = = 
 The following tables summarize the early publication history of Raspe 's text , from 1785 to 1800 . Unless otherwise referenced , information in the tables comes from the Munchausen bibliography established by John Carswell . 
 = = Fictional character = = 
 The fictional Baron Munchausen is a braggart soldier , most strongly defined by his comically <unk> boasts about his own adventures ; all of the stories in Raspe 's book are told in first @-@ person narrative , with a prefatory note explaining that " the Baron is supposed to relate these extraordinary Adventures over his Bottle , when surrounded by his Friends " . The Baron 's stories imply him to be a superhuman figure who spends most of his time either getting out of absurd predicaments or indulging in equally absurd moments of gentle mischief . In some of his best @-@ known stories , the Baron rides a cannonball , travels to the Moon , is swallowed by a giant fish in the Mediterranean Sea , saves himself from drowning by pulling on his own hair , fights a forty @-@ foot crocodile , enlists a wolf to pull his sleigh , and uses laurel tree branches to fix his horse when the animal is accidentally cut in two . 
 In the stories he narrates , the Baron is shown as a calm , rational man , describing what he experiences with simple objectivity ; absurd happenings elicit , at most , mild surprise from him , and he shows serious doubt about any unlikely events he has not witnessed himself . The resulting narrative effect is an ironic tone , encouraging skepticism in the reader and marked by a running undercurrent of subtle social satire . In addition to his fearlessness when hunting and fighting , he is suggested to be a debonair , polite gentleman given to moments of gallantry , with a scholarly penchant for knowledge , a tendency to be pedantically accurate about details in his stories , and a deep appreciation for food and drink of all kinds . The Baron also provides a solid geographical and social context for his narratives , peppering them with topical allusions and satire about recent events ; indeed , many of the references in Raspe 's original text are to historical incidents in the real @-@ life Münchhausen 's military career . 
 Because the feats the Baron describes are overtly implausible , they are easily recognizable as fiction , with a strong implication that the Baron is a liar . Whether he expects his audience to believe him varies from version to version ; in Raspe 's original 1785 text , he simply narrates his stories without further comment , but in the later extended versions he is insistent that he is telling the truth . In any case , the Baron appears to believe every word of his own stories , no matter how internally inconsistent they become , and he usually appears <unk> indifferent to any disbelief he encounters in others . 
 Illustrators of the Baron stories have included Thomas Rowlandson , Alfred <unk> , George Cruikshank , Ernst Ludwig <unk> , Theodor <unk> , Adolf <unk> , Gustave Doré , William Strang , W. Heath Robinson , and Ronald Searle . The Finnish @-@ American cartoonist Klaus Nordling featured the Baron in a weekly Baron Munchausen comic strip from 1935 to 1937 , and in 1962 , Raspe 's text was adapted for Classics Illustrated # 146 ( British series ) , with both interior and cover art by the British cartoonist Denis Gifford . 
 In the first published illustrations , which may have been drawn by Raspe himself , the Baron appears slim and youthful . For the 1792 Sequel to the Adventures of Baron Munchausen , an anonymous artist drew the Baron as a dignified but tired old soldier whose face is marred by injuries from his adventures ; this illustration remained the standard portrait of the Baron for about seventy years , and its imagery was echoed in Cruikshank 's depictions of the character . Doré , illustrating a Théophile Gautier fils translation in 1862 , retained the sharply beaked nose and twirled moustache from the 1792 portrait , but gave the Baron a healthier and more affable appearance ; the Doré Baron became the definitive visual representation for the character . 
 The relationship between the real and fictional Barons is complex . On the one hand , the fictional Baron Munchausen can be easily distinguished from the historical figure Hieronymus von Münchhausen ; the character is so separate from his namesake that at least one critic , the writer W. L. George , concluded that the namesake 's identity was irrelevant to the general reader , and Richard Asher named Munchausen syndrome using the anglicized spelling so that the disorder would reference the character rather than the real person . On the other hand , Münchhausen remains strongly connected to the character he inspired , and is still nicknamed the <unk> ( " Baron of Lies " ) in German . As the Munchausen researcher Bernhard <unk> has said , " These two barons are the same and they are not the same . " 
 = = Critical and popular reception = = 
 Reviewing the first edition of Raspe 's book in December 1785 , a writer in The Critical Review commented appreciatively : 
 This is a satirical production calculated to throw ridicule on the bold assertions of some parliamentary <unk> . If rant may be best foiled at its own weapons , the author 's design is not ill @-@ founded ; for the marvellous has never been carried to a more whimsical and ludicrous extent . 
 A writer for The English Review around the same time was less approving : " We do not understand how a collection of lies can be called a satire on lying , any more than the adventures of a woman of pleasure can be called a satire on fornication . " 
 W. L. George described the fictional Baron as a " comic giant " of literature , describing his boasts as " splendid , purposeless lie [ s ] born of the joy of life " . Théophile Gautier fils highlighted that the Baron 's adventures are endowed with an " absurd logic pushed to the extreme and which backs away from nothing " . According to an interview , Jules Verne relished reading the Baron stories as a child , and used them as inspiration for his own adventure novels . Thomas <unk> commented that " Munchausen has undoubtedly achieved [ a permanent place in literature ] ... The Baron 's notoriety is universal , his character proverbial , and his name as familiar as that of Mr. Lemuel Gulliver , or Robinson Crusoe . " 
 Steven T. Byington wrote that " Munchausen 's modest seat in the Valhalla of classic literature is undisputed " , comparing the stories to American tall tales and concluding that the Baron is " the patriarch , the perfect model , the <unk> fragrant flower , of liberty from accuracy " . The folklore writer Alvin Schwartz cited the Baron stories as one of the most important influences on the American tall tale tradition . In a 2012 study of the Baron , the literary scholar Sarah Tindal Kareem noted that " Munchausen embodies , in his deadpan presentation of absurdities , the novelty of <unk> [ and ] the sophistication of aesthetic illusion " , adding that the additions to Raspe 's text made by Kearsley and others tend to mask these ironic literary qualities by emphasizing that the Baron is lying . 
 By the beginning of the nineteenth century , Kearsley 's phenomenally popular version of Raspe 's book had spread to abridged chapbook editions for young readers , who soon became the main audience for the stories . The book , especially in its adaptations for children , remained widely popular throughout the century . It was translated into nearly all languages spoken in Europe ; Robert Southey referred to it as " a book which everybody knows , because all boys read it " . Notable later translations include Gautier 's French rendering and <unk> <unk> 's popular Russian adaptation . By the 1850s , Munchausen had come into slang use as a verb meaning " to tell extravagantly untruthful pseudo @-@ autobiographical stories " . Robert Chambers , in an 1863 almanac , cited the iconic 1792 illustration of the Baron by asking rhetorically : 
 Who is there that has not , in his youth , enjoyed The Surprising Travels and Adventures of Baron Munchausen in Russia , the Caspian Sea , Iceland , Turkey , & c. a slim volume — all too short , indeed — illustrated by a formidable portrait of the baron in front , with his broad @-@ sword laid over his shoulder , and several deep gashes on his manly countenance ? I presume they must be few . 
 Though Raspe 's book is no longer widely read by English speakers , the Munchausen stories remain popular in Europe , especially in Germany and in Russia . 
 = = In culture = = 
 = = = Literature = = = 
 As well as the many augmented and adapted editions of Raspe 's text , the fictional Baron has occasionally appeared in other standalone works . In 1838 – 39 , Karl Leberecht Immermann published the long novel Münchhausen : Eine Geschichte in <unk> ( Münchhausen : A History of <unk> ) as an homage to the character , and Adolf <unk> 's <unk> <unk> , an elaborate expansion of the stories , appeared in 1846 . In his 1886 philosophical treatise Beyond Good and Evil , Friedrich Nietzsche uses one of the Baron 's adventures , the one in which he rescues himself from a swamp , as a metaphor for belief in complete metaphysical free will ; Nietzsche calls this belief an attempt " to pull oneself up into existence by the hair , out of the swamps of nothingness " . 
 In the late nineteenth century , the Baron appeared as a character in John Kendrick Bangs 's comic novels A House @-@ Boat on the Styx , Pursuit of the House @-@ Boat , and The Enchanted Type @-@ Writer . Shortly after , in 1901 , Bangs published Mr. Munchausen , a collection of new Munchausen stories , closely following the style and humor of the original tales . Hugo Gernsback 's second novel , Baron Münchhausen 's New Scientific Adventures , put the Baron character in a science fiction setting ; the novel was serialized in The Electrical Experimenter from May 1915 to February 1917 . 
 Pierre Henri <unk> 's character Baron de Crac , a French soldier and courtier under Louis XV , is an imitation of the Baron Munchausen stories . In 1998 , the British game designer James Wallis used the Baron character to create a multi @-@ player storytelling game , The Extraordinary Adventures of Baron Munchausen , in which players improvise Munchausen @-@ like first @-@ person stories while overcoming objections and other interruptions from opponents . 
 = = = Stage and audio = = = 
 On stage , Harlequin Munchausen , or the Fountain of Love , a pantomime based on the Raspe text , was produced in London in 1818 , and Herbert <unk> made the Baron the main character of a 1900 play , Münchhausen . The Expressionist writer Walter <unk> turned the stories into a comedy , Münchhausen , in 1934 . Grigori Gorin used the Baron as the hero of his 1976 play That Very Munchausen ; a film version was made in 1980 . Baron <unk> , a Czech musical about the Baron , opened in 2010 in Prague . The following year , the National Black Light Theatre of Prague toured the United Kingdom with a <unk> production of The Adventures of Baron Munchausen . 
 In 1932 , the comedy writer Billy Wells adapted Baron Munchausen for a radio comedy routine starring the comedians Jack Pearl and Cliff Hall . In the routine , Pearl 's Baron would relate his unbelievable experiences in a thick German accent to Hall 's " straight man " character , Charlie . When Charlie had had enough and expressed disbelief , the Baron would invariably retort : " Vass you <unk> , <unk> ? " The line became a popular and much @-@ quoted catchphrase , and by early 1933 The Jack Pearl Show was the second most popular series on American radio ( after Eddie Cantor 's program ) . Pearl attempted to adapt his portrayal to film in Meet the Baron in 1933 , playing a modern character mistaken for the Baron , but the film was not a success . Pearl 's popularity gradually declined between 1933 and 1937 , though he attempted to revive the Baron character several times before ending his last radio series in 1951 . 
 For a 1972 Caedmon Records recording of some of the stories , Peter Ustinov voiced the Baron . A review in The Reading Teacher noted that Ustinov 's portrayal highlighted " the braggadocio personality of the Baron " , with " self @-@ adulation ... plainly discernible in the <unk> innuendo " . 
 = = = Film = = = 
 The early French filmmaker Georges Méliès , who greatly admired the Baron Munchausen stories , filmed Baron Munchausen 's Dream in 1911 . Méliès 's short silent film , which has little in common with the Raspe text , follows a sleeping Baron through a surrealistic succession of intoxication @-@ induced dreams . Méliès may also have used the Baron 's journey to the moon as an inspiration for his well @-@ known 1902 film A Trip to the Moon . In the late 1930s , he planned to collaborate with the Dada artist Hans Richter on a new film version of the Baron stories , but the project was left unfinished at his death in 1938 . Richter attempted to complete it the following year , taking on Jacques <unk> , Jacques Brunius , and Maurice Henry as screenwriters , but the beginning of the Second World War put a permanent halt to the production . 
 The French animator Emile Cohl produced a version of the stories using silhouette cutout animation in 1913 ; other animated versions were produced by Richard <unk> in Germany in 1920 , and by Paul <unk> in the United States in 1929 . Colonel <unk> Liar , the protagonist of the first animated cartoon series in cinema history , was created by John Randolph Bray in 1913 as an amalgamation of the Baron and Teddy Roosevelt . The Italian director Paolo Azzurri filmed The Adventures of Baron Munchausen in 1914 , and the British director F. Martin Thornton made a short silent film featuring the Baron , The New Adventures of Baron Munchausen , the following year . In 1940 , the Czech director Martin <unk> filmed Baron <unk> , starring the comic actor <unk> Burian as a twentieth @-@ century descendant of the Baron . 
 For the German film studio Ufa 's twenty @-@ fifth anniversary in 1943 , Joseph Goebbels hired the filmmaker Josef von <unk> to direct Münchhausen , a big @-@ budget color film about the Baron . David Stewart Hull describes Hans Albers 's Baron as " jovial but somewhat sinister " , while Tobias Nagle writes that Albers imparts " a male and muscular zest for action and testosterone @-@ driven adventure " . A German musical comedy , Münchhausen in Afrika , made as a vehicle for the Austrian singing star Peter Alexander , appeared in 1957 . Karel Zeman 's 1961 Czech film The Fabulous Baron Munchausen commented on the Baron 's adventures from a contemporary perspective , highlighting the importance of the poetic imagination to scientific achievement ; Zeman 's stylized mise @-@ en @-@ scène , based on Doré 's illustrations for the book , combined animation with live @-@ action actors , including Miloš Kopecký as the Baron . 
 In the Soviet Union , Soyuzmultfilm released a 16 @-@ minute stop @-@ motion animation Adventures of Baron Munchausen in 1967 , directed by Anatoly <unk> . Another Soviet animated version was produced as a series of short films , Munchausen 's Adventures , in 1973 and 1974 . The French animator Jean Image filmed The Fabulous Adventures of the Legendary Baron Munchausen in 1979 , and followed it with a 1984 sequel , Moon Madness . Oleg <unk> appeared as the Baron in the 1980 Russian television film That Same Munchausen , directed by Mark Zakharov from Grigori Gorin 's play . The film , a commentary on Soviet censorship and social mores , imagines an ostracized Baron attempting to prove the truth of his adventures in a disbelieving and conformity @-@ driven world . 
 In 1988 , Terry Gilliam adapted the Raspe stories into a lavish Hollywood film , The Adventures of Baron Munchausen , with the Canadian stage actor John Neville in the lead . Roger Ebert , in his review of the film , described Neville 's Baron as a man who " seems sensible and matter @-@ of @-@ fact , as anyone would if they had spent a lifetime growing accustomed to the incredible " . The German actor Jan Josef <unk> starred in a 2012 two @-@ part television film titled Baron Münchhausen ; according to a Spiegel Online review , his characterization of the Baron strongly resembled Johnny Depp 's performance as Jack Sparrow in the Pirates of the Caribbean film series . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 = = = Memorials = = = 
 In 2004 , a fan club calling itself Munchausen 's Grandchildren ( <unk> <unk> ) was founded in the Russian city of Kaliningrad ( formerly Königsberg ) . The club 's early activities included identifying " historical proofs " of the fictional Baron 's travels through Königsberg , such as a <unk> supposedly belonging to the Baron and a sperm whale skeleton said to be that of the whale in whose belly the Baron was trapped . 
 On 18 June 2005 , to celebrate the 750th anniversary of Kaliningrad , a monument to the Baron was unveiled as a gift from Bodenwerder , portraying the Baron 's cannonball ride . Bodenwerder sports a Munchausen monument in front of its Town Hall , as well a Munchausen museum including a large collection of illustrated editions of the stories . Another Munchausen Museum ( <unk> <unk> ) exists in <unk> <unk> , Latvia , home of the real Baron 's first wife ; the couple had lived in the town for six years , before moving back to the baronial estate in Hanover . In 2005 , to mark the real @-@ life Baron 's 285th birthday , the National Bank of Latvia issued a commemorative silver coin . 
 = = = Nomenclature = = = 
 In 1951 , the British physician Richard Asher published an article in The Lancet describing patients whose <unk> disorders led them to lie about their own states of health . Asher proposed to call the disorder " Munchausen 's syndrome " , commenting : " Like the famous Baron von Munchausen , the persons affected have always travelled widely ; and their stories , like those attributed to him , are both dramatic and untruthful . Accordingly , the syndrome is respectfully dedicated to the baron , and named after him " . The disease is now usually referred to as Munchausen syndrome . The name has spawned two other coinages : Munchausen syndrome by proxy , in which illness is feigned by caretakers rather than patients , and Munchausen by internet , in which illness is feigned online . 
 In 1968 , Hans Albert coined the term " Münchhausen <unk> " to describe the philosophical problem inherent in having to derive conclusions from premises ; those premises have to be derived from still other premises , and so on forever , leading to an infinite regress <unk> only by circular logic or dogmatism . The problem is named after the similarly paradoxical story in which the Baron saves himself from being drowned in a swamp by pulling on his own hair . The same story also inspired the mathematical term " Munchausen number " , coined by Daan van Berkel in 2009 to describe numbers whose digits , when raised to their own powers , can be added together to form the number itself ( for example , <unk> = 33 + 44 + 33 + 55 ) . 
 Subclass <unk> of the Aarne – Thompson – Uther classification system , a standard index of folklore , was named " Münchhausen Tales " in tribute to the stories . In 1994 , a main belt asteroid was named <unk> Münchhausen in honor of both the real and the fictional Baron . 
 = 24th Infantry Division ( United States ) = 
 The 24th Infantry Division was an infantry division of the United States Army . It was inactivated in October 1996 , it was based at Fort Stewart , Georgia and later reactivated at Fort Riley , Kansas . Formed during World War II from the disbanding Hawaiian Division , the division saw action throughout the Pacific theater , first fighting in New Guinea before landing on the Philippine islands of Leyte and Luzon , driving Japanese forces from them . Following the end of the war , the division participated in occupation duties in Japan , and was the first division to respond at the outbreak of the Korean War . For the first 18 months of the war , the division was heavily engaged on the front lines with North Korean and Chinese forces , suffering over 10 @,@ 000 casualties . It was withdrawn from the front lines to the reserve force for the remainder of the war , but returned to Korea for patrol duty at the end of major combat operations . 
 After its deployment in the Korean War , the division was active in Europe and the United States during the Cold War , but saw relatively little combat until the Persian Gulf War , when it faced the Iraqi military . A few years after that conflict , it was inactivated as part of the post @-@ Cold War U.S. military drawdown of the 1990s . The division was reactivated in October 1999 as a formation for training and deploying U.S. Army National Guard units before its deactivation in October 2006 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Hawaiian Division = = = 
 The 24th Infantry Division traces its lineage to Army units activated in Hawaii . It was activated under the Square Division Table of Organization and Equipment ( TO & E ) on 1 March 1921 as the Hawaiian Division at Schofield Barracks , Oahu . The division insignia is based on the taro leaf , emblematic of Hawaii . The division was assigned the 21st Infantry Regiment and the 22nd Infantry Regiment , both of which had been assigned to the US 11th Infantry Division prior to 1921 . 
 The entire Hawaiian Division was concentrated at a single location during the next few years , allowing it to conduct more effective combined arms training . It was also manned at higher personnel levels than other divisions , and its field artillery was the first to be motorized . 
 Between August and September 1941 , the Hawaiian Division 's assets were reorganized to form two divisions under the new Triangular Division TO & E. Its brigade headquarters were disbanded and the 27th and 35th Infantry regiments were assigned to the new 25th Infantry Division . Hawaiian Division headquarters was redesignated as Headquarters , 24th Infantry Division on 1 October 1941 . The 24th Infantry Division also received the Hawaiian Division 's Shoulder Sleeve Insignia , which was approved in 1921 . 
 The division was centered around three infantry regiments : the 19th Infantry Regiment and the 21st Infantry Regiment from the Active duty force , and the 299th Infantry Regiment from the Hawaii National Guard . Also attached to the division were the 13th Field Artillery Battalion , the 52nd Field Artillery Battalion , the 63rd Field Artillery Battalion , the 11th Field Artillery Battalion , the 24th Signal Company , the 724th Ordnance Company , the 24th Quartermaster Company , the 24th Reconnaissance Troop , the 3rd Engineer Battalion , the 24th Medical Battalion , and the 24th Counter Intelligence Detachment . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 The 24th Infantry Division was among the first US Army divisions to see combat in World War II and among the last to stop fighting . The division was on Oahu , with its headquarters at Schofield Barracks , when the Japanese launched their Attack on Pearl Harbor on 7 December 1941 and the unit suffered some casualties during the attack . Among these casualties were Sgt. Paul J. <unk> ( killed in a truck 10 miles north of Schofield Barracks ) , Pvt. Walter R. French , Pfc. Conrad <unk> , Pvt. Torao <unk> ( killed by friendly fire in downtown Honolulu ) , and Cpt . Theodore J. Lewis ( who became the 24th Infantry Division 's first soldier killed during WWII ) . The division was then charged with the defense of northern Oahu , where it built an elaborate system of coastal defenses throughout 1942 . In July 1942 , the 299th Infantry Regiment was replaced by the 298th Infantry Regiment . One year later , this regiment was replaced by the 34th Infantry Regiment from the Hawaiian Department Reserve . The 34th Infantry remained with the 24th Infantry Division until the end of the war . As an active component unit , the 34th was easier to deploy than the reserve component units , which were less trained . 
 = = = = Hollandia = = = = 
 In May 1943 , the 24th Infantry Division was alerted for movement to Australia , and it completed the move to Camp Caves , near Rockhampton , on the eastern coast of Australia by 19 September 1943 . Once deployed , it began intensive combat training . After training , the division moved to Goodenough Island on 31 January 1944 , to prepare for Operation Reckless , the amphibious capture of Hollandia , Netherlands New Guinea ( now Jayapura , Papua province , Indonesia ) . 
 The 24th landed at Tanahmerah Bay on 22 April 1944 and seized the important Hollandia <unk> despite torrential rain and marshy terrain . Shortly after the Hollandia landing , the division 's 34th Infantry Regiment moved to Biak to reinforce the 41st Infantry Division . The regiment captured <unk> and <unk> airdromes before returning to the division on Hollandia in July . The 41st and 24th divisions isolated 40 @,@ 000 Japanese forces south of the landings . Despite resistance from the isolated Japanese forces in the area , the 24th Infantry Division advanced rapidly through the region . In two months , the 24th Division crossed the entirety of New Guinea . 
 = = = = Leyte = = = = 
 After occupation duty in the Hollandia area , the 24th Division was assigned to X Corps of the Sixth United States Army in preparation for the invasion of the Philippines . On 20 October 1944 , the division was paired with the 1st Cavalry Division within X Corps , and the two divisions made an assault landing at Leyte , initially encountering only light resistance . Following a defeat at sea on 26 October , the Japanese launched a large , uncoordinated counteroffensive against the Sixth Army . The 24th Division drove up the Leyte Valley , advanced to Jaro and captured Breakneck Ridge on 12 November 1944 , in heavy fighting . 
 While final clearing operations continued on Leyte , the 24th Division 's 19th Infantry Regiment moved to Mindoro Island as part of the Western Visayan Task Force and landed in the San Jose area on 15 December 1944 . There , it secured airfields and a patrol base for operations on Luzon . Elements of the 24th Infantry Division effected a landing on Marinduque Island . Other elements supported the 11th Airborne Division drive from Nasugbu to Manila . 
 = = = = Luzon = = = = 
 The 24th Division was among the 200 @,@ 000 men of the Sixth Army moved to recapture Luzon to helped the regular and constable troops of the Philippine Commonwealth Army and Philippine Constabulary from the Japanese 14th Area Army , which fought delaying actions on the island . The division 's 34th Infantry Regiment landed at San Antonio , Zambales on 29 January 1945 and ran into a furious battle on Zig Zag Pass , where it suffered heavy casualties . On 16 February 1945 the 3rd Battalion , 34th Infantry took part in the amphibious landing on Corregidor and fought the Japanese on the well @-@ defended island . The rest of the division landed at Sablayan , Mindoro on 19 February , cleared the remainder of the island and engaged in numerous mopping up actions during the following month . These operations were complete by 18 March , and the division moved south to attack through <unk> the division landed at Mindanao on 17 April 1945 and cut across the island to <unk> until 27 April , stormed into Davao on 3 May , and cleared Libby airdrome on 13 May . Although the campaign officially closed on 30 June , the division continued to clear up Japanese resistance during July and August 1945 . The 24th Infantry Division and the Philippine Commonwealth military patrolled the region until the official surrender of Japan ended the war . On 15 October 1945 the division left Mindanao for occupation duty on mainland Japan . 
 Four soldiers were awarded the Medal of Honor during their service with the 24th Infantry Division during World War II . They were James H. Diamond , Charles E. Mower , Harold H. Moon , Jr . , and Francis B. Wai . Members of the 24th Infantry Division also won 15 Distinguished Service Crosses , two Distinguished Service Medals , 625 Silver Star Medals , 38 Soldier 's Medals , 2 @,@ 197 Bronze Star Medals , and 50 Air Medals . The division itself was awarded eight Distinguished Unit Citations for participation in the campaign . 
 = = = = Occupation of Japan = = = = 
 After the end of the war , the division remained on mainland Japan . It occupied Kyūshū from 1945 until 1950 . During this time , the US Army shrank . At the end of World War II it contained 89 divisions , but by 1950 , the 24th Infantry Division was one of only 10 active divisions in the force . It was one of four understrength divisions on occupation duty in Japan . The others were the 1st Cavalry Division , 7th Infantry Division , and 25th Infantry Division , all under control of the Eighth United States Army . The 24th Division retained the 19th , 21st , and 34th regiments , but the formations were undermanned and ill @-@ equipped due to the post @-@ war drawdown and reduction in military spending . 
 = = = Korean War = = = 
 On 25 June 1950 , 10 divisions of the North Korean People 's Army launched an attack into the Republic of Korea in the south . The North Koreans overwhelmed the South Korean Army and advanced south , preparing to conquer the entire nation . The UN ordered an intervention to prevent the conquest of South Korea . U.S. President Harry S. Truman ordered ground forces into South Korea . The 24th Infantry Division was closest to Korea , and it was the first US division to respond . The 24th Division 's first mission was to " take the initial shock " of the North Korean assault , then try to slow its advance until more US divisions could arrive . 
 = = = = Task Force Smith = = = = 
 Five days later , on 30 June , a 406 @-@ man infantry force from 1st Battalion , 21st Infantry Regiment , supported by a 134 @-@ man artillery battery ( also from the 24th Infantry Division ) was sent into South Korea . The force , nicknamed Task Force Smith for its commander , Lieutenant Colonel Charles Smith , was lightly armed and ordered to delay the advance of North Korean forces while the rest of the 24th Infantry Division moved into South Korea . On 4 July , the task force set up in the hills north of Osan and prepared to block advancing North Korean forces . The next day , they spotted an incoming column of troops from the North Korean 105th Armored Division . The ensuing battle was a rout , as the Task Force 's obsolescent anti @-@ tank weapons and understrength units were no match for the North Koreans ' T @-@ 34 Tanks and full @-@ strength formations . Within a few hours , the first battle between American and North Korean forces was lost . Task Force Smith suffered 20 killed and 130 wounded in action . Dozens of US soldiers were captured , and when US forces retook the area , some of the prisoners were discovered to have been executed . According to recently declassified documents the troops were captured and taken to Pyongyang where they are thought to have been murdered about three months later . 
 Approximately 30 percent of task Force Smith became casualties in the Battle of Osan . The task force delayed the North Korean forces ' advance for only seven hours . 
 = = = = Pusan Perimeter = = = = 
 The rest of the 24th Infantry Division arrived in South Korea , through the port of Pusan , followed by elements of the 1st Cavalry Division and 25th Infantry Division from the Eighth Army . As more soldiers arrived , the 24th Infantry Division was placed under the command of I Corps , Eighth Army . For the first month after the defeat of Task Force Smith , 24th Infantry Division soldiers were repeatedly defeated and pushed south by the North Korean force 's superior numbers and equipment . 24th Infantry Division soldiers were pushed south at and around Chochiwon , Chonan , Pyongtaek , Hadong , and Yechon . The division 's 19th and 34th regiments engaged the North Korean 3rd Infantry Division and the North Korean 4th Infantry Division at the Kum River between 13 and 16 July and suffered 650 casualties of the 3 @,@ 401 men committed there . The next day , the North Korean divisions attacked the 24th Infantry Division 's headquarters in Taejon and overran it in the Battle of Taejon . In the ensuing battle , 922 men of the 24th Infantry Division were killed and 228 were wounded of 3 @,@ 933 committed there . Many soldiers were missing in action , including the division commander , Major General William F. Dean , who was captured and later won the Medal of Honor . On 1 August , the 24th Division 's 19th Infantry Regiment engaged North Korean forces and was again forced back , losing 90 killed . North Korean officers at the battle claimed that some US soldiers were " too frightened to fight . " However , the 24th Infantry Division managed to delay the advancing North Koreans for two days , long enough for significant numbers of UN forces to arrive in Pusan and begin establishing defenses further south . By the time the 24th Infantry Division retreated and reformed , the 1st Cavalry Division was in place behind it . The division suffered over 3 @,@ 600 casualties in the 17 days it fought alone against the 3rd and 4th North Korean divisions . 
 By 4 August , a perimeter was established around Pusan on the hills to the north of the city and the Naktong River to the west . The Eighth Army , including the 24th Infantry Division , was cornered by the surrounding North Korean army . With UN forces concentrated and North Korean supply lines stretched out , the 24th Infantry Division halted the advance of the North Koreans . The 24th Division was at Naktong , with the 25th Infantry Division to the south , and the 1st Cavalry Division and South Korean forces to the north . The 24th Division was also reinforced by the 2nd Infantry Division , newly arrived in the theater . The 24th was quickly sent to block the North Korean 6th Infantry Division , which attempted to attack the UN forces from the southwest . On 8 August , the North Korean 4th Infantry Division crossed the river and attempted to penetrate the perimeter . After 10 days of fighting , the 24th Infantry Division counterattacked and forced the North Koreans back across the river . By late August 1950 , only 184 of the 34th Regiment 's original 1 @,@ 898 men remained . The regiment was dissolved and was replaced within the 24th by the 5th Regimental Combat Team . The 34th Regiment 's survivors were added to the ranks of the 19th and 21st regiments in an effort to bring them up to strength , and the 5th Infantry remained with the 24th Division until the division withdrew from Korea . Elements of the 24th Infantry Division were moved into reserve on 23 August and replaced by the 2nd Infantry Division . A second , larger North Korean attack occurred between 31 August and 19 September , but the 2nd , 24th , and 25th infantry divisions and the 1st Cavalry Division beat the North Koreans back across the river again . 
 At the same time , X Corps , with the 7th Infantry Division and 1st Marine Division , attacked Incheon , striking the North Korean army from the rear . The attack routed the surprised North Koreans , and by 19 September , the Eighth Army pushed out of the Pusan Perimeter and advanced north . The 24th Infantry Division advanced to Songju , then to Seoul . The Army advanced north along the west coast of Korea through October . By mid @-@ October , the North Korean Army had been almost completely destroyed , and US President Harry S. Truman ordered General MacArthur to advance all units into North Korea as quickly as possible to end the war . The 24th Infantry Division , with the South Korean 1st Infantry Division , moved to the left flank of the advancing Eighth Army , and moved north along Korea 's west coast . The 24th Division then moved north to Chongju . On 1 November , the division 's 21st Infantry captured <unk> , 18 miles from the Yalu River and Korea 's border with China . Units of the Eighth Army and X Corps spread out as they attempted to reach the Yalu and complete the conquest of North Korea as quickly as possible . 
 = = = = Chinese intervention = = = = 
 On 25 November , the Chinese entered the war in defense of North Korea . The People 's Liberation Army force , which totaled 260 @,@ 000 troops , flooded into North Korea and caught the Eighth Army by surprise . Chinese forces crushed the UN and South Korean forces with overwhelming numbers , surrounding and destroying elements of the US 2nd Infantry Division , 7th Infantry Division , and South Korean forces . The 24th Infantry Division , on the west coast of the Korean peninsula , was hit by soldiers from the 50th and 66th Chinese field armies . Amid heavy casualties , the Eighth Army retreated to the Imjin River , south of the 38th parallel , having been devastated by the overwhelming Chinese force . 
 On 1 January 1951 , 500 @,@ 000 Chinese troops attacked the Eighth Army 's line at the Imjin River , forcing it back 50 miles and allowing the Chinese to capture Seoul . The 24th Infantry Division was then reassigned to IX Corps to replace the 2nd and 25th Infantry Divisions , which had been placed in reserve due to heavy losses . The Chinese eventually advanced too far for their supply lines to adequately support them , and their attack stalled . 
 = = = = Stalemate = = = = 
 General Matthew B. Ridgway ordered I , IX , and X Corps to conduct a general counteroffensive on the Chinese ( Operation Thunderbolt ) quickly thereafter . The 24th Division , as part of IX Corps , advanced along the center of the peninsula to take Chipyong @-@ ni . The corps ran into heavy resistance and fought for the region until February . Between February and March 1951 , the 24th Infantry Division participated in Operation Killer , pushing Chinese forces north of the Han River . This operation was followed by Operation Ripper , which recaptured Seoul in March . After this , operations Rugged and Dauntless in April saw the division advance north of the 38th parallel and reestablish itself along previously established of defense , code named Kansas and Utah , respectively . 
 In late April , the Chinese launched a major counterattack . Though the 24th and 25th Infantry Divisions were able to hold their ground against the Chinese 9th CPV Army Corps , the South Korean 6th Infantry Division , to the east , was destroyed by the 13th CPV Army Corps , which penetrated the line and threatened to encircle the 24th and 25th divisions . The 1st Marine Division and 27th British Commonwealth Brigade were able to drive the 13th Army Corps back while the 24th and 25th divisions withdrew on 25 April . The UN forces ' line was moved back to Seoul but managed to hold . In September , the UN forces launched another counteroffensive with the 24th Infantry Division at the center of the line , west of the Hwachon Reservoir . Flanked by the South Korean 2nd and 6th Divisions , the 24th advanced past Kumwha , engaging the 20th and 27th CPV Armies . In November , the Chinese attempted to counter this attack but were unsuccessful . It was at this point , after several successive counteroffensives that saw both sides fighting intensely over the same ground , that the two sides started serious peace negotiations . 
 In January 1952 , the 24th Infantry Division , which suffered over 10 @,@ 000 casualties in 18 months of fighting , was redesignated as the Far East Theater reserve and pulled out of Korea . It returned to Japan to rebuild . The 34th Infantry Regiment was reconstituted , and the division returned to full strength during the next year , having been replaced in Korea by the 40th Infantry Division of the California Army National Guard . In July 1953 , the division returned to Korea to restore order in prisoner of war camps . It arrived two weeks before the end of the war . 
 During the war , 10 soldiers of the division were awarded the Medal of Honor . They were William F. Dean , George D. Libby , Melvin O. Handrich , Mitchell Red Cloud , Jr . , Carl H. Dodd , Nelson V. Brittin , Ray E. Duke , Stanley T. Adams , Mack A. Jordan , and Woodrow W. Keeble . Keeble 's medal was awarded on 3 March 2008 , 26 years after his death . The 24th Infantry Division suffered 3 @,@ 735 killed and 7 @,@ 395 wounded during the Korean War . It remained on front @-@ line duty after the armistice until October 1957 , patrolling the 38th parallel in the event that combat would resume . The division then returned to Japan and remained there for a short time . 
 = = = Cold War = = = 
 On 1 July 1958 the division was relocated to Augsburg , Germany , replacing the 11th Airborne Division in a reflagging ceremony . The 24th was organized under the Pentomic Division TO & E , in which its combat forces were organized into five oversized battalions ( called " battle groups " ) with no intermediate brigade or regimental headquarters . Although considered an infantry division , the 24th included two airborne battle groups for several months . The 1st Airborne Battle Group , 503rd Infantry left the division for reassignment to the 82nd Airborne Division at Fort Bragg on 7 January 1959 and the 1st Airborne Battle Group , 187th Infantry departed on 8 February 1959 , also for the 82nd . 
 On 13 July , less than 2 weeks after the reorganization , King Faisal II of Iraq was assassinated in a coup orchestrated by pro @-@ Egyptian officers . The Christian president of Lebanon , pressured by Muslims to join Egypt and Syria in the Gamal Abdel Nasser @-@ led United Arab Republic , requested help from the Eisenhower administration during the 1958 Lebanon crisis . 
 On the night of 15 July , U.S. Marines from the Sixth Fleet landed at Beirut and secured the Beirut airport . The following day , the 24th Division 's 1st Airborne Battle Group , 187th Infantry deployed to Turkey and flew to Beirut on 19 July . They were joined by a medium tank battalion ( seemingly 3rd Battalion , 35th Armor Regiment ) and support units , which assisted the Marines in forming a security cordon around the city . The force stayed until late October , providing security , making shows of force , including parachute jumps , and training the Lebanese Army . When factions of the Lebanese government worked out a political settlement , they left . The 24th Division 's 1 / 187th lost one soldier killed by a sniper . 
 The 24th came into international press focus in 1961 when its commanding general , Major General Edwin Walker , was removed from command for making " derogatory remarks of a serious nature about certain prominent Americans ... which linked the persons and institutions with Communism and Communist influence " . The inquiry was sparked by Walker 's " Pro Blue " program and accusations Walker and his Information Officer , Lieutenant Colonel Archibald Roberts , distributed John Birch Society literature as troop information in the 24th . 
 After the construction of the Berlin Wall in August 1961 , the Seventh Army began sending infantry units from the divisions in West Germany on a rotating basis to reinforce the Berlin Brigade . The 24th Division 's units participated in this action . 
 In January 1963 , the 24th was reorganized as a mechanized infantry division under the Reorganization Objective Army Division ( <unk> ) TO & E , which replaced the <unk> battle groups with conventional @-@ sized battalions organized in three combined arms brigades . The 169th Infantry Brigade , previously assigned to the 85th Infantry Division was redesignated the 1st Brigade , 24th Infantry Division . The 85th Division 's 170th Infantry Brigade was redesignated the 2nd Brigade , 24th Infantry Division . The 190th Infantry Brigade , previously assigned to the 95th Infantry Division , became the 3rd Brigade , 24th Infantry Division . In 1965 , the 24th Infantry Division received its distinctive unit insignia . 
 The 24th remained in Germany , specifically Augsburg , Munich until September 1968 , when it redeployed its 1st and 2nd Brigades to Fort Riley , Kansas , as part of Exercise <unk> while the division 's 3rd Brigade was maintained in Germany . As the US Army withdrew from Vietnam and reduced its forces , the 24th Infantry Division and its three brigades were inactivated on 15 April 1970 at Fort Riley . 
 In September 1975 , the 24th Infantry Division was reactivated at Fort Stewart , Georgia , as part of the program to build a 16 @-@ division US Army force . Because the Regular Army could not field a full division at Fort Stewart , the 24th had the 48th Infantry Brigade of the Georgia Army National Guard assigned to it as a round @-@ out unit in place of its 3rd Brigade . Targeted for a North Atlantic Treaty Organization ( NATO ) role , the 24th Division was reorganized as a mechanized division in 1979 . It was one of several divisions equipped with new M1 Abrams tanks and M2 Bradley Fighting Vehicles that formed the core of the U.S. Army 's heavily armored mechanized force for the 15 years that followed . 
 = = = Gulf War = = = 
 = = = = Desert Shield = = = = 
 When the United Nations intervened in Kuwait in 1990 , the 24th Infantry Division , which was part of the Rapid Deployment Force , was one of the first units deployed to Southwest Asia . It arrived in 10 large cargo ships of the US Navy Sealift Command . Advance elements of the 24th Division began arriving in Saudi Arabia on 17 August . Some controversy erupted when the division 's round @-@ out unit , the 48th Infantry Brigade ( Mechanized ) , of the Georgia National Guard , was not called up for service . Army leaders decided that the use of National Guard forces was unnecessary , as they felt the active @-@ duty force had sufficient troops . The 48th Brigade was replaced once the 24th Division was in Saudi Arabia with the regular Army 's 197th Infantry Brigade ( Mechanized ) . The 24th Division was then assigned to XVIII Airborne Corps as the corps ' heavy @-@ armored division . 
 In the months that followed , the 24th Division played an important part of Operation Desert Shield by providing heavy firepower with its large number of armored vehicles , including 216 M1A1 Abrams tanks . Elements of the division were still arriving in September , and in the logistical chaos that followed the rapid arrival of U.S. forces in the region , the soldiers of the 24th Division were housed in warehouses , airport hangars , and on the desert sand . The 24th remained in relatively stationary positions in defense of Saudi Arabia until additional American forces arrived for Operation Desert Storm . Aviation units of the division included 2nd Squadron , 4th Cavalry , and 1st Battalion , 24th Aviation Regiment . 
 = = = = Desert Storm = = = = 
 Operation Desert Storm began with an extensive aerial bombing campaign on 17 January 1991 . When the ground attack commenced on 24 February , the 24th Infantry Division formed the east flank of the corps with the 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment . It blocked the Euphrates River valley to cut off Iraqi forces in Kuwait and little resistance . At this time , the 24th Division 's ranks swelled to over 25 @,@ 000 troops in 34 battalions , commanding 94 helicopters , 241 M1 Abrams tanks , 221 M2 Bradley Armored fighting vehicles , and over 7 @,@ 800 other vehicles . The 24th Infantry Division performed exceptionally well in the theater ; it had been training in desert warfare for several years before the conflict . On 26 February , the 24th Division advanced through the valley and captured Iraqi airfields at <unk> and <unk> . At the airfields , it encountered entrenched resistance from the Iraqi 37th and 49th Infantry Divisions , as well as the 6th Nebuchadnezzar Mechanized Division of the Iraqi Republican Guard . Despite some of the most fierce resistance of the war , the 24th Infantry Division destroyed the Iraqi formations and captured the two airfields the next day . The 24th then moved east with VII Corps and engaged several Iraqi Republican Guard divisions . 
 After the Iraqi forces were defeated , the U.N. mandated that the U.S. withdraw from Iraq , ending the Gulf War . By the end of combat operations , the 24th Infantry Division advanced 260 miles and destroyed 360 tanks and other armored personnel carriers , 300 artillery pieces , 1 @,@ 200 trucks , 25 aircraft , 19 missiles , and over 500 pieces of engineer equipment . The division took over 5 @,@ 000 Iraqi prisoners of war while suffering only eight killed , 36 wounded , and five non @-@ combat casualties . 
 After returning to the United States in spring 1991 , the 24th was reorganized with two brigades at Fort Stewart and the 3rd Brigade reactivated at Fort Benning , Georgia , replacing the 197th Infantry Brigade . In fall 1994 , Iraq again threatened the Kuwaiti border , and two brigades from the division returned to southwest Asia . As part of the Army 's reduction to a ten @-@ division force , the 24th Infantry Division was inactivated on 15 February 1996 and reflagged to become the 3rd Infantry Division . Its three brigades were reflagged as 3rd Infantry Division brigades . 
 = = = Training command = = = 
 In the wake of the Cold War , the US Army considered new options for the integration and organization of active duty , Army Reserve and Army National Guard units in training and deployment . Two active duty division headquarters were activated for training National Guard units ; those of the 7th Infantry Division and the 24th Infantry Division . The subordinate brigades of the divisions did not activate , so they could not be deployed as combat divisions . Instead , the headquarters units focused on full @-@ time training . 
 On 5 June 1999 the 24th Infantry Division was reactivated , this time at Fort Riley , Kansas . From 1999 to 2006 , the 24th Infantry Division consisted of a headquarters and three separate National Guard brigades ; the 30th Heavy Brigade Combat Team at Clinton , North Carolina , the 218th Heavy Brigade Combat Team at Columbia , South Carolina , and the 48th Infantry Brigade Combat Team in Macon , Georgia . The division headquarters was responsible for the Guard brigades should they be called to active duty in wartime . This never occurred , as each brigade deployed individually . The division 's final operations included preparing Fort Riley for the return of the 1st Infantry Division , which was stationed in Germany . 
 To expand upon the concept of Reserve component and National Guard components , the First Army activated Division East and Division West , two commands responsible for reserve units ' readiness and mobilization exercises . Division East activated at Fort Riley . This transformation was part of an overall restructuring of the US Army to streamline the organizations overseeing training . Division East took control of reserve units in states east of the Mississippi River , eliminating the need for the 24th Infantry Division headquarters . As such , the 24th Infantry Division was subsequently deactivated for the last time on 1 August 2006 at Fort Riley . 
 = = = Inactivation = = = 
 Though it was inactivated , the division was initially identified as the third highest priority inactive division in the United States Army Center of Military History 's lineage scheme due to its numerous accolades and long history . All of the division 's flags and heraldic items were moved to the National Infantry Museum at Fort Benning , Georgia following its inactivation . Should the U.S. Army decide to activate more divisions in the future following the activation of the 7th Infantry Division in 2012 , the center will most likely suggest the first new division be the 9th Infantry Division , the second be the 24th Infantry Division , the third be the 5th Infantry Division , and the fourth be the 2d Armored Division . 
 = = Honors = = 
 The 24th Infantry Division was awarded five campaign streamers and one unit decoration in World War II , eight campaign streamers and three unit decorations in the Korean War , two campaign streamers for the Gulf War , and one unit award in peacetime , for a total of fifteen campaign streamers and five unit decorations in its operational history . 
 = = = Unit decorations = = = 
 = = = Campaign streamers = = = 
 = James Hill ( British Army officer ) = 
 Brigadier Stanley James Ledger Hill DSO & Two Bars , MC ( 14 March 1911 – 16 March 2006 ) was a British Army officer , who served as commander of the 3rd Parachute Brigade , part of the 6th Airborne Division , during World War II . Born in Bath , Somerset , Hill was educated at Marlborough College and the Royal Military College , Sandhurst before joining the British Army in 1931 and being commissioned into the Royal Fusiliers . He commanded a platoon for a short period , and was then attached to the command post of Field Marshal Lord Gort during the Battle of France in May 1940 , where he oversaw the evacuation of Brussels as well as the beach at De Panne during the evacuation of Dunkirk . After a brief period of time in the Irish Free State , he volunteered for parachute training and joined the 1st Parachute Battalion , and was its commanding officer when its parent formation , the 1st Parachute Brigade , was deployed to North Africa . 
 Hill commanded the battalion during its first airborne operation in North Africa , dropping near the towns of Souk el @-@ Arba and Béja , in Tunisia . It secured Beja and then sent out patrols to harass German troops , ambushing a convoy and inflicting numerous German casualties , and defended a bridge at Medjez el Bab , although it was eventually forced to retreat . Hill was wounded during an attack by the battalion on Gue Hill , in which he attempted to capture three Italian tanks using his revolver ; the crews of two were successfully subdued without incident , but the third opened fire and hit Hill in the chest several times . He was awarded the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) and Légion d 'Honneur for his service in North Africa and then evacuated back to England . There he took command of the 3rd Parachute Brigade in the newly formed 6th Airborne Division , and jumped with the brigade during Operation Tonga , the British airborne landings in Normandy on the night of 5 / 6 June 1944 . After nearly being killed on D @-@ Day , by an aircraft strafing his position , Hill commanded the brigade throughout the rest of the time it was in Normandy , once leading a counter @-@ attack during a German assault and later winning the first Bar to his DSO . 
 After advancing to the Seine , the 6th Airborne Division was withdrawn to England in September 1944 , but briefly served in the Ardennes in December during the Battle of the Bulge . Hill then commanded 3rd Parachute Brigade during Operation Varsity , the Allied airborne assault over the River Rhine , where he was nearly killed by a glider containing his own personal Jeep . He then commandeered a motorcycle and rode alongside the brigade as the 6th Airborne Division advanced from the Rhine to the River Elbe , at the end of which he was awarded a second Bar to his DSO as well as the American Silver Star . After the war , he was briefly military governor of Copenhagen , for which he was awarded the King Haakon VII Liberty Cross , and also raised and commanded the 4th Parachute Brigade ( Territorial Army ) . Retiring from the British Army in 1949 , he became involved in a number of charities and businesses . He died on 16 March 2006 , aged 95 . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Hill was born on 14 March 1911 , in Bath , Somerset , the son of Major General Walter Hill . He was educated at Marlborough College , where he was the head of the college 's Officer Training Corps , and then attended the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst ; there he won the Sword of Honour and became captain of athletics . He joined the British Army in 1931 , being commissioned as a 2nd lieutenant into the Royal Fusiliers ( City of London regiment ) , the regiment which his father commanded . He ran the regimental athletic and boxing associations during his service with the regiment , and in 1936 transferred to the Supplementary Reserve in order to marry his first wife , Denys Gunter @-@ Jones . For the next three years he worked as part of his family 's ferry company . 
 = = Second World War = = 
 When the Second World War began in September 1939 , Hill was recalled to his regiment and given command of the 2nd Battalion , Royal Fusiliers ' advance party when the battalion left for France during the same month . The battalion was assigned to the 12th Infantry Brigade , part of the 4th Infantry Division . He then commanded a platoon for several months , when the battalion was stationed along the Maginot Line , before being promoted to the rank of Captain in January 1940 and joining the staff at Allied Headquarters . The Battle of France began in May 1940 , by which time Hill was attached to the command post of Field Marshal Lord Gort ; during this period he was involved in planning the evacuation of the civilian population of Brussels , and also carried Gort 's dispatches to Calais ordering the withdrawal of the British Expeditionary Force ( BEF ) . At the end of the campaign , he took command of the evacuation of the beach at La Panne , and was on the last destroyer to leave Dunkirk . For these actions , he was awarded the Military Cross . On his return to Britain , he was promoted to Major and travelled to Dublin in the Irish Free State , where he planned for the evacuation of British citizens from the city should German forces land there . When this task was completed , he volunteered for the fledgling Parachute Regiment , part of the British Army 's growing airborne forces , and undertook parachute training ; when the 1st Parachute Battalion was formed on 15 August 1941 , he was appointed as its second @-@ in @-@ command . 
 The battalion was part of 1st Parachute Brigade , which by mid @-@ 1942 had been expanded into 1st Airborne Division under the command of Major @-@ General <unk> Browning . In July 1942 the 1st Parachute Battalion was selected to participate in the Dieppe Raid , and got as far as being loaded onto transport aircraft before poor weather cancelled the operation ; when the raid was planned for a second time the parachute battalion was removed because their deployment was too dependent on there being good weather on the day of the raid . In mid September , as 1st Airborne Division was coming close to reaching full strength , Browning was informed that Operation Torch , the Allied invasion of North Africa , would take place in November . After being informed that an American airborne unit , the 509th Parachute Infantry Battalion , was to be used during the invasion , Browning successfully advocated for the 1st Parachute Brigade to also be included . He argued that a larger airborne force should be utilised during the invasion , as the large distances and comparatively light opposition would provide a number of opportunities for airborne operations . The War Office and Commander in Chief , Home Forces were won over by the argument , and agreed to detach the brigade from 1st Airborne Division and place it under the command of General Dwight D. Eisenhower , who would command all Allied troops participating in the invasion . After it had been brought to full operational strength , partly by cross posting personnel from the newly formed 2nd Parachute Brigade , and had been provided with sufficient equipment and resources , the brigade departed for North Africa at the beginning of November 1942 . 
 = = = North Africa = = = 
 As an insufficient number of transport aircraft were allocated to the brigade , it was only possible to transport the 3rd Parachute Battalion by air . The rest of the brigade arrived at Algiers on 12 November , with some of its stores arriving slightly later . By the evening , reconnaissance parties had travelled to the airfield at Maison Blanche , with the remainder of the brigade following on the morning of 13 November ; it was quartered in Maison Blanche , Maison <unk> and <unk> . After several ambitious airborne operations were planned but then cancelled by British First Army , on 14 November it directed that a single parachute battalion would be dropped the next day near Souk el @-@ Arba and Béja ; the battalion was to contact French forces at Beja to ascertain whether they would remain neutral , or support the Allies ; secure and guard the cross roads and airfield at Soul el Arba ; and patrol eastwards to harass German forces . 1st Parachute Battalion was selected for the task , to which Hill objected . The battalion had been forced to unload the vessel carrying its supplies and equipment itself , and had also to arrange its own transportation to Maison Blanche as no drivers were provided at Algiers ; when it had arrived at Maison Blanche , it had been subjected to several Luftwaffe air raids that targeted the airfield . Hill argued that as a result his men were exhausted , and he did not believe all of the battalion 's equipment could be sorted out within twenty four hours ; as such he asked for the operation to be postponed for a short period , but this was denied . 
 Hill faced further problems as he planned for the operation . The American pilots of the Dakota transport aircraft that would transport the battalion were inexperienced and had never conducted a parachute drop before , and there was no time for any training or exercises . There were also no photos of the airfield or the surrounding areas , and only a single , small scale map available for navigation . To ensure that the aircraft found the drop zone and delivered the battalion accurately , Hill sat in the cockpit of the leading Dakota and assisted the pilot . The Dakotas were escorted by four American P @-@ 38 Lightning fighters , which engaged and drove off two roving German fighters , but as the Dakotas approached the Tunisian border they encountered thick clouds and were forced to turn back , landing at Maison Blanche at 11 : 00 . It was decided that the battalion would conduct the operation the next day , which allowed the paratroopers to rest for a night . 1st Parachute Battalion took off on the morning of 16 November , and enjoyed excellent weather that allowed the transport aircraft to drop the battalion accurately around the airfield at Souk el Arba . Most of the paratroopers landed successfully , but one man was killed when his rigging line twisted around his neck mid drop , throttling him ; one officer broke his leg on landing , and four men were wounded when a Sten gun was accidentally fired . The battalion 's second in command , Major Alastair Pearson , remained at the airfield with a small detachment that collected the airborne equipment and supervised the burial of the casualty . 
 Meanwhile , Hill led the rest of the battalion , approximately 525 strong , in some commandeered trucks towards the town of Béja , an important road and railway centre approximately forty miles from the airfield . The battalion arrived at approximately 18 : 00 and was welcomed by the local French garrison , 3 @,@ 000 strong , which Hill persuaded to cooperate with the paratroopers ; in order to give the garrison and any German observers the impression that he possessed a larger force than he actually did , Hill arranged for the battalion to march through the town several times , wearing different headgear and holding different equipment each time . A short time after the battalion entered Béja , German aircraft arrived and bombed the town , although they caused little damage and no casualties . The next day , ' S ' Company was sent with a detachment of engineers to the village of Sidi N 'Sir , about twenty miles away ; they were to contact the local French forces , believed to be pro British , and harass German forces . The detachment found the village and made contact with the French , who allowed them to pass through towards the town of Mateur ; by nightfall the force had not reached the town , and decided to encamp for the night . At dawn a German convoy of armoured cars passed the detachment , and it was decided to set an ambush for the convoy if it returned , with anti @-@ tank mines being laid on the road and a mortar and Bren guns being set up in concealed positions . When the convoy returned at approximately 10 : 00 the leading vehicle struck a mine and exploded , blocking the road , and the other vehicles were disabled with mortar fire , Gammon bombs and the remaining anti tank mines . A number of Germans were killed and the rest taken prisoner , with two paratroopers being slightly wounded . The detachment returned to Béja with prisoners and several slightly damaged armoured cars . After the success of the ambush , Hill sent a second patrol to harass local German forces , but it was withdrawn after it encountered a larger German force that inflicted several British casualties ; Béja was also bombed by Stuka divebombers , inflicting civilian casualties and destroying a number of houses . 
 On 19 November , Hill visited the commanding officer of the French forces guarding a vital bridge at Medjez el Bab , and warned him that any attempt by German forces to cross the bridge would be opposed by the battalion . Hill attached ' R ' Company to the French forces to ensure the bridge was not captured . German forces soon arrived at the bridge , and their commanding officer demanded that they be allowed to take control of the bridge and cross it to attack the British positions . The French rejected the German demands , and in conjunction with ' R ' Company repelled subsequent German attacks that lasted several hours . The battalion was reinforced by the U.S. 175th Field Artillery Battalion and elements of the Derbyshire Yeomanry , but , despite fierce resistance , the German forces proved to be too strong , and by 04 : 30 on 20 November the Allied forces had yielded the bridge and the surrounding area to the Germans . Two days later , Hill received information that a strong Italian force , which included a number of tanks , was stationed at Gue Hill . Hill decided to attack the force and attempt to disable the tanks , and the following night moved the battalion , less a small guard detachment that remained at Béja , to Sidi N 'Sir where it linked up with a force of French Senegalese infantry . Hill decided that the battalion 's section of 3 inch mortars would cover ' R ' and ' S ' Companies as they advanced up Gue Hill and attacked the Italian force , while a small force of sappers would mine the road at the rear of the hill to ensure the Italian tanks could not retreat . 
 The battalion arrived at the hill without incident and began to prepare for the attack ; however , just prior to the beginning of the attack there were several loud explosions from the rear of the hill . The anti tank grenades carried by the sappers had accidentally detonated , killing all but two of them . The battalion lost the element of surprise , and Hill immediately ordered the two companies to advance up the hill . The force reached the top and engaged a mixed force of German and Italian soldiers , who were assisted by three light tanks . Hill drew his revolver , and with his adjutant and a small group of paratroopers advanced on the tanks , firing shots through their observation ports in an attempt to persuade the crews to surrender . This tactic worked on two tanks , but upon reaching the third tank Hill and his men were fired upon by the tank 's crew ; Hill was shot three times in the chest and his adjutant wounded , although the tank crew were swiftly dispatched with small arms fire . Hill survived because of prompt medical treatment , and was replaced as commander of the battalion by Major Pearson , who supervised the routing of the rest of the German and Italian soldiers . 
 = = = Normandy = = = 
 After his injuries were treated , Hill was evacuated to a hospital in North Africa to recover ; although forbidden to do so , he often exercised by climbing out of the window of his hospital ward at night . For his actions in North Africa , he was awarded the Distinguished Service Order ( DSO ) , which " paid tribute to the brilliant handling of his force and his complete disregard of personal danger , " as well as the French Légion d 'honneur . By February 1943 he had recovered from his injuries , and was flown back to England where he met up with Brigadier Gerald W. Lathbury , commander of the newly raised 3rd Parachute Brigade . The War Office had authorised the raising of the brigade on 5 November 1942 , comprising the 7th , 8th and 9th Parachute Battalions , all converted infantry battalions . The 9th Parachute Battalion was in need of a commanding officer and Lathbury offered the job to Hill , who accepted . His first action was to send the entire unit on a forced march , at the end of which he announced that the battalion would " work a six and a half day week " with Sunday afternoons off , until it was well @-@ trained and fit . The 3rd Parachute Brigade was initially attached to the 1st Airborne Division , but in April 1943 Lathbury was given command of 1st Parachute Brigade , which departed with 1st Airborne Division at the end of April for the Mediterranean theatre and Operation Husky , the invasion of Sicily . The 3rd Parachute Brigade was detached from the division in March and remained in England , and on 23 April it was transferred into the newly formed 6th Airborne Division with Hill as the brigade 's new commander . On 11 August , 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion was attached to the 3rd Parachute Brigade ; although meant to be assigned to the newly formed 5th Parachute Brigade , also attached to the 6th Airborne Division , it instead replaced the 7th Parachute Battalion , which was transferred to the new parachute brigade . 
 The 6th Airborne Division , under the command of Major @-@ General Richard Nelson Gale , was fully mobilised by late December 1943 , with orders to prepare for airborne operations to be conducted during mid @-@ 1944 . The division 's first airborne operation would also be the first time it saw combat , conducting Operation Tonga , the British airborne landings in Normandy on the night of 5 / 6 June , D @-@ Day . It was tasked with guarding the left flank of the British amphibious landings by securing the area east of the city of Caen , capturing a number of bridges that spanned several rivers and canals , and then preventing any Axis forces from advancing on the British beaches . The 3rd Parachute Brigade was given several tasks to accomplish . The 9th Parachute Battalion , commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Terence Otway , was to assault and destroy the Merville Gun Battery , as well as capturing high ground and setting up roadblocks . The 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion was to destroy two bridges , and the 8th Parachute Battalion had the task of destroying three bridges . When the operation began , the brigade suffered from a combination of poor navigation by the pilots of their C @-@ 47 Dakota transport aircraft , heavy cloud cover and incorrectly marked drop zones , which led to all of its units being scattered over a wide area ; Hill himself was dropped with several sticks from the 1st Canadian and 9th Parachute Battalions near the River Dives . He landed in a submerged river rank approximately half a mile from Cabourg , and was forced to wade through four feet of water and a number of flooded irrigation ditches before reaching dry land ; the same flooded areas claimed the lives of a number of paratroopers from his brigade . 
 Collecting up a number of his men , he headed for the town of Sallenelles , where he hoped to find out how the 9th Parachute Battalion had fared assaulting the Merville Battery . En route , however , he and his party were strafed by low @-@ flying German aircraft , forcing the paratroopers to dive for cover ; when the aircraft had departed Hill stood up again , finding that he had been wounded in the buttocks and the officer next to him had been killed . Most of the other men had either been killed or wounded during the attack , leaving only himself and the commander of his headquarters defence platoon ; once first aid had been administered to the wounded , Hill continued on and finally managed reach Ranville , where the headquarters of the General Officer Commanding ( GOC ) , Major @-@ General Gale , had been set up . After being informed by Gale that his brigade had successfully completed its objectives , Hill had his wound tended to , and then travelled to his own headquarters ; there he found Lieutenant Colonel Pearson in temporary command , who informed him that many the brigade 's staff had been killed during the drop . By 00 : 00 on the night of 6 / 7 June , the entire division was fully deployed on the eastern flank of the invasion beaches . The 3rd Parachute Brigade was holding a 4 @-@ mile ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) front , with the 9th Parachute Battalion at Le Plein , 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion at Les <unk> and the 8th Parachute Battalion in the southern part of the Bois de Bavent . 
 For the rest of its time in Normandy the division acted in an infantry role . From 7 June until 16 August , it first consolidated and then expanded its bridgehead . The 3rd Parachute Brigade was responsible for a section of front around the Chateau Saint Come and a nearby manor , with the latter being used as the brigade 's primary defensive position . The brigade was positioned next to the 1st Special Service Brigade , and from 7 June onwards German pressure rapidly increased against both brigade 's positions , with a number of attacks being repelled between then and 10 June . On 10 June the decision was taken to expand the bridgehead to the east of the River Orne , with the 6th Airborne Division tasked with achieving this ; however , it was deemed not to be strong enough , and the 5th Battalion , Black Watch was placed under the 3rd Parachute Brigade 's command ; the battalion launched an attack on the town of Breville on 11 June , but was met with extremely heavy resistance and was repulsed after suffering a number of casualties . The next day 3rd Parachute Brigade 's entire front was subjected to fierce artillery bombardment and assaults by German tanks and infantry , with the Germans particularly focusing on the positions held by 9th Parachute Battalion . Both the 9th Parachute Battalion and the remnants of the 5th Black Watch defended the Chateau Saint Come but were gradually forced to retreat . Lieutenant Colonel Otway informed brigade headquarters , some 400 metres ( 1 @,@ 300 ft ) away , that his battalion would be unable to hold its ground for much longer ; upon hearing this message , Brigadier Hill gathered together forty paratroopers from the 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion and led a counter @-@ attack that forced the German troops to withdraw . 
 German attempts to breach the 9th Parachute battalions ' positions did not end until 12 June , and Hill stated that the period 7 – 12 June were " five of the toughest days fighting I saw in five years of war . " It was during this period that Hill was awarded the first Bar to his Distinguished Service Order , after supervising an assault by 12th Parachute Battalion on the town of Breville ; the town dominated a long ridge near the Allied bridgehead , from which the German 346th Infantry Division launched repeated attacks . From then on until mid @-@ August the division remained in static positions , holding the left flank of the Allied bridgehead and conducting vigorous patrolling . Finally , on 7 August the division was ordered to prepare to move over to the offensive , and on the night of 16 / 17 August it began to advance against stiff German opposition , its ultimate objective being the mouth of the River Seine ( see 6th Airborne Division advance to the River Seine ) . Hill 's 3rd Parachute Brigade led the division 's advance , being held up until nightfall at the village of Goustranville , but then securing several bridges and allowing the 5th Parachute Brigade to pass through its positions and continue the division 's advance . The brigade remained around the Dives canal for several days , and then on 21 August it advanced towards Pont L <unk> , but was stalled by German infantry and armour near Annebault until 8th Parachute Battalion secured the village . Fighting continued to be fierce , but by 24 August the entire division had advanced across the River Touques . After another three days of reorganising and patrolling , the division 's time in Normandy came to an end ; in nine days it had advanced 45 miles , captured 400 square miles ( 1 @,@ 000 km2 ) of occupied territory and taken prisoner over 1 @,@ 000 German soldiers . Its casualties for the period were 4 @,@ 457 , of which 821 would be killed , 2 @,@ 709 wounded and 927 missing . It was finally withdrawn from the frontline in the last days of August , and embarked for England at the beginning of September . 
 = = = Ardennes = = = 
 On 16 December 1944 , the Germans launched a huge offensive in the Ardennes forest , with the German objective to split British and American forces apart and capture the port of Antwerp , an important logistical base for the Allies . The initial assaults were extremely successful , creating a salient some fifty miles wide and forty @-@ five miles deep , and by 23 December German units were advancing towards Dinant . American resistance was fierce , however , and blunted German advances in several areas , particularly the U.S. 101st Airborne Division around the town of Bastogne . By Christmas Day the offensive had been halted and contained , and an Allied counter @-@ offensive began . Although the majority of the troops committed belonged to the American First and Third Armies , British XXX Corps also participated , with the British 6th Airborne Division as one of its leading divisions . The division had been in England since the beginning of September , and had been due to go on Christmas leave only days before the counter @-@ offensive began ; however , it was quickly transported to the Ardennes , arriving on the night of 24 December . By 26 December the 6th Airborne Division , now commanded by Major @-@ General Eric Bols , had positioned itself between the towns of Dinant and Namur , and on 29 December it advanced against the German salient , with the 3rd Parachute Brigade , under James Hill , occupying an area around Rochefort . 
 When the German offensive had begun , Hill had been in hospital , undergoing reconstructive plastic surgery ; this meant that he was unable to join the 3rd Parachute Brigade for two days . When he had recovered , however , he and his batman were flown to the Ardennes and he was able to rejoin the brigade . The 5th Parachute Brigade launched several attacks against German positions in the village of Bure , which resulted in heavy British casualties , and both brigades conducted a large number of offensive patrols . The 3rd Parachute Brigade did not see any action , as those German units occupying positions opposite to it withdrew without fighting . By the end of January , however , the division was transferred back to the Netherlands and set up new positions along the Maas river , where it conducted more patrolling against elements of the German 7th Parachute Division , which held positions on the other side of the Maas . These operations came to an end in late February , when the 6th Airborne Division was withdrawn back to England to prepare for a major airborne operation in March . 
 = = = Rhine = = = 
 On 24 March 1945 Operation Varsity began , an airborne operation to aid in the establishment of a bridgehead on the east bank of the River Rhine which involved the British 6th Airborne Division and the U.S. 17th Airborne Division , under Major General William Miley . Varsity was the airborne component of Operation Plunder , in which the British Second Army , under Lieutenant @-@ General Miles C. Dempsey , and the U.S. Ninth Army , under Lieutenant General William Simpson , crossed the Rhine at Rees , Wesel , and an area south of the Lippe Canal . Both divisions would be dropped near the town of Hamminkeln , and were tasked with a number of objectives : they were to seize the Diersfordter Wald , a forest that overlooked the Rhine , including a road linking several towns together ; several bridges over a smaller waterway , the River Issel , were to be seized to facilitate the advance ; and the town of Hamminkeln was to be captured . The 6th Airborne Division was specifically tasked with securing the northern portion of the airborne bridgehead , including Hamminkeln , a section of high ground to the east of Bergen , and several bridges over the River Issel . Hill 's 3rd Parachute Brigade was to drop at the north @-@ eastern corner of the Diersfordterwald forest and clear the western portion of the forest . It would then seize a hill known as the Schneppenberg , secure a road junction near Bergen and eventually link up with the 5th Parachute Brigade . 
 The 3rd Parachute Brigade dropped nine minutes later than planned , but otherwise landed accurately on drop zone ' A ' . Hill landed near to the Diersfordterwald forest , which was occupied by German soldiers " who are switched @-@ on people , " killing a number of paratroopers whose parachutes became tangled up in the trees . His brigade headquarters was positioned by a copse which was supposed to have been immediately cleared , but when he arrived it was still occupied by German troops ; Hill immediately ordered a company commander of the 8th Parachute Battalion to clear the copse . The officer did so , but was killed in the process . Hill then moved his headquarters to the copse , but was then nearly killed by an approaching glider which barely managed to pull up in time , landing in the trees above him ; upon investigation , Hill discovered that it contained his batman and personal Jeep , which took some time to lower down safely . The brigade suffered a number of casualties as it engaged the German forces in the Diersfordter Wald , but by 11 : 00 hours the drop zone was all but completely clear of enemy forces and all battalions of the brigade had formed up . The key town of Schnappenberg was captured by the 9th Parachute Battalion in conjunction with the 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion , the latter unit having lost its commanding officer to German small @-@ arms fire only moments after he had landed . Despite taking casualties the brigade cleared the area of German forces , and by 13 : 45 Hill could report that the brigade had secured all of its objectives . 
 With Varsity a success , the 6th Airborne Division was ordered by Major General Matthew Ridgway , commander of U.S. XVIII Airborne Corps , to advance eastwards . It was supported by the 6th Guards Tank Brigade , and many of the airborne troops used unconventional transport during the advance , including captured German staff cars , prams and even horses . Hill requisitioned a motorcycle for his batman and travelled alongside the 3rd Parachute Brigade as it advanced ; at one point his batman stopped the motorcycle and relieved a captured German colonel of his binoculars before driving off again . Hill disapproved of battlefield looting and admonished his batman , although eventually relented by stating " If you can get me a pair [ as well ] , you can keep them ! " At midnight , 27 / 28 March the division came under the control of British VIII Corps , commanded by Lieutenant @-@ General Evelyn Barker , and became part of the general Allied advance through Germany towards the Baltic Sea , with the 3rd Parachute Brigade as the division 's leading unit . German resistance continued to be heavy , but the division managed to advance at a rapid pace despite this , with the brigade at one point advancing fifteen miles in twenty @-@ four hours , with eighteen of those being spent in combat . By early April the 6th Airborne reached the River Weser , with the brigade approaching it near the town of Minden , accompanied by armoured support ; as it did so , the brigade found itself moving parallel to several German tanks , with Hill sitting on the rear of one of the British tanks . Both sides opened fire , but did little damage , the two German tanks managing to outpace the brigade . 
 The brigade continued its fast pace of advance , with Hill continuing to ride pillion on his motorcycle , and by 23 April it had reached the River Elbe , having advanced 103 miles in fourteen days ; the division had captured more than 19 @,@ 000 prisoners during this period . After crossing the Elbe , the division once again came under the command of U.S. XVIII Airborne Corps , with General Ridgway informing Major General Bols that it was vital the division reach the port of Wismar before the approaching Russian Army did , to ensure that Denmark was not occupied by the Soviet Union . Although the 5th Parachute Brigade was ordered to lead the division 's advance , Hill was determined to reach Wismar first ; after an extremely rapid advance he succeeded , with troops from the 1st Canadian Parachute Battalion being the first to enter Wismar , beating an advancing Russian tank column by only a few miles . A few days later , on 7 May 1945 , Germany surrendered and the war in Europe came to an end . Hill was awarded a second Bar to his DSO for his command of the 3rd Parachute Brigade during its advance from the Rhine to the Elbe , as well as the American Silver Star . 
 = = Post @-@ war career = = 
 In May 1945 Hill served as military governor of Copenhagen , for which he was awarded the King Haakon VII Liberty Cross , and then assumed command of the 1st Parachute Brigade and oversaw its demobilisation . He retired from the British Army in July 1945 , although he continued to serve as an officer in the Territorial Army , raising the 4th Parachute Brigade ( Territorial Army ) in 1947 and serving as its commanding officer until 1949 . After standing down as commander of the brigade , Hill served on the board of a number of companies , including Lloyds Bank , the Associated Coal and Wharf Companies , and Powell Duffryn of Canada . Hill was an avid birdwatcher , with a particular claim to fame for being only the second person to discover a cuckoo 's egg in the nest of a whinchat . He also helped to set up the Parachute Regiment Association and the Airborne Forces Security fund , acting as a trustee of the latter organisation for thirty years and chairman for five years . Hill married for a second time , wedding Joan Patricia Haywood in 1986 . On 6 June 2004 he attended the 60th Anniversary of the Normandy landings , and a bronze statue of him was unveiled at Le Mesnil crossroads by Charles , Prince of Wales , Colonel @-@ in @-@ Chief of The Parachute Regiment . He died on 16 March 2006 , two days after his 95th birthday . He is survived by his second wife and a daughter from the first marriage , Gillian Bridget Sanda . 
 = Death and state funeral of Ronald Reagan = 
 On June 5 , 2004 , Ronald Reagan , the 40th President of the United States , died after having suffered from Alzheimer 's disease for nearly a decade . His seven @-@ day state funeral followed . After Reagan 's death , his body was taken from his Bel Air , Los Angeles home to the Gates , Kingsley and Gates Funeral Home in Santa Monica , California to prepare the body for burial . On June 7 , Reagan 's casket was transported by hearse and displayed at the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley , California , then flown to Washington , D.C. on June 9 for a service , public viewing and tributes at the U.S. Capitol . 
 After lying in state for thirty @-@ four hours in the Capitol rotunda , a state funeral service was conducted at the Washington National Cathedral on June 11 , the day when President George W. Bush declared a national day of mourning . Later that day , after the service , Reagan 's casket was transported back to California for interment at the Reagan Presidential Library . The state funeral was executed by the Military District of Washington ( MDW ) and was the first since that of Lyndon B. Johnson in 1973 . Richard Nixon , who presided over Johnson 's funeral , declined to have a state funeral in 1994 . Reagan was the first U.S. former president to die in the 21st century . 
 = = Death = = 
 On the morning of June 5 , 2004 , there were reports that Reagan 's health had significantly deteriorated , following nine years of Alzheimer 's disease . He died of pneumonia at his home at 13 : 09 PDT , at the age of 93 . 
 President George W. Bush was in Paris when Reagan died and acknowledged the death in a press conference . President Bush made the following statement on June 5 , 2004 : 
 American flags at the White House , across the United States , and around the world over official U.S. installations and operating locations , were ordered flown at half @-@ staff for 30 days in a presidential proclamation by President Bush . In the announcement of Reagan 's death , Bush also declared June 11 a National Day of Mourning . 
 Some of the early international tributes to Reagan included those of Queen Elizabeth II , former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher , former Soviet Union Leader Mikhail Gorbachev , British Prime Minister Tony Blair , former Canadian Prime Minister Brian Mulroney , Canadian Prime Minister Paul Martin , and French President Jacques Chirac . Martin advised Governor General Adrienne Clarkson to order all flags across Canada and at all Canadian diplomatic missions in the United States flown to half @-@ staff on the 11th as well , in sympathy with the U.S. ' s National Day of Mourning . In Germany , Chancellor Gerhard Schröder ordered flags flown at half @-@ staff above government buildings on the 11th as well . 
 People marked Reagan 's death by leaving tributes and condolences at U.S. embassies and consulates overseas , as well as at locales around the country significant to Reagan 's life , including his presidential library , his birthplace in Tampico , Illinois , the funeral home where his body was taken after he died , and the Tau Kappa Epsilon fraternity house in Eureka , Illinois . 
 After Reagan 's death , campaigning for the ongoing U.S. presidential election was considered disrespectful during a time of mourning , and was suspended . The 2004 Canadian federal election was also to be held ; Martin , Opposition Leader Stephen Harper , the Conservative leader , and NDP Leader Jack Layton suspended their campaigns , citing respect for Reagan . 
 = = Funeral events = = 
 = = = Reagan Library = = = 
 On June 7 , Reagan 's body was removed from the funeral home and driven in a 20 @-@ mile @-@ per @-@ hour motorcade , by hearse , to the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library in Simi Valley . 
 Reagan 's casket , a <unk> Masterpiece model , was carried by a military honor guard representing all branches of the United States Armed Forces into the lobby of the library to lie in repose . There , a brief family service was conducted by the Reverend Dr. Michael H. Wenning , former pastor of Bel Air Presbyterian Church , where Reagan worshipped . When the prayer service concluded , Nancy Reagan and her family approached the casket , where Mrs. Reagan laid her head on it . After the family left , the doors of the presidential library opened , and the public began filing in at a rate of 2 @,@ 000 an hour throughout the night . In all , about 108 @,@ 000 people visited the presidential library to see the casket . 
 = = = Departure to Washington = = = 
 On June 9 , Reagan 's casket was removed from the presidential library and driven in a motorcade to NAS Point Mugu in Oxnard , California ; it was the same airfield Reagan flew into and out of during his presidency when visiting his California ranch . SAM <unk> , one of the two Boeing 747 @-@ 200s , which usually serves the president as Air Force One , arrived to transport the casket to Washington . Thousands of people gathered to witness the plane 's departure . Just before she boarded the VC @-@ 25A Presidential Aircraft , Nancy Reagan waved to the crowd with her military escort at her side . The plane lifted off at about 9 : 40 AM PST . 
 = = = Events in Washington = = = 
 In Washington , D.C. , members of Congress , and much of the public , paid tribute to Reagan immediately after his death and throughout his funeral . 
 = = = = Funeral procession = = = = 
 Events in the capital began when Reagan 's casket arrived at Andrews Air Force Base , Maryland . It was removed from the plane , driven by hearse in a procession through the Maryland and Virginia suburbs and the nation 's capital , across the Memorial Bridge , and onto Constitution Avenue . 
 Just before the plane arrived at Andrews , the Capitol was evacuated for a brief period , for a plane carrying Kentucky Governor Ernie Fletcher was off course and created a scare by entering restricted airspace ; the incident was attributed to radio problems on board the plane and did not affect funeral events . 
 Near the Ellipse , and within sight of the White House , the hearse halted and Reagan 's body was transferred to a horse @-@ drawn caisson for the procession down Constitution Avenue to Capitol Hill . Nancy Reagan stepped out of her limousine to witness the body 's transfer ; she was met with a warm greeting , including applause . The cortege began the 45 @-@ minute journey just after 6 : 00 PM EST , with the Reagan family following in limousines . Military units escorted the caisson as it made its way to the sounds of muffled drums . Behind the caisson was a riderless horse named Sergeant York , carrying Reagan 's riding boots reversed in the stirrups . The caisson paused at 4th Street and Constitution Avenue , where 21 Air Force F @-@ 15 's from Seymour Johnson Air Force Base , North Carolina , flew over in missing man formation . 
