 = = = = Capitol Hill = = = = 
 The caisson stopped when it arrived at Capitol Hill ; military units removed it , and " Hail to the Chief " was played amidst a 21 @-@ gun salute . The casket was carried up the west front steps of the Capitol , mainly because Reagan was first inaugurated there and he wanted to face west , toward California . Two teams of military pallbearers carried the casket up the steps of the Capitol to " The Battle Hymn of the Republic " . 
 When the casket reached the top of the steps , Nancy Reagan and her military escort met it . As the casket passed them , Mrs. Reagan momentarily pulled away from her escort , reached out , and touched the casket . They followed it inside to the rotunda . 
 The casket was placed under the rotunda , where it lay in state on Abraham Lincoln 's catafalque . An evening memorial service then took place , with dignitaries primarily composed of Congressional members , members of the United States Supreme Court , and the diplomatic corps ; the Reverend Daniel Coughlin , Chaplain of the House of Representatives , gave the invocation . Eulogies were then delivered by Senate President pro tempore Ted Stevens , House Speaker Dennis Hastert , and Vice President Dick Cheney . 
 After the eulogies , the three speakers each laid a wreath at the casket , and the Senate Chaplain , the Reverend Barry Black , gave the benediction . Cheney escorted Mrs. Reagan to the casket , where she said her goodbyes . The dignitaries in the room paid their respects during the next half @-@ hour . In a rare instance , the doors of the Capitol were then opened to the public , who stood in lines stretching many blocks to view the casket . 
 = = = = = Public viewing = = = = = 
 The general public stood in long lines waiting for a turn to pay their respects to the president . People passed by the casket at a rate of about 5 @,@ 000 per hour ( 83 @.@ 3 per minute <unk> . 1 @.@ 4 per second ) and the wait time for some exceeded seven hours . In all , 104 @,@ 684 paid their respects when Reagan lay in state . The Washington Metro subway set a then daily record in ridership of 850 @,@ 636 as a result . 
 After returning to Washington following the G8 summit , President George W. Bush and First Lady Laura Bush visited the rotunda to pay their respects . Many world leaders did the same , including interim Iraqi President Ghazi al @-@ Yawer , former Polish president Lech Wałęsa , Gorbachev , and Thatcher , Reagan 's good friend and associate . 
 While Reagan 's casket lay in state , Nancy Reagan and her family took up temporary residence in Blair House , the official residence of guests of the President of the United States . There , she was greeted by additional dignitaries and public figures . During a visit from Thatcher , the former Prime Minister wrote in the Blair House condolence book , " To Ronnie , Well done , thou good and faithful servant . " 
 = = = State funeral service = = = 
 After thirty @-@ four hours of lying in state , the doors of the Capitol were closed to the public and Nancy Reagan was escorted in , where she had a moment alone with the casket . A military honor guard entered and carried it down the west steps of the Capitol to a 21 @-@ gun salute where Mrs. Reagan , holding her hand over her heart , met it . After it was placed in a hearse , the motorcade departed on the five mile @-@ trip to the Washington National Cathedral , where the state funeral service was to be held ; crowds lined the route of the cortege as the hearse made its way . 
 = = = = Dignitaries = = = = 
 About 4 @,@ 000 people gathered at the cathedral for the service , including President and Mrs. Bush , former presidents George H. W. and Barbara Bush , Gerald and Betty Ford , Jimmy and Rosalynn Carter , and Bill and Hillary Clinton . Members of Congress and past and present governors were also present . 
 Foreign dignitaries attended as well , coming from 165 nations . The dignitaries included 36 past and present heads of state and government , and UN Secretary General Kofi Annan . Leading the dignitaries were Gorbachev , Thatcher , Mulroney , and Prince Charles ( representing Queen Elizabeth II ) . Other world leaders included UK Prime Minister Tony Blair and his wife Cherie , German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder , former Japanese Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone , Italian Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi , Jordan 's King Abdullah , as well as interim presidents Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan and Ghazi al @-@ Yawer of Iraq , and Irish President Mary McAleese . Blair , Schröder , Berlusconi , Karzai , King Abdullah , and al @-@ Yawer had been at the G8 summit in Sea Island , Georgia , and later decided to extend their stay in the U.S. to attend the funeral . Schröder said about attending the funeral : " It is appropriate that the German chancellor says , ' Thank you , ' and that is what I 'm doing . ' " For Karzai , the funeral was part of his week @-@ long visit to the U.S. and it was the beginning of his visit to Washington . He scrapped a visit to the West Coast to visit the Afghan community there to attend the funeral . World leaders who attended the summit , but decided not to extend their stay in the U.S. to attend the funeral , paid tribute at the summit , including Canadian Prime Minister Paul Martin , French President Jacques Chirac , Russian President Vladimir Putin , Irish Prime Minister Bertie Ahern , also president of the European Union , and Japanese Prime Minister <unk> Koizumi . McAleese 's presence had special significance , as she paid tribute to Reagan 's Irish roots , recalling his visit to Ireland in 1984 . In addition , Taiwan 's President of the Control Yuan Frederick Chien and Representative Chen Chien @-@ jen attended the funeral . 
 The funeral for Reagan was the largest in the United States since that of John F. Kennedy in 1963 . President Kennedy 's daughter , Caroline , and her husband , Edwin Schlossberg , both attended . 
 = = = = Cathedral events = = = = 
 The motorcade arrived at the Cathedral and Reagan 's casket was removed . The bearers carrying it paused on the Cathedral steps , and an opening prayer was given by Bishop John Bryson Chane , Dean of the Washington National Cathedral . The casket was then carried down the aisle ; the Reagan family followed and Mrs. Reagan was escorted to her seat by President Bush . Rabbi Harold Kushner and Supreme Court Associate Justice Sandra Day O 'Connor ( the first female Supreme Court justice , whom Reagan appointed ) , then each gave a reading , which preceded the eulogies . The choir then sang hymns — " Faire is the Heaven " ; " Bring Us , O Lord " ; " And I saw a New Heaven " — before Thatcher delivered the first eulogy . In view of her failing mental faculties following several small strokes , the message had been pre @-@ recorded several months earlier and was broadcast throughout the Cathedral on plasma television screens . During the speech , Thatcher said , " We have lost a great president , a great American and a great man , and I have lost a dear friend . " 
 Following Thatcher 's eulogy , Mulroney delivered his , ending with : " In the presence of his beloved and indispensable Nancy , his children , his family , his friends and all of the American people that he so deeply revered , I say au revoir today to a gifted leader and historic president and a gracious human being . " 
 Former President George H. W. Bush then spoke , his voice breaking at one point when describing Reagan ; Bush had been Reagan 's Vice President from 1981 to 1989 . His son , President George W. Bush , was the last to give a eulogy , saying in part , " Ronald Reagan belongs to the ages now , but we preferred it when he belonged to us ... In his last years he saw through a glass darkly . Now he sees his Savior face to face . And we look for that fine day when we will see him again , all weariness gone , clear of mind , strong and sure and smiling again , and the sorrow of this parting gone forever . " 
 The choir then sang " The Battle Hymn of the Republic " and Theodore Edgar McCarrick , Cardinal Archbishop of Washington , delivered a Bible reading from the Gospel of Matthew . The celebrant , former Missouri Senator the Reverend John Danforth , delivered the homily and Irish tenor Ronan Tynan sang songs such as " Ave Maria " and " Amazing Grace " at the request of Nancy Reagan . The Reverend Ted Eastman , former Bishop of Maryland , delivered the benediction , flanked by Reverend Danforth and Reverend Chane . 
 = = = Interment at the Reagan Library = = = 
 = = = = Return to California = = = = 
 After the service , the casket was removed from the cathedral and driven to Andrews Air Force Base for the return to California , passing crowds along its route . The family and close friends boarded the VC 25 @-@ A Presidential Aircraft , and as she had done previously , Nancy Reagan waved farewell to the crowds just before boarding the plane . 
 About five hours after the aircraft departed Andrews , it touched down at Naval Base Ventura County , Point Mugu , California . The public , including sailors from the USS Ronald Reagan , was there to witness the plane 's arrival . Reagan 's body was driven in a large motorcade on one final trip though the streets of southern California . 
 = = = = Burial service and interment = = = = 
 The service drew 700 invited guests , including former Reagan administration officials such as George P. Shultz , and noted dignitaries ; Margaret Thatcher , who traveled on the plane from Washington , sat next to California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and his wife , Maria Shriver ; former California Governor Pete Wilson was in attendance , as well as former Los Angeles Mayor Richard Riordan . Hollywood actors and other celebrities also attended , including Mr. Reagan 's first wife , actress Jane Wyman , Kirk Douglas , Charlton Heston , Mickey Rooney , Dolores Hope ( widow of Bob Hope ) , Merv Griffin , Tommy Lasorda , Wayne Gretzky , Scott Baio , Bo Derek , Tom Selleck , Pat Sajak , Wayne Newton , and the Sinatra family . The three surviving Reagan children , Michael , Patti , and Ron , gave final eulogies at the interment ceremony . 
 Eulogies finished , and the service over , the Air Force Band of the Golden West played four " ruffles and flourishes " , and the U.S. Army Chorus sang " The Star @-@ Spangled Banner " . <unk> Eric Rigler played " Amazing Grace " as the casket was moved to its grave site and placed on a plinth . There , burial rites were given , followed by a last 21 @-@ gun salute ; members of the armed services fired three volleys and a bugler played " Taps " . At that time , four Navy F / A @-@ 18 fighter jets flew over in missing man formation , and the flag that flew over the Capitol during President Reagan 's 1981 inauguration was folded by the honor guard and was presented to Nancy Reagan by Captain James Symonds , the commanding officer of the USS Ronald Reagan . 
 After Nancy Reagan accepted the flag , she approached the casket and spent several minutes patting and stroking it . She laid her head down on the casket , before breaking down and crying ; The Washington Post described Mrs. Reagan as having been " stoic through nearly a week of somber rituals " but she " surrendered to her grief after being handed the flag that had covered her husband 's coffin . " While she cried , she kissed the casket and said " I love you " . Her children surrounded her , and attempted to console her . Mrs. Reagan then walked away with her military escort , clutching the folded flag . The military band began to play the Victorian hymn " My Faith Looks Up to Thee " as the Reagan children said their goodbyes . Funeral attendees had an opportunity to file past the coffin . 
 The casket was lowered into the vault and closed approximately before 3 : 00 AM PDT the next day . The exterior of the horseshoe shaped monument is inscribed with a quote Ronald Reagan delivered in 1991 : 
 = = Music = = 
 Music played during the week @-@ long events included four ruffles and flourishes , " Hail to the Chief " , " My Country , ' Tis of Thee " , " The Battle Hymn of the Republic " , " Amazing Grace " , " Eternal Father , Strong to Save " ( also known as " The Navy Hymn " ) , " God of Our Fathers " , " Mansions of the Lord " , " God Bless America " , " America the Beautiful " , " Going Home " , and " On a <unk> of Philip Bliss " by David Holsinger . 
 = = Security measures = = 
 The state funeral marked the first time that Washington had hosted a major event since the September 11 attacks . As a result , the Department of Homeland Security ( DHS ) designated the state funeral a National Special Security Event ( NSSE ) . Special precautions were taken because many of the events were open to the public and there were multiple protectees . As means of assisting the motorcade , many streets were temporarily blocked off by law enforcement . 
 Attorney General John Ashcroft told a Senate hearing before the funeral : " It is a sad commentary when the observation of a memorial service for a former president of the United States must be labeled a National Special Security Event . Such is the fact of modern life in Washington and such is the nature of the war against al Qaeda . " <unk> Chief Charles H. Ramsey agreed saying , " In a post @-@ 9 / 11 world , we have to be very concerned ... and aware of the potential that something could happen , not that we 've received any information at all . " 
 However , DHS was handling another NSSE at the same time : the G @-@ 8 Summit in Sea Island , Georgia . 
 During the services , the news media made note that the security measures also made evident that the era of terrorism that the world was experiencing had its roots during the Reagan years . The worst act of terrorism against the United States prior to 9 / 11 , the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie , Scotland , which killed 189 Americans , happened during the Reagan years . 
 = = Public and media comments = = 
 The majority of those commemorating Reagan were supporters of his , although not all held the 40th president in high regard . In one noted example , Paul Mays , a retired engineer who never thought much of Reagan 's politics , witnessed the motorcade leave the tarmac at Andrews Air Force Base ; he commented " This is history " . Frank Dubois , an American University professor , also was there for the motorcade , though of the laudatory praise he remarked , " [ Reagan ] hurt the environment ; there was double @-@ digit inflation . I just don 't get it . " 
 The majority of media coverage of the event was deferential . Most major news organizations broadcast the various events live multiple times ; during the week , the cable channel C @-@ SPAN broadcast uninterrupted coverage of the funeral ceremonies . A few complained , however , that the television coverage was excessive and preempted coverage of other events . CBS News anchor Dan Rather was quoted as saying : " Even though everybody is respectful and wants to pay homage to the president , life does go on . There is other news , like the reality of Iraq . It got very short shrift this weekend . " Throughout the week , media experts reported that the national mourning , televised nearly non @-@ stop on many television networks , provided Americans welcome respite from unhappy reports that American troops were being killed in Iraq and Afghanistan , giving them a sense of good news they had been desperate for since the September 11 attacks . 
 Reagan 's obituaries also included a few criticisms . Richard Goldstein of The Village Voice criticized the funeral for its careful orchestration , writing , " Because the networks had so long to plan for this production ... this was the most precisely mounted news event in modern times . Each gesture was minutely choreographed , every tear strategically placed . " 
 Additionally , some media outlets were criticized for lionizing Reagan without paying equal attention to more controversial decisions made during his administration . Thomas Kunkel , dean of the University of Maryland , College Park 's journalism college , wrote in A magazine that the coverage " would have you believe that Reagan was a cross between Abe Lincoln and Mother Teresa , with an overlay of Mister Rogers . " Howard Kurtz , The Washington Post 's media columnist , said Reagan was " a far more controversial figure in his time than the largely gushing obits on television would suggest . " The Nation ran a series of articles about the many controversies of his presidency . 
 = = Gallery = = 
 = Harvey Kurtzman 's Jungle Book = 
 Harvey Kurtzman 's Jungle Book is a 1959 graphic novel by American cartoonist Harvey Kurtzman . The satirical stories are aimed at an adult audience , in contrast to Kurtzman 's earlier work for adolescents in periodicals such as Mad . The social satire in the book 's four stories targets Peter Gunn @-@ style private @-@ detective shows , Westerns such as Gunsmoke , capitalist avarice in the publishing industry , Freudian pop psychology , and lynch @-@ hungry yokels in the South . Kurtzman 's character Goodman Beaver makes his first appearance in one of the stories . 
 Kurtzman created the satirical Mad in 1952 , but left its publisher EC Comics in 1956 after a dispute over financial control . After two failed attempts with similar publications , Kurtzman proposed Jungle Book as an all @-@ original cartoon book to Ballantine Books to replace its successful series of Mad collections , which had moved to another publisher . Ballantine accepted Kurtzman 's proposal , albeit with reservations about its commercial viability . It was the first mass @-@ market paperback of original comics published in the United States . Though it was not a financial success , Jungle Book attracted fans and critics for its brushwork , satirical adult @-@ oriented humor , experimental dialogue balloons , and adventurous page and panel designs . 
 = = Contents = = 
 The full title of the book is Harvey Kurtzman 's Jungle Book : Or , Up from the Apes ! ( and Right Back Down ) — In Which Are Described in Words and Pictures Businessmen , Private Eyes , Cowboys , and Other Heroes All Exhibiting the Progress of Man from the Darkness of the Cave into the Light of Civilization by Means of Television , Wide Screen Movies , the Stone Axe , and Other Useful Arts . At 140 pages , Jungle Book remains Kurtzman 's longest solo work . Freed from the length constraints of magazine pieces , Kurtzman was able to make inventive use of page and panel rhythms . According to critic and publisher Kim Thompson , his satire never had " more pitiless a bite " at any other time in his career . Kurtzman had aimed his Mad stories at an adolescent audience ; his targeting Jungle Book at an adult audience was uncommon in American comics . 
 Four stories make up the book : 
 = = = " Thelonius Violence , Like Private Eye " = = = 
 Thelonius Violence speaks in jazz slang while surrounded by beautiful women and jazz background music , which was a parody of the jazz @-@ choreographed fight scenes in the Peter Gunn television series . Violence 's job is to protect a young , vapid woman named Lolita Nabokov who is being blackmailed over her infidelity . Violence suffers the onslaughts of a thug who attempts to keep him away from the young woman , but in the end it is revealed that the thug and Violence are partners in her extortion . 
 In his parody , Kurtzman retained little from the original Peter Gunn aside from the main character . Kurtzman stated he " was trying to get ... that Henry Mancini feel to the story " . " Thelonius Violence " appears first in the book , but was one of the last stories to be completed . It remained a favorite of Kurtzman 's , as he " had control of this story . The action and line are good . It took time and practice and effort to get it , but it 's there . " 
 = = = " The Organization Man in the Gray Flannel Executive Suit " = = = 
 Goodman Beaver is an editor hired by Schlock Publications Inc . During his time there , he loses his youthful idealism and succumbs to the corruption he finds in the publishing world . Goodman finds himself sexually harassing the secretaries , just as the other cynical executives at Schlock do , and ends up stealing from the company . 
 Goodman Beaver was a stand @-@ in for Kurtzman himself in this semi @-@ autobiographical tale . At this point in his career , Kurtzman had had several negative experiences with publishers , and he used this story to satirize the corrupting influence of capitalism and power . Kurtzman 's memories of his time at Timely Comics were a strong influence on the Schlock Publications he portrayed ; Timely publisher Martin Goodman was Kurtzman 's model for the publisher in the story . Kurtzman also used Burt Lancaster as his model for the editor of the men 's magazine in the story , and Hugh Hefner was his model for the editor of the " girlie " magazine . As Goodman Beaver did in the story , early in his career Kurtzman worked making crossword puzzles for Goodman . The title is an amalgamation of three bestselling 1950s novels : Executive Suite ( 1952 ) by Cameron Hawley , The Man in the Gray Flannel Suit ( 1955 ) by Sloan Wilson , and The Organization Man ( 1956 ) by William H. Whyte . 
 = = = " Compulsion on the Range " = = = 
 " Compulsion on the Range " is a satire that blends Westerns and Freudian pop psychology . In the 1950s , a trend of " adult " Westerns appeared in which characters were given psychological backgrounds to explain their motivations , as in The Left Handed Gun , in which an angst @-@ ridden Billy the Kid gets his revenge after losing his father figure . In " Compulsion " , a psychologist tries to work out why Marshall Matt Dolin ( a parody of James <unk> as Marshal Matt Dillon from the popular Gunsmoke TV show ) insists on trying to outshoot Johnny <unk> , chasing him across the West . 
 " Compulsion " was the third story in the book , but the first to be drawn , and was Kurtzman 's least favorite , as he thought he had yet to perfect the style he had developed for the book . The story recycled ideas from a Kurtzman strip called " Endings to End the Fast Draw " that TV Guide had rejected in 1958 . 
 = = = " Decadence Degenerated " = = = 
 One of Kurtzman 's favorites , " Decadence Degenerated " is set in a town in the Deep South called <unk> , where nothing happens until local beauty Honey Lou is found murdered . A quiet bookworm named Si Mednick is lynched for the murder because , as one of the yokels declares , " You cain not truss [ sic ] a man who reads ! " The town sheriff overlooks the lynching , despite the presence of a " Northern " reporter — actually from the northern part of the state . 
 At the time the story appeared , Hollywood was releasing adaptations of works set in the South by writers such as Tennessee Williams and William Faulkner . However , Kurtzman said his inspiration came from his real @-@ life memories of Paris , Texas , where he was stationed during World War II . He learned the Southern drawl used in the story from what he heard at United Service Organizations ( USO ) dances . He recalled , " I just wanted a parody of that town . I worked from memory . " The scene in which the unemployed townsmen mentally undress Honey Lou affected Art Spiegelman , who saw the possibilities of the comics medium in the formalities of the scene 's portrayal of motion . 
 = = Style and themes = = 
 The black @-@ and @-@ white art is in loose , fluid , and sketchy brushwork with a gray wash . The drawings are in an exaggerated cartoon style , with rounded , fluid , elongated characters . The rendering is simple and clean , and characters often have mere circles for eyes . Most of the women lack noses except when drawn in profile . Kurtzman blends the verbal and visual aspects of the work — for example , when an enraged Goodman Beaver confronts his diminutive boss Mr. Schlock , Goodman is graphically overwhelmed by Schlock 's word balloons , which demonstrates Goodman 's helpless subservience and Schlock 's effortless psychological dominance over his employees . 
 Kurtzman lettered the dialogue in an expressive , handwriting @-@ like style . Unlike as in the majority of American comic books , Kurtzman did not letter using all capitals . His tall and thin dialogue balloons necessitated frequent hyphenation , which made the dialogue more difficult to read . Kurtzman experimented with drawing on blue @-@ lined paper ; the blue lines were not supposed to reproduce visibly when the book was printed , but they were unintentionally reinforced by the gray wash Kurtzman used in the artwork . 
 Kurtzman used the book to lampoon humankind 's inability or incompetence , its failure to reach its supposed aspirations , and its self @-@ delusion . He also targeted middlebrow entertainment , deflating its pretensions . The women in the stories are extraordinarily curvaceous and are frequently objectified — although the character Sam in " Decadence Degenerated " avoids being ogled or groped , it is only because she is depicted as repulsive . 
 = = Publication = = 
 Kurtzman founded the satirical Mad at EC Comics as a color comic book in 1952 , and turned it into a black @-@ and @-@ white comics magazine in 1955 . In 1956 , Kurtzman left over a dispute with EC Comics publisher William Gaines about financial control . Kurtzman tried his hand at another magazine in 1957 with the financial backing of Hugh Hefner . The result , Trump , was slick and lavish , and lasted only two issues before Hefner canceled it . Kurtzman then co @-@ founded and co @-@ published Humbug along with a group of Mad and Trump artists . In 1958 , after eleven unprofitable issues , Humbug also came to an end . Kurtzman was left disillusioned and cynical about the business end of publishing , and struggling financially , with a wife , three children , and a mortgage to take care of . 
 While still at EC , Kurtzman had overseen the first five Mad pocket books published by Ballantine Books , which went on to become perennial sellers with sales in the millions . When Kurtzman left EC , his royalties from the successful books ceased and Gaines had Kurtzman 's name removed from them . In 1958 Gaines abandoned Ballantine for Signet Books . Kurtzman proposed an original paperback to Ian Ballantine , who was looking for something to replace the Mad line . Kurtzman was well respected at th Ballantine offices , and it was editor Bernard <unk> @-@ Cliff who provided Kurtzman with the postcard of the gap @-@ toothed character that was to become Mad 's mascot Alfred E. Neuman . Ballantine had earlier published The Humbug Digest in the same format with material culled from Kurtzman 's Humbug magazine , though it fared poorly in the market . 
 Rather than reprint material cut @-@ and @-@ pasted to fit the narrow pages of the paperback format as had been done with Ballantine 's Mad books , Kurtzman wanted to create new material designed to fit the page dimensions . Ballantine accepted Kurtzman 's proposal on faith , but he had reservations . He suspected it was the Mad brand name that sold books rather than Kurtzman 's name , although the artist had been the creative force behind Mad . In January Kurtzman signed a contract with Ballantine that came with an advance of $ 1 @,@ 500 with a 4 % royalty per copy sold ; the <unk> was 144 pages by May 1 , 1959 . The contracted book was to be called Pleasure Package , for which <unk> mocked up a cover , but appeared as Harvey Kurtzman 's Jungle Book . 
 When it was published in September 1959 , Jungle Book was the first mass @-@ market paperback of original comics content in the United States . The 35 ¢ book had small dimensions at 4 1 ⁄ 4 × 7 inches ( 11 × 18 cm ) and was poorly printed from low @-@ grade Kodak Velox onto low @-@ quality paper . Ballantine printed 150 @,@ 000 copies for the books first run , a low number for the company . Jungle Book sold poorly ; after five years and despite an offer of copies with subscriptions to Kurtzman 's Help ! magazine only 78 @,@ 000 copies had sold — for Ballantine to break even 107 @,@ 000 copies would have to have been sold . Ballantine pulped the remaining copies , and Kurtzman and the company 's relationship came to an end . 
 Kurtzman lamented the book 's poor sales as he " truly liked the format " . Kurtzman had been developing at least one other story , a science @-@ fiction parody , but abandoned it after two pages . If Jungle Book had been a market success , Kurtzman had intended to continue producing books in the format . Kurtzman reprinted " Decadence Degenerated " in the second issue of Help ! , a magazine he edited in the 1960s . " Compulsion on the Range " was reprinted in the underground comic book Yellow Dog # 15 in 1969 . Kitchen Sink Press reprinted Jungle Book in 1986 in a deluxe hardcover format with the pages reproduced at the size in which they were drawn . The reprinting included an introduction by Art Spiegelman . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Jungle Book sold poorly , but developed a fan following and became a collectors ' item . This group included pioneering underground cartoonists such as Joel Beck , Denis Kitchen , Jay Lynch , Spain Rodriguez , Gilbert Shelton , Art Spiegelman , Skip Williamson , and Robert Crumb , who wrote " [ s ] ome of [ Kurtzman 's ] greatest stuff was done in a little Ballantine Book called Harvey Kurtzman ’ s Jungle Book " . Goodman Beaver later appeared in a series of stories drawn by Will Elder in Kurtzman 's Help ! , and was later adapted into Little Annie Fanny in Playboy magazine . 
 Biographers Denis Kitchen and Paul Buhle see the book as a precursor of the graphic novel . In 1962 , Kurtzman made another aborted attempt at this form with Marley 's Ghost , an adaptation of A Christmas Carol by Charles Dickens , a project he had conceived in 1954 . He finished seven of the project 's projected 100 pages , and had long @-@ time collaborator Jack Davis reinterpret one of the pages as part of the proposal . The project failed to interest a publisher . Graphic novels did not start to become widespread until 1978 , a year which saw the publication of McGregor and <unk> 's Sabre and Eisner 's A Contract with God , the latter a book also made up of four short stories . By the time of the publication of these books a well @-@ organized comics fandom had developed whose conventions , fanzines , and comic shops provided a more receptive environment for such innovations . 
 The Comics Journal placed Jungle Book 26th on its 1999 list of " Top 100 English @-@ Language Comics of the Century " , along with four other works with which Kurtzman was involved . Kim Thompson described the book as " the biggest ' if ' in comics ' history : What if it had been a success ? " Thompson speculated on what Kurtzman may have been capable of if he had not had to resort to teaching , illustration , and Little Annie Fanny . Thompson called the book " one of the artform 's most stunning successes , and one of the field 's most heartbreaking failures " . Kurtzman 's self @-@ portrait from the back cover of the book has become iconic , and is used in connection with the Harvey Awards , named in Kurtzman 's honor . 
 = Bovista pila = 
 Bovista pila , commonly known as the tumbling puffball , is a species of puffball fungus in the family Agaricaceae . A temperate species , it is widely distributed in North America , where it grows on the ground on road sides , in pastures , grassy areas , and open woods . There are few well @-@ documented occurrences of B. pila outside North America . B. pila closely resembles the European B. nigrescens , from which it can be reliably distinguished only by microscopic characteristics . 
 The egg @-@ shaped to spherical puffball of B. pila measures up to 8 cm ( 3 in ) in diameter . Its white outer skin flakes off in age to reveal a shiny , bronze @-@ colored inner skin that encloses a spore sac . The spores are more or less spherical , with short tube @-@ like extensions . The puffballs are initially attached to the ground by a small cord that readily breaks off , leaving the mature puffball to be blown about . Young puffballs are edible while their internal tissue is still white and firm . B. pila puffballs have been used by the Chippewa people of North America as a charm , and as an <unk> medicine for livestock farming in western Canada . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The species was described as new to science in 1873 by Miles Joseph Berkeley and Moses Ashley Curtis , from specimens collected in Wisconsin . In their short description , they emphasize the short pedicels ( tube @-@ like extensions ) on the spores , and indicate that these pedicels — initially about as long as the spore is wide — soon break off . According to the nomenclatural authority MycoBank , taxonomic synonyms ( i.e. , having different type specimens ) include Pier Andrea Saccardo 's 1882 Bovista <unk> , Job Bicknell Ellis and Benjamin Matlack Everhart 's 1885 Mycenastrum oregonense , and Andrew Price Morgan 's 1892 Bovista montana . William Chambers Coker and John Nathaniel Couch called B. pila " the American representative of B. nigrescens in Europe " , referring to their close resemblance . 
 Bovista pila is commonly known as the tumbling puffball , referring to the propensity of detached puffballs to be blown about by the wind . The specific epithet pila is Latin for " ball " . 
 = = Description = = 
 B. pila has an egg @-@ shaped to roughly spherical fruit body measuring up to 8 cm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) in diameter . The thin ( 0 @.@ 25 millimeter ) outer tissue layer ( exoperidium ) is white to slightly pink . Its surface texture , initially appearing as if covered with minute flakes of bran ( furfuraceous ) , becomes marked with irregular , crooked lines ( <unk> ) . The exoperidium flakes off in maturity to reveal a thin , inner peridium ( endoperidium ) . The color of this shiny inner skin , splotched with darker areas , resembles the metallic colors of bronze and copper . Bovista pila puffballs are attached to the ground by a small cord ( a rhizomorph ) that typically breaks off when the puffball is mature . The interior flesh , or gleba , comprises spores and surrounding capillitial tissue . Initially white and firm with tiny , irregularly shaped chambers ( visible with a magnifying glass ) , the gleba later becomes greenish and then brown and powdery as the spores mature . In age , the upper surface of the puffball cracks and tears open . The resilient texture of the inner peridium enables the puffball to maintain its ball @-@ like shape after it has detached from the ground . As the old puffballs get blown around , spores get shaken out of the tears . 
 The spores of Bovista pila are spherical , smooth ( when viewed with a light microscope ) , and measure 3 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 5 μm . They have thick walls and very short pedicels . Basidia ( spore @-@ bearing cells ) are club @-@ shaped , measuring 8 – 10 @.@ 5 by 14 – 18 μm . They are usually four @-@ spored ( rarely , some are three @-@ spored ) , with unequal length sterigmata between 4 and 7 @.@ 4 μm . The capillitia ( sterile fibers interspersed among the spores ) tend to form loose balls about 2 mm in diameter . The main , trunk @-@ like branches of the capillitia are up to 15 μm in diameter , with walls that are typically 2 – 3 μm thick . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Characteristics typically used to identify Bovista pila in the field include its relatively small size , the metallic lustre of the endoperidium , and the presence of rhizomorphs . B. plumbea is similar in appearance , but can be distinguished by its typically smaller fruit body and the blue @-@ gray color of its inner coat . Unlike B. pila , B. plumbea is attached to the ground by a mass of mycelial fibers known as a sterile base . Microscopically , B. plumbea has larger spores ( 5 – 7 by 4 @.@ 5 – 6 @.@ 0 μm ) ; with long pedicels ( 9 – 14 μm ) . Another lookalike is the European B. nigrescens , which can most reliably be distinguished from B. pila by its microscopic characteristics . The spores of B. nigrescens are oval rather than spherical , rougher than those of B. pila , and have a hyaline ( translucent ) pedicel about equal in length to the spore diameter ( 5 μm ) . The puffball <unk> pila was named for its external resemblance to B. pila . Found in Texas and Argentina , it has much larger , warted spores that measure 7 @.@ 9 – 9 @.@ 4 μm . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 Bovista pila is found in corrals , stables , roadsides , pastures and open woods . The puffballs fruit singly , scattered , or in groups on the ground . It is also known to grow in lawns and parks . The puffball spore cases are persistent and may overwinter . Fruiting occurs throughout the mushroom season . 
 Bovista pila is widely distributed in North America ( including Hawaii ) . There are few well @-@ documented occurrences of B. pila outside North America . Hanns Kreisel recorded it from Russia , in what is now known as the Sakha Republic . The puffball has been tentatively identified from the Galápagos Islands , and has been collected from Pernambuco and São Paulo , Brazil . The South American material , however , has grayish @-@ yellow coloration in the gleba , which may be indicative of not yet fully matured specimens . This renders identification of this material tentative , as unripe material may have different microscopic characteristics from mature material . Although the puffball has been reported from both the European part of Turkey as well as Anatolia , and from Morocco , reports without supporting microscopic or macroscopic information are viewed with skepticism . 
 = = Uses = = 
 Edible when the interior gleba is still firm and white , Bovista pila puffballs have a mild taste and odor . 
 The puffball was used by the Chippewa people of North America as a charm , and medicinally as a <unk> . In British Columbia , Canada , it is used by livestock farmers who are not allowed to use conventional drugs under certified organic programs . The spore mass of the puffball is applied to bleeding hoof trimming ' nicks ' , and then wrapped with breathable first @-@ aid tape . It is also similarly used on bleeding areas resulting from <unk> , and wounds resulting from sternal abscesses . 
 = Cadet Nurse Corps = 
 The United States Cadet Nurse Corps was established by the U.S. Congress on June 15 , 1943 , and signed into law by president Franklin D. Roosevelt on July 1 , 1943 . Its purpose was to ensure the country had enough nurses to care for its citizens at home and abroad during World War II . It was a non @-@ discriminatory program that allowed Native Americans , African Americans , and relocated Japanese Americans to participate . The Corps was supervised by the United States Public Health Service ( USPHS ) , whose duty was to train young women as nurses during the war . 
 The program was open to all women between the ages of 17 and 35 , in good health , who had graduated from an accredited high school . Successful applicants were eligible for a government subsidy , paying for tuition , books , uniforms , and a stipend . In exchange , they were required to pledge to actively serve in essential civilian or federal government services for the duration of World War II . All state nursing schools were eligible to participate in the program . However , they needed to be accredited by the accrediting agency in their state , and connected with a hospital that had been approved by the American College of Surgeons . 
 Cadet nurses came from across the United States and from all backgrounds . Some joined because they wanted to become nurses , others for the free education , and others joined because their country needed them . Attrition rates for cadets were comparable to those reported for other nursing schools in the same period . The corps was the largest of the federal nurse @-@ training programs , and allowed young women to serve their country in uniform and without discrimination . The American Hospital Association credited the cadet student nurses with helping to prevent the collapse of civilian nursing during the war . 
 The unique feature of the program was its accelerated training curricula . The nursing schools were required to compress the traditional nursing program of 36 months to 30 months . Of the 1 @,@ 300 schools of nursing in the country , 1 @,@ 125 participated in the program . The Corps operated from 1943 until 1948 , and during this period 179 @,@ 294 student nurses enrolled in the program and 124 @,@ 065 of them graduated from participating nursing schools . The enrollment included over 3 @,@ 000 African Americans , 40 Native Americans , and 400 Japanese Americans . The federal government spent $ 160 @,@ 326 @,@ 237 on the nursing program . 
 The Cadet Nurse Corps alleviated the critical shortage of nurses during World War II and thus fulfilled its congressional mandate . In the process , it positively influenced the way future nurses would be educated and trained in the United States . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Nurses were in short supply before the United States entered World War II . In July 1940 , a meeting was organized by the American Nurses Association to discuss the role nursing might play in wartime . Those in attendance included representatives from six nursing organizations , the American Red Cross , and federal agencies involved with nursing . The gathering resulted in the formation of the Nursing Council for National Defense . One of the council 's first acts was to survey nursing resources and schools throughout the country . They determined that 100 @,@ 000 nurses were eligible for military service and found most nursing schools were ill @-@ equipped to expand their instructional or housing capabilities . In response , the Council urged the federal government to appropriate public funds to support nursing education . 
 In the subsequent fiscal years 1941 and 1942 , the federal government partially funded the education of 12 @,@ 000 students at 309 nursing schools . Through that initiative , 3 @,@ 800 inactive nurses received refresher courses and 4 @,@ 800 graduated nurses received postgraduate training . By the end of 1942 , 47 @,@ 500 students were enrolled in nursing schools but that did not meet the country 's need . At this point , it was clear that nurses could not be trained quickly enough to keep abreast of both civilian and military needs . The need for additional federal aid for the recruitment of nurses became apparent when the U.S. Army and Navy called for 2 @,@ 500 new nurses each month during the fiscal year 1943 . 
 Meanwhile , supporters of nurse training programs recommended the doubling of federal aid for basic nursing education in the fiscal year 1943 . Representative Frances P. Bolton of Ohio , an advocate of nursing , supported the proposed increase in federal aid . She told Congress further expansion of nursing schools might be needed the following year . 
 = = = Creation of the program = = = 
 On March 29 , 1943 , Bolton introduced H.R. 2326 , a bill that would " provide for the training of nurses for the armed forces , government and civilian hospitals , health agencies , and war industries through grants to the institutions providing the training " . The act also stated that the nurses trained by its funding would be a uniformed body . An amendment by the Senate prohibited discrimination against race , creed , or color . The Nurse Training Act , also called the Bolton Act , was passed unanimously by Congress on June 15 , 1943 , and became Public Law No. 74 on July 1 , 1943 . The Division of Nurse Education of the USPHS was established to supervise the program and was answerable to the U.S. Surgeon General , Thomas Parran , Jr . He appointed Lucile Petry , a registered nurse ( RN ) , as director of the corps ; she was the first woman to head a division in the USPHS . 
 Shortly after the Nurse Training Act was passed , the Surgeon General sent a lengthy telegram outlining the program to 1 @,@ 300 nursing schools in the United States and Puerto Rico . This was followed up with applications and instructions sent by mail . Hawaii 's two nursing schools were not eligible for the program because they were in the war zone ; Alaska did not have any nursing schools at the time . 
 Regulations required interested nursing schools to : ( 1 ) be state accredited ; ( 2 ) be connected with a hospital approved by the American College of Surgeons or a hospital of equal standards ; ( 3 ) maintain adequate instructional facilities and personnel ; ( 4 ) provide adequate clinical experience in four basic services — medicine , surgery , pediatrics and obstetrics ; ( 5 ) provide maintenance and a stipend of $ 30 @.@ 00 for all Senior Cadet Nurses , or arrange for their requested transfer to federal or other hospitals ; ( 6 ) provide satisfactory living facilities and an adequate health service for students ; ( 7 ) provide for an accelerated program ; and ( 8 ) restrict its hours of practice . The standards of the National League of Nursing Education were adopted to evaluate the participating schools . After issuing these regulations , the Surgeon General said , " The schools of nursing are free to select students , to plan curricula , and to formulate policies consistent with the Act and the traditions of the institution concerned . This is a partnership job between the USPHS , the institutions , and the students ... " 
 The Federal Security Administrator was required by law to appoint an advisory committee for federal nurse training programs . The committee , which was appointed for the Nurse Training Act , consisted of people in nursing and related fields drawn from various parts of the country . Once in place , the committee met with designated federal officials and formulated the regulations necessary to carry out the act . The agreed @-@ upon rules were then approved by the Surgeon General and published in the Federal Register . The committee was also responsible for naming the new program . The Victory Nurse Corps and the Student War Nursing Reserve were considered , but both were rejected in favor of the United States Cadet Nurse Corps . 
 By the time the Nurse Training Act was passed by congress in 1943 , the U.S. had been involved in World War II for nearly two years , and a serious shortage of nurses already existed at home and abroad . The Cadet Nurse Corps was open to all women between the ages of 17 and 35 , in good health , who had graduated from an accredited high school . Marriage was permissible subject to guidelines . Successful applicants were eligible for a government subsidy , which paid for tuition , books , uniforms , and a living stipend . In exchange , student cadets were required to pledge to actively serve in essential civilian or federal government services for the duration of World War II . All state accredited schools of nursing were eligible to participate in the program ; however , each school was required to apply individually . Of the 1 @,@ 300 nursing schools in the country , 1 @,@ 125 participated . For the purposes of the program , the traditional 36 @-@ month nurse training program was accelerated to a 30 @-@ month program . Senior nursing students were required to work for a six @-@ month period in a federal or non @-@ federal hospital , or in other health agency . In return , the federal government would pay the schools for the related tuition and fees of the students . 
 = = = Recruitment = = = 
 The USPHS and cooperating groups created the plan for the recruitment of cadet nursing students . It was broad in scope to attract the maximum number of potential applicants in the shortest time . The primary target was the high school graduate but college girls were also recruited . The selling point of the program was that the cadets would obtain a free education in a proud profession and provide an essential service to their country . Appeals to join the Corps reached more than 7 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 newspaper and magazine readers , millions of radio listeners , and movie patrons around the country . Pleas were made in a thousand speeches , through 2 @,@ 800 @,@ 000 car @-@ boards and billboards , and in several million leaflets . U.S. corporations donated $ 13 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 worth of advertising space and technical services to the program in one year . Few media sources lacked advertising for the Corps . 
 For example , Eastman Kodak sponsored a full @-@ page advertisement in Life magazine ( January 24 , 1944 ) touting the U.S. Cadet Nurse Corps as a way to serve the country in the war job with a future . The ad proposed that young women who could qualify as a Cadet Nurse were lucky girls , lucky in so many different ways . Ads promised free training with pay , room and board , and gray uniforms with gray berets . The uniforms were sold with the slogan " There 's one for summer and one for winter , and it 's hard to say which is the smarter , which you 'll wear with more pride " . Applicants were assured they could wear something " frilly and feminine " for dances and they would have time for dating . 
 In 1944 , David O. Selznick 's Vanguard Films produced a short film , Reward Unlimited , to promote the Cadet Nurse Corps . Starring Dorothy McGuire in one of her first films , and directed by Jacques Tourneur , the 10 @-@ minute film was exhibited in theaters and at Cadet Nurse Corps recruitment events in 1944 and 1945 . The story , by Mary C. McCall , Jr . , dramatizes the choice that young Peggy Adams makes to become a nurse , her training , and her volunteering for military nursing service . The cast includes Aline MacMahon , James Brown , Spring Byington and Tom Tully . 
 Recruitment centers were established by the American Hospital Association in all 1 @,@ 125 participating nursing schools . Using recruiting booths , volunteers disseminated information about the opportunities offered by the Corps to potential candidates . State and local nursing councils , and many other organizations , associations , and volunteers aided the recruitment effort . 65 @,@ 521 nursing students — 521 more than projected — registered for the program in the fiscal year 1943 , the first year of enrollment . In the 1944 enrollment period , 61 @,@ 471 registered , exceeding the estimate by 1 @,@ 471 . In the 1945 enrollment period , 3 @,@ 000 students were admitted to what would be the final class of the program . As a result of the non @-@ discriminatory provision , by 1945 , over 3 @,@ 000 African Americans , 40 Native Americans , and 400 Japanese Americans had enrolled in the Corps . 
 = = = Uniforms = = = 
 The official outdoor uniforms of the Cadet Nurse Corps were distinctive ; there was one for summer and another for winter . The summer uniform consisted of a two @-@ piece , gray @-@ and @-@ white @-@ striped cotton suit and a gray twill raincoat . The winter uniform was a gray , woollen , single @-@ breasted jacket suit , a gored skirt and a gray velour overcoat . A gray Montgomery beret was worn with both uniforms . The winter uniform was one of three designs created by professional designers and introduced at a fashion show in New York City on August 16 , 1943 . Thirty @-@ two fashion editors judged this uniform and the Montgomery beret — resembling the one worn by the British general — as the winners . The uniform was " ... heralded as the most attractive for all women who served during World War II , provided a strong incentive for young women to join the corps " . 
 The official outdoor uniforms — with the exception of blouse , gloves , shoes , and stockings — were supplied to the cadets by the institution in which they were enrolled . The students paid for the items . Indoor uniforms varied from school to school , and were purchased by the school from federal grants . Models recruiting for the corps wore the first available cadet uniforms , which were first issued to cadets in May 1944 . 
 The insignia of the Cadet Nurse Corps was the Maltese Cross . The patch was worn on the left shoulder of the uniforms and on the student nurse uniform of the official school of nursing . The USPHS official insignia was worn on jacket lapels and was also present on the silver buttons . On the Montgomery beret , the USPHS insignia was worn beneath the spread eagle and the American Shield . 
 = = = Training = = = 
 A key feature of the Cadet Nurse Corps program was its accelerated training curricula . Participating schools of nursing were required to compress the traditional nursing program of 36 months to 30 months . They were also bound to provide the students with the four clinical experiences of medical , surgical , obstetrics , and pediatrics . The students became senior cadets in the last six months before graduation , requiring them to serve in a federal or civilian hospital . They rendered full @-@ time service equivalent to that of a graduate nurse . During their first nine months of service , the cadets were protected by regulation from working on the wards for more than 24 hours each week . Junior cadets typically worked between 40 and 48 hours each week , including classes . Senior cadets were free of classes . All State Boards of Nursing modified their regulations to agree with the accelerated program . 
 The quality and standards of the educational systems in which the cadets would be trained varied considerably . In 1943 , nursing schools , hospital administrators , and government officials assured the U.S. Congress the federally , subsidized training of nurses would at least conform to minimum standards . With his rule @-@ making powers , the Surgeon General issued regulations ; schools had to : 
 be accredited by the appropriate accrediting agency for schools of nursing in the state or territory ; 
 be connected with a hospital that had been approved by the American College of Surgeons , or that maintained standards of nursing equivalent to those required by the college . In rural schools of nursing , the major hospital clinical unit had to meet these standards ; 
 require for admission not less than graduation from an accredited high school ; 
 maintain an educational staff adequate to provide satisfactory instruction and supervision ; 
 provide adequate clinical experience in the four basic services – medicine , surgery , pediatrics , and obstetrics ; 
 provide well @-@ balanced schedules of organized instruction , experience and study ; 
 provide adequate and well equipped class rooms , laboratories , libraries , and other necessary facilities for the program ; 
 provide satisfactory living facilities and health service for students . 
 Institutions offering degrees in nursing had to be accredited by the appropriate nursing agency for universities and colleges . The curriculum had to include all units of instruction necessary to conform with accepted practices in basic nursing education . It had to be arranged so the entire program of combined study and practice would be completed in 24 to 30 months . The standards of the National League of Nursing Education were to be used as a guide for evaluating the adequacy of school facilities to meet the requirements specified . 
 Congressional hearings on appropriations emphasized that all schools — regardless of location or size — should be allowed to participate in the cadet nurse program . However , when the educational consultants Division of Nurse Education tested the standards against actual conditions , they did not seem possible for some schools to achieve . Adjustments were made for certain schools , setting lower standards for them . They would be judged by criteria included the qualifications and number of instructional personnel , their clinical facilities , the curricula , the weekly schedule of hours , and the health and guidance programs . Borderline schools produced a small percentage of the total cadet force . The educational consultants traveled thousands of miles , wrote thousands of letters , and provided support services while monitoring the standards of the 1 @,@ 125 approved schools of nursing . 
 = = = Cadet nurses = = = 
 Cadet nurses came from across the U.S. and from all economic backgrounds . Some joined because they wished to become nurses , others for the education , and others joined for the temporary World War II service . Cadets shared accepted the pledge to serve and contributed nursing services to the nation when it was needed . The Cadet Pledge was : 
 At this moment of my induction into the United States Cadet Nurse Corps of the United States Public Health Service , I am solemnly aware of the obligations I assume toward my country and toward my chosen profession ; I will follow faithfully the teachings of my instructors and the guidance of the physicians with whom I work ; I will hold in trust the finest traditions of nursing and the spirit of the Corps ; I will keep my body strong , my mind alert , and my heart steadfast ; I will be kind , tolerant , and understanding ; Above all , I will dedicate myself now and forever to the triumph of life over death ; As a Cadet nurse , I pledge to my county my service in essential nursing for the duration of the war . 
 The cadet pledge was considered a statement of intention rather than a binding contract . The attrition rate for cadets was comparable to that reported for other schools of nursing in the same period . The main cause of withdrawals was homesickness ; some married students withdrew to be with their husbands when they were released from the military ; others when the hostilities ceased ; some failed in their studies ; others left for health reasons ; and some left because of the realities of a nursing career . 
 The Cadet Nurses Corps was the largest of the federal nurse @-@ training programs ; it allowed young women to serve their country in uniform and without discrimination . It also influenced the way in which nurses would be educated and trained in the United States . The American Hospital Association credited the cadet student nurses with helping to prevent the collapse of civilian nursing care , and commended them for replacing graduate nurses who enlisted in the armed forces during World War II . 
 = = = End of the Corps = = = 
 Following the surrender of Japan in August 1945 , President Harry Truman set October 5 , 1945 , as the final date for new student admissions , allowing for an “ orderly transition of an important wartime activity ” . At the time , 116 @,@ 498 students were still in training and 3 @,@ 000 more were admitted for the fall and final term . Student nurses were providing 80 % of the country 's nursing care in more than 1 @,@ 000 civilian hospitals . Of the 1 @,@ 300 nursing schools contacted by the Surgeon General , 1 @,@ 125 participated in the Cadet Nurse Corps . The program was operational from 1943 to 1948 , which included three enrollment periods , or fall terms : the first term was 1943 , the second was 1944 , and the third and final term was 1945 . During this time , 179 @,@ 294 student nurses enrolled in the program and 124 @,@ 065 of them graduated from participating nursing schools . 
 The federal government spent $ 160 @,@ 326 @,@ 237 on the Nurse Training Act of 1943 for administration , uniforms , maintenance , tuition , fees and stipends . By the end of the program , the records of all participating schools of nursing had been audited by up to 32 field auditors , who were assigned to each ( USPHS ) district office and covered the schools in that area . The work of the field auditors resulted in the recovery of $ 2 @,@ 200 @,@ 000 of prepaid funds . 
 In January 1945 , the Surgeon General , Thomas Parran , Jr . , appeared before the House Committee on Military Affairs and said , " In my opinion , the country has received and increasingly will receive substantial returns on this investment . We can not measure what the loss to the country would have been if civilian nursing service had collapsed , any more than we could measure the cost of failure at the Normandy beachheads . " 
 = A Fresh Start = 
 A Fresh Start is a 1910 American silent short drama produced by the Thanhouser Company . The film is the story of Jim , a chauffeur , who is fired from his job for drunkenness . Jim becomes a tramp , but decides to reform after a little girl orders her butler to give him food . He encounters her again at the zoo and notices that two men are following the girl and her parents . Jim uncovers a plot to kidnap her and takes the place of their chauffeur . Jim then drives the kidnappers to the police station and secures a new position as the family 's chauffeur . According to a trade review , the actual kidnapping scene and where Jim overpowers the villain 's chauffeur is not actually depicted . The reviewer also stated the strength of the production is not in the plot , but in the staging and photography . The film was released on September 2 , 1910 and it likely had a wide national release . The film is presumed lost . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Though the film is presumed lost , a synopsis survives in The Moving Picture World from September 3 , 1910 . It states : " Jim , an expert chauffeur , is discharged from a garage , for <unk> . Penniless and being unable to obtain a new situation , he takes to the road , a common tramp . At one house where he applies for food , he is harshly refused , and is about to turn away and try his luck elsewhere , when little Marie , the daughter of the house , comes to his assistance and orders the butler to at once give him the food he requires . She also picks a rose for him from the garden . Jim strolls into a nearby park and sits on a bench to enjoy his lunch . He is about to take a drink from the ever @-@ present flask , which he takes from his pocket , when the sight of the rose , which the sweet @-@ faced little girl gave him , inspires him with a desire to reform . He throws the flask from him , and refreshed by the lunch , he starts out with a new ambition to face the world . " 
 " Little Marie also visits the park with her parents . While viewing the wonderful zoo it contains she is seen and recognized by Jim . While admiring the little girl and viewing her enjoyment over the wonders of the zoo , Jim notices that two evil @-@ looking men are apparently shadowing the little one and her parents . Jim 's suspicions are aroused , and he determines to watch closely the actions of the mysterious pair . He finds that they have arranged with a chauffeur to assist in carrying off little Marie and holding her for ransom . Seizing an opportune moment , Jim forces the plotting chauffeur to turn over his auto , and disguised in the other man 's coat , cap and goggles , he calmly awaits the conspirators . When the two wicked men return , after having successful enticed Marie away from her parents , they give the driver of their auto directions as to where to drive . Jim simply nods assent and drives quickly off , but instead of taking them to the destination they directed , he lands them safe at the police station , where they are quickly taken into custody . Here Marie is united to her parents , whom she easily persuades to offer her rescuer a life position . " 
 = = Production = = 
 The writer of the scenario is unknown , but it was most likely Lloyd Lonergan . He was an experienced newspaperman employed by The New York Evening World while writing scripts for the Thanhouser productions . The film director is unknown , but it may have been Barry O 'Neil . Film historian Q. David Bowers does not attribute a cameraman for this production , but at least two possible candidates exist . Blair Smith was the first cameraman of the Thanhouser company , but he was soon joined by Carl Louis Gregory who had years of experience as a still and motion picture photographer . The role of the cameraman was uncredited in 1910 productions . Only the role of Marie Eline is cited by Bowers , but a surviving film still raises the possibility of identifying several more actors in the production . Bowers states that most of the credits are fragmentary for 1910 Thanhouser productions . 
 Little is known on the actual production of the film , but the The New York Dramatic Mirror reviewer provided some insight into the production . The review and the synopsis are at odds on several aspects including on whether or not the man was fired for drunkenness or for no reason . In this case , it can be assumed that a drunken state was either not depicted or done inadequately . The reviewer states the " impossible parts of the plot are gracefully omitted " in reference to the abduction of the little girl played by Marie Eline and the overpowering of the chauffeur . Here the synopsis also differs , saying the girl is enticed away instead of being kidnapped . Though the overpowering of the chauffeur is required and acknowledged in the synopsis , the reviewer makes clear the actual method is not depicted . The reviewer also had a keen eye for detail , stating that the passengers disembarked into the middle of the street instead of on the sidewalk . The final scene 's setting is captured in a surviving film still that shows the little girl persuading her parents to hire Jim in the police station with three officers looking on in the background . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 The single reel drama , approximately 1 @,@ 000 feet long , was released on September 2 , 1910 . The film was distributed by the Motion Picture Distributing and Sales Company . The film likely had a wide release like other Thanhouser releases . Known advertisements by theaters include those in Minnesota , Kansas , and Indiana . The film received mainly positive reviews from trade publications including The New York Dramatic Mirror which stated , " Although the story of the film does not promise a great deal , the scenes are developed with enough care for details to carry it easily . More is due to the stage management in this case than to the author . A chauffeur , dismissed for no reason by his employer , is down and out . <unk> to beggary , he is kindly treated by a little girl whom he later repays by rescuing her from two abductors . The grateful parents immediately give him a new chance at which he doubtless makes good . Except for the point where the beggar overhears the accomplices , the acting is good . The impossible parts of the plot are gracefully omitted - the abduction itself , and the overpowering of the chauffeur who was in the plot . In the last scene it is noted that the occupants of the automobile all disembark into the middle of the street instead of upon the sidewalk . <unk> their excitement excuses their indiscretion . " This review serves to highlight the actual action of the lost film and some of the execution of the scenes . The reviewer states that the chauffeur is dismissed for no reason , whereas the synopsis for drunkenness and it is possible that the scene was not depicted . Walton of The Moving Picture News approved of the film for its plot and execution . The Moving Picture World review is a more neutral one , but it concludes that , " [ p ] <unk> like this might serve as an encouragement to reformation , but it is better to consider them as a species of entertainment , not to be despised , and yet , on the other hand , not to be accepted too literally . " 
 = Thanksgiving ( Family Guy ) = 
 " Thanksgiving " is the sixth episode of the tenth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy . The episode originally aired on Fox in the United States on November 20 , 2011 . The episode follows the Griffin family , and several of their neighbors , as they celebrate the Thanksgiving holiday . As they sit down for dinner , they are shocked to see that Kevin Swanson , son of Joe and Bonnie Swanson , has returned from Iraq . 
 The episode was written by Patrick Meighan and directed by Jerry Langford . It received mostly mixed reviews from critics for its storyline , and many cultural references . According to Nielsen ratings , it was viewed in 6 @.@ 04 million homes in its original airing . The episode featured guest performances by Max Burkholder , Jackson Douglas , Kevin Durand , Colin Ford , Zachary Gordon , Scott Grimes , Julie Hagerty , Jonathan Morgan Heit , Christine Lakin and Patrick Stewart , along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 As the Thanksgiving holiday begins , Lois invites Glenn Quagmire and his father Dan / Ida , the Swansons , Carter and Babs Pewterschmidt , Mayor Adam West , and Carol Pewterschmidt to join the Griffin family in a Thanksgiving dinner . 
 Once the guests arrive , they then begin eating their meal , when suddenly another guest arrives at the door . It is revealed to be Kevin Swanson , the son of Joe and Bonnie Swanson , whom they had presumed had died fighting in the war in Iraq . Overjoyed , they ask why the army had reported that he had died in action . Kevin then tells them a story that he was in a coma following a bomb that had been placed inside a turkey during Thanksgiving years before . Later , while having dessert , Kevin voices his distaste of the war , and reveals several inconsistencies about his time in Iraq . Kevin then tells his father that he had actually gone A.W.O.L. , and because most of his unit was killed in the bombing but he miraculously survived , he faked his own death in order to leave the war and return home . Joe then arrests his son for the crime of desertion with the rest of the family criticizing him for lying about being a war hero . 
 Brian , the family dog , asks Kevin to explain why he deserted the army , with Kevin telling him that he had grown tired of the war , and had befriended many of the Iraqis , leading him to want to try to escape . Kevin and the family then begin fighting over the United States 's occupation of Iraq , with Brian sympathizing with him , and several others , including Quagmire 's Dad , a war veteran , disagreeing with Kevin 's choice to desert the army . Angered , Joe then begins to take his son to jail and handcuffs him . Kevin reminds his father of a time when he let a homeless man get away with stealing a can of tomato soup to feed his hungry family , for whom he had felt sorry . Emotional and sympathetic , Joe agrees to let his son off the hook , and the two make amends . 
 As the family goes to finish eating dinner , another man resembling Kevin Swanson enters the family 's home , saying that the other Kevin is an imposter , but Peter says " Guys , I don 't think we have time for this " and the episode ends . 
 = = Production and development = = 
 The episode was directed by series regular Jerry Langford , shortly after the conclusion of the ninth production season , in his first episode of the season . Langford joined the series in its seventh season , directing the episode " Tales of a Third Grade Nothing " . The episode was written by series regular Patrick Meighan , who joined the show as a writer in its fourth season , writing the episode " 8 Simple Rules for Buying My Teenage Daughter " . Series regulars Peter Shin and James Purdum served as supervising directors , with Andrew Goldberg , Alex Carter , Spencer Porter , Anthony Blasucci , Mike Desilets , and Deepak Sethi serving as staff writers for the episode . Composer Ron Jones , who has worked on the series since its inception , returned to compose the music for " Thanksgiving " . 
 The role of Kevin Swanson has been portrayed by several people , including actor Jon Cryer , in the second season episode " There 's Something About Paulie " . In subsequent appearances , Kevin was voiced by series creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane , until his eventual disappearance from the series , when it was revealed that he had supposedly died in Iraq . Actor Scott Grimes , who notably portrays the character Steve Smith in MacFarlane 's second animated series American Dad ! , took over the role of Kevin in the episode . 
 In addition to Grimes and the regular cast , actor Max Burkholder , actor Jackson Douglas , actor Kevin Durand , voice actor Colin Ford , actor Zachary Gordon , actress and model Julie Hagerty , actor Jonathan Morgan Heit , actress Christine Lakin and actor Patrick Stewart guest starred in the episode . Recurring guest voice actors Alexandra Breckenridge , actor Chris Cox , writer Mike Desilets , actor Ralph Garman , writer Gary Janetti , writer Danny Smith , writer Alec Sulkin , and writer John Viener also made minor appearances throughout the episode . Recurring guest cast members Adam West , Jennifer Tilly and Patrick Warburton also appeared in the episode as Mayor Adam West , Bonnie Swanson , and Joe Swanson respectively . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 As the Griffin family prepare to sit down for their dinner , baby Stewie is shown watching television , with the annual Macy 's Thanksgiving Day Parade taking place on the screen . Stewie notices a hot air balloon in the parade resembling himself . After the family decides to go to the Griffin family 's backyard to play football , Joe approaches his son to encourage him to beat the other team . Joe then references the 2009 war film The Hurt Locker , with Kevin responding with disdain for the film , despite supposedly being in a coma during its release . Joe also goes on to point out that Kevin is wearing an Ed Hardy t @-@ shirt , which also became popularized during his supposed coma , and despite Kevin telling his father that he flew straight home after he awoke . Later during dinner , when Kevin reveals that he went A.W.O.L. , Peter makes an off the wall reference , causing the episode to cut to a room showing several of the show 's editors , who become confused about what cutaway to play on the screen . They then decide to play a clip involving several characters from The Wizard of Oz , including the Cowardly Lion , who is shown to be actress Lindsay Lohan 's gynecologist . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Thanksgiving " was broadcast on November 20 , 2011 , as a part of an animated television night on Fox , and was preceded by The Simpsons and Allen Gregory , and followed by Family Guy creator and executive producer Seth MacFarlane 's second show , American Dad ! . It was watched by 6 @.@ 04 million viewers , according to Nielsen ratings , despite airing simultaneously with the American Music Awards on ABC , The Amazing Race on CBS and Sunday Night Football on NBC . The episode also acquired a 3 @.@ 1 / 7 rating in the 18 – 49 demographic , beating The Simpsons , Allen Gregory , American Dad ! , in addition to significantly edging out all three shows in total viewership . The episode 's ratings increased slightly from the previous week 's episode , " Back to the Pilot " . 
 Reviews of the episode were mostly mixed , calling the storyline " a loudspeaker for political views . " Kevin McFarland of The A.V. Club wrote of the episode , " I had a hard time listening to the characters spout out opinions , since none of them really made sense as character views and felt distinctly like the writers just wanted a place to dump their <unk> – I don 't want to only call out Seth MacFarlane because he didn 't write this episode , but considering the little bit I know about the show 's writer 's room , it 's pretty safe to assume he has final say on this sort of thing , especially given his 9 / 11 experience . " He also compared the A @-@ story to the television series South Park , noting , " It 's very clear that South Park benefits from the short turnaround time between production and air , because it allows that show to comment very quickly on current events , and stay timely . Family Guy seems to do the exact opposite , waiting an extraordinarily long time to weigh in on a serious issue it doesn ’ t satirize for comedy . " He ended his review by commenting , " After last week 's bright spot , I knew we were headed back down for another helping of the usual misery , but this week offered neither a surprise nor an all @-@ out failure , just expected , bland mediocrity . " He graded the episode as a C. In a much more positive review , <unk> R. Moore of Ology , writing , " It 's just funny , and it 's got a lot of ways of achieving that funniness , and it 's definitely true that the show isn 't always in its best form , but " Thanksgiving " shows that Family Guy refuses to be dead yet . " He also praised the episode for giving each character their own part in the episode , adding , " while most of the story revolves around Joe , Kevin , and Peter , the three kids and Brian also get time in as well . " Moore also stated his enjoyment of the cultural references in the episode , stating , " It 's all good fun , and the cutaways are also top notch , including Peter 's First Holiday and The Cowardly Lion as Lindsay Lohan 's gynecologist . I nearly fell out when Peter described his probably @-@ black coworker who turned out to be a white guy , which I should have seen coming because it 's very Family Guy , but still managed to get a laugh out of me . " He gave the episode a nine out of ten . 
 = Homer Badman = 
 " Homer Badman " , also known as " Homer : Bad Man " , is the ninth episode of The Simpsons ' sixth season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on November 27 , 1994 . It was written by Greg Daniels and directed by Jeffrey Lynch . In the episode , Homer is falsely accused of sexual harassment after a babysitter mistakes him grabbing a gummi candy stuck to her pants for a sexual pass at her , resulting in Homer becoming public enemy number one . Dennis Franz guest stars as himself . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Homer and Marge attend a candy convention and hire Ashley Grant , a feminist graduate student , to babysit Bart , Maggie and Lisa . At the convention , Homer outfits Marge with an oversized trenchcoat and is vigilant in smuggling out as much candy as possible in her pockets , including a rare gummy Venus de Milo . 
 That night , Homer searches for the gummy Venus amongst his smuggled goods , but is unable to find it . Marge reminds him to take Ashley home and Homer grudgingly obliges . As Ashley is exiting Homer 's car , he sees the gummy Venus stuck to the backside of her jeans . Homer innocently grabs the candy , and Ashley turns around to see Homer drooling lustfully at the piece of candy . <unk> his poor tact and drooling as a deliberate sexual advance , Ashley runs off screaming in terror while Homer gleefully eats the candy . 
 The next morning , an angry mob marches onto the Simpsons ' lawn and claims that Homer sexually harassed Ashley . The crowd refuses to listen to Homer , who was trying to tell his side of the story . When Rock Bottom , a tabloid news show , asks to interview him about his predicament , he agrees in the hope that it will clear his name . However , the interview is heavily ( and poorly ) edited into a totally inaccurate segment where Homer is portrayed as a pervert . Things go from bad to worse as a media circus arrives at the Simpson home to provide 24 @-@ hour coverage of things such as Marge letting the cat out and the family watching TV ; Fox even produces a TV movie , Homer S. : Portrait of an Ass @-@ <unk> , starring Dennis Franz as a lascivious Homer . Lisa and Marge suggest Homer videotape himself telling his side of the story to air on a Public @-@ access television cable TV , but all he succeeds at accomplishing is angering an old @-@ time bicyclist . It was to appear Homer will most likely be guilty . 
 However , Groundskeeper Willie also saw Homer 's speech , and arrives at the Simpson home with a video tape of what happened the night Homer took Ashley home . The tape clearly shows that Homer was grabbing the Gummy Venus , and upon seeing it , Ashley and the media apologize for labeling Homer a monster . Later on , the Simpson family is watching a " Rock Bottom " episode that labels Willie as a disgusting voyeur and Homer immediately declares that he is evil . Marge asks Homer if he learned anything from his experiences , to which Homer replies that he has not learned a thing . After the rest of the family leaves the room , Homer embraces the television and quietly says to it , " Let 's never fight again . " 
 = = Production = = 
 Greg Daniels , the writer of the episode , originally pitched this episode as being more centered on Lisa and Homer 's opposing ideas on feminism . Eventually , the episode became more of a satire of the media and shows like Hard Copy . David Mirkin , the show runner at the time , felt very strongly about the " <unk> of the media " and has said that the episode is as current today as it was at the time and things have since gotten worse . Several gags in the episode are based on what real life shows like Hard Copy would do , such as making people look to be guilty without a trial as well as a complete invasion of privacy by setting up camp outside people 's homes . The talk show " Ben " , which is hosted by a bear named " Gentle Ben " wearing a microphone on its head , reflects the writers ' feeling that anyone could host a talk show because all they need is a microphone and an audience . 
 Dennis Franz was the writers ' second choice for the role of Homer when the first choice pulled out . According to the DVD commentary , the original actor was more " barrel chested . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The action sequence at the Candy convention is " based on every Bruce Willis movie ever made . " Homer 's imagination of living underwater is a parody of the song " Under the Sea " from the Disney film The Little Mermaid . David Mirkin says he thought the sequence would be funny because Homer would eat all of the characters from The Little Mermaid . Groundskeeper Willie is referred to as Rowdy Roddy <unk> , a reference to " Rowdy " Roddy Piper , a wrestler who used a Scotsman gimmick . When Homer is found naked by an invasive camera crew outside his bathroom window underneath his clear shower curtain , ( the helicopter camera crew startled Homer as he was taking his shower causing him to rip the curtain and fall underneath it ) , A channel 6 journalist reports that Homer sleeps under an oxygen tent giving him sexual powers , is a reference to the rumor about Michael Jackson sleeping in a hyperbaric oxygen chamber to extend his life . The talk show Ben , hosted by a bear named " Gentle Ben " , refers to the 1960s television series Gentle Ben about a wild black bear who became a little boy 's best friend . Among the TV shows parodied during the episode : Hard Copy , Sally Jessy Raphael , the Late Show with David Letterman and media coverage of the O.J. Simpson standoff . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original broadcast , " Homer Badman " finished 50th in ratings for the week of November 21 – 27 , 1994 , with a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 5 , equivalent to approximately 9 @.@ 1 million viewing households . It was the highest @-@ rated show on the Fox network that week , beating Married ... with Children . 
 According to David Mirkin , this episode is very highly ranked among Simpsons fans . In Entertainment Weekly 's top 25 The Simpsons episodes in 2003 , " Homer Badman " was placed eighteenth . The Quindecim , a college newspaper , made their own top 25 list , with this episode at 15th place . The Daily Telegraph characterized the episode as one of " The 10 Best Simpsons TV Episodes . " 
 = The Secret of the Unicorn = 
 The Secret of the Unicorn ( French : Le Secret de la Licorne ) is the eleventh volume of The Adventures of Tintin , the comics series by Belgian cartoonist Hergé . The story was serialised daily in Le Soir , Belgium 's leading francophone newspaper , from June 1942 to January 1943 amidst the German occupation of Belgium during World War II . The story revolves around young reporter Tintin , his dog Snowy , and his friend Captain Haddock , who discover a riddle left by Haddock 's ancestor , the 17th century Sir Francis Haddock , which could lead them to the hidden treasure of the pirate Red Rackham . To unravel the riddle , Tintin and Haddock must obtain three identical models of Sir Francis 's ship , the Unicorn , but they discover that criminals are also after these model ships and are willing to kill in order to obtain them . 
 The Secret of the Unicorn was a commercial success and was published in book form by Casterman shortly after its conclusion . Hergé concluded the arc begun in this story with Red Rackham 's Treasure , while the series itself became a defining part of the Franco @-@ Belgian comics tradition . The Secret of the Unicorn remained Hergé 's favourite of his own works until creating Tintin in Tibet ( 1960 ) . The story was adapted for the 1957 Belvision animated series , Hergé 's Adventures of Tintin , for the 1991 animated series The Adventures of Tintin by Ellipse and Nelvana , and for the feature film The Adventures of Tintin : The Secret of the Unicorn ( 2011 ) . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 While browsing in a Brussels market , Tintin purchases an antique model ship which he intends to give Captain Haddock . Two strangers , model ship collector Ivan Ivanovitch <unk> and antique @-@ scout Barnaby , independently try to persuade Tintin to sell the model to them . He also sees the two police detectives , Thomson and Thompson , on the look out for a pickpocket . At Tintin 's flat , Snowy accidentally knocks the model over and breaks its mainmast . Having repaired it , and shown the ship to Haddock , Tintin discovers that the ship is named the Unicorn , after a ship commanded by Haddock 's ancestor . While Tintin is out , the ship is stolen from his apartment ; in the investigation , he discovers that <unk> owns an identical model , also named the Unicorn . At home , Tintin discovers a miniature scroll , and realises that this must have been hidden in the mast of the model which Snowy had broken . Written on the parchment is a riddle : " Three brothers <unk> . Three Unicorns in company sailing in the <unk> sunne will speak . For ' tis from the light that light will dawn , and then shines forth the Eagle 's cross " . 
 Upon hearing of the riddle , Captain Haddock explains that the Unicorn was a 17th @-@ century warship captained by his ancestor , Sir Francis Haddock , but seized by a pirate band led by Red Rackham . Alone of his crew to survive the capture , Sir Francis killed Rackham in single combat and destroyed the Unicorn ; but later built three models , which he left to his sons . Meanwhile , Barnaby requests a meeting with Tintin , but is gunned down on Tintin 's doorstep before he can speak , and points to sparrows as a cryptic clue to the identity of his assailant . Later , Tintin is kidnapped by the perpetrators of the shooting : the Bird brothers , two unscrupulous antique dealers who own the third model of the Unicorn , and who now seek the treasure plundered by Rackham . Tintin escapes from the cellars of the Bird brothers ' country estate , Marlinspike Hall , while the Captain arrives with officers Thomson and Thompson to arrest them . It is found that the Bird Brothers have only one of the parchments , as two were lost when their wallet was stolen . Tintin and Thomson and Thompson track down the pickpocket , Aristides Silk , a kleptomaniac who has a penchant for collecting wallets , and obtain the Bird Brothers ' wallet , containing the missing two parchments . By combining the three parchments and holding them to the light , Tintin and Haddock discover the coordinates ( 20 ° 37 ' 42 @.@ 0 " N 70 ° 52 ' 15 @.@ 0 " W ) of the lost treasure and plan an expedition to find it . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Amidst the German occupation of Belgium during World War II , Hergé had accepted a position working for Le Soir , Belgian 's largest Francophone daily newspaper . Confiscated from its original owners , the German authorities permitted Le Soir to reopen under the directorship of Belgian editor Raymond de Becker , although it remained firmly under Nazi control , supporting the German war effort and espousing anti @-@ Semitism . After joining Le Soir on 15 October 1940 , Hergé became editor of its new children 's supplement Le Soir Jeunesse , with assistance by old friend Paul Jamin and cartoonist Jacques Van Melkebeke , before paper shortages forced Tintin to be serialised daily in the main pages of Le Soir . Some Belgians were upset that Hergé was willing to work for a newspaper controlled by the occupying Nazi administration , although he was heavily enticed by the size of Le Soir 's readership , which reached 600 @,@ 000 . Faced with the reality of Nazi oversight , Hergé abandoned the overt political themes that had pervaded much of his earlier work , instead adopting a policy of neutrality . Without the need to satirise political types , entertainment producer and author Harry Thompson observed that " Hergé was now concentrating more on plot and on developing a new style of character comedy . The public reacted positively . " 
 The Secret of the Unicorn was the first of The Adventures of Tintin which Hergé had collaborated on with Van Melkebeke to a significant degree ; biographer Benoît Peeters suggested that Van Melkebeke should rightly be considered the story 's " co @-@ scriptwriter " . It was Hergé 's discussions with Van Melkebeke that led him to craft a more complex story than he had in prior Adventures . Van Melkebeke had been strongly influenced by the adventure novels of writers like Jules Verne and Paul d <unk> , with this influence being apparent throughout the story . The inclusion of three hidden scrolls has parallels with Verne 's 1867 story , The Children of Captain Grant , which Van Melkebeke had recommended to Hergé . Hergé acknowledged Van Melkebeke 's contribution by including a cameo of him within the market scene at the start of the story ; this was particularly apt as Van Melkebeke had purchased his books in Brussels ' Old Market as a child . 
 The Secret of the Unicorn was the first half of a two @-@ part story arc that was concluded in the following adventure , Red Rackham 's Treasure . This arc was the first that Hergé had utilised since Cigars of the Pharaoh and The Blue Lotus ( 1934 – 36 ) . However , as Tintin expert Michael Farr related , whereas Cigars of the Pharaoh and The Blue Lotus had been largely " self @-@ sufficient and self @-@ contained " , the connection between The Secret of the Unicorn and Red Rackham 's Treasure would be far closer . 
 In previous works , Hergé had drawn upon a variety of pictorial sources , such as newspaper clippings , from which to draw the scenes and characters ; for The Secret of the Unicorn he drew upon an unprecedented variety of these sources . In drawing many of the old vessels , Hergé initially consulted the then recently published L 'Art et le Mer ( " Art and the Sea " ) by Alexandre <unk> . Seeking further accurate depictions of old naval vessels , Hergé consulted a friend of his , Gérard Liger @-@ Belair , who owned a Brussels shop specialising in model ships . Liger @-@ Belair produced plans of a 17th @-@ century French fifty @-@ gun warship for Hergé to copy ; Le Brillant , which had been constructed in Le Havre in 1690 by the shipwright <unk> and then decorated by Jean <unk> the Elder . 
 He also studied other vessels from the period , such as the Le Soleil Royal , La Couronne , La Royale and Le Reale de France , to better understand 17th @-@ century ship design . It was from the Le Reale de France that he gained a basis for his design of the Unicorn 's jolly boat . No ship named the Unicorn was listed in the annals of the French Navy , but Hergé instead took the name from a British frigate which had been active in the mid @-@ 18th century ; the fictional ship 's unicorn figurehead was also adopted from the frigate . 
 The character of Red Rackham was partly inspired by Jean <unk> , a fictional pirate who appeared in a story alongside female pirates Anne Bonny and Mary Read that Hergé encountered in a November 1938 edition of Dimanche @-@ <unk> . Red Rackham 's looks and costumes were also inspired by the character , <unk> , who appears in C. S. Forester 's novel , The Captain from Connecticut , and by the 17th @-@ century French <unk> Daniel <unk> . The name of Marlinspike Hall — Moulinsart in French — was based upon the name of the real Belgian town , Sart @-@ Moulin . The actual design of the building was based upon the Château de <unk> , albeit with the two outer wings removed . In introducing Francis Haddock to the story , Hergé made Captain Haddock the only character in the series ( except Jolyon Wagg , introduced later ) to have a family and an ancestry . The Secret of the Unicorn was set entirely in Belgium and was the last Adventure to be set there until The Castafiore Emerald . It would also be Hergé 's favourite story until Tintin in Tibet . 
 = = = Historical parallels = = = 
 After publishing the book , Hergé learned that there had actually been an Admiral Haddock who had served in the British Royal Navy during the late 17th and early 18th centuries : Sir Richard Haddock ( 1629 – 1715 ) . Richard Haddock was in charge of the Royal James , the flagship of the Earl of Sandwich during the Battle of Solebay of 1672 , the first naval battle of the Third Anglo @-@ Dutch War . During the fighting , the Royal James was set alight and Haddock escaped but had to be rescued from the sea , following which his bravery was recognised by the British monarch , King Charles II . He subsequently took command of another ship , the Royal Charles , before becoming a naval administrator in later life . Admiral Haddock 's grandfather , also named Richard , commanded the ship of the line HMS Unicorn during the reign of King Charles I. 
 Another individual known as Captain Haddock had lived in this period , who had commanded a fire ship , the Anne and Christopher . It was recorded by David Ogg that this captain and his ship had been separated from their squadron whilst out at sea and so docked at Málaga to purchase goods that could be taken back to Britain and sold for a profit . For this action , Haddock was brought before an admiralty tribunal in 1674 , where he was ordered to forfeit all profits from the transaction and suspended from his command for six months . 
 = = = Publication = = = 
 Le Secret De La Licorne began serialisation as a daily strip in newspaper Le Soir from 11 June 1942 . As with previous adventures , it then began serialisation in the French Catholic newspaper Cœurs Vaillants , from 19 March 1944 . In Belgium , it was then published in a 62 @-@ page book format by Editions Casterman in 1943 . Now fully coloured , the book included a new cover design created by Hergé after he had completed the original serialisation of the story , along with six large colour drawings . The first printing sold 30 @,@ 000 copies in Francophone Belgium . 
 The Secret of the Unicorn and Red Rackham 's Treasure were the first two Adventures of Tintin to be published in English @-@ language translations for the British market . Published by Casterman , these two editions sold poorly and have since become rare collector 's items . Both stories would be republished for the British market seven years later , this time by Methuen with new translations provided by Michael Turner and Leslie Lonsdale @-@ Cooper . In the English translation , Sir Francis Haddock was described as serving the British monarch Charles II , in contrast to the original French version , in which he serves French king Louis XIV . 
 The series ' Danish publishers , Carlsen , later located a model of an early @-@ 17th @-@ century Danish ship called the <unk> ( The Unicorn ) which they gave to Hergé . Constructed in 1605 , <unk> had been wrecked in an attempt to navigate the Northwest Passage . 
 = = Critical analysis = = 
 The Secret of the Unicorn resembled the earlier Adventures of Tintin in its use of style , colour and content , leading Harry Thompson to remark that it " unquestionably " belongs to the 1930s , considering it to be " the last and best of Hergé 's detective mysteries . " He asserted that this story and Red Rackham 's Treasure marked the third and central stage of " Tintin 's career " , also stating that here , Tintin has been converted from a reporter into an explorer to cope with the new political climate . He further added his opinion that it was " the most successful of all Tintin 's adventures " . Jean @-@ Marc Lofficier and Randy Lofficier asserted that Sir Francis Haddock was " the best realised character " in the story , conversely describing the Bird Brothers as " relatively uninspired villains " . They went on to state that The Secret of the Unicorn @-@ Red Rackham 's Treasure arc represents " a turning point " for the series as it shifts the reader 's attention from Tintin to Haddock , who has become " by far , the most interesting character " . They praised the " truly outstanding storytelling " of The Secret of the Unicorn , ultimately awarding it a rating of four out of five . 
 Phillipe Goddin commented on the scene in the story in which Haddock relates the life of his ancestor , stating that the reader is " alternately projected into the present and the past with staggering mastery . Periods interlocked , enriched one another , were amplified and married in a stunning fluidity . Hergé was at the height of his powers . " 
 Hergé biographer Benoît Peeters asserted that both The Secret of the Unicorn and Red Rackham 's Treasure " hold a crucial position " in The Adventures of Tintin as they establish the " Tintin universe " with its core set of characters . Focusing on the former comic , he described it as one of Hergé 's " greatest narrative successes " through the manner in which it interweaves three separate plots . He felt that while religious elements had been present in previous stories , they were even stronger in The Secret of the Unicorn and its sequel , something which he attributed to Van Melkebeke 's influence . Elsewhere he asserted that it " explores this prelude with extraordinary narrative virtuosity . " 
 Biographer Pierre Assouline stated that the story was " clearly influenced ... in spirit if not in detail " by Robert Louis Stevenson 's book , Treasure Island in that it " seemed to cater to a need for escapism " . He described the adventure as " a new development in Hergé 's work , a flight from the topical to epics of pirate adventures set in distant horizons " . Assouline also expressed the view that the ancestral figure of Sir Francis Haddock reflected Hergé 's attempt to incorporate one of his own family secrets , that he had an aristocratic ancestor , into the story . 
 Michael Farr believed that the " most remarkable " factor of the book was its introduction of Sir Francis Haddock , highlighting that in his mannerisms and visual depiction , he is " <unk> distinguishable " from Captain Haddock . He also highlighted that the scenes in which Captain Haddock relates the tale of his ancestor carries on the " merging of dreams and reality " that Hergé had " experimented with " in The Crab with the Golden Claws and The Shooting Star . Noting that unlike The Shooting Star , this two @-@ book story arc contains " scarcely an allusion to occupation and war " , he praised the arc 's narrative as " perfectly paced , without that feeling of haste " present in some of Hergé 's earlier work . 
 In his psychoanalytical study of the Adventures of Tintin , the academic Jean @-@ Marie Apostolidès characterised the Secret of the Unicorn @-@ Red Rackham 's Treasure arc as being about the characters going on a " treasure hunt that turns out to be at the same time a search for their roots . " He stated that the arc delves into Haddock 's ancestry , and in doing so " deals with the meanings of symbolic relations within personal life " . Discussing the character of Sir Francis Haddock , he states that this ancestral figure resembles both Tintin and Haddock , " the foundling and the bastard " , thus making the duo brothers as well as close friends . He adds that when Captain Haddock reenacts his ancestor 's fight with Rackham , he adopts his " very soul , his mana , and is transformed in the process . " Comparing Sir Francis Haddock to Robinson Crusoe , he also draws a comparison between the way that the Caribbean natives deified Sir Francis Haddock by erecting a statue of him in the same manner that the Congolese deify Tintin at the end of Tintin in the Congo . Apostolidès also discusses Red Rackham , noting that the name " Red " conjures up " the forbidden colour of blood and wine " while " Rackham " combines <unk> ( " false brother " ) with the French word for scum ( <unk> ) , then highlighting a potential link between Rackham 's name and that of Rascar Capac , an Incan mummy who appears in The Seven Crystal Balls . He further draws parallels between the model ships containing the secret parchments with the Arumbaya fetish containing a rare diamond which appears in The Broken Ear . 
 Literary critic Tom McCarthy highlighted the scene in which Tintin was imprisoned in the Marlinspike crypt , observing that it had parallels with Tintin 's exploration of tombs and other secret chambers throughout the series . He identified the mystery left in Francis Haddock 's parchments to be another appearance of Tintin 's adventures being " framed by enigmas " . To this he adds that in solving the enigma , Tintin shows that he is " the best reader " in the series , and it is this which establishes him as " the oeuvre 's hero " . McCarthy praised Hergé 's Silk as one of the pivotal characters in the series who can " exude a presence far beyond that which we might expect from a novelist , let alone a cartoonist " . 
 Pierre <unk> @-@ <unk> discussed the scene in the story in which Tintin was imprisoned in the crypt of Marlinspike Hall . He stated that in this section , " Hergé offers us an embedded story , a kind of interlude in which the artist , setting aside the use value of objects , takes the liberty of giving them mischievous powers , akin to a certain surrealism . " 
 = = Adaptations = = 
 In 1957 , the animation company Belvision Studios produced Hergé 's Adventures of Tintin , a series of daily five @-@ minute colour adaptations based upon Hergé 's original comics . The Secret of the Unicorn was the fourth to be adapted in the second animated series ; it was directed by Ray Goossens and written by Greg , a well @-@ known cartoonist who was to become editor @-@ in @-@ chief of Tintin magazine . 
 In 1991 , a collaboration between the French studio Ellipse and the Canadian animation company Nelvana adapted 21 of the stories into a series of episodes . The Secret of the Unicorn was the ninth story of The Adventures of Tintin to be produced and was divided into two thirty @-@ minute episodes . Directed by Stéphane Bernasconi , the series has been praised for being " generally faithful " to the original comics , to the extent that the animation was directly adopted from Hergé 's original panels . 
 A 2011 motion capture feature film The Adventures of Tintin : The Secret of the Unicorn , directed by Steven Spielberg and produced by Peter Jackson , was released in most of the world October – November 2011 and in the US on 21 December 2011 . The film is based partly upon The Secret of the Unicorn and partly on both Red Rackham 's Treasure and The Crab with the Golden Claws . A video @-@ game tie @-@ in to the movie was released October 2011 . 
 = Hamlet = 
 The Tragedy of Hamlet , Prince of Denmark , often shortened to Hamlet ( / <unk> / ) , is a tragedy written by William Shakespeare at an uncertain date between 1599 and 1602 . Set in the Kingdom of Denmark , the play dramatises the revenge Prince Hamlet is called to wreak upon his uncle , Claudius , by the ghost of Hamlet 's father , King Hamlet . Claudius had murdered his own brother and seized the throne , also marrying his deceased brother 's widow . Hamlet is Shakespeare 's longest play , and is ranked among the most powerful and influential tragedies in English literature , with a story capable of " seemingly endless retelling and adaptation by others " . The play likely was one of Shakespeare 's most popular works during his lifetime , and still ranks among his most performed , topping the performance list of the Royal Shakespeare Company and its predecessors in Stratford @-@ upon @-@ Avon since 1879 . It has inspired many other writers – from Johann Wolfgang von Goethe and Charles Dickens to James Joyce and Iris Murdoch – and has been described as " the world 's most filmed story after Cinderella " . The story of Shakespeare 's Hamlet was derived from the legend of <unk> , preserved by 13th @-@ century chronicler Saxo Grammaticus in his Gesta Danorum , as subsequently retold by 16th @-@ century scholar François de <unk> . Shakespeare may also have drawn on an earlier ( hypothetical ) Elizabethan play known today as the Ur @-@ Hamlet , though some scholars believe he himself wrote the Ur @-@ Hamlet , later revising it to create the version of Hamlet we now have . He almost certainly wrote his version of the title role for his fellow actor , Richard Burbage , the leading tragedian of Shakespeare 's time . In the 400 years since its inception , the role has been performed by numerous highly acclaimed actors in each successive century . 
 Three different early versions of the play are extant : the First Quarto ( Q1 , 1603 ) ; the Second Quarto ( Q2 , 1604 ) ; and the First Folio ( F1 , 1623 ) . Each version includes lines and entire scenes missing from the others . The play 's structure and depth of characterisation have inspired much critical scrutiny . One such example is the centuries @-@ old debate about Hamlet 's hesitation to kill his uncle , which some see as merely a plot device to prolong the action , but which others argue is a dramatisation of the complex philosophical and ethical issues that surround cold @-@ blooded murder , calculated revenge , and thwarted desire . More recently , psychoanalytic critics have examined Hamlet 's unconscious desires , while feminist critics have re @-@ evaluated and attempted to rehabilitate the often maligned characters of Ophelia and Gertrude . 
 = = Characters = = 
 = = Plot = = 
 Act I 
 The protagonist of Hamlet is Prince Hamlet of Denmark , son of the recently deceased King Hamlet , and nephew of King Claudius , his father 's brother and successor . Claudius hastily married King Hamlet 's widow , Gertrude , Hamlet 's mother , and took the throne for himself . Denmark has a long @-@ standing feud with neighboring Norway , which culminated when King Hamlet slew King Fortinbras of Norway in a battle years ago . Although Denmark defeated Norway , and the Norwegian throne fell to King Fortinbras 's infirm brother , Denmark fears that an invasion led by the dead Norwegian king 's son , Prince Fortinbras , is imminent . 
 On a cold night on the ramparts of Elsinore , the Danish royal castle , the sentries Bernardo and Marcellus and Hamlet 's friend Horatio encounter a ghost that looks like the late King Hamlet . They vow to tell Prince Hamlet what they have witnessed . 
 As the Court gathers the next day , while King Claudius and Queen Gertrude discuss affairs of state with their elderly adviser Polonius , Hamlet looks on glumly . After the Court exits , Hamlet despairs of his father 's death and his mother 's hasty remarriage . Learning of the Ghost from Horatio , Hamlet resolves to see it himself . 
 As Polonius 's son Laertes prepares to depart for a visit to France , Polonius gives him contradictory advice that culminates in the ironic maxim " to thine own self be true " . Polonius 's daughter , Ophelia , admits her interest in Hamlet , but both Polonius and Laertes warn her against seeking the prince 's attention . That night on the rampart , the Ghost appears to Hamlet , telling the prince that he was murdered by Claudius and demanding that Hamlet avenge him . Hamlet agrees and the Ghost vanishes . The prince confides to Horatio and the sentries that from now on he plans to " put an antic disposition on " and forces them to swear to keep his plans for revenge secret . Privately , however , he remains uncertain of the Ghost 's reliability . 
 Act II 
 Soon thereafter , Ophelia rushes to her father , telling him that Hamlet arrived at her door the prior night half @-@ undressed and behaving crazily . Polonius blames love for Hamlet 's madness and resolves to inform Claudius and Gertrude . As he enters to do so , the king and queen finish welcoming Rosencrantz and Guildenstern , two student acquaintances of Hamlet , to Elsinore . The royal couple has requested that the students investigate the cause of Hamlet 's mood and behavior . Additional news requires that Polonius wait to be heard : messengers from Norway inform Claudius that the King of Norway has rebuked Prince Fortinbras for attempting to re @-@ fight his father 's battles . The forces that Fortinbras conscripted to march against Denmark will instead be sent against Poland , though they will pass through a portion of Denmark to get there . 
 Polonius tells Claudius and Gertrude his theory regarding Hamlet 's behavior , and speaks to Hamlet in a hall of the castle to try to uncover more information . Hamlet feigns madness but subtly insults Polonius all the while . When Rosencrantz and Guildenstern arrive , Hamlet greets his friends warmly , but quickly discerns that they are spies . Hamlet becomes bitter , admitting that he is upset at his situation but refusing to give the true reason why , instead commenting on " what a piece of work " humanity is . Rosencrantz and Guildenstern tell Hamlet that they have brought along a troupe of actors that they met while traveling to Elsinore . Hamlet , after welcoming the actors and dismissing his friends @-@ turned @-@ spies , plots to stage a play featuring a death in the style of his father 's murder , thereby determining the truth of the Ghost 's story , as well as Claudius 's guilt or innocence , by studying Claudius 's reaction . 
 Act III 
 Polonius forces Ophelia to return Hamlet 's love letters and tokens of affection to the prince while he and Claudius watch from afar to evaluate Hamlet 's reaction . Hamlet is walking alone in the hall as the King and Polonius await Ophelia 's entrance , musing whether " to be or not to be " . When Ophelia enters and tries to return Hamlet 's things , Hamlet accuses her of immodesty and cries " get thee to a nunnery , " though it is unclear whether this , too , is a show of madness or genuine distress . His reaction convinces Claudius that Hamlet is not mad for love . Shortly thereafter , the court assembles to watch the play Hamlet has commissioned . After seeing the Player King murdered by his rival pouring poison in his ear , Claudius abruptly rises and runs from the room : proof positive for Hamlet of his uncle 's guilt . 
 Gertrude summons Hamlet to her room to demand an explanation . Meanwhile , Claudius talks to himself about the impossibility of repenting , since he still has possession of his ill @-@ gotten goods : his brother 's crown and wife . He sinks to his knees . Hamlet , on his way to visit his mother , sneaks up behind him , but does not kill him , reasoning that killing Claudius while he is praying will send him straight to heaven while the Ghost is stuck in purgatory . In the queen 's bedchamber , Hamlet and Gertrude fight bitterly . Polonius , spying on the conversation from behind a tapestry , makes a noise . Hamlet , believing it is Claudius , stabs wildly , killing Polonius , but pulls aside the curtain and sees his mistake . In a rage , Hamlet brutally insults his mother for her apparent ignorance of Claudius 's villainy , but the Ghost enters and reprimands Hamlet for his inaction and harsh words . Unable to see or hear the Ghost herself , Gertrude takes Hamlet 's conversation with it as further evidence of madness . After begging the queen to stop sleeping with Claudius , Hamlet leaves , dragging Polonius 's corpse away . Hamlet jokes with Claudius about where he has hidden Polonius 's body , and the king , fearing for his life , sends Rosencrantz and Guildenstern to accompany Hamlet to England with a sealed letter to the English king requesting that Hamlet be executed immediately . 
 Act IV 
 <unk> by grief at Polonius 's death , Ophelia wanders Elsinore . Laertes arrives back from France , enraged by his father 's death and his sister 's madness . Claudius convinces Laertes that Hamlet is solely responsible , but a letter soon arrives indicating that Hamlet has returned to Denmark , foiling Claudius 's plan . Claudius switches tactics , proposing a fencing match between Laertes and Hamlet to settle their differences . Laertes will be given a poison @-@ tipped foil , and Claudius will offer Hamlet poisoned wine as a congratulation if that fails . Gertrude interrupts to report that Ophelia has drowned , though it is unclear whether it was suicide or an accident exacerbated by her madness . 
 Act V 
 Horatio has received a letter from Hamlet , explaining that the prince escaped by negotiating with pirates who attempted to attack his England @-@ bound ship , and the friends reunite offstage . Two gravediggers discuss Ophelia 's apparent suicide while digging her grave . Hamlet arrives with Horatio and <unk> with one of the gravediggers , who unearths the skull of a jester from Hamlet 's childhood , Yorick . Hamlet picks up the skull , saying " alas , poor Yorick " as he contemplates mortality . Ophelia 's funeral procession approaches , led by Laertes . Hamlet and Horatio initially hide , but when Hamlet realizes that Ophelia is the one being buried , he reveals himself , proclaiming his love for her . Laertes and Hamlet fight by Ophelia 's graveside , but the brawl is broken up . 
 Back at Elsinore , Hamlet explains to Horatio that he had discovered Claudius 's letter with Rosencrantz and Guildenstern 's belongings and replaced it with a forged copy indicating that his former friends should be killed instead . A foppish courtier , Osric , interrupts the conversation to deliver the fencing challenge to Hamlet . Hamlet , despite Horatio 's advice , accepts it . Hamlet does well at first , leading the match by two hits to none , and Gertrude raises a toast to him using the poisoned glass of wine Claudius had set aside for Hamlet . Claudius tries to stop her , but is too late : she drinks , and Laertes realizes the plot will be revealed . Laertes slashes Hamlet with his poisoned blade . In the ensuing scuffle , they switch weapons and Hamlet wounds Laertes with his own poisoned sword . Gertrude collapses and , claiming she has been poisoned , dies . In his dying moments , Laertes reconciles with Hamlet and reveals Claudius 's plan . Hamlet rushes at Claudius and kills him . As the poison takes effect , Hamlet , hearing that Fortinbras is marching through the area , names the Norwegian prince as his successor . Horatio , distraught at the thought of being the last survivor , says he will commit suicide by drinking the dregs of Gertrude 's poisoned wine , but Hamlet begs him to live on and tell his story . Hamlet dies , proclaiming " the rest is silence " . Fortinbras , who was ostensibly marching towards Poland with his army , arrives at the palace , along with an English ambassador bringing news of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern 's deaths . Horatio promises to recount the full story of what happened , and Fortinbras , seeing the entire Danish royal family dead , takes the crown for himself . 
 = = Date = = 
 " Any dating of Hamlet must be tentative " , cautions the New Cambridge editor , Phillip Edwards . The earliest date estimate relies on Hamlet 's frequent allusions to Shakespeare 's Julius Caesar , itself dated to mid @-@ 1599 . The latest date estimate is based on an entry , of 26 July 1602 , in the Register of the Stationers ' Company , indicating that Hamlet was " <unk> <unk> by the Lo : <unk> his <unk> " . 
 In 1598 , Francis Meres published his Palladis Tamia , a survey of English literature from Chaucer to its present day , within which twelve of Shakespeare 's plays are named . Hamlet is not among them , suggesting that it had not yet been written . As Hamlet was very popular , Bernard Lott , the series editor of New Swan , believes it " unlikely that he [ Meres ] would have overlooked ... so significant a piece " . 
 The phrase " little <unk> " in the First Folio ( F1 ) may allude to the Children of the Chapel , whose popularity in London forced the Globe company into provincial touring . This became known as the War of the Theatres , and supports a 1601 dating . Katherine Duncan @-@ Jones accepts a 1600 – 1 attribution for the date Hamlet was written , but notes that the Lord Chamberlain 's Men , playing Hamlet in the 3000 @-@ capacity Globe , were unlikely to be put to any disadvantage by an audience of " barely one hundred " for the Children of the Chapel 's equivalent play , Antonio 's Revenge ; she believes that Shakespeare , confident in the superiority of his own work , was making a playful and charitable allusion to his friend John Marston 's very similar piece . 
 A contemporary of Shakespeare 's , Gabriel Harvey , wrote a marginal note in his copy of the 1598 edition of Chaucer 's works , which some scholars use as dating evidence . Harvey 's note says that " the wiser sort " enjoy Hamlet , and implies that the Earl of Essex — executed in February 1601 for rebellion — was still alive . Other scholars consider this inconclusive . Edwards , for example , concludes that the " sense of time is so confused in Harvey 's note that it is really of little use in trying to date Hamlet " . This is because the same note also refers to Spenser and Watson as if they were still alive ( " our flourishing <unk> " ) , but also mentions " Owen 's new epigrams " , published in 1607 . 
 = = Texts = = 
 Three early editions of the text have survived , making attempts to establish a single " authentic " text problematic . Each is different from the others : 
 First Quarto ( Q1 ) : In 1603 the booksellers Nicholas Ling and John <unk> published , and Valentine Simmes printed , the so @-@ called " bad " first quarto . Q1 contains just over half of the text of the later second quarto . 
 Second Quarto ( Q2 ) : In 1604 Nicholas Ling published , and James Roberts printed , the second quarto . Some copies are dated 1605 , which may indicate a second impression ; consequently , Q2 is often dated " 1604 / 5 " . Q2 is the longest early edition , although it omits about 77 lines found in F1 ( most likely to avoid offending James I 's queen , Anne of Denmark ) . 
 First Folio ( F1 ) : In 1623 Edward Blount and William and Isaac Jaggard published the First Folio , the first edition of Shakespeare 's Complete Works . 
 Other folios and quartos were subsequently published — including John Smethwick 's Q3 , Q4 , and Q5 ( 1611 – 37 ) — but these are regarded as derivatives of the first three editions . 
 Early editors of Shakespeare 's works , beginning with Nicholas Rowe ( 1709 ) and Lewis Theobald ( 1733 ) , combined material from the two earliest sources of Hamlet available at the time , Q2 and F1 . Each text contains material that the other lacks , with many minor differences in wording : scarcely 200 lines are identical in the two . Editors have combined them in an effort to create one " inclusive " text that reflects an imagined " ideal " of Shakespeare 's original . Theobald 's version became standard for a long time , and his " full text " approach continues to influence editorial practice to the present day . Some contemporary scholarship , however , discounts this approach , instead considering " an authentic Hamlet an unrealisable ideal . ... there are texts of this play but no text " . The 2006 publication by Arden Shakespeare of different Hamlet texts in different volumes is perhaps evidence of this shifting focus and emphasis . Other editors have continued to argue the need for well @-@ edited editions taking material from all versions of the play . Colin Burrow has argued that " most of us should read a text that is made up by conflating all three versions ... it 's about as likely that Shakespeare wrote : " To be or not to be , ay , there 's the point " [ in Q1 ] , as that he wrote the works of Francis Bacon . I suspect most people just won 't want to read a three @-@ text play ... [ multi @-@ text editions are ] a version of the play that is out of touch with the needs of a wider public . " 
 Traditionally , editors of Shakespeare 's plays have divided them into five acts . None of the early texts of Hamlet , however , were arranged this way , and the play 's division into acts and scenes derives from a 1676 quarto . Modern editors generally follow this traditional division , but consider it unsatisfactory ; for example , after Hamlet drags Polonius 's body out of Gertrude 's bedchamber , there is an act @-@ break after which the action appears to continue uninterrupted . 
 The discovery in 1823 of Q1 — whose existence had been quite unsuspected — caused considerable interest and excitement , raising many questions of editorial practice and interpretation . Scholars immediately identified apparent deficiencies in Q1 , which was instrumental in the development of the concept of a Shakespearean " bad quarto " . Yet Q1 has value : it contains stage directions ( such as Ophelia entering with a lute and her hair down ) that reveal actual stage practices in a way that Q2 and F1 do not ; it contains an entire scene ( usually labelled 4 @.@ 6 ) that does not appear in either Q2 or F1 ; and it is useful for comparison with the later editions . The major deficiency of Q1 is in the language : particularly noticeable in the opening lines of the famous " To be , or not to be " soliloquy : " To be , or not to be , aye there 's the point . / To die , to sleep , is that all ? Aye all : / No , to sleep , to dream , aye marry there it goes . " However , the scene order is more coherent , without the problems of Q2 and F1 of Hamlet seeming to resolve something in one scene and enter the next drowning in indecision . New Cambridge editor Kathleen Irace has noted that " Q1 's more linear plot design is certainly easier [ … ] to follow [ … ] but the simplicity of the Q1 plot arrangement eliminates the alternating plot elements that correspond to Hamlet 's shifts in mood . " 
 Q1 is considerably shorter than Q2 or F1 and may be a memorial reconstruction of the play as Shakespeare 's company performed it , by an actor who played a minor role ( most likely Marcellus ) . Scholars disagree whether the reconstruction was pirated or authorised . It is suggested by Irace that Q1 is an abridged version intended especially for travelling productions , thus the question of length may be considered as separate from issues of poor textual quality . Editing Q1 thus poses problems in whether or not to " correct " differences from Q2 and F. Irace , in her introduction to Q1 , wrote that " I have avoided as many other alterations as possible , because the differences ... are especially intriguing ... I have recorded a selection of Q2 / F readings in the collation . " The idea that Q1 is not riddled with error but is instead eminently fit for the stage has led to at least 28 different Q1 productions since 1881 . Other productions have used the probably superior Q2 and Folio texts , but used Q1 's running order , in particular moving the to be or not to be soliloquy earlier . Developing this , some editors such as Jonathan Bate have argued that Q2 may represent " a ' reading ' text as opposed to a ' performance ' one " of Hamlet , analogous to how modern films released on disc may include deleted scenes : an edition containing all of Shakespeare 's material for the play for the pleasure of readers , so not representing the play as it would have been staged . 
 = = Analysis and criticism = = 
 = = = Critical history = = = 
 From the early 17th century , the play was famous for its ghost and vivid dramatisation of melancholy and insanity , leading to a procession of mad courtiers and ladies in Jacobean and Caroline drama . Though it remained popular with mass audiences , late 17th @-@ century Restoration critics saw Hamlet as primitive and disapproved of its lack of unity and decorum . This view changed drastically in the 18th century , when critics regarded Hamlet as a hero — a pure , brilliant young man thrust into unfortunate circumstances . By the mid @-@ 18th century , however , the advent of Gothic literature brought psychological and mystical readings , returning madness and the Ghost to the forefront . Not until the late 18th century did critics and performers begin to view Hamlet as confusing and inconsistent . Before then , he was either mad , or not ; either a hero , or not ; with no in @-@ betweens . These developments represented a fundamental change in literary criticism , which came to focus more on character and less on plot . By the 19th century , Romantic critics valued Hamlet for its internal , individual conflict reflecting the strong contemporary emphasis on internal struggles and inner character in general . Then too , critics started to focus on Hamlet 's delay as a character trait , rather than a plot device . This focus on character and internal struggle continued into the 20th century , when criticism branched in several directions , discussed in context and interpretation below . 
 = = = Dramatic structure = = = 
 Hamlet departed from contemporary dramatic convention in several ways . For example , in Shakespeare 's day , plays were usually expected to follow the advice of Aristotle in his Poetics : that a drama should focus on action , not character . In Hamlet , Shakespeare reverses this so that it is through the soliloquies , not the action , that the audience learns Hamlet 's motives and thoughts . The play is full of seeming discontinuities and irregularities of action , except in the " bad " quarto . At one point , as in the Gravedigger scene , Hamlet seems resolved to kill Claudius : in the next scene , however , when Claudius appears , he is suddenly tame . Scholars still debate whether these twists are mistakes or intentional additions to add to the play 's themes of confusion and duality . Finally , in a period when most plays ran for two hours or so , the full text of Hamlet — Shakespeare 's longest play , with 4 @,@ 042 lines , totalling 29 @,@ 551 words — often takes over four hours to deliver . Even today the play is rarely performed in its entirety , and has only once been dramatised on film completely , in Kenneth Branagh 's 1996 version . Hamlet also contains a favourite Shakespearean device , a play within the play , a literary device or conceit in which one story is told during the action of another story . 
 = = = Language = = = 
 Much of Hamlet 's language is courtly : elaborate , witty discourse , as recommended by Baldassare Castiglione 's 1528 etiquette guide , The Courtier . This work specifically advises royal retainers to amuse their masters with inventive language . Osric and Polonius , especially , seem to respect this injunction . Claudius 's speech is rich with rhetorical figures — as is Hamlet 's and , at times , Ophelia 's — while the language of Horatio , the guards , and the gravediggers is simpler . Claudius 's high status is reinforced by using the royal first person plural ( " we " or " us " ) , and anaphora mixed with metaphor to resonate with Greek political speeches . 
 Hamlet is the most skilled of all at rhetoric . He uses highly developed metaphors , <unk> , and in nine memorable words deploys both anaphora and <unk> : " to die : to sleep — / To sleep , perchance to dream " . In contrast , when occasion demands , he is precise and straightforward , as when he explains his inward emotion to his mother : " But I have that within which passes show , / These but the trappings and the suits of woe " . At times , he relies heavily on puns to express his true thoughts while simultaneously concealing them . His " nunnery " remarks to Ophelia are an example of a cruel double meaning as nunnery was Elizabethan slang for brothel . His very first words in the play are a pun ; when Claudius addresses him as " my cousin Hamlet , and my son " , Hamlet says as an aside : " A little more than kin , and less than kind . " 
 An unusual rhetorical device , <unk> , appears in several places in the play . Examples are found in Ophelia 's speech at the end of the nunnery scene : " Th <unk> and rose of the fair state " and " And I , of ladies most <unk> and wretched " . Many scholars have found it odd that Shakespeare would , seemingly arbitrarily , use this rhetorical form throughout the play . One explanation may be that Hamlet was written later in Shakespeare 's life , when he was adept at matching rhetorical devices to characters and the plot . Linguist George T. Wright suggests that <unk> had been used deliberately to heighten the play 's sense of duality and dislocation . Pauline Kiernan argues that Shakespeare changed English drama forever in Hamlet because he " showed how a character 's language can often be saying several things at once , and contradictory meanings at that , to reflect fragmented thoughts and disturbed feelings " . She gives the example of Hamlet 's advice to Ophelia , " get thee to a nunnery " , which is simultaneously a reference to a place of chastity and a slang term for a brothel , reflecting Hamlet 's confused feelings about female sexuality . 
 Hamlet 's soliloquies have also captured the attention of scholars . Hamlet interrupts himself , vocalising either disgust or agreement with himself , and embellishing his own words . He has difficulty expressing himself directly and instead blunts the thrust of his thought with wordplay . It is not until late in the play , after his experience with the pirates , that Hamlet is able to articulate his feelings freely . 
 = = Context and interpretation = = 
 = = = Religious = = = 
 Written at a time of religious upheaval , and in the wake of the English Reformation , the play is alternately Catholic ( or piously medieval ) and Protestant ( or consciously modern ) . The Ghost describes himself as being in purgatory , and as dying without last rites . This and Ophelia 's burial ceremony , which is characteristically Catholic , make up most of the play 's Catholic connections . Some scholars have observed that revenge tragedies come from traditionally Catholic countries , such as Spain and Italy ; and they present a contradiction , since according to Catholic doctrine the strongest duty is to God and family . Hamlet 's conundrum , then , is whether to avenge his father and kill Claudius , or to leave the vengeance to God , as his religion requires . 
 Much of the play 's Protestantism derives from its location in Denmark — both then and now a predominantly Protestant country , though it is unclear whether the fictional Denmark of the play is intended to mirror this fact . The play does mention Wittenberg , where Hamlet , Horatio , and Rosencrantz and Guildenstern attend university , and where Martin Luther first proposed his 95 theses in 1517 , effectively ushering in the Protestant Reformation . 
 = = = Philosophical = = = 
 Hamlet is often perceived as a philosophical character , expounding ideas that are now described as relativist , existentialist , and sceptical . For example , he expresses a <unk> idea when he says to Rosencrantz : " there is nothing either good or bad , but thinking makes it so " . The idea that nothing is real except in the mind of the individual finds its roots in the Greek Sophists , who argued that since nothing can be perceived except through the senses — and since all individuals sense , and therefore perceive things differently — there is no absolute truth , but rather only relative truth . The clearest alleged instance of existentialism is in the " to be , or not to be " speech , where Hamlet is thought by some to use " being " to allude to life and action , and " not being " to death and inaction . 
 Hamlet reflects the contemporary scepticism promoted by the French Renaissance humanist Michel de Montaigne . Prior to Montaigne 's time , humanists such as Pico della Mirandola had argued that man was God 's greatest creation , made in God 's image and able to choose his own nature , but this view was subsequently challenged in Montaigne 's <unk> of 1580 . Hamlet 's " What a piece of work is a man " could supposedly echo many of Montaigne 's ideas , and many scholars have disagreed on whether Shakespeare drew directly from Montaigne or whether both men were simply reacting similarly to the spirit of the times . 
 = = = Psychoanalytic = = = 
 In the first half of the 20th century , when psychoanalysis was at the height of its influence , its concepts were applied to Hamlet , notably by Sigmund Freud , Ernest Jones , and Jacques Lacan , and these studies influenced theatrical productions . In his The Interpretation of Dreams ( 1900 ) , Freud 's analysis starts from the premise that " the play is built up on Hamlet 's hesitations over fulfilling the task of revenge that is assigned to him ; but its text offers no reasons or motives for these hesitations " . After reviewing various literary theories , Freud concludes that Hamlet has an " Oedipal desire for his mother and the subsequent guilt [ is ] preventing him from murdering the man [ Claudius ] who has done what he unconsciously wanted to do " . Confronted with his repressed desires , Hamlet realises that " he himself is literally no better than the sinner whom he is to punish " . Freud suggests that Hamlet 's apparent " distaste for sexuality " — articulated in his " nunnery " conversation with Ophelia — accords with this interpretation . John Barrymore 's long @-@ running 1922 performance in New York , directed by Thomas Hopkins , " broke new ground in its Freudian approach to character " , in keeping with the post @-@ World War I rebellion against everything Victorian . He had a " blunter intention " than presenting the genteel , sweet prince of 19th @-@ century tradition , imbuing his character with virility and lust . 
 Beginning in 1910 , with the publication of " The <unk> @-@ Complex as an Explanation of Hamlet 's Mystery : A Study in Motive " Ernest Jones — a psychoanalyst and Freud 's biographer — developed Freud 's ideas into a series of essays that culminated in his book Hamlet and Oedipus ( 1949 ) . Influenced by Jones 's psychoanalytic approach , several productions have portrayed the " closet scene " , where Hamlet confronts his mother in her private quarters , in a sexual light . In this reading , Hamlet is disgusted by his mother 's " incestuous " relationship with Claudius while simultaneously fearful of killing him , as this would clear Hamlet 's path to his mother 's bed . Ophelia 's madness after her father 's death may also be read through the Freudian lens : as a reaction to the death of her hoped @-@ for lover , her father . She is overwhelmed by having her unfulfilled love for him so abruptly terminated and drifts into the oblivion of insanity . In 1937 , Tyrone Guthrie directed Laurence Olivier in a Jones @-@ inspired Hamlet at The Old Vic . Olivier later used some of these same ideas in his 1948 film version of the play . 
 In the 1950s , Lacan 's structuralist theories about Hamlet were first presented in a series of seminars given in Paris and later published in " Desire and the Interpretation of Desire in Hamlet " . Lacan postulated that the human psyche is determined by structures of language and that the linguistic structures of Hamlet shed light on human desire . His point of departure is Freud 's Oedipal theories , and the central theme of mourning that runs through Hamlet . In Lacan 's analysis , Hamlet unconsciously assumes the role of phallus — the cause of his inaction — and is increasingly distanced from reality " by mourning , fantasy , narcissism and psychosis " , which create holes ( or lack ) in the real , imaginary , and symbolic aspects of his psyche . Lacan 's theories influenced literary criticism of Hamlet because of his alternative vision of the play and his use of semantics to explore the play 's psychological landscape . 
 In the Bloom 's Shakespeare Through the Ages volume on Hamlet , editors Bloom and Foster express a conviction that the intentions of Shakespeare in portraying the character of Hamlet in the play exceeded the capacity of the Freudian Oedipus complex to completely encompass the extent of characteristics depicted in Hamlet throughout the tragedy : " For once , Freud regressed in attempting to fasten the Oedipus Complex upon Hamlet : it will not stick , and merely showed that Freud did better than T.S. Eliot , who preferred Coriolanus to Hamlet , or so he said . Who can believe Eliot , when he exposes his own Hamlet Complex by declaring the play to be an aesthetic failure ? " The book also notes James Joyce 's interpretation , stating that he " did far better in the Library Scene of Ulysses , where Stephen marvelously credits Shakespeare , in this play , with universal fatherhood while accurately implying that Hamlet is fatherless , thus opening a pragmatic gap between Shakespeare and Hamlet . " 
 Joshua Rothman has written in The New Yorker that " we tell the story wrong when we say that Freud used the idea of the Oedipus complex to understand Hamlet " . Rothman suggests that " it was the other way around : Hamlet helped Freud understand , and perhaps even invent , psychoanalysis " . He concludes , " The Oedipus complex is a misnomer . It should be called the ' Hamlet complex ' . " 
 In the essay " Hamlet Made Simple " , David P. <unk> turns the tables on the psychoanalysts by suggesting that Claudius is not a symbolic father figure but actually Prince Hamlet 's biological father . The hesitation in killing Claudius results from an unwillingness on Hamlet 's part to slay his real father . If Hamlet is the biological son of Claudius , that explains many things . Hamlet doesn 't become King of Denmark on the occasion of the King 's death inasmuch as it is an open secret in court that he is Claudius 's biological son , and as such he is merely a court bastard not in the line of succession . He is angry with his mother because of her long standing affair with a man Hamlet hates , and Hamlet must face the fact that he has been sired by the man he loathes . That point overturns T. S. Eliot 's complaint that the play is a failure for not furnishing an " objective correlative " to account for Hamlet 's rage at his mother . <unk> suggests that if the reader assumes that Hamlet is not who he seems to be , the objective correlative becomes apparent . Hamlet is suicidal in the first soliloquy not because his mother quickly remarries but because of her adulterous affair with the despised Claudius which makes Hamlet his son . Finally , the Ghost 's confirmation of an alternative fatherhood for Hamlet is a fabrication that gives the Prince a motive for revenge . 
 = = = Feminist = = = 
 In the 20th century , feminist critics opened up new approaches to Gertrude and Ophelia . New Historicist and cultural materialist critics examined the play in its historical context , attempting to piece together its original cultural environment . They focused on the gender system of early modern England , pointing to the common trinity of maid , wife , or widow , with whores outside of that stereotype . In this analysis , the essence of Hamlet is the central character 's changed perception of his mother as a whore because of her failure to remain faithful to Old Hamlet . In consequence , Hamlet loses his faith in all women , treating Ophelia as if she too were a whore and dishonest with Hamlet . Ophelia , by some critics , can be seen as honest and fair ; however , it is virtually impossible to link these two traits , since ' fairness ' is an outward trait , while ' honesty ' is an inward trait . 
 Carolyn Heilbrun 's 1957 essay " The Character of Hamlet 's Mother " defends Gertrude , arguing that the text never hints that Gertrude knew of Claudius poisoning King Hamlet . This analysis has been praised by many feminist critics , combating what is , by Heilbrun 's argument , centuries ' worth of misinterpretation . By this account , Gertrude 's worst crime is of pragmatically marrying her brother @-@ in @-@ law in order to avoid a power vacuum . This is borne out by the fact that King Hamlet 's ghost tells Hamlet to leave Gertrude out of Hamlet 's revenge , to leave her to heaven , an arbitrary mercy to grant to a conspirator to murder . This view has not been without objection from some critics . 
 Ophelia has also been defended by feminist critics , most notably Elaine Showalter . Ophelia is surrounded by powerful men : her father , brother , and Hamlet . All three disappear : Laertes leaves , Hamlet abandons her , and Polonius dies . Conventional theories had argued that without these three powerful men making decisions for her , Ophelia is driven into madness . Feminist theorists argue that she goes mad with guilt because , when Hamlet kills her father , he has fulfilled her sexual desire to have Hamlet kill her father so they can be together . Showalter points out that Ophelia has become the symbol of the distraught and hysterical woman in modern culture . 
 = = Influence = = 
 See also Literary influence of Hamlet 
 Hamlet is one of the most quoted works in the English language , and is often included on lists of the world 's greatest literature . As such , it reverberates through the writing of later centuries . Academic Laurie Osborne identifies the direct influence of Hamlet in numerous modern narratives , and divides them into four main categories : fictional accounts of the play 's composition , simplifications of the story for young readers , stories expanding the role of one or more characters , and narratives featuring performances of the play . 
 Henry Fielding 's Tom Jones , published about 1749 , describes a visit to Hamlet by Tom Jones and Mr Partridge , with similarities to the " play within a play " . In contrast , Goethe 's Bildungsroman Wilhelm Meister 's Apprenticeship , written between 1776 and 1796 , not only has a production of Hamlet at its core but also creates parallels between the Ghost and Wilhelm Meister 's dead father . In the early 1850s , in Pierre , Herman Melville focuses on a Hamlet @-@ like character 's long development as a writer . Ten years later , Dickens 's Great Expectations contains many Hamlet @-@ like plot elements : it is driven by revenge @-@ motivated actions , contains ghost @-@ like characters ( Abel <unk> and Miss Havisham ) , and focuses on the hero 's guilt . Academic Alexander Welsh notes that Great Expectations is an " autobiographical novel " and " anticipates psychoanalytic readings of Hamlet itself " . About the same time , George Eliot 's The Mill on the Floss was published , introducing Maggie <unk> " who is explicitly compared with Hamlet " though " with a reputation for sanity " . 
 L. Frank Baum 's first published short story was " They Played a New Hamlet " ( 1895 ) . When Baum had been touring New York State in the title role , the actor playing the ghost fell through the floorboards , and the rural audience thought it was part of the show and demanded that the actor repeat the fall , because they thought it was funny . Baum would later recount the actual story in an article , but the short story is told from the point of view of the actor playing the Ghost . 
 In the 1920s , James Joyce managed " a more upbeat version " of Hamlet — stripped of obsession and revenge — in Ulysses , though its main parallels are with Homer 's Odyssey . In the 1990s , two novelists were explicitly influenced by Hamlet . In Angela Carter 's Wise Children , To be or not to be is reworked as a song and dance routine , and Iris Murdoch 's The Black Prince has Oedipal themes and murder intertwined with a love affair between a Hamlet @-@ obsessed writer , Bradley Pearson , and the daughter of his rival . 
 There is the story of the woman who read Hamlet for the first time and said , " I don 't see why people admire that play so . It is nothing but a bunch of quotations strung together . " 
 — Isaac Asimov , Asimov 's Guide to Shakespeare , pg vii , Avenal Books , 1970 
 = = Performance history = = 
 = = = Shakespeare 's day to the Interregnum = = = 
 Shakespeare almost certainly wrote the role of Hamlet for Richard Burbage . He was the chief tragedian of the Lord Chamberlain 's Men , with a capacious memory for lines and a wide emotional range . Judging by the number of reprints , Hamlet appears to have been Shakespeare 's fourth most popular play during his lifetime — only Henry IV Part 1 , Richard III and Pericles eclipsed it . Shakespeare provides no clear indication of when his play is set ; however , as Elizabethan actors performed at the Globe in contemporary dress on minimal sets , this would not have affected the staging . 
 Firm evidence for specific early performances of the play is scant . What is known is that the crew of the ship Red Dragon , anchored off Sierra Leone , performed Hamlet in September 1607 ; that the play toured in Germany within five years of Shakespeare 's death ; and that it was performed before James I in 1619 and Charles I in 1637 . Oxford editor George Hibbard argues that , since the contemporary literature contains many allusions and references to Hamlet ( only Falstaff is mentioned more , from Shakespeare ) , the play was surely performed with a frequency that the historical record misses . 
 All theatres were closed down by the Puritan government during the Interregnum . Even during this time , however , <unk> known as drolls were often performed illegally , including one called The Grave @-@ Makers based on Act 5 , Scene 1 of Hamlet . 
 = = = Restoration and 18th century = = = 
 The play was revived early in the Restoration . When the existing stock of pre @-@ civil war plays was divided between the two newly created patent theatre companies , Hamlet was the only Shakespearean favourite that Sir William Davenant 's Duke 's Company secured . It became the first of Shakespeare 's plays to be presented with movable flats painted with generic scenery behind the proscenium arch of Lincoln 's Inn Fields Theatre . This new stage convention highlighted the frequency with which Shakespeare shifts dramatic location , encouraging the recurrent criticisms of his violation of the neoclassical principle of maintaining a unity of place . Davenant cast Thomas Betterton in the eponymous role , and he continued to play the Dane until he was 74 . David Garrick at Drury Lane produced a version that adapted Shakespeare heavily ; he declared : " I had sworn I would not leave the stage till I had rescued that noble play from all the rubbish of the fifth act . I have brought it forth without the grave @-@ digger 's trick , <unk> , & the fencing match " . The first actor known to have played Hamlet in North America is Lewis Hallam . Jr . , in the American Company 's production in Philadelphia in 1759 . 
 John Philip Kemble made his Drury Lane debut as Hamlet in 1783 . His performance was said to be 20 minutes longer than anyone else 's , and his lengthy pauses provoked the suggestion by Richard Brinsley Sheridan that " music should be played between the words " . Sarah Siddons was the first actress known to play Hamlet ; many women have since played him as a breeches role , to great acclaim . In 1748 , Alexander <unk> wrote a Russian adaptation that focused on Prince Hamlet as the embodiment of an opposition to Claudius 's tyranny — a treatment that would recur in Eastern European versions into the 20th century . In the years following America 's independence , Thomas <unk> Cooper , the young nation 's leading tragedian , performed Hamlet among other plays at the Chestnut Street Theatre in Philadelphia , and at the Park Theatre in New York . Although chided for " acknowledging acquaintances in the audience " and " inadequate memorisation of his lines " , he became a national celebrity . 
 = = = 19th century = = = 
 From around 1810 to 1840 , the best @-@ known Shakespearean performances in the United States were tours by leading London actors — including George Frederick Cooke , Junius Brutus Booth , Edmund Kean , William Charles Macready , and Charles Kemble . Of these , Booth remained to make his career in the States , fathering the nation 's most notorious actor , John Wilkes Booth ( who later assassinated Abraham Lincoln ) , and its most famous Hamlet , Edwin Booth . Edwin Booth 's Hamlet at the Fifth Avenue Theatre in 1875 was described as " … the dark , sad , dreamy , mysterious hero of a poem . … [ acted ] in an ideal manner , as far removed as possible from the plane of actual life " . Booth played Hamlet for 100 nights in the 1864 / 5 season at The Winter Garden Theatre , inaugurating the era of long @-@ run Shakespeare in America . 
 In the United Kingdom , the actor @-@ managers of the Victorian era ( including Kean , Samuel Phelps , Macready , and Henry Irving ) staged Shakespeare in a grand manner , with elaborate scenery and costumes . The tendency of actor @-@ managers to emphasise the importance of their own central character did not always meet with the critics ' approval . George Bernard Shaw 's praise for Johnston Forbes @-@ Robertson 's performance contains a <unk> at Irving : " The story of the play was perfectly intelligible , and quite took the attention of the audience off the principal actor at moments . What is the Lyceum coming to ? " 
 In London , Edmund Kean was the first Hamlet to abandon the regal finery usually associated with the role in favour of a plain costume , and he is said to have surprised his audience by playing Hamlet as serious and introspective . In stark contrast to earlier opulence , William Poel 's 1881 production of the Q1 text was an early attempt at reconstructing the Elizabethan theatre 's austerity ; his only backdrop was a set of red curtains . Sarah Bernhardt played the prince in her popular 1899 London production . In contrast to the " effeminate " view of the central character that usually accompanied a female casting , she described her character as " manly and resolute , but nonetheless thoughtful ... [ he ] thinks before he acts , a trait indicative of great strength and great spiritual power " . 
 In France , Charles Kemble initiated an enthusiasm for Shakespeare ; and leading members of the Romantic movement such as Victor Hugo and Alexandre Dumas saw his 1827 Paris performance of Hamlet , particularly admiring the madness of Harriet Smithson 's Ophelia . In Germany , Hamlet had become so assimilated by the mid @-@ 19th century that Ferdinand <unk> declared that " Germany is Hamlet " . From the 1850s , the Parsi theatre tradition in India transformed Hamlet into folk performances , with dozens of songs added . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 Apart from some western troupes ' 19th @-@ century visits , the first professional performance of Hamlet in Japan was <unk> Kawakami 's 1903 <unk> ( " new school theatre " ) adaptation . <unk> <unk> translated Hamlet and produced a performance in 1911 that blended Shingeki ( " new drama " ) and Kabuki styles . This hybrid @-@ genre reached its peak in <unk> Fukuda 's 1955 Hamlet . In 1998 , Yukio Ninagawa produced an acclaimed version of Hamlet in the style of <unk> theatre , which he took to London . 
 Constantin Stanislavski and Edward Gordon Craig — two of the 20th century 's most influential theatre practitioners — collaborated on the Moscow Art Theatre 's seminal production of 1911 – 12 . While Craig favoured stylised abstraction , Stanislavski , armed with his ' system , ' explored psychological motivation . Craig conceived of the play as a symbolist monodrama , offering a dream @-@ like vision as seen through Hamlet 's eyes alone . This was most evident in the staging of the first court scene . The most famous aspect of the production is Craig 's use of large , abstract screens that altered the size and shape of the acting area for each scene , representing the character 's state of mind spatially or visualising a dramaturgical progression . The production attracted enthusiastic and unprecedented world @-@ wide attention for the theatre and placed it " on the cultural map for Western Europe " . 
 Hamlet is often played with contemporary political overtones . Leopold <unk> 's 1926 production at the Berlin <unk> portrayed Claudius 's court as a parody of the corrupt and fawning court of Kaiser Wilhelm . In Poland , the number of productions of Hamlet has tended to increase at times of political unrest , since its political themes ( suspected crimes , coups , surveillance ) can be used to comment on a contemporary situation . Similarly , Czech directors have used the play at times of occupation : a 1941 Vinohrady Theatre production " emphasised , with due caution , the helpless situation of an intellectual attempting to endure in a ruthless environment " . In China , performances of Hamlet often have political significance : Gu Wuwei 's 1916 The Usurper of State Power , an amalgam of Hamlet and Macbeth , was an attack on Yuan Shikai 's attempt to overthrow the republic . In 1942 , Jiao <unk> directed the play in a Confucian temple in Sichuan Province , to which the government had retreated from the advancing Japanese . In the immediate aftermath of the collapse of the protests at Tiananmen Square , Lin <unk> staged a 1990 Hamlet in which the prince was an ordinary individual tortured by a loss of meaning . In this production , the actors playing Hamlet , Claudius and Polonius exchanged roles at crucial moments in the performance , including the moment of Claudius 's death , at which point the actor mainly associated with Hamlet fell to the ground . 
 Notable stagings in London and New York include Barrymore 's 1925 production at the Haymarket ; it influenced subsequent performances by John Gielgud and Laurence Olivier . Gielgud played the central role many times : his 1936 New York production ran for 132 performances , leading to the accolade that he was " the finest interpreter of the role since Barrymore " . Although " posterity has treated Maurice Evans less kindly " , throughout the 1930s and 1940s he was regarded by many as the leading interpreter of Shakespeare in the United States and in the 1938 / 9 season he presented Broadway 's first uncut Hamlet , running four and a half hours . Evans later performed a highly truncated version of the play that he played for South Pacific war zones during World War II which made the prince a more decisive character . The staging , known as the " G.I. Hamlet , " was produced on Broadway for 131 performances in 1945 / 46 . Olivier 's 1937 performance at The Old Vic was popular with audiences but not with critics , with James Agate writing in a famous review in The Sunday Times , " Mr. Olivier does not speak poetry badly . He does not speak it at all . " . In 1937 Tyrone Guthrie directed the play at Elsinore , Denmark with Laurence Olivier as Hamlet and Vivien Leigh as Ophelia . 
 In 1963 , Olivier directed Peter O 'Toole as Hamlet in the inaugural performance of the newly formed National Theatre ; critics found resonance between O 'Toole 's Hamlet and John Osborne 's hero , Jimmy Porter , from Look Back in Anger . 
 Richard Burton received his third Tony Award nomination when he played his second Hamlet , his first under John Gielgud 's direction , in 1964 in a production that holds the record for the longest run of the play in Broadway history ( 137 performances ) . The performance was set on a bare stage , conceived to appear like a dress rehearsal , with Burton in a black v @-@ neck sweater , and Gielgud himself tape @-@ recorded the voice for the Ghost ( which appeared as a looming shadow ) . It was immortalised both on record and on a film that played in US theatres for a week in 1964 as well as being the subject of books written by cast members William Redfield and Richard L. Sterne . Other New York portrayals of Hamlet of note include that of Ralph Fiennes 's in 1995 ( for which he won the Tony Award for Best Actor ) – which ran , from first preview to closing night , a total of one hundred performances . About the Fiennes Hamlet Vincent Canby wrote in The New York Times that it was " … not one for literary sleuths and Shakespeare scholars . It respects the play , but it doesn 't provide any new material for arcane debates on what it all means . Instead it 's an intelligent , beautifully read … " Stacy Keach played the role with an all @-@ star cast at Joseph Papp 's Delacorte Theatre in the early 70s , with Colleen Dewhurst 's Gertrude , James Earl Jones 's King , Barnard Hughes 's Polonius , Sam Waterston 's Laertes and Raúl Juliá 's Osric . Sam Waterston later played the role himself at the Delacorte for the New York Shakespeare Festival , and the show transferred to the Vivian Beaumont Theatre in 1975 ( Stephen Lang played Bernardo and other roles ) . Stephen Lang 's Hamlet for the Roundabout Theatre Company in 1992 received mixed reviews and ran for sixty @-@ one performances . David Warner played the role with the Royal Shakespeare Theatre in 1965 . William Hurt ( at Circle Rep Off @-@ Broadway , memorably performing " To Be Or Not to Be " while lying on the floor ) , Jon Voight at Rutgers , and Christopher Walken ( fiercely ) at Stratford CT have all played the role , as has Diane Venora at the Public Theatre . Off Broadway , the Riverside Shakespeare Company mounted an uncut first folio Hamlet in 1978 at Columbia University , with a playing time of under three hours . In fact , Hamlet is the most produced Shakespeare play in New York theatre history , with sixty @-@ four recorded productions on Broadway , and an untold number Off Broadway . 
 Ian Charleson performed Hamlet from 9 October to 13 November 1989 , in Richard Eyre 's production at the Olivier Theatre , replacing Daniel Day @-@ Lewis , who had abandoned the production . Seriously ill from AIDS at the time , Charleson died eight weeks after his last performance . Fellow actor and friend , Sir Ian McKellen , said that Charleson played Hamlet so well it was as if he had rehearsed the role all his life ; McKellen called it " the perfect Hamlet " . The performance garnered other major accolades as well , some critics echoing McKellen in calling it the definitive Hamlet performance . 
 = = = 21st century = = = 
 Hamlet continues to be staged regularly , with actors such as Simon Russell Beale , Ben Whishaw , David Tennant , Angela Winkler , Samuel West , Christopher Eccleston , Maxine Peake , Rory Kinnear , Christian Camargo and Andrew Scott , performing the lead role . 
 In May 2009 , Hamlet opened with Jude Law in the title role at the Donmar Warehouse West End season at Wyndham 's Theatre . The production officially opened on 3 June and ran through 22 August 2009 . A further production of the play ran at Elsinore Castle in Denmark from 25 – 30 August 2009 . The Jude Law Hamlet then moved to Broadway , and ran for 12 weeks at the Broadhurst Theatre in New York . 
 In 2013 , American actor Paul Giamatti won critical acclaim for his performance on stage in the title role of Hamlet , performed in modern dress , at the Yale Repertory Theater , at Yale University in New Haven , Connecticut . 
 The Globe Theatre of London initiated a project in 2014 to perform Hamlet in every country in the world in the space of two years . Titled Globe to Globe Hamlet , it began its tour on 23 April 2014 , the 450th anniversary of Shakespeare 's birth . As of 23 February 2016 , the project had performed in 170 different countries . 
 Benedict Cumberbatch played the role for a 12 @-@ week run in a production at the Barbican Theatre , opening on 25 August 2015 . The play was produced by Sonia Friedman , and directed by Lyndsey Turner , with set design by Es Devlin . It was called the " most in @-@ demand theatre production of all time " . The entire run sold out in seven hours after tickets went on sale 11 August 2014 , more than a year before the play opened . 
 = = = Film and TV performances = = = 
 The earliest screen success for Hamlet was Sarah Bernhardt 's five @-@ minute film of the fencing scene , which was produced in 1900 . The film was an early attempt at combining sound and film , music and words were recorded on phonograph records , to be played along with the film . Silent versions were released in 1907 , 1908 , 1910 , 1913 , 1917 , and 1920 . In the 1920 version , Asta Nielsen played the role of Hamlet as a woman who spends her life disguised as a man . 
 Laurence Olivier 's 1948 moody black @-@ and @-@ white Hamlet won best picture and best actor Oscars , and is still , as of 2015 , the only Shakespeare film to have done so . His interpretation stressed the Oedipal overtones of the play , and cast 28 @-@ year @-@ old Eileen <unk> as Hamlet 's mother , opposite himself , at 41 , as Hamlet . In 1953 , actor Jack Manning performed the play in 15 @-@ minute segments over two weeks in the short @-@ lived late night DuMont series <unk> Theater . New York Times TV critic Jack Gould praised Manning 's performance as Hamlet . 
 Shakespeare experts Sir John Gielgud and Kenneth Branagh consider the definitive rendition of the Bard 's tragic tale to be the 1964 Russian film <unk> ( Russian : <unk> ) based on a translation by Boris Pasternak and directed by Grigori <unk> , with a score by Dmitri Shostakovich . <unk> <unk> was cast in the role of Hamlet ; he was particularly praised by Sir Laurence Olivier . 
 John Gielgud directed Richard Burton in a Broadway production at the Lunt @-@ Fontanne Theatre in 1964 – 5 , the longest @-@ running Hamlet in the U.S. to date . A live film of the production was produced using " <unk> " , a method of recording a live performance with multiple video cameras and converting the image to film . Eileen <unk> repeated her role from Olivier 's film version as the Queen , and the voice of Gielgud was heard as the Ghost . The Gielgud / Burton production was also recorded complete and released on LP by Columbia Masterworks . 
 The first Hamlet in color was a 1969 film directed by Tony Richardson with Nicol Williamson as Hamlet and Marianne Faithfull as Ophelia . 
 In 1990 Franco Zeffirelli , whose Shakespeare films have been described as " sensual rather than cerebral " , cast Mel Gibson — then famous for the Mad Max and Lethal Weapon movies — in the title role of his 1990 version ; Glenn Close — then famous as the psychotic " other woman " in Fatal Attraction — played Gertrude , and Paul Scofield played Hamlet 's father . In contrast to Zeffirelli , whose Hamlet was heavily cut , Kenneth Branagh adapted , directed , and starred in a 1996 version containing every word of Shakespeare 's play , combining the material from the F1 and Q2 texts . Branagh 's Hamlet runs for around four hours . Branagh set the film with late 19th @-@ century costuming and furnishings ; and Blenheim Palace , built in the early 18th century , became Elsinore Castle in the external scenes . The film is structured as an epic and makes frequent use of flashbacks to highlight elements not made explicit in the play : Hamlet 's sexual relationship with Kate Winslet 's Ophelia , for example , or his childhood affection for Yorick ( played by Ken Dodd ) . 
 In 2000 , Michael Almereyda 's Hamlet set the story in contemporary Manhattan , with Ethan Hawke playing Hamlet as a film student . Claudius ( played by Kyle MacLachlan ) became the CEO of " Denmark Corporation " , having taken over the company by killing his brother . 
 Notable made @-@ for @-@ television productions of Hamlet include those starring Christopher Plummer ( 1964 ) , Richard Chamberlain ( 1970 ; Hallmark Hall of Fame ) , Derek Jacobi ( 1980 ; Royal Shakespeare Company , BBC ) , Kevin Kline ( 1990 ) , Campbell Scott ( 2000 ) and David Tennant ( 2009 ; Royal Shakespeare Company , BBC ) . 
 There have also been several films that transposed the general storyline of Hamlet or elements thereof to other settings . There have also been many films which included performances of scenes from Hamlet as a play @-@ within @-@ a @-@ film . See Hamlet on screen for further details . 
 = = Stage pastiches = = 
 There have been various " derivative works " of Hamlet which recast the story from the point of view of other characters , or transpose the story into a new setting or act as sequels or prequels to Hamlet . This section is limited to those written for the stage . 
 The best @-@ known is Tom Stoppard 's 1966 play Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead , which retells many of the events of the story from the point of view of the characters Rosencrantz and Guildenstern and gives them a backstory of their own . Several times since 1995 , the American Shakespeare Center has mounted repertories that included both Hamlet and Rosencrantz and Guildenstern , with the same actors performing the same roles in each ; in their 2001 and 2009 seasons the two plays were " directed , designed , and rehearsed together to make the most out of the shared scenes and situations " . 
 W.S. Gilbert wrote a short comic play titled Rosencrantz and Guildenstern , in Hamlet 's play is presented as a tragedy written by Claudius in his youth of which he is greatly embarrassed . Through the chaos triggered by Hamlet 's staging of it , Guildenstern helps Rosencrantz vie with Hamlet to make Ophelia his bride . 
 Lee Blessing 's Fortinbras is a comical sequel to Hamlet in which all the deceased characters come back as ghosts . The New York Times reviewed the play , saying it is " scarcely more than an extended comedy sketch , lacking the portent and linguistic complexity of Tom Stoppard 's Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead . Fortinbras operates on a far less ambitious plane , but it is a ripping yarn and offers Keith <unk> a role in which he can commit comic mayhem . " 
 Heiner Müller 's postmodern drama The <unk> was first produced in Paris by director Jean <unk> in 1979 . This play in turn inspired Giannina Braschi 's dramatic novel United States of Banana , which takes place at the Statue of Liberty in post @-@ 9 / 11 New York City . In it , Hamlet , Zarathustra , and Giannina are on a quest to free the Puerto Rican prisoner Segismundo from the dungeon of Liberty , where Segismundo 's father , Basilio , the King of the United States of Banana , imprisoned him for the crime of having been born . The work intertwines the plots and characters of Pedro Calderón de la Barca 's Life Is a Dream with Shakespeare 's Hamlet . 
 Caridad <unk> 's 12 Ophelias ( a play with broken songs ) includes elements of the story of Hamlet but focuses on Ophelia . In <unk> 's play , Ophelia is resurrected and rises from a pool of water , after her death in Hamlet . The play is a series of scenes and songs , and was first staged at public swimming pool in Brooklyn . Heidi Weiss of the Chicago Sun @-@ Times said of the play , " Far more surreal and twisted than Tom Stoppard 's Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are Dead , 12 Ophelias is a reminder of just how <unk> and mysterious Shakespeare 's original remains . " Other characters are renamed : Hamlet is Rude Boy , Rosencrantz and Guildenstern are androgynous helpers known simply as R and G , Gertrude is the madam of a brothel , Horatio becomes H and continues to be Hamlet 's best friend / confidante , and a chorus of Ophelias serves as guide . A new character , Mina , is introduced , and she is a whore in Gertrude 's brothel . 
 David Davalos ' Wittenberg is a " tragical @-@ comical @-@ historical " prequel to Hamlet that depicts the Danish prince as a student at Wittenberg University ( now known as the University of Halle @-@ Wittenberg ) , where he is torn between the conflicting teachings of his mentors John Faustus and Martin Luther . The New York Times reviewed the play , saying , " Mr. Davalos has molded a daft campus comedy out of this unlikely convergence , " and <unk> 's review said the playwright " has imagined a fascinating alternate reality , and quite possibly , given the fictional Hamlet a back story that will inform the role for the future . " 
 = = = Editions of Hamlet = = = 
 = Kevin Kolb = 
 Kevin Benjamin Kolb ( / <unk> / ; born August 24 , 1984 ) is a former American football quarterback . He was drafted by the Philadelphia Eagles in the second round of the 2007 NFL Draft . He has also been a member of the Arizona Cardinals and the Buffalo Bills . He played college football for the Houston Cougars . 
 Kolb attended Stephenville High School in Stephenville , Texas , where he was a three @-@ year starter at quarterback . He moved on to the University of Houston where he earned Conference USA Offensive Most Valuable Player of the Year honors in 2006 . Kolb started for two games in place of the injured Donovan McNabb during the 2009 NFL season for the Eagles , and earned NFC Player of the Week honors following his week 3 performance against the Kansas City Chiefs . Following McNabb 's trade to the Washington Redskins in April 2010 , Kolb became the starting quarterback for the Eagles . However , after suffering a concussion in week 1 against the Green Bay Packers , Kolb was replaced at quarterback by Michael Vick . Vick suffered a rib cartilage injury in week four and Kolb was named the starter . When Vick returned after week eight , Kolb was relegated to a backup role . Kolb was traded to the Arizona Cardinals prior to the start of the 2011 season . Kolb was released by the Cardinals on March 15 , 2013 . 
 = = Early years = = 
 While attending Stephenville High School in Stephenville , Texas , Kolb became the starting quarterback for the Yellow Jackets during his sophomore year . He was a two @-@ time UIL District 8 @-@ 4A offensive MVP . His most outstanding year was his senior year , 2002 , in which he completed 206 of 321 passing attempts for 3 @,@ 357 yards and 29 touchdowns , as well as rushing for 197 yards . At the end of the 2002 season , he earned honorable mention All @-@ State and second @-@ team Academic All @-@ State honors . 
 = = College career = = 
 Kolb initially committed to Oklahoma State to play college football but rescinded this commitment when Houston hired head coach Art <unk> , a former head coach at Stephenville High School . Kolb was also recruited by TCU , Oklahoma and Texas Tech . 
 = = = 2003 = = = 
 One day before the season @-@ opener in 2003 , Kolb was named the starter in Houston as a true freshman , the first true freshman quarterback to start in the season @-@ opener in school history , making his debut against Rice at Robertson Stadium . On September 20 , Kolb threw for 321 yards and four touchdowns and went 20 @-@ for @-@ 29 passing in the 42 – 35 win over Mississippi State . He was named Conference USA Player of the Week for his performance . On October 25 , Kolb accounted for over 400 yards passing and 100 yards rushing against TCU in a 62 @-@ 55 loss to the Horned Frogs , only the fourth time this feat had been achieved in Division I @-@ A. He tied the league record with 578 total yards , and earned Conference USA offensive co @-@ player of the week honors for his performance . Kolb finished the season with 3 @,@ 131 passing yards , 25 touchdowns , and only six interceptions en route to a 7 @-@ 6 record on the year , which ended with a 54 @-@ 48 loss to Hawaii in the Hawaii Bowl . Following the season , Kolb was named Conference USA Freshman of the Year . 
 = = = 2004 = = = 
 Kolb was named to the Walter Camp Award , Davey O 'Brien Award and Maxwell Award watchlists prior to the start of the 2004 season . He started in all 11 games in 2004 , finishing first in the conference in total offense with 256 @.@ 1 yards per game , and he passed for 2 @,@ 766 yards and 11 touchdowns . 
 = = = 2005 = = = 
 Kolb was named to the Maxwell Award and Davey O 'Brien Award watchlists for the second straight year in 2005 . After a losing season in 2004 , Kolb led the Cougars to a 6 @-@ 5 regular @-@ season record in 2005 . He was named the Cougars ' MVP in the Fort Worth Bowl in a 42 @-@ 13 loss to Kansas after passing for 214 yards and scoring one rushing touchdown . He finished the season with 3 @,@ 258 passing yards , and became the school 's all @-@ time total offense leader . He earned third @-@ team All @-@ Conference USA honors following the season . 
 = = = 2006 = = = 
 Kolb was named to the Maxwell Award watchlist for the third consecutive year in 2006 . He was named the consensus Conference USA Preseason Offensive Player of the Year , and he earned preseason all @-@ conference honors . The 2006 season was Kolb 's signature college year , in which he threw 30 touchdowns and only four interceptions on the way to a 10 @-@ 4 record and a Conference USA championship . He went 22 @-@ for @-@ 35 for 235 yards and three touchdowns in a win over Rice University on September 2 , and was named the Conference USA Player of the Week for his efforts . He was named as a finalist for the Johnny Unitas Golden Arm Award on November 1 . He was named the Conference USA Offensive Player of the Year on November 30 . Kolb won the conference 's offensive MVP , but Houston lost to South Carolina 44 @-@ 36 in the Liberty Bowl . He finished the season with 3 @,@ 808 passing yards , 30 touchdowns and four interceptions . Kolb ended his career with 12 @,@ 964 total passing yards , fifth all @-@ time . 
 Kolb was invited to play in the 2007 East – West Shrine Game on January 20 , 2007 , and the 2007 Senior Bowl on January 27 . 
 = = Professional career = = 
 = = = Pre @-@ draft = = = 
 Kolb was rated as the sixth @-@ best quarterback in the 2007 NFL Draft by NFLDraftScout.com , and was projected to be drafted in the third or fourth round . He hired Jeff Nalley and Vann McElroy as his agents prior to the draft , and they hired former NFL quarterback Jerry <unk> to work with Kolb to get him ready for the pre @-@ draft workouts . He worked out with Danny Arnold in Stafford , Texas in February 2007 in order to prepare for the NFL Scouting Combine . Kolb worked out for the Baltimore Ravens in the first week of April , and followed it up with a visit to the Philadelphia Eagles . 
 = = = Philadelphia Eagles = = = 
 Kolb was drafted by the Philadelphia Eagles in the second round ( 36th overall ) of the 2007 NFL Draft . He was the third quarterback taken in the draft behind <unk> Russell ( 1st overall ) and Brady Quinn ( 22nd overall ) . He signed a four @-@ year , $ 4 @.@ 285 million contract with the team on July 25 , 2007 . Kolb spent 2007 as the third @-@ string quarterback behind Donovan McNabb and A. J. Feeley . 
 In his second year in the league , Kolb was promoted to second @-@ string quarterback ahead of A. J. Feeley . He played the entire second half of the Eagles game against the Baltimore Ravens on November 23 after an infamous benching of McNabb . Kolb threw an interception in the endzone to Ed Reed , who took it back 108 yards for a touchdown , an NFL record . Kolb completed only 17 passes on 34 attempts for 144 yards , throwing no touchdowns and four interceptions during the season . 
 Kolb 's first NFL start was a 48 @-@ 22 loss against the New Orleans Saints at home on September 20 , 2009 due to an injury to Donovan McNabb . His first career touchdown was recorded in the first quarter of that game on a 71 @-@ yard pass to DeSean Jackson ; he threw for 391 yards on 31 completions . On September 27 , 2009 , Kolb made his second start in place of McNabb , throwing for 327 yards and two touchdowns in a 34 @-@ 14 win against the Kansas City Chiefs . Kolb became the first quarterback in NFL history to throw for more than 300 yards in each of his first two career starts . He was named the NFC Offensive Player of the Week after his efforts against the Chiefs . 
 Kolb expressed his desire to be the starting quarterback for the Eagles during the 2010 offseason : " Obviously my goal is to be the starter and to start for 16 games and to lead this team as far as we can go . Personally , I don 't have a lot of personal goals right now , they 're more team @-@ oriented , besides me getting on the field and proving I can take over this thing . " Kolb gained many comparisons to the situation Aaron Rodgers endured backing up Brett Favre during his first three seasons . Kolb and Rodgers reached out to one another to share their similar plights . 
 On March 26 , Adam <unk> reported that the Eagles expected Kolb to be the starting quarterback for the 2010 season . On April 4 , McNabb was traded to the Washington Redskins , making Kolb the starting quarterback . Kolb signed a one @-@ year contract extension worth $ 12 @.@ 25 million on April 29 , keeping him under contract with the Eagles through the 2011 season . 
 In the Eagles ' season @-@ opener against the Green Bay Packers , the supposed start of the " Kevin Kolb Era , " he was tackled by Packers linebacker Clay Matthews , and sustained a concussion . For precautionary measures , Kolb was withdrawn from the game . After passing a series of tests , he was nonetheless withheld for the game against the Detroit Lions . On September 21 , backup quarterback Michael Vick was named the starting quarterback over Kolb for the rest of the season following Vick 's win over the Lions . Kolb took over for Vick in a game against the Redskins in week 4 after Vick suffered a chest injury . Kolb went 22 @-@ for @-@ 35 with 201 passing yards , one touchdown and an interception in place of Vick . However , he was still beaten by the Redskins and their new starting quarterback , Donovan McNabb , 12 @-@ 17 . Against the Atlanta Falcons in week 6 , Kolb went 23 @-@ for @-@ 29 for 326 yards , three touchdowns and one interception , and was named the NFC Offensive Player of the Week following his performance . During the game , Kolb made an illegal horse @-@ collar tackle on Falcons safety William Moore following an interception . The Eagles were penalized 15 yards and Kolb was later fined $ 5 @,@ 000 by the league , the first time a quarterback was fined for a horse @-@ collar tackle . 
 After the 2010 season , there was speculation that the Eagles would look to make a deal for Kolb since Vick was the clear starting quarterback . However , due to the 2011 NFL Labor Dispute , the Eagles were unable to trade away Kolb . On July 19 , 2011 , Kolb expressed interest in playing for the Arizona Cardinals , saying " Arizona would be a great place " to play . 
 = = = Arizona Cardinals = = = 
 Kolb was traded to the Arizona Cardinals on July 28 , 2011 , in exchange for cornerback Dominique Rodgers @-@ Cromartie and a second @-@ round draft pick in the 2012 NFL Draft ( which the Eagles traded for draft picks used on Vinny Curry and Brandon Boykin ) . Expected to start , Kolb had a decent preseason debut for the Cardinals in preseason play against the Oakland Raiders , going 4 @-@ for @-@ 7 for 68 yards ; among the four completions was a 43 @-@ yard pass to wide receiver Larry Fitzgerald . 
 Kolb started his first game for the Cardinals on September 11 , 2011 against the Carolina Panthers in the first week of the 2011 NFL season . Kolb was 18 of 27 for 309 yards , two touchdowns , and no picks in the 28 @-@ 21 win over the Panthers . He also posted a 130 @.@ 0 passer rating in the game , third best in the NFL in Week 1 . However , over the rest of the season , his play markedly deteriorated as the Cardinals lost several close games . Furthermore , he was hampered by various injuries . A foot injury ( turf @-@ toe ) that he incurred in a game against the Baltimore Ravens sidelined him for several games . His backup quarterback , John Skelton , performed ably as he stepped in and won games against St. Louis ( once at home , once away ) and against Philadelphia . Upon return from his turf @-@ toe injury , Kevin led the Cardinals to a comeback win against the Dallas Cowboys in overtime . The game was memorable for the blunder committed by Cowboys head coach Jason Garrett , who called a time @-@ out to " ice " his own kicker on a potential game @-@ winning field goal . The ensuing kick after the time @-@ out was not good , and in overtime , Kevin threw a touch @-@ pass to <unk> Stephens @-@ Howling who ran it into the end @-@ zone for the winning score . But in the very next game against the San Francisco 49ers , Kolb was inadvertently kicked in the back of the head early in the first series . He left the game with concussion @-@ related symptoms , and did not return that season . 
 Following a quarterback battle , Kolb lost his starting position to John Skelton for the 2012 NFL season . Following a Week 1 injury to Skelton , Kolb entered the game during the 4th quarter , leading the team on a come @-@ from @-@ behind victory . Skelton was eventually ruled out for the Week 2 matchup against the New England Patriots . Arizona was handed their first loss of the season by the 2 @-@ 2 St. Louis Rams , by a final score of 17 @-@ 3 . Kolb completed just around 50 % of his passes , and was sacked 9 times ( The 2012 Cardinals became the first team since their 2003 counterparts to allow eight or more sacks in consecutive games ) . 
 Kolb proved his worth to the coaching staff following October 14 's matchup against the Buffalo Bills , in which Kolb suffered a rib injury late in the fourth quarter . Skelton began taking snaps for the injured Kolb and was only able to complete 2 of 10 passes with a game @-@ costing interception in the OT period . This injury caused Kolb to miss the following seven games , all of which the Cardinals lost . 
 The Cardinals released Kolb on March 15 , 2013 after failing to agree to a restructured contract . 
 = = = Buffalo Bills = = = 
 Kolb agreed to a two @-@ year contract for $ 13 million with the Buffalo Bills on March 30 , 2013 . On August 24 , Kolb suffered a severe concussion in a preseason game against the Washington Redskins . He was placed on injured reserve on August 30 . Kolb was released on March 11 , 2014 . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 Kolb retired in 2014 due to Post @-@ concussion syndrome , citing lingering effects from 3 career concussions . 
 = = = Career statistics = = = 
 Kolb married his wife Whitney Huddleston in February 2007 . Whitney gave birth to their first child , a daughter named <unk> June , on January 10 , 2009 , and their second child , a daughter named Atley Rose , was born in April 2010 . 
 = = Personal = = 
 Kolb majored in business entrepreneurship at the University of Houston . 
 Kolb competed in North Texas fishing tournaments in the offseason . Kolb also enjoys hunting wild hogs in his spare time . It may seem dangerous to hunt with just a twelve @-@ inch Bowie knife , but Kolb , assured the public , " Our dogs go and find ' em first , and then we stab the pigs . It 's a little bit dangerous , but as long as you know what you 're doing , you 'll be alright . " 
 On June 28 , 2014 , Kolb was arrested in Willacy County , Texas , for boating while intoxicated . 
 = Mussel Slough Tragedy = 
 The Mussel Slough Tragedy was a dispute over land titles between settlers and the Southern Pacific Railroad ( SP ) that took place on May 11 , 1880 , on a farm located 5 @.@ 6 miles ( 9 km ) northwest of Hanford , California , in the central San Joaquin Valley , leaving seven people dead . Frank Norris ' 1901 novel , The Octopus : A Story of California , was inspired by this incident , as was W. C. Morrow 's 1882 novel Blood @-@ Money . May Merrill Miller 's novel , First the Blade , includes a fictionalized account of the conflict . The exact history of the incident has been the source of some disagreement , largely because popular anti @-@ railroad sentiment in the 1880s made the incident to be a clear example of corrupt and cold @-@ blooded corporate greed . <unk> journalists and anti @-@ railroad activists glorified the settlers and used the events as evidence and justification for their anti @-@ corporate crusades . The site of the episode is now registered as California Historical Landmark # 245 . A historical marker on the east side of 14th Avenue , 350 yards ( 320 m ) north of Elder Avenue , memorializes the site . 
 = = Background = = 
 The region known in the late 19th century as the Mussel Slough country was mostly in what was then Tulare County , California , with a small portion in what was then Fresno County ( later the entire area became part of Kings County after the latter was formed in 1893 ) . The Mussel Slough country took its name from a slough which went from the Kings River to Tulare Lake . This area had remained unsettled as it was a broad , dry plain suitable only for cattle ranching . However , in 1866 Congress authorized the railroad companies to build a line through the area , and created numbered lots of one square mile ( or 640 acres ( 3 km2 ) ) each . The Southern Pacific Railroad ( SP ) received the odd @-@ numbered sections of land , totaling about 25 @,@ 000 acres ( 101 km2 ) worth . The even @-@ numbered sections were given to homesteaders by the government and were not subject to the events which followed . Given SP 's history of encouraging settlement and development along its lines , land prices were expected to appreciate considerably . 
 Settlers , who had spent a great deal of money and time in building their houses and farms , had begun to file for homesteads in the area on the railroad lands starting in 1869 , in anticipation of the completion of the line . In 1872 , the Central Pacific Railroad completed work to Goshen from the north and the Southern Pacific was to construct the southern portion ( although not generally known by the public at the time , the two railroad systems were owned and operated by the same people although they were technically separate corporations ) . The SP 's brochures had stated the price of the land would be " $ 2 @.@ 50 per acre and upwards " , leading many people to mistakenly believe that $ 2 @.@ 50 / acre was a set price . Furthermore , other brochures indicated that any improvements the settlers made to the land would not be counted when the prices were fixed . However , when the settlers attempted to acquire their land , the asking price was significantly greater than that , which SP attributed to rising property values because of the laying of the railroad , although many settlers believed it was due to their own improvements such as irrigation , housing , fences , and barns . Settlers protested against the railroads , but to no avail . A bill in the United States Congress that would have fixed the price at $ 2 @.@ 50 / acre failed to pass . The Southern Pacific then filed and won a lawsuit in 1878 against the settlers , amidst allegations of court bias ( former California Governor Leland Stanford was also president of SP ) . 
 While the issue was still pending in court , the SP decided to change the course of the route , claiming that was its prerogative , despite the Department of the Interior having already granted homestead rights . Those who had been building homes along the previous course were distraught . Settlers argued in court that by not building the line where the federal government had deeded the land , SP forfeited the title . On the other hand , the SP was convinced of its legal ownership of the land and felt it should have the freedom to set whatever prices it deemed fit for its property . Others took the opportunity to move onto the SP 's parcels , anticipating that the courts would rule against the company , thus allowing them to get the land for free . The Supreme Court finally ruled in Schulenberg v. Harriman 21 Wall . 44 ( 1874 ) that SP still owned the lands and as such , the SP was justified to reclaim the land without compensation unless the settlers were willing to pay their asking price , now up to $ 35 / acre . Still , the Settler 's League , which was formed in 1878 in opposition to the SP 's Mussel Slough actions , even attempted to appeal directly to President Rutherford B. Hayes during his visit to San Francisco in 1880 , presenting him a petition which read , 
 Besides the 1874 Supreme Court ruling , a critical moment came on December 15 , 1879 , when Judge Lorenzo Sawyer of the Ninth Circuit Court ruled in Orton , 32 F. 457 ( C.C.D. Cal . 1879 ) , that the federal government controlled the railroad land grants , and more importantly , the state could not control ultra vires acts of corporations . 
 Given the legal system 's affirmation of its position , the SP began to forcibly remove some of the settlers . Their agents would attempt to serve eviction notices , but often would not find anyone at home , as homeowners knew they were coming . In these cases , the agents then tried removing the furniture from the homes , but the Settler 's League would just put the furniture back after the agents ' departure . Finally , it escalated to the point at which the agents would then disassemble the houses , but again , volunteers would just put them back together . The settlers were not above their own brand of justice , either . People who had purchased land from those forced to sell would be harassed by locals , and in one case one farmer who had aligned with the SP had his house burned down . Those supporting the railroads tended to be wealthier than the others , deriding the Settler 's League as " a set of demagogues " who were " very anxious to get something for nothing . " 
 Although the settlers received the benefit of a section of public opinion , politically and legally every decision was going the way of the railroad . In March 1880 , Stanford himself attempted a reconciliation by appearing in Hanford and meeting with the Settler 's League in an attempt to find some sort of compromise . 
 = = The Mussel Slough Tragedy = = 
 On May 11 , 1880 , a picnic was being held in Hanford which was to feature a speech by pro @-@ settler former California Supreme Court Justice David S. Terry ( who was actually unable to appear ) , when word reached the picnickers that four " railroad men " ( A U.S. Marshal , an SP land appraiser , and two locals ) were actively evicting settlers on railroad lands , and a group of about twenty people left to confront them ( the historical marker indicates that the two local men were Deputy U.S. Marshals , which was not in fact the case ) . However , the rumors were only partially true ; in addition to serving eviction notices , the group was also purchasing land ( and any improvements ) from settlers who had refused to pay SP 's asking price . This act was seen as a betrayal of Stanford 's visit a mere two months earlier . 
 = = = List of involved persons = = = 
 = = = = Marshal 's group = = = = 
 Alonzo W. Poole , U.S. Marshal 
 William H. Clark , railroad land grader 
 Walter J. Crow , settler ( killed ) 
 Mills Hartt , settler ( killed ) 
 = = = = Settlers ' group = = = = 
 James N. Patterson , leader of the group 
 William Braden 
 B. S. Burr 
 James Harris ( killed ) 
 Edwin Haymaker ( died of pneumonia soon after and was considered a victim of the fight ) 
 John E. Henderson ( killed ) 
 Daniel Kelly ( killed ) 
 Iver Knutson ( killed ) 
 Archibald McGregor ( killed ) 
 W. L. Morton 
 Wayman L. Pryor 
 John D. Pursell 
 = = = Sequence of events = = = 
 The parties met at the homestead of Henry D. Brewer three miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) north of Grangeville ( which is near Hanford ) , the marshal 's group having just been at Braden 's house . Later testimony from uninvolved parties indicated that the party of settlers were lightly armed and had every intention of persuading the railroad party to delay their actions until a pending court case could be resolved . However , there was bad blood between Crow and Harris , and Hartt had previously threatened to kill any " <unk> " ( a derisive term for homesteaders , equivalent to the modern day " redneck " ) , and an argument broke out between them . Harris and Hartt simultaneously opened fire at each other . Crow , a skilled marksman who was armed with a shotgun , singlehandedly killed or wounded most of the settlers ' party . After the initial exchange of gunfire ended , Crow fled the scene , but was shot in the back about 1 @.@ 5 mi ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) away by an unknown assailant before he could reach safety . Poole and Clark did not participate in the battle and left immediately after the incident , possibly defusing tensions enough to avoid further bloodshed . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 Afterwards , seventeen people were indicted by a federal grand jury and five were found guilty of wilfully interfering with a marshal in performance of his duties ( Braden , Patterson , Pryor , Purcell , and John J. Doyle , a leader in the Settler 's League ) . They were convicted in federal court ( with Judge Sawyer presiding ) and sentenced to eight months in prison and fined $ 300 each . Their time spent in imprisonment was hardly difficult . Three of the men 's wives were allowed to live with them , and Susan Curtis , daughter of one of the jailers , fell in love with and later married Braden . Upon their release in September 1881 , they were greeted by a joyous crowd of 3 @,@ 000 in Hanford . Such was the anti @-@ railroad sentiment that the five were looked upon as heroes by many across California , and those killed were considered martyrs who had given their lives for a cause . 
 Nevertheless , the affair brought such a shock that people were sobered . The legal battle had been lost , the railroad had won , and there was not enough public support for changing the policy of granting public lands to railroads . The only concession SP made was to reduce the land price slightly . In the end , most people simply stayed where they were and purchased the land . 
 = = The Mussel Slough myth = = 
 The Mussel Slough affair was seized upon by newspaper editors as well as a number of popular writers soon after the tragic shootout , as an example of corporate greed and the abuses of freewheeling market capitalism around the start of the 20th century . <unk> novels such as W. C. Morrow 's Blood @-@ Money ( 1882 ) and Charles Cyril Post 's Driven from Sea to Sea ; or , Just A ' Campin ' ( 1884 ) exaggerate the fault of the railroad for the events as they unfolded in San Joaquin and romanticize the ranchers according to a Jeffersonian agrarian ideal . Ambrose Bierce attempted to <unk> Crow , calling him " this bravest of Americans . " 
 Later novels depicting the affair , such as the philosopher Josiah Royce 's The Feud of Oakfield Creek ( 1887 ) and novelist Frank Norris ' The Octopus ( 1901 ) are slightly less hagiographic in their portrayals of the Mussel Slough ranchers , but nevertheless give a fairly one @-@ sided , anti @-@ railroad view of the Mussel Slough affair . Richard Orsi 's history of the Southern Pacific , Sunset Limited , includes a chapter outlining some common misconceptions about the Mussel Slough affair which Orsi suggests have been perpetuated through the mythic retellings of Morrow , Post , Royce , and Norris , among others . 
 The significance of the Mussel Slough myth in the history of California and the Southern Pacific Railroad is evident from a quote by Theodore Roosevelt , who as president focused considerable time and energy in redressing the wrongs and abuses of corporate monopolies throughout the U.S. After reading Norris ' The Octopus , Roosevelt stated he was " inclined to think [ ... ] that conditions were worse in California than elsewhere . " These mythic narratives about Mussel Slough helped bolster public anti @-@ railroad sentiments , and encouraged continued rebellion among homesteaders , squatters and poachers against railroad land agents , who " came to accept squatters as an ordinary , if disagreeable , part of the land business " . 
 Despite the nationwide attention the incident received , the Mussel Slough Tragedy is not remembered much today as well as later gunfights such as the gunfight at the O.K. Corral . Richard Maxwell Brown argues in No Duty to Retreat that the Mussel Slough shootout did not fit the mold of the gunfight / hero myth , which usually ignores such factors as ideology , and social and economic conflict , thus not implanting it in the lore of the American Old West . 
 = = Tragedy Oak = = 
 Six victims of the shooting were carried to the porch of the Brewer house , which was shaded by a tall oak tree . The tree became famously known as the Tragedy Oak . It blew down in a storm in the early 1990s . A piece of the tree was saved as a memorial and is on display at nearby Pioneer Elementary School in Hanford . 
 = Ahmad ibn Tulun = 
 Ahmad ibn Tulun ( Arabic : أحمد بن <unk> , DMG Aḥmad ibn <unk> ; ca . 20 September 835 – 10 May 884 ) was the founder of the Tulunid dynasty that ruled Egypt and Syria between 868 and 905 . Originally a Turkic slave @-@ soldier , in 868 Ibn Tulun was sent to Egypt as governor by the Abbasid caliph . Within four years Ibn Tulun had established himself as a virtually independent ruler by evicting the caliphal fiscal agent , Ibn al @-@ Mudabbir , taking over control of Egypt 's finances , and establishing a large military force personally loyal to himself . This process was facilitated by the volatile political situation in the Abbasid court and the preoccupation of the Abbasid regent , al @-@ Muwaffaq , with the wars against the Saffarids and the Zanj Rebellion . Ibn Tulun also took care to establish an efficient administration in Egypt . After reforms to the tax system , repairs to the irrigation system , and other measures , the annual tax yield grew markedly . As a symbol of his new regime , he built a new capital , al @-@ Qata 'i , north of the old capital Fustat . 
 After 875 / 6 he entered into open conflict with al @-@ Muwaffaq , who tried unsuccessfully to unseat him . In 878 , with the support of al @-@ Muwaffaq 's brother , Caliph al @-@ Mu 'tamid , Ibn Tulun took over the governance of Syria as well as the frontier districts with the Byzantine Empire , although control of Tarsus in particular proved tenuous . During his absence in Syria , his eldest son and deputy , Abbas , tried to usurp power in Egypt , leading to the imprisonment of Abbas and the nomination of Ibn Tulun 's second son , Khumarawayh , as his heir . The defection in 882 of a senior commander , Lu 'lu ' , to al @-@ Muwaffaq , and the defection of Tarsus , forced Ibn Tulun to return to Syria . Now virtually powerless , al @-@ Mu 'tamid tried to escape from his brother 's control to Ibn Tulun 's domains but was captured by al @-@ Muwaffaq 's agents , and Ibn Tulun convened an assembly of jurists at Damascus to denounce al @-@ Muwaffaq as a usurper . His attempt in autumn 883 to bring Tarsus to heel failed , and he fell sick . Returning to Egypt , he died in May 884 and was succeeded by Khumarawayh . 
 Ibn Tulun stands out as the first governor of a major province of the Abbasid Caliphate to not only establish himself as its master independently of the Abbasid court , but to also pass power on to his son . He was thus also the first ruler since the Ptolemaic Pharaohs to make Egypt an independent political power again , with a sphere of influence encompassing Syria and parts of the Maghreb , setting the tone for later Egypt @-@ based regimes like the Ikhshidids and the Fatimids . 
 = = Life = = 
 = = = Early life and career = = = 
 Ahmad ibn Tulun was born on the 23rd day of the month of Ramadan 220 AH ( 20 September 835 ) or slightly later , probably in Baghdad . His father , Tulun , was a Turk from a locality known in Arabic sources as <unk> or <unk> [ o ] <unk> , i.e. the Uyghur confederation . In the year 815 / 6 ( 200 AH ) Tulun was taken captive along with other Turks , and sent as part of the tribute of the Samanid governor of Bukhara <unk> ibn Asad to the Caliph al @-@ Ma 'mun ( reigned 813 – 833 ) , who at the time resided in Khurasan . After al @-@ Ma 'mun returned to Baghdad in 819 , these Turkish slaves were formed into a guard corps of slave soldiers ( ghilmān , sing. <unk> ) entrusted to al @-@ Ma 'mun 's brother and eventual successor , al @-@ Mu 'tasim ( r . 833 – 842 ) . Tulun did well for himself , eventually coming to command the Caliph 's private guard . Ahmad 's mother , called Qasim , was one of his father 's slaves . In 854 / 5 , Tulun died , and Qasim is commonly held to have married a second time , to the Turkish general <unk> or Bakbak . This report , however , does not appear in Ibn al @-@ Daya or al @-@ Balawi , and may be spurious . According to al @-@ Balawi , after his father 's death Ahmad came under the tutelage by <unk> , a close companion of Tulun , who had been taken captive alongside him . At his deathbed , Tulun urged his friend to take care of his wife and son , and Bakbak thereafter treated the young Ahmad as his own son . 
 The young Ahmad ibn Tulun received a thorough education , involving military training at the new Abbasid capital of Samarra and studies in Islamic theology at Tarsus , acquiring a reputation not only for his knowledge but also for his pious and ascetic way of life . He became popular among his fellow Turks , who would confide secrets and entrust their money and even their women to him . While at Tarsus , Ibn Tulun fought in the frontier wars with the Byzantine Empire . There he also met another senior Turkish leader , Yarjukh , whose daughter , variously given as <unk> or Khatun , became his first wife and the mother of his eldest son , Abbas , and his daughter Fatimah . On one occasion , while returning to Samarra , he saved a caravan bearing a caliphal envoy returning from Constantinople from a Bedouin raiding party , and accompanied it to Samarra . This act gained him the favour of Caliph al @-@ Musta 'in ( r . 862 – 866 ) , as well as a thousand gold dinars and the hand of the slave <unk> , the mother of his second son , Khumarawayh . When the Caliph abdicated and went into exile at Wasit in 866 , he chose Ibn Tulun to be his guard . <unk> , the mother of the new caliph , al @-@ Mu 'tazz ( r . 866 – 869 ) , schemed to remove the deposed al @-@ Musta 'in , and offered Ibn Tulun the governorship of Wasit if he would murder him . Ibn Tulun refused and was replaced by another , who carried out the deed . Ibn Tulun himself played no part in the assassination , but gave his master a burial and returned to Samarra . 
 = = = Governor of Egypt = = = 
 Already under Caliph al @-@ Mu 'tasim , senior Turkish leaders began being appointed as governors of provinces of the Caliphate as a form of appanage . Thereby they secured immediate access to the province 's tax revenue for themselves and their troops , bypassing the civilian bureaucracy . The Turkish generals usually remained close to the centre of power in Samarra , sending deputies to govern in their name . Thus when al @-@ Mu 'tazz gave Bakbak charge of Egypt in 868 , Bakbak in turn sent his stepson Ahmad as his lieutenant and resident governor . Ahmad ibn Tulun entered Egypt on 27 August 868 , and the Egyptian capital , Fustat , on 15 September . 
 Ibn Tulun 's position after his appointment was far from undisputed within his province . As governor of Fustat he oversaw the province 's garrison and was the head of the Muslim community as recognized in his title of " overseer of the army and the Friday prayer " ( wāli al @-@ <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> ) , but the fiscal administration , in particular the collection of the land tax ( kharāj ) was in the hands of the powerful veteran administrator Ibn al @-@ Mudabbir . The latter had been appointed as fiscal agent ( ʿāmil ) already since ca . 861 , and had rapidly become the most hated man in the country as he doubled the taxes and imposed new ones on Muslims and non @-@ Muslims alike . Ibn Tulun quickly signalled his intention to be sole master of his province : on his arrival at Fustat , when both Ibn al @-@ Mudabbir and <unk> , the head of the postal service ( <unk> ) and of correspondence with the caliphal government , came out to meet him with a gift of 10 @,@ 000 dinars , he refused to accept it . For the next four years , Ibn Tulun and his rivals fought via their emissaries and relatives at the caliphal court in Samarra to neutralize each other ; in the end , Ibn Tulun managed to secure Ibn al @-@ Mudabbir 's transfer to Syria in July 871 , and assumed collection of the kharāj himself . At the same time , Ibn Tulun also secured the dismissal of <unk> , who died shortly after . Thus by 872 Ibn Tulun had assumed control of all branches of the administration in Egypt , becoming de facto independent of the Abbasid central government . 
 At the time of Ibn Tulun 's appointment , Egypt was undergoing a transformative process . In 834 its early Muslim elite , the Arab settler families ( jund ) of Fustat , lost their privileges and government pay , and power passed to officials sent by the Abbasid court . At about the same time , for the first time the Muslim population began surpassing the Coptic Christians in numbers , and the rural districts were increasingly subject to both Arabization and Islamization . The rapidity of this process , and the influx of settlers after the discovery of gold and emerald mines at Aswan , meant that Upper Egypt in particular was only superficially controlled by the local governor . Furthermore , the persistence of internecine strife and turmoil at the heart of the Abbasid state — the so @-@ called " Anarchy at Samarra " — led to the appearance of millennialist revolutionary movements in the province under a series of Alid pretenders . One of them was Ibn al @-@ Sufi , a descendant of Ali 's son Umar , who rebelled in late 869 and massacred the populace of Esna . In winter 870 he defeated an army sent against him by Ibn Tulun , but was driven to the oases of the desert in spring . He remained there until he was defeated in a struggle with another regional strongman , Abu Abdallah ibn Abd al @-@ Hamid al @-@ Umari in 872 , fleeing to Mecca . There he was seized and imprisoned for a while by Ibn Tulun . One of his followers , Abu Ruh <unk> , rebelled in the oases in 873 / 4 and was successful enough for Ibn Tulun to offer him an amnesty . Ibn al @-@ Sufi 's <unk> , al @-@ Umari , was another descendant of Ali who had created an autonomous principality around the gold mines , defeating the forces sent against him . Another revolt broke out in 874 / 5 by the governor of Barqa , Muhammad ibn al @-@ Faraj al @-@ Farghani . Ibn Tulun tried to reconcile him at first but was eventually forced to send an army to besiege and storm the city , although the reprisals were limited . The re @-@ imposition of his authority over Barqa however led to the strengthening of ties with Ifriqiya to the west , including , according to Ibn al @-@ Athir , the erection of a series of lighthouses and messaging beacons along the coast . 
 In the meantime , in Palestine , the local governor , Isa ibn al @-@ Shaykh al @-@ Shaybani , had used the anarchy in Iraq to set up a quasi @-@ independent Bedouin regime , intercepting the tax caravans from Egypt and threatening Damascus . When Caliph al @-@ Muhtadi ascended the throne in July 869 , he offered a general amnesty , and wrote to Ibn al @-@ Shaykh , offering a pardon in exchange for him handing over the treasure he had wrongfully appropriated . When Ibn al @-@ Shaykh refused , the Caliph ordered Ibn Tulun to march against him . Ibn Tulun complied and began a mass purchase of black African ( <unk> ) and Greek ( <unk> ) slaves to form an army over the winter of 869 / 70 , but no sooner had he arrived at al @-@ Arish with his army in summer 870 than orders came to turn back . Ibn al @-@ Shaykh 's revolt was crushed soon after by another Turkish soldier , Amajur al @-@ Turki , who continued to govern Syria for the Abbasids until his death in 878 . This episode was nevertheless of major importance as it allowed Ibn Tulun to recruit an army of his own with caliphal sanction . The Tulunid army , which eventually grew to reportedly 100 @,@ 000 men — other sources give a breakdown of 24 @,@ 000 Turkish ghilmān and 42 @,@ 000 black African and Greek slaves , as well as a mercenary corps composed mostly of Greeks — became the foundation of Ibn Tulun 's power and independence . For his personal protection , Ibn Tulun reportedly employed a corps of ghilmān from Ghur . 
 Ibn Tulun 's stepfather Bakbak was murdered in 869 / 70 , but luckily for him in the summer of 871 the supervision of Egypt passed to his father @-@ in @-@ law Yarjukh . Yarjukh not only confirmed Ibn Tulun in his post , but in addition conferred to him the authority over Alexandria and Barqa . In 873 , Ibn Tulun entrusted the government of Alexandria to his eldest son , Abbas . Ibn Tulun 's growing power was manifested in the establishment of a new palace city to the northeast of Fustat , called al @-@ Qata 'i , in 870 . The project was a conscious emulation of , and rival to , the Abbasid capital Samarra . Just like Samarra , the new city was designed as quarters for Ibn Tulun 's new army with the aim of reducing frictions with the urban populace of Fustat . Each unit received an allotment or ward ( whence the city 's name ) to settle , after which the ward was named . The new city 's centrepiece was the Mosque of Ibn Tulun , which was built in 878 – 880 under the supervision of the Mesopotamian Christian architect Ibn Katib al @-@ Farghani . A royal palace adjoined the mosque , and the rest of the city was laid out around them . Beside government buildings , it included markets , a hospital ( al @-@ <unk> ) that provided services free of charge , and a hippodrome . Nevertheless , Ibn Tulun himself preferred to reside in the Coptic monastery of Qusayr outside Fustat . 
 = = = Ibn Tulun 's new regime = = = 
 The administration of Egypt was already well developed before Ibn Tulun 's arrival , with a number of departments ( <unk> ) responsible for the collection of the land tax , the supervision of the post , the public granaries ( dīwān al @-@ <unk> ) , the Nile Delta lands ( dīwān <unk> al @-@ <unk> ) , and possibly a privy purse ( dīwān al @-@ <unk> ) for the governor 's personal use . A chancery ( dīwān al @-@ <unk> ) possibly also already existed , but it may have been first established under Ibn Tulun , when he remodelled the Egyptian administration after the Abbasid central government . Most of the officials employed by Ibn Tulun were like him trained in the caliphal court at Samarra . Ibn Tulun 's chancellor was the capable Abu Ja 'far Muhammad ibn Abd al @-@ Kan ( died 891 ) , while other important positions in the administration were held by the four al @-@ Muhajir brothers and Ibn al @-@ Daya . Al @-@ Balawi also reports several anecdotes about Ibn Tulun 's extensive use of spies and his own ability to uncover spies sent against him , and claims that the chancery was established so that Ibn Tulun could check up on every piece of correspondence with the caliphal court . 
 Unsurprisingly , given his own origins as a slave soldier , Ibn Tulun 's regime was in many ways typical of the " <unk> system " that became one of the two main paradigms of Islamic polities in the 9th and 10th centuries , as the Abbasid Caliphate fragmented and new dynasties emerged . These regimes were based on the power of a regular army composed of the ghilmān , but in turn , according to Hugh N. Kennedy , " the paying of the troops was the major preoccupation of government " . It is therefore in the context of the increased financial requirements that in 879 , the supervision of the finances in Egypt and Syria passed to Abu Bakr Ahmad ibn Ibrahim al @-@ Madhara 'i , the founder of the al @-@ Madhara 'i bureaucratic dynasty that dominated the fiscal apparatus of Egypt for the next 70 years . Although , as Zaky M. Hassan notes , " fragmentary evidence does not permit a thorough assessment of Tulunid economic and financial policies " , it appears that the peace and security provided by the Tulunid regime , the establishment of an efficient administration , and repairs and expansions to the irrigation system , coupled with a consistently high level of Nile floods , resulted in a major increase in revenue . By the time of Ibn Tulun 's death , income from the land tax alone had risen from 800 @,@ 000 dinars under Ibn al @-@ Mudabbir to the sum of 4 @.@ 3 million dinars , and Ibn Tulun bequeathed his successor a fiscal reserve of ten million dinars . Crucial to this was the reform of the tax assessment and collection system , including the introduction of tax farming — which at the same time led to the rise of a new landholding class . Additional revenue was collected from commercial activities , most notably textiles and in particular linen . 
 Ibn Tulun 's regime was highly centralized , but also featured " consistent attempts to win the backing of Egypt 's commercial , religious and social élite " , according to Zaky M. Hassan . Thus the wealthy merchant Ma <unk> al @-@ Jawhar functioned both as Ibn Tulun 's personal financier and as the head of an informal intelligence network through his contacts in Iraq . A further " notable characteristic " of Ibn Tulun 's rule , according to Thierry Bianquis , was " the quality of relations it maintained with Christians and Jews " ; according to a letter by the Patriarch of Jerusalem , Elias III , when he took over Palestine , he appointed a Christian as governor of Jerusalem , and possibly even of the provincial capital , Ramla , thereby putting an end to the persecution of Christians and allowing the renovation of churches . 
 = = = Expansion into Syria = = = 
 In the early 870s , a major change took place in the Abbasid government , as the Abbasid prince al @-@ Muwaffaq emerged as the de facto regent of the empire , sidelining his brother , Caliph al @-@ Mu 'tamid ( r . 870 – 892 ) . Officially , al @-@ Muwaffaq controlled the eastern half of the Caliphate , while al @-@ Mu 'tamid 's son and first heir al @-@ Mufawwad controlled the western , with the aid of the Turkish general Musa ibn Bugha . In reality al @-@ Muwaffaq held the actual reins of power . Al @-@ Muwaffaq however was preoccupied with the more immediate threats to the Abbasid government presented by the rise of the Saffarids in the east and by the Zanj Rebellion in Iraq itself , as well as with keeping in check the Turkish troops and managing the internal tensions of the caliphal government . This gave Ibn Tulun the necessary space to consolidate his own position in Egypt . Ibn Tulun kept himself out of the Zanj conflict , and even refused to recognize al @-@ Mufawwad as his suzerain , who in turn did not confirm him in his position . 
 Open conflict between Ibn Tulun and al @-@ Muwaffaq broke out in 875 / 6 , on the occasion of a large remittance of revenue to the central government . Counting on the rivalry between the Caliph and his over @-@ mighty brother to maintain his own position , Ibn Tulun forwarded a larger share of the taxes to al @-@ Mu 'tamid instead of al @-@ Muwaffaq : 2 @.@ 2 million dinars went to the Caliph and only 1 @.@ 2 million dinars to his brother . Al @-@ Muwaffaq , who in his fight against the Zanj considered himself entitled to the major share of the provincial revenues , was angered by this , and by the implied machinations between Ibn Tulun and his brother . Al @-@ Muwaffaq sought a volunteer to replace him , but all the officials in Baghdad had been bought off by Ibn Tulun and refused . Al @-@ Muwaffaq sent a letter to the Egyptian ruler demanding his resignation , which the latter predictably refused . Both sides geared for war . Ibn Tulun created a fleet and fortified his borders and ports , including Alexandria , and a new fortress on Rawda Island to protect Fustat . Al @-@ Muwaffaq nominated Musa ibn Bugha as governor of Egypt and sent him with troops to Syria . In the event , due to a combination of lack of pay and supplies for the troops , and the fear generated by Ibn Tulun 's army , Musa never got further than al @-@ Raqqah . After ten months of inaction and a rebellion by his troops , Musa returned to Iraq . In a public gesture of support for al @-@ Mu 'tamid and opposition to al @-@ Muwaffaq , Ibn Tulun would assume the title of " Servant of the Commander of the Faithful " ( <unk> amīr al @-@ <unk> ) in 878 . 
 Ibn Tulun now seized the initiative . Having served in his youth in the border wars with the Byzantine Empire at Tarsus , he now requested to be conferred the command of the frontier districts of Cilicia ( the <unk> ) . Al @-@ Muwaffaq initially refused , but following the Byzantine successes of the previous years al @-@ Mu 'tamid prevailed upon his brother and in 877 / 8 Ibn Tulun received responsibility for the entirety of Syria and the Cilician frontier . Ibn Tulun marched into Syria in person . He received the submission of the son of Amajur , who had recently died , whom he appointed governor at Ramla , and proceeded to take possession of Damascus , Homs , Hama , and Aleppo . At Damascus Ibn Tulun encountered his old rival Ibn al @-@ Mudabbir , who since his eviction from Egypt had served as Amajur 's ʿāmil for Palestine and Damascus . Ibn al @-@ Mudabbir was fined 600 @,@ 000 dinars and thrown into prison , where he died in 883 / 4 . In the rest of the provincial administration , however , he largely left the people who had served under Amajur in place . Only the governor of Aleppo , Sima al @-@ Tawil , resisted , and fled to Antioch . Ibn Tulun laid siege to the city until Sima was killed , reportedly by a local woman . He then continued on to Tarsus , where he began preparing for a campaign against the Byzantines . The presence of his numerous soldiers , however , led to a rapid rise in prices , causing great hostility among the Tarsians , who demanded that he either leave or reduce his army . At this juncture , news arrived from Egypt that his son Abbas , whom he had left as his regent , was preparing to usurp his position under the influence of his entourage . Ibn Tulun hastily withdrew from Tarsus , but as more information about the situation in Egypt began to arrive , clarifying that Abbas posed no real threat , Ibn Tulun decided to spend more time in Syria and consolidate his authority . He redressed the injustices of Sima , installed troops in Aleppo ( under his ghulam Lu 'lu ' ) and Harran , secured the co @-@ operation of the Banu Kilab tribe and their leader Ibn al @-@ Abbas , and captured the rebel Musa ibn <unk> . At some point after his takeover of Syria , Ibn Tulun ordered the refortification of Akka , a task undertaken by Abu Bakr al @-@ Banna , the grandfather of al @-@ Muqaddasi , who provides a detailed description of the work . 
 Only then , in April 879 , did Ibn Tulun return to Egypt . Abbas fled west with his supporters , and from Barqa tried to take over Ifriqiya . Defeated by the Ifriqiyans ( probably in the winter of 880 – 881 ) , he retreated back east to Alexandria , where he was finally confronted and captured by Ibn Tulun 's forces . After being publicly paraded seated on a mule , Ibn Tulun ordered his son to execute or mutilate his companions , who had driven him to rebel . Ibn Tulun reportedly secretly hoped that his son would refuse to do such a dishonourable act , but he agreed . Weeping , Ibn Tulun had Abbas whipped and imprisoned . He then named his second son , Khumarawayh , as his heir @-@ apparent . 
 = = = Final years and death = = = 
 Following his return from Syria , Ibn Tulun added his own name to coins issued by the mints under his control , along with those of the Caliph and heir apparent , al @-@ Mufawwad . In the autumn of 882 , the Tulunid general Lu 'lu ' defected to the Abbasids . At the same time , the Tulunid @-@ appointed governor of Tarsus and the <unk> died , and his replacement , Yazaman al @-@ Khadim , with popular backing , refused to acknowledge Tulunid rule . Ibn Tulun immediately left in person for Syria — taking the chained Abbas with him as a precaution — and headed for Tarsus . At Damascus , he received a message from al @-@ Mu 'tamid informing him that the by now nearly powerless Caliph had escaped Samarra and was heading for Syria . Taking custody of al @-@ Mu 'tamid would have immensely boosted Ibn Tulun 's standing : not only would the sole source of political legitimacy in the Muslim world reside under his control , but he would also be able to pose as the " rescuer " of the Caliph . Ibn Tulun therefore decided to halt and await al @-@ Mu 'tamid 's arrival . In the event , however , the Caliph was overtaken at al @-@ Haditha on the Euphrates by the governor of Mosul , Ishaq ibn Kundaj , who defeated the caliphal escort and brought him back to Samarra ( February 883 ) and thence south to Wasit , where al @-@ Muwaffaq could better control him . This opened anew the rift between the two rulers : al @-@ Muwaffaq nominated Ishaq ibn Kundaj as governor of Egypt and Syria — in reality a largely symbolic appointment — while Ibn Tulun organized an assembly of religious jurists at Damascus which denounced al @-@ Muwaffaq as a usurper , condemned his maltreatment of the Caliph , declared his place in the succession as void , and called for a jihād against him . Only three participants , including the chief <unk> of Egypt , Bakkar ibn Qutayba , refused to pronounce the call for jihād publicly . Ibn Tulun had his rival duly denounced in sermons in the mosques across the Tulunid domains , while the Abbasid regent responded in kind with a ritual denunciation of Ibn Tulun . Despite the belligerent rhetoric , however , neither made moves to confront the other militarily . 
 After his failure to take control of the Caliph , Ibn Tulun turned on Tarsus . He appointed Abdallah ibn Fath in Lu 'lu 's place in Aleppo , and marched in person to Cilicia . The Egyptian ruler laid siege to Tarsus in autumn 883 , but Yazaman diverted the local river , inundating the Tulunid camp and forcing Ibn Tulun to retreat . Ibn Tulun fell ill on his return to Egypt , and was carried to Fustat on a wheeled vehicle . In the same year , a campaign to take over the two holy cities of Islam , Mecca and Medina , also failed . Back in Egypt , he ordered Bakkar to be arrested and replaced him with Muhammad ibn <unk> al @-@ <unk> . A thorough examination of Bakkar 's accounts while head of the charitable endowments , however , revealed no <unk> . Although Ibn Tulun ordered him released , the elderly and sick <unk> refused to leave his cell . At the same time , the illness of Ibn Tulun himself worsened . " Muslims , Christians and Jews , including women and children , converged separately upon the flank of the Muqattam to implore God to save him " , as Bianquis writes , but Ibn Tulun died at Fustat on 10 May 884 and was interred on the slopes of the Muqattam . According to al @-@ Balawi , Ibn Tulun left his heir 24 @,@ 000 servants , 7 @,@ 000 men and 7 @,@ 000 horses , 3 @,@ 000 camels , 1 @,@ 000 mules , 350 ceremonial horses , and 200 fully equipped warships . 
 At Ibn Tulun 's death , Khumarawayh , with the backing of the Tulunid elites , succeeded without opposition . Ibn Tulun bequeathed his heir " with a seasoned military , a stable economy , and a coterie of experienced commanders and bureaucrats " . Khumarawayh was able to preserve his authority against the Abbasid attempt to overthrow him at the Battle of Tawahin and even made additional territorial gains , but his extravagant spending exhausted the treasury , and his assassination in 896 began the rapid decline of the Tulunid regime . Internal strife sapped Tulunid power . Khumarawayh 's son Jaysh was a drunkard who executed his uncle , Mudar ibn Ahmad ibn Tulun ; he was deposed after only a few months and replaced by his brother Harun ibn Khumarawayh . Harun too was a weak ruler , and although a revolt by his uncle Rabi 'ah in Alexandria was suppressed , the Tulunids were unable to confront the attacks of the Qarmatians who began at the same time . In addition , many commanders defected to the Abbasids , whose power revived under the capable leadership of al @-@ Muwaffaq 's son , Caliph al @-@ Mu 'tadid ( r . 892 – 902 ) . Finally , in December 904 , two other sons of Ibn Tulun , Ali and Shayban , murdered their nephew and assumed control of the Tulunid state . Far from halting the decline , this event alienated key commanders in Syria and led to the rapid and relatively unopposed reconquest of Syria and Egypt by the Abbasids under Muhammad ibn Sulayman al @-@ Katib , who entered Fustat in January 905 . With the exception of the great Mosque of Ibn Tulun , the victorious Abbasid troops pillaged al @-@ Qata 'i and razed it to the ground . 
 = = = Offspring = = = 
 According to al @-@ Balawi , from his various wives and concubines , Ibn Tulun had 33 children , 17 sons and 16 daughters . The only modern edition of al @-@ Balawi provides the following list : 
 Male children : Abū al @-@ <unk> al @-@ <unk> ( the eldest ) , Abū al @-@ Jaysh <unk> , Abū al @-@ <unk> <unk> , Abū al @-@ <unk> <unk> , Abū al @-@ <unk> <unk> , Abū <unk> ' <unk> , Abū <unk> <unk> , Abū al @-@ <unk> <unk> , Abū <unk> <unk> , Abū <unk> Kindah , Abū <unk> Aghlab , Abū <unk> <unk> , Abū al @-@ <unk> <unk> , Abū al @-@ <unk> <unk> , Abū al @-@ Faraj <unk> , Abū <unk> Muhammad , and Abū al @-@ <unk> <unk> . 
 Female children ( note that only 15 names are listed ) : <unk> , <unk> , ( unreadable ) , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , Maryam , <unk> , Umm al @-@ <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Despite the downfall of his dynasty , Ibn Tulun 's rule was a seminal event not only for Egypt , but for the entire Islamic world . For Egypt itself , his reign marks a turning point as the country for the first time since the Pharaohs ceased being a passive province subject to a foreign imperial power , and became once again a centre of power in its own right . The new realm he forged , encompassing Egypt and Syria as well as the Jazira and Cilicia , and to a lesser extent the eastern parts of the Maghreb , established a new political zone separated from the Islamic lands further east , restoring in a fashion the frontier that had existed between the Byzantine and Sassanid Persian realms in Antiquity . Egypt was the basis of Ibn Tulun 's power ; he paid particular attention to restoring its economy , as well as establishing an autonomous bureaucracy , army , and navy . These policies were continued by later Egypt @-@ based regimes , the Ikhshidids ( 935 – 969 ) and eventually the Fatimids ( 969 – 1171 ) , who likewise used Egypt 's wealth to establish control over parts or even most of Syria . Indeed , as Thierry Bianquis remarks , the territory ruled by Ibn Tulun in Syria was remarkably similar to that controlled by the later , similarly Egypt @-@ based regimes of Saladin and the Mamluk Sultanate . 
 Ibn Tulun 's relations with and quest for autonomy from the Abbasids is a " central problem of Tulunid history " . Modern scholars see in Ibn Tulun 's policies a " careful balancing act " ( Matthew S. Gordon ) and notice that he never fully severed himself from the Caliphate , remaining conspicuously loyal to the person of al @-@ Mu 'tamid , who , after all , was a powerless figurehead . Nevertheless , the move towards increasing autonomy is evident throughout his reign . His relations with the Abbasid government were dominated by his conflict with al @-@ Muwaffaq , resulting from the latter 's attempts to establish control over Egypt — whose wealth was <unk> needed during the costly war against the Zanj — and prevent the further rise of Ibn Tulun . In a certain sense , writes Matthew Gordon , many of Ibn Tulun 's measures " were as much the means by which imperial interests were protected against the ambitions of al @-@ Muwaffaq and his ( largely Turkish ) military coterie in Iraq as they were efforts to secure Tulunid authority " . Given that Ibn Tulun at least twice ( in 871 and 875 / 6 ) remitted huge sums to the caliphal treasury , it remains an open question whether without the conflict with al @-@ Muwaffaq , this would have been a more regular occurrence . 
 Ibn Tulun 's role in the wider Islamic history is as the herald of the Abbasid Caliphate 's disintegration and the rise of local dynasties . This became particularly evident with the succession of Khumarawayh : as Thierry Bianquis explains , " this was the first time in Abbasid history with regard to the government of so large and rich a territory , that a wāli , whose legitimacy derived from the caliph who had designated him , was succeeded openly by an amīr who claimed his legitimacy by inheritance " . Thus Zaky M. Hassan calls Ibn Tulun a " typical example of the Turkish slaves who from the time of Harun al @-@ Rashid were enlisted in the private service of the caliph and the principal officers of state , and whose ambition and spirit of intrigue and independence [ eventually made ] them the real masters of Islam " . 
 = Gunnerkrigg Court = 
 Gunnerkrigg Court is a science @-@ fantasy webcomic created by Tom Siddell and launched in April 2005 . It is updated online three days a week , and the first volume of the comic was published in print format by Archaia Studios Press and Titan Books ( in the UK and Ireland ) . The comic has been critically acclaimed and has won numerous Web Cartoonists ' Choice Awards , as well as receiving positive reviews for its artwork and storytelling . 
 The comic tells the story of Antimony Carver , a young girl who has just started attending a strange and mysterious school called Gunnerkrigg Court , and the events that unfold around her as she becomes embroiled in political intrigues between Gunnerkrigg Court and the inhabitants of the Gillitie Wood , a forest outside the school . The comic 's style and themes include elements from science , fantasy creatures , mythology from a variety of traditions , and alchemical symbols and theories ; the literary style is heavily influenced by mystery and manga comics . 
 = = Production = = 
 Gunnerkrigg Court was first posted online on 4 April 2005 , and was originally updated two days per week . The comic began updating three days per week on 25 December 2006 . The end of the seventh chapter in May 2006 marked the end of the " first book , " which Siddell published through <unk> in 2007 ; that book is no longer in print . In August 2008 , Tom Siddell explained that the comic had a standard " comic book format " which was useful when he had sufficient pages to print a hard copy . The first fourteen chapters of the webcomic were printed as the first Archaia Studios Press edition of 296 pages bound in a hardcover collection titled " Orientation " . In 2012 he announced that he had quit his regular job to work on the comic full @-@ time . In addition to books and merchandising the comic is supported through crowdfunding by <unk> since July 2014 . 
 = = = Format = = = 
 The Gunnerkrigg Court webcomic is told in a series of episodic chapters such that each , while forming part of the overall storyline , also functions individually as a stand @-@ alone plot arc . The themes and topics of the chapters vary widely : as one reviewer describes , " You are also not subjected to 400 @-@ plus pages of intricate plot movement . While there is an overall story arc , there are also lighter chapters that focus on unusual classes ... or small moments that build the main characters . " Each chapter begins with a title page and ends with one or more " bonus pages , " which are not integral to the main storyline but often offer ancillary details about the world of Gunnerkrigg Court or about minor characters . The chapters have varied in length from four pages to over eighty . Each page is drawn in traditional ( A4 ; 210 × 297 mm ) page format and divided arbitrarily into frames . At the bottom of the most recent page is a link to a comments thread for that page , in which readers may comment on and discuss that day 's comic . 
 = = = Influences = = = 
 Siddell has stated that he enjoyed reading Alfred Hitchcock & The Three Investigators as a child , and that it has heavily influenced the literary style of his comic . His artistic style is influenced by many artists , among which he cites as his favorites Jamie Hewlett , Yukito <unk> , and Mike Mignola , as well as the manga Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind and Dragon Ball . 
 One notable feature of the comic is the blending of mythological elements from many different cultural traditions , especially from the British Isles and Native American mythology . Siddell attributes this style to his experience as a child : " I moved about a lot when I was younger and had the opportunity to grow up hearing stories from different parts of the world and I 've always been fascinated by them . " In addition to mythology , Siddell makes heavy use of alchemical themes ; for example , the main character is named Antimony , after a toxic chemical element , and many pages feature artistic depictions of alchemical symbols . The symbol for antimony appears frequently in Gunnerkrigg Court : the character Antimony wears a necklace shaped like that symbol , the character Reynardine has the symbol imprinted on his wolf body , and the symbol is used to mark the end of a chapter . 
 The artwork of Gunnerkrigg Court has been described as " stylized , " with simple character designs . At least one reviewer , on the other hand , has noticed that the backgrounds , in contrast to the characters , are often very elaborate . The comic has also been described as having a " rich " look in spite of its limited color palette , and Siddell himself has stated that he first developed the idea for the comic using only a limited number of colors . The pieces of artwork that Siddell has posted at the end of each printed book , entitled " Treatise " and " Second Treatise , " demonstrate many such of Siddell 's artistic and storytelling motifs : they integrate alchemical symbols , mythological figures , nature , and technology . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 Gunnerkrigg Court is set in a boarding school in a country that resembles the United Kingdom , identifiable from the grey skies and mandatory uniforms . The comic contains other clues about the setting , such as the house system that is described at the end of the first chapter . This system is similar to that used by many UK schools , including the one the author attended ; Siddell has even stated that the school in which Gunnerkrigg Court takes place is modeled after his own secondary school . 
 Gunnerkrigg Court , the fictional school around which the story revolves , is a mysterious and vast establishment that many characters suspect hides much more than just a school . The school appears to actively recruit many talented or extraordinary students . As the story progresses , it is soon revealed that the school is inhabited by a wide variety of both supernatural creatures — many of which become characters involved in the story 's plot — and ultra @-@ modern technology . One character explains that " the Court was founded on a union between technological and etheric design . " Another describes it as " man 's endeavor to become god . " 
 The court is built on the edge of a wide chasm , on the other side of which lies the Gillitie Wood , which is inhabited by " etheric " or magical creatures . At the time when the main story takes place , the two sides exist in a kind of truce , with the Court as the realm of science and technology and the Wood the realm of nature and the etheric . The denizens of the Gillitie Wood do not allow technology in the Wood , and the rules of the Court forbid students from leaving school grounds . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The story of Gunnerkrigg Court involves several different ongoing plot arcs . The main story is that of the protagonist , Antimony Carver , and her deepening involvement in the intrigues between Gunnerkrigg Court and the Gillitie Wood , the forest outside Gunnerkrigg Court ; she is accompanied throughout the storyline by her friend and classmate Katerina Donlan and her companion Reynardine , a demon living within her stuffed animal . As the story progresses , Antimony and her companions also slowly learn more about their surroundings , the relationship between Gunnerkrigg Court and the Gillitie Wood , and the beings they encounter . 
 The story begins when Antimony builds a robot to transport a mysterious shadow into Gillitie Wood , the forest outside Gunnerkrigg Court . Several chapters later in the comic , and apparently several months later in the story 's timeline , the robot reappears on the bridge outside Gunnerkrigg Court ; being controlled by a malevolent creature from Gillitie Wood , it pushes Antimony off the bridge when she goes out to it . Antimony spends a night at the banks of the river below the bridge , and encounters a ghost , before she is rescued by Kat and taken back to the school . Her brief time outside Gunnerkrigg Court , though , sets off a dispute between Gunnerkrigg Court and the Gillitie Wood . Not long after Antimony 's return , the Court is visited by Coyote , a god from the Gillitie Wood , and General Ysengrin , the being who caused the robot to attack Antimony at the bridge . They express anger over the robot 's visit to the forest , and over the damage Antimony caused when she left the Court . 
 During the time that the robot is gone , Antimony meets a creature named Reynardine , who tries to take over her body but , by accident , instead becomes trapped in the body of a stuffed animal she carries ; and becomes subject to her command . Because of her relationship with Reynardine and the events with Coyote and Ysengrin , Antimony is nominated to begin training to become a medium , one of the individuals who moderate disputes between the Wood and the Court and communicates with etheric beings , and she decides to return to the woods to speak with Coyote . When Antimony visits Coyote , she learns that in the past Coyote had travelled across the sea to find Reynardine and Ysengrin and make them into " powerful being [ s ] " like himself . He had given Ysengrin " power over the trees " and given Reynardine the power to take bodies , but bodies that Reynardine took always died after he left them and Ysengrin was hardly strong enough to stand without the help of Coyote 's tree armor . Reynardine had been in love with Antimony 's mother , Surma , and had used his power to steal a young man 's body and woo Surma ; the man died , however , and Reynardine was imprisoned in Gunnerkrigg Court until the events surrounding his first meeting with Antimony . 
 In addition to this plotline , the story includes several additional plot arcs interspersed with the main story . One concerns two girls from the Court , Zimmy and Gamma , who communicate with one another telepathically . Zimmy sees hallucinations of monsters which her etheric abilities turn into reality , which she relies on Gamma to dispel . In one chapter , Antimony and another student , Jack , also become trapped briefly in Zimmy 's hallucinatory world , and escape after they " find " Gamma there . Another storyline revolves around Kat 's attempts to repair Antimony 's robot ( which had been temporarily taken control of when it pushed her off the bridge ) , during which time they discover a set of highly complex robots that Antimony speculates are related in some way to the ghost she encountered at the river . 
 = = = Main characters = = = 
 = = Reception = = 
 In addition to being officially recognized at the Web Cartoonists ' Choice Awards , Gunnerkrigg Court has been critically acclaimed in a number of online reviews , and has a large readership and an active forum . Author Tom Siddell has been interviewed about his work numerous times , mostly by non @-@ mainstream online magazines such as ComixTalk . Kevin Powers of the Comics Bulletin and Graphic Smash listed Gunnerkrigg Court as one of the series he " respect [ s ] , " and ComixTalk ( then called <unk> ) listed Siddell as one of the twenty @-@ five " People of Webcomics " in 2006 . 
 The comic has received praise for its artwork and use of color , dark mood , slowly revealed mysteries , and pacing . Al Schroeder of ComixTalk has called Gunnerkrigg Court 's setting " marvelous " and " unique , " and said the comic is " delightfully fun " in spite of its moody backdrop . Along with the evolution in art style since the start of the comic , many reviewers have praised the age progression of the protagonists and their maturation with the plot , likening it to that of Harry Potter . 
 Some reviewers , on the other hand , have criticized its dark and depressing tone as potentially being frightening for younger audiences , also noting that there can be " lots [ of information ] to take in at times . " 
 In 2006 , science fiction author Neil Gaiman praised Gunnerkrigg Court in his blog , which brought the comic to the attention of many more readers . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Gunnerkrigg Court has been nominated for and has won a number of Web Cartoonist 's Choice Awards , shown in the table below . When the Web Cartoonists ' Choice Awards were discontinued in 2008 and replaced by The Webcomic List Awards ( run by The Webcomic List Community ) in 2009 , it won several of those as well . It was also nominated in 2006 for a <unk> award in the " International <unk> " category at <unk> Haarlem , a webcomics festival in the Netherlands . Gunnerkrigg Court : Orientation won a 2008 gold book of the year award from <unk> magazine in their graphic novel category . Gunnerkrigg Court : Orientation was nominated for a 2009 <unk> Award in the graphic novel category . Gunnerkrigg Court was nominated for the 2014 Harvey Award for Best Online Comics Work . 
 = = Books = = 
 Siddell , Tom ( 2008 ) . Gunnerkrigg Court : Orientation . Gunnerkrigg Court . Kearny : Archaia Studios Press . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . Diamond Code : <unk> <unk> . Archived from the original on 1 May 2010 . 
 Siddell , Tom ( 2008 ) . Gunnerkrigg Court : Orientation . Gunnerkrigg Court . Titan Books . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 Siddell , Tom ( 2010 ) . Gunnerkrigg Court , Volume 2 : Research . Gunnerkrigg Court . Archaia Studios Press . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 Siddell , Tom ( 2011 ) . Gunnerkrigg Court Volume 3 : Reason . Gunnerkrigg Court . Archaia Studios Press . ISBN 978 @-@ 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 23 @-@ 7 . 
 Siddell , Tom ( 2013 ) . Gunnerkrigg Court , Volume 4 : Materia . Gunnerkrigg Court . Archaia Studios Press . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 Siddell , Tom ( 2015 ) . Gunnerkrigg Court Volume 5 : <unk> . Gunnerkrigg Court . Archaia Studios Press . ISBN 978 @-@ <unk> . 
 = = = Side comics = = = 
 Siddell , Tom ( 2013 ) . Annie in the Forest Part One . Beyond The Walls . Robot Voice Comics . 
 Siddell , Tom ( 2013 ) . Annie in the Forest Part Two . Beyond The Walls . Robot Voice Comics . 
 Siddell , Tom ( 2015 ) . Traveller . Beyond The Walls . Robot Voice Comics . 
 = = = Explanatory footnotes = = = 
 = = = Story notes = = = 
 = You da One = 
 " You da One " is a song by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna recorded for her sixth studio album , Talk That Talk ( 2011 ) . It was co @-@ written by Rihanna with Ester Dean , Henry Walter , John Hill and Lukasz Gottwald . Production of the song was completed by Gottwald , under his production name Dr. Luke , and Cirkut . Kuk Harrell and Marcas Tovar recorded the track at the Sofital Paris Le Laubourg , Room 538 , and Westlake Recording Studios in Los Angeles , California . It premiered on US radio on November 11 , 2011 , and was made available to download digitally throughout Europe and Australasia on November 14 , 2011 . It was added to US Mainstream , rhythmic and urban radio station playlists on November 29 , 2011 . Throughout December 2011 and January 2012 , a remix extended play ( EP ) was released worldwide . 
 Musically , " You Da One " is a mid @-@ tempo pop and reggae song , which incorporates elements of electropop , dancehall and dubstep . It also features a dubstep bridge before the final chorus . It garnered positive reviews from music critics , many of whom complimented the West Indian and Caribbean tone , and compared it to " What 's My Name ? " and " Man Down " , from her previous studio album Loud ( 2010 ) . The song achieved moderate chart success ; it peaked at number one on the US Hot Dance Club Songs and number 14 on the Billboard Hot 100 . Internationally , it peaked inside the top 10 in New Zealand , South Korea and on the UK R & B Chart , and attained top twenty positions in Canada , Hungary , Norway and Sweden . 
 To promote the song , an accompanying music video was shot in East London and directed by Melina Matsoukas . It was inspired by the 1971 film A Clockwork Orange , and premiered on December 23 , 2011 . It was mainly shot in black and white , and features Rihanna in a variety of different set ups , such as in a photo shoot and a lyric video game . At various points , lyrics are stamped across the video as Rihanna sings them . Hours after the release of the video , Norwegian photographer Sølve Sundsbø accused Rihanna and Matsoukas of plagiarism , suggesting that the scene featuring the singer wearing a white outfit with black dots was deliberately copied from his 2008 montage " Numero 93 " . 
 = = Recording and production = = 
 " You da One " was written by Ester Dean , Henry Walter , John Hill , Lukasz Gottwald and Rihanna . Production of the song was helmed by Dr. Luke and Cirkut . Rihanna recorded the song at several recording studios around the world during her Loud Tour ( 2011 ) , which included Sofital Paris Le Laubourg in Room 538 and at Westlake Recording Studios in Studio B in Los Angeles , California . Vocal recording and production was carried out by Kuk Harrell and Marcos Tovar . Alejandro Barajas and Jennifer Rosales served as the vocal recording and production assistants to Harrel and Tovar . " You da One " was mixed by Serban Ghenea and assisted by Phil Seaford , at Mixstar Studios , Virginia Beach , Virginia . John Hanes served as the mixing engineer . The song was engineered by Aubrey “ Big Juice ” Delaine and Clint Gibbs , and were assisted by Chris Sclafani and Jonathon Steer . All instrumentation was provided by Dr. Luke , Cirkut and Hill , and the production coordinators were Irene Richter and Katie <unk> . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 During an interview with Ryan Seacrest on his radio show On Air with Ryan Seacrest , Rihanna revealed that she found " You da One " to be a highly addictive to listen to after she heard the final cut , saying " ' You da One ' is one of those records that became very addictive for me . I could not stop listening to this song . It 's very infectious . " The artwork for the single was shot in black @-@ and @-@ white , the same technique which was used for Rihanna 's previous single 's artwork , " We Found Love " . " You da One " ' s artwork displays the singer with her head tilted back and her eyes closed holding a cigarette between her lips . It prompted a mixed reaction from Sarah Anne Hughes for The Washington Post ; while she noted that Rihanna looks " perfectly coiffed , " she criticized the inclusion of the cigarette , and called it a " social taboo . " 
 The song was released as the second single from Talk That Talk , and premièred in the United States nationwide on November 11 , 2011 , via the Clear Channel Radio station network . " You Da One " was made available to download digitally via iTunes on November 14 , 2011 , in Australia , New Zealand , South America , the United States and multiple European countries . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " You da One " is a pop and reggae song with just a touch of a dubstep groove that embraces Caribbean rhythms , reggae , and pulsing house <unk> which incorporates elements of dancehall The song also features a dubstep bridge before the final chorus . " You da One " runs for 3 minutes and 19 seconds , and it was composed in the key of E ♭ major using common time and a moderate groove of 126 beats per minute ; it follows a chord progression of A ♭ – Cm – E ♭ . Instrumentation is provided by a piano . Rihanna 's vocal range spans one octave from the low note of B ♭ 3 to the high note of B ♭ 4 on the song . According to Bradley Stern of MTV , the song 's musical structure bore a resemblance to Britney Spears ' " Inside Out " , writing that Rihanna " gets squeezed between a killer dubstep @-@ to @-@ death breakdown , not unlike the ex @-@ <unk> ' jam Dr. Luke crafted for Britney 's ' Femme Fatale ' cut . " James Montgomery of the same publication commented on the song 's structure , writing that the song " starts in traditional [ Rihanna ] territory — building on a slow , <unk> rhythm — expands with a <unk> chorus , then contracts nearly as quickly on a knotty , ratcheting middle . " 
 The lyrics to " You da One " are about a stable and comfortable relationship , which can be heard in the lyrics " You know how to love me hard / I won 't lie , I 'm falling hard / Yup , I 'm falling for ya , but there 's nothing wrong with that . " Michael Cragg of The Guardian explained some of the lyrics in the song as part of his review , writing " It 's perhaps less immediate , but there 's a lovely pre @-@ chorus of ' My love is your love , your love is my love ' that leads into a refrain about how great it is to have found someone decent , ( ' I 'm so happy that you came in my life ' ) . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " You da One " garnered positive reviews from music critics . In regards to the song 's sexually lewd demeanor , Jocelyn Vena of MTV News felt that Rihanna embodied a " potty @-@ mouthed sex kitten " ; Vena continued to write that the song is the most radio friendly on Talk That Talk , despite the excessive use of " NSFW lyrics " . Robert Copsey for Digital Spy praised the song , writing that it is " bouncy " and is " oozing with Caribbean flavor " . The song was also positively reviewed by Sadao Turner of On Air with Ryan Seacrest , who said that " ' You da One ' is a radio @-@ friendly record with island influence teeming with pop goodness and that signature Rihanna sound that carries across a dancefloor " . Amanda Dobbins of New York wrote that " You da One " and " We Found Love " are " relatively PG " compared to other songs on Talk That Talk . Entertainment Weekly 's Melissa Maerz praised the song , writing that " You da One " is " the perfect opener to set the tone for an album that embraces Caribbean rhythms , reggae , and pulsing house beats . " Maerz continued to call the song " an island @-@ breezy tribute to some guy who 's got [ Rihanna ] ' dreaming all the time ' . " Jason Lipshutz of Billboard magazine noted that the song is similar to some of Rihanna 's previous dancehall influenced songs , such as " What 's My Name ? " and " Man Down " , from her previous studio album Loud ( 2010 ) . Leah Collins of Dose praised the lyrics in the song which she described as " lovey @-@ dovey and most definitely radio @-@ friendly . " 
 Andrew Martin of Prefix Magazine commented on the infectiousness of the song , writing that once it has been listened to , it is hard to stop thinking about it . Martin continued to praise the " sugary sweetness of the song " , but criticized the incorporation of the dubstep breakdown toward the end of the song , citing that the reason as to why it was included was to try and make the song " even bigger " . Michael Cragg of The Guardian also noted that the song has a relaxed feel to it , and compared it to some of the singer 's previous dancehall songs , " What 's My Name ? " and " Rude Boy " . A reviewer for Spin criticized the song , writing " [ Rihanna ] is giving us a half @-@ limp reggae jam full of platitudes like , ' [ You da ] one I dream about all day ' . " The reviewer continued to write that there is " more chaste " on " You da One " than there was presented on Britney Spears ' guest vocal on " S & M " . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 = = = North America = = = 
 In the United States , " You da One " debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 chart at number 73 on November 16 , 2011 , two days after it was released to iTunes . The following week , it peaked at number 14 . It debuted at number 28 on the US Radio Songs , the apex of its stay , with a first week audience impression of 28 million . With this chart entry , the song became the highest chart position debut since Lady Gaga 's " Born This Way " , which debuted at number six in February 2011 . On the US Hot Digital Songs chart , the song debuted and peaked at number nine with digital download sales of 124 @,@ 000 units sold . With this chart entry , Rihanna became the first female artist in the history of the chart to have three songs in the top 10 of the Digital Songs Chart ; that week , the lead single from Talk That Talk , " We Found Love " , was at number one with sales of 211 @,@ 000 units , while her duet with Drake , " Take Care " from album of the same name , was at number four with sales of 162 @,@ 000 units . She became the first artist to have three songs in the top 10 of the chart since Michael Jackson had a record breaking six songs in the top 10 following his death in July 2009 . 
 On the US Pop Songs , " You da One " debuted at number 26 on November 26 , 2011 , and was awarded the honor of that week 's Greatest Gainer , and peaked at number 19 . " You da One " achieved the most success on the US Hot Dance Club Songs chart , where it peaked at number one , and became her seventeenth number one song on the chart . With this chart entry , she tied with Beyoncé Knowles for the third most Hot Dance Club Songs chart number one songs in the chart 's 35 @-@ year history . Only Madonna ( 42 ) and Janet Jackson ( 19 ) have achieved more number songs on the chart . The song also peaked at number 60 on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , and number 12 on the Canadian Hot 100 . In the United States , " You da One " was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on March 27 , 2012 , denoting shipments of over one million units 
 = = = Europe and Australasia = = = 
 In France , " You da One " debuted at number 64 on November 19 , 2011 , and reached a 2011 peak of 28 . In its ninth week on the chart , February 14 , 2012 , the song peaked at number 23 ; it spent 23 weeks on the chart in total . In The Netherlands , " You da One " debuted at number 92 on November 19 , 2011 , and peaked at number 53 in its third week . It made a re @-@ entry on the chart at number 61 on December 31 , 2011 , and remained on the chart for a further two weeks in January 2012 . Elsewhere in Europe , the song managed to peak inside the top twenty in Ireland at number 12 , in Norway at number 16 , and in Sweden at number 17 . It peaked inside the top fifty in Austria , Switzerland , and Spain . In the United Kingdom , " You da One " debuted on the UK Singles Chart at number 39 on December 3 , 2011 . The following week , it fell by one position to number 40 . In the last week of December 2011 , it charted at number 22 . In the first week of January 2012 , the song reached its peak of number 16 . On the UK R & B Chart , " You da One " debuted at number 11 on December 3 , 2011 , and reached a 2011 peak of number six . On January 1 , 2012 , it peaked at number five . 
 In Australia , " You da One " debuted at number 41 on December 14 , 2011 , and peaked at number 26 in its third week . In 2012 , it reached a peak of number 35 . In total , it remained on that countries singles chart for a period of 10 weeks . It has since been certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) denoting shipments of over 70 @,@ 000 units . In New Zealand , it debuted at number 22 on November 21 , 2011 , and peaked at number 10 in its third week . In 2012 , it reached a peak of number 27 . It remained on the chart for a total of 10 weeks . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background and synopsis = = = 
 The music video for " You da One " was filmed on November 30 , 2011 at MC Motors in Dalston , East London . It was directed by Melina Matsoukas , who also directed the controversial video for her previous single , " We Found Love " . In the first images from the London set , Rihanna sported short blonde hair , torn denim shorts , patterned leggings , and a white bowler hat . She held a black cane as she performed scenes in front of a bright pink wall in the visuals inspired by the 1971 film A Clockwork Orange . It premiered on December 23 , 2011 . 
 The clip is partly a photo shoot and a lyric video as lyrics are stamped across the screen and Rihanna 's body , and was shot mainly in black and white . She wears numerous outfits and blonde wigs throughout the video as she emulates the clothes from A Clockwork Orange by wearing a white bowler hat and cane from Laird Hatters , sporting a smoky eye in homage , and smacking her pink pouty lips with bubblegum . Rihanna later strips down to a flesh @-@ coloured leotard as she writhes on the floor with strategically placed artistic shards of light to create leopard spots and tiger stripes on her skin . Several scenes capture solely her mouth ; first with a gold grill covering her bottom row of teeth , and later with smoke billowing from her lips transitioning into and out of the words " Dream " and later " You Da One " . Another scene finds Rihanna in a white tank top and tattered jean shorts , swinging a cane in between two brick buildings . She continuously exudes sexuality ; in several scenes , she touches and thrusts her crotch ( reminiscent of Michael Jackson 's dance moves , as noted by Jason Lipshutz of Billboard ) , struts toward the camera with a pimp cane , endorses provocative dance moves , and drapes herself over a giant ball . Using the latter move , she is found in a black and white chequered background room where she moves around a larger than life playing card . The video ends with Rihanna running away from the camera and jumping into a chair , throwing her legs over the side with a smile on her face . 
 = = = Reception and plagiarism allegations = = = 
 A reviewer for Idolator described the video as " glorious . " Amy Sciarretto for PopCrush wrote " Judging from the song 's official video , it is , since RiRi can ’ t keep her hands to herself . The black and white video features the newly blond singer cavorting in an array of black and white outfits , dancing , smiling , giggling and grabbing her crotch with a great degree of regularity . " Hours after the release of the video , Norwegian photographer Sølve Sundsbø alleged that the scene of Rihanna wearing a white outfit with black dots shining on her ( pictured ) is the same as a photo shoot he completed in 2008 titled " Numero 93 ' " . A reviewer for Idolator wrote that " the evidence really doesn ’ t look to be in Rihanna 's favor . " The reviewer continued to write " Not only are the projected shapes similar , but both Rihanna and the model are wearing nearly @-@ identical body suits and wigs ( though the color differs ) . Plus , those pink lips providing the only splash of color also look pretty familiar . " A reviewer for The Huffington Post concurred with Idolator 's observations , and noted " The nakedness , the projections , the interplay of light and shadow ... even the haircut " were very similar to that of the work by <unk> . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Recording locations 
 Vocal recording – Sofital Paris Le Laubourg , Room 538 ; Westlake Recording Studios ( Studio B ) , Los Angeles , California . 
 Music recording – <unk> Studios , Brentwood , California . 
 Mixing – Mixstar Studios , Virginia Beach , Virginia . 
 Personnel 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of Talk That Talk , Def Jam Recordings , SRP Records . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = = Radio and release history = = 
 = Hurricane Gerda ( 1969 ) = 
 Hurricane Gerda was a North Atlantic tropical cyclone that formed during the 1969 Atlantic hurricane season . It was the seventh named storm , fifth hurricane and third major hurricane of the 1969 season . Gerda formed on September 6 and crossed Florida as a tropical depression . Gerda later became a tropical storm after making a hard right turn and moving northeast and reaching hurricane status on September 8 . Gerda brushed past the Outer Banks of North Carolina before reaching maximum intensity of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) and a low barometric pressure of 979 millibars ( 28 @.@ 9 inHg ) . On September 10 , Gerda made landfall near Eastport , Maine , and became extratropical the following day . 
 Hurricane Gerda brought light rain across southern Florida and moderate to heavy rain across eastern North Carolina and New England , causing minor damage to trees and powerlines . The highest amount of rain was 5 @.@ 67 inches ( 144 mm ) which was recorded in South Wellfleet , Massachusetts on Cape Cod . There were no fatalities or injuries from Gerda although planes at Otis Air Force Base were moved to their hangars and two ships from Naval Station Newport left their berth to ride out the storm . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A tropical wave moved off the eastern coast of Africa on August 21 and moved westward across the Atlantic Ocean without development . On September 3 , the disturbance merged with a dissipating upper level low pressure system over Hispaniola and Puerto Rico and developed an increasing cloud mass as it continued westward . As the disturbance crossed the Bahamas , satellite imagery showed the disturbance gaining a distinct circulation on September 5 . On September 6 , the disturbance became a Tropical Depression before it made landfall in southeastern Florida on the same day . 
 After crossing Florida , the depression drifted northeastward back over the western Atlantic Ocean on September 7 . As the system headed northeastward , hurricane hunter aircraft recorded winds of 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) , and barometric pressure fell to 1 @,@ 000 millibars ( 30 inHg ) . Forecasters at the National Hurricane Center upgraded the system to tropical storm status and named it Gerda . Gerda continued to move rapidly northeast in response to an approaching trough and the storm reached hurricane status on September 8 . Gerda 's forward speed approached 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) as the eye of the hurricane passed 50 miles ( 80 km ) east of Cape Cod on September 9 , with maximum sustained winds of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) . Because the storm was interacting with the trough to the west and was moving rapidly northeastward , the result was the minimum central barometric pressure was an unusually high 979 millibars ( 28 @.@ 9 inHg ) . Gerda later made landfall near Eastport , Maine later that day as a Category 2 hurricane , one of the strongest to ever make landfall in the state . Gerda then became extratropical as it crossed into Canada as an 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) extratropical storm on September 10 . The storm later dissipated the following day . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Gale warnings and small craft advisories were issued along the coast of North Carolina stretching from Wilmington to Cape Hatteras . Storm shelters in Kitty Hawk and Manteo , North Carolina were opened and the American Red Cross sent relief workers and equipment to North Carolina . In Frederick County , Maryland , local forecasters and the National Weather Service issued a flood watch while the National Hurricane Center issued a hurricane watch for the county , as well as the rest of eastern Maryland . Officials at the National Weather Service and National Hurricane Center predicted that the western half of the storm would lash New York City and much of New England ( which were under a hurricane watch ) with high winds and torrential rainfall . 
 Ships and other water craft were advised to avoid the Cape Cod area as the storm was forecast to brush that area , which was put under a hurricane warning by the National Hurricane Center . In Massachusetts , schools were closed and emergency shelters were opened to accommodate evacuees . Evacuations were ordered for residents living in low lying areas in Cape Cod . In Boston , the threat of the storm caused both elementary and middle schools to close at noon while high schools were closed at 1 p.m. ( est ) . The approach of the storm also postponed a fair at a local hospital and planes at Otis Air Force Base were quickly moved to their hangars . Much of southeastern Massachusetts civil defense and fire departments were alerted in preparation of the storm 's impact . In Rhode Island , schools and other buildings were used as shelter to house evacuees . As Hurricane Gerda sped up the East Coast of the United States , the National Hurricane Center extended the hurricane warnings from Block Island , Rhode Island to Eastport , Maine . At Naval Station Newport in Newport , Rhode Island , two ships of the United States Navy left their berths to ride out the storm . One of which was the <unk> flagship USS Puget Sound ( AD @-@ 38 ) . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Hurricane Gerda affected much of eastern North Carolina and New England with gusty rain and heavy rainfall causing minor to moderate damage . In Florida , Gerda dropped light rainfall across southern and central portions of the state . Damage there , if any , was unknown . In South Carolina , Gerda brought sustained winds of 20 mph ( 32 km / h ) . In Canada , Gerda passed over Labrador as a strong extratropical storm with hurricane force winds . Damage there is unknown . 
 In North Carolina , Gerda produced moderate rainfall across the Outer Banks . The highest rainfall total on the Outer Banks was 1 @.@ 32 inches ( 34 mm ) in Cape Hatteras . Elsewhere on the Outer Banks , the storm produced 27 mph ( 43 km / h ) winds with gusts up to 36 mph ( 58 km / h ) . A tide gauge in Ocracoke Island reported a tide of 1 @.@ 5 feet ( 0 @.@ 45 meter ) above normal . Gerda then dropped heavy rainfall across eastern Virginia , Maryland , New Jersey and New York . There was no reported damage from Gerda 's impact on North Carolina and the Mid @-@ Atlantic States . 
 Gerda produced heavy rainfall throughout much of southeastern New England . In Massachusetts , a rain gauge in South Wellfleet reported rainfall of 5 @.@ 67 inches ( 144 mm ) . The city of Lowell also reported heavy rainfall from the storm as 2 inches ( 51 mm ) of rain fell in a 24 ‑ hour period . The heavy rainfall caused isolated street flooding due to clogged storm drains . In Fitchburg , the storm dropped 1 @.@ 87 inches ( 47 mm ) of rain while Cape Cod received tides 3 – 6 feet ( 0 @.@ 91 @-@ 1 @.@ 83 meters ) above normal . Elsewhere in New England , the storm caused minor damage to trees , powerlines and highways . There were no reported fatalities or injuries from Gerda 's impact on New England . 
 = Shelly Manne = 
 Sheldon " Shelly " Manne ( June 11 , 1920 – September 26 , 1984 ) , was an American jazz drummer . Most frequently associated with West Coast jazz , he was known for his versatility and also played in a number of other styles , including Dixieland , swing , bebop , avant @-@ garde jazz and fusion , as well as contributing to the musical background of hundreds of Hollywood films and television programs . 
 = = Family and origins = = 
 Manne 's father and uncles were drummers . In his youth he admired many of the leading swing drummers of the day , especially Jo Jones and Dave Tough . Billy Gladstone , a colleague of Manne 's father and the most admired percussionist on the New York theatrical scene , offered the teenage Shelly tips and encouragement . From that time , Manne rapidly developed his style in the clubs of 52nd Street in New York in the late 1930s and 1940s . His first professional job with a known big band was with the Bobby Byrne Orchestra in 1940 . In those years , as he became known , he recorded with jazz stars like Coleman Hawkins , Charlie Shavers , and Don <unk> . He also worked with a number of musicians mainly associated with Duke Ellington , like Johnny Hodges , Harry Carney , Lawrence Brown , and Rex Stewart . 
 In 1943 , Manne married a <unk> named Florence Butterfield ( known affectionately to family and friends as " Flip " ) . The marriage would last 41 years , until the end of Manne 's life . 
 When the bebop movement began to change jazz in the 1940s , Manne loved it and adapted to the style rapidly , performing with Dizzy Gillespie and Charlie Parker . Around this time he also worked with rising stars like Flip Phillips , Charlie Ventura , Lennie Tristano , and Lee Konitz . 
 Manne rose to stardom when he became part of the working bands of Woody Herman and , especially , Stan Kenton in the late 1940s and early 1950s , winning awards and developing a following at a time when jazz was the most popular music in the United States . Joining the hard @-@ swinging Herman outfit allowed Manne to play the bebop he loved . The controversial Kenton band , on the other hand , with its " progressive jazz " , presented obstacles , and many of the complex , overwrought arrangements made it harder to swing . But Manne appreciated the musical freedom that Kenton gave him and saw it as an opportunity to experiment along with what was still a highly innovative band . He rose to the challenge , finding new colors and rhythms , and developing his ability to provide support in a variety of musical situations . 
 = = In California = = 
 In the early 1950s , Manne left New York and settled permanently on a ranch in an outlying part of Los Angeles , where he and his wife raised horses . From this point on , he played an important role in the West Coast school of jazz , performing on the Los Angeles jazz scene with Shorty Rogers , Hampton Hawes , Red Mitchell , Art Pepper , Russ Freeman , Frank Rosolino , Chet Baker , Leroy Vinnegar , Pete Jolly , Howard McGhee , Bob Gordon , Conte <unk> , Sonny Criss , and numerous others . Many of his recordings around this time were for Lester Koenig 's Contemporary Records , where for a period Manne had a contract as an " exclusive " artist ( meaning that he could not record for other labels without permission ) . 
 Manne led a number of small groups that recorded under his name and leadership . One consisting of Manne on drums , trumpeter Joe Gordon , saxophonist Richie <unk> , bassist Monty Budwig , and pianist Victor Feldman performed for three days in 1959 at the famous Black Hawk club in San Francisco . Their music was recorded on the spot , and four LPs were issued . Highly regarded as an innovative example of a " live " jazz recording , the Black Hawk sessions were reissued on CD in augmented form years later . 
 = = West Coast jazz = = 
 Manne is often associated with the once frequently criticized West Coast school of jazz . He has been considered " the quintessential " drummer in what was seen as a West Coast movement , though Manne himself did not care to be so pigeonholed . In the 1950s , much of what he did could be seen as in the West Coast style : performing in tightly arranged compositions in what was a cool style , as in his 1953 album named The West Coast Sound , for which he commissioned several original compositions . Some of West Coast jazz was experimental , avant @-@ garde music several years before the more mainstream avant @-@ garde playing of Cecil Taylor and Ornette Coleman ( Manne also recorded with Coleman in 1959 ) ; a good deal of Manne 's work with Jimmy Giuffre was of this kind . Critics would condemn much of this music as overly cerebral . 
 Another side of West Coast jazz that also came under critical fire was music in a lighter style , intended for popular consumption . Manne made contributions here too . Best known is the series of albums he recorded with pianist André Previn and with members of his groups , based on music from popular Broadway shows , movies , and television programs . ( The first and most famous of these was the one based on My Fair Lady , recorded by Previn , Manne , and bassist Leroy Vinnegar in 1956 . See My Fair Lady ( Shelly Manne album ) . ) The music — with each album devoted to a single show — was improvised in the manner of jazz , but always in a light , immediately appealing style aimed at popular taste , which did not always go over well with aficionados of " serious " jazz music , which may be one reason why Manne has been frequently overlooked in accounts of major jazz drummers of the 20th century . Much of the music produced on the West Coast in those years , as Robert Gordon concedes , was in fact imitative and " lacked the fire and intensity associated with the best jazz performances " . But Gordon also points out that there is a level of musical sophistication , as well as an intensity and " swing " , in the music recorded by Manne with Previn and Vinnegar ( and later Red Mitchell ) that is missing in the many lackluster albums of this type produced by others in that period . 
 West Coast jazz , however , represented only a small part of Manne 's playing . In Los Angeles and occasionally returning to New York and elsewhere , Manne recorded with musicians of all schools and styles , ranging from those of the swing era through bebop to later developments in modern jazz , including hard bop , usually seen as the antithesis to the cool jazz frequently associated with West Coast playing . 
 = = Collaborations = = 
 From the 78 @-@ rpm recordings of the 1940s to the LPs of the 1950s and later , to the hundreds of film soundtracks he appeared on , Manne 's recorded output was enormous and often hard to pin down . According to the jazz writer Leonard Feather , Manne 's drumming had been heard on well " over a thousand LPs " — a statement that Feather made in 1960 , when Manne had not reached even the midpoint of his 45 @-@ year @-@ long career . 
 An extremely selective list of those with whom Manne performed includes Benny Carter , Earl Hines , Clifford Brown , Zoot Sims , Ben Webster , Maynard Ferguson , Wardell Gray , Lionel Hampton , Junior Mance , Jimmy Giuffre , and Stan Getz . In the 1950s , he recorded two solid albums with Sonny Rollins — Way Out West ( Contemporary , 1957 ) received particular acclaim and helped dispel the notion that West Coast jazz was always different from jazz made on the East Coast — and , in the 1960s , two with Bill Evans . Around the same time in 1959 , Manne recorded with the traditional Benny Goodman and the iconoclastic Ornette Coleman , a striking example of his versatility . 
 One of Manne 's most adventurous 1960s collaborations was with Jack Marshall , the guitarist and arranger celebrated for composing the theme and incidental music for The Munsters TV show in that period . Two duet albums ( Sounds <unk> Of ! , 1962 , and Sounds ! , 1966 ) feature Marshall on guitar , accompanied by Manne playing drums and a wide variety of percussion instruments unusual in jazz , from " Hawaiian slit bamboo sticks " , to a Chinese gong , to castanets , to piccolo Boo @-@ Bam . 
 Another example of Manne 's ability to transcend the narrow borders of any particular school is the series of trio albums he recorded with guitarist Barney Kessel and bassist Ray Brown as " The Poll Winners " . ( They had all won numerous polls conducted by the popular publications of the day ; the polls are now forgotten , but the albums endure , now reissued on CD . ) Manne even dabbled in Dixieland and fusion , as well as " Third Stream " music . He participated in the revival of that jazz precursor ragtime ( he appears on several albums devoted to the music of Scott Joplin ) , and sometimes recorded with musicians best associated with European classical music . He always , however , returned to the straight @-@ ahead jazz he loved best . 
 = = Style and influences = = 
 In addition to Dave Tough and Jo Jones , Manne admired and learned from contemporaries like Max Roach and Kenny Clarke , and later from younger drummers like Elvin Jones and Tony Williams . Consciously or unconsciously , he borrowed a little from all of them , always searching to extend his playing into new territory . 
 Despite these and numerous other influences , however , Shelly Manne 's style of drumming was always his own — personal , precise , clear , and at the same time multilayered , using a very broad range of colors . Manne was often experimental , and had participated in such musically exploratory groups of the early 1950s as those of Jimmy Giuffre and Teddy Charles . Yet his playing never became overly cerebral , and he never neglected that element usually considered fundamental to all jazz : time . 
 Whether playing Dixieland , bebop , or avant @-@ garde jazz , in big bands or in small groups , Manne 's self @-@ professed goal was to make the music swing . His fellow musicians attested to his listening appreciatively to those around him and being ultra @-@ sensitive to the needs and the nuances of the music played by the others in the band , his goal being to make them — and the music as a whole — sound better , rather than calling attention to himself with overbearing solos . 
 Manne refused to play in a powerhouse style , but his understated drumming was appreciated for its own strengths . In 1957 , critic Nat Hentoff called Manne one of the most " musical " and " <unk> imaginative " drummers . Composer and multi @-@ instrumentalist Bob Cooper called him " the most imaginative drummer I 've worked with " . In later years this kind of appreciation for what Manne could do was echoed by jazz notables like Louie <unk> , John Lewis , Ray Brown , Harry " Sweets " Edison , and numerous others who had worked with him at various times . Composer , arranger , bandleader , and multi @-@ instrumentalist Benny Carter was " a great admirer of his work " . " He could read anything , get any sort of effect " , said Carter , who worked closely with Manne over many decades . 
 Though he always insisted on the importance of time and " swing " , Manne 's concept of his own drumming style typically pointed to his melody @-@ based approach . He contrasted his style with that of Max Roach : " Max plays melodically from the rhythms he plays . I play rhythms from thinking melodically " . 
 Manne had strong preferences in his choice of drum set . Those preferences , however , changed several times over his career . He began with Gretsch drums . In 1957 , intrigued by the sound of a kind of drum made by Leedy ( then owned by Slingerland ) , he had a line made for him that also became popular with other drummers . In the 1970s , after trying and abandoning many others for reasons of sound or maintainability , he settled on the Japanese @-@ made Pearl Drums . 
 = = Singers = = 
 Manne was also acclaimed by singers . Jackie Cain , of the vocal team of Jackie and Roy ( " Roy " being Roy Kral ) , claimed that she had " never heard a drummer play so beautifully behind a singer " . Jackie and Roy were only two of the many singers he played behind , recording several albums with that husband @-@ and @-@ wife team , with their contemporary June Christy , and with Helen Humes , originally made famous by her singing with the Count Basie orchestra . 
 Over decades , Manne recorded additional albums , or sometimes just sat in on drums here and there , with renowned vocalists like Ella Fitzgerald , Mel Tormé , Peggy Lee , Frank Sinatra , Ernestine Anderson , Sarah Vaughan , Lena Horne , Blossom Dearie , and Nancy Wilson . Not all the singers Manne accompanied were even primarily jazz artists . Performers as diverse as Teresa Brewer , Leontyne Price , Tom Waits , and Barry Manilow included Manne in their recording sessions . 
 = = Film and television = = 
 At first , jazz was heard in film soundtracks only as jazz bands performed in the story . Early in his career , Manne was occasionally seen and heard in the movies , for example in the 1942 film Seven Days Leave , as the drummer in the highly popular Les Brown orchestra ( soon to be known as " Les Brown and His Band of Renown " ) . 
 In the 1950s , however , jazz began to be used for all or parts of film soundtracks , and Manne pioneered in these efforts , beginning with The Wild One ( 1953 ) . As jazz quickly assumed a major role in the musical background of films , so did Manne assume a major role as a drummer and percussionist on those soundtracks . A notable early example was 1955 's The Man with the Golden Arm ; Manne not only played drums throughout but functioned as a personal assistant to director Otto Preminger and tutored star Frank Sinatra . The Decca soundtrack LP credits him prominently for the " Drumming Sequences " . 
 From then on , as jazz became more prominent in the movies , Manne became the go @-@ to percussion man in the film industry ; he even appeared on screen in some minor roles . A major example is Johnny Mandel 's jazz score for I Want to Live ! in 1958 . 
 Soon , Manne began to contribute to film music in a broader way , often combining jazz , pop , and classical music . Henry Mancini in particular found plenty of work for him ; the two shared an interest in experimenting with tone colors , and Mancini came to rely on Manne to shape the percussive effects in his music . Breakfast at Tiffany 's ( 1961 ) , <unk> ! ( 1962 ) and The Pink Panther ( 1963 ) are only a few of Mancini 's films where Manne 's drums and special percussive effects could be heard . 
 Manne frequently collaborated with Mancini in television as well , such as in the series Peter Gunn ( 1958 – 1961 ) and Mr. Lucky ( 1959 – 1960 ) . Although Mancini developed such a close partnership with Manne that he was using him for practically all his scores and other music at this time , the drummer still found time to perform on movie soundtracks and in TV shows with music by others , including the series Richard Diamond ( music by Pete Rugolo , 1959 – 1960 ) , and Checkmate ( music by John Williams , 1959 – 1962 ) , and the film version of Leonard Bernstein 's West Side Story ( 1961 ) . 
 In the late 1950s , Manne began to compose his own film scores , such as that for The Proper Time ( 1959 ) , with the music also played by his own group , Shelly Manne and His Men , and issued on a Contemporary LP . In later years , Manne divided his time playing the drums on , adding special percussive effects to , and sometimes writing complete scores for both film and television . He even provided a musical setting for a recording of the Dr. Seuss children 's classic Green Eggs and Ham ( 1960 ) and later performed in and sometimes wrote music for the backgrounds of numerous animated cartoons . For example , he joined other notable jazz musicians ( including Ray Brown and Jimmy <unk> ) in playing Doug Goodwin 's music for the cartoon series The Ant and the Aardvark ( 1969 – 1971 ) . Notable examples of later scores that Manne wrote himself and also performed in are , for the movies , Young Billy Young ( 1969 ) and Trader Horn ( 1973 ) , and , for television , Daktari , 1966 – 1969 . With these and other contributions to cartoons , children 's stories , movies , television programs ( and even commercials ) , Manne 's drumming became woven into the popular culture of several decades . 
 = = Later career = = 
 A star in Stan Kenton 's famous orchestra in the 1940s and 1950s , as well as that of Woody Herman , also in the 1940s , and winner of numerous awards , Manne slipped from public view as jazz became less central in popular music . In the 1960s and early 1970s , however , he helped keep jazz alive on the Los Angeles scene as part owner of the nightclub Shelly 's Manne @-@ Hole on North Cahuenga Boulevard . There , the house band was Shelly Manne and His Men , which featured some of his favorite sidemen , such as Russ Freeman , Monty Budwig , Richie <unk> , Conte <unk> , and later Frank Strozier , John Morell , and Mike Wofford , among many other notable West Coast jazz musicians . Also appearing was a roster of jazz stars from different eras and all regions , including Ben Webster , Rahsaan Roland Kirk , Les McCann , Bill Evans , John Coltrane , Sonny Stitt , Thelonious Monk , Michel Legrand , Carmen McRae , Milt Jackson , Teddy Edwards , Monty Alexander , Lenny <unk> , Miles Davis , and many , many others . Stan Getz was the last to be featured ( at a briefly occupied second location at <unk> 's restaurant on Wilshire Boulevard ) , when , late in 1973 , Manne was forced to close the club for financial reasons . 
 From that point , Manne refocused his attention on his own drumming . It might be argued that he never played with more taste , refinement , and soulful swing than in the 1970s , when he recorded numerous albums with musicians like trumpeter Red Rodney , pianist Hank Jones , saxophonists Art Pepper and Lew <unk> , and composer @-@ arranger @-@ saxophonist Oliver Nelson . 
 From 1974 to 1977 he joined guitarist Laurindo Almeida , saxophonist and flutist Bud Shank , and bassist Ray Brown to perform as the group The L.A. Four , which recorded four albums before Manne left the ensemble . 
 In the 1980s , Manne recorded with such stars as trumpeter Harry " Sweets " Edison , saxophonist Zoot Sims , guitarists Joe Pass and Herb Ellis , and pianist John Lewis ( famous as the musical director of the Modern Jazz Quartet ) . 
 Meanwhile , he continued to record with various small groups of his own . Just one representative example of his work in this period is a live concert recorded at the Los Angeles club " Carmelo 's " in 1980 with pianists Bill Mays and Alan Broadbent and bassist Chuck <unk> . With their enthusiasm and spontaneity , and the sense that the audience in the intimate ambience of the club is participating in the music , these performances share the characteristics that had been celebrated more than two decades before in the better @-@ known Black Hawk performances . Although this phase of his career has frequently been overlooked , Manne , by this time , had greatly refined his ability to back other musicians sympathetically , yet make his own musical thoughts clearly heard . 
 Manne 's heavy load of Hollywood studio work sometimes shifted his attention from his mainstream jazz playing . Even in lackluster films , however , he nevertheless often succeeded in making art of what might be called hackwork . Still , for all his tireless work in the studios , Manne 's labor of love was his contribution to jazz as an American art form , to which he had dedicated himself since his youth and continued to work at almost to the last day of his life . 
 Manne died somewhat before the popular revival of interest in jazz had gained momentum . But in his last few years , his immense contribution to the music regained at least some local recognition , and the role Manne had played in the culture of his adopted city began to draw public appreciation . Two weeks before his sudden death of a heart attack , he was honored by the City of Los Angeles in conjunction with the Hollywood Arts Council when September 9 , 1984 was declared " Shelly Manne Day " . 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = As leader = = = 
 " The Three " & " The Two " ( Contemporary , 1954 [ 1960 ] ) - compilation of previously issued 10 @-@ inch LPs 
 The West Coast Sound ( Contemporary , 1953 – 55 [ 1955 ] ) - re @-@ release of the first Shelly Manne & His Men 10 @-@ inch LP with additional material 
 Swinging Sounds ( Contemporary , 1956 ) 
 More Swinging Sounds ( Contemporary , 1956 ) 
 Shelly Manne & His Friends ( Contemporary , 1956 ) 
 My Fair Lady ( Contemporary , 1956 ) 
 Li 'l Abner ( Contemporary , 1957 ) 
 Concerto for Clarinet & Combo ( Contemporary , 1955 @-@ 57 [ 1957 ] ) 
 The Gambit ( Contemporary , 1957 @-@ 58 [ 1958 ] ) 
 Bells Are Ringing ( Contemporary , 1958 ) 
 Shelly Manne & His Men Play Peter Gunn ( Contemporary , 1959 ) 
 Son of Gunn ! ! ( Contemporary , 1959 ) 
 At the Black Hawk 1 ( Contemporary , 1959 ) 
 At the Black Hawk 2 ( Contemporary , 1959 ) 
 At the Black Hawk 3 ( Contemporary , 1959 ) 
 At the Black Hawk 4 ( Contemporary , 1959 ) 
 At the Black Hawk 5 ( Contemporary , 1959 [ 1991 ] ) 
 The Proper Time ( Contemporary , 1960 ) - Motion Picture Soundtrack 
 Ruth Price with Shelly Manne & His Men at the Manne @-@ Hole ( Contemporary , 1961 ) - with Ruth Price 
 Live ! Shelly Manne & His Men at the Manne @-@ Hole ( Contemporary , 1961 ) - Double LP , reissued on 2 separate CDs 
 Shelly Manne & His Men Play Checkmate ( Contemporary , 1961 ) 
 Sounds <unk> Of ! ( Contemporary , 1962 ) with Jack Marshall - stereo demonstration record 
 2 @-@ 3 @-@ 4 ( Impulse ! , 1962 ) , with Coleman Hawkins 
 Empathy ( Verve , 1962 ) with Bill Evans 
 My Son the Jazz Drummer ! ( Contemporary , 1962 ) - reissued as Steps to the Desert in 2004 
 My Fair Lady with the Un @-@ original Cast ( Capitol , 1964 ) , arranged and conducted by Johnny Williams with Jack Sheldon and Irene Kral 
 Manne – That 's Gershwin ! ( Capitol , 1965 ) , arranged and directed by John Williams 
 Sounds ! ( Capitol , 1966 ) with Jack Marshall 
 Boss Sounds ! ( Atlantic , 1966 ) 
 Jazz Gunn ( Atlantic , 1967 ) 
 Perk Up ( Concord , 1967 [ 1976 ] ) 
 Daktari ( Atlantic , 1967 ) 
 Young Billy Young ( United Artists , 1969 ) - Motion Picture Soundtrack 
 Outside ( Contemporary , 1969 [ 1970 ] ) 
 Alive in London ( Contemporary , 1970 ) 
 <unk> ( Mainstream , 1972 ) 
 Hot Coles ( Flying Dutchman , 1975 ) 
 Essence ( Galaxy , 1977 ) 
 French Concert ( Galaxy , 1977 [ 1979 ] ) with Lee Konitz 
 Rex : Shelly Manne Plays Richard Rogers ( Discovery , 1977 ) 
 Double Piano Jazz Quartet in Concert at Carmelo 's ( Trend 1980 ) 
 Hollywood Jam ( Atlas , 1981 ) 
 <unk> ( Atlas , 1981 ) with Monty Alexander and Ray Brown 
 One on One ( Atlas , 1982 ) with Russ Freeman 
 The Shelly Manne Trio in Zurich ( Contemporary , 1984 ) 
 = = = As sideman = = = 
 With Chet Baker 
 Grey December ( Pacific Jazz , 1953 [ 1992 ] ) 
 Witch Doctor ( Contemporary , 1953 [ 1985 ] ) 
 West Coast Live - with Stan Getz ( 1954 [ 1997 ] ) 
 Pretty / Groovy ( World Pacific , 1953 @-@ 54 [ 1958 ] ) 
 The Trumpet Artistry of Chet Baker ( Prestige , 1953 – 54 ) 
 Chet Baker & Strings ( Columbia , 1954 ) 
 Quartet : Russ Freeman / Chet Baker ( Pacific Jazz , 1956 ) 
 With Elmer Bernstein 
 The Man with the Golden Arm ( Decca , 1956 ) 
 Sweet Smell of Success ( Decca , 1957 ) 
 With Brass Fever 
 Brass Fever ( Impulse ! , 1975 ) 
 With Benny Carter 
 Jazz Giant ( Contemporary , 1958 ) 
 Swingin ' the ' 20s ( Contemporary , 1958 ) with Earl Hines 
 With Teddy Charles 
 Collaboration West ( Prestige , 1953 ) 
 Evolution ( Prestige , 1953 [ 1957 ] ) 
 With Ornette Coleman 
 Tomorrow Is the Question ! ( Contemporary , 1959 ) 
 With Buddy Collette 
 Nice Day with Buddy Collette ( Contemporary , 1957 ) 
