 At the Cinema ! ( Mercury , 1959 ) 
 With Sonny Criss 
 I 'll Catch the Sun ! ( Prestige , 1969 ) 
 With Bill Evans 
 A Simple Matter of Conviction ( Verve , 1966 ) 
 With Art Farmer 
 On the Road ( Contemporary , 1976 ) 
 With Maynard Ferguson 
 Maynard Ferguson 's Hollywood Party ( EmArcy , 1954 ) 
 Dimensions ( EmArcy , 1955 ) 
 Maynard Ferguson Octet ( EmArcy , 1955 ) 
 With Ella Fitzgerald 
 Whisper Not ( Verve , 1967 ) 
 With Stan Getz 
 West Coast Jazz ( <unk> , 1955 ) 
 Stan Getz and the Cool Sounds ( Verve , 1953 @-@ 55 [ 1957 ] ) 
 Hamp and Getz ( <unk> , 1955 ) with Lionel Hampton 
 With Dizzy Gillespie 
 The Complete RCA Victor Recordings ( Bluebird , 1937 – 1949 [ 1995 ] ) 
 With Jimmy Giuffre 
 Jimmy Giuffre ( Capitol , 1955 ) 
 The Jimmy Giuffre Clarinet ( Atlantic , 1956 ) 
 With Hampton Hawes 
 Four ! ( Contemporary , 1958 ) 
 Hampton Hawes at the Piano ( Contemporary , 1976 [ 1978 ] ) 
 With Paul Horn 
 Plenty of Horn ( Dot , 1958 ) 
 With Hank Jones 
 Just for Fun ( Galaxy , 1977 ) 
 With Stan Kenton 
 Stan Kenton 's Milestones ( Capitol , 1943 @-@ 47 [ 1950 ] ) 
 Stan Kenton Classics ( Capitol , 1944 @-@ 47 [ 1952 ] ) 
 Artistry in Rhythm ( Capitol , 1946 ) 
 Encores ( Capitol , 1947 ) 
 A Presentation of Progressive Jazz ( Capitol , 1947 ) 
 Innovations in Modern Music ( Capitol , 1950 ) 
 Stan Kenton Presents ( Capitol , 1950 ) 
 City of Glass ( Capitol , 1951 ) 
 Popular Favorites by Stan Kenton ( Capitol , 1953 ) 
 This Modern World ( Capitol , 1953 ) 
 The Kenton Era ( Capitol , 1940 – 54 [ 1955 ] ) 
 Kenton with Voices ( Capitol , 1957 ) 
 Lush Interlude ( Capitol , 1958 ) 
 The Innovations Orchestra ( Capitol , 1950 @-@ 51 [ 1997 ] ) 
 With Barney Kessel 
 Easy Like ( Contemporary , 1953 – 56 ) 
 Kessel Plays Standards ( Contemporary , 1954 ) 
 To Swing or Not to Swing ( Contemporary , 1955 ) 
 Music to Listen to Barney Kessel By ( Contemporary , 1956 ) 
 The Poll Winners ( Contemporary , 1957 ) with Ray Brown 
 Let 's Cook ! ( Contemporary , 1957 [ 1962 ] ) 
 The Poll Winners Ride Again ! ( Contemporary , 1958 ) with Ray Brown 
 Carmen ( Contemporary , 1959 ) 
 Some Like It Hot ( Contemporary , 1959 ) 
 Poll Winners Three ! ( Contemporary , 1959 ) 
 Exploring the Scene ! ( Contemporary , 1960 ) 
 With John Klemmer 
 Constant Throb ( Impulse ! , 1971 ) 
 With John Lewis 
 Kansas City Breaks ( Finesse , 1982 ) 
 With Henry Mancini 
 More Music from Peter Gunn ( RCA Victor , 1959 ) 
 The Mancini Touch ( RCA Victor , 1960 ) 
 Combo ! ( RCA Victor , 1961 ) 
 With Johnny Mandel 
 I Want to Live ( United Artists , 1958 ) 
 With Bill Mays 
 Tha 's Delights ( Trend , 1983 ) 
 With Howard McGhee 
 Maggie 's Back in Town ! ! ( Contemporary , 1961 ) 
 With Jack Montrose 
 Arranged by Montrose ( Pacific Jazz , 1954 ) 
 Arranged / Played / Composed by Jack Montrose ( Atlantic , 1955 ) 
 Jack Montrose Sextet ( Pacific Jazz , 1955 ) 
 Blues and Vanilla ( RCA Victor , 1956 ) 
 With Gerry Mulligan 
 I Want to Live ( United Artists , 1958 ) 
 With Oliver Nelson 
 Sound Pieces ( Impulse ! , 1966 ) 
 Skull Session ( Flying Dutchman , 1975 ) 
 Stolen Moments ( East Wind , 1975 ) 
 With Art Pepper 
 Popo ( Xanadu , 1951 [ 1980 ] ) with Shorty Rogers 
 Living Legend ( Contemporary , 1975 ) 
 With André Previn 
 Pal Joey ( Contemporary , 1957 ) 
 The Subterraneans ( Soundtrack ) ( MGM , 1960 ) 
 A Different Kind of Blues ( Angel , 1980 ) with Itzhak Perlman 
 With Shorty Rogers 
 Shorty Rogers and His Giants ( RCA Victor , 1953 ) 
 Cool and Crazy ( RCA Victor , 1953 ) 
 Shorty Rogers Courts the Count ( RCA Victor , 1954 ) 
 Collaboration ( RCA Victor , 1954 ) with André Previn 
 The Swinging Mr. Rogers ( Atlantic , 1955 ) 
 Martians Come Back ! ( Atlantic , 1955 [ 1956 ] ) 
 Way Up There ( Atlantic , 1955 [ 1957 ] ) 
 Afro @-@ Cuban Influence ( RCA Victor , 1958 ) 
 With Sonny Rollins 
 Way Out West ( Contemporary , 1957 ) 
 With Joe Sample and Ray Brown 
 The Three , The Three ( East Wind , 1975 ) 
 With Lalo Schifrin 
 Gone with the Wave ( Colpix , 1964 ) 
 Music from Mission : Impossible ( Dot , 1967 ) 
 There 's a Whole Lalo Schifrin Goin ' On ( Dot , 1968 ) 
 With Bud Shank 
 Strings & <unk> ( Pacific Jazz , 1955 ) 
 Barefoot Adventure ( Pacific Jazz , 1961 ) 
 Windmills of Your Mind ( Pacific Jazz , 1969 ) 
 With Sonny Stitt 
 <unk> Mama ( Flying Dutchman , 1975 ) 
 With Tom Waits 
 Small Change ( Asylum Records , 1976 ) 
 Foreign Affairs ( Asylum Records , 1977 ) 
 One from the Heart ( CBS Records , 1982 ) 
 = Hurricane Isidore = 
 Hurricane Isidore was the ninth named storm and the second hurricane in the 2002 Atlantic hurricane season . Isidore was the fifth of eight named storms to occur in September . The tropical cyclone peaked as a Category 3 hurricane , causing damage as well as four fatalities in Jamaica , Cuba , Mexico , and the United States . Isidore is noted for threatening to strike the northern Gulf Coast as a Category 4 hurricane , but instead striking as a moderate tropical storm due to a track change that brought the storm over the Yucatán Peninsula for over a day , which significantly weakened the cyclone . Its primary impact was the heavy rainfall which fell across southeast Mexico and from the central United States Gulf coast into the Ohio Valley . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On September 9 , a tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa . Despite moving through a dry environment , its convection became organized as an anticyclone developed over the wave . On September 14 , convection was well @-@ organized enough around a small closed wind circulation to classify the system as Tropical Depression Ten near Trinidad and Tobago . Land interaction from Venezuela later weakened the depression back to a tropical wave . The wave continued west @-@ northwestward through the Caribbean , and redeveloped into a tropical depression on September 17 while 140 miles ( 230 km ) south of Jamaica . 
 Embedded within a weak steering current , it drifted to the northwest , and strengthened into Tropical Storm Isidore on September 18 near Jamaica . After grazing the island , it quickly intensified to a hurricane late on September 19 while south of Cuba . Isidore 's maximum sustained winds reached 100 miles per hour ( 160 km / h ) near the Isle of Youth , and weakened slightly to an 85 miles per hour ( 137 km / h ) hurricane as it made landfall on Cabo Frances late on September 20 . The hurricane crossed the island , then slowed as it moved westward across the Gulf of Mexico . Favorable conditions aloft with warm water temperatures allowed Isidore to quickly intensify to a peak of 125 miles per hour ( 201 km / h ) winds on September 21 . 
 Despite Dvorak satellite estimates of 145 miles per hour ( 233 km / h ) , reconnaissance aircraft indicated Isidore remained a 125 miles per hour ( 201 km / h ) Category 3 hurricane , with pressures dropping to 934 mbar ( 27 @.@ 6 inHg ) , typical of a Category 4 hurricane . It is the lowest minimum pressure ever observed for an Atlantic hurricane which did not exceed Category 3 intensity . With nearly ideal conditions for development , Isidore was forecast to reach winds of 150 miles per hour ( 240 km / h ) over the northern Gulf of Mexico . High pressures to its north forced it southward , and Isidore made landfall at Telchac Puerto in Yucatán as a major hurricane on September 22 . It weakened rapidly as it nearly stalled over Yucatán , and was only a minimal tropical storm after being inland for 30 hours . 
 The inner core of convection collapsed while over southeast Mexico , and upon moving northward and reaching the Gulf of Mexico again , it was a large but weak tropical storm . Conditions favored significant strengthening , but Isidore did not redevelop central convection until reaching the northern Gulf of Mexico . The strengthening system hit Grand Isle , Louisiana on September 26 as a 65 miles per hour ( 105 km / h ) tropical storm , but weakened quickly into a tropical depression after moving inland . The system raced to the northeast , and became an extratropical cyclone on September 27 before becoming absorbed in a frontal zone over Pennsylvania that night . 
 = = Preparations = = 
 Before Isidore became a hurricane , there were fears that the storm would end up being a significant threat . The upper level environment ahead of the storm was very favorable , and the oceanic heat content was very high . Just ten months after the destructive Hurricane Michelle , Hurricane Isidore threatened to cause similar effects in Cuba . In preparation for the storm , about 292 @,@ 000 people and thousands of farm animals were evacuated in the Pinar del Río province . Hurricane Warnings were posted about 48 hours before landfall , leaving ample time to prepare for the storm . 
 Once in the Gulf of Mexico , Hurricane Isidore became a major Category 3 storm with winds of 125 miles per hour ( 201 km / h ) . The forecasts then predicted Isidore to move westward in the Gulf of Mexico for a few days , before turning northward towards the Gulf Coast as what was predicted by then to be a strong Category 4 hurricane . Initially expected to remain north of the peninsula , hurricane warnings were issued just over a day prior to landfall , with no watch preceding Isidore 's passage . More than 70 @,@ 000 people were evacuated , and ports on the Gulf coast of Yucatán were closed . Mexican authorities declared a state of emergency prior to the arrival of the storm . Due to Isidore 's unexpected southward turn into the Yucatán Peninsula , Isidore weakened significantly to a tropical storm which limited potential damage along the United States Gulf Coast . In preparation for the hurricane , the Red Cross mobilized its members across Texas , Alabama , Louisiana , Mississippi , and Florida days before Isidore 's expected landfall . Volunteers were sent in the days prior to ensure families had a family disaster plan and a disaster supplies kit in their household . Hurricane watches raised for the United States Gulf coast between Cameron , Louisiana and Pascagoula , Mississippi late on the morning of September 24 were discontinued early on the morning of September 25 , when the storm was no longer expected to restrengthen into a hurricane . 
 = = Impact = = 
 = = = Caribbean islands = = = 
 In the Windward Islands , Isidore was a weak tropical depression that caused no reported damage or casualties . The Cayman Islands reported tropical storm force winds , and likely experienced flooding to some degree , but Isidore caused no reported damage or casualties . Isidore brought heavy rains to Jamaica , totalling 27 @.@ 2 inches ( 690 mm ) at Cotton Tree Gully . 
 = = = Cuba = = = 
 Hurricane Isidore brought torrential rainfall , with many areas reporting over 1 foot ( 300 mm ) of rain . The maximum reported was 21 @.@ 7 inches ( 550 mm ) at Isabel Rubio in western Cuba . The rainfall , combined with a 12 feet ( 3 @.@ 7 m ) storm surge , destroyed 77 houses , caused power outages , uprooted trees and blew off roofs . Over 130 tobacco drying houses were affected to some degree , damaging valuable tobacco stock . A total of 24 @,@ 000 metric tons of citrus and 132 metric tons of coffee were lost from the storm . Thousands of livestock perished . No deaths were reported . 
 = = = Southeast Mexico = = = 
 Hurricane Isidore was one of only four storms to hit the north side of the Yucatán since records have been kept . It was the first tropical cyclone to hit the area since Tropical Depression Greta in 1970 , the first tropical storm since 1935 , the first hurricane since 1888 , and only major hurricane to ever hit the area . 
 The storm shut down oil production of the Mexican state @-@ run oil company , <unk> . Drilling operations , as well as exports from Mexico , stopped for one week which cost the oil company US $ 108 @.@ 7 million . The Gulf Coast island of Isla Arena was nearly covered by Isidore 's storm surge . Its residents evacuated prior to the storm 's passage . 
 Hurricane Isidore hit near Mérida , Yucatán , as a 125 miles per hour ( 201 km / h ) hurricane , and remained over the area for around 36 hours . Over 30 inches ( 760 mm ) of rainfall fell , with the maximum recorded near Campeche . The storm surge reached as high as 6 metres ( 20 ft ) over southern portions of Yucatán state . Nearly one @-@ third of all fishing vessels were damaged by Isidore . Nearly 36 @,@ 500 houses were destroyed in Yucatán from the intense winds , 83 @,@ 000 homes damaged , and 500 @,@ 000 were left homeless . Downed trees and power lines were common over much of the northern Yucatán Peninsula , and 75 % of barns and warehouses were either severely damage or destroyed . Damage to crops and livestock was extreme ; 2 @,@ 000 square kilometres of maize and 400 square kilometres of fruit trees were damaged across the country . A total of 70 % of the poultry production and livestock were lost during the storm in Yucatán . Damage to Mexico 's power grid reached US $ 19 @.@ 76 million . Over one @-@ fourth of the roads across the peninsula were moderately or severely damaged , which resulted in losses of US $ 9 @.@ 88 million to rural areas . Farming in Campeche experienced significant damage , with 30 @,@ 000 cattle and 100 @,@ 000 acres ( 400 km ² ) of agricultural land lost . 
 Throughout the Yucatán Peninsula , there were 17 deaths were attributed to Hurricane Isidore , two of which were indirectly related to the storm . Damage in the country totaled $ 950 million ( 2002 USD ) . 
 = = = Central America = = = 
 Isidore caused heavy rains in Guatemala due to upslope flow from the Pacific Ocean , which led to landslides and flooding across southern and western portions of the country . The rains led to the drowning of two people when they tried to cross a rain @-@ swollen river . Three hundred and fifty households reported losses . 
 = = = Eastern United States = = = 
 In the open Gulf of Mexico , Hurricane Isidore and later Hurricane Lili contributed to the shutdown of offshore oil and gas platforms . The effects of back @-@ to @-@ back storms resulted in the loss of production of 14 @.@ 4 million barrels ( 2 @,@ 290 @,@ 000 m3 ) of oil and 88 @.@ 9 billion cubic feet ( 2 @.@ 52 × 109 m3 ) of natural gas . A storm surge of 8 @.@ 3 feet ( 2 @.@ 5 m ) was measured at <unk> , Louisiana and at Gulfport Harbor , Mississippi . Hurricane Isidore brought widespread heavy rainfall from the central Gulf coast into the Ohio Valley , with a maximum of 15 @.@ 97 inches ( 406 mm ) at Metairie , Louisiana . The flooding was responsible for moderate crop damage , with a total of $ 330 million in damage ( 2002 USD , 360 million 2006 USD ) . Isidore claimed five lives ; four direct and one indirect . The indirect death was from a man that went into cardiac arrest in Mississippi , whereas the other four were drowning deaths . 
 = = = Retirement = = = 
 The name Isidore was retired in the spring of 2003 and will never be used for an Atlantic hurricane again . It was replaced with Ike in the 2008 season . That name itself was retired and replaced with Isaias after Hurricane Ike caused immense destruction in the United States and Cuba . 
 = Spanish conquest of the Maya = 
 The Spanish conquest of the Maya was a protracted conflict during the Spanish colonisation of the Americas , in which the Spanish conquistadores and their allies gradually incorporated the territory of the Late Postclassic Maya states and polities into the colonial Viceroyalty of New Spain . The Maya occupied a territory that is now incorporated into the modern countries of Mexico , Guatemala , Belize , Honduras and El Salvador ; the conquest began in the early 16th century and is generally considered to have ended in 1697 . 
 The conquest of the Maya was hindered by their politically fragmented state . Spanish and native tactics and technology differed greatly . The Spanish engaged in a strategy of concentrating native populations in newly founded colonial towns ; they viewed the taking of prisoners as a hindrance to outright victory , whereas the Maya prioritised the capture of live prisoners and of booty . Among the Maya , ambush was a favoured tactic ; in response to the use of Spanish cavalry , the highland Maya took to digging pits and lining them with wooden stakes . Native resistance to the new nucleated settlements took the form of the flight into inaccessible regions such as the forest or joining neighbouring Maya groups that had not yet submitted to the European conquerors . Spanish weaponry included broadswords , rapiers , lances , pikes , halberds , crossbows , matchlocks and light artillery . Maya warriors fought with flint @-@ tipped spears , bows and arrows , stones , and wooden swords with inset obsidian blades , and wore padded cotton armour to protect themselves . The Maya lacked key elements of Old World technology such as a functional wheel , horses , iron , steel , and gunpowder ; they were also extremely susceptible to Old World diseases , against which they had no resistance . 
 Before the conquest , Maya territory contained a number of competing kingdoms . Many conquistadors viewed the Maya as " infidels " who needed to be forcefully converted and pacified , disregarding the achievements of their civilization . The first contact between the Maya and European explorers came in the early 16th century when a Spanish ship sailing from Panama to Santo Domingo was wrecked on the east coast of the Yucatán Peninsula in 1511 . Several Spanish expeditions followed in 1517 and 1519 , making landfall on various parts of the Yucatán coast . The Spanish conquest of the Maya was a prolonged affair ; the Maya kingdoms resisted integration into the Spanish Empire with such tenacity that their defeat took almost two centuries . The Itza Maya and other lowland groups in the Petén Basin were first contacted by Hernán Cortés in 1525 , but remained independent and hostile to the encroaching Spanish until 1697 , when a concerted Spanish assault led by Martín de Urzúa y Arizmendi finally defeated the last independent Maya kingdom . 
 = = Geography = = 
 The Maya civilization occupied a wide territory that included southeastern Mexico and northern Central America ; this area included the entire Yucatán Peninsula , and all of the territory now incorporated into the modern countries of Guatemala and Belize , as well as the western portions of Honduras and El Salvador . In Mexico , the Maya occupied territory now incorporated into the states of Chiapas , Tabasco , Campeche , Quintana Roo and Yucatán . 
 The Yucatán Peninsula is bordered by the Caribbean Sea to the east and by the Gulf of Mexico to the north and west . It incorporates the modern Mexican states of Yucatán , Quintana Roo and Campeche , the eastern portion of the state of Tabasco , most of the Guatemalan department of Petén , and all of Belize . Most of the peninsula is formed by a vast plain with few hills or mountains and a generally low coastline . The northwestern and northern portions of the Yucatán Peninsula experience lower rainfall than the rest of the peninsula ; these regions feature highly porous limestone bedrock resulting in less surface water . In contrast , the northeastern portion of the peninsula is characterised by forested swamplands . The northern portion of the peninsula lacks rivers , except for the Champotón River – all other rivers are located in the south . 
 The Petén region consists of densely forested low @-@ lying limestone plain , crossed by low east – west oriented ridges and is characterised by a variety of forest and soil types ; water sources include generally small rivers and low @-@ lying seasonal swamps known as bajos . A chain of fourteen lakes runs across the central drainage basin of Petén . The largest lake is Lake Petén Itza ; it measures 32 by 5 kilometres ( 19 @.@ 9 by 3 @.@ 1 mi ) . A broad savannah extends south of the central lakes . To the north of the lakes region bajos become more frequent , interspersed with forest . To the south the plain gradually rises towards the Guatemalan Highlands . Dense forest covers northern Petén and Belize , most of Quintana Roo , southern Campeche and a portion of the south of Yucatán state . Further north , the vegetation turns to lower forest consisting of dense scrub . 
 Chiapas occupies the extreme southeast of Mexico ; it possesses 260 kilometres ( 160 mi ) of Pacific coastline . Chiapas features two principal highland regions ; to the south is the Sierra Madre de Chiapas and in central Chiapas are the Montañas Centrales ( Central Highlands ) . They are separated by the Depresión Central , containing the drainage basin of the Grijalva River , featuring a hot climate with moderate rainfall . The Sierra Madre highlands gain altitude from west to east , with the highest mountains near the Guatemalan border . The Central Highlands of Chiapas rise sharply to the north of the Grijalva , to a maximum altitude of 2 @,@ 400 metres ( 7 @,@ 900 ft ) , then descend gradually towards the Yucatán Peninsula . They are cut by deep valleys running parallel to the Pacific coast , and feature a complex drainage system that feeds both the Grijalva and the Lacantún River . At the eastern end of the Central Highlands is the Lacandon Forest , this region is largely mountainous with lowland tropical plains at its easternmost extreme . The littoral zone of Soconusco lies to the south of the Sierra Madre de Chiapas , and consists of a narrow coastal plain and the foothills of the Sierra Madre . 
 = = Maya region before the conquest = = 
 The Maya had never been unified as a single empire , but by the time the Spanish arrived Maya civilization was thousands of years old and had already seen the rise and fall of great cities . 
 = = = Yucatán = = = 
 The first large Maya cities developed in the Petén Basin in the far south of the Yucatán Peninsula as far back as the Middle Preclassic ( c . 600 – 350 BC ) , and Petén formed the heartland of the ancient Maya civilization during the Classic period ( c . AD 250 – 900 ) . The 16th @-@ century Maya provinces of northern Yucatán are likely to have evolved out of polities of the Maya Classic period . The great cities that dominated Petén had fallen into ruin by the beginning of the 10th century with the onset of the Classic Maya collapse . A significant Maya presence remained in Petén into the Postclassic period after the abandonment of the major Classic period cities ; the population was particularly concentrated near permanent water sources . 
 In the early 16th century , the Yucatán Peninsula was still dominated by the Maya civilization . It was divided into a number of independent provinces that shared a common culture but varied in their internal sociopolitical organisation . When the Spanish discovered Yucatán , the provinces of Mani and Sotuta were two of the most important polities in the region . They were mutually hostile ; the Xiu Maya of Mani allied themselves with the Spanish , while the <unk> Maya of Sotuta became the implacable enemies of the European colonisers . 
 At the time of conquest , polities in the northern Yucatán peninsula included Mani , Cehpech and Chakan ; further east along the north coast were Ah Kin Chel , Cupul , and Chikinchel . Ecab , Uaymil , Chetumal all bordered on the Caribbean Sea . Cochuah was also in the eastern half of the peninsula . <unk> , <unk> and Sotuta were all landlocked provinces . Chanputun ( modern Champotón ) was on the coast of the Gulf of Mexico , as was Acalan . In the southern portion of the peninsula , a number of polities occupied the Petén Basin . The Kejache occupied a territory between the Petén lakes and what is now Campeche . The Cholan Maya @-@ speaking Lakandon ( not to be confused with the modern inhabitants of Chiapas by that name ) controlled territory along the tributaries of the Usumacinta River spanning eastern Chiapas and southwestern Petén . The Lakandon had a fierce reputation amongst the Spanish . 
 Before their defeat in 1697 the Itza controlled or influenced much of Petén and parts of Belize . The Itza were warlike , and their capital was Nojpetén , an island city upon Lake Petén Itzá . The Kowoj were the second in importance ; they were hostile towards their Itza neighbours . The Kowoj were located around the eastern Petén lakes . The Yalain occupied a territory that extended eastwards to Tipuj in Belize . Other groups in Petén are less well known , and their precise territorial extent and political makeup remains obscure ; among them were the Chinamita , the Icaiche , the Kejache , the Lakandon Ch 'ol , the Manche Ch 'ol , and the Mopan . 
 = = = Maya Highlands = = = 
 What is now the Mexican state of Chiapas was divided roughly equally between the non @-@ Maya Zoque in the western half and Maya in the eastern half ; this distribution continued up to the time of the Spanish conquest . On the eve of the conquest the highlands of Guatemala were dominated by several powerful Maya states . In the centuries preceding the arrival of the Spanish the K 'iche ' had carved out a small empire covering a large part of the western Guatemalan Highlands and the neighbouring Pacific coastal plain . However , in the late 15th century the Kaqchikel rebelled against their former K 'iche ' allies and founded a new kingdom to the southeast with Iximche as its capital . In the decades before the Spanish invasion the Kaqchikel kingdom had been steadily eroding the kingdom of the K 'iche ' . Other highland groups included the Tz 'utujil around Lake Atitlán , the Mam in the western highlands and the Poqomam in the eastern highlands . The central highlands of Chiapas were occupied by a number of Maya peoples , including the Tzotzil , who were divided into a number of provinces ; the province of Chamula was said to have five small towns grouped closely together . The Tojolabal held territory around Comitán . The Coxoh Maya held territory in the upper reaches of the Grijalva drainage , near the Guatemalan border , and were probably a subgroup of the Tojolabal . 
 = = = Pacific lowlands = = = 
 Soconusco was an important communication route between the central Mexican highlands and Central America . It had been subjugated by the Aztec Triple Alliance at the end of the 15th century , under the emperor <unk> , and paid tribute in cacao . The highland K 'iche ' dominated the Pacific coastal plain of western Guatemala . The eastern portion of the Pacific plain was occupied by the non @-@ Maya Pipil and Xinca . 
 = = Background to the conquest = = 
 Christopher Columbus discovered the New World for the Kingdom of Castile and Leon in 1492 . Private adventurers thereafter entered into contracts with the Spanish Crown to conquer the newly discovered lands in return for tax revenues and the power to rule . In the first decades after the discovery of the new lands , the Spanish colonised the Caribbean and established a centre of operations on the island of Cuba . By August 1521 the Aztec capital of Tenochtitlan had fallen to the Spanish . Within three years of the fall of Tenochtitlan the Spanish had conquered a large part of Mexico , extending as far south as the Isthmus of Tehuantepec . The newly conquered territory became New Spain , headed by a viceroy who answered to the king of Spain via the Council of the Indies . 
 = = Weaponry , strategies and tactics = = 
 The conquistadors were all volunteers , the majority of whom did not receive a fixed salary but instead a portion of the spoils of victory , in the form of precious metals , land grants and provision of native labour . Many of the Spanish were already experienced soldiers who had previously campaigned in Europe . In addition to Spaniards , the invasion force probably included dozens of armed African slaves and freemen . The politically fragmented state of the Yucatán Peninsula at the time of conquest hindered the Spanish invasion , since there was no central political authority to be overthrown . However , the Spanish exploited this fragmentation by taking advantage of pre @-@ existing rivalries between polities . Among Mesoamerican peoples the capture of prisoners was a priority , while to the Spanish such taking of prisoners was a hindrance to outright victory . The Spanish engaged in a strategy of concentrating native populations in newly founded colonial towns , or reducciones ( also known as congregaciones ) . Native resistance to the new nucleated settlements took the form of the flight of the indigenous inhabitants into inaccessible regions such as the forest or joining neighbouring Maya groups that had not yet submitted to the Spanish . Those that remained behind in the reducciones often fell victim to contagious diseases ; coastal reducciones , while convenient for Spanish administration , were also vulnerable to pirate attacks . 
 = = = Spanish weapons and tactics = = = 
 Spanish weaponry and tactics differed greatly from that of the indigenous peoples . This included the Spanish use of crossbows , firearms ( including muskets , arquebuses and cannon ) , war dogs and war horses . Horses had never been encountered by the Maya before , and their use gave the mounted conquistador an overwhelming advantage over his unmounted opponent , allowing the rider to strike with greater force while simultaneously making him less vulnerable to attack . The mounted conquistador was highly manoeuvrable and this allowed groups of combatants to quickly displace themselves across the battlefield . The horse itself was not passive , and could buffet the enemy combatant . 
 The crossbows and early firearms were unwieldy and deteriorated rapidly in the field , often becoming unusable after a few weeks of campaigning due to the effects of the climate . The Maya lacked key elements of Old World technology , such as the use of iron and steel and functional wheels . The use of steel swords was perhaps the greatest technological advantage held by the Spanish , although the deployment of cavalry helped them to rout indigenous armies on occasion . The Spanish were sufficiently impressed by the quilted cotton armour of their Maya enemies that they adopted it in preference to their own steel armour . The conquistadors applied a more effective military organisation and strategic awareness than their opponents , allowing them to deploy troops and supplies in a way that increased the Spanish advantage . 
 The 16th @-@ century Spanish conquistadors were armed with one- and two @-@ handed broadswords , lances , pikes , rapiers , halberds , crossbows , matchlocks and light artillery . Crossbows were easier to maintain than matchlocks , especially in the humid tropical climate of the Caribbean region that included much of the Yucatán Peninsula . 
 In Guatemala the Spanish routinely fielded indigenous allies ; at first these were Nahua brought from the recently conquered Mexico , later they also included Maya . It is estimated that for every Spaniard on the field of battle , there were at least 10 native auxiliaries . Sometimes there were as many as 30 indigenous warriors for every Spaniard , and the participation of these Mesoamerican allies was decisive . 
 = = = Native weapons and tactics = = = 
 Maya armies were highly disciplined , and warriors participated in regular training exercises and drills ; every able @-@ bodied adult male was available for military service . Maya states did not maintain standing armies ; warriors were mustered by local officials who reported back to appointed <unk> . There were also units of full @-@ time mercenaries who followed permanent leaders . Most warriors were not full @-@ time , however , and were primarily farmers ; the needs of their crops usually came before warfare . Maya warfare was not so much aimed at destruction of the enemy as the seizure of captives and plunder . Maya warriors entered battle against the Spanish with flint @-@ tipped spears , bows and arrows and stones . They wore padded cotton armour to protect themselves . The Spanish described the weapons of war of the Petén Maya as bows and arrows , fire @-@ sharpened poles , flint @-@ headed spears and two @-@ handed swords crafted from strong wood with the blade fashioned from inset obsidian , similar to the Aztec macuahuitl . Maya warriors wore body armour in the form of quilted cotton that had been soaked in salt water to toughen it ; the resulting armour compared favourably to the steel armour worn by the Spanish . Warriors bore wooden or animal hide shields decorated with feathers and animal skins . The Maya had historically employed ambush and raiding as their preferred tactic , and its employment against the Spanish proved troublesome for the Europeans . In response to the use of cavalry , the highland Maya took to digging pits on the roads , lining them with fire @-@ hardened stakes and camouflaging them with grass and weeds , a tactic that according to the Kaqchikel killed many horses . 
 = = Impact of Old World diseases = = 
 Epidemics accidentally introduced by the Spanish included smallpox , measles and influenza . These diseases , together with typhus and yellow fever , had a major impact on Maya populations . The Old World diseases brought with the Spanish and against which the indigenous New World peoples had no resistance were a deciding factor in the conquest ; they decimated populations before battles were even fought . It is estimated that 90 % of the indigenous population had been eliminated by disease within the first century of European contact . 
 A single soldier arriving in Mexico in 1520 was carrying smallpox and initiated the devastating plagues that swept through the native populations of the Americas . Modern estimates of native population decline vary from 75 % to 90 % mortality . Maya written histories suggest that smallpox was rapidly transmitted throughout the Maya area the same year that it arrived in central Mexico . Among the most deadly diseases were the aforementioned smallpox , influenza , measles and a number of pulmonary diseases , including tuberculosis . Modern knowledge of the impact of these diseases on populations with no prior exposure suggests that 33 – 50 % of the population of the Maya highlands perished . 
 These diseases swept through Yucatán in the 1520s and 1530s , with periodic recurrences throughout the 16th century . By the late 16th century , malaria had arrived in the region , and yellow fever was first reported in the mid @-@ 17th century . Mortality was high , with approximately 50 % of the population of some Yucatec Maya settlements being wiped out . Those areas of the peninsula that experience damper conditions became rapidly depopulated after the conquest with the introduction of malaria and other waterborne parasites . The native population of the northeastern portion of the peninsula was almost completely eliminated within fifty years of the conquest . Soconusco also suffered catastrophic population collapse , with an estimated 90 – 95 % drop . 
 In the south , conditions conducive to the spread of malaria existed throughout Petén and Belize . In Tabasco the population of approximately 30 @,@ 000 was reduced by an estimated 90 % , with measles , smallpox , catarrhs , dysentery and fevers being the main culprits . At the time of the fall of Nojpetén in 1697 , there are estimated to have been 60 @,@ 000 Maya living around Lake Petén Itzá , including a large number of refugees from other areas . It is estimated that 88 % of them died during the first ten years of colonial rule owing to a combination of disease and war . 
 = = First encounters : 1502 and 1511 = = 
 On 30 July 1502 , during his fourth voyage , Christopher Columbus arrived at Guanaja , one of the Bay Islands off the coast of Honduras . He sent his brother Bartholomew to scout the island . As Bartholomew explored , a large trading canoe approached . Bartholomew Columbus boarded the canoe , and found it was a Maya trading vessel from Yucatán , carrying well @-@ dressed Maya and a rich cargo . The Europeans looted whatever took their interest from amongst the cargo and seized the elderly captain to serve as an interpreter ; the canoe was then allowed to continue on its way . This was the first recorded contact between Europeans and the Maya . It is likely that news of the piratical strangers in the Caribbean passed along the Maya trade routes – the first prophecies of bearded invaders sent by Kukulkan , the northern Maya feathered serpent god , were probably recorded around this time , and in due course passed into the books of Chilam Balam . 
 In 1511 the Spanish caravel Santa María de la Barca sailed along the Central American coast under the command of Pedro de Valdivia . The ship foundered upon a reef somewhere off Jamaica . There were just twenty survivors from the wreck , including Captain Valdivia , Gerónimo de Aguilar and Gonzalo Guerrero . They set themselves adrift in one of the ship 's boats and after thirteen days , during which half of the survivors died , they made landfall upon the coast of Yucatán . There they were seized by Halach Uinik , a Maya lord . Captain <unk> was sacrificed with four of his companions , and their flesh was served at a feast . Aguilar and Guerrero were held prisoner and fattened for killing , together with five or six of their shipmates . Aguilar and Guerrero managed to escape their captors and fled to a neighbouring lord , who took them prisoner and kept them as slaves . After a time , Gonzalo Guerrero was passed as a slave to the lord Nachan Can of Chetumal . Guerrero became completely <unk> and by 1514 Guerrero had achieved the rank of <unk> , a war leader who served against Nachan Chan 's enemies . 
 = = Exploration of the Yucatán coast , 1517 – 1519 = = 
 = = = Francisco Hernández de Córdoba , 1517 = = = 
 In 1517 , Francisco Hernández de Córdoba set sail from Cuba with a small fleet . The expedition sailed west from Cuba for three weeks before sighting the northeastern tip of the Yucatán Peninsula . The ships could not put in close to the shore due to the coastal shallows . However , they could see a Maya city some two leagues inland . The following morning , ten large canoes rowed out to meet the Spanish ships , and over thirty Maya boarded the vessels and mixed freely with the Spaniards . The following day the conquistadors put ashore . As the Spanish party advanced along a path towards the city , they were ambushed by Maya warriors . Thirteen Spaniards were injured by arrows in the first assault , but the conquistadors regrouped and repulsed the Maya attack . They advanced to a small plaza upon the outskirts of the city . When the Spaniards ransacked nearby temples they found a number of low @-@ grade gold items , which filled them with enthusiasm . The expedition captured two Mayas to be used as interpreters and retreated to the ships . The Spanish discovered that the Maya arrowheads were fashioned from flint and tended to shatter on impact , causing infected wounds and a slow death ; two of the wounded Spaniards died from the arrow @-@ wounds inflicted in the ambush . 
 Over the next fifteen days the fleet followed the coastline west , and then south . The expedition was now perilously short of fresh water , and shore parties searching for water were left dangerously exposed because the ships could not pull close to the shore due to the shallows . On 23 February 1517 , the Spanish spotted the Maya city of Campeche . A large contingent put ashore to fill their water casks . They were approached by about fifty finely @-@ dressed and unarmed Indians while the water was being loaded into the boats ; they questioned the Spaniards as to their purpose by means of signs . The Spanish party then accepted an invitation to enter the city . Once inside the city , the Maya leaders made it clear that the Spanish would be killed if they did not withdraw immediately . The Spanish party retreated in defensive formation to the safety of the ships . 
 After ten more days , the ships spotted an inlet close Champotón , and a landing party discovered fresh water . Armed Maya warriors approached from the city , and communication was attempted with signs . Night fell by the time the water casks had been filled and the attempts at communication concluded . By sunrise the Spanish had been surrounded by a sizeable army . The massed Maya warriors launched an assault and all of the Spanish party received wounds in the frantic melee that followed , including Hernández de Córdoba . The Spanish regrouped and forced passage to the shore , where their discipline collapsed and a frantic scramble for the boats ensued , leaving the Spanish vulnerable to the pursuing Maya warriors who waded into the sea behind them . By the end of the battle , the Spanish had lost over fifty men , more than half their number , and five more men died from their wounds in the following days . The battle had lasted only an hour . They were now far from help and low on supplies ; too many men had been lost and injured to sail all three ships back to Cuba , so one was abandoned . The ship 's pilot then steered a course for Cuba via Florida , and Hernández de <unk> wrote a report to Governor Diego Velázquez describing the voyage and , most importantly , the discovery of gold . Hernández died soon after from his wounds . 
 = = = Juan de Grijalva , 1518 = = = 
 Diego Velázquez , the governor of Cuba , was enthused by Hernández de Córdoba 's report of gold in Yucatán . He organised a new expedition and placed his nephew Juan de Grijalva in command over his four ships . The small fleet left Cuba in April 1518 , and made its first landfall upon the island of Cozumel , off the east coast of Yucatán . The Maya inhabitants of Cozumel fled the Spanish and would not respond to Grijalva 's friendly overtures . The fleet then sailed south along the east coast of the peninsula . The Spanish spotted three large Maya cities along the coast , but Grijalva did not land at any of these and turned back north to loop around the north of the peninsula and sail down the west coast . At Campeche the Spanish tried to barter for water but the Maya refused , so Grijalva opened fire against the city with small cannon ; the inhabitants fled , allowing the Spanish to take the abandoned city . Messages were sent with a few Maya who had been too slow to escape but the Maya remained hidden in the forest ; the Spanish boarded their ships and continued along the coast . 
 At Champotón , the fleet was approached by a small number of large war canoes , but the ships ' cannon soon put them to flight . At the mouth of the Tabasco River the Spanish sighted massed warriors and canoes but the natives did not approach . By means of interpreters , Grijalva indicated that he wished to trade and bartered wine and beads in exchange for food and other supplies . From the natives they received a few gold trinkets and news of the riches of the Aztec Empire to the west . The expedition continued far enough to confirm the reality of the gold @-@ rich empire , sailing as far north as Pánuco River . As the fleet returned to Cuba , the Spanish attacked Champotón to avenge the previous year 's defeat of the Spanish expedition led by Hernández . One Spaniard was killed and fifty were wounded in the ensuing battle , including Grijalva . Grijalva put into Havana five months after he had left . 
 = = = Hernán Cortés , 1519 = = = 
 Grijalva 's return aroused great interest in Cuba , and Yucatán was believed to be a land of riches waiting to be plundered . A new expedition was organised , with a fleet of eleven ships carrying 500 men and some horses . Hernán Cortés was placed in command , and his crew included officers that would become famous conquistadors , including Pedro de Alvarado , Cristóbal de Olid , Gonzalo de Sandoval and Diego de Ordaz . Also aboard were Francisco de Montejo and Bernal Díaz del Castillo , veterans of the Grijalva expedition . 
 The fleet made its first landfall at Cozumel ; Maya temples were cast down and a Christian cross was put up on one of them . At Cozumel Cortés heard rumours of bearded men on the Yucatán mainland , who he presumed were Europeans . Cortés sent out messengers to them and was able to rescue the shipwrecked Gerónimo de Aguilar , who had been enslaved by a Maya lord . Aguilar had learnt the Yucatec Maya language and became Cortés ' interpreter . 
 From Cozumel , the fleet looped around the north of the Yucatán Peninsula and followed the coast to the Grijalva River , which Cortés named in honour of the Spanish captain who had discovered it . In Tabasco , Cortés anchored his ships at Potonchán , a Chontal Maya town . The Maya prepared for battle but the Spanish horses and firearms quickly decided the outcome . The defeated Chontal Maya lords offered gold , food , clothing and a group of young women in tribute to the victors . Among these women was a young Maya noblewoman called <unk> , who was given the Spanish name Marina . She spoke Maya and Nahuatl and became the means by which Cortés was able to communicate with the Aztecs . From Tabasco , Cortés continued to along the coast , and went on to conquer the Aztecs . 
 = = Preparations for conquest of the Highlands , 1522 – 1523 = = 
 After the Aztec capital Tenochtitlan fell to the Spanish in 1521 , the Kaqchikel Maya of Iximche sent envoys to Hernán Cortés to declare their allegiance to the new ruler of Mexico , and the K 'iche ' Maya of Q 'umarkaj may also have sent a delegation . In 1522 Cortés sent Mexican allies to scout the Soconusco region of lowland Chiapas , where they met new delegations from Iximche and Q 'umarkaj at <unk> ; both of the powerful highland Maya kingdoms declared their loyalty to the King of Spain . But Cortés ' allies in Soconusco soon informed him that the K 'iche ' and the Kaqchikel were not loyal , and were harassing Spain 's allies in the region . Cortés despatched Pedro de Alvarado with 180 cavalry , 300 infantry , 4 cannons , and thousands of allied warriors from central Mexico ; they arrived in Soconusco in 1523 . 
 = = Soconusco , 1523 – 1524 = = 
 Pedro de Alvarado passed through Soconusco with a sizeable force in 1523 , en route to conquer Guatemala . Alvarado 's army included hardened veterans of the conquest of the Aztecs , and included cavalry and artillery ; he was accompanied by a great many indigenous allies . Alvarado was received in peace in Soconusco , and the inhabitants swore allegiance to the Spanish Crown . They reported that neighbouring groups in Guatemala were attacking them because of their friendly outlook towards the Spanish . By 1524 , Soconusco had been completely pacified by Alvarado and his forces . Due to the economic importance of cacao to the new colony , the Spanish were reluctant to move the indigenous inhabitants far from their established cacao orchards . As a result , the inhabitants of Soconusco were less likely to be rounded up into new reducción settlements than elsewhere in Chiapas , since the planting of a new cacao crop would have required five years to mature . 
 = = Hernán Cortés in the Maya lowlands , 1524 – 25 = = 
 In 1524 , after the Spanish conquest of the Aztec Empire , Hernán Cortés led an expedition to Honduras over land , cutting across Acalan in southern Campeche and the Itza kingdom in what is now the northern Petén Department of Guatemala . His aim was to subdue the rebellious Cristóbal de Olid , whom he had sent to conquer Honduras , and who had set himself up independently in that territory . Cortés left Tenochtitlan on 12 October 1524 with 140 Spanish soldiers , 93 of them mounted , 3 @,@ 000 Mexican warriors , 150 horses , artillery , munitions and other supplies . Cortés marched into Maya territory in Tabasco ; the army crossed the Usumacinta River near Tenosique and crossed into the Chontal Maya province of Acalan , where he recruited 600 Chontal Maya carriers . Cortés and his army left Acalan on 5 March 1525 . 
 The expedition passed onwards through Kejache territory , and arrived at the north shore of Lake Petén Itzá on 13 March 1525 . The Roman Catholic priests accompanying the expedition celebrated mass in the presence of the king of the Itza , who was said to be so impressed that he pledged to worship the cross and to destroy his idols . Cortés accepted an invitation from Kan Ek ' to visit Nojpetén . On his departure , Cortés left behind a cross and a lame horse that the Itza treated as a deity , but the animal soon died . 
 From the lake , Cortés continued on the arduous journey south along the western slopes of the Maya Mountains , during which he lost most of his horses . The expedition became lost in the hills north of Lake Izabal and came close to starvation before they captured a Maya boy who led them to safety . Cortés found a village on the shore of Lake Izabal , and crossed the Dulce River to the settlement of Nito , somewhere on the Amatique Bay , with about a dozen companions , and waited there for the rest of his army to regroup over the next week . By this time the remnants of the expedition had been reduced to a few hundred ; Cortés succeeded in contacting the Spaniards he was searching for , only to find that Cristóbal de Olid 's own officers had already put down his rebellion . Cortés then returned to Mexico by sea . 
 = = Fringes of empire : Belize , 16th – 17th centuries = = 
 No Spanish military expeditions were launched against the Maya of Belize , although both Dominican and Franciscan friars penetrated the region in attempts at evangelising the natives . The only Spanish settlement in the territory was established by Alonso d 'Avila in 1531 and lasted less than two years . In 1574 , fifty households of Manche Ch 'ol were relocated from Campin and <unk> , in southern Belize , to the shore of Lake Izabal , but they soon fled back into the forest . In order to counter Spanish encroachment into their territory , the local Maya maintained an uneasy friendship with British loggers operating in central Belize . In 1641 , the Franciscans established two reducciones among the <unk> Maya of central Belize , at <unk> and <unk> ; both settlements were sacked by Dutch corsairs within a year . 
 = = Conquest of the Maya Highlands , 1524 – 1526 = = 
 = = = Subjugation of the K 'iche ' , 1524 = = = 
 Pedro de Alvarado and his army advanced along the Pacific coast unopposed until they reached the Samalá River in western Guatemala . This region formed a part of the K 'iche ' kingdom , and a K 'iche ' army tried unsuccessfully to prevent the Spanish from crossing the river . Once across , the conquistadors ransacked nearby settlements . On 8 February 1524 Alvarado 's army fought a battle at <unk> , ( modern San Francisco Zapotitlán ) . The Spanish and their allies stormed the town and set up camp in the marketplace . Alvarado then headed upriver into the Sierra Madre mountains towards the K 'iche ' heartlands , crossing the pass into the valley of Quetzaltenango . On 12 February 1524 Alvarado 's Mexican allies were ambushed in the pass and driven back by K 'iche ' warriors but a Spanish cavalry charge scattered the K 'iche ' and the army crossed to the city of <unk> ( modern Quetzaltenango ) to find it deserted . The Spanish accounts relate that at least one and possibly two of the ruling lords of Q 'umarkaj died in the fierce battles upon the initial approach to Quetzaltenango . Almost a week later , on 18 February 1524 , a 30 @,@ 000 @-@ strong K 'iche ' army confronted the Spanish army in the Quetzaltenango valley and was comprehensively defeated ; many K 'iche ' nobles were among the dead . This battle exhausted the K 'iche ' militarily and they asked for peace , and invited Pedro de Alvarado into their capital Q 'umarkaj . Alvarado was deeply suspicious of K 'iche ' intentions but accepted the offer and marched to Q 'umarkaj with his army . At Tzakahá the Spanish conducted a Roman Catholic mass under a makeshift roof ; this site was chosen to build the first church in Guatemala . The first Easter mass held in Guatemala was celebrated in the new church , during which high @-@ ranking natives were baptised . 
 In March 1524 Pedro de Alvarado encamped on the plain outside the Q 'umarkaj . Not wishing to enter the narrow streets of Q 'umarkaj , he invited the K 'iche ' lords Oxib @-@ Keh ( the ajpop , or king ) and Beleheb @-@ Tzy ( the ajpop k 'amha , or king elect ) to visit him in his camp . As soon as they did so , he seized them and kept them as prisoners . In response , the K 'iche ' warriors attacked the Spaniards ' indigenous allies and killed one of the Spanish soldiers . At this point Alvarado had the captured K 'iche ' lords burnt to death , and then proceeded to burn the entire city . After the destruction of Q 'umarkaj , Pedro de Alvarado sent messages to Iximche , capital of the Kaqchikel , proposing an alliance against the remaining K 'iche ' resistance . Alvarado wrote that they sent 4000 warriors to assist him , although the Kaqchikel recorded that they sent only 400 . With the capitulation of the K 'iche ' kingdom , various non @-@ K 'iche ' peoples under K 'iche ' dominion also submitted to the Spanish . This included the Mam inhabitants of the area now within the modern department of San Marcos . 
 = = = Kaqchikel alliance and conquest of the Tz 'utujil , 1524 = = = 
 On 14 April 1524 , the Spanish were invited into Iximche and were well received by the lords Belehe Qat and Cahi Imox . The Kaqchikel kings provided native soldiers to assist the conquistadors against continuing K 'iche ' resistance and to help with the defeat of the neighbouring Tz 'utujil kingdom . The Spanish only stayed briefly before continuing to Atitlan and the Pacific coast . The Spanish returned to the Kaqchikel capital on 23 July 1524 and on 27 July Pedro de Alvarado declared Iximche as the first capital of Guatemala , Santiago de los Caballeros de Guatemala ( " St. James of the Knights of Guatemala " ) . 
 After two Kaqchikel messengers sent by Pedro de Alvarado were killed by the Tz 'utujil , the conquistadors and their Kaqchikel allies marched against the Tz 'utujil . Pedro de Alvarado led 60 cavalry , 150 Spanish infantry and an unspecified number of Kaqchikel warriors . The Spanish and their allies arrived at the lakeshore after a day 's march , and Alvarado rode ahead with 30 cavalry along the lake shore until he engaged a hostile Tz 'utujil force , which was broken by the Spanish charge . The survivors were pursued across a causeway to an island on foot before the inhabitants could break the bridges . The rest of Alvarado 's army soon arrived and they successfully stormed the island . The surviving Tz 'utujil fled into the lake and swam to safety . The Spanish could not pursue them because 300 canoes sent by the Kaqchikels had not yet arrived . This battle took place on 18 April . 
 The following day the Spanish entered Tecpan Atitlan , the Tz 'utujil capital , but found it deserted . The Tz 'utujil leaders responded to Alvarado 's messengers by surrendering to Pedro de Alvarado and swearing loyalty to Spain , at which point Alvarado considered them pacified and returned to Iximche ; three days later , the lords of the Tz 'utujil arrived there to pledge their loyalty and offer tribute to the conquistadors . 
 = = = Reconnaissance of the Chiapas Highlands , 1524 = = = 
 In 1524 Luis Marín led a small party on a reconnaissance expedition into Chiapas . He set out from Coatzacoalcos ( renamed Espíritu Santo by the Spanish ) , on the coast of the Gulf of Mexico . His party followed the Grijalva upriver ; near modern Chiapa de Corzo the Spanish party fought and defeated the <unk> . Following this battle , Marín headed into the central highlands of Chiapas ; around Easter he passed through the Tzotzil Maya town Zinacantan without opposition from the inhabitants . The Zinacantecos , true to their pledge of allegiance two years earlier , aided the Spanish against the other indigenous peoples of the region . 
 Marín was initially met by a peaceful embassy as he approached the <unk> town of Chamula . He took this as the submission of the inhabitants , but was met by armed resistance when he tried to enter the province . The Spanish found that the Chamula Tzotzil had abandoned their lands and stripped them of food in an attempt to discourage the invaders . A day after their initial approach , Marín found that the Chamula Tzotzil had gathered their warriors upon a ridge that was too steep for the Spanish horses to climb . The conquistadors were met with a barrage of missiles and boiling water , and found the nearby town defended by a formidable 1 @.@ 2 @-@ metre ( 4 ft ) thick defensive wall . The Spanish stormed the wall , to find that the inhabitants had withdrawn under cover of torrential rain that had interrupted the battle . After taking the deserted Chamula , the Spanish expedition continued against their allies at Huixtan . Again the inhabitants offered armed resistance before abandoning their town to the Spanish . Conquistador Diego Godoy wrote that the Indians killed or captured at Huixtan numbered no more than 500 . The Spanish , by now disappointed with the scarce pickings , decided to retreat to Coatzacoalcos in May 1524 . 
 = = = Kaqchikel rebellion , 1524 – 1530 = = = 
 Pedro de Alvarado rapidly began to demand gold in tribute from the Kaqchikels , souring the friendship between the two peoples , and the Kaqchikel people abandoned their city and fled to the forests and hills on 28 August 1524 . Ten days later the Spanish declared war on the Kaqchikel . Two years later , on 9 February 1526 , a group of sixteen Spanish deserters burnt the palace of the Ahpo Xahil , sacked the temples and kidnapped a priest , acts that the Kaqchikel blamed on Pedro de Alvarado . 
 The Spanish founded a new town at nearby Tecpán Guatemala . The Spanish abandoned Tecpán in 1527 , because of continuous Kaqchikel attacks , and moved to the Almolonga Valley to the east , refounding their capital at Ciudad Vieja . The Kaqchikel kept up resistance against the Spanish for a number of years , but on 9 May 1530 , exhausted by warfare , the two kings of the most important clans returned from the wilds . A day later they were joined by many nobles and their families and many more people ; they then surrendered at the new Spanish capital at Ciudad Vieja . The former inhabitants of Iximche were dispersed ; some were moved to Tecpán , the rest to Sololá and other towns around Lake Atitlán . 
 = = = Siege of Zaculeu , 1525 = = = 
 At the time of the conquest , the main Mam population was situated in Xinabahul ( modern Huehuetenango city ) , but Zaculeu 's fortifications led to its use as a refuge during the conquest . The refuge was attacked by Gonzalo de Alvarado y Contreras , brother of Pedro de Alvarado , in 1525 , with 40 Spanish cavalry and 80 Spanish infantry , and some 2 @,@ 000 Mexican and K 'iche ' allies . Gonzalo de Alvarado left the Spanish camp at Tecpán Guatemala in July 1525 and marched to Momostenango , which quickly fell to the Spanish after a four @-@ hour battle . The following day Gonzalo de Alvarado marched on Huehuetenango and was confronted by a Mam army of 5 @,@ 000 warriors from Malacatán . The Mam army advanced across the plain in battle formation and was met by a Spanish cavalry charge that threw them into disarray , with the infantry mopping up those Mam that survived the cavalry . The Mam leader <unk> Acab was killed and the surviving warriors fled to the hills . The Spanish army rested for a few days , then continued onwards to Huehuetenango only to find it deserted . 
 Kayb 'il B 'alam had received news of the Spanish advance and had withdrawn to his fortress at Zaculeu , with some 6 @,@ 000 warriors gathered from the surrounding area . The fortress possessed formidable defences , and Gonzalo de Alvarado launched an assault on the weaker northern entrance . Mam warriors initially held firm against the Spanish infantry but fell back before repeated cavalry charges . Kayb 'il B 'alam , seeing that outright victory on an open battlefield was impossible , withdrew his army back within the safety of the walls . As Alvarado dug in and laid siege to the fortress , an army of approximately 8 @,@ 000 Mam warriors descended on Zaculeu from the Cuchumatanes mountains to the north , drawn from towns allied with the city ; the relief army was annihilated by the Spanish cavalry . After several months the Mam were reduced to starvation . Kayb 'il B 'alam finally surrendered the city to the Spanish in the middle of October 1525 . When the Spanish entered the city they found 1 @,@ 800 dead Indians , and the survivors eating the corpses . After the fall of Zaculeu , a Spanish garrison was established at Huehuetenango , and Gonzalo de Alvarado returned to Tecpán Guatemala . 
 = = = Pedro de Alvarado in the Chiapas Highlands , 1525 = = = 
 A year after Luis Marín 's reconnaissance expedition , Pedro de Alvarado entered Chiapas when he crossed a part of the Lacandon Forest in an attempt to link up with Hernán Cortés ' expedition heading for Honduras . Alvarado entered Chiapas from Guatemala via the territory of the Acala Ch 'ol ; he was unable to locate Cortés , and his scouts eventually led him to Tecpan Puyumatlan ( modern Santa Eulalia , Huehuetenango ) , in a mountainous region near the territory of the Lakandon Ch 'ol . The inhabitants of Tecpan Puyumatlan offered fierce resistance against the Spanish @-@ led expedition , and Gonzalo de Alvarado wrote that the Spanish suffered many losses , including the killing of messengers sent to summon the natives to swear loyalty to the Spanish Crown . After failing to locate Cortés , the Alvarados returned to Guatemala . 
 = = = Central and eastern Guatemalan Highlands , 1525 – 1532 = = = 
 In 1525 Pedro de Alvarado sent a small company to conquer Mixco Viejo ( Chinautla Viejo ) , the capital of the Poqomam . The Spanish attempted an approach through a narrow pass but were forced back with heavy losses . Alvarado himself launched the second assault with 200 Tlaxcalan allies but was also beaten back . The Poqomam then received reinforcements , and the two armies clashed on open ground outside of the city . The battle was chaotic and lasted for most of the day , but was finally decided by the Spanish cavalry . The leaders of the reinforcements surrendered to the Spanish three days after their retreat and revealed that the city had a secret entrance in the form of a cave . Alvarado sent 40 men to cover the exit from the cave and launched another assault along the ravine , in single file owing to its narrowness , with crossbowmen alternating with <unk> , each with a companion sheltering him with a shield . This tactic allowed the Spanish to break through the pass and storm the entrance of the city . The Poqomam warriors fell back in disorder in a chaotic retreat through the city . Those who managed to retreat down the neighbouring valley were ambushed by Spanish cavalry who had been posted to block the exit from the cave , the survivors were captured and brought back to the city . The siege had lasted more than a month , and because of the defensive strength of the city , Alvarado ordered it to be burned and moved the inhabitants to the new colonial village of Mixco . 
 There are no direct sources describing the conquest of the Chajoma by the Spanish but it appears to have been a drawn @-@ out campaign rather than a rapid victory . After the conquest , the inhabitants of the kingdom were resettled in San Pedro Sacatepéquez , and San Martín Jilotepeque . The Chajoma rebelled against the Spanish in 1526 , fighting a battle at <unk> 'il , an unidentified site somewhere near the modern towns of San Juan Sacatepéquez and San Pedro Sacatepéquez . 
 Chiquimula de la Sierra ( " Chiquimula in the Highlands " ) was inhabited by Ch 'orti ' Maya at the time of the conquest . The first Spanish reconnaissance of this region took place in 1524 . In 1526 three Spanish captains invaded Chiquimula on the orders of Pedro de Alvarado . The indigenous population soon rebelled against excessive Spanish demands , but the rebellion was quickly put down in April 1530 . However , the region was not considered fully conquered until a campaign by Jorge de Bocanegra in 1531 – 1532 that also took in parts of Jalapa . The afflictions of Old World diseases , war and overwork in the mines and encomiendas took a heavy toll on the inhabitants of eastern Guatemala , to the extent that indigenous population levels never recovered to their pre @-@ conquest levels . 
 = = Francisco de Montejo in Yucatán , 1527 – 28 = = 
 The richer lands of Mexico engaged the main attention of the Conquistadors for some years , then in 1526 Francisco de Montejo ( a veteran of the Grijalva and Cortés expeditions ) successfully petitioned the King of Spain for the right to conquer Yucatán . On 8 December of that year he was issued with the hereditary military title of adelantado and permission to colonise the Yucatán Peninsula . In 1527 he left Spain with 400 men in four ships , with horses , small arms , cannon and provisions . One of the ships was left at Santo Domingo as a supply ship to provide later support ; the other ships set sail and reached Cozumel , an island off the east coast of Yucatán , in the second half of September 1527 . Montejo was received in there in peace by the lord Aj Naum Pat . The ships only stopped briefly before making for the mainland , making landfall somewhere near Xelha in the Maya province of Ekab . 
 Montejo garrisoned Xelha with 40 soldiers and posted 20 more at nearby Pole . Xelha was renamed Salamanca de Xelha and became the first Spanish settlement in the peninsula . The provisions were soon exhausted and additional food was requisitioned from the local Maya villagers ; this too was soon consumed . Many local Maya fled into the forest and Spanish raiding parties scoured the surrounding area for food , finding little . With discontent growing among his men , Montejo took the drastic step of burning his ships ; this strengthened the resolve of his troops , who gradually acclimatised to the harsh conditions of Yucatán . Montejo was able to get more food from the still @-@ friendly Aj <unk> Pat of Cozumel . Montejo took 125 men and set out on an expedition to explore the north @-@ eastern portion of the Yucatán peninsula . At Belma , Montejo gathered the leaders of the nearby Maya towns and instructed them to swear loyalty to the Spanish Crown . After this , Montejo led his men to Conil , a town in Ekab , where the Spanish party halted for two months . 
 In the spring of 1528 , Montejo left Conil for the city of Chauaca , which was abandoned by its Maya inhabitants under cover of darkness . The following morning the inhabitants attacked the Spanish party but were defeated . The Spanish then continued to Ake , where they engaged in a major battle , which left more than 1 @,@ 200 Maya dead . After this Spanish victory , the neighbouring Maya leaders all surrendered . Montejo 's party then continued to <unk> and Loche before heading back to Xelha . Montejo arrived at Xelha with only 60 of his party , and found that only 12 of his 40 @-@ strong garrison survived , while the entire garrison at Pole had been slaughtered . 
 The support ship eventually arrived from Santo Domingo , and Montejo used it to sail south along the coast , while he sent his second @-@ in @-@ command Alonso d 'Avila via land . Montejo discovered the thriving port city of Chaktumal ( modern Chetumal ) . The Maya at Chaktumal fed false information to the Spanish , and Montejo was unable link up with d 'Avila , who returned overland to Xelha . The fledgling Spanish colony was moved to nearby Xamanha , modern Playa del Carmen , which Montejo considered to be a better port . After waiting for d 'Avila without result , Montejo sailed south as far as Honduras before turning around and heading back up the coast to finally meet up with his lieutenant at Xamanha . Late in 1528 , Montejo left d 'Avila to oversee Xamanha and sailed north to loop around the Yucatán Peninsula and head for the Spanish colony of New Spain in central Mexico . 
 = = Conquest of the Chiapas Highlands , 1527 – 1547 = = 
 Pedro de Portocarrero , a young nobleman , led the next expedition into Chiapas after Alvarado , again from Guatemala . His campaign is largely undocumented but in January 1528 he successfully established the settlement of San Cristóbal de los Llanos in the Comitán valley , in the territory of the Tojolabal Maya . This served as a base of operations that allowed the Spanish to extend their control towards the Ocosingo valley . One of the scarce mentions of Portocarrero 's campaign suggests that there was some indigenous resistance but its exact form and extent is unknown . Portocarrero established Spanish dominion over a number of Tzeltal and Tojolabal settlements , and penetrated as far as the Tzotzil town of Huixtan . 
 By 1528 , Spanish colonial power had been established in the Chiapas Highlands , and encomienda rights were being issued to individual conquistadores . Spanish dominion extended from the upper drainage of the Grijalva , across Comitán and <unk> to the Ocosingo valley . The north and northwest were incorporated into the Villa de Espíritu Santo district , that included Ch 'ol Maya territory around Tila . In the early years of conquest , encomienda rights effectively meant rights to pillage and round up slaves , usually in the form of a group of mounted conquistadores launching a lightning slave raid upon an unsuspecting population centre . Prisoners would be branded as slaves , and were sold in exchange for weapons , supplies , and horses . 
 = = = Diego Mazariegos , 1528 = = = 
 In 1528 , captain Diego Mazariegos crossed into Chiapas via the Isthmus of Tehuantepec with <unk> and raw recruits recently arrived from Spain . By this time , the indigenous population had been greatly reduced by a combination of disease and famine . They first travelled to Jiquipilas to meet up with a delegation from Zinacantan , who had asked for Spanish assistance against rebellious vassals ; a small contingent of Spanish cavalry was enough to bring these back into line . After this , Mazariegos and his companions proceeded to Chiapan and set up a temporary camp nearby , that they named Villa Real . Mazariegos had arrived with a mandate to establish a new colonial province of Chiapa in the Chiapas Highlands . He initially met with resistance from the veteran conquistadores who had already established themselves in the region . Mazariegos heard that Pedro de Portocarrero was in the highlands , and sought him out in order to persuade him to leave . The two conquistadors eventually met up in Huixtan . Mazariegos entered into protracted three @-@ month negotiations with the Spanish settlers in Coatzacoalcos ( Espíritu Santo ) and San Cristóbal de los Llanos . Eventually an agreement was reached , and the encomiendas of Espíritu Santo that lay in the highlands were merged those of San Cristóbal to form the new province . Unknown to Mazariegos , the king had already issued an order that the settlements of San Cristóbal de los Llanos be transferred to Pedro de Alvarado . The end result of the negotiations between Mazariegos and the established settlers was that Villa de San Cristóbal de los Llanos was broken up , and those settlers who wished to remain were transferred to Villa Real , which had been moved to the fertile Jovel valley . Pedro de Portocarrero left Chiapas , and he returned to Guatemala . Mazariegos proceeded with the policy of moving the Indians into reducciones ; this process was made easier by the much reduced indigenous population levels . Mazariegos issued licences of encomienda covering still unconquered regions in order to encourage colonists to conquer new territory . The Province of Chiapa had no coastal territory , and at the end of this process about 100 Spanish settlers were concentrated in the remote provincial capital at Villa Real , surrounded by hostile Indian settlements , and with deep internal divisions . 
 = = = Rebellion in the Chiapas Highlands , 1528 = = = 
 Although Mazariegos had managed to establish his new provincial capital without armed conflict , excessive Spanish demands for labour and supplies soon provoked the locals into rebellion . In August 1528 , Mazariegos replaced the existing encomenderos with his friends and allies ; the natives , seeing the Spanish isolated and witnessing the hostility between the original and newly arrived settlers , took this opportunity to rebel and refused to supply their new masters . Zinacantán was the only indigenous settlement that remained loyal to the Spanish . 
 Villa Real was now surrounded by hostile territory , and any Spanish help was too far away to be of value . The colonists quickly ran short of food and responded by taking up arms and riding against the Indians in search of food and slaves . The Indians abandoned their towns and hid their women and children in caves . The rebellious populations concentrated themselves on easily defended mountaintops . At Quetzaltepeque a lengthy battle was fought between the Tzeltal Maya and the Spanish , resulting in the deaths of a number of Spanish . The battle lasted several days , and the Spanish were supported by indigenous warriors from central Mexico . The battle eventually resulted in a Spanish victory , but the rest of the province of Chiapa remained rebellious . 
 After the battle of Quetzaltepeque , Villa Real was still short on food and Mazariegos was ill ; he retreated to Copanaguastla against the protests of the town council , which was left to defend the fledgling colony . By now , Nuño de Guzmán was governor in Mexico , and he despatched Juan Enríquez de Guzmán to Chiapa as end @-@ of @-@ term judge over Mazariegos , and as alcalde mayor ( a local colonial governor ) . He occupied his post for a year , during which time he attempted to reestablish Spanish control over the province , especially the northern and eastern regions , but was unable to make much headway . 
 = = = Founding of Ciudad Real , Chiapa , 1531 – 1535 = = = 
 In 1531 , Pedro de Alvarado finally took up the post of governor of Chiapa . He immediately reinstated the old name of San Cristóbal de los Llanos upon Villa Real . Once again , the encomiendas of Chiapa were transferred to new owners . The Spanish launched an expedition against Puyumatlan ; it was not successful in terms of conquest , but enabled the Spanish to seize more slaves to trade for weapons and horses . The newly acquired supplies would then be used in further expeditions to conquer and pacify still @-@ independent regions , leading to a cycle of slave raids , trade for supplies , followed by further conquests and slave raids . The Mazariegos family managed to establish a power base in the local colonial institutions and , in 1535 , they succeeded in having San Cristóbal de los Llanos declared a city , with the new name of Ciudad Real . They also managed to acquire special privileges from the Crown in order to stabilise the colony , such as an edict that specified that the governor of Chiapa must govern in person and not through a delegated representative . In practise , the quick turnover of encomiendas continued , since few Spaniards had legal Spanish wives and legitimate children who could inherit . This situation would not stabilise until the 1540s , when the dire shortage of Spanish women in the colony was alleviated by an influx of new colonists . 
 = = = Establishment of the Dominicans in Chiapa , 1545 – 1547 = = = 
 In 1542 , the New Laws were issued with the aim of protecting the indigenous peoples of the Spanish colonies from their overexploitation by the encomenderos . Friar Bartolomé de las Casas and his followers left Spain in July 1544 to enforce the New Laws . Las Casas arrived in Ciudad Real with 16 fellow Dominicans on 12 March 1545 . The Dominicans were the first religious order to attempt the evangelisation of the native population . Their arrival meant that the colonists were no longer free to treat the natives as they saw fit without the risk of intervention by the religious authorities . The Dominicans soon came into conflict with the established colonists . Colonial opposition to the Dominicans was such that the Dominicans were forced to flee Ciudad Real in fear of their lives . They established themselves nearby in two indigenous villages , the old site of Villa Real de Chiapa and Cinacantlán . From Villa Real , Bartolomé de las Casas and his companions prepared for the evangelisation of all the territory that fell within the Bishopric of Chiapa . The Dominicans promoted the veneration of Santiago Matamoros ( St. James the Moor @-@ slayer ) as a readily identifiable image of Spanish military superiority . The Dominicans soon saw the need to reestablish themselves in Ciudad Real , and the hostilities with the colonists were calmed . In 1547 , the first stone for the new Dominican convent in Ciudad Real was placed . 
 = = Francisco de Montejo and Alonso d 'Avila , Yucatán 1531 – 35 = = 
 Montejo was appointed alcalde mayor ( a local colonial governor ) of Tabasco in 1529 , and pacified that province with the aid of his son , also named Francisco de Montejo . D 'Avila was sent from eastern Yucatán to conquer Acalan , which extended southeast of the Laguna de <unk> . Montejo the Younger founded Salamanca de Xicalango as a base of operations . In 1530 d 'Avila established Salamanca de Acalán as a base from which to launch new attempts to conquer Yucatán . Salamanca de Acalán proved a disappointment , with no gold for the taking and with lower levels of population than had been hoped . D 'Avila soon abandoned the new settlement and set off across the lands of the Kejache to Champotón , arriving there towards the end of 1530 , where he was later joined by the Montejos . 
 In 1531 Montejo moved his base of operations to Campeche . Alonso d 'Avila was sent overland to the east of the peninsula , passing through Maní where he was well received by the Xiu Maya . D 'Avila continued southeast to Chetumal where he founded the Spanish town of Villa Real just within the borders of modern Belize . The local Maya fiercely resisted the placement of the new Spanish colony and d 'Avila and his men were forced to abandon it and make for Honduras in canoes . 
 At Campeche , a strong Maya force attacked the city , but was repulsed by the Spanish . Aj Canul , the lord of the attacking Maya , surrendered to the Spanish . After this battle , the younger Francisco de Montejo was despatched to the northern Cupul province , where the lord Naabon Cupul reluctantly allowed him to found the Spanish town of Ciudad Real at Chichen Itza . Montejo parcelled out the province amongst his soldiers as encomiendas . After six months of Spanish rule , Naabon Cupul was killed during a failed attempt to kill Montejo the Younger . The death of their lord only served to inflame Cupul anger and , in mid 1533 , they laid siege to the small Spanish garrison at Chichen Itza . Montejo the Younger abandoned Ciudad Real by night , and he and his men fled west , where the Chel , Pech and Xiu provinces remained obedient to Spanish rule . Montejo the Younger was received in friendship by the lord of the Chel province . In the spring of 1534 he rejoined his father in the Chakan province at Dzikabal , ( near modern Mérida ) . 
 The Xiu Maya maintained their friendship with the Spanish throughout the conquest and Spanish authority was eventually established over Yucatán in large part due to Xiu support . The Montejos founded a new Spanish town at Dzilam , although the Spanish suffered hardships there . Montejo the Elder returned to Campeche , where he was received with friendship by the local Maya . He was accompanied by the friendly Chel lord Namux Chel . Montejo the Younger remained behind in Dzilam to continue his attempts at conquest of the region but soon retreated to Campeche to rejoin his father and Alonso d 'Avila , who had returned to Campeche shortly beforehand . Around this time the news began to arrive of Francisco Pizarro 's conquests in Peru and the rich plunder there . Montejo 's soldiers began to abandon him to seek their fortune elsewhere ; in seven years of attempted conquest in the northern provinces of the Yucatán Peninsula , very little gold had been found . Towards the end of 1534 or the beginning of the next year , Montejo the Elder and his son retreated to Veracruz , taking their remaining soldiers with them . 
 Montejo the Elder became embroiled in colonial infighting over the right to rule Honduras , a claim that put him in conflict with Pedro de Alvarado , captain general of Guatemala , who also claimed Honduras as part of his jurisdiction . Alvarado was ultimately to prove successful . In Montejo the Elder 's absence , first in central Mexico , and then in Honduras , Montejo the Younger acted as lieutenant governor and captain general in Tabasco . 
 = = = Conflict at Champoton = = = 
 The Franciscan friar Jacobo de Testera arrived in Champoton in 1535 to attempt the peaceful incorporation of Yucatán into the Spanish Empire . His initial efforts were proving successful when Captain Lorenzo de Godoy arrived in Champoton at the command of soldiers despatched there by Montejo the Younger . Godoy and Testera were soon in conflict and the friar was forced to abandon Champoton and return to central Mexico . Godoy 's attempt to subdue the Maya around Champoton was unsuccessful , so Montejo the Younger sent his cousin to take command ; his diplomatic overtures to the Champoton Kowoj were successful and they submitted to Spanish rule . Champoton was the last Spanish outpost in the Yucatán Peninsula ; it was increasingly isolated and the situation there became difficult . 
 = = San Marcos : Province of Tecusitlán and Lacandón , 1533 = = 
 In 1533 Pedro de Alvarado ordered de León y Cardona to explore and conquer the area around the <unk> , Tajumulco , Lacandón and San Antonio volcanoes ; in colonial times this area was referred to as the Province of Tecusitlán and Lacandón . De León marched to a Maya city named <unk> by his Nahuatl @-@ speaking allies with a force of fifty Spaniards ; his Mexican allies also referred to the city by the name <unk> . De León renamed the city as San Pedro Sacatepéquez . The Spanish founded a village nearby at <unk> in April that year , renaming it as San Marcos . 
 = = Campaigns in the Cuchumatanes and Lacandon Forest = = 
 In the ten years after the fall of Zaculeu various Spanish expeditions crossed into the Sierra de los Cuchumatanes and engaged in the gradual and complex conquest of the Chuj and Q 'anjob 'al . The Spanish were attracted to the region in the hope of extracting gold , silver and other riches from the mountains but their remoteness , the difficult terrain and relatively low population made their conquest and exploitation extremely difficult . The population of the Cuchumatanes is estimated to have been 260 @,@ 000 before European contact . By the time the Spanish physically arrived in the region this had collapsed to 150 @,@ 000 because of the effects of the Old World diseases that had run ahead of them . 
 = = = Eastern Cuchumatanes , 1529 – 1530 = = = 
 After Zaculeu fell to the Spanish , the Ixil and Uspantek Maya were sufficiently isolated to evade immediate Spanish attention . The Uspantek and the Ixil were allies and in 1529 Uspantek warriors were harassing Spanish forces and the city of Uspantán was trying to foment rebellion among the K 'iche ' ; the Spanish decided that military action was necessary . Gaspar Arias , magistrate of Guatemala , penetrated the eastern Cuchumatanes with sixty Spanish infantry and three hundred allied indigenous warriors . By early September he had imposed temporary Spanish authority over the Ixil towns of Chajul and Nebaj . The Spanish army then marched east toward Uspantán ; Arias then handed command over to the inexperienced Pedro de Olmos and returned to the capital . Olmos then launched a disastrous full @-@ scale frontal assault on the city . As soon as the Spanish attacked , they were ambushed from the rear by over two thousand Uspantek warriors . The Spanish forces were routed with heavy losses ; many of their indigenous allies were slain , and many more were captured alive by the Uspantek warriors only to be sacrificed . 
 A year later Francisco de Castellanos set out from Santiago de los Caballeros de Guatemala ( by now relocated to Ciudad Vieja ) on another expedition , leading eight corporals , thirty @-@ two cavalry , forty Spanish infantry and several hundred allied indigenous warriors . The expedition recruited further forces on the march north to the Cuchumatanes . On the steep southern slopes they clashed with between four and five thousand Ixil warriors ; a lengthy battle followed during which the Spanish cavalry outflanked the Ixil army and forced them to retreat to their mountaintop fortress at Nebaj . The Spanish besieged the city , and their indigenous allies managed to penetrate the stronghold and set it on fire . This allowed the Spanish to storm the entrance and break the defences . The victorious Spanish branded surviving warriors as slaves . The inhabitants of Chajul immediately capitulated to the Spanish as soon as news of the battle reached them . The Spanish continued east towards Uspantán to find it defended by ten thousand warriors , including forces from <unk> , <unk> , Sacapulas and Verapaz . Although heavily outnumbered , the Spanish cavalry and firearms decided the battle . The Spanish overran Uspantán and again branded all surviving warriors as slaves . The surrounding towns also surrendered , and December 1530 marked the end of the military stage of the conquest of the Cuchumatanes . 
 = = = Western <unk> and Lacandon Forest , 1529 – 1686 = = = 
 In 1529 the Chuj city of San Mateo Ixtatán ( then known by the name of <unk> ) was given in encomienda to the conquistador Gonzalo de Ovalle together with Santa Eulalia and <unk> . In 1549 , the first reduction ( reducción in Spanish ) of San Mateo Ixtatán took place , overseen by Dominican missionaries , in the same year the Q 'anjob 'al reducción settlement of Santa Eulalia was founded . Further Q 'anjob 'al reducciones were in place by 1560 . Q 'anjob 'al resistance was largely passive , based on withdrawal to the inaccessible mountains and forests . In 1586 the Mercedarian Order built the first church in Santa Eulalia . The Chuj of San Mateo Ixtatán remained rebellious and resisted Spanish control for longer than their highland neighbours , resistance that was possible owing to their alliance with the lowland Lakandon Ch 'ol to the north . 
 By the mid @-@ 16th century , the Spanish frontier expanding outwards from Comitán and Ocosingo reached the Lacandon Forest , and further advancement was impeded by the region 's fiercely independent inhabitants . At the time of Spanish contact in the 16th century , the Lacandon Forest was inhabited by Ch 'ol people referred to as Lakam Tun . This name was <unk> to Lacandon . The Lakandon were aggressive , and their numbers were swelled by refugees from neighbouring indigenous groups fleeing Spanish domination . The ecclesiastical authorities were so worried by this threat to their peaceful efforts at evangelisation that they eventually supported military intervention . The first Spanish expedition against the Lakandon was carried out in 1559 , commanded by Pedro Ramírez de Quiñones . Repeated expeditions into the Lacandon Forest succeeded in destroying some villages but did not manage to subdue the inhabitants of the region , nor bring it within the Spanish Empire . This successful resistance against Spanish attempts at domination served to attract ever more Indians fleeing colonial rule . 
 In 1684 , a council led by Enrique Enríquez de Guzmán , the governor of Guatemala , decided on the reduction of San Mateo Ixtatán and nearby Santa Eulalia . On 29 January 1686 , Captain Melchor Rodríguez Mazariegos , acting under orders from the governor , left Huehuetenango for San Mateo Ixtatán , where he recruited indigenous warriors from the nearby villages . To prevent news of the Spanish advance reaching the inhabitants of the Lacandon area , the governor ordered the capture of three of San Mateo 's community leaders , and had them sent under guard to be imprisoned in Huehuetenango . The governor joined Captain Rodríguez Mazariegos in San Mateo Ixtatán on 3 February ; he ordered the captain to remain in the village and use it as a base of operations for penetrating the Lacandon region . Two Spanish missionaries also remained in the town . Governor Enriquez de Guzmán subsequently left San Mateo Ixtatán for Comitán in Chiapas , to enter the Lacandon region via Ocosingo . 
 = = = Conquest of the Lakandon , 1695 – 1696 = = = 
 In 1695 the colonial authorities decided to act upon a plan to connect the province of Guatemala with Yucatán , and a three @-@ way invasion of the Lacandon was launched simultaneously from San Mateo Ixtatán , Cobán and Ocosingo . Captain Rodriguez Mazariegos , accompanied by Fray de Rivas and 6 other missionaries together with 50 Spanish soldiers , left Huehuetenango for San Mateo Ixtatán . Following the same route used in 1686 , they managed on the way to recruit 200 indigenous Maya warriors from Santa Eulalia , San Juan <unk> and San Mateo . On 28 February 1695 , all three groups left their respective bases of operations to conquer the Lacandon . The San Mateo group headed northeast into the Lacandon Jungle , and joined up with Jacinto de Barrios Leal , president of the Royal Audiencia of Guatemala . 
 The soldiers commanded by Barrios Leal conquered a number of Ch 'ol communities . The most important of these was Sakb 'ajlan on the Lacantún River , which was renamed as Nuestra Señora de Dolores , or Dolores del Lakandon , in April 1695 . The Spanish built a fort and garrisoned it with 30 Spanish soldiers . Mercederian friar Diego de Rivas was based at Dolores del Lakandon , and he and his fellow Mercederians baptised several hundred Lakandon Ch 'ols in the following months and established contacts with neighbouring Ch 'ol communities . The third group , under Juan Díaz de Velasco , marched from Verapaz against the Itza of northern Petén . Barrios Leal was accompanied by Franciscan friar Antonio Margil , who remained in Dolores del Lakandon until 1697 . The Ch 'ol of the Lacandon Forest were resettled in Huehuetenango , in the Guatemalan Highlands , in the early 18th century . 
 = = Land of War : Verapaz , 1537 – 1555 = = 
 By 1537 the area immediately north of the new colony of Guatemala was being referred to as the Tierra de Guerra ( " Land of War " ) . Paradoxically , it was simultaneously known as Verapaz ( " True Peace " ) . The Land of War described an area that was undergoing conquest ; it was a region of dense forest that was difficult for the Spanish to penetrate militarily . Whenever the Spanish located a centre of population in this region , the inhabitants were moved and concentrated in a new colonial settlement near the edge of the jungle where the Spanish could more easily control them . This strategy resulted in the gradual depopulation of the forest , simultaneously converting it into a wilderness refuge for those fleeing Spanish domination , both for individual refugees and for entire communities . The Land of War , from the 16th century through to the start of the 18th century , included a vast area from Sacapulas in the west to Nito on the Caribbean coast and extended northwards from Rabinal and Salamá , and was an intermediate area between the highlands and the northern lowlands . 
 Dominican friar Bartolomé de las Casas arrived in the colony of Guatemala in 1537 and immediately campaigned to replace violent military conquest with peaceful missionary work . Las Casas offered to achieve the conquest of the Land of War through the preaching of the Catholic faith . 
 In this way they congregated a group of Christian Indians in the location of what is now the town of Rabinal . Las Casas was instrumental in the introduction of the New Laws in 1542 , established by the Spanish Crown to control the excesses of the colonists against the indigenous inhabitants of the Americas . As a result , the Dominicans met substantial resistance from the Spanish colonists ; this distracted the Dominicans from their efforts to establish peaceful control over the Land of War . 
 In 1555 Spanish friar Domingo de Vico offended a local Ch 'ol ruler and was killed by the Acala Ch 'ol and their Lakandon allies . In response to the killing , a punitive expedition was launched , headed by Juan <unk> , a Q 'eqchi ' leader from <unk> ; the independent Indians captured by the Q 'eqchi ' expedition were taken back to Cobán and resettled in Santo Tomás Apóstol . 
 The Dominicans established themselves in Xocolo on the shore of Lake Izabal in the mid @-@ 16th century . Xocolo became infamous among the Dominican missionaries for the practice of witchcraft by its inhabitants . By 1574 it was the most important staging post for European expeditions into the interior , and it remained important in that role until as late as 1630 , although it was abandoned in 1631 . 
 = = Conquest and settlement in northern Yucatán , 1540 – 46 = = 
 In 1540 Montejo the Elder , who was now in his late 60s , turned his royal rights to colonise Yucatán over to his son , Francisco Montejo the Younger . In early 1541 Montejo the Younger joined his cousin in <unk> ; he did not remain there long , and quickly moved his forces to Campeche . Once there Montejo the Younger , commanding between three and four hundred Spanish soldiers , established the first permanent Spanish town council in the Yucatán Peninsula . Shortly afterwards , Montejo the Younger summoned the local Maya lords and commanded them to submit to the Spanish Crown . A number of lords submitted peacefully , including the ruler of the Xiu Maya . The lord of the Canul Maya refused to submit and Montejo the Younger sent his cousin against them ( also called Francisco de Montejo ) ; Montejo the Younger remained in Campeche awaiting reinforcements . 
 Montejo the Younger 's cousin met the Canul Maya at Chakan , not far from T 'ho . On 6 January 1542 he founded the second permanent town council , calling the new colonial town Mérida . On 23 January , Tutul Xiu , the lord of Mani , approached the Spanish encampment at Mérida in peace . He was greatly impressed by a Roman Catholic mass celebrated for his benefit and converted to the new religion . Tutul Xiu was the ruler of the most powerful province of northern Yucatán and his submission to Spain and conversion to Christianity had repercussions throughout the peninsula , and encouraged the lords of the western provinces of the peninsula to accept Spanish rule . The eastern provinces continued to resist Spanish overtures . 
 Montejo the Younger then sent his cousin to Chauaca where most of the eastern lords greeted him in peace . The Cochua Maya resisted fiercely but were soon defeated . The Cupul Maya also opposed Spanish domination , but were quickly defeated . Montejo continued to the eastern Ekab province . When nine Spaniards were drowned in a storm off Cozumel and another was killed by hostile Maya , rumours grew in the telling and both the Cupul and Cochua provinces once again rose up against their would @-@ be overlords . The Spanish hold on the eastern portion of the peninsula remained tenuous and a number of Maya polities remained independent , including Chetumal , Cochua , Cupul , Sotuta and the Tazes . 
 On 8 November 1546 an alliance of eastern provinces launched a coordinated uprising against the Spanish . The provinces of Cupul , Cochua , Sotuta , Tazes , Uaymil , Chetumal and Chikinchel united in an effort to drive the invaders from the peninsula ; the uprising lasted four months . Eighteen Spaniards were surprised in the eastern towns , and were sacrificed , and over 400 allied Maya were killed . Mérida and Campeche were forewarned of the impending attack ; Montejo the Younger and his cousin were in Campeche . Montejo the Elder arrived in Mérida from Chiapas in December 1546 , with reinforcements gathered from Champoton and Campeche . The rebellious eastern Maya were finally defeated in a single battle , in which twenty Spaniards and several hundred allied Maya were killed . This battle marked the final conquest of the northern portion of the Yucatán Peninsula . As a result of the uprising and the Spanish response , many of the Maya inhabitants of the eastern and southern territories fled to the still unconquered Petén Basin , in the extreme south . 
 = = Southern lowlands , 1618 – 97 = = 
 The Petén Basin covers an area that is now part of Guatemala ; in colonial times it originally fell under the jurisdiction of the Governor of Yucatán , before being transferred to the jurisdiction of the Audiencia Real of Guatemala in 1703 . The Contact Period in the Petén lowlands lasted from 1525 through to 1700 . Superior Spanish weaponry and the use of cavalry , although decisive in the northern Yucatán , were ill @-@ suited to warfare in the dense forests of lowland Petén . 
 = = = Early 17th century = = = 
 The leaders of Xocolo and Amatique , backed by the threat of Spanish action , persuaded a community of 190 Toquegua to settle on the Amatique coast in April 1604 . The new settlement immediately suffered a drop in population , but although the Amatique Toquegua were reported extinct before 1613 in some sources , Mercedarian friars were still attending to them in 1625 . In 1628 the towns of the Manche Ch 'ol were placed under the administration of the governor of Verapaz , with Francisco Morán as their ecclesiastical head . Morán moved Spanish soldiers into the region to protect against raids from the Itza to the north . The new Spanish garrison in an area that had not previously seen a heavy Spanish military presence provoked the Manche to revolt , which was followed by abandonment of the indigenous settlements . 
 Following Cortés ' visit in 1525 , no Spanish attempted to visit the warlike Itza inhabitants of Nojpetén for almost a hundred years . In 1618 two Franciscan friars set out from Mérida on a mission to attempt the peaceful conversion of the still pagan Itza in central Petén . Bartolomé de Fuensalida and Juan de Orbita were accompanied by some Christianised Maya . They were well received at Nojpetén by the current Kan Ek ' . Attempts to convert the Itza failed , and the friars left Nojpetén on friendly terms with the Itza king . The friars returned in October 1619 , and again Kan Ek ' welcomed them in a friendly manner , but this time the Maya priesthood were hostile and the missionaries were expelled without food or water , but survived the journey back to Mérida . 
 In March 1622 , Captain Francisco de Mirones Lezcano set out from Yucatán with 20 Spanish soldiers and 80 Mayas to launch an assault upon the Itza . His was joined by Franciscan friar Diego Delgado . In May the expedition advanced to Sakalum , where they waited for reinforcements . En route to Nojpetén , Delgado left the expedition to make his own way to Nojpetén with eighty Christianised Maya from Tipuj in Belize ; he was joined by an escort of 13 soldiers . Soon after their arrival at the Itza capital , the Itza seized and sacrificed the Spanish party . Soon afterwards , on 27 January 1624 , an Itza war party led by AjK 'in P 'ol caught Mirones and his soldiers off guard and unarmed in the church at Sakalum and slaughtered them . Spanish reinforcements arrived too late . A number of local Maya men and women had also been killed , and the attackers burned the town . 
 Following these massacres , the Maya governor of Oxkutzcab , Fernando Kamal , set out with 150 Maya archers to track AjK 'in P 'ol down . The captured Itza captain and his followers were taken back to the Spanish Captain Antonio Méndez de Canzo , interrogated under torture , tried , and executed . These events ended all Spanish attempts to contact the Itza until 1695 . In the 1640s internal strife in Spain distracted the government from attempts to conquer unknown lands ; the Spanish Crown lacked the time , money or interest in such colonial adventures for the next four decades . 
 = = = Late 17th century = = = 
 In 1692 Basque nobleman Martín de Ursúa y Arizmendi proposed to the Spanish king the construction of a road from Mérida southwards to link with the Guatemalan colony , in the process " reducing " any independent native populations into colonial congregaciones ; this was part of a greater plan to subjugate the Lakandon and Manche Ch 'ol of southern Petén and the upper reaches of the Usumacinta River . At the beginning of March 1695 , Captain Alonso García de Paredes led a group of 50 Spanish soldiers south into Kejache territory , accompanied by native guides , muleteers and labourers . He rounded up some natives to be moved into colonial settlements , but met with armed Kejache resistance , and retreated around the middle of April . 
 In March 1695 , Captain Juan Díaz de Velasco set out from Cahabón in Alta Verapaz , Guatemala , with 70 Spanish soldiers , accompanied by a large number of Maya archers from Verapaz , native muleteers , and four Dominican friars . They pressed ahead to Lake Petén Itzá and engaged in a series of fierce skirmishes with Itza hunting parties . At the lakeshore , the Spanish encountered such a large force of Itzas that they retreated south , back to their main camp . The expedition almost immediately withdrew back to Cahabón . 
 In mid @-@ May 1695 García again marched southwards from Campeche , with 115 Spanish soldiers and 150 Maya musketeers , plus Maya labourers and muleteers . The expedition was joined by two companies of Maya musketeers . García ordered the construction of a fort at Chuntuki , some 25 leagues ( approximately 65 miles or 105 km ) north of Lake Petén Itzá , which served as the main military base for the Camino Real ( " Royal Road " ) project . 
 The Sajkab 'chen company of native musketeers engaged in a skirmish with about 25 Kejache near the abandoned Kejache town of Chunpich . Several musketeers were injured , and the Kejache retreated without injury . The company seized large amounts of abandoned food from two more deserted settlements and then also retreated . A small group of Franciscans led by friar Andrés de Avendaño sought out the Chunpich Kejache that had engaged the Sajkab 'chen musketeers but were unable to find them , and Avendaño returned to Mérida . Meanwhile , another group of Franciscans continued following the roadbuilders into Kejache territory . Around 3 August García moved his entire army forward to Chunpich , and by October Spanish soldiers had established themselves near the source of the San Pedro River . By November Tzuktok ' was garrisoned with 86 soldiers and more at Chuntuki . In December 1695 the main force was reinforced with 250 soldiers , of which 150 were Spanish and pardo and 100 were Maya , together with labourers and muleteers . 
 = = = = Franciscan expeditions , September 1695 – January 1696 = = = = 
 Juan de San Buenaventura 's small group of Franciscans arrived in Chuntuki on 30 August 1695 . In early November 1695 , two Franciscans were sent to establish a mission at Pak 'ek 'em , where they were well received by the cacique ( native chief ) and his pagan priest . Pak 'ek 'em was sufficiently far from the new Spanish road that it was free from military interference , and the friars oversaw the building of a church in what was the largest mission town in Kejache territory . A second church was built at B 'atkab ' to attend to over 100 K 'ejache refugees who had been gathered there under the stewardship of a Spanish friar ; a further church was established at Tzuktok ' , overseen by another friar . 
 Franciscan Andrés de Avendaño left Mérida on 13 December 1695 , and arrived in Nojpetén around 14 January 1696 , accompanied by four companions . The Franciscans baptised over 300 Itza children over the following four days . Avendaño tried to convince Kan Ek ' to convert to Christianity and surrender to the Spanish Crown , without success . The king of the Itza , cited Itza prophecy and said the time was not yet right . Kan Ek ' learnt of a plot by the Kowoj and their allies to ambush and kill the Franciscans , and the Itza king advised them to return to Mérida via Tipuj . 
 = = = = February – March 1696 = = = = 
 When Captain García de Paredes arrived at Chuntuki in mid @-@ January , he only had 90 soldiers plus labourers . Captain Pedro de Zubiaur , García ’ s senior officer , arrived at Lake Petén Itza with 60 musketeers , two Franciscans , and allied Yucatec Maya warriors . They were also accompanied by about 40 Maya porters . They were approached by about 300 canoes carrying approximately 2 @,@ 000 Itza warriors . The warriors mingled freely with the Spanish party and the encounter degenerated into a skirmish . About a dozen of the Spanish party were seized , and three were killed . The Spanish soldiers opened fire with their muskets , and the Itza retreated across the lake with their prisoners , who included the two Franciscans . The Spanish party retreated from the lake shore and regrouped on open ground where they were surrounded by thousands of Itza warriors . Zubiaur ordered his men to fire a volley that killed between 30 and 40 Itzas . Realising that they were hopelessly outnumbered , the Spanish retreated towards Chuntuki , abandoning their captured companions . Martín de Ursúa now began to organise an all @-@ out assault on Nojpetén . Work on the road was redoubled and about a month after the battle at Ch 'ich ' the Spanish arrived at the lakeshore , now supported by artillery . 
 A Guatemalan expedition against the Itza set out from Cahabón in early 1696 . An advance party was led into an Itza trap and 87 expedition members were lost , including 50 soldiers , two Dominicans and about 35 Maya helpers . The rest of the party arrived at the shore of Lake Petén Itzá , but quickly retreated back to Guatemala . 
 = = = = Assault on Nojpetén = = = = 
 Martín de Urzúa y Arizmendi arrived on the western shore of Lake Petén Itzá with his soldiers on 26 February 1697 . Once there they built a heavily @-@ armed galeota attack boat , which carried 114 men and at least five artillery pieces . On 10 March , Ursúa received a mixed Itza and Yalain embassy in peace , and invited Kan Ek ' to visit his encampment three days later . On the appointed day , Kan Ek ' failed to arrive ; instead Maya warriors amassed both along the shore and in canoes upon the lake . That morning , a waterbourne assault was launched upon Kan Ek 's capital . The galeota , commanded by Ursúa , rowed east with 108 soldiers ; half way across the lake it encountered a large fleet of canoes blocking the approach to Nojpetén – and simply rowed through them . A large quantity of defenders had gathered along the shore of Nojpetén and on the roofs of the city . Itza archers shot at the invaders from the canoes , but the defending Itza soon fled from the withering Spanish gunfire . 
 The city fell after a brief but bloody battle in which many Itza warriors died ; the Spanish suffered only minor casualties . After the battle the surviving defenders swam across to the mainland and melted away into the forests , leaving the Spanish to occupy the abandoned town . Martín de Ursúa renamed Nojpetén as Nuestra Señora de los Remedios y San Pablo , Laguna del Itza ( " Our Lady of Remedy and Saint Paul , Lake of the Itza " ) . Kan Ek ' was soon captured with help from the Yalain Maya ruler Chamach Xulu ; The Kowoj king was also soon captured , together with other Maya nobles and their families . With the defeat of the Itza , the last independent and unconquered native kingdom in the Americas fell to the European colonisers . 
 = = Final years of conquest = = 
 During the campaign to conquer the Itza of Petén , the Spanish sent expeditions to harass and relocate the Mopan north of Lake Izabal and the Ch 'ol Maya of the Amatique forests to the east . They were resettled on the south shore of the lake . By the latter half of the 18th century , the local inhabitants consisted entirely of Spaniards , mulattos and others of mixed race , all associated with the Castillo de San Felipe de Lara fort guarding the entrance to Lake Izabal . There was a drastic depopulation of Lake Izabal and the Motagua Delta due to constant slave raids by the Miskito <unk> of the Caribbean coast that effectively ended the Maya population of the region ; the captured Maya were sold into slavery in the British colony of Jamaica . 
 In the late 17th century the small population of Ch 'ol Maya in southern Petén and Belize was forcibly removed to Alta Verapaz , where the people were absorbed into the Q 'eqchi ' population . The Ch 'ol of the Lacandon Jungle were resettled in Huehuetenango in the early 18th century . By 1699 the neighbouring Toquegua no longer existed as a separate people because of a combination of high mortality and intermarriage with the Amatique Indians . At around this time the Spanish decided on the reduction of the independent Mopan Maya living to the north of Lake Izabal . Catholic priests from Yucatán founded several mission towns around Lake Petén Itzá in 1702 – 1703 . Surviving Itza and Kowoj were resettled in the new colonial towns by a mixture of persuasion and force . Kowoj and Itza leaders in these mission towns rebelled in 1704 , but although well @-@ planned , the rebellion was quickly crushed . Its leaders were executed and most of the mission towns were abandoned . By 1708 only about 6 @,@ 000 Maya remained in central Petén , compared to ten times that number in 1697 . Although disease was responsible for the majority of deaths , Spanish expeditions and internecine warfare between indigenous groups also played their part . 
 = = Legacy of the Spanish conquest = = 
 The initial shock of the Spanish conquest was followed by decades of heavy exploitation of the indigenous peoples , allies and foes alike . Over the following two hundred years colonial rule gradually imposed Spanish cultural standards on the subjugated peoples . The Spanish reducciones created new nucleated settlements laid out in a grid pattern in the Spanish style , with a central plaza , a church and the town hall housing the civil government , known as the ayuntamiento . This style of settlement can still be seen in the villages and towns of the area . The introduction of Catholicism was the main vehicle for cultural change , and resulted in religious syncretism . Old World cultural elements came to be thoroughly adopted by Maya groups . The greatest change was replacement of the pre @-@ Columbian economic order by European technology and livestock ; this included the introduction of iron and steel tools to replace Neolithic tools , and of cattle , pigs and chickens . New crops were also introduced ; however , sugarcane and coffee led to plantations that economically exploited native labour . Some indigenous elites such as the Xajil Kaqchikel noble family did manage to maintain a level of status into the colonial period . During the second half of the 18th century , adult male Indians were heavily taxed , often being forced into debt peonage . Western Petén and neighbouring Chiapas remained sparsely populated , and the Maya inhabitants avoided contact with the Spanish . 
 = = Historical sources = = 
 The sources describing the Spanish conquest of Guatemala include those written by the Spanish themselves , among them two letters written by conquistador Pedro de Alvarado in 1524 , describing the initial campaign to subjugate the Guatemalan Highlands . Gonzalo de Alvarado y Chávez wrote an account that mostly supports that of Pedro de Alvarado . Pedro de Alvarado 's brother Jorge wrote another account to the king of Spain that explained it was his own campaign of 1527 – 1529 that established the Spanish colony . Bernal Díaz del Castillo wrote a lengthy account of the conquest of Mexico and neighbouring regions , the Historia verdadera de la conquista de la Nueva España ( " True History of the Conquest of New Spain " ) ; his account of the conquest of Guatemala generally agrees with that of the Alvarados . He also included his own description of Cortes ' expedition , and an account of the conquest of the Chiapas highlands . Conquistador Diego Godoy accompanied Luis Marín on his reconnaissance of Chiapas , and wrote an account of the battle against the inhabitants of Chamula . Hernán Cortés described his expedition to Honduras in the fifth letter of his Cartas de Relación . Dominican friar Bartolomé de las Casas wrote a highly critical account of the Spanish conquest of the Americas and included accounts of some incidents in Guatemala . 
 The Tlaxcalan allies of the Spanish wrote their own accounts of the conquest ; these included a letter to the Spanish king protesting at their poor treatment once the campaign was over . Other accounts were in the form of questionnaires answered before colonial magistrates to protest and register a claim for recompense . Two pictorial accounts painted in the stylised indigenous pictographic tradition have survived ; these are the Lienzo de <unk> , and the Lienzo de Tlaxcala . Accounts of the conquest as seen from the point of view of the defeated highland Maya kingdoms are included in a number of indigenous documents , including the Annals of the Kaqchikels . A letter from the defeated Tz 'utujil Maya nobility to the Spanish king written in 1571 details the exploitation of the subjugated peoples . Francisco Antonio de Fuentes y Guzmán was a colonial Guatemalan historian of Spanish descent who wrote La Recordación Florida . The book was written in 1690 and is regarded as one of the most important works of Guatemalan history . Field investigation has tended to support the estimates of indigenous population and army sizes given by Fuentes y Guzmán . 
 In 1688 colonial historian Diego López de <unk> detailed the expeditions of the Spanish missionaries in 1618 and 1619 in his Los tres siglos de la <unk> española en Yucatán o sea historia de esta provincia ( " The three centuries of Spanish domination in Yucatán , or the history of this province " ) ; he based it upon Fuensalida 's report , which is now lost . 
 Franciscan friar Andrés Avendaño y Loyola recorded his own account of his late 17th century journeys to Nojpetén . When the Spanish finally conquered Petén in 1697 they produced a vast quantity of documentation . Juan de <unk> Soto @-@ Mayor was a Spanish colonial official who wrote the Historia de la Conquista de la Provincia de el Itza , <unk> , y <unk> de la de el Lacandon , y otras <unk> de indios <unk> , de la <unk> de el <unk> de <unk> , a las <unk> del Yucatan en la América Septentrional ( " History of the Conquest of the Province of the Itza , reduction , and advances in that of the Lacandon , and other nations of barbarous indians , and the intervention of the Kingdom of Guatemala , and the provinces of Yucatan in Northern America " ) . This detailed the history of Petén from 1525 through to 1699 . 
 = Editors ( band ) = 
 Editors are an English rock band , formed in 2002 in Stafford . Previously known as Pilot , The Pride and Snowfield , the band currently consists of Tom Smith ( lead vocals , guitar , piano ) , Russell Leetch ( bass guitar , synthesizer , backing vocals ) , Ed Lay ( drums , percussion , backing vocals ) , Justin Lockey ( lead guitar ) , and Elliott Williams ( keys , synthesizers , guitars , and backing vocals ) . 
 Editors have so far released two platinum studio albums , and five in total , with several million combined sales . Their debut album The Back Room was released in 2005 . It contained the hits " Munich " and " Blood " and the following year received a Mercury Prize nomination . 
 Their follow @-@ up album An End Has a Start went to number 1 in the UK Album Chart in June 2007 and earned the band a Brit Awards nomination for best British Band . It also spawned another Top 10 hit single , " Smokers Outside the Hospital Doors " . The band 's third album , In This Light and on This Evening , was released in October 2009 and went straight to number 1 in the UK Album Chart . The band released their fourth studio album , The Weight of Your Love , in July 2013 , followed by self @-@ produced In Dream in October 2015 . 
 Alongside their critical acclaim and strong success in the charts , Editors have consistently enjoyed sold @-@ out tours and numerous headlining festival slots . Their brand of dark indie rock is commonly compared to the sound of bands such as Echo & the Bunnymen , Joy Division , Interpol , The Chameleons and U2 . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Formation ( 2002 – 2004 ) = = = 
 The band met while studying Music Technology at Staffordshire University , but they realised technology wasn 't the right career for them and instead formed a band , and went on to perform in Wolverhampton , Birmingham and Stafford . 
 The band was initially known as Pilot and played its first show under this name in 2002 . While in college , the band constructed a marketing strategy which involved placing hundreds of promotional stickers across the walls of Stafford asking " Who 's the Pilot ? " . However , they realised the name was already taken by a 1970s Scottish pop group , so they changed their name to The Pride . 
 They made a promo under this name with the tracks " Come Share the View " and " Forest Fire " and then uploaded them onto the internet , making the songs available to listen to on BBC Radio 1 's <unk> Unsigned . A review of the songs reads " The Pride keep things subliminally lo @-@ fi . <unk> simple and restrained , " Come Share The View " is a lesson in welding hypnotic soundscapes with white noise while showing allegiance to the school of slo @-@ mo on " Forest Fire " " . The band then took its music offline to create mystery and anxiousness and ensure that more " A & R " representatives came to see them perform . 
 They then changed the line @-@ up with Ed Lay replacing Geraint Owen on drums as he began to focus on his Welsh band The Heights . Under this lineup they became known as Snowfield . They played their debut gig under this name at the request of Fused Magazine in March 2003 . The following summer the band self @-@ released a demo six @-@ track EP , all of which went on to become future Editors songs . Then , as it was the home of their management and the nearest big city , the band relocated to Birmingham after graduation in the autumn of 2003 . 
 For the next year , the different band members then worked part @-@ time jobs along with the rest of their work with the band . After continuous gigging around the Midlands , it wasn 't long until word of mouth helped them become a popular unsigned band . The band then sent out a one track demo cd of Bullets , earning them the interest of several British labels , with thirty A & R reps coming to see them play at Birmingham . In October 2004 , the group signed to Newcastle based indie label Kitchenware Records . Upon signing to the record label they changed their band name to Editors . 
 = = = The Back Room ( 2005 – 2006 ) = = = 
 After supporting bands such as <unk> and <unk> , Editors released debut single " Bullets " recorded with producer Gavin Monaghan as a limited edition of 1000 copies on Kitchenware Records on 24 January 2005 . The song had previously been played by BBC Radio 1 disc jockey Zane Lowe , where it earned the honour of ' Single of the Week ' . The limited run then sold out on the day of its release , with copies famously then sold later in the week for more than £ 30 on eBay . 
 The release of " Munich " followed in April of that year and gave the band their first Top 25 hit , another sold out UK tour and a place on MTV ’ s Spanking New Music show in Manchester . At this point , due to the band 's increasing popularity , Editors and Kitchenware signed an exclusive distribution deal with Sony BMG . " Blood " was released two months later , reaching number 18 in the UK Singles Chart in its first week , selling 5 @,@ 286 copies . With these releases their fanbase continued to grow and on 25 July 2005 their debut album The Back Room was released to critical acclaim and commercial success . In its first week , the album entered the charts at number 13 , selling 17 @,@ 627 copies . After re @-@ issuing " Bullets " and achieving another Top 30 hit , Editors gained a high profile support slot , supporting Franz Ferdinand in arenas across the UK and Europe . 
 Editors then re @-@ issued " Munich " in January 2006 , selling one and half thousand more copies than the last time it was released . The song gave Editors their first Top 10 single and an appearance on Top of the Pops . With the single release , The Back Room also rose back up the album charts , peaking at number 2 . It sold an additional 40 @,@ 000 copies in the week of " Munich " ' s release and went platinum in the process . A joint North American tour with Stellastarr * coincided with the American release of The Back Room in March 2006 . It was released by Fader Label and sold 35 @,@ 000 albums after 20 weeks . The band went on to play influential American festivals in 2006 such as Coachella and Lollapalooza . Editors proceeded to perform " Munich " on the American television show Late Night with Conan O 'Brien . 
 At the end of March , Editors released " All Sparks " as a single in the United Kingdom , achieving a position of 21 in the singles chart . After a European tour which included three successive nights at Brixton Academy , Editors re @-@ issued a limited edition of " Blood " . It entered the Top 40 , pushing the album up the chart 45 places . Shortly after this , The Back Room hit the million mark in sales worldwide and was also nominated for the 2006 Mercury Prize . After a string of high @-@ profile festival shows across Europe , including slots on T in the Park , V 2006 and the Isle of Wight Festival , Editors began work on their second album . 
 = = = An End Has a Start ( 2007 – 2008 ) = = = 
 Editors recorded their second album An End Has a Start with producer Jacknife Lee in Grouse Lodge , Ireland over a two @-@ month period beginning in late November 2006 . It was released on 25 June 2007 and went straight to number 1 in the UK album charts , selling 59 @,@ 405 copies in its first week . The album was preceded by the Top 10 single " Smokers Outside the Hospital Doors " on the 18th . The song was Editors ' highest @-@ charting single at number 7 and it also earned its own Making the Video episode on MTV . 
 Just after its release , Editors played at the Glastonbury Festival with a second from top slot on The Other Stage . They also played many other festivals such as Oxegen , Lowlands and Pukkelpop over the following weeks , as well as playing their first ever tour dates in Australia and New Zealand . They then released the album 's title track " An End Has a Start " in September to coincide with their North American tour . Editors went on to play the song live on American television shows such as Jimmy Kimmel Live ! and The Tonight Show with Jay Leno . 
 Upon returning to the UK , the band contributed a cover of The Cure 's " Lullaby " to the Radio 1 Established 1967 compilation , which was released on 1 October 2007 . Shortly after this , Editors played a 75 @-@ minute set for the BBC Electric Proms at <unk> in London with backing from a classical string quartet . In November , they released " The Racing Rats " as the third single off the album . Editors played it live on ' Friday Night with Jonathan Ross ' and it helped the song reach number 26 in the UK Charts . It also reached number 12 in the Dutch Top 40 , the band 's highest ever single charting outside of the UK at that point . 
 For the first two months of 2008 , Editors played 30 shows on a tour across America and Canada . During the tour Editors were nominated for a Brit Award , in the Best British Group Category . The nomination resulted in increased acclaim from the media with The Mail on Sunday newspaper declaring them as the second biggest British band of the 2000s decade after Arctic Monkeys . Also as a result of the nomination , one of the North American tour dates had to be cancelled , as the band had to return to London to attend the prize ceremony . A month later , Editors announced " Push Your Head Towards the Air " to be the fourth single from An End Has a Start . This release was a limited special edition which was ineligible to chart . Along with this release Editors engaged in their biggest and most extensive British tour to date . They played arenas such as the 12 @,@ 000 capacity National Indoor Arena in Birmingham and two sold out dates in London 's Alexandra Palace . 
 In June , they released " Bones " as a download only single in Continental Europe to coincide with the summer festival season , the video of which was directed by the band 's bassist Russell Leetch . Shortly afterwards , Editors played at the Glastonbury Festival , playing on the pyramid stage for the first time . The band then played their second major support slot of their history supporting R.E.M. on a 16 date summer tour across Europe alongside their festival dates which included the headlining of the Lowlands Festival in August . 
 = = = In This Light and on This Evening ( 2009 – 2010 ) = = = 
 Lead singer Smith revealed that the band will explore a new direction on their next album , pursuing a new , rawer sound . Before January 2009 , Editors had written around eighteen new songs for the new album and they have been described as some of the most synthetic , raw and anthemic songs they have written to date . In October the band went to the studio to record some demos . The band spent the first week of April recording the album and on 8 April , they released a short video with information about the recording process . It announced that Mark ' Flood ' Ellis would be the producer for the album . Earlier on in the year , the sound of the album was said to have a very electric feel ; the band often using the Terminator theme song as a reference . 
 On 2 June 2009 , it was announced that the new album title would be In This Light and on This Evening and that they would be the first band to play at the new O2 Academy Birmingham . Through producer Flood 's heavy usage of synthesisers , the album provided a synthpop / post @-@ punk sound to Editors ' production . Flood , who is famous for collaborating with electronic music influenced bands like U2 , Depeche Mode , The Killers and Erasure , helped develop synthetic elements on the album , which resulted in a mixed reception from long @-@ term fans as to the group 's new direction . 
 The album was released on 12 October and debuted at number one on the UK Albums Chart . Alongside the album , the band released lead single " Papillon " and it led them to their first taste of number one success outside the UK , with the song hitting the top position in Belgium and being certified Gold in the process . After releasing singles " You Don 't Know Love " , " Last Day " and " Eat Raw Meat = Blood Drool " to limited chart success , it was announced that their unreleased song " No Sound But the Wind " would appear on the New Moon soundtrack . A live version of the song was later released in continental Europe in September 2010 and again achieved the same success as " Papillon " in Belgium , going to number 1 and being certified Gold . 
 In November 2010 it was confirmed that a boxset called <unk> compiling the first 3 albums , as well as b @-@ sides and previously unreleased songs on 7 12 " vinyls , 7 CDs and 7 MP3 albums , alongside a book of photos and words , would be released in early 2011 . The boxset included the full band version of " No Sound But The Wind " , demos of " Camera " and " These Streets Are Still Home To Me " , and an unreleased version of " The Weight of the World " , called " Every Little Piece " . 
 = = = The Weight of Your Love and Urbanowicz 's departure ( 2011 – 2014 ) = = = 
 On 26 November 2010 Smith announced on the band 's website that they had started work on a new album , that it would again be produced by Flood , and that they were recording " in stages over 2011 " , and that first rehearsals started in " a matter of days " . 
 On 26 March 2011 , Editors performed their first tour date of the year at the Royal Albert Hall as the headline act for the penultimate show in the 2011 Teenage Cancer Trust , during which they showcased two new songs , " Two Hearted Spider " and " The Sting " . In October 2011 , Editors played their first shows ever in Latin America with two dates in Mexico City . 
 In October 2011 , Smith spoke to Q Radio about the new album . " It 's still going to be fairly electronic , I think , compared to our earlier records . So far it feels quite muscular with a bit of swagger and a bit more of a groove . The last record was liberating in lots of different ways and I think we just need to , kind of , build on that ..... with a nod to our past as well . It 's our fourth record and we don 't want to feel like we 're doing the same thing again . " 
 On 22 November 2011 , Russell Leetch , the band 's bassist posted on the band 's official site saying they have seven songs ready to record and some more ideas " floating around " and that the album " will be with you next year . " 
 On 16 April 2012 , it was announced that Chris Urbanowicz had left the group due to a difference in musical direction . 
 Following Urbanowicz 's departure the band played their first shows as a five piece with new members Justin Lockey and Elliot Williams in Birmingham , UK on 26 and 27 June 2012 . On 29 June , they played at Main Square Festival in Arras , France , and on 30 June they headlined Rock Werchter festival in Belgium . At the shows they played new versions of " Two Hearted Spider " and " The Sting " as well as two new songs , " Sugar " and " Nothing " . 
 On 8 April 2013 Tom Smith stated , via his official Twitter account , that " the record is being mastered <unk> it 's <unk> done . " 
 On 6 May 2013 Zane Lowe stated , via his official Twitter account , that the new Editors record would be entitled The Weight of Your Love . The first single for this album is " A Ton of Love " . In February 2014 the band released their fourth single , " Sugar " . 
 During 2014 , Elliot Williams left the band for a period of touring to work on his own music project <unk> , supporting The 1975 . The band continued to tour with musician Nicholas Willes . 
 = = = In Dream ( 2014 – present ) = = = 
 In October 2014 , the band reconvened in Scotland to work on their fifth album . During a session supporting Andy Burrows on Jo Wiley 's Radio 2 show , Tom Smith confirmed the album 's songs had been written . 
 On 20 April 2015 , the band released a new song entitled ' No Harm ' for free download . The song later became available through retailers , and on 11 May , its official video was posted on their YouTube channel . On 18 June , they released a video for the album 's lead single , ' Marching Orders ' . The video , directed by Rahi Rezvani ( as was ' No Harm ' ) , was filmed in the Western Highlands of Scotland . The song was released on 19 June for digital download , and a limited run of 300 12 " vinyl test pressings were distributed randomly throughout Oxfam stores . 
 On 15 July 2015 the band announced the album In Dream via Facebook . It is the first Editors record to feature a duet . The third single and video ' Life is a Fear ' got its first play on Zane Lowe 's Apple Music <unk> radio show on 11 August 2015 . Its video , again directed by Rahi Rezvani , was uploaded to YouTube on the same day . On 22 September , Editors shared ' The Law ' , an album track which features Rachel Goswell of Slowdive . 
 The fifth album In Dream , produced by Editors themselves and mixed by Alan Moulder , was released on 2 October 2015 . It marks the band 's collaboration with the Iranian born Dutch photographer , film and music video director Rahi Rezvani who also directed the video for ' Ocean of Night ' , released on 24 November . In October 2015 , Editors together with Brussels Beer Project has released their own beer ' Salvation ' , named after a track on their album In Dream . 
 In support of the album the band embarked on a 42 @-@ date tour , playing throughout October , November and December in the UK , Ireland and Europe . Editors supported Manic Street Preachers across the UK on the 20th anniversary tour of the album Everything Must Go . They are confirmed for the Glastonbury , <unk> , Hurricane / Southside , Rock Werchter and Bilbao BBK Live 2016 festivals , among many others . 
 = = Musical style = = 
 Editors ' own variation of dark indie guitar rock draws on influences from both older and contemporary bands . Their influences include Echo & the Bunnymen , Joy Division , The Strokes , The <unk> , <unk> and R.E.M .. The band draw their musical style particularly from the latter two bands ' debut albums Asleep in the Back and Murmur . While often compared to Joy Division and Echo and the Bunnymen by the media , the band commented that those bands are too old to have a major impact on their musical style . Upon Editors ' first appearances in the British music scene , they were also heavily compared to American indie band Interpol . 
 Editors ' first album , The Back Room , was described as having a wiry and raw sound , which led it to being famously dubbed ' dark disco ' by the NME . This sound was created by the use of synthesizers , catchy guitar riffs and simple , ambiguous lyrics . An End Has a Start showed progression to a new ' bigger ' sound . This new sound was created by adding more textured layers to the songs as well as incorporating new forms of music into them . These include the adding of a choir in " Smokers Outside the Hospital Doors " and the inclusion of the sounds of the band playing Hide @-@ and @-@ seek in the song " Spiders " . 
 Lead singer Smith announced that the band would explore a new direction on their next album , pursuing a new , rawer sound . The new sound materialised itself on the third album through the use of traditional synthesizers instead of the band 's previous use of guitars . The producer of In This Light and on This Evening , Flood also increased the importance of " vibe " in the music 's sound , making it darker than the previous two albums , while also attempting to make the album sound as if it had been recorded live . 
 While Smith tends to write the lyrics and chords , song writing overall is a collaborative effort . The song writing starts with Smith on the piano or acoustic guitar where he records them and sends them to the other band members where the song is turned into a full ' Editors song ' . Smith has said that he purposely makes the lyrics ambiguous so people can draw their own conclusions . 
 " To us , it 's interesting if it has a darkness , " said Smith in 2015 . " Whatever that is . On the lyric side of things , if I was singing about dancefloors or happier or rosier things , it wouldn 't ring true for me . I don 't know why that is . People quite often say , ' oh , you write these sad lyrics but you 're not a sad person ' - and I 'm not ... I don 't think you need to be sad to write a sad song , everybody has a dark side . " 
 = = Discography = = 
 Studio albums 
 The Back Room ( 2005 ) 
 An End Has a Start ( 2007 ) 
 In This Light and on This Evening ( 2009 ) 
 The Weight of Your Love ( 2013 ) 
 In Dream ( 2015 ) 
 = Darren O 'Dea = 
 Darren O 'Dea ( born 4 February 1987 ) is an Irish professional footballer who plays as a centre @-@ back for Scottish Premiership club Dundee . 
 O 'Dea began his career on the youth team of Celtic , with whom he played from 2006 to 2012 . During his time on Celtic , he was loaned to Reading , Ipswich Town and Leeds United . While playing for Leeds , O 'Dea won the Ireland Young International Player of the Year Award . For more first @-@ team opportunities he switched clubs and countries , joining Toronto FC of Major League Soccer for a year until 2013 . The following season , he represented FC Metalurh Donetsk in Ukraine . O 'Dea 's stint was cut short due to the Ukrainian political situation , and he returned to England with Blackpool . In July 2015 , he signed with Indian Super League club Mumbai City FC . 
 After being capped by the youth national teams of the Republic of Ireland , O 'Dea made his senior @-@ team debut in 2009 and has been capped 20 times . He represented Ireland at the 2012 UEFA European Championship . 
 = = Club career = = 
 = = = Celtic = = = 
 Born in Dublin , O 'Dea played for Home Farm before he was signed by Celtic as a teenager . After making his way through the reserves and academy side , he made his first @-@ team debut for Celtic in the Scottish League Cup against St Mirren in September 2006 . A month later , O 'Dea made his league debut against Inverness Caledonian Thistle , where he played the last thirty minutes after substituting for Gary Caldwell . His UEFA Champions League debut was on 6 December against Danish club F.C. Copenhagen as a substitute for the injured Stephen McManus . O 'Dea made his first league starting appearance against Dunfermline Athletic four days after his Champions League debut . Later that month he scored his first goal in a match against Dundee United , with his rebound of a 78th @-@ minute free kick by Shunsuke Nakamura tying the match 2 – 2 . O 'Dea 's first season saw Celtic win the 2007 Scottish Cup Final , where he scored a goal against Livingston . 
 After playing 16 times for Celtic , O 'Dea signed a three @-@ year contract in March 2007 and considered it a " reward for the hard work " he had done . In his second season he incorporated Celtic win the league championship , although he did not feature in the final against Dundee . After O 'Dea did not play for two months ( since his last Champions League match against FC Spartak Moscow ) , the BBC reported in October that he would be recalled to the injury @-@ plagued team as a replacement for Gary Caldwell , and he played the entire league match against Rangers on 20 October 2007 . That season , he primarily played centre @-@ back . 
 During the 2008 – 09 season O 'Dea made a total of sixteen appearances , scoring twice . His extra @-@ time goal in the 2009 Scottish League Cup Final gave Celtic the trophy . After playing fifty times for the club , O 'Dea was loaned to championship club Reading in September 2009 for more first @-@ team experience and he called it a " massive chance " to represent Celtic . He made his debut in a 0 – 0 draw against Doncaster Rovers , with his second @-@ half shot saved by Doncaster goalkeeper Neil Sullivan . In a September interview , O 'Dea was reluctant to return to Celtic 's few match opportunities . 
 Returning from Reading in January 2010 , he started all five games that month . O 'Dea was appointed stand @-@ in captain after Stephen McManus went on loan to Middlesbrough and Gary Caldwell left for Wigan . Again superfluous on Celtic , he was loaned to Ipswich Town on 18 August 2010 until January 2011 and made his Ipswich debut against Crystal Palace on 21 August . In January O 'Dea said he was uncertain if his loan would be extended because of the sacking of Ipswich manager Roy Keane , expressing his desire to stay . New manager Paul Jewell unexpectedly extended his loan to the end of the season . Vital Football praised O 'Dea 's performance in a league cup match against Arsenal , with Jewell calling it " tremendous and crucial in the result " . Two months later , he expressed a desire to return to Celtic instead of signing permanently with Ipswich . O 'Dea said he would play for another club if he did not have first @-@ team opportunities at Celtic , since he felt that playing was " not about sitting on a bench " . 
 In May 2011 , he said he " may quit Celtic " to play regularly and represent the national team at the 2012 UEFA Euro qualifiers . The following month Leeds United signed him on loan until the end of the season , and he said his objective on his new club was to win promotion to Premier League . O 'Dea made his Leeds debut in a 3 – 1 loss to Southampton . He scored his first goal for the club against Coventry City , an " angled shot " for a 1 – 1 draw . O 'Dea again found the net in the next game , against Peterborough United , in the 95th minute for a 3 – 2 win . Against Cardiff City , according to the BBC Leeds conceded a goal due to O 'Dea 's " indecision " which " opened the door for Joe Mason " . In a January 2012 interview he expressed his desire to sign permanently with Leeds , although he received a red card in a loss to Blackpool . O 'Dea played 38 times for Leeds , scoring twice . Due to his form with Leeds and Ireland , O 'Dea and teammate Aidy White were nominated for the Young International Player of the Year at the Football Association of Ireland International Football Awards . He won the award in a ceremony held in February 2012 . 
 After spending the previous two seasons out on loan , O 'Dea was released by Celtic at the end of his contract on 1 June 2012 despite a one @-@ year contract @-@ extension option . He said he " had a great time at Celtic and have a lot of friends there so it was important for me that I left properly " . 
 = = = Toronto FC = = = 
 O 'Dea signed with Major League Soccer club Toronto FC on 3 August 2012 , and made his club debut on 18 August in a 1 – 0 home loss to Sporting Kansas City . According to CBC News , he looked " lively " in his first match with the team . In a match against Houston Dynamo he passed to Terry <unk> , who scored , and at the end of the game said he was " delighted " with the result . Manager Paul Mariner named O 'Dea team captain in September , succeeding the injured Torsten Frings . The following month , he was unable to play a match against Montreal Impact due to a thigh injury sustained during World Cup qualifying play for Ireland . In O 'Dea 's first season for Toronto , he played nine times as Toronto finished tenth in the Eastern Conference . O 'Dea was employed at left back for the 2013 season after the regular player at that position was injured . According to him , it had been two years since he had previously played left back . O 'Dea scored his first goal for Toronto on 3 July 2013 in a 3 – 3 home draw with Canadian rivals Montreal Impact . Because of his " keen sense of positioning and timing " against Sporting Kansas City , he was named to the Team of the Week for 12 March . Originally part of a transfer ( a " win @-@ win for both parties " , according to head coach Ryan Nelsen , since O 'Dea was the highest @-@ paid player in the league ) , he was released by Toronto on 18 July 2013 to sign with FC Metalurh Donetsk . Club president Kevin Payne wished him luck and hoped he would return in the future . O 'Dea played a total of 26 times for Toronto , scoring one goal and setting up three , and was succeeded as team captain by Steven Caldwell . 
 = = = Metalurh Donetsk = = = 
 After his release from Toronto O 'Dea signed a three @-@ year contract with Ukraine 's FC Metalurh Donetsk . He debuted for the team in a July 20 , 2013 1 – 1 draw with FC Karpaty Lviv , playing 46 minutes before being substituted . O 'Dea scored his first goal for Metalurh in his second game , a 2 – 1 away win over Vorskla Poltava . He left the club in August 2014 , terminating his contract two years early due to the unrest in Ukraine . O 'Dea described the situation in the country as " hostile and intense , but also surreal " . 
 = = = Blackpool = = = 
 O 'Dea then signed with championship club Blackpool in December 2014 , making his debut in a 6 – 1 loss to Bournemouth . Bournemouth 's fourth goal was scored by Brett Pitman , converting a penalty shot incurred by O 'Dea ( who fouled Callum Wilson in the penalty area ) . Against Wolverhampton Wanderers , the BBC reported that he " got into a terrible muddle trying to cut out a pass from Kevin McDonald " and allowed Benik <unk> ( in his first game for Wolverhampton ) to score the second goal . O 'Dea was injured in a match against Nottingham Forest in February 2015 , forcing him to miss the game with Blackburn Rovers . Released when his contract expired in May , he said the club had a " disastrous season " . O 'Dea played 20 times for Blackpool . 
 = = = Mumbai City = = = 
 Although the Toronto Sun reported in May 2015 that O 'Dea might re @-@ sign with the city 's MLS club , he signed a contract until 22 December with Indian Super League club Mumbai City FC , managed by Nicolas Anelka . Calling his signing " a new experience , a new chapter " , he said he knew little about the quality of football in the league . O 'Dea made his ISL debut on 10 October , starting in a goalless draw at Kerala Blasters . He left the club after making nine appearances . 
 = = = Dundee = = = 
 O 'Dea signed a short @-@ term contract with Dundee in January 2016 . On 22 March 2016 , he signed a new three @-@ year contract . 
 = = International career = = 
 After playing for the Irish under @-@ 19 and under @-@ 21 teams , O 'Dea was called up to the international squad within a year . Promoted to the Irish under @-@ 21 international squad by manager Don Givens on 3 March 2007 , he was the team captain . Less than a week later , O 'Dea was named to the international squad for Ireland 's UEFA Euro 2008 qualifying Group D matches on 24 and 28 March . 
 On 13 May 2008 , he was listed on Giovanni Trapattoni 's first squad as Ireland 's manager for the 2010 FIFA World Cup qualification – UEFA Group 8 matches against Bulgaria and Italy . O 'Dea made his senior @-@ team debut on 8 September 2009 in a 1 – 0 friendly win over South Africa at Thomond Park in Limerick as a 60th @-@ minute substitute for Paul McShane . 
 After a match against the Czech Republic , O 'Dea said he dreamed of being named to the Irish squad for UEFA Euro 2012 . Although he was on the roster for the tournament in Poland and Ukraine , he did not appear ; the Irish were eliminated from the group stage . O 'Dea scored his first senior goal for Ireland , an 88th @-@ minute header , in a World Cup qualifying match against the Faroe Islands on 16 October 2012 which Ireland won 4 – 1 . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 O 'Dea 's manager at Toronto FC , Paul Mariner , described him as a " different specimen " with " fantastic habits " and a good leader . According to Miloš <unk> , he is a good defender of set pieces . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of 23 July 2016 
 = = Honours = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 Celtic 
 Scottish Premier League : 2006 – 07 , 2007 – 08 
 Scottish League Cup : 2008 – 09 
 Scottish Cup : 2006 – 07 
 International 
 Nations Cup : 2011 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 Ireland Young International Player of the Year Award 2012 
 = Star Alliance = 
 Star Alliance is the world 's largest global airline alliance . Founded on 14 May 1997 , its current CEO is Mark Schwab and its headquarters is in Frankfurt am Main , Germany . As of 31 March 2014 , Star Alliance is the largest global alliance by passenger count with 637 @.@ 6 million , ahead of SkyTeam ( 588 million ) and Oneworld ( 512 @.@ 8 million ) . Its slogan is " The Way The Earth <unk> " . 
 Star Alliance 's 27 member airlines operate a fleet of approximately 4 @,@ 000 aircraft , serve more than 1 @,@ 000 airports in 194 countries and carry 637 @.@ 6 million passengers per year on more than 18 @,@ 000 daily departures . The alliance has a two @-@ tier rewards program , Silver and Gold , with incentives including priority boarding and upgrades . Like other airline alliances , Star Alliance airlines share airport terminals ( known as co @-@ location ) and many member planes are painted in the alliance 's livery . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1997 – 1999 : First alliance = = = 
 On 14 May 1997 , an agreement was announced forming Star Alliance from five airlines on three continents : Scandinavian Airlines , Thai Airways International , Air Canada , Lufthansa , and United Airlines . The alliance chose Young & Rubicam for advertising , with a budget of $ 25 million ( € 18 million ) . The airlines shared the star logo from the beginning , with its five points representing the founding airlines . The alliance adopted its first slogan , " The Airline Network for Earth " , with its goal " an alliance that will take passengers to every major city on earth " . 
 = = = Additions = = = 
 The now defunct Brazilian airline <unk> joined the Star Alliance network on 22 October 1997 , extending the alliance into South America . Also joining were Ansett Australia and Air New Zealand , expanding Star Alliance to Australia and the Pacific . With the addition of the latter two carriers , the alliance served 720 destinations in 110 countries with a combined fleet of 1 @,@ 650 aircraft . The next airline to join was All Nippon Airways ( ANA ) , the group 's second Asian airline , on 15 October 1999 . 
 = = = 2000 @-@ 2006 : Expansion = = = 
 During the early 2000s , a number of airlines joined Star Alliance ; the Austrian Airlines Group ( Austrian Airlines , Tyrolean Airways and Lauda Air ) joined on 26 March 2000 and Singapore Airlines on 1 April . BMI ( British Midland ) and Mexicana Airlines joined on 1 July , bringing the alliance 's membership to 13 . The addition of BMI made London Heathrow the only European hub with two alliances . During the year , Emirates considered joining Star Alliance , but decided against it . That year the now @-@ defunct <unk> West Indies Airways , which had entered an alliance with United Airlines , considered becoming a member but did not . In 2000 , the alliance also opened its first three business centers ( in Los Angeles , Frankfurt , and Bangkok ) and announced the formation of an Alliance Management Team ( AMT ) , the partnership 's executive body . In September 2001 , Ansett Australia ( the alliance 's only Australian member ) left Star Alliance due to bankruptcy , giving most of the Australian market to Qantas ( a Oneworld member ) . That year , Star Alliance announced the appointment of a new CEO , Jaan Albrecht . 
 Asiana Airlines joined the alliance on 1 March 2003 , <unk> on 1 May , and LOT Polish Airlines ( Poland 's flag carrier ) in October . Around this time , Mexicana Airlines left the alliance after deciding not to renew a codeshare agreement with United Airlines , later joining Oneworld . US Airways joined the alliance in May 2003 , becoming its second US @-@ based airline . In November Adria Airways , <unk> and Croatia Airlines joined the alliance as its first three regional members . 
 Although Star Alliance invited <unk> <unk> Azteca in 2005 to join in mid @-@ 2007 , the airline filed for bankruptcy . TAP Portugal joined on 14 March 2005 , adding African destinations to the network . In April 2006 Swiss International Air Lines , the alliance 's sixth European airline , and South African Airways ( its first African carrier ) became the 17th and 18th members . 
 = = = 2007 : Tenth anniversary = = = 
 By May 2007 , Star Alliance 's 10th anniversary , its members had a combined 16 @,@ 000 daily departures to 855 destinations in 155 countries and served 406 million passengers annually . The alliance introduced Biosphere Connections , a partnership with UNESCO , the International Union for Conservation of Nature ( IUCN ) , and the Ramsar Convention On Wetlands to promote environmental sustainability . 
 Today , nearly 30 % of global air travellers use the services of our member carriers or , looking at it from an overall industry perspective , two thirds of worldwide air travellers use one of the three airline alliances . 
 <unk> left the alliance on 31 January 2007 , and the two Chinese airlines Air China and Shanghai Airlines joined on 12 December . 
 = = = 2008 – 2010 : Second decade of operations = = = 
 On 1 April 2008 , Turkish Airlines joined the alliance after a 15 @-@ month integration process beginning in December 2006 , becoming its seventh European airline and 20th member . EgyptAir , Egypt 's national airline and Star Alliance 's second African carrier , joined on 11 July 2008 . 
 On 27 October 2009 , Continental Airlines became the 25th member of Star Alliance after leaving SkyTeam three days earlier . According to alliance CEO Jaan Albrecht , " Bringing Continental Airlines into Star Alliance has been a truly unique experience . This is the first time an airline has moved directly from one alliance to another and I would like to thank all those involved in ensuring a smooth switch " . At the time , it was rumored that the switch was Continental 's first move in a planned United Airlines @-@ Continental merge . Two months later , Brussels Airlines joined the alliance . 
 Brazilian carrier TAM Airlines joined Star Alliance on 13 May 2010 , increasing its foothold in South America . Aegean Airlines , Greece 's largest airline by number of passengers , joined on 30 June . 
 Shanghai Airlines left the alliance on 31 October 2010 when it merged with China Eastern Airlines , a SkyTeam member . On 29 September , the chief executive board approved Ethiopian Airlines as Star Alliance 's 30th member . In 2010 the alliance flew to 1 @,@ 172 airports in 181 countries , with about 21 @,@ 200 daily departures . 
 = = = 2011 @-@ present : Further expansion = = = 
 Since 2011 , more airlines have joined , and others have left due to their collapse or restructuring . In August 2011 , after several delays , Air India was rejected for membership when it did not meet alliance requirements . On 13 December 2011 , Ethiopian Airlines joined , adding five countries and 24 destinations to the alliance 's map . 
 Star Alliance had a tumultuous 2012 , with <unk> leaving early in the year when the carrier ceased operations . In early March , Continental merged with United Airlines , ending its membership in the alliance . BMI left on 20 April after its acquisition by International Airlines Group ( IAG ) , the parent company of Oneworld members Iberia and British Airways . On 21 June , Avianca , TACA Airlines and Copa Airlines joined the alliance , increasing its Latin American presence . In November , <unk> left the alliance , becoming an affiliate of parent Scandinavian Airlines . Shenzhen Airlines joined on 29 November , augmenting Air China 's Chinese network . 
 On 8 March 2013 , TAM Airlines announced its departure due to its merger with LAN Airlines to become LATAM Airlines Group . With the addition of EVA Air on 18 June and TACA 's integration into Avianca , the alliance now had 28 members and was the largest of the three major airline alliances . On 13 December , Air India was again invited to begin an integration process with Star Alliance . On 31 March 2014 , TAM Airlines moved to Oneworld , and US Airways and an American Airlines affiliate also left the alliance . That day , Avianca Brazil announced that it would join Star Alliance in 2014 as an affiliate of Avianca . After TAM Airlines and US Airways left , the alliance had 26 members . On 24 June , Air India was approved , joining the alliance on 11 July . Avianca Brazil then joined the alliance on 22 July 2015 . Future Connecting Partners member Mango , South African Airways ' low @-@ cost subsidiary , will be joining in 3Q 2016 . 
 = = Member airlines and affiliates = = 
 = = = Members and affiliates = = = 
 A Founding <unk> Airlines operating under Air Canada Express , Air New Zealand Link , Cimber A / S , Lufthansa Regional , Tyrolean Airways and United Express are not necessarily members of Star Alliance . However , flights are operated on behalf of the respective member airlines , carry their designator code and are Star Alliance <unk> Members of Lufthansa Regional that are fully owned by Deutsche Lufthansa <unk> Air Canada Express flights are operated by Air Georgian , <unk> Air , Jazz Aviation , Sky Regional <unk> Air India Regional flights are operated by Alliance <unk> Air New Zealand Link flights are operated by Air Nelson , Eagle Airways and Mount Cook <unk> Lufthansa Regional flights are operated by Air <unk> , <unk> and Lufthansa <unk> United Express flights are operated by Cape Air , <unk> , ExpressJet Airlines , <unk> Airlines , Mesa Airlines , Republic Airlines , Shuttle America , SkyWest Airlines and Trans States <unk> South African low @-@ cost airline Mango will join the alliance as a Connecting Partner in the third quarter of <unk> Vanilla Air and Tigerair are now part of Value Alliance . 
 = = Former members and affiliates = = 
 = = Customer service = = 
 Codeshare flights of Star Alliance airlines are consistent . This cooperation led to suspicions of anti @-@ competitive behavior ; the alliance was suspected by the European Union of being a virtual merger of its members , and speculation existed that if government regulations were relaxed the members would merge into one corporation . 
 Star Alliance developed a " regional " concept in 2004 , which helped it penetrate markets with participation by smaller regional carriers . Regional Star Alliance members had to be sponsored by an alliance member . The alliance no longer designates airlines as " regional " members , now referring to its 27 airlines as " members " . 
 In 2007 , alliance members flew 18 @,@ 521 daily flights to 1 @,@ 321 airports in 193 countries with a fleet of 4 @,@ 025 aircraft . Its members carried a total of 627 @.@ 52 million passengers , with revenue of US $ 156 @.@ 8 billion ( € 145 billion ) . It had 28 percent of the global market based on revenue passenger kilometers ( RPK ) , greater than the combined market share of all airlines not in one of the three major alliances . All alliance carriers combined employed over 405 @,@ 000 pilots , flight attendants , and other staff . Star Alliance was voted best airline alliance in the Skytrax 2007 World Airline Awards . 
 = = = Member hubs = = = 
 = = = Co @-@ location at airports ( under one roof ) = = = 
 = = = Premiums = = = 
 Star Alliance has two premium levels ( Silver and Gold ) , based on a customer 's status in a member 's frequent @-@ flyer program . Member and regional airlines recognize Star Silver and Gold status , with a few exceptions mostly pertaining to airport lounge access . Membership is based on the frequent @-@ flyer programs of the individual airlines . Many members have a premium status beyond Gold , which is not recognized across the alliance . 
 = = = = Star Alliance Silver = = = = 
 Star Alliance Silver status is given to customers who have reached a premium level of a member carrier 's frequent @-@ flyer program . Benefits are priority reservation wait @-@ listing and airport stand @-@ by . Some airlines also offer priority airport check @-@ in , baggage handling and boarding ; preferred seating ; an additional checked @-@ luggage allowance , and waived fees for two checked bags . 
 = = = = Star Alliance Gold = = = = 
 Star Alliance Gold status is given to customers who have reached a higher level of a member airline 's frequent @-@ flyer program . Benefits are priority reservations wait @-@ listing , airport stand @-@ by and check @-@ in and baggage handling ; an additional checked luggage allowance of 20 kg ( or one extra piece , where the piece rule applies ) , and access to designated Star Alliance Gold lounges the day and place of departure with the presentation of a Star Alliance boarding pass . Some airlines also offer preferred seating ( an exit seat or a special section of the plane ) ; guaranteed seating on fully booked flights , subject to the booking class code and notice period , and free upgrades in the form of a voucher , certificate or automatic upgrade at check @-@ in . United restricts US lounge access for their Gold Members to long @-@ haul international passengers ; Gold members from other carriers are welcome in US lounges run by United on all itineraries . 
 = = = = Qualifying tiers by airline = = = = 
 = = Livery and logo = = 
 Some Star Alliance members paint some of their aircraft with the alliance livery , usually a white fuselage with " Star Alliance " across it and a black tail fin with the alliance logo ; the color or design of the engine cowlings or winglets remains , depending on the member 's livery . Singapore Airlines is the only exception , formerly keeping its own logo on the tails of its aircraft but now using the Star Alliance logo on white tails . Asiana Airlines was the first Star Alliance member to paint its aircraft in the current Star Alliance livery . Aircraft painted in an airline 's regular livery have the Star Alliance logo between the cockpit and the first set of cabin doors . 
 = Arrow ( Israeli missile ) = 
 The Arrow or Hetz ( Hebrew : <unk> , pronounced [ <unk> ͡ s ] ) is a family of anti @-@ ballistic missiles designed to fulfill an Israeli requirement for a theater missile defense system that would be more effective against ballistic missiles than the MIM @-@ 104 Patriot surface @-@ to @-@ air missile . Jointly funded and produced by Israel and the United States , development of the system began in 1986 and has continued since , drawing some contested criticism . Undertaken by Israel Aerospace Industries ( IAI ) and Boeing , it is overseen by the Israeli Ministry of Defense 's " Homa " ( Hebrew : <unk> , pronounced [ <unk> ] , " rampart " ) administration and the U.S. Missile Defense Agency . 
 The Arrow system consists of the joint production hypersonic Arrow anti @-@ missile interceptor , the Elta EL / M @-@ 2080 " Green Pine " early @-@ warning AESA radar , the Elisra " Golden Citron " ( " Citron Tree " ) C3I center , and the Israel Aerospace Industries " Brown Hazelnut " ( " Hazelnut Tree " ) launch control center . The system is transportable , as it can be moved to other prepared sites . 
 Following the construction and testing of the Arrow 1 technology demonstrator , production and deployment began with the Arrow 2 version of the missile . The Arrow is considered one of the most advanced missile defense programs currently in existence . It is the first operational missile defense system specifically designed and built to intercept and destroy ballistic missiles . The first Arrow battery was declared fully operational in October 2000 . Although several of its components have been exported , the Israeli Air Defense Command within the Israeli Air Force ( IAF ) of the Israel Defense Forces ( IDF ) is currently the sole user of the complete Arrow system . 
 = = Background = = 
 The Arrow program was launched in light of the acquisition by Arab states of long ranged surface @-@ to @-@ surface missiles . It was chosen over <unk> Armament Development Authority 's AB @-@ 10 missile defense system since the Arrow was judged to be a more complete concept and have greater range . The AB @-@ 10 system was criticized as being merely an improved MIM @-@ 23 Hawk , rather than a system designed from the outset for missile interception . 
 The United States and Israel signed a memorandum of understanding to co @-@ fund the Arrow program on May 6 , 1986 , and in 1988 the United States Department of Defense Strategic Defense Initiative Organization ( SDIO ) placed an order with Israel Aircraft Industries for the Arrow 1 technology demonstrator . The Gulf War , which exposed the controversial performance of the Patriot missile against Iraqi " Al Hussein " missiles , gave further impetus to the development of the Arrow . It was initially designed to intercept missiles such as the SS @-@ 1 " Scud " , its " Al Hussein " derivative , the SS @-@ 21 " Scarab " operated by Syria , and the CSS @-@ 2 operated by Saudi Arabia . The Arrow evolved also with an eye on the advanced missile programs of Iran . Yitzhak Rabin , then Defense Minister of Israel , viewed the emerging missile threat as one of the most dangerous future threats on Israel 's security . He said of the program that : 
 The Israeli Administration for the Development of Weapons and Technological Infrastructure , part of the Israeli Ministry of Defense , runs the Arrow development project under the " Homa " administration . The " Homa " administration , which is also commonly referred to as the IMDO – Israel Missile Defense Organization , is responsible for coordinating industrial activities of Israel 's different defense companies involved in the development of the Arrow system . 
 = = = Funding = = = 
 The multibillion @-@ dollar development program of the Arrow is undertaken in Israel with the financial support of the United States . When the development program began , the projection for the total cost of its development and manufacture – including the initial production of missiles – was an estimated $ 1 @.@ 6 billion . The price of a single Arrow missile was estimated at $ 3 million . Between 1989 and 2007 some $ 2 @.@ 4 billion had been reportedly invested in the Arrow program , 50 – 80 percent of which was funded by the United States . Israel contributes approximately $ 65 million annually . 
 = = = Criticism and opposition = = = 
 The Arrow program encountered opposition from the IAF , whose traditional doctrine of deterrence and use of preemptive strikes stand in sharp contrast with the nature of the missile . In addition , the IAF feared that the procurement of the costly missiles would diminish the resources allocated towards offensive projects such as fighter aircraft . 
 A criticism of the concept of missile defense for Israel was aired by Dr. Reuven Pedatzur in a comprehensive study published in 1993 by the Jaffee Center for Strategic Studies . The arguments made in the study conformed to the opinions of numerous defense officials and analysts , and echoed many of the arguments made by the Strategic Defense Initiative critics in the United States . 
 Pedatzur argued that it was exceedingly simple to fool an Arrow @-@ type defensive system with simple , cheap , and easily installed countermeasures , which would render the Arrow system ineffective . He doubted Israel 's defense industries could rise to the challenge of such a complex system , citing anonymous experts in the IDF who predicted that the system would not be available before 2010 . He envisaged enormous costs , around $ 10 billion , that would distort budgeting priorities and divert funds from the vital enhancement of the IDF 's warfighting capability , thus forcing a profound revision of Israel 's national security doctrine . He further argued that even if effective against missiles with conventional , chemical or biological warheads , the Arrow would not be relevant against future threats of missiles with nuclear warheads , since it would never be able to supply hermetic defense and the impact of even a single nuclear warhead in Israel 's densely populated urban area would be an existential threat to Israel . 
 At the same time , John E. Pike , who worked then with the Federation of American Scientists , stated that " given technical problems with the systems radar and command system , coupled with its high development cost , the Arrow program may soon fall by the wayside " . Victoria Samson , a research associate of the Center for Defense Information , also stated in October 2002 that the Arrow system cannot track an incoming missile that has split its warhead into submunitions . 
 In June 2003 a group of Israeli chief engineers , co @-@ inventors , and project managers of IAI and subcontractors were awarded the Israel Defense Prize for the development and production of the Arrow system . 
 According to Dr. Uzi Rubin , first Director of IMDO , with the passage of time most of the pessimistic predictions have proven to be unfounded . Israel 's defense industries overcame the technical challenge , the system 's development was completed a full decade ahead of what was predicted , and there are no indications that the expenditures for the Arrow harmed other IDF procurement plans to any degree whatsoever . Rubin insists that Israel 's missile defense is now an established fact and that most of the warnings issued by critics have failed to materialize . Pedatzur , however , remained unconvinced . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Arrow 1 = = = 
 The first launch of the Arrow interceptor took place on August 9 , 1990 , designed to test the missile 's control and guidance systems . The test came to a halt seconds after take off and the missile was intentionally destroyed due to fears it might go off track and hit a settled location . This was caused by the failure of the ground tracking radars to track the missile 's trajectory . Test number two took place on March 25 , 1991 . Designed to check missile components during launch , it was conducted from a ship at sea . Once again a missile malfunction resulted in the abortion of the experiment . A third test , designed to examine the Arrow 's interception capabilities , was conducted on October 31 , 1991 . The missile was once again launched from a ship at sea , and was once more aborted because of a repeat of previous malfunctions . 
 On September 23 , 1992 , in another test of the missile components during launch , the systems finally operated as planned and the Arrow reached its designated point in the sky , 45 seconds after launch . As planned , the missile was then destroyed . This successful experiment ended the system 's preliminary testing phase . The fifth , sixth , and seventh tests took place on February 28 , July 14 , and October 14 , 1993 respectively . During these , the Arrow managed to pass in close proximity to the target missiles , thereby proving its ability to intercept surface @-@ to @-@ surface missiles . During test number eight on March 1 , 1994 , the missile was not launched due to a ground computer failure . The ninth test launch on June 12 , 1994 , also known as ATD # 1 ( Arrow Demonstration Test 1 ) , saw an Arrow 1 successfully intercepted a target missile launched from a ship anchored in the middle of the Mediterranean . 
 The Arrow 1 was reportedly a two @-@ stage solid propellant missile , with an overall length of 7 @.@ 5 m ( 25 ft ) , a body diameter of 1 @,@ 200 mm ( 47 in ) , and a launch weight of around 2 @,@ 000 kg ( 4 @,@ 400 lb ) . It was estimated that the second stage had a length of 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) , and that it had inertial and command update mid @-@ course guidance , with a terminal infrared focal plane array . The missile was described as being relatively high @-@ speed and maneuverable , with thrust vectoring in the both stages . The range capability has been described as around 50 km ( 31 mi ) . On the other hand , the Arrow 1 could be a single stage missile . Development of the " big and cumbersome " Arrow 1 then ceased and further research continued with the " smaller , faster and more lethal " Arrow 2 . 
 = = = Arrow 2 = = = 
 Two successful tests ( designated IIT # 21 and IIT # 22 ) of the steering , control and cruising systems were conducted without target missiles on July 30 , 1995 and February 20 , 1996 . Two successful interceptions took place on August 20 , 1996 and March 11 , 1997 , and were designated AIT # 21 and AIT # 22 . Another interception test ( AIT # 23 ) was conducted on August 20 , 1997 , but the missile was destroyed when its steering system malfunctioned . The fault was corrected in time to ensure the success of AST # 3 , the first comprehensive test of the entire system . On September 14 , 1998 , all system components successfully countered a computer @-@ simulated threat . On November 29 , 1998 , Israel Aerospace Industries delivered the first operational Arrow 2 interceptor to the Israeli Ministry of Defense . 
 A full system interception test ( AST # 4 ) was held on November 1 , 1999 . During this test the Arrow system located , tracked and intercepted a TM @-@ 91C target missile simulating a " Scud " missile , launched on a very steep trajectory from a ship located offshore . The IAI TM @-@ 91C target missile was itself based on the Arrow 1 interceptor . On March 14 , 2000 , the first complete Arrow 2 battery was rolled out in a ceremony at Palmachim Airbase . In his speech , then IAF commander Aluf Eitan Ben <unk> said : 
 Another Arrow 2 test ( AST # 5 ) took place on September 14 , 2000 , this time with a new target missile , the Rafael Advanced Defense Systems " Black Sparrow " . This airborne ballistic target missile , launched by an IAF F @-@ 15 towards Israel 's coastline at a ballistic trajectory simulating an aggressor " Scud " , was intercepted and destroyed . Consequently , the following month saw the Palmachim Arrow battery declared operational by the Israeli Air Defense Command . The " Black Sparrow " has since been used as the aggressor target in the AST # 6 , AST # 9 , and AST # 10 tests . Reportedly , in June 2001 Arrow missiles were test @-@ fired in the course of a joint American @-@ Israeli @-@ Turkish exercise code @-@ named Anatolian Eagle , in the southeast of Turkey . On August 27 , 2001 ( AST # 6 ) , the Arrow system successfully intercepted its target at some 100 km ( 62 mi ) from shore , the highest and farthest that the Arrow 2 had been tested to date . In October 2002 the second battery was declared operational . 
 = = = = Block @-@ 2 = = = = 
 A successful test of the Arrow 2 block @-@ 2 took place on January 5 , 2003 ( AST # 8 ) . Four missiles were launched towards four simulated targets in order to examine the interceptor 's performance during special flight conditions as well as system performance during a sequence of launches . The test did not include actual interceptions . Another successful test held on December 16 , 2003 ( AST # 9 ) , examined the system 's ability to intercept and destroy incoming missiles at significantly high altitudes , around 60 km ( 37 mi ) . Reportedly , AST # 8 and AST # 9 also tested integration of the Arrow with Patriot batteries . 
 On July 29 , 2004 , Israel and the United States carried out a joint test at the Naval Air Station Point Mugu ( NAS Point Mugu ) Missile Test Center in California , in which the Arrow interceptor was launched against a real " Scud @-@ B " missile . The test represented a realistic scenario that could not have been tested in Israel due to test @-@ field safety restrictions . To enable the test a full battery was shipped to Point Mugu . The " Green Pine " radar and command @-@ and @-@ control systems were deployed at the base , while the Arrow launcher was installed 100 km ( 62 mi ) offshore on an island that forms part of the test range . The test was a success , with the interceptor destroying the " Scud " that flew a 300 km ( 190 mi ) trajectory at an altitude of 40 km ( 25 mi ) , west of San Nicolas Island . This was the twelfth Arrow interceptor test and the seventh test of the complete system , the first interception of a real " Scud " . This significant test became known as the AST <unk> # 1 . Following this test , then Defense Minister of Israel , Shaul Mofaz , said : 
 AST <unk> # 2 was conducted at NAS Point Mugu a month later , on August 26 . This test was aimed at examining the Arrow 's ability to detect a splitting warhead of a separating ballistic missile . It detected the true target , but a technical malfunction reportedly prevented it from maneuvering to strike it , leading to a suspension of testing . In March – April 2005 the ability of " Green Pine " and " Golden Citron " to work with Patriot system elements operated by U.S. Army was successfully tested against simulated " Scud " -type targets during regular series of U.S. – Israeli biennial exercises code @-@ named " Juniper Cobra " . Actual testing of the complete Arrow system was resumed in December 2005 , when the system successfully intercepted a target at an unspecified but reported record low altitude . This test ( AST # 10 ) was the fourteenth test of the Arrow missile and the ninth test of the complete system . 
 = = = = Block @-@ 3 = = = = 
 On February 11 , 2007 an Arrow 2 block @-@ 3 successfully intercepted and destroyed a " Black Sparrow " target missile simulating a ballistic missile at high altitude . It was the first so @-@ called distributed weapon system test conducted in Israel , which required two Arrow units deployed some 100 km ( 62 mi ) apart to share data on incoming threats and coordinate launching assignments . It was also the first time the Link 16 data distribution system was used to connect two Arrow units , although the system had been used in previous tests to connect Arrow and Patriot batteries . Furthermore , an improved launcher was used . Another " Juniper Cobra " exercises ran from March 10 to 20 , 2007 . The computer simulation used for " Juniper Cobra 2007 " was similar to the computer simulation used in " Juniper Cobra 2005 " . 
 A precursor of the next block was launched without a target on March 26 , 2007 in order to gather information on its flight and performance , introducing unspecified modifications to its hardware and electronics and reduced manufacturing costs by some 20 percent . Arieh Herzog , then Director of IMDO , has said : " Our Arrow operational system can without a doubt deal with all of the operational threats in the Middle East , particularly in Iran and Syria . " 
 = = = = Block @-@ 4 = = = = 
 On April 15 , 2008 the Arrow weapon system successfully detected and made a simulated intercept of a new target missile , the " Blue Sparrow " , a successor of the " Black Sparrow " capable of simulating " Scud @-@ C / D " missiles and reportedly the Iranian Shahab @-@ 3 as well . During the test , a target missile was launched from an IAF F @-@ 15 at a height of 90 @,@ 000 feet ( 27 @.@ 5 km ) . The missile split into multiple warheads , making it harder to intercept it . Nevertheless , " Green Pine " tracked the warhead , simulating an intercept . In September 2008 the IDF attempted a test of actual Arrow 2 block @-@ 4 missile against the " Blue Sparrow " . The drill had to be aborted , however , when the target missile malfunctioned shortly after launch . Eventually the Arrow 2 block @-@ 4 was successfully tested against the " Blue Sparrow " on April 7 , 2009 . 
 A July 22 , 2009 , joint test of the Arrow 2 block @-@ 4 against an airborne target missile with a range of over 1 @,@ 000 km ( 620 mi ) once again at the NAS Point Mugu , was reportedly aborted in the final second before launch after the missile failed to establish a communications link . A target had been released from a C @-@ 17 Globemaster III aircraft , the radar detected the target and transferred its tracks , but the interceptor was not launched . " Tracking of the target worked well , but tracking trajectory information that the radar transferred to the battle management center erroneously showed we would be out of the prescribed safety range , so the mission was aborted , " a program source said . The aborted interception came after two earlier setbacks in the planned test , initially scheduled for July 17 . The first try was scuttled due to a technical glitch in the C @-@ 17 aircraft , and a planned July 20 attempt was scrubbed due to a malfunctioning electric battery that was not providing enough power to a key element of the Arrow system . The test was widely referred to as a failure , however objectives of interoperability with other ballistic missile defense systems were achieved . 
 On February 22 , 2011 the Arrow system successfully intercepted a long @-@ range ballistic target missile during a flight test conducted at NAS Point Mugu . The target missile was launched from a mobile launch platform off the coast of California , within the Point Mugu test range . The test validated new block @-@ 4 versions designed to improve discriminating capabilities of the Arrow 2 interceptor . It was a body @-@ to @-@ body impact that completely destroyed the target . 
 On February 10 , 2012 developers successfully conducted the final target @-@ tracking test prior to delivery of block @-@ 4 Arrow system . The Blue Sparrow target missile was detected and tracked by the radar , the intercept solutions were plotted by the battle management controller and transferred to the launch units . 
 According to Arieh Herzog , block @-@ 4 upgrades " improve the process of discrimination of what happens in the sky and the transmission of target data for much better situational control . " Block @-@ 4 upgrades also refine <unk> guidance which , when coupled with improved target identification and discrimination capabilities , improves lethality . 
 Block @-@ 4 @.@ 1 is expected to include a new Battle Management Center , armored launchers with high shooting availability , better communication with other missile systems and wider ranges of interceptions . On September 9 , 2014 an intercept test was conducted over the Mediterranean Sea with block @-@ 4 @.@ 1 versions of the operational system . The outcome was inconclusive and remained so until data was fully analyzed . In February 2015 , an official at the IMDO acknowledged that a test successfully acquired , but narrowly missed its target . The exact reason behind the failure was not provided , but officials initially attributed the glitch to easily correctable software issues . 
 = = = = Block @-@ 5 = = = = 
 IMDO recently launched initial definition of a new block @-@ 5 upgrade to the complete Arrow system that will merge the lower @-@ tier Arrow 2 and exoatmospheric Arrow 3 into a single national missile defense system . According to Arieh Herzog , the planned block @-@ 5 will include new ground- and airborne sensors , a command and control system , and a new target missile – the Silver Sparrow – to simulate potentially nuclear @-@ capable delivery vehicles developed by Iran . According to the U.S. Missile Defense Agency , block @-@ 5 is expected to be able to deal with " more stressing regional threats " by increasing total defended area by some 50 percent . 
 The planned block @-@ 5 will optimize the existing Super Green Pine radar to operate with the AN / <unk> @-@ 2 radar as well as with radars commanding anti @-@ ballistic missiles aboard United States Navy destroyers . U.S. radars will be used to support closed @-@ loop operations if Israel and U.S. targets in the region come under attack . 
 = = = Arrow 3 = = = 
 By August 2008 the United States and Israeli governments have initiated development of an upper @-@ tier component to the Israeli Air Defense Command , known as Arrow 3 . The development is based on an architecture definition study conducted in 2006 – 2007 , determining the need for the upper @-@ tier component to be integrated into Israel 's ballistic missile defense system . According to Arieh Herzog , the main element of this upper tier will be an exoatmospheric interceptor , to be jointly developed by IAI and Boeing . 
 = = Specifications = = 
 The Arrow system was originally designed and optimized to intercept short and medium @-@ range ballistic missiles with ranges above 200 km ( 120 mi ) . It is not intended to intercept either military aircraft or artillery rockets , the second of which are relatively small and short ranged . In contrast to <unk> , RIM @-@ 161 Standard Missile 3 , and MIM @-@ 104 Patriot PAC @-@ 3 , that use kinetic , direct impact to destroy the target ( " hit @-@ to @-@ kill " ) the Arrow 2 relies on explosive detonation . Arrow 2 is able to intercept its targets above the stratosphere , high enough so that any nuclear , chemical , or biological weapons do not scatter over Israel . The developers ' intention was to perform the destruction sequence away from populated locations . According to Dr. Uzi Rubin , the missile was tested to determine whether chemical warfare agents would reach the ground should such a warhead be intercepted . The conclusion was that nothing would reach the ground if the warhead is destroyed above the jet stream , which flows from west to east and would therefore blow any chemical residue . Nevertheless , Arrow is also capable of low altitude interception , as well as multi @-@ tactical ballistic missiles interception . 
 The two @-@ stage missile is equipped with solid propellant booster and sustainer rocket motors . The missile uses an initial burn to carry out a vertical hot launch from the container and a secondary burn to sustain the missile 's trajectory towards the target at a maximum speed of Mach 9 , or 2 @.@ 5 km / s ( 1 @.@ 6 mi / s ) . Thrust vector control is used in the boost and sustainer phases of flight . At the ignition of the second stage sustainer motor , the first stage assembly separates . The Arrow missile is launched before the threat missile 's trajectory and intercept point are accurately known . As more trajectory data becomes available , the optimum intercept point is more precisely defined , towards which the missiles is then guided . The 500 kg ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) kill vehicle section of the missile , containing the warhead , fusing and the terminal seeker , is equipped with four moving delta aerodynamic control fins to give low altitude interception capability . The dual mode missile seeker has a passive infrared seeker for the acquisition and tracking of tactical ballistic missiles and an active radar seeker used to home on air @-@ breathing targets at low altitudes . The infrared seeker is an indium antimonide focal plane array . The kill vehicle is designed to achieve a hit @-@ to @-@ kill interception , but if this is not achieved , the proximity fuze will direct the warhead fragments at the target shortly before reaching the closest point to the target . The high explosive directed blast fragmentation warhead is capable of destroying a target within a 40 – 50 m ( 130 – 160 ft ) radius . In this manner , Arrow also differs from Patriot PAC @-@ 3 , <unk> , and Standard Missile 3 , which rely purely on hit @-@ to @-@ kill technology in which the kinetic force of a precise impact causes the destruction of the threat . 
 According to Dov Raviv , a senior developer dubbed " the father of the Arrow anti @-@ ballistic missile " , a single Arrow interceptor has a 90 percent probability of destroying a target missile at the highest altitude possible . In case of failure two more interceptors can be launched towards the target at short time intervals . If the first of these destroys the target , the second can be directed to another target . Using this technique , three independent interception possibilities are provided which raise the interception probability from 90 percent to 99 @.@ 9 percent , thus satisfying the leakage rate requirement . The Arrow also has the capability to simultaneously intercept a salvo of more than five incoming missiles , with the target missiles arriving within a 30 @-@ second span . Such capability is currently possessed only by the United States and Russia . According to Raviv , the Arrow can discriminate between a warhead and a decoy . 
 Each Arrow battery is equipped with typically four to eight erectors – launchers , its manning requires about 100 personnel . Each trailer @-@ mounted <unk> – launcher weighs 35 tonnes ( 77 @,@ 000 lb ) when loaded with six launch tubes with ready @-@ to @-@ fire missiles . After firing the launchers can be reloaded in an hour . The system is transportable rather than mobile , as it can be moved to other prepared sites , but cannot be set up just anywhere . 
 = = = Green Pine = = = 
 The " Green Pine " is an active electronically scanned array ( AESA ) solid state radar operating at L band in the range 500 MHz to 1 @,@ 000 MHz , or 1 @,@ 000 MHz to 2 @,@ 000 MHz . It operates in search , detection , tracking , and missile guidance modes simultaneously . It is capable of detecting targets at ranges of up to about 500 km ( 310 mi ) and is able to track more than 30 targets at speeds over 3 @,@ 000 m / s ( 10 @,@ 000 ft / s ) . The radar illuminates the target and guides the Arrow missile to within 4 m ( 13 ft ) of the target . 
 Super Green Pine 
 An advanced version of the radar , called " Super Green Pine " , " Green Pine " Block @-@ B , or " Great Pine " ( Hebrew : אורן <unk> , pronounced [ oʁen <unk> ] ) , is to take the place of the original " Green Pine . As of 2008 both versions were active . The " Super Green Pine " extends detection range to about 800 – 900 km ( 500 – 560 mi ) . An even more advanced upgrade of the Super Green Pine is under development . 
 = = = Golden Citron = = = 
 The " Golden Citron " ( Hebrew : <unk> <unk> , pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ] ) truck @-@ mounted net @-@ centric open systems architecture Battle Management Command , Control , Communication & Intelligence Center can control up to 14 intercepts simultaneously . As of 2007 it was one of the world 's most advanced net @-@ centric systems . The system provides fully automatic as well as Human @-@ in @-@ the @-@ Loop options at every stage of battle operation management . It is also capable of interoperability with other theater missile defense systems and C3I systems . Notably Link 16 , <unk> @-@ J , communications were being altered to allow interoperability with Patriot fire control units . Assigned targets can be handed over to the Patriot 's AN / <unk> @-@ 53 fire control radar . Tests carried out by the U.S and Israel have successfully linked the Arrow with both U.S and Israeli versions of the Patriot . 
 The " Citron Tree " has three banks of operator consoles laid out in a U shape . In the center sits the officer in command who oversees the engagement , but also has links to the other parts of the battery as well as to IAF headquarters . On the commander 's right sits the engagement officer , who ensures that targets are assigned to other engagement officers sitting on the right @-@ hand leg of the U. Each is assigned a geographical area to defend and two of the officers are more senior as they have an overview of Patriot batteries . To the left of the commander is the resource officer , who monitors the status and readiness of the missiles . On the left of the U sits the sky picture officer , who is in contact with the Home Front Command and uses the center 's ability to predict impact point to alert the civil authorities . Also at these consoles are an intelligence officer and an after @-@ action / debrief officer , who uses recordings as it is impossible to absorb all the information during engagements . All in all , the " Golden Citron " is manned by 7 – 10 operators . 
 = = = Brown Hazelnut = = = 
 The " Brown Hazelnut " ( Hebrew : <unk> <unk> , pronounced [ <unk> <unk> ] ) launch control center is located at the launch site , up to 300 km ( 190 mi ) from the " Golden Citron " fire control center . It employs microwave and radio data and voice communications links to the " Green Pine " and " Golden Citron " . The launch method is a vertical hot launch from a sealed canister , providing all @-@ azimuth coverage . " Brown Hazelnut " also has missile maintenance and diagnostic capabilities . 
 = = Production = = 
 Israel initially produced the Arrow system domestically , but on February 11 , 2003 IAI and Boeing signed an agreement , valued at over $ 25 million for fiscal years 2003 – 2004 , to establish production facilities for the manufacture of components for the Arrow missile in the United States . In March 2004 , IAI awarded a $ 78 million production contract to Boeing ; the total contract value could exceed $ 225 million through second quarter 2008 . As a result of successful implementation of this contract Boeing is responsible for production of about 35 percent of Arrow missile components , including the electronics section , booster motor case and missile canister , at its Huntsville , Alabama facilities . IAI , the prime contractor of the Arrow system , is responsible for integration and the final assembly of the Arrow missile in Israel . Boeing also coordinates the production of Arrow missile components manufactured by more than 150 American companies located in over 25 states . Boeing delivered its first Arrow 2 interceptor to Israel in 2005 . Co @-@ produced interceptors has been tested since February 12 , 2007 . Final deliveries to the Israel Air Force were planned by the end of 2010 . 
 Other major contractors are : 
 Elta – produces the " Green Pine " / " Super Green Pine " radar ; 
 Elisra – produces the " Golden Citron " C3I Center ; 
 Rafael Advanced Defense Systems – produces the sustainer motor and the warhead ; 
 Israel Military Industries – produces the booster motor ; 
 Alliant <unk> – produces the motor cases and the first stage nozzle ; 
 Lockheed Martin – produces the active radar seeker ; 
 Raytheon – produces the infrared seeker ; 
 <unk> – produces the ceramic radome . 
 = = Deployment = = 
 According to its original 1986 schedule , the Arrow system was supposed to enter operational service in 1995 . The first operational Arrow battery was deployed , however , in March 2000 in Palmachim Airbase , near the city of Rishon LeZion , south of the Tel Aviv metropolitan area . It was declared operational in October 2000 , and reached its full capacity in March 2001 . Deployment of the second battery at Ein Shemer ( Ein Shemer Airfield ) , near the city of Hadera , Haifa District , northern Israel , was delayed by strong opposition from local residents who feared its radar would be hazardous to their health . The situation was eventually resolved and Israel 's second battery completed its deployment , turned operational and linked up with first battery in October 2002 . In 2007 the IDF has reportedly decided to modify its missile defense doctrine and in order to counter possible Syrian and Iranian missile barrages and has quietly modified its deployment of the Arrow in northern Israel . 
 The IDF planned to procure 50 – 100 interceptors for each battery . As of 1998 , a battery was estimated to cost about $ 170 million . As of 2012 , reportedly one " Great Pine " radar is deployed alongside two " Green Pine " radars . 
 Israel had originally planned to deploy two Arrow 2 batteries but has since sought and won promises of funding for a third battery . Some reports stated that a third battery was already deployed , or in development in the south , while others claimed that a decision on deployment of a third battery has not yet been made , although it was under discussion for service entry in 2012 . Another report stated that Israel planned to deploy not one , but two additional Arrow 2 batteries to defend the country 's southern region , also covering sensitive sites such as the Negev Nuclear Research Center . However the decision about the third battery was taken in October 2010 . The new battery was expected to be put into operational use in 2012 in the center of the country . According to Jane 's Defence Weekly , some sources indicate that the new Arrow 2 battery became operational in 2012 in an Israeli Air Force facility at Tal Shahar , roughly halfway between Jerusalem and Ashdod , near Beit Shemesh . 
 = = = Export = = = 
 Apart from Israel no country has purchased a full Arrow system , although India had acquired and deployed three " Green Pine " radars by August 2005 . The Indian government has sought to purchase the Arrow system since 1999 , however in early 2002 the U.S. vetoed Israel 's request to sell the Arrow 2 missiles to India , exercising its right as a major funding contributor . U.S. officials argued that the sale would violate the Missile Technology Control Regime ( MTCR ) . Although the Arrow 2 could possibly achieve a range of 300 km ( 190 mi ) , it is designed for intercepts at shorter ranges , and it is unclear whether it could carry a 500 kg ( 1 @,@ 100 lb ) payload to this range specified in the MTCR . In 2011 once again an Indian Army official said that the Arrow 2 might become part of India 's missile defense solution . 
 Turkey also planned to buy anti @-@ missile air defense systems worth more than $ 1 billion . The Arrow was considered a potential contender , but was rejected on political grounds . In the past , the United Kingdom , Japan , and Singapore were mentioned as then potential foreign customers of the Arrow system . Netherlands reportedly expressed interest in the " Golden Citron " C3I center in November 1999 . 
 In the late 1990s officials of Jordan have expressed concern that any conflagration between Israel and Iraq or Iran would impact its territory . The problem becomes more difficult for Jordan when the warheads are not conventional . Therefore , Benjamin Netanyahu , during his first term of office as Prime Minister of Israel , reportedly offered Jordan " a defensive umbrella of Arrow 2 " . Without allowing Israel to forward deploy the Arrow launchers close to the Iraqi border , the other option is for Israel to sell Jordan the Arrow system . This is most likely what Prime Minister Netanyahu meant above . In May 1999 Israel reportedly requested U.S. approval for selling Arrow batteries to Jordan , but apparently no such approval has been given yet . 
 Armed with marketing approval by their respective governments , a U.S. – Israeli industrial team plans to offer the Arrow system to South Korea . The potential deal , estimated to exceed $ 1 billion . 
 For the United States , the Arrow has provided important technical and operational data . It remains a key element in the Missile Defense Agency ’ s plan for a layered missile defense architecture , and an example of a successful , affordable program . At the moment , however , the United States does not have any plans to procure and deploy the Arrow . Nevertheless , in September 2009 the Arrow system was mentioned by then U.S. Secretary of Defense Robert Gates and then Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General James Cartwright among the alternative to the proposed U.S. missile defense assets in Europe . The Arrow system is being incorporated into U.S. anti @-@ ballistic capability in Europe , they said . 
 In a June 2011 interview Lieutenant General Patrick J. O 'Reilly said that Arrow 2 will be integrated into a regional defense array planned by the U.S. in the Middle East . According to the interview , it may also protect Arab countries who are allies of the U.S. but with which Israel has no diplomatic ties . By October 2015 , the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council ( GCC ) had become interested in procuring the Arrow system for themselves . 
 = Cyclone Waka = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Waka ( Fiji Meteorological Service designation : 03F , Joint Typhoon Warning Center designation : 07P ) was one of the most destructive tropical cyclones ever to affect the South Pacific Kingdom of Tonga . Waka originated within the near @-@ equatorial trough in mid @-@ December 2001 , although the system remained disorganized for more than a week . The storm gradually matured and attained tropical cyclone status on December 29 . Subsequently , Waka underwent rapid intensification in which it attained its peak intensity as a Category 4 severe tropical cyclone ( Australian tropical cyclone intensity scale ) on December 31 , with winds of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . Shortly thereafter , it passed directly over Vava 'u , Tonga , resulting in widespread damage . By January 1 , 2002 , the cyclone began to weaken as it underwent an extratropical transition . The remnants of Waka persisted for several more days and were last observed near the Southern Ocean on January 6 . 
 Although the storm affected several countries along its path , Waka left the most significant losses in Tonga , where it killed one person and wrought 104 @.@ 2 million paʻanga ( $ 51 @.@ 3 million USD ) in damage . Hundreds of structures , including 200 in the island 's largest city , and much of the nation 's agriculture were destroyed . Winds in excess of 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) battered Vava 'u , defoliating nearly every tree on the island . In addition to infrastructural and public losses , the environment was also severely affected ; a native species of bat lost roughly 80 % of its population due to the lack of fruit . Following the storm , Tonga requested international aid to cope with the scale of damage . Due to the severity of damage , the name Waka was later retired and replaced with Wiki . According to a study by Janet Franklin et al . , storms similar in intensity to Waka , on average , strike Tonga once every 33 years . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 In mid @-@ December 2001 , at the end of a Madden – Julian oscillation pulse , twin equatorial monsoonal troughs developed in the Northern and Southern Hemispheres . Although warm sea surface temperatures of 30 ° C ( 86 ° F ) in the region favored development of a tropical cyclone , the southern trough developed substantially slower than the northern one . On December 19 , the southern component was classified as Tropical Depression 03F by the Regional Specialized Meteorological Center in Nadi , Fiji ( Fiji Meteorological Service ) ; at this time the depression was situated just east of the Solomon Islands . The northern component eventually developed into Typhoon Faxai , an extremely powerful Category 5 equivalent cyclone . Unlike Faxai , the precursor to Cyclone Waka developed slowly , mainly because of moderate wind shear in the region . Moving southeastward , the system gradually became more organized . On two occasions , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert ; however , the agency later canceled them both times . By December 27 , the depression had entered a region of lesser shear , favoring significant development of the system . The following day , the JTWC classified the system as Tropical Depression 07P , when the storm was situated roughly 640 km ( 400 mi ) northwest of Pago Pago , American Samoa . 
 Tracking towards the southwest in response to a mid @-@ level ridge to the southeast , the depression quickly intensified , attaining gale @-@ force winds on December 29 . Upon doing so , it was upgraded to a tropical cyclone and given the name Waka . Shortly thereafter , the storm underwent rapid intensification ; roughly 24 hours after being named , Waka attained sustained winds of 120 km / h ( 75 mph ) . During December 30 , the center of the storm brushed Wallis Island before turning towards the southeast and accelerating due to an approaching trough from the northwest . Continuing to intensify , Waka passed directly over Niuafo 'ou on December 31 with winds of 150 km / h ( 90 mph ) . Later that day , the cyclone attained its peak intensity as a Category 4 severe tropical cyclone with ten @-@ minute sustained winds of 185 km / h ( 115 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 930 mbar ( hPa ; 27 @.@ 46 inHg ) . The JTWC assessed the storm to have attained similar one @-@ minute sustained winds upon peaking ; however , this was due to discrepancies between the two warning centers . At this time , Waka displayed a well @-@ defined , circular eye roughly 60 km ( 37 mi ) in diameter . Shortly after attaining its peak intensity , the center of Waka passed over Vava 'u . 
 Continuing into the new year , Waka gradually weakened on January 1 , 2002 as it entered a less favorable region for tropical cyclones . As a result , wind shear displaced convection from the center and its eyewall broke apart . Moving over decreasing sea surface temperatures , Waka began to undergo an extratropical transition , which it completed on January 2 . Tracking southeastward , the remnant cyclone briefly slowed over open waters before again accelerating . Over the following few days , the system gradually weakened , with sustained winds decreasing below gale @-@ force by January 5 . The storm was last noted on January 6 near the Southern Ocean , about 2 @,@ 200 km ( 1 @,@ 400 mi ) north @-@ northwest of Antarctica , at which time it had a pressure of 972 mbar ( hPa ; 28 @.@ 7 inHg ) . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 = = = Tonga = = = 
 On December 30 , just a day before Waka passed through Tonga , warnings were issued for numerous islands , including parts of Fiji and Samoa . Forecasts showed the storm passing directly over the low @-@ lying Tongan capital of Nuku 'alofa as a Category 3 cyclone . Owing to warnings from local media , all New Year 's Eve celebrations were canceled as residents and tourists boarded up their homes . All airports in the region were shut down and ferry service was suspended . Many residents on the small island of Niuafo 'ou , about 35 km2 ( 13 @.@ 5 mi2 ) in size , evacuated to other islands prior to Waka 's arrival . 
 When the storm was moving through the islands of Tonga at peak strength , a few islands recorded hurricane @-@ force winds ; the city of <unk> measured the strongest winds , peaking at 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) . In the southern islands , wind gusts up to 250 km / h ( 155 mph ) affected isolated areas . In the Haʻapai islands , sustained winds reached 100 km / h ( 65 mph ) and gusted to 140 km / h ( 85 mph ) . Heavy rains also fell during Waka 's passage , amounting to over 200 mm ( 7 @.@ 9 in ) in Haʻapai . 
 Initial reports from Nukuʻalofa on December 31 indicated severe agricultural damage but few infrastructural losses . Following the passage of Waka , communication with Niuas and Vava 'u were lost . According to local reports , high winds sandblasted <unk> and downed nearly every tree . Surveys by the Red Cross revealed that roughly 200 homes in the city were severely damaged or destroyed and those left standing lost their roofs . Vava 'u lost roughly 90 % of its crops , including essential food crops such as taro , yams and bananas . In Ha 'apai , one person died from cardiac arrest brought on by the storm . Fallen trees blocked numerous roads ; power and water supplies were also interrupted to most residents . Severe damage also took place on Niuatoputapu where coastal homes were impacted by Waka 's storm surge and several structures lost their roofs . In one instance , a yacht was brought onshore by the surge and crashed into a restaurant , destroying both . 
 According to damage surveys , 13 of the country 's islands sustained damage ; 470 homes and 6 schools were destroyed and hundreds more damaged . Damage throughout Tonga amounted to 104 @.@ 2 million paʻanga ( $ 51 @.@ 3 million USD ) . In addition to infrastructural and public damage , the environment sustained catastrophic losses on Tonga . The Insular Flying Fox ( Pteropus <unk> ) , a native species of bat , suffered great losses from Waka . Compared to pre @-@ cyclone population levels , 79 @.@ 8 % ( ± 9 @.@ 9 % ) of the species was killed across six islands . This was due to widespread destruction of their natural food source , which decreased by 85 % ( ± 11 @.@ 8 % ) following Waka . Trees across Vava 'u were completely defoliated , although only 6 @.@ 6 % were killed , leaving no food for the bats . The greatest decline in bats was on <unk> <unk> Island at 95 @.@ 7 % ; A 'a Island sustained a complete loss of food @-@ bearing plants . Six months after the storm , the bat population in Vava 'u was still only 20 % of the pre @-@ storm level . 
 = = = Elsewhere = = = 
 During the cyclone 's formative stages , it brought significant winds and swells to Tokelau , resulting in localized flooding and crop damage . American Samoa also experienced heavy rains , amounting to 56 @.@ 9 mm ( 2 @.@ 24 in ) , and gusts up to 90 km / h ( 56 mph ) . The winds downed a few trees and caused minor crop damage , with losses amounting to US $ 120 @,@ 000 . Large swells affected the island for roughly a week as the storm developed and moved away from the region . Cyclone Waka also affected Wallis and Futuna , prompting tropical cyclone watches and warnings from December 28 to 31 , and later impacted Niue , prompting warnings there from December 30 to January 1 . On Wallis Island , one home was destroyed and 50 % of the banana crop was lost . A maximum of 112 mm ( 4 @.@ 4 in ) of rain fell in Hihifo during the passage of Waka . A wind gust of 126 km / h ( 78 mph ) and swells up to 7 m ( 23 ft ) were recorded in Wallis . Niue received more significant damage , experiencing a storm surge of up to 8 m ( 26 ft ) and sea spray up to 100 m ( 330 ft ) inland . Numerous fallen trees and power lines blocked roads and left southern areas of the island without power for roughly six hours . Damage in Niue amounted to US $ 10 @,@ 000 . 
 After moving through the Tongan islands , the remnants of Waka brought large swells , estimated up to 2 @.@ 5 m ( 8 @.@ 2 ft ) , to the North Island of New Zealand . Thousands of residents and tourists were in the region following the New Year 's holiday . Meteorologists warned that the oceans would be increasingly dangerous and advised people not to venture into the water . Every lifeguard in <unk> , as well as former lifeguards , were called in to assist in keeping an estimated 8 @,@ 000 people out of the water . Although most people stayed within a designated swimming area , several rescues had to be made . Rip currents also pulled 38 people out to sea in Mount Maunganui Main Beach ; all were quickly rescued by lifeguards . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Within a day of Cyclone Waka 's passage in Tonga , the Government of New Zealand deployed an aircraft to survey the scale of damage and reestablish contact with the Tongan Islands . This aircraft was sent in accordance with the FRANZ Agreement , enacted in 1992 , which states that <unk> from one country would be used in relief operations . On January 2 , the head of Tonga 's Disaster Office announced that they would likely need international assistance to recover from the storm . Due to the substantial damage to agriculture , food shortages were expected to impact the region over the following months . By January 7 , the Red Cross began sending supplies to Tonga . Hundreds of tents and tarpaulins were brought in by an Australian AC @-@ 130 to help with the recovery process . On January 12 , a New Zealand Lockheed C @-@ 130 Hercules carrying US $ 700 @,@ 000 worth of supplies flew to the area to deliver aid . An additional US $ 700 @,@ 000 was given in relief funds to repair damage wrought by the storm . Of this , US $ 500 @,@ 000 would be used to repair schools that were damaged or destroyed and the remaining US $ 200 @,@ 000 would be used for emergency lighting , cooking and food supply recovery . 
 Further funds came from the United States Agency for International Development , which offered US $ 25 @,@ 000 by mid @-@ January . The French Polynesian assembly in Tahiti also provided US $ 770 @,@ 000 worth of relief supplies and aid . The main industry of Tonga , tourism , was devastated by the storm as no tourists were allowed to travel to the region for at least two weeks after Waka 's passage . The Government of Tonga requested a total of US $ 39 @.@ 2 million in international aid , most of which was dedicated to rehabilitation of infrastructure . Medical supplies and personnel were later deployed by the World Health Organization . In early March , a relief fund based on donations was set up by the United Methodist Committee on Relief to provide US $ 210 @,@ 000 for 30 families impacted by the storm . About 180 people were given assistance in rebuilding their homes by the Church World Service later that month . As food shortages became severe in April , emergency supplies were sent to the outlying Niuas islands of Tonga . In May , US $ 5 @.@ 85 million was approved for emergency funds by the World Bank to assist in infrastructural rehabilitation . 
 Vava 'u suffered a tremendous decrease in agricultural exports due to Waka , dropping 86 @.@ 5 % from the previous year . Despite substantial agricultural losses , the sector ended up expanding roughly 2 % by the end of 2002 and the overall economy grew by 2 @.@ 9 % . Owing to the severity of damage wrought by the cyclone , the World Meteorological Organization retired the name Waka following its using and replaced it with Wiki . 
 = 1990 Andhra Pradesh cyclone = 
 The 1990 Andhra Pradesh cyclone or the 1990 Machilipatnam Cyclone was the worst disaster to affect Southern India since the 1977 Andhra Pradesh cyclone . The system was first noted as a depression on May 4 , 1990 , while it was located over the Bay of Bengal about 600 km ( 375 mi ) to the southeast of Chennai , India . During the next day the depression intensified into a cyclonic storm and started to intensify rapidly , becoming a super cyclonic storm early on May 8 . The cyclone weakened slightly before it made landfall on India about 300 km ( 190 mi ) to the north of Madras in the Andhra Pradesh state as a very severe cyclonic storm with winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) . While over land the cyclone gradually dissipated . The cyclone had a severe impact on India , with over 967 people reported to have been killed . Over 100 @,@ 000 animals also died in the cyclone with the total cost of damages to crops estimated at over $ 600 million ( 1990 USD ) . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On May 4 , 1990 the India Meteorological Department ( IMD ) reported that a depression had developed over the Bay of Bengal about 600 km ( 375 mi ) to the southeast of Chennai , India . During that day the system gradually developed further and became the subject of a tropical cyclone formation alert , by the Joint Typhoon Warning Center as it moved westwards under the influence of the subtropical ridge of high pressure . The depression subsequently intensified into a cyclonic storm early the next day , before the JTWC initiated advisories on the system and designated it as Tropical Cyclone 02B later that day . At this stage the JTWC only expected the cyclone to intensify marginally , before it weakened as it made landfall in Southern India within 72 hours . During May 6 , the system started to move more towards the north @-@ west because of a weakness in the subtropical ridge , as it continued to intensify and became a Very Severe Cyclonic Storm . This turn towards the northwest turned out to be more northerly than had been expected , which as a result allowed the system to stay offshore for longer than had been expected by the JTWC . 
 Over the next couple of days the system rapidly intensified before the JTWC reported early on May 8 , that the system had peaked with 1 @-@ minute sustained windspeeds of 230 km / h ( 145 mph ) , which made the system equivalent to a category 4 hurricane on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane wind scale . At around the same time the IMD also reported that the cyclone had peaked as a Super Cyclonic Storm , with 3 @-@ minute sustained wind speeds of 235 km / h ( 145 mph ) and an estimated central pressure of 920 hPa ( 27 @.@ 17 inHg ) . By this time the system was located about 150 km ( 95 mi ) to the northeast of Madras and was moving northwards slowly . Later that day as the ship <unk> moved through the systems eye region , it measured a central pressure of 912 hPa ( 26 @.@ 93 inHg ) , which the IMD reported would be one of the lowest central pressures ever measured in the Bay of Bengal if it was correct . The system subsequently started to weaken and had become a Very Severe Cyclonic Storm by the time it made landfall during May 9 , near the mouth of the Krishna River in southern Andhra Pradesh . The system subsequently moved north @-@ westwards and gradually weakened further , before it was last noted during May 11 , by both the IMD and JTWC . 
 = = Preparations , impact and aftermath = = 
 = = = Preparations = = = 
 As a result of timely warnings issued by the IMD , the Indian government was able to launch an evacuation campaign and order that all fisherman return to shore . This led to more than 150 @,@ 000 people being evacuated to relief camps which had been set up on higher ground . Due to the thorough preparations , there was fewer deaths than in the 1977 Andhra Pradesh cyclone . 
 = = = Impact = = = 
 On <unk> Island over 7 @,@ 000 people were left stranded after they refused to evacuate . The island itself was reported to have experienced the full brunt of the system . However , all of the residents reportedly sought protection within a shelter provided by the government . The cyclone had a significant effect on India , with storm surge tides as high as 4 @.@ 9 meters ( 16 ft ) above normal . Consequently , over 100 villages were submerged in water and destroyed . At least 967 people were killed by the cyclone ; most of the deaths occurred when houses made mostly out of mud and straw collapsed . Other people were killed when electrical wires were knocked down and while some people were carried away by flooded rivers . The storm left at least 3 million people homeless , while over 100 @,@ 000 farm animals were killed . At least 435 @,@ 000 acres ( 1 @,@ 760 km2 ) of rice paddies were destroyed along with huge tracts of mango and banana trees . The total damage to crops and property was estimated at over $ 600 million ( 1990 USD ) . The cyclone was described as the worst disaster in southern India since the 1977 storm . Sea water contaminated fresh drinking wells , prompting warnings about outbreaks of Cholera and Typhoid as many people were drinking and cooking with water from the drains which was causing stomach disorders . 
 = = = = Tamil Nadu = = = = 
 Overall the cyclone only caused minor damage to Tamil Nadu with the worst affected area being the district of Chingleput , where one of the old shrines of <unk> Temple collapsed as high waves hit the coast . A large number of huts were also washed away by the waves , while six deaths were reported in the state . 
 = = = = Andhra Pradesh = = = = 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 On May 11 , two days after the cyclone had hit , the Indian Government launched a massive relief and rescue operation . The Indian Army and Naval helicopters took surveys of areas affected by the cyclone , and also dropped food packets . Although the Indian Government did not request international assistance , the Red Cross provided food , oil , medicines and water tanks for the affected families ; the <unk> / <unk> issued an appeal for $ 262 thousand ( 1990 USD ) so they could provide immediate needs with World Vision providing $ 160 thousand ( 1990 USD ) for food blankets and utensils . 
 = Mary McLeod Bethune = 
 Mary Jane McLeod Bethune ( born Mary Jane McLeod ; July 10 , 1875 – May 18 , 1955 ) was an American educator , stateswoman , philanthropist , humanitarian and civil rights activist best known for starting a private school for African @-@ American students in Daytona Beach , Florida . She attracted donations of time and money , and developed the academic school as a college . It later continued to develop as Bethune @-@ Cookman University . She also was appointed as a national adviser to President Franklin D. Roosevelt as part of what was known as his Black Cabinet . She was known as " The First Lady of The Struggle " because of her commitment to gain better lives for African Americans . 
 Born in Mayesville , South Carolina , to parents who had been slaves , she started working in fields with her family at age five . She took an early interest in becoming educated ; with the help of benefactors , Bethune attended college hoping to become a missionary in Africa . She started a school for African @-@ American girls in Daytona Beach , Florida . It later merged with a private institute for African @-@ American boys , and was known as the Bethune @-@ Cookman School . Bethune maintained high standards and promoted the school with tourists and donors , to demonstrate what educated African Americans could do . She was president of the college from 1923 to 1942 , and 1946 to 1947 . She was one of the few women in the world to serve as a college president at that time . 
 Bethune was also active in women 's clubs , which were strong civic organizations supporting welfare and other needs , and became a national leader . After working on the presidential campaign for Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1932 , she was invited as a member of his Black Cabinet . She advised him on concerns of black people and helped share Roosevelt 's message and achievements with blacks , who had historically been Republican voters since the Civil War . At the time , blacks had been largely disenfranchised in the South since the turn of the century , so she was speaking to black voters across the North . Upon her death , columnist Louis E. Martin said , " She gave out faith and hope as if they were pills and she some sort of doctor . " 
 Honors include designation of her home in Daytona Beach as a National Historic Landmark , her house in Washington , D.C. as a National Historic Site , and the installation of a sculpture of her in Lincoln Park in Washington , D.C. 
 = = Early life and education = = 
 Mary Jane McLeod was born in 1875 in a small log cabin near Mayesville , South Carolina , on a rice and cotton farm in Sumter County . She was the fifteenth of seventeen children born to Sam and Patsy ( McIntosh ) McLeod , both former slaves . Most of her siblings had been born into slavery . Her mother worked for her former master , and her father farmed cotton near a large house they called " The Homestead . " 
 Her parents wanted to be independent so had sacrificed to buy a farm for the family . As a child , Mary would accompany her mother to deliver " white people ’ s " wash . Allowed to go into the white children ’ s nursery , Mary became fascinated with their toys . One day she picked up a book and as she opened it , a white child took it away from her , saying she didn ’ t know how to read . Mary decided then that the only difference between white and colored people was the ability to read and write . She was inspired to learn . 
 McLeod attended Mayesville 's one @-@ room black schoolhouse , Trinity Mission School , which was run by the Presbyterian Board of Missions of Freedmen . She was the only child in her family to attend school , so each day , she taught her family what she had learned . To get to and from school , Mary walked five miles each day . Her teacher Emma Jane Wilson became a significant mentor in her life . Wilson had attended Scotia Seminary ( now Barber @-@ Scotia College ) . She helped McLeod attend the same school on a scholarship , which she did from 1888 – 1893 . The following year , she attended Dwight L. Moody 's Institute for Home and Foreign Missions in Chicago ( now the Moody Bible Institute ) , hoping to become a missionary in Africa . Told that black missionaries were not needed , she planned to teach , as education was a prime goal among African Americans . 
 = = Marriage and family = = 
 McLeod married Albertus Bethune in 1898 , and they lived for a year in Savannah , Georgia , where she did social work . They had a son Albert together . <unk> Harold Uggams , a visiting Presbyterian minister , persuaded the couple to relocate to Palatka , Florida , to run a mission school . The <unk> moved in 1899 ; Mary ran the mission school and began an outreach to prisoners . Albertus left the family in 1907 ; he never got a divorce but relocated to South Carolina . He died in 1918 from tuberculosis . 
 = = Teaching career = = 
 = = = Foundations with Lucy Craft Laney = = = 
 Bethune worked as a teacher briefly at her former elementary school in Sumter County . In 1896 , she began teaching at Haines Normal and Industrial Institute in Augusta , Georgia , which was part of a Presbyterian mission organized by northern congregations . It was founded and run by Lucy Craft Laney . As the daughter of former slaves , Laney ran her school with a Christian missionary zeal , emphasizing character and practical education for girls . She also accepted the boys who showed up eager to learn . Laney 's mission was to imbue Christian moral education in her students to arm them for their life challenges . Of her year at Laney 's school , Bethune said , 
 " I was so impressed with her fearlessness , her amazing touch in every respect , an energy that seemed inexhaustible and her mighty power to command respect and admiration from her students and all who knew her . She handled her domain with the art of a master . " 
 Bethune adopted many of Laney 's educational philosophies , including her emphasis on educating girls and women to improve the conditions of black people : " I believe that the greatest hope for the development of my race lies in training our women thoroughly and practically . " ( This is a strategy being followed by organizers in numerous developing countries . Educating women raises the lives of families as a whole . ) After one year at Haines , Bethune was transferred by the Presbyterian mission to the <unk> Institute in Sumter , South Carolina , where she had met her current husband . 
 = = = School in Daytona = = = 
 After her marriage and move to Florida , Bethune became determined to start a school for girls . Bethune moved from Palatka to Daytona because it had more economic opportunity ; it had become a popular tourist destination and businesses were thriving . In October 1904 , she rented a small house for $ 11 @.@ 00 per month . She made benches and desks from discarded crates , and acquired other items through charity . Bethune used $ 1 @.@ 50 to start the Literary and Industrial Training School for Negro Girls . She initially had six students — five girls aged six to twelve , and her son Albert . The school bordered Daytona 's dump . Bethune , parents of students , and church members raised money by making sweet potato pies , ice cream , and fried fish , and selling them to crews at the dump . 
 In the early days , the students made ink for pens from elderberry juice , and pencils from burned wood ; they asked local businesses for furniture . Bethune wrote later , " I considered cash money as the smallest part of my resources . I had faith in a loving God , faith in myself , and a desire to serve . " The school received donations of money , equipment , and labor from local black churches . Within a year , Bethune was teaching more than 30 girls at the school . 
 Bethune also courted wealthy white organizations , such as the ladies ' Palmetto Club . She invited influential white men to sit on her school board of trustees , gaining participation by James Gamble ( of Procter & Gamble ) and Thomas H. White ( of White Sewing Machines ) . When Booker T. Washington of Tuskegee Institute visited in 1912 , he advised her of the importance of gaining support by white benefactors for funding . Bethune had met with Washington in 1896 and was impressed by his clout with his donors . 
 The rigorous curriculum had the girls rise at 5 : 30 a.m. for Bible study . The classes in home economics and industrial skills such as dressmaking , millinery , cooking , and other crafts emphasized a life of self @-@ sufficiency for them as women . Students ' days ended at 9 pm . Soon Bethune added science and business courses , then high school @-@ level courses of math , English , and foreign languages . Bethune was always seeking donations to keep her school operating ; as she traveled , she was fundraising . A donation of $ 62 @,@ 000 by John D. Rockefeller helped , as did her friendship with Franklin D. Roosevelt and his wife , beginning in the 1930s , who gave her entree to a progressive network . 
 In 1931 , the Methodist Church helped the merger of her school with the boys ' Cookman Institute , forming the Bethune @-@ Cookman College , a coeducational junior college . Bethune became president . Through the Great Depression , Bethune @-@ Cookman School continued to operate , and met the educational standards of the State of Florida . From 1936 to 1942 , Bethune had to cut back her time as president because of her duties in Washington , DC . Funding declined during this period of her absence . But , by 1941 the college had developed a four @-@ year curriculum and achieved full college status . By 1942 Bethune gave up the presidency , as her health was being adversely affected by her many responsibilities . 
 = = Career as a public leader = = 
 = = = National Association of Colored Women = = = 
 In 1896 , the National Association of Colored Women was formed to promote the needs of black women . Bethune served as the Florida chapter president of the NACW from 1917 to 1925 . She worked to register black voters , which was resisted by white society and had been made almost impossible by a variety of obstacles in Florida law and practices controlled by white administrators . She was threatened by members of the resurgent Ku Klux Klan in those years . Bethune also served as the president of the Southeastern Federation of Colored Women 's Clubs from 1920 to 1925 , which worked to improve opportunities for black women . 
 She was elected as national president of the NACW in 1924 . While the organization struggled to raise funds for regular operations , Bethune envisioned its acquiring a headquarters and hiring a professional executive secretary ; she implemented this when NACW bought a property at 1318 Vermont Avenue in Washington , DC . She led it to be the first black @-@ controlled organization with headquarters in the capital . 
 Gaining a national reputation , in 1928 Bethune was invited to attend the Child Welfare Conference called by Republican President Calvin Coolidge . In 1930 President Herbert Hoover appointed her to the White House Conference on Child Health . 
 = = = Southeastern Association of Colored Women 's Clubs = = = 
 The Southeastern Federation of Colored Women ’ s Clubs ( eventually renamed as the Southeastern Association of Colored Women ’ s Clubs ) elected Bethune as president after its first conference in 1920 at the Tuskegee Institute . They intended to reach out to Southern Women ( specifically white women ) for support and unity in gaining rights for black women . The women met in Memphis , Tennessee to discuss interracial problems . In many respects , all of the women agreed about what needed to be changed , until they came to the topic of suffrage . The white women at the conference tried to strike down a resolution on black suffrage . The <unk> responded by issuing a pamphlet entitled Southern Negro Women and Race Co @-@ Operation ; it delineated their demands regarding conditions in domestic service , child welfare , conditions of travel , education , lynching , the public press , and voting rights . The group went on to help register black women to vote after they were granted suffrage a few months later after passage of the constitutional amendment . Within the state , however , and in other southern states , black men and women were largely disenfranchised by discriminatory application of literacy and comprehension tests , as well as requirements to pay poll taxes , lengthy residency requirements , and the need to keep and display records . 
 = = = National Council of Negro Women = = = 
 In 1935 Bethune founded the National Council of Negro Women in New York City , bringing together representatives of 28 different organizations to work to improve the lives of black women and their communities . Bethune said of the council : 
 " It is our pledge to make a lasting contribution to all that is finest and best in America , to cherish and enrich her heritage of freedom and progress by working for the integration of all her people regardless of race , creed , or national origin , into her spiritual , social , cultural , civic , and economic life , and thus aid her to achieve the glorious destiny of a true and unfettered democracy . " 
 In 1938 , the NCNW hosted the White House Conference on Negro Women and Children , demonstrating the importance of black women in democratic roles . During World War II , the NCNW gained approval for black women to be commissioned as officers in the Women 's Army Corps . Bethune also served as a political appointee and the Special Assistant to the Secretary of War during the war . 
 In the 1990s , the headquarters for the National Council for Negro Women moved to Pennsylvania Avenue , centrally located between the White House and the U.S. Capitol . The former headquarters , where Bethune also lived at one time , has been designated as a National Historic Site . 
 = = = National Youth Administration = = = 
 The National Youth Administration ( NYA ) was a federal agency created under Roosevelt 's Works Progress Administration ( WPA ) . It provided programs specifically to promote relief and employment for young people . It focused on unemployed citizens aged sixteen to twenty @-@ five years who were not in school . Bethune lobbied the organization so aggressively and effectively for minority involvement that she earned a full @-@ time staff position in 1936 as an assistant . 
 Within two years , Bethune was appointed to position of Director of the Division of Negro Affairs , and as such , became the first African @-@ American female division head . She managed NYA funds to help black students through school @-@ based programs . She was the only black agent of the NYA who was a financial manager . She ensured black colleges participation in the Civilian Pilot Training Program , which graduated some of the first black pilots . The director of the NYA said in 1939 : " No one can do what Mrs. Bethune can do . " 
 Bethune ’ s determination helped national officials recognize the need to improve employment for black youth . The NYA ’ s final report , issued in 1943 , stated , 
 " more than 300 @,@ 000 black young men and women were given employment and work training on NYA projects . These projects opened to these youth , training opportunities and enabled the majority of them to qualify for jobs heretofore closed to them . " 
 Within the administration , Bethune advocated for the appointment of black NYA officials to positions of political power . Bethune ’ s administrative assistants served as liaisons between the National Division of Negro Affairs and the NYA agencies on the state and local levels . The high number of administrative assistants composed a work force commanded by Bethune . They helped gain better job and salary opportunities for blacks across the country . During her tenure , Bethune also pushed federal officials to approve a program of consumer education for blacks , and a foundation for black crippled children . She planned for studies for black workers ’ education councils . National officials did not support these due to inadequate funding and fear of duplicating the work of private non @-@ governmental agencies . The NYA was terminated in 1943 . 
 = = = Black Cabinet = = = 
 Bethune became a close and loyal friend of Eleanor and Franklin Roosevelt . At the Southern Conference on Human Welfare in 1938 , held in Birmingham , Alabama , Eleanor Roosevelt requested a seat next to Bethune despite state segregation laws . Roosevelt frequently referred to Bethune as " her closest friend in her age group . " Bethune told black voters about the work being done on their behalf by the Roosevelt Administration , and made their concerns known to the Roosevelts . She had unprecedented access to the White House through her relationship with the First Lady . 
 She used her access to form a coalition of leaders from black organizations called the Federal Council of Negro Affairs , but which came to be known as the Black Cabinet . It served as an advisory board to the Roosevelt administration on issues facing black people in America . It was composed of numerous talented blacks , mostly men , who had been appointed to positions in federal agencies . This was the first collective of black people working in higher positions in government . It showed voters that the Roosevelt administration cared about black concerns . The group gathered in Bethune 's office or apartment and met informally , rarely keeping minutes . Although as advisers they did not directly create public policy , they were a respected leadership among black voters ; they influenced political appointments and disbursement of funds to organizations that would benefit black people . 
 = = = Civil Rights = = = 
 In 1931 the Methodist Church supported merging of the Daytona Normal and Industrial School and the Cookman College for Men into Bethune @-@ Cookman College , established first as a junior college . Bethune became a member of the church but it was segregated in the South . Essentially two organizations operated in the Methodist denomination . Bethune was prominent in the primarily black Florida Conference . While she worked to integrate the mostly white Methodist Episcopal Church , South , she protested its initial plans for integration because they proposed separate jurisdictions based on race . 
 Bethune worked to educate both whites and blacks about the accomplishments and needs of black people , writing in 1938 @,@ 
 " If our people are to fight their way up out of bondage we must arm them with the sword and the shield and buckler of pride – belief in themselves and their possibilities , based upon a sure knowledge of the achievements of the past . " A year later she wrote , " Not only the Negro child but children of all races should read and know of the achievements , accomplishments and deeds of the Negro . World peace and brotherhood are based on a common understanding of the contributions and cultures of all races and creeds . " 
 On Sundays she opened her school to tourists in Daytona Beach , showing off her students ' accomplishments , hosting national speakers on black issues , and taking donations . She ensured that these Community Meetings were integrated . A black who was a teenager in Daytona at the turn of the 20th century later recalled : " Many tourists attended , sitting wherever there were empty seats . There was no special section for white people . " 
 When the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in Brown v. Board of Education ( 1954 ) that segregation of public schools was unconstitutional , Bethune defended the decision by writing in the Chicago Defender that year : 
 There can be no divided democracy , no class government , no half @-@ free county , under the constitution . Therefore , there can be no discrimination , no segregation , no separation of some citizens from the rights which belong to all .... We are on our way . But these are frontiers which we must conquer .... We must gain full equality in education ... in the franchise ... in economic opportunity , and full equality in the abundance of life . 
 Bethune organized the first officer candidate schools for black women . She lobbied federal officials , including Roosevelt , on behalf of African @-@ American women who wanted to join the military . 
 = = Death and accolades = = 
 On May 18 , 1955 , Bethune died of a heart attack . Her death was followed by editorial tributes in African @-@ American newspapers across the United States . The Oklahoma City Black Dispatch stated she was , " Exhibit No. 1 for all who have faith in America and the democratic process . " The Atlanta Daily World said her life was , " One of the most dramatic careers ever enacted at any time upon the stage of human activity . " And the Pittsburgh Courier wrote , " In any race or nation she would have been an outstanding personality and made a noteworthy contribution because her chief attribute was her indomitable soul . " 
 The mainstream press praised her as well . Christian Century suggested , " the story of her life should be taught to every school child for generations to come . " The New York Times noted she was , " one of the most potent factors in the growth of interracial goodwill in America . " The Washington Post said : " So great were her dynamism and force that it was almost impossible to resist her ... Not only her own people , but all America has been enriched and ennobled by her courageous , ebullient spirit . " Her hometown newspaper , the Daytona Beach Evening News printed , " To some she seemed unreal , something that could not be .... What right had she to greatness ? ... The lesson of Mrs. Bethune 's life is that genius knows no racial barriers . " 
 = = Honors = = 
 In 1930 , journalist Ida Tarbell included Bethune as number 10 on her list of America 's greatest women . Bethune was awarded the Spingarn Medal in 1935 by the NAACP . 
 Mary McLeod Bethune was the only black woman present at the founding of the United Nations in San Francisco in 1945 , representing the NAACP with W. E. B. Du Bois and Walter White . In 1949 she became the first woman to receive the National Order of Honour and Merit , Haiti 's highest award . She served as the US emissary to the induction of President William V.S. Tubman of Liberia in 1949 . 
 She also served as an adviser to five of the Presidents of the United States . Calvin Coolidge and Franklin D. Roosevelt appointed her to several government positions which included : Special Advisor in Minority Affairs , director of the Division of Negro Affairs of the National Youth Administration , and chair of Federal Council of Negro Affairs . Among her honors , she was an assistant director of the Women 's Army Corps . She was also an honorary member of Delta Sigma Theta sorority . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Bethune was described as " ebony " in complexion . She carried a cane , not for support but for effect . She said it gave her " swank " . She was a teetotaler and preached temperance for African Americans , taking opportunities to chastise drunken blacks she encountered in public . Bethune said more than once that the school and the students in Daytona were her first family , and that her son and extended family came second . Her students often referred to her as " Mama Bethune . " 
 She was noted for achieving her goals . Dr. Robert Weaver , who also served in Roosevelt 's Black Cabinet , said of her , " She had the most marvelous gift of effecting feminine helplessness in order to attain her aims with masculine ruthlessness . " But when a white Daytona resident threatened Bethune 's students with a rifle , Bethune worked to make an ally of him . The director of the McLeod Hospital recalled , " Mrs. Bethune treated him with courtesy and developed such goodwill in him that we found him protecting the children and going so far as to say , ' If anybody bothers old Mary , I will protect her with my life . ' " 
 Self @-@ sufficiency was a high priority throughout her life . Bethune invested in several businesses , including the Pittsburgh Courier , a black newspaper , and several life insurance companies . She founded Central Life Insurance of Florida . She eventually retired in Florida . Due to state segregation , blacks were not allowed to visit the beach . Bethune and several other business owners invested in Paradise Beach : they purchased a 2 @-@ mile ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) stretch of beach and the surrounding properties , selling these to black families . They did allow white families to visit the waterfront . Paradise Beach was later renamed as Bethune @-@ Volusia Beach in her honor . She also was a one @-@ fourth owner of the <unk> Motel in Daytona . 
 = = Legacy and honors = = 
 In 1973 , Mary McLeod Bethune was inducted into the National Women 's Hall of Fame . On July 10 , 1974 , the anniversary of her 99th birthday , the Mary McLeod Bethune Memorial , by artist Robert Berks , was erected in her honor in Lincoln Park ( Washington , D.C. ) The funds for the monument were raised by the National Council of Negro Women . It was the first monument honoring an African American or a woman to be installed in a public park in the District of Columbia . The inscription on the pedestal reads " let her works praise her , " while the side is engraved with a passage from her " Last Will and Testament " : 
 I leave you love . I leave you hope . I leave you the challenge of developing confidence in one another . I leave you a thirst for education . I leave you a respect for the use of power . I leave you faith . I leave you racial dignity . I leave you a desire to live harmoniously with your fellow men . I leave you a responsibility to our young people . 
 Approximately 250 @,@ 000 people attended the unveiling ceremony , including Shirley Chisholm , the first African @-@ American woman elected to Congress . 
 In 1985 the US Postal Service issued a stamp in Bethune 's honor . In 1989 Ebony Magazine listed her as one of " 50 Most Important Figures in Black US History . " In 1999 , Ebony Magazine included her as one of the " 100 Most Fascinating Black Women of the 20th century . " 
 In 1991 , the International Astronomical Union named the Bethune Patera on planet Venus in her honor . 
 In 1994 , the National Park Service acquired Bethune 's last residence , the NACW Council House at 1318 Vermont Avenue . The former headquarters was designated as the Mary McLeod Bethune Council House National Historic Site . The NACW is now located on Pennsylvania Avenue . 
 Schools have been named in her honor in Los Angeles , Chicago , San Diego , Dallas , Palm Beach , Florida , Moreno Valley , California , Minneapolis , Ft . Lauderdale , Atlanta , Philadelphia , Folkston and College Park , Georgia , New Orleans , Rochester , New York , Cleveland , South Boston , Virginia , Jacksonville , Florida , and Milwaukee , Wisconsin . 
 In 2002 , scholar Molefi Kete Asante listed Mary McLeod Bethune on his list of 100 Greatest African Americans . 
 In 2004 , Bethune @-@ Cookman University celebrated its hundredth anniversary from its founding as a primary school . It has a 82 @.@ 2 acres ( 333 @,@ 000 m2 ) campus in Daytona Beach and 40 buildings . The former 2nd Avenue on one side of the university was renamed as Mary Mcleod Bethune Boulevard . The university offers 35 majors in six major colleges . The university 's website says , " the vision of the founder remains in full view over one @-@ hundred years later . The institution prevails in order that others might improve their heads , hearts , and hands . " The university 's vice president recalled her legacy : " During Mrs. Bethune 's time , this was the only place in the city of Daytona Beach where Whites and Blacks could sit in the same room and enjoy what she called ' gems from students ' — their recitations and songs . This is a person who was able to bring Black people and White together . " 
 An historical marker in Mayesville , Sumter County , South Carolina , commemorates her birthplace . 
 = Hartford City Glass Company = 
 Hartford City Glass Company was among the top three window glass manufacturers in the United States between 1890 and 1899 , and continued to be one of the nation 's largest after its acquisition . It was also the country 's largest manufacturer of chipped glass , with capacity double that of its nearest competitor . The company 's works was the first of eight glass plants that existed in Hartford City , Indiana during the Indiana Gas Boom . It became the city 's largest manufacturer and employer , peaking with 600 employees . 
 Many of the skilled workers employed at the Hartford City Glass Company were from Belgium , at the time the world ’ s leading manufacturer of window glass . The Belgian workers and their families accounted for over one @-@ third of Hartford City 's population during the 1890s , and lived on the city 's south side . Because of the importance of the French @-@ speaking Belgians , one of the local newspapers featured articles in French . 
 In 1899 , Hartford City Glass was acquired by the American Window Glass Company , which controlled 85 percent of the American window glass manufacturing capacity . During the next decade , the company began replacing its skilled and well – paid Belgian glass blowers with machines and less @-@ skilled machine operators . The company used the Hartford City plant to test and refine the new technology . Most of the Belgian glass workers left town . 
 During the 1920s , competitors developed new window glass production processes that eclipsed the American Window Glass technology , and the company lost its advantage . By the time the Great Depression struck , the Hartford City plant had closed . 
 = = Manufacturers drawn to Indiana = = 
 During the late 1880s , the discovery of natural gas in Eaton , Indiana started an economic boom period in East Central Indiana . Manufacturers were lured to the region to take advantage of the low cost fuel . Blackford County , a small rural county located close to Eaton , had only 181 people working in manufacturing in 1880 . By 1901 , the county had over 1 @,@ 100 people employed at manufacturing plants in small communities such as Hartford City , Indiana . Between 1880 and 1900 , populations doubled in area counties such as Blackford , Delaware , and Grant . The region became Indiana ’ s major manufacturing center . 
 = = = Hartford City = = = 
 Like many Indiana communities during the gas boom , Hartford City ’ s leaders sought to take advantage of their newfound energy resource . The Hartford City Land Company was formed in 1891 as part of the effort to attract manufacturers . The company offered " free sites , free gas , excellent switching facilities , and reasonable cash subsidies " as enticements for manufacturers to locate in the boom town . Manufacturers that used high quantities of energy were especially attracted to no @-@ cost or low @-@ cost natural gas sites , and glassmaking was one of those energy @-@ consuming industries . 
 Hartford City 's success in attracting manufacturers can be indirectly measured by its population growth . The city 's population was 2 @,@ 287 in 1890 , but grew to 5 @,@ 912 by 1900 . In 1890 , the city convinced <unk> Richard Heagany to relocate from Kokomo , Indiana . An additional glass maker , Sneath Glass Company , relocated from Tiffin , Ohio , in 1894 . During 1901 , Indiana state inspectors visited 15 manufacturing facilities in Hartford City . These manufacturers employed 1 @,@ 077 people , and the American Window Glass plant ( the former Hartford City Glass Company ) plus the Sneath Glass works accounted for over half of the manufacturing employees . By 1902 , Hartford City was the home of 8 glass factories . 
 = = Organization and management = = 
 In 1878 , <unk> Richard Heagany organized a window glass plant in New York and was the factory 's superintendent . That plant became the largest window glass plant in the state . In 1886 , he moved to Kokomo , Indiana and opened the first window glass plant in the region to use natural gas as a fuel source . Heagany 's Kokomo plant lasted three years before it was destroyed by fire . Instead of rebuilding in Kokomo , he moved to Hartford City and organized the Hartford City Glass Company . The company was organized in 1890 with the financial assistance of several capitalists . Production began in early 1891 after the plant was constructed . Heagany was the plant manager until his retirement in 1899 . 
 = = = Capitalists = = = 
 One of the principal stockholders of the new company was multi @-@ millionaire A. M. Barber . Barber was involved in grain and banking in Akron , Ohio . Another important investor from Akron was Colonel Arthur Latham Conger , who was the company 's first president . Conger was a Civil War veteran who invested in companies in Ohio and Indiana ( including in Kokomo ) . He was also elected president of the Hartford City Land Company in 1893 . Hartford City 's Sydney W. Cantwell was secretary of the Hartford City Glass Company during its early years . He was also president of the state organization of window glass manufacturers . Cantwell was an attorney involved with the Blackford County Bank , Akron Oil Company , and Hartford City Land Company . Another Hartford City investor , Henry " H. B. " Smith , was president of Hartford City 's Citizen 's Bank . 
 = = = Management change = = = 
 Top management changed during 1895 after the company 's annual shareholders ' meeting . Colonel A. L. Conger , who had been president since the company 's beginning , lost his position to another colonel from Akron , George T. Perkins . Conger had fallen into disfavor with many of the local citizens . He immediately expressed his unhappiness with the election by selling his company stock and leaving town . Conger 's stock was purchased by Kokomo banker John A. Jay . Officers of Hartford City Glass in 1896 were George T. Perkins , President ; John A. Jay , Vice President ; H.B. Smith , Treasurer ; Richard Heagany , General Manager ; and John Rodgers Johnston , Secretary . 
 Colonel George Tod Perkins was a Civil War veteran and president of the B. F. Goodrich Company . He was also involved in banking and had been president of the Bank of Akron . John R. Johnston began working at the Hartford City plant in 1890 as a bookkeeper . He was elected secretary after 4 years . Johnston lived in Hartford City and helped Heagany run the business . Heagany submitted his resignation at the August 1899 board meeting , retiring after 42 years in the glass business . Johnston became plant manager at that time . Johnston resigned a short time later , effective April 1900 . He formed Hartford City 's Johnston Glass Company in September of the same year . 
 = = Workforce = = 
 During its peak years , Hartford City Glass Company employed 500 to 600 people . In 1894 , it employed 100 glass blowers as part of a total workforce of 540 people . The wages for that workforce were said to be equivalent to " about 1500 men in any other industry . " Not only was the glass works the largest industry in the county , it was thought to be the second @-@ largest plant of any industry located in the Indiana Gas Belt . To help meet the housing needs for the factory 's many employees , 184 houses were built nearby . In 1896 , 443 workers at the plant lived in Hartford City , especially on the south side . Assuming each local worker had a family of five , over one @-@ third of the city 's population ( 2 @,@ 235 of " an estimated 6 @,@ 000 " ) was financially dependent upon Hartford City Glass . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 The window glass manufacturing process used by Hartford City Glass was known as the Cylinder Method . The process was labor @-@ intensive , and required the services of a glass blower and glass cutter — who were both highly skilled and well paid . The glass blower led a small production crew that included skilled and unskilled workers . At older plants , the glass blower 's workstation was adjacent to a ceramic pot located inside the furnace . Each pot contained molten glass created by melting a batch of ingredients that included sand , soda , and lime . At newer plants such as the Hartford City works , tanks were used instead of pots . The tanks were essentially huge brick pots with multiple workstations . A tank furnace is more efficient than a pot furnace , but more costly to build . 
 In the first step of the glass @-@ making process , molten glass was extracted from the pot or tank . The glass blower and his helper used a blowpipe , which was typically 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) to 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) long , to create a bubble of molten glass . The glass blower manipulated the bubble into a cylinder , and removed it from the pot or tank . The cylinders were 12 inches ( 30 @.@ 5 cm ) to 16 inches ( 40 @.@ 6 cm ) in diameter , and 4 feet ( 1 @.@ 2 m ) or 5 feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) long . 
 Next , the glass – cutter cut the cylinder , and the glass was flattened . It was necessary to gradually cool the glass , a process known as annealing , to prevent it from breaking . A lehr or annealing oven was used to anneal the product . A typical 20th @-@ century lehr was a large conveyor inside a long oven . The newly made glass gradually moved from the hot end of the lehr to its opposite end , which was at room temperature . The glass would then be cut into the desired window glass size , placed in a box , and moved to inventory . It is not known if ( or when ) the <unk> at the Hartford City plant had conveyors . 
 = = = The Belgians = = = 
 During the late 19th century , glass blowers were difficult to find . Belgium was the largest exporter of window glass to the United States , and plant manager Heagany previously used the skills of glass blowers from that country in his Kokomo glass works . In Hartford City , Heagany again relied upon Belgian workers for the skilled positions in his glass works . 
