 = = Release and promotion = = 
 A demo version of " Young Blood " was released on 27 March 2013 , as a complimentary download on Ellis @-@ Bextor 's website . Selected as the lead single of Wanderlust , the song was released as a standalone digital download on 21 November of that year . A CD single of the track was sent to radio stations in that month , including the album version of it as well as a radio edit ; the song was eventually playlisted by hot adult contemporary UK station BBC Radio 2 . Ellis @-@ Bextor revealed that she chose " Young Blood " as the first single from Wanderlust because she found it representative of the album 's sound . 
 The official music video of " Young Blood " was filmed by Sophie Muller , and released on 25 November 2013 . It mostly depicts Ellis @-@ Bextor , dressed in a striped dress , lip @-@ synching the song 's lyrics , walking through an abandoned pier " in terrible weather " . Those scenes are interspersed with clips of her sat on a red sofa , wearing a " buttoned up , Victorian @-@ styled lace dress " inside a lounge room . Writing for Idolator , Mike Wass characterised the visual as " simple " , noting that it is adequate for the song 's tone . On 9 April 2014 , Ellis @-@ Bextor performed " Young Blood " on ITV 's morning programme Daybreak ; fifteen days later , she sang it on the first episode of the channel 's Weekend , aired on 26 April 2014 . She performed the song in an unplugged setting on ZDF <unk> , a programme of German channel ZDF , on 23 January 2014 . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Promotional CD single 
 Details adapted from the liner notes of the " Young Blood " promotional CD single . 
 " Young Blood " ( Radio edit ) – 3 : 45 
 " Young Blood " – 4 : 28 
 Digital download 
 " Young Blood " – 4 : 28 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 = = Weekly charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill = 
 The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , also known as UNC , or simply Carolina , is a public research university located in Chapel Hill , North Carolina , United States . After being chartered in 1789 , the university first began enrolling students in 1795 , which also allows it to be one of three schools to claim the title of the oldest public university in the United States . North Carolina is one of the original eight Public Ivy schools . 
 The first public institution of higher education in North Carolina , the school opened its doors to students on February 12 , 1795 . The university offers degrees in over 70 courses of study through fourteen colleges and the College of Arts and Sciences . All undergraduates receive a liberal arts education and have the option to pursue a major within the professional schools of the university or within the College of Arts and Sciences from the time they obtain junior status . Under the leadership of President Kemp Plummer Battle , in 1877 North Carolina became coeducational and began the process of desegregation in 1951 when African @-@ American graduate students were admitted under Chancellor Robert Burton House . In 1952 , North Carolina opened its own hospital , UNC Health Care , for research and treatment , and has since specialized in cancer care . The school 's students , alumni , and sports teams are known as " Tar Heels " . 
 The campus of North Carolina is located in Chapel Hill , North Carolina , a university town . The campus covers 729 acres ( 3 km2 ) over Chapel Hill 's downtown area , encompassing places like the Morehead Planetarium and the many stores and shops located on Franklin Street . Students can participate in over 550 officially recognized student organizations . The student @-@ run newspaper The Daily Tar Heel has won national awards for collegiate media , while the student radio station WXYC provided the world 's first internet radio broadcast . North Carolina is one of the charter members of the Atlantic Coast Conference , which was founded on June 14 , 1953 . Competing athletically as the Tar Heels , North Carolina has achieved great success in sports , most notably in men 's basketball , women 's soccer , and women 's field hockey . 
 = = History = = 
 Chartered by the North Carolina General Assembly on December 11 , 1789 , the university 's cornerstone was laid on October 12 , 1793 , near the ruins of a chapel , chosen because of its central location within the state . The first public university chartered under the US Constitution , The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill is the oldest public university in the United States and the only such institution to confer degrees in the eighteenth century . 
 During the Civil War , North Carolina Governor David Lowry Swain persuaded Confederate President Jefferson Davis to exempt some students from the draft , so the university was one of the few in the Confederacy that managed to stay open . However , Chapel Hill suffered the loss of more of its population during the war than any village in the South , and when student numbers did not recover , the university was forced to close during Reconstruction from December 1 , 1870 until September 6 , 1875 . 
 Despite initial skepticism from university President Frank Porter Graham , on March 27 , 1931 , legislation was passed to group the University of North Carolina with the State College of Agriculture and Engineering and Woman 's College of the University of North Carolina to form the Consolidated University of North Carolina . In 1963 , the consolidated university was made fully coeducational , although most women still attended Woman 's College for their first two years , transferring to Chapel Hill as juniors , since freshmen were required to live on campus and there was only one women 's dorm . As a result , Woman 's College was renamed the " University of North Carolina at Greensboro " , and the University of North Carolina became the " University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill . " In 1955 , UNC Chapel Hill officially desegregated its undergraduate divisions . 
 During World War II , UNC Chapel Hill was one of 131 colleges and universities nationally that took part in the V @-@ 12 Navy College Training Program which offered students a path to a Navy commission . 
 During the 1960s , the campus was the location of significant political protest . Prior to the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , protests about local racial segregation which began quietly in Franklin Street restaurants led to mass demonstrations and disturbance . The climate of civil unrest prompted the 1963 Speaker Ban Law prohibiting speeches by communists on state campuses in North Carolina . The law was immediately criticized by university Chancellor William Brantley <unk> and university President William Friday , but was not reviewed by the North Carolina General Assembly until 1965 . Small amendments to allow " infrequent " visits failed to placate the student body , especially when the university 's board of trustees overruled new Chancellor Paul Frederick Sharp 's decision to allow speaking invitations to Marxist speaker Herbert Aptheker and civil liberties activist Frank Wilkinson ; however , the two speakers came to Chapel Hill anyway . Wilkinson spoke off campus , while more than 1 @,@ 500 students viewed Aptheker 's speech across a low campus wall at the edge of campus , christened " Dan Moore 's Wall " by The Daily Tar Heel for Governor Dan K. Moore . A group of UNC Chapel Hill students , led by Student Body President Paul Dickson , filed a lawsuit in U.S. federal court , and on February 20 , 1968 , the Speaker Ban Law was struck down . In 1969 , campus food workers of Lenoir Hall went on strike protesting perceived racial injustices that impacted their employment , garnering the support of student groups and members of the University and Chapel Hill community . 
 From the late 1990s and onward , UNC Chapel Hill expanded rapidly with a 15 % increase in total student population to more than 28 @,@ 000 by 2007 . This was accompanied by the construction of new facilities , funded in part by the " Carolina First " fundraising campaign and an endowment that increased fourfold to more than $ 2 billion in just ten years . Professor Oliver Smithies was awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine in 2007 for his work in genetics . Additionally , Aziz Sancar was awarded the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 2015 for his work in understanding the molecular repair mechanisms of DNA . 
 Notable leaders of the university include the 26th Governor of North Carolina , David Lowry Swain ( president 1835 – 1868 ) ; and Edwin Anderson Alderman ( 1896 – 1900 ) , who was also president of Tulane University and the University of Virginia . The current chancellor is Carol <unk> , the first woman to hold the post . 
 = = Campus = = 
 UNC Chapel Hill 's 729 @-@ acre ( 3 @.@ 0 km2 ) campus is dominated by two central quads : Polk Place and McCorkle Place . Polk Place is named after North Carolina native and university alumnus President James K. Polk , and McCorkle Place is named in honor of Samuel Eusebius McCorkle , the original author of the bill requesting the university 's charter . Adjacent to Polk Place is a sunken brick courtyard known as the Pit where students will gather , often engaging in lively debate with speakers such as the Pit Preacher . The Morehead – Patterson Bell Tower , located in the heart of campus , tolls the quarter @-@ hour . In 1999 , UNC Chapel Hill was one of sixteen recipients of the American Society of Landscape Architects Medallion Awards and was identified as one of 50 college or university " works of art " by T.A. Gaines in his book The Campus as a Work of Art . 
 The university 's campus is informally divided into three regions , usually referred to as " north campus , " " middle campus , " and " south campus . " North campus includes the two quads along with the Pit , Frank Porter Graham Student Union , and the Davis , House , and Wilson libraries . Almost all classrooms are located in north campus along with several undergraduate residence halls . Middle campus includes Fetzer Field and Woollen Gymnasium along with the Student Recreation Center , Kenan Memorial Stadium , Irwin Belk outdoor track , Eddie Smith Field House , <unk> Stadium , Carmichael Auditorium , the Sonja Haynes Stone Center for Black Culture and History , School of Government , School of Law , George Watts Hill Alumni Center , Ram 's Head complex ( with a dining hall , parking garage , grocery store , and gymnasium ) , and various residence halls . South campus includes the Dean Smith Center for men 's basketball , <unk> Natatorium , School of Medicine , UNC Hospitals , Kenan – Flagler Business School , and the newest student residence halls . 
 A new satellite campus , Carolina North , to be built on the site of Horace Williams Airport was approved in 2007 . This is planned to be primarily a research park with expanded science facilities , but will also add classrooms and residence halls to cope with future increases in student population . 
 = = = Sustainability = = = 
 The principles of sustainability have been integrated throughout much of UNC Chapel Hill . In the area of green building , the university requires that all new projects meet the requirements for LEED Silver certification and is in the process of building the first building in North Carolina to receive LEED Platinum status . UNC Chapel Hill 's award @-@ winning co @-@ generation facility produces one @-@ fourth of the electricity and all of the steam used on campus . In 2006 , the university and the Town of Chapel Hill jointly agreed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 60 % by 2050 , becoming the first town @-@ gown partnership in the country to do so . Through these efforts , the university achieved a " A − " grade on the Sustainable Endowment Institute 's College Sustainability Report Card 2010 . Only 14 out of 300 universities received a higher score than this . 
 = = = Old Well and McCorkle Place = = = 
 The most enduring symbol of the university is the Old Well , a small neoclassical rotunda based on the Temple of Love in the Gardens of Versailles , in the same location as the original well that provided water for the school . The well stands at the south end of McCorkle Place , the northern quad , between two of the campus 's oldest buildings , Old East , and Old West . Also located in McCorkle Place is the Davie Poplar tree under which the university 's founder , William Richardson Davie , supposedly selected the location for the university . The legend of the Davie Poplar says that if the tree falls , so will UNC Chapel Hill . Because of the tree 's questionable health from damage caused by severe weather such as Hurricane Fran in 1996 , the university has planted two genetic clones nearby called Davie Poplar Jr. and Davie Poplar III . The second clone , Davie Poplar III , was planted in conjunction with the university 's bicentennial celebration in 1993 by President Bill Clinton . 
 Another university landmark is the Confederate monument , known to students as Silent Sam , erected to commemorate UNC Chapel Hill students who died fighting for the Confederacy . The statue has at times been dogged by controversy , some critics claiming that the monument invokes memories of racism and slavery , while others counter that " Silent Sam " is simply historical and a part of the rich heritage of the South . The statue depicts a soldier armed with a rifle , but lacking a cartridge box . Thus , Silent Sam does not carry any ammunition and is a " benign " soldier . The statue was erected in 1913 by the United Daughters of the Confederacy to honor the school 's Confederate heroes . The student members of the university 's Dialectic and Philanthropic Societies are not allowed to walk on the grass of McCorkle Place out of respect for the unknown resting place of Joseph Caldwell , the university 's first president . 
 The Morehead – Patterson bell tower was commissioned by John Motley Morehead III , the benefactor of the prestigious Morehead Scholarship . The hedge and surrounding landscape was designed by William C. Coker , botany professor and creator of the campus arboretum . Traditionally , seniors have the opportunity to climb the tower a few days prior to May commencement . 
 The historic Playmakers Theatre is located on Cameron Avenue between McCorkle Place and Polk Place . It was designed by Alexander Jackson Davis , the same architect who renovated the northern façade of Old East in 1844 . The east @-@ facing building was completed in 1851 and initially served as a library and as a ballroom . It was originally named Smith Hall after North Carolina Governor General Benjamin Smith , who was a special aide to George Washington during the American Revolutionary War and was an early benefactor to the university . When the library moved to Hill Hall in 1907 , the School of Law occupied Smith Hall until 1923 . In 1925 , the structure was renovated and used as a stage by the university theater group , the Carolina Playmakers . It has remained a theater to the present day . Louis Round Wilson wrote in 1957 that Playmakers Theatre is the " architectural gem of the campus . " Playmakers Theatre was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1973 . Today , the building is a venue for student drama productions , concerts , and events sponsored by academic departments . In 2006 , the university began a renovation of Playmakers Theatre , which has included an exterior paint job and interior remodeling . The renovation is expected to be complete by the end of 2010 . 
 = = Academics = = 
 = = = Curriculum = = = 
 UNC Chapel Hill offers 71 bachelor 's , 107 master 's and 74 doctoral degree programs . The university enrolls more than 28 @,@ 000 students from all 100 North Carolina counties , the other 49 states , and 47 other countries . It is the second largest university in North Carolina . State law requires that the percentage of students from North Carolina in each freshman class meet or exceed 82 % . The student body consists of 17 @,@ 981 undergraduate students and 10 @,@ 935 graduate and professional students ( as of Fall 2009 ) . Minorities comprise 30 @.@ 8 % of UNC Chapel Hill 's undergraduate population and applications from international students have more than doubled in the last five years ( from 702 in 2004 to 1 @,@ 629 in 2009 ) . Eighty @-@ nine percent of enrolling first year students in 2009 reported a GPA of 4 @.@ 0 or higher on a weighted 4 @.@ 0 scale . UNC Chapel Hill students are strong competitors for national and international scholarships . In 2009 , two UNC Chapel Hill seniors won Rhodes Scholarships . The most popular majors at UNC Chapel Hill are Biology , Business Administration , Psychology , Media and Journalism , and Political Science . UNC Chapel Hill also offers 300 study abroad programs in 70 countries . 
 At the undergraduate level , all students must fulfill a number of general education requirements as part of the Making Connections curriculum , which was introduced in 2006 . English , social science , history , foreign language , mathematics , and natural science courses are required of all students , ensuring that they receive a broad liberal arts education . The university also offers a wide range of first year seminars for incoming freshmen . After their second year , students move on to the College of Arts and Sciences , or choose an undergraduate professional school program within the schools of medicine , nursing , business , education , pharmacy , information and library science , public health , or media and journalism . Undergraduates are held to an eight @-@ semester limit of study . 
 = = = Undergraduate admissions = = = 
 UNC Chapel Hill 's admissions process is " most selective " according to U.S. News & World Report . State law requires that the percentage of in @-@ state students per freshman class be at least 82 % , making out @-@ of @-@ state admissions very selective . For freshmen entering Fall 2015 , 9 @,@ 510 were accepted out of 31 @,@ 953 applicants , a 30 % acceptance rate , and 4 @,@ 076 enrolled . Women constituted 59 % of the incoming class ; men 41 % . 
 Among freshman students who enrolled in fall 2015 , SAT scores for the middle 50 % ranged from 600 @-@ 710 for critical reading , 620 @-@ 720 for math , and 590 @-@ 700 for writing . ACT composite scores for the middle 50 % ranged from 28 – 33 . In terms of class rank , 77 % of enrolled freshmen were in the top 10 % of their high school classes . 
 = = = Department of Public Policy = = = 
 The UNC Chapel Hill Department of Public Policy , established in 2001 , is a public policy program offering specializations in areas such as global health policy , education policy , tax policy , and social justice . 
 Established in 1979 , the Curriculum in Public Policy Analysis was one of the first undergraduate degree programs in public policy , and a charter member of the national Association for Public Policy Analysis and Management . It was augmented in 1991 by an interdisciplinary PhD Curriculum in Public Policy Analysis . In 1995 the two curricula were combined and began recruiting their own core faculty . In 2001 the combined curriculum became the present Department of Public Policy . 
 = = = Honor Code = = = 
 The university has a longstanding Honor Code known as the " Instrument of Student Judicial Governance , " supplemented by an entirely student @-@ run Honor System to resolve issues with students accused of academic and conduct offenses against the university community . The Honor System is divided into three branches : the Student Attorney General Staff , the Honor Court , and the Honor System Outreach . The Student Attorney General is appointed by the Student Body President to investigate all reports of Honor Code violations and determine whether or not to bring charges against the student as detailed in the " Instrument . " The Attorney General is supported by a select staff of around 40 students . The Honor Court is led by the Chair , who is appointed by the Student Body President , and supported by Vice Chairs who adjudicate all students ' hearings . The Honor Court as a whole is made up of some 80 selected students . The Honor System Outreach is a branch of the System solely devoted to promoting honor and integrity in the university community . UNC Chapel Hill is the only public university , with the exception of the military academies , that has a completely student @-@ run system from the beginning to the end of the process . 
 = = = Libraries = = = 
 UNC Chapel Hill 's library system includes a number of individual libraries housed throughout the campus and holds more than 7 @.@ 0 million volumes in total . UNC Chapel Hill 's North Carolina Collection ( NCC ) is the largest and most comprehensive collection of holdings about any single state nationwide . The unparalleled assemblage of literary , visual , and artifactual materials documents four centuries of North Carolina history and culture . The North Carolina Collection is housed in Wilson Library , named after Louis Round Wilson , along with the Southern Historical Collection , the Rare Books Collection , and the Southern Folklife Collection . The university is home to <unk> , one of the world 's largest collections of freely available information including software , music , literature , art , history , science , politics , and cultural studies . 
 The Davis Library , situated near the Pit , is the main library and the largest academic facility and state @-@ owned building in North Carolina . It was named after North Carolina philanthropist Walter Royal Davis and opened on February 6 , 1984 . The first book checked out of Davis Library was George Orwell 's 1984 . The R.B. House Undergraduate Library is located between the Pit area and Wilson Library . It is named after Robert B. House , the Chancellor of UNC Chapel Hill from 1945 to 1957 , and it opened in 1968 . In 2001 , the R.B. House Undergraduate Library underwent a $ 9 @.@ 9 million renovation that modernized the furnishings , equipment , and infrastructure of the building . Prior to the construction of Davis , Wilson Library was the university 's main library , but now Wilson hosts special events and houses special collections , rare books , and temporary exhibits . 
 = = = Rankings and reputation = = = 
 In 2015 , U.S. News & World Report ranked UNC Chapel Hill 5th among the top public colleges and universities in the United States . 
 The university was named a Public Ivy by Richard Moll in his 1985 book The Public Ivies : A Guide to America 's Best Public Undergraduate Colleges and Universities , and in later guides by Howard and Matthew Greene . Many of UNC Chapel Hill 's professional schools have achieved high rankings in publications such as Forbes magazine , as well as annual U.S. News & World Report surveys . In 2016 , U.S. News & World Report ranked UNC Chapel Hill business school 's MBA program as the 16th best in the nation . In the 2011 edition , U.S. News & World Report ranked the UNC Chapel Hill Gillings School of Global Public Health as the top public school of public health in the United States , and the second ranked school of public health in the U.S. ( behind the top ranked school , Johns Hopkins and ahead of the third ranked school , Harvard ) . The UNC Chapel Hill <unk> School of Pharmacy was ranked second among pharmacy schools in the United States in 2012 by U.S. News & World Report . In 2005 , Business Week ranked UNC Chapel Hill business school 's Executive MBA program as the 5th best in the United States . Other highly ranked schools include journalism and mass communication , law , library and information science , medicine , dentistry , and city and regional planning . Nationally , UNC Chapel Hill is in the top ten public universities for research . Internationally , the 2015 QS World University Rankings ranked North Carolina 79th in the world ( in 2010 Times Higher Education World University Rankings and QS World University Rankings parted ways to produce separate rankings ) . 
 UNC Chapel Hill 's undergraduate program is ranked 30th in the United States by U.S. News & World Report and is consistently ranked among the nation 's top five public universities , just behind UC Berkeley , University of Virginia , UCLA , and the University of Michigan . Kiplinger 's Personal Finance in 2015 ranked UNC Chapel Hill as the number one " best value " public college in the country . The university also topped The Princeton Review 's list of the Best Value Colleges in 2014 . Similarly , the university is first among public universities and ninth overall in " Great Schools , Great Prices " , on the basis of academic quality , net cost of attendance and average student debt . Along with one of the nation 's most acclaimed undergraduate honors programs in a public institution , UNC Chapel Hill also has the highest percentage of undergraduates studying abroad for any public institution . 
 The University is also a large recipient of National Institute of Health grants and funds . For fiscal year 2014 , the university received $ 247 @,@ 555 @,@ 416 in NIH funds for research . This amount makes Chapel Hill the 7th overall recipient to research funds in the nation by the NIH . 
 = = = Scholarships = = = 
 For decades UNC Chapel Hill has offered an undergraduate merit scholarship known as the Morehead @-@ Cain Scholarship . Recipients receive tuition , room and board , books , and funds for summer study for four years . Since the inception of the Morehead scholarship program , 29 alumni of the program have been named Rhodes Scholars . North Carolina also boasts the Robertson Scholars Program , a scholarship granting recipients the opportunity to attend both UNC Chapel Hill and neighboring Duke University . Additionally , the university provides merit @-@ based scholarships , including the Carolina , Colonel Robinson , and Pogue Scholars programs , which offer full scholarships for out @-@ of @-@ state students . 
 In 2003 , Chancellor James <unk> announced the Carolina Covenant , which provides a debt free education to low @-@ income students who are academically qualified to attend the university . The program was the second in the nation ( following Princeton ) and the first of its kind at a public university . About 80 other universities have since followed suit . 
 North Carolina is tied for the largest number of Rhodes Scholars among public universities ( 47 since 1902 ) with the University of Virginia . Additionally , many students have won Truman , Goldwater , Mitchell , Churchill , Fulbright , Marshall , Udall , and Mellon scholarships . 
 = = = Academic @-@ athletic scandal = = = 
 From 1993 to 2011 UNC Chapel Hill offered independent study courses within the Department of African and Afro @-@ American Studies that consistently awarded high grades regardless of the quality of the work submitted . The final research papers generally received only a cursory review by an administrator without faculty oversight . During the 18 @-@ year period the courses saw 3 @,@ 100 enrollees , of which slightly fewer than half were athletes . A report released in October 2014 by former federal prosecutor Kenneth L. Wainstein showed that a number of faculty and administrators , including some members of the athletic support department and the director of the Parr Center for Ethics , had varying levels of knowledge about the nature of the courses . Members of the athletic support staff raised concerns with the College of Arts and Sciences on multiple occasions , but they were repeatedly rebuffed by an Associate Dean , who claimed that professors are free to run their classes as they see fit ; nine employees were eventually terminated or placed under disciplinary review for their role in the classes . In June 2015 , the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools ' Commission on Colleges put UNC Chapel Hill on one year of probation . 
 = = Athletics = = 
 North Carolina 's athletic teams are known as the Tar Heels . They compete as a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association ( NCAA ) Division I level ( Football Bowl Subdivision ( FBS ) sub @-@ level for football ) , primarily competing in the Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) for all sports since the 1953 – 54 season . Men 's sports include baseball , basketball , cross country , fencing , football , golf , lacrosse , soccer , swimming & diving , tennis , track & field and Wrestling ; while women 's sports include basketball , cross country , fencing , field hockey , golf , gymnastics , lacrosse , rowing , soccer , softball , swimming and diving , tennis , track & field and volleyball . 
 The NCAA refers to UNC Chapel Hill as the " University of North Carolina " for athletics . As of Fall 2011 , the university had won 40 NCAA team championships in six different sports , eighth all @-@ time . These include twenty one NCAA championships in women 's soccer , six in women 's field hockey , four in men 's lacrosse , five in men 's basketball , one in women 's basketball , and two in men 's soccer . The Men 's basketball team won its 5th NCAA basketball championship in 2009 , the second for Coach Roy Williams since he took the job as head coach . Other recent successes include the 2011 College Cup in men 's soccer , and four consecutive College World Series appearances by the baseball team from 2006 to 2009 . In 1994 , the university 's athletic programs won the Sears Directors Cup " all @-@ sports national championship " awarded for cumulative performance in NCAA competition . Consensus collegiate national athletes of the year from North Carolina include Rachel Dawson in field hockey ; Phil Ford , Tyler Hansbrough , Antawn Jamison , Vince Carter , James Worthy and Michael Jordan in men 's basketball ; and Mia Hamm ( twice ) , Shannon Higgins , Kristine Lilly , and Tisha Venturini in women 's soccer . 
 = = = Mascot and nickname = = = 
 The university 's teams are nicknamed the " Tar Heels , " in reference to the state 's eighteenth century prominence as a tar and pitch producer . The nickname 's cultural relevance , however , has a complex history that includes anecdotal tales from both the American Civil War and the American Revolution . The mascot is a live Dorset ram named Rameses , a tradition that dates back to 1924 , when the team manager brought a ram to the annual game against Virginia Military Institute , inspired by the play of former football player Jack " The Battering Ram " Merrit . The kicker rubbed his head for good luck before a game @-@ winning field goal , and the ram stayed . There is also an anthropomorphic ram mascot who appears at games . The modern Rameses is depicted in a sailor 's hat , a reference to a United States Navy flight training program that was attached to the university during World War II . 
 = = = The Carolina Way = = = 
 Dean Smith was widely known for his idea of " The Carolina Way " , in which he challenged his players to , " Play hard , play smart , play together . " " The Carolina Way " was an idea of excellence in the classroom , as well as on the court . In Coach Smith 's book , The Carolina Way , former player Scott Williams said , regarding Dean Smith , " Winning was very important at Carolina , and there was much pressure to win , but Coach cared more about our getting a sound education and turning into good citizens than he did about winning . " 
 The October 22 , 2014 release of the Wainstein Report alleging institutionalized academic fraud that involved over 3 @,@ 100 students and student athletes , over an 18 @-@ year period from 1993 to 2011 that began during the final years of the Dean Smith era , marred " The Carolina Way " image . The report alleged that at least 54 players during the Dean Smith era were enrolled in what came to be known as " paper classes . " In response to the allegations of the Wainstein report , the NCAA launched their own investigation and on June 5 , 2015 accused the institution of five major violations ( including lack of institutional control ) . Sports Illustrated has since gone on to say , " The Carolina Way " is no longer shorthand for all that is admirable and salutary in college sports . " 
 = = = Rivalries = = = 
 The South 's Oldest Rivalry between North Carolina and its first opponent , the University of Virginia , was prominent throughout the first third of the twentieth century . The 119th meeting in football between two of the top public universities in the east occurred in October 2014 . 
 One of the fiercest rivalries is with Durham 's Duke University . Located only eight miles from each other , the schools regularly compete in both athletics and academics . The Carolina @-@ Duke rivalry is most intense , however , in basketball . With a combined ten national championships in men 's basketball , both teams have been frequent contenders for the national championship for the past thirty years . The rivalry has been the focus of several books , including Will Blythe 's To Hate Like This Is to Be Happy Forever and was the focus of the HBO documentary Battle for Tobacco Road : Duke vs Carolina . Duke was Carolina 's biggest rival from the 1930 's until the early 1960 's , when Duke 's declining athletic program shifted Carolina 's rival focus to North Carolina State . 
 Carolina holds an in @-@ state rivalry with fellow Tobacco Road school , North Carolina State University . Attention shifted back to Duke following a decline in NC State 's basketball program since the mid @-@ 1970 's ( and the resurgence of Duke 's basketball program ) , but the rivalry is sometimes still considered the most bitter in the state . Combined , the two schools hold seven NCAA Championships and 27 ACC Championships in basketball . Students from each school often exchange pranks before basketball and football games . 
 = = = Rushing Franklin = = = 
 While students previously held " Beat Duke " parades on Franklin Street before sporting events , today students and sports fans have been known to spill out of bars and dormitories upon the victory of one of Carolina 's sports teams . In most cases , a Franklin Street " bonfire " celebration is due to a victory by the men 's basketball team , although other Franklin Street celebrations have stemmed from wins by the women 's basketball team and women 's soccer team . The first known student celebration on Franklin Street came after the 1957 men 's basketball team capped their perfect season with a National Championship victory over the Kansas Jayhawks . From then on , students have flooded the street after important victories . After a Final Four victory in 1981 and the men 's basketball team won the 1982 NCAA Championship , Franklin Street was painted blue by the fans who had rushed the street . This event has led local vendors to stop selling Carolina blue paint as the Tar Heels near the national championship . 
 = = = School colors = = = 
 Since the beginning of intercollegiate athletics at UNC Chapel Hill in the late nineteenth century , the school 's colors have been Carolina blue and white . The colors were chosen years before by the Dialectic ( blue ) and Philanthropic ( white ) Societies , the oldest student organization at the university . The school had required participation in one of the clubs , and traditionally the " Di " s were from the western part of North Carolina while the " Phi " s were from the eastern part of the state . 
 Society members would wear a blue or white ribbon at university functions , and blue or white ribbons were attached to their diplomas at graduation . On public occasions , both groups were equally represented , and eventually both colors were used by processional leaders to signify the unity of both groups as part of the university . When football became a popular collegiate sport in the 1880s , the Carolina football team adopted the light blue and white of the Di @-@ Phi Societies as the school colors . 
 = = = School songs = = = 
 Notable among a number of songs commonly played and sung at various events such as commencement , convocation , and athletic games are the university fight songs " I 'm a Tar Heel Born " and " Here Comes Carolina " . The fight songs are often played by the bell tower near the center of campus , as well as after major victories . " I 'm a Tar Heel Born " originated in the late 1920s as a tag to the school 's alma mater , " Hark The Sound " . " Hark the Sound " was usually played at the end of games , but as of late it has been played at the beginning of games as well . 
 The Institute of Folk Music at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill was founded by Lamar Stringfield in 1930 , followed by the founding of the North Carolina Symphony in 1932 . 
 = = Student life = = 
 = = = Organizations and activities = = = 
 Most student organizations at UNC Chapel Hill are officially recognized and provided with assistance by the Carolina Union , an administrative unit of the university . Funding is derived from the student government student activity fee , which is allocated at the discretion of the student congress . 
 The largest student fundraiser , the UNC Chapel Hill Dance Marathon , involves thousands of students , faculty , and community members in raising funds for the North Carolina Children 's Hospital . The organization conducts fundraising and volunteer activities throughout the year and , as of 2008 , had donated $ 1 @.@ 4 million since its inception in 1999 . 
 The university is also noted for its Campus Y , the social justice hub on campus that houses many service and internationally focused organizations . The Campus Y was founded in 1859 , and is noted as a " leader in on @-@ campus discussion and dialogue and off @-@ campus service and activism " . The Campus Y was at the center of many progressive movements within the university , including the racial integration of the student body , the effort to improve wages and working conditions for University employees , and the establishment of the Sonja Haynes Stones Center for Black Culture and History . The Y is a collection of many UNC Chapel Hill specific and outside organizations , such as Carolina Kickoff , STAND , <unk> International , Carolina <unk> Initiative , Homeless Outreach & Poverty Eradication ( HOPE ) , and Project Literacy . 
 The student @-@ run newspaper The Daily Tar Heel is ranked highly by The Princeton Review , and received the 2004 – 5 National Pacemaker Award from the Associated Collegiate Press . Founded in 1977 , WXYC 89 @.@ 3 FM is UNC Chapel Hill 's student radio station that broadcasts 24 hours a day , 365 days a year . Programming is left up to student DJs . WXYC typically plays little heard music from a wide range of genres and eras . On November 7 , 1994 , WXYC became the first radio station in the world to broadcast its signal over the internet . A student @-@ run television station , STV , airs on the campus cable and throughout the Chapel Hill Time Warner Cable system . Founded in 1948 as successor to the Carolina Magazine , the Carolina Quarterly , edited by graduate students , has published the works of numerous authors , including Wendell Berry , Raymond Carver , Don DeLillo , Annie Dillard , Joyce Carol Oates , and John Edgar Wideman . Works appearing in the Quarterly have been anthologized in Best American Short Stories and New Stories from the South and have won the <unk> and O. Henry Prizes . 
 The Clef Hangers ( also known as the <unk> ) are the university 's oldest a cappella group , founded by Barry Saunders in 1977 . The group has since won several Contemporary A Cappella Recording Awards ( <unk> ) , including Best Soloist in the song Easy , featured on the 2003 album Breeze . They have won two more <unk> for Best Male Collegiate Songs for My Love on Time Out ( 2008 ) , and for Ain 't Nothing Wrong on Twist ( 2009 ) . Members have included Brendan James , who graduated in 2002 , and Anoop Desai , who graduated in 2008 . Since the spring of 2002 , the Clef Hangers have sung each year at Commencement . They hold fall and spring concerts , sometimes featuring special guests . 
 The Residence Hall Association , the school 's third @-@ largest student @-@ run organization , is dedicated to enhancing the experience of students living in residence halls . This includes putting on social , educational , and philanthropic programs for residents ; recognizing outstanding residents and members ; and helping residents develop into successful leaders . The organization is run by 8 student executive officers ; 16 student governors that represent each residence hall community ; and numerous community government members . RHA is the campus organization of <unk> , the largest student organization in the world . In 2010 the organization won the national RHA Building Block Award , which is awarded to the school with the most improved RHA organization . 
 The athletic teams at the university are supported by the Marching Tar Heels , the university 's marching band . The entire 275 @-@ member volunteer band is present at every home football game , and smaller pep bands play at all home basketball games . Each member of the band is also required to play in at least one of five pep bands that play at athletic events of the 26 other sports . 
 UNC Chapel Hill has a regional theater company in residence , the Playmakers Repertory Company , and hosts regular dance , drama , and music performances on campus . The school has an outdoor stone amphitheatre known as Forest Theatre used for weddings and drama productions . Forest Theatre is dedicated to Professor Frederick Koch , the founder of the Carolina Playmakers and the father American folk drama . 
 Many fraternities and sororities on campus belong to the National Panhellenic Conference ( NPC ) , Interfraternity Council ( IFC ) , Greek Alliance Council , and National Pan @-@ Hellenic Council ( NPHC ) . As of spring 2010 , eighteen percent of undergraduates were Greek ( 1146 men and 1693 women out of 17 @,@ 160 total ) . The total number of community service hours completed for the 2010 spring semester by fraternities and sororities was 51 @,@ 819 hours ( average of 31 hours / person ) . UNC Chapel Hill also offers professional and service fraternities that do not have houses but are still recognized by the school . Some of the campus honor societies include : the Order of the Golden Fleece , the Order of the Grail @-@ Valkyries , the Order of the Old Well , the Order of the Bell Tower , and the Frank Porter Graham Honor Society . 
 Student government at Carolina is composed of an executive branch headed by the student body president , a legislative branch composed of a student @-@ elected student congress , and a judicial branch which includes the honor court and student supreme court . The Judicial Reform Committee created the Instrument of Student Judicial Governance , which outlined the current Honor Code and its means for enforcement in 1974 . Currently , Carolina boasts one of the only student @-@ run judicial systems in the nation . All academic and most conduct violations are handled by the student @-@ run Honor System . Prior to that time , the Dialectic and Philanthropic Societies along with other campus organizations supported student concerns . 
 = = = Dining = = = 
 Lenoir Dining Hall was completed in 1939 and opened for service to students when they returned from Christmas holidays in January 1940 . The building was named for General William Lenoir , first chairman of the Board of Trustees of the university in 1790 . The new Rams Head Dining Hall seats 1 @,@ 300 people and has a capacity for serving 10 @,@ 000 meals per day . It has one large dining area , two medium size dining areas , food service staff offices , kitchen , food preparation areas , storage and a Starbucks coffee shop . 
 Rams Head Dining Center was opened to the students in March 2005 . It includes the Rams Head Dining Hall , Starbucks , and the Rams Head Market . It was opened to offer more food service options to the students living on south campus . In addition the dining hall 's hours were extended to include the 9 pm – 12 am period , a time referred to as " Late Night " by students . 
 = = = Housing = = = 
 On campus , the Department of Housing and Residential Education manages thirty @-@ two residence halls , grouped into thirteen communities . These communities range from Olde Campus Upper Quad Community which includes Old East Residence Hall , the oldest building of the university , to modern communities such as Manning West , completed in 2002 . In addition to residence halls , the university oversees an additional eight apartment complexes organized into three communities , Ram Village , Odum Village , and <unk> Hill Student Family Housing . Along with themed housing focusing on foreign languages and substance @-@ free living , there are also " living @-@ learning communities " which have been formed for specific social , gender @-@ related , or academic needs . An example is <unk> , sponsored by the Department of Anthropology , where residents are assigned roommates on the basis of cultural or racial differences rather than similarities . Three apartment complexes offer housing for families , graduate students , and some upperclassmen . Along with the rest of campus , all residence halls , apartments , and their surrounding grounds are smoke @-@ free . As of 2008 , 46 % of all undergraduates live in university @-@ provided housing . 
 = = Alumni = = 
 With over 300 @,@ 000 living former students , North Carolina has one of the largest and most active alumni groups in America . Many Tar Heels have attained local , national , and international prominence . James K. Polk served as President of the United States for a single term , William R. King was the thirteenth Vice President of the United States . North Carolina has produced many United States Senators including Paul Wellstone and Thomas Lanier Clingman , along with multiple House Representatives such as Virginia Foxx and Ike Franklin Andrews . <unk> L. <unk> and Thomas Settle have received positions of federal judgeship . Former Secretary of War and Secretary of the Army Kenneth Claiborne Royall and the fifth White House Press Secretary Jonathan W. Daniels were graduates of North Carolina . Peaches Golding was appointed by HM Queen Elizabeth II as High Sheriff of the City and County of Bristol 2010 @-@ 2011 , the first Black female High Sheriff and second only black High Sheriff in over 1 @,@ 000 years . 
 Tar Heels have also made a mark on pop culture . Andy Griffith and John Forsythe became successful actors . Stuart Scott , Woody Durham , and Mick Mixon have become sportscasters . Civil War historian and writer Shelby Foote , sportswriter Peter Gammons , and Pulitzer Prize winner Lenoir Chambers all graduated from North Carolina . Other notable writers who have attended UNC Chapel Hill include Thomas Wolfe , who has a memorial on campus ; National Book Award winners Walker Percy , Hayden Carruth , and Charles Frazier ; Dos Passos Prize winner Russell Banks ; National Book Critics Circle Award winner Ben Fountain ; Pulitzer Prize finalist Lydia Millet ; New Yorker columnist Joseph Mitchell ; National Geographic writer John Patric ; Armistead Maupin ; and the notable poets Lawrence Ferlinghetti and Bollingen Prize winner Edgar <unk> journalist Charles Kuralt , honored with three Peabody Awards , is a UNC Chapel Hill graduate . Three @-@ time Pulitzer Prize winner , political cartoonist Jeff <unk> graduated from Carolina . Caleb Bradham , the inventor of the popular soft drink Pepsi @-@ Cola , was a member of the Philanthropic Society and the class of 1890 . 
 Tar Heels have made their mark on the basketball court with Southern Methodist University head coach Larry Brown , title winning coach Roy Williams , Los Angeles Lakers general manager Mitch <unk> , college player of the year award winners George <unk> , Lennie Rosenbluth , Antawn Jamison , and Tyler Hansbrough , Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame inductees Michael Jordan , Billy Cunningham , and Robert McAdoo , great defender Bobby Jones , and NBA All @-@ Star Vince Carter . Other notable Tar Heels include football players Lawrence Taylor and <unk> Bly , soccer stars Mia Hamm , Ashlyn Harris , Heather O 'Reilly , Meghan <unk> , Whitney Engen , Allie Long , Lori <unk> and Tobin Heath , baseball standouts Dustin Ackley and B.J. <unk> , and Olympians April Heinrichs and Vikas Gowda . 
 Many Tar Heels have become business leaders . The leaders include Jason <unk> , former CEO of Hulu ; Howard R. Levine , chairman of the board and CEO of Family Dollar ; Paul <unk> , chairman of the American Stock Exchange ; Julian Robertson , founder of Tiger Management Corp. ; Bill Ruger , founder of Sturm , Ruger ; Warren Grice Elliott , former president of Atlantic Coast Line Railroad ; Allen B. Morgan , Jr . , founder and former CEO of Morgan Keegan & Company ; Ken Thompson , former chairman and CEO of Wachovia ; Hugh McColl , former CEO of Bank of America ; Sallie <unk> , former CFO of Citigroup Inc. and William Johnson , the current president and CEO of Progress Energy , and John A. Allison IV , former CEO of BB & T. 
 = = Criticism = = 
 = = = UNC tuition increase = = = 
 In July 2011 , the public universities in North Carolina had to share a budget cut of $ 414 million , of which the Chapel Hill campus lost more than $ 100 million in 2011 . This followed state budget cuts that trimmed university spending by $ <unk> since 2007 ; Provost Bruce Carney said more than 130 faculty members have left UNC since 2009 . , with poor staff retention . 
 On November 17 , 2011 , the Board of Trustees for UNC @-@ CH recommended a 15 @.@ 6 percent increase in tuition tuition increase , a historically <unk> increase . The budget cuts in 2011 greatly affected the university and set this increased tuition plan in motion 
 UNC students angrily protested on November 17 , with the slogan " Strike the <unk> " . They believe that the university should dip into its $ 2 @.@ 2 billion endowment , but UNC officials noted that they endowments are restricted for specific uses , such as scholarships and other financial aid . Mary Cooper ( Student Body President ) , the lone student representative , was the only trustee to vote against the proposal . 
 On February 10 , 2012 , the UNC Board of Governors approved tuition and fee increases of 8 @.@ 8 percent for in @-@ state undergraduates across all 16 campuses 
 = Ames Project = 
 The Ames Project was a research and development project that was part of the larger Manhattan Project to build the first atomic bombs during World War II . It was founded by Frank Spedding from Iowa State College in Ames , Iowa as an offshoot of the Metallurgical Laboratory at the University of Chicago devoted to chemistry and metallurgy , but became a separate project in its own right . The Ames Project developed the Ames Process , a method for preparing pure uranium metal that the Manhattan Project needed for its atomic bombs and nuclear reactors . Between 1942 and 1945 , it produced over 1 @,@ 000 short tons ( 910 t ) of uranium metal . It also developed methods of preparing and casting thorium , cerium and beryllium . In October 1945 Iowa State College received the Army @-@ Navy " E " Award for Excellence in Production , an award usually only given to industrial organisations . In 1947 it became the Ames Laboratory , a national laboratory under the Atomic Energy Commission . 
 = = Background = = 
 The discovery of the neutron by James Chadwick in 1932 , followed by that of nuclear fission by German chemists Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann in 1938 , and its theoretical explanation ( and naming ) by Lise Meitner and Otto Frisch soon after , opened up the possibility of a controlled nuclear chain reaction with uranium . On 20 December , soon after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor that brought the United States into World War II , the Nobel Prize @-@ winning physicist Arthur H. Compton was placed in charge of the plutonium project , objective of which was to produce reactors to convert uranium into plutonium , to find ways to chemically separate plutonium from the uranium , and ultimately to design and build an atomic bomb . This became the Manhattan Project . Although a successful reactor had not yet been built , the scientists had already produced several different but promising design concepts . 
 Compton established its Metallurgical Laboratory at the University of Chicago in February 1942 . Its mission was to build nuclear reactors to create plutonium that would be used in atomic bombs . For advice on assembling the laboratory 's Chemistry Division , Compton , a physicist , turned to Herbert McCoy , who had considerable experience with isotopes and radioactive elements . McCoy recommended Frank Spedding from Iowa State College in Ames , Iowa , as an expert on the rare earth elements , which were chemically similar to the actinide series that included uranium and plutonium . Compton asked Spedding to become the head of the Metallurgical Laboratory 's Chemistry Division . 
 Due to lack of space at the University of Chicago , Spedding proposed to organise part of the Chemistry Division at Iowa State College , where he had colleagues who were willing to help . It was agreed that Spedding would spend half of each week in Ames , and half in Chicago . The intention was that staff at Ames would eventually move to Chicago when space became available , but this never happened . The success of the Ames Project ensured that it became a separate laboratory within the Manhattan Project . 
 = = Organization = = 
 Spedding started by recruiting two fellow scientists at Iowa State College to become his associate directors ; Harley A. Wilhelm , an expert in <unk> , as the head of the Ames Project 's Metallurgy Division , and <unk> B. Johns as the head of the Plutonium Division . Under them were eight section chiefs . The Ames Project grew to over 90 scientific staff . The total number of staff eventually exceeded 500 . Senior staff would meet on Sunday mornings to review the previous week 's work and set goals for the week ahead , a process that came to be called " <unk> " . At first Spedding had to depart for Chicago soon after the meeting , but in early 1943 he was succeeded as head of the chemistry division at the Metallurgical Laboratory by James Franck , allowing Spedding to spend more times at Ames . He remained an associate director at the Metallurgical Laboratory . 
 Spedding was fortunate in having the full support of Charles E. <unk> , the president of Iowa State College , even though the nature of the work could not at first be disclosed to him until security checks were complete . Once this was complete , <unk> brought in Harold V. Gaskill , the Dean of Science , as the Ames Project 's administrator . The United States Army Corps of Engineers took control of the Manhattan Project in June 1942 , and the Ames Project in late 1942 . 
 = = Uranium = = 
 = = = Ames Process = = = 
 The first item on the agenda was to find uranium for the nuclear reactor that Enrico Fermi was proposing to build . Uranium ore was readily available . Some 1 @,@ 200 short tons ( 1 @,@ 100 t ) of high @-@ grade ore from the Belgian Congo was in storage in a warehouse at Port Richmond on Staten Island . About 300 short tons ( 270 t ) per annum was being mined at the Eldorado Mine at Port Radium on the Great Bear Lake near the Arctic Circle in Canada 's Northwest Territories . The Eldorado company also operated a refinery at Port Hope , Ontario , where Canadian and Belgian ore was refined . The Manhattan Project 's estimated requirements for 1942 were 200 short tons ( 180 t ) , of which Compton required just 45 short tons ( 41 t ) for his proposed nuclear reactor . 
 The major problem was impurities in the uranium oxide , which could act as neutron poisons and prevent a nuclear chain reaction . Due to the presence of impurities , references published before 1942 typically listed its melting point at around 1 @,@ 700 ° C ( 3 @,@ 090 ° F ) when pure uranium metal actually melts at 1 @,@ 132 ° C ( 2 @,@ 070 ° F ) . Peter P. Alexander , at Metal <unk> Incorporated , gave in 1938 the first indications that the melting point of uranium was " as low as 1 @,@ 100 ° C ( 2 @,@ 010 ° F ) and even somewhat lower " . 
 The most effective way to purify uranium oxide in a laboratory was to take advantage of the fact that uranium nitrate is soluble in ether . Scaling this process up for industrial production was a dangerous proposition ; ether was explosive , and a factory using large quantities was likely to blow up or burn down . Compton and Spedding turned to Mallinckrodt in Saint Louis , Missouri , which had experience with ether . Spedding went over the details with Mallinckrodt 's chemical engineers , Henry V. Farr and John R. <unk> , on 17 April 1942 . Within a few months , sixty tons of highly pure uranium oxide was produced . 
 The only uranium metal available commercially was produced by the Westinghouse Electric and Manufacturing Company , using a photochemical process . Uranium oxide was reacted with potassium fluoride in large vats on the roof of Westinghouse 's plant in Bloomfield , New Jersey . This produced ingots the size of a quarter that were sold for around $ 20 per gram . But Edward Creutz , the head of the Metallurgical Laboratory 's group responsible for fabricating the uranium , wanted a metal sphere the size of an orange for his experiments . With Westinghouse 's process , it would have cost $ 200 @,@ 000 and taken a year to produce . The hydride or " <unk> " process , developed by Peter P. Alexander used calcium hydride as the reducing agent for the conversion of uranium ore to metal . By this means the Metal Hydrides plant in Beverly , Massachusetts , managed to produce a few pounds of uranium metal . Unfortunately , the calcium hydride contained unacceptable amounts of boron , a neutron poison , making the metal unsuitable for use in a reactor . Some months would pass before Clement J. Rodden from the National Bureau of Standards and Union Carbide figured out a means to produce sufficiently pure calcium hydride . 
 Spedding and Wilhelm began looking for ways to create the uranium metal . At the time , it was produced in the form of a powder , and was highly pyrophoric . It could be pressed and sintered and stored in cans , but to be useful , it needed to be melted and cast . Casting presented difficulty because uranium corroded crucibles of beryllium , magnesia and graphite . To produce uranium metal , they tried reducing uranium oxide with hydrogen , but this did not work . While most of the neighboring elements on the periodic table can be reduced to form pure metal and slag , uranium did not behave this way . In June 1942 they then tried reducing the uranium with carbon in a hydrogen atmosphere , with only moderate success . They then tried aluminum , magnesium and calcium , all of which were unsuccessful . The following month the Ames team found that molten uranium could be cast in a graphite container . Although graphite was known to react with uranium , this could be managed because the carbide formed only where the two touched . 
 Around this time , someone from the Manhattan Project 's Berkeley Radiation Laboratory brought a 2 @-@ inch ( 51 mm ) cube of uranium tetrafluoride — the uranium compound being used in the calutrons — to the Metallurgical Laboratory to discuss the possibility of using it rather than uranium oxide in the reactor . Spedding began wondering whether it would be possible to produce uranium metal from this salt , bypassing the problems with oxygen . He took the cube back to Ames , and asked Wilhelm to investigate . The task was assigned to an associate , Wayne H. Keller . He investigated a process ( now known as the Ames process ) originally developed by J. C. Goggins and others at the University of New Hampshire in 1926 . This involved mixing uranium tetrachloride and calcium metal in a calcium oxide @-@ lined steel pressure vessel ( known as a " bomb " ) and heating it . Keller was able to reproduce Goggin 's results on 3 August 1942 , creating a 20 @-@ gram ( 0 @.@ 71 oz ) button of very pure uranium metal . The process was then scaled up . By September , bombs were being prepared in a 4 @-@ inch ( 10 cm ) steel pipes 15 inches ( 38 cm ) long , lined with lime to prevent corrosion , and containing up to 3 kilograms ( 6 @.@ 6 lb ) of uranium tetrafluoride . C. F. Gray took these ingots and cast them into a 4 @,@ 980 @-@ gram ( 10 @.@ 98 lb ) 5 @-@ by @-@ 2 @-@ inch ( 12 @.@ 7 by 5 @.@ 1 cm ) billet of pure uranium . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 On 24 September 1942 , Wilhelm took the ingot to Spedding at the Metallurgical Laboratory in Chicago and presented it to Compton , whose first reaction was of disbelief . He thought it must be hollow . Spedding had the ingot cut open . It was not hollow . A few days later , the Metallurgical Laboratory 's director , Richard L. Doan , went to Ames , where he drew up an Office of Scientific Research and Development ( OSRD ) contract for the Ames Project to produce 100 pounds ( 45 kg ) of pure uranium metal a day . This would be a pilot plant , with the process eventually being transferred to industry . The OSRD contract was superseded by a Manhattan Project contract in November 1942 . The initial contract was for $ 50 @,@ 000 . By 31 December 1945 , the face value of contracts let to the Ames Project totalled $ 6 @,@ 907 @,@ 000 ; but the work was carried out for $ 4 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 . 
 Spedding and Wilhelm found an old wooden building on the southeastern edge of the campus . It had been a home economics building until 1926 , and then had served as a women 's gymnasium until a new one was built in 1941 ; by 1942 it was mainly used for storage . The building was handed over to the Ames Project , and the wooden floor replaced with a concrete one , much to the disappointment of the university architect , who had been trying for some years to get the place torn down . The building officially became known as the Physical Chemistry Annex ; local people called it " Little Ankeny " , after the nearby town of Ankeny , Iowa , where there was an ordnance plant . Looking for machine tools , Wilhelm found a machine shop for sale in Ames . The owner , Bill Maitland , had once made gardening tools , but could no longer obtain the metal he needed due to wartime rationing . Wilhelm bought it for $ 8 @,@ 000 . The Metallurgical Laboratory supplied two large 40 @,@ 000 W reduction furnaces . 
 The Ames Project supplied two tons of uranium metal to the Metallurgical Laboratory for the construction of Chicago Pile @-@ 1 , the world 's first nuclear reactor , which achieved criticality on 2 December 1942 . The Ames Project would later supply over 90 percent of the uranium for the X @-@ 10 Graphite Reactor at the Clinton Engineer Works in Oak Ridge , Tennessee . The Ames Project was producing a ton of highly pure uranium metal a day . Production rose from 100 pounds ( 45 kg ) per day in December 1942 to 550 pounds ( 250 kg ) per day by the middle of January . 
 For production , the process was changed to use magnesium instead of calcium ; magnesium was cheaper , more readily available , and purer . But it was also harder to start the reaction with magnesium than calcium , requiring more heating . The uranium tetrafluoride , known as green salt because of its characteristic color , was supplied by Mallinckrodt , DuPont and Harshaw Chemical , and was ground up on arrival , as was the magnesium . Bombs were normally 6 @-@ inch ( 15 cm ) pipes , 36 @-@ inch ( 91 cm ) long , although 10 @-@ inch ( 25 cm ) , 42 @-@ inch ( 110 cm ) long pipes could be used to produce 125 @-@ pound ( 57 kg ) ingots . They were heated to 650 ° C ( 1 @,@ 202 ° F ) for 40 to 60 minutes , after which the mixture spontaneously reacted , reaching temperatures of 1 @,@ 500 to 2 @,@ 000 ° C ( 2 @,@ 730 to 3 @,@ 630 ° F ) . A microphone was used to detect the ignition , and the bomb would be moved to a spray chamber to cool . If everything worked , uranium metal biscuit and magnesium fluoride slag would be produced . After the bomb cooled , it would be opened and hammered until the two separated . The resulting biscuit would be stamped , and sent off to be cast . 
 Casting re @-@ shaped the uranium into ingots and removed impurities . The metal biscuits were melted in a graphite crucible and poured into a mold . This produced rods between 1 @.@ 5 and 5 @.@ 0 inches ( 3 @.@ 8 and 12 @.@ 7 cm ) in diameter and 20 to 30 inches ( 51 to 76 cm ) long . The rods were stamped with a number and placed in wooden boxes for shipping to the Metallurgical Laboratory . From there they were sent to the Oak Ridge or the Hanford Site . By July 1943 , the Ames Project was producing 130 @,@ 000 pounds ( 59 @,@ 000 kg ) of uranium metal per month . The cost of a pound of uranium metal fell from $ 1 @,@ 000 to around one dollar . Starting in July 1943 , Mallinckrodt , <unk> , and DuPont began producing uranium by the Ames process , and Ames phased out its own production by early 1945 . 
 The Ames Project began a program of recovering uranium metal from scrap . A new building , known as Physical Chemistry Annex 2 , was constructed for the purpose in 1944 . Uranium turnings were washed , dried , passed through a magnet to remove iron impurities , and pressed into briquettes . They were then send to be remelted . The job was handed over to Metal Hydrides and a recovery plant at the Hanford Site in December 1945 , by which time the Ames Project had recovered 600 @,@ 000 pounds ( 270 t ) of scrap metal . In all , the Ames Project produced over 1 @,@ 000 short tons ( 910 t ) of uranium metal . All production ceased on 5 August 1945 , as did that at Metal Hydrides and DuPont , leaving Mallinckrodt as the only producer of uranium metal in the early post @-@ war period . 
 = = Other metals = = 
 Beginning in 1942 , along with uranium production operations , the Ames Project conducted a variety of metallurgical research related to the separation and purification of thorium , beryllium and rare earth metals , such as cerium . 
 = = = Thorium = = = 
 In 1942 , Glenn T. Seaborg established that when thorium was bombarded with neutrons , it could be transformed into fissile uranium @-@ 233 . This was another possible route to an atomic bomb , especially if it turned out that uranium @-@ 233 could be more easily separated from thorium than plutonium from uranium . It was not pursued further because uranium @-@ 233 production would have required a complete redesign of the Hanford reactors ; but in April 1944 the Metallurgical Laboratory 's <unk> R. <unk> calculated that a nuclear reactor containing thorium could produce enough uranium @-@ 233 to sustain its reaction without adding anything but more thorium . This was very interesting , because at the time it was thought that uranium might be scarce , whereas thorium was at least ten times more plentiful . 
 In July and August 1943 , the Ames Project attempted to create thorium metal using something similar to the Ames Process . This was unsuccessful , because thorium has a much higher melting point than uranium . Efforts continued into 1944 , and it was found that with a zinc chloride booster they could produce a zinc @-@ thorium alloy . Heating to 1 @,@ 300 ° C ( 2 @,@ 370 ° F ) in a graphite crucible could then melt the zinc , which could be drawn off . This left the thorium , which was cast into 150 pounds ( 68 kg ) ingots in <unk> crucibles . Some 4 @,@ 500 pounds ( 2 @,@ 000 kg ) was produced by 31 December 1945 . Thorium sold for $ 3 a gram before the war ; by its end , the Ames Project was producing it for less than 5 ¢ a gram . 
 = = = Beryllium = = = 
 Beryllium was used by the Manhattan Project as a neutron reflector , and as a component of modulated neutron initiators . Only one firm produced it commercially in the United States , Brush Beryllium in Lorain , Ohio . The Ames Project began working on a production process in December 1943 , reducing beryllium fluoride in a bomb with metallic magnesium and a sulphur booster . The main difficulty with working with beryllium was its high toxicity . A closed bomb was used to minimise the possibility of producing toxic beryllium dust . The process worked , but the high temperatures and pressures created by the magnesium sulphide meant that it was potentially explosive . An alternative was then developed using beryllium fluoride in a bomb with metallic calcium and a lead chloride booster . The metal was cast in a vacuum . Research was still ongoing when the war ended . 
 = = = Cerium = = = 
 In mid @-@ 1944 , the Ames Project was asked to produce cerium . This was being used by the laboratories at Berkeley and Los Alamos for cerium sulphide , which was used in crucibles to cast plutonium . Again , the bomb method was used , this time to reduce anhydrous cerium chloride with calcium using an iodine booster . A special " dry room " was constructed for drying out the cerium chloride using hydrogen chloride gas . The resulting metal contained calcium and magnesium impurity , so it had to be recast to remove them . The opportunity was taken to make it into 0 @.@ 75 @-@ inch ( 19 mm ) diameter rods 4 inches ( 100 mm ) long , the desired shape . Because cerium is so reactive , the remelting was done in a vacuum , using a calcium oxide or magnesium oxide crucible . The first shipment of cerium metal was made in August 1944 . The Ames Laboratory produced 437 pounds ( 198 kg ) of extremely ( more than 99 % ) pure cerium by August 1945 , when production ended . 
 = = Alloys = = 
 Since uranium metal had been so scarce before the war , little was known about its metallurgy , but with uranium being used in the reactors , the Manhattan Project became keenly interested in its properties . In particular , with water being used for cooling , there was speculation about alloys with high thermal conductivity and resistance to corrosion . The Ames Project produced and tested uranium carbide , which had a potential to be used as a fuel in reactors instead of metallic uranium . So too was bismuth , because of its low neutron capture cross section , so the Ames Project produced and tested uranium @-@ bismuth alloys . 
 At one point a proposal was on the table to protect the uranium in a reactor from corrosion by jacketing it with copper . The Ames Project therefore studied uranium @-@ copper alloys , which would occur at the interface . In practice , the uranium was canned in aluminum ; this too was studied , as were alloys with tin , which was used to solder the cans . Tests were also carried out with alloys of uranium with beryllium , calcium , cobalt , magnesium , manganese and thorium , which were being produced or in use elsewhere in the Ames Project . Attempts were made to separate plutonium from uranium through metallurgy , exploiting plutonium 's greater affinity with gold and silver , but the Manhattan Project chose to use the Bismuth phosphate process , a chemical separation method , instead . 
 The Ames Project also studied thorium , alloying it with bismuth , carbon , chromium , iron , manganese , molybdenum , nickel , oxygen , tin , tungsten and uranium , and alloyed beryllium with bismuth , lead , thorium , uranium and zinc . 
 = = Chemistry = = 
 The chemistry of uranium was the focus of multiple studies by the Ames Project . The properties of the various uranium oxides and uranium hydride were investigated . The latter of was particular interest because at one point the Los Alamos Laboratory considered using it in an atomic bomb instead of metallic uranium , but the idea was found to be inefficient , and was shelved . A process was developed to recovery depleted uranium metal from the uranium tetrafluoride left over from the electromagnetic isotope separation process and uranium hexafluoride left over from the gaseous diffusion process . This was operated as a pilot plant that produced kilogram quantities , before being turned over to the Manhattan Project 's SAM Laboratories for implementation on an industrial scale at Oak Ridge . 
 If the chemistry and metallurgy of uranium was poorly understood , that of plutonium was practically unknown , as it had only existed in microscopic amounts . Samples began arriving from the reactors in 1943 , and although the locus of the Manhattan Project 's investigations into plutonium chemistry was at the Metallurgical Laboratory , the Ames Project investigated methods of separating plutonium metal from uranium and fission products . 
 = = Post @-@ war = = 
 Major General Leslie R. Groves Jr . , the director of the Manhattan Project , visited Iowa State College on 12 October 1945 , and presented the Army @-@ Navy " E " Award for Excellence in Production for its part in producing uranium for the Manhattan Project . It was unprecedented for a college or university to receive this award , which was usually given to industrial organisations . The award came in the form of a banner sporting four white stars , representing two and a half years of service to the war effort . As of 2011 , the award was on display at Iowa State University in Spedding Hall . 
 The Iowa State Board of Education created the Institute of Atomic Research ( IAR ) as a coordinating body for research throughout the Midwestern United States on 1 November 1945 , with Spedding as its director . The Manhattan Project continued to fund the activities of the Ames Project , but with the passage of the Atomic Energy Act of 1946 , responsibility passed to the newly @-@ created Atomic Energy Commission ( AEC ) on 1 January 1947 . 
 On 17 May 1947 , the AEC awarded the contract to run the Ames Laboratory , which now had the status of a national laboratory , to Iowa State College . The laboratory remained on the Iowa State College campus , and its faculty and graduate students made up most the staff . Spedding remained its director until he retired in 1968 . Administration was delegated to IAR . Permanent buildings were constructed that were opened in 1948 and 1950 , and subsequently named Wilhelm Hall and Spedding Hall . The Ames Laboratory retained a focus on chemistry and metallurgy , particularly of the rare earth metals . 
 = Vildanden ( airline ) = 
 Vildanden AS ( " The Wild Duck " ) was a virtual , regional airline based at Skien Airport , Geiteryggen in Norway , where it was the only airline . With operations starting in 2005 , it flew to Bergen , Trondheim and Stavanger using a Jetstream 32 and an ATR 42 , which is wet leased from Danish Air Transport ( DAT ) and Helitrans . Previously , the airline has also served Stockholm and Molde , and has also operated Saab 340 aircraft , operated by Coast Air , Air Aurora and Avitrans . The airline <unk> in conflict with Coast Air about terminating the wet lease agreement . The company has had to be bailed out several times , including by the municipality , until it managed to make its first profit in 2009 . It ceased operations and filed for bankruptcy in January 2011 . 
 = = Operation = = 
 The airline was based at Skien Airport , Geiteryggen . It provides twenty weekly trips to Bergen and weekly trips to Stavanger . In 2009 , 50 @,@ 000 people traveled with Vildanden . The company has one ATR 42 , which seats 48 passengers and is operated by Danish Air Transport , and one Jetstream 32 , which seats 19 and is operated by Helitrans . The airline used Sandefjord Airport , Torp as its reserve airport in case of bad weather . The airline is named after the play The Wild Duck ( Norwegian : Vildanden ) written by Henrik Ibsen , who was born in Skien . The slogan " The shortest path between Ibsen and Grieg " is a pun on the Bergen composer Edvard Grieg 's and Ibsen 's names . The largest owner is Magne <unk> , who owns 70 % . 
 = = Destinations = = 
 The following list shows all current and former destinations , including the city served , the country , the airport ( with IATA airport codes and ICAO airport codes ) , and the begin and end year of the service . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Establishment = = = 
 Vildanden was founded on 23 November 2004 by 18 local investors who wanted to start commercial scheduled flights from Skien Airport , Geiteryggen . For a long period , there had been a public debate about closing the airport . Owned by the municipality , the airport was receiving annual subsidies of NOK 2 @.@ 5 million from the municipality , and NOK 3 @.@ 8 million from the state . It was decided to operate Vildanden as a virtual airline ( one that owns none of its equipment , leasing everything from others ) , and wet lease operations from other companies . Initial plans had been started in 2003 to cooperate with Dutch airline Denim Air , with a 50 @-@ seater aircraft , but these plans did not work out . 
 In October 2004 , a contract was signed with Haugesund @-@ based Coast Air , who would operate Jetstream 31 aircraft between Skien and Bergen . The owner of Coast Air , <unk> , also bought 20 % of Vildanden . Coast Air had previously operated routes from Skien to Western Norway , but had withdrawn in 1999 . Following the announcement from Vildanden and Coast Air , the municipality decided to not close the airport , and cover the estimated NOK 300 @,@ 000 annual deficit , as well as upgrade the control tower for NOK 700 @,@ 000 . The airport had been closed since 2002 , following the increased domestic and international traffic from near @-@ by Sandefjord Airport , Torp . 
 Initial service would have 16 weekly departures to Bergen Airport , Flesland . The main market segment is the offshore petroleum industry , and the departure times were designed to mesh with helicopter routes to offshore installations . The company estimated that one @-@ quarter of travellers would be people commuting to the North Sea . Norsk Hydro , who have a lot of employees in the Grenland area , stated that they could not start using Vildanden because they had an agreement with SAS Braathens ' services from Sandefjord . The first scheduled service flew on 24 January 2005 , carrying eight passengers . This first month , 972 passengers took the plane , and Vildanden announced that they would try to also start a route to Stavanger Airport , Sola , as well as potentially to Oslo Airport , Gardermoen . 
 = = = DAT in , Coast Air out = = = 
 On 19 April , a new Jetstream 32 aircraft was taken into service . This allowed capacity to increase from 12 to 19 passengers , and at the same time travel time was reduced from 47 to 39 minutes . By September , the most popular departures were being booked full , and Vildanden asked Coast Air for a larger aircraft , with about 30 seats . In addition to allowing more passengers , larger planes would give higher comfort , and allow a more flexible ticket pricing scheme . An agreement with Danish Air Transport ( DAT ) to operate an ATR 42 , with a capacity of 48 seats , was signed in mid @-@ October . 
 To be able to breach the agreement with Coast Air — who still had a wet leasing contract , but were not able to put into operation a larger aircraft — the company Skien Lufttransport AS was created , and it purchased all the revenue and passenger rights from Vildanden . At the same time , it became the legal counterpart for DAT . The new aircraft was put into service on 31 October , branded with the Vildanden logo . Coast Air chose to continue operating the route between Bergen and Skien in their own name , and used the same aircraft and slot times . At Skien Airport , the Vildanden passengers were given the choice between Coast Air and Vildanden , and all nineteen chose Vildanden . On the return flight , three passengers chose each airline . Both aircraft flew to Skien , but due to heavy rain , only the aircraft from DAT was able to land . The passengers who had taken the Coast Air aircraft , were forced to land at Sandefjord Airport instead . 
 The following day , Coast Air terminated their flights , but stated that they still had an agreement with Vildanden . Skien Lufttransport on their hand stated that Vildanden was now a sleeping company , and that the contract therefore was terminated . Both companies considered the incident a legal matter . In December , the two companies settled outside court . 
 At the same time , the municipal council was considering the future of the airport . The city engineer estimated it would need a subsidy of NOK 2 million in 2006 , and the politicians , who wanted the airport to run without subsidies , demanded that Vildanden guarantee for the deficit . This was rejected by Vildanden — on the contrary , the company was in dire need for more capital , and issued a private placement for NOK 4 million in December 2005 . The company had since the start been losing money , and needed extra capital to get through the rough until it could make an operating profit . After the placement , 15 % of the company was owned by DAT , while Coast Air sold their shares . In 2005 , Vildanden had a revenue of NOK 15 million . 
 = = = More operators = = = 
 During 2006 , the ridership increased , and Vildanden started becoming more aggressive against Widerøe , which was flying to Bergen from Sandefjord Airport . Vildanden stated that they aimed to outperform Widerøe on price to Bergen . The ATR @-@ 42 turned out to be too large ; from 1 July , operations was taken over by the Czech company Air Aurora , with a smaller 30 @-@ seater Saab 340 . This reduced the monthly leasing costs from NOK 700 @,@ 000 to NOK 550 @,@ 000 . DAT remained responsible for the booking system . 
 In October , an agreement was signed with the Avitrans of Sweden to take over operations . This also included a second aircraft , so the airline could start operations to Stavanger and Molde in 2007 . From 18 March , Vildanden also started three weekly departures from Skien to Stockholm @-@ <unk> Airport . The route was necessary to transport personnel from Avitrans ' hub at Bromma to Skien . 
 = = = Troubled times = = = 
 By October 2007 , Vildanden was in severe financial distress . An agreement was made with the municipal council , where the latter gave a credit loan to the airline . The route to Molde had given large deficits , and the company was forced to close it down . NOK 2 @.@ 3 million , equal to the airlines debt to the airport , was granted to the municipal @-@ owned airport operator , and the company allowed to make an agreement where half the debt was deleted , and the other half made interest and principal @-@ free for two years . At the same time , the management of Vildanden had to raise new capital equal to at least half the companies accounts payable , which was NOK 8 million . The case raised local debate about whether it was the municipality 's job to subsidize the airport and the airline . The Federation of Norwegian Aviation Industries announced that they would consider reporting the subsidies to the EFTA Surveillance Authority ( ESA ) for violation of the European Community competition law . 
 The fiscal year 2007 gave a revenue of NOK 61 million , and a deficit of NOK 13 million . During the airport strike in May 2008 — which closed Bergen Airport — Vildanden had full planes since they could land them on the short runway at near @-@ by Stord Airport , Sørstokken . In 2008 , 50 @,@ 000 people used Skien Airport , most of whom flew with Vildanden . 
 On 19 June 2008 , the municipal council voted to not give further subsidies to the airport . Upgrades for NOK 8 million were needed to <unk> safety standard . The airport operator had debt of NOK 12 million , and no <unk> assets . Vildanden was under certain conditions willing to pay some of the capital needed to perform the upgrades . The municipal council changed their opinion and voted — with a single decisive vote — to keep the airport running in July . The financial risk would be taken over by the municipal @-@ owned Kontorbygg , who operate a range of offices and commercial buildings in Skien . The proposal was supported by the right @-@ winged parties , and opposed by the socialist parties , as well as the chair of Kontorbygg . As a response , the Federation of Norwegian Aviation Industries reported the municipality to ESA , and demanded that NOK 20 million in illegal subsidies be repaid by Vildanden and the airport operator . 
 The company had a loss of NOK 3 @.@ 4 million in 2008 . In April 2009 , Vildanden terminated its agreement with <unk> with the intention of using larger aircraft . In July , an agreement was made with DAT to operate an ATR @-@ 42 on the Bergen route . From 1 August , the Stockholm route was terminated . The company stated that they had been considering having a stop @-@ over at Moss Airport , Rygge on the Stockholm flights , but instead decided to terminate the route . 
 During the winter of 2008 – 09 , Vildanden was forced to land at Sandefjord Airport 50 times due to weather closing Geiteryggen . In March , Widerøe started a marketing campaign to attract people from Grenland to use their routes at Torp . Local Liberal Party politician Gustav <unk> stated that he was opposed to Widerøe advertising in the Telemark press for their services . At the same time , Asbjørn <unk> , previous chief of operations in Malmö Aviation , was hired as new CEO . 
 Magne <unk> increased his ownership in the company to 70 % in August , after he had previously given NOK 10 @.@ 5 million in interest @-@ free loans to the company . On 11 November 2009 , the German pilots on a flight from Skien to Bergen announced that only 28 of the passengers , without baggage , could take the ride . The reason was bad weather , which was described as " normal Norwegian rain " by the airline afterwards . This caused several commuters to miss their connecting flights on helicopters to offshore installations . The airline later stated that it was caused by the pilots not being aware of the safety equipment installed at Geiteryggen . 
 In December 2009 , Vildanden announced it plans to operate routes to Trondheim Airport , Værnes , but lacks financial maneuverability to commence operations . By October 2009 , Vildanden owed Kontorbygg , the operator of Geiteryggen , NOK 1 @.@ 5 million in airport fees . Kontorbygg stated that if Vildanden did not pay , the airport would have to file for bankruptcy . Innovation Norway rejected to give Vildanden a loan for NOK 3 @.@ 5 million in December 2009 . Kontorbygg stated that the operation of Geiteryggen had cost the municipality NOK 50 million in the course of the five years Vildanden had been operating from it . In February 2010 , the Municipality of Skien announced that it required Vildanden to pay back the NOK 3 @.@ 1 million , plus NOK 200 @,@ 000 in interest , that they borrowed in 2007 . The loan was renewed in March , after Vildanden paid NOK 385 @,@ 000 . From 16 August , Helitrans took over as the operator , using an ATR 42 . From 6 September , the company started with flights to Trondheim . The company ceased operations after its last flight on 14 January 2011 . 
 = Your Love ( Nicki Minaj song ) = 
 " Your Love " is a song by Trinidadian @-@ born recording artist Nicki Minaj , taken from her debut studio album Pink Friday ( 2010 ) . It was released on June 1 , 2010 by Young Money , Cash Money , and Universal Motown as the lead single of the album . The song was written by Minaj , Joseph Hughes , David Freedman , and Andrew " Pop " Wansel , and was produced by the latter . Minaj originally intended to release " Massive Attack " as the lead single from Pink Friday , though its release was scrapped after an underwhelming commercial performance . 
 Described as a " rap ballad " , the song is a change of tempo compared to Minaj 's previous work , and according to Mariel Concepcion of Billboard , the song contains a " new brand of hood majesty . " The song heavily samples Annie Lennox 's 1995 cover version of the song " No More I Love You 's " ( 1986 ) by The Lover Speaks , using its background vocals with additional bass , hip @-@ hop backbeats and drum loops added . 
 The song peaked at numbers 14 and four on the US Billboard Hot 100 and Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs charts , respectively . 
 = = Background = = 
 The first version of " Your Love " appeared on Minaj 's unofficial mixtape Barbie World ( 2010 ) , with different lyrics included in the pre @-@ chorus along with a faster pace . Another version was later stolen and leaked online . The song underwent minor lyrical adjustments and mixing before being sent to mainstream radio , as the first official single from Minaj 's debut album Pink Friday ( 2010 ) . In an interview with Hot 93 @.@ 7 radio , Minaj spoke about the leak of the song , saying " That was a leak and I was so upset they put it out ' cause I recorded that song like two years ago . Next thing you know , people started falling in love with it . " Whilst on set on the music video for " Your Love " , Minaj further explain about the song 's theft and leak , saying , 
 " I was not planning on putting the song out at all . But then I heard it one day , somebody told me it was online . And I was like , ' No way , no way in the world that song is out . ' I went and listened to it and was really upset . It wasn 't mixed , it wasn 't finished , it wasn 't anything — I wasn 't gonna use it at all . But then radio started playing it . " 
 Rap @-@ Up posted cover art featuring a close up of Minaj smirking to her right , however for unknown reasons the art work was changed . The new cover features a cartoon version of Minaj , made by illustrator Asia Kendrick @-@ Horton who posted it for Minaj on Twitter . 
 = = Composition = = 
 " Your Love " is a mid @-@ tempo song with the heavy use of Auto @-@ Tune in the chorus . It samples the instrumentals and background vocals of Annie Lennox 's cover version of " No More I Love You 's " by the Lover Speaks , with the addition of additional bass , drum @-@ loops and hip @-@ hop backbeats . According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes.com by Sony / ATV Music Publishing , " Your Love " is set in common time with a metronome of 94 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of E major with Minaj 's vocal range spanning from the low @-@ note of B3 to the high @-@ note of C ♯ 5 . 
 Sara D. Anderson of AOL Radio Blog described the song as a " rap / singing mash @-@ up . " Coined as a " new brand of hood majesty , " the song is accompanied by a simple beat , which includes finger snaps and " xylophone clings . " Lean Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly commented : " Rap 's spitfire explores her softer side , sampling Annie Lennox on her honey @-@ tongued ode to a good man . " Greenblatt went on to compare the song to Jay @-@ Z 's " kindred " " Young Forever . " Minaj makes several references in her lines to well known people , which includes Bruce Willis in Die Hard , as well as Adam and Eve . Minaj makes several connections to Superman including in the pre @-@ chorus , " ' S ' on my chest , let me get my cape on . " The official remix featuring Cash Money labelmate Jay Sean was leaked via @-@ internet on August 2 , 2010 , and later made available for purchase in Australia via iTunes . American rapper Flo Rida released an unofficial remix to the song , in which he adds a verse . Reggae recording artist Sean Paul also did a remix to the song where he ad @-@ libs his verse throughout the original and later adds his own verse . Other remixes to the song include those done by American rapper Rick Ross and American R & B singer Chris Brown . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 Rap @-@ Up stated that Minaj " slows down her rapid @-@ fire verses on the sticky and sweet " Your Love " ... with a sprinkling of Auto @-@ Tune to top it off . Young Money ’ s First Lady even exercises her vocal chops . We demand another helping . " Robbie Daw of Idolator gave the song a positive review , while complimented Minaj 's dual rapping and singing , as well as the use of the sample . <unk> Bain also of Idolator additionally gave the song a positive review stating " We were a bit worried that <unk> Barbie would forever be the garnish on other people ’ s tracks instead of the main dish , but this sweet song proves otherwise . " Mariel Concepcion of Billboard commented on Minaj toning it down stating , " the Young Money rap princess puts the sleazy talk aside and finds herself smitten with a young man ... Minaj proves that even the wildest ones can be tamed . " While reviewing the music video , Brad Wete also of Entertainment Weekly reviewed the song positively , stating that Minaj was " [ .. ] slicing the competition to pieces with her second try . " David Jeffries of AllMusic deemed the song an album highlight , additionally adding that the song , " waltzes out of the speakers . In 2014 , Pitchfork named it the best Nicki Minaj single . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 " Your Love " debuted on the US Billboard Hot 100 at 51 , becoming Minaj 's first song to chart on the Hot 100 as a solo artist . It eventually peaked at No. 14 , becoming her first Top 20 in the country . It debuted at No. 23 on the US Hot R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Songs chart , and peaked at number four . Your Love " peaked at No. 1 on the US Rap Songs chart for eight consecutive weeks . Minaj became the first female rapper to top the chart since Lil ' Kim 's " Magic Stick " , featuring 50 Cent . Minaj also became the first artist to lead the chart with a song without any features since Missy Elliott in 2003 with " Work It " . The song was certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) denoting sales of over one million copies . On the Canadian Hot 100 , the song peaked at 43 . " Your Love " also charted in the United Kingdom , at a peak of 71 on the UK Singles Chart and at a peak of 22 on the UK R & B Chart . The song peaked at number 32 on the Australian Urban Singles chart . 
 = = Music video = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 A music video for the song was directed by Lil X on the weekend of July 4 , 2010 in Los Angeles . Minaj took to her Twitter , asking fans who they would like to see portray her love interest in the video . Minaj was interviewed on the set of " Your Love " by MTV News while wearing a pink and purple kimono as a geisha for the video . In the interview , Minaj said , " We wanted to have geisha themes , samurai themes , stuff like that . I wanted to tell a love story . It 's just kinda liking a guy , where he 's not really for you to like — the forbidden fruit — and me and this other girl happen to like him and we go to war . " The video premiered July 21 , 2010 on MTV.com. Actor Michael Jai White portrays Minaj 's love interest in the video . 
 = = = Synopsis = = = 
 The video is set to tell the story of a samurai @-@ in @-@ training , who falls in love with her master while a jealous peer fights for his affection . The video begins with Minaj delivering her lines over a red flowing fabric backdrop wearing a brown coat and a geisha costume with a blue flowing fabric backdrop , while White teaches a martial arts class . As Minaj and the instructor ( White ) begin to fall for one another , a student , who also has feelings for the instructor sees this and is jealous . This is intercut with scenes with Minaj donning a blonde wig and black bodysuit and in front of a green flowing backdrop . After seeing Minaj and White embrace each other on a bridge over blue @-@ fabric " water " , Minaj and her peer rival have a confrontation , which results in a duel . According to MTV News , the scenes pay homage to Uma Thurman as The Bride and Lucy Liu as <unk> in Kill Bill . Minaj loses and her rival walks away as Minaj bleeds a red fabric and White walks up and grieves over her body . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Robbie Daw of Idolator appreciated the plot twist of the video , commenting , " We really expected Nicki to waste that other warrior @-@ in @-@ training hater . The fact that she dies — and does so in such a beautiful way here — kind of makes us love her all the more . " Daw also inferred that the fancy attire from the " No More I Love You 's " video inspired Minaj 's in the " Your Love " video . Nicole Sia of MTV Buzzworthy stated that the video resembles Crouching Tiger , Hidden Dragon in its fight scene . Sia also commented on Minaj 's appearance stating " the camera cuts to Ms. Young Money soloing in front of billowing one @-@ million @-@ thread @-@ count satin sheets , just to remind us how damn FINE she is . " Tray Hova of Vibe gave a list of the best and worst parts of the music video , stating the best were Minaj chopped through the blocks of cement , her crazy faces , silk sheets and headgear , and that the worst part was the " melodramatic ending " and " the return of those Freddy Krueger fingers . " 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Songwriting – Onika Maraj , Warren " Oak " Felder , Andrew " Pop " Wansel , David Freeman , Joseph Patrick Hughes 
 Recording / Mixing – Ariel Chobaz , assisted by Lyttleton " Cartwheel " Carter 
 Mixing – Neal Pogue 
 Production – Pop Wansel , Oak 
 Credits are taken from Pink Friday liner notes . 
 = = Charts and certifications = = 
 = = Radio dates and release history = = 
 = Miles Copeland ( Home and Away ) = 
 Miles Copeland is a fictional character from the Australian Channel Seven soap opera Home and Away , played by Josh Quong Tart . He debuted on @-@ screen during the episode airing on 30 November 2007 . Ryley Mickle and Jackson Edwards played Miles in flashback sequences , showing him at ages three and eight years old respectively . During the early years of Home and Away , Sally Fletcher ( Kate Ritchie ) often spoke of an imaginary friend she called " Milco " . When Ritchie announced her departure from the soap , producers decided to introduce the real Milco , as regular character Miles Copeland . The development was described by the media as a " legacy storyline . " Quong Tart announced his departure from Home and Away in October 2011 . Miles departed on 23 November 2011 . 
 Miles is characterised as being charming and quick witted . His clothes often consist of board shorts and crumpled shirts , with his long hair , this gives him a trademark " beachy " look . Miles ' style changed in 2010 following Quong Tart 's break from the show . Upon returning to Home and Away , the actor had lost weight , grown a beard and cut his hair short . Producers were impressed with the changes and wrote them into the scripts . Miles is often seen consuming large amounts of food , which stems from his time spent living hungry on the streets . This was a character trait created by Quong Tart . Some viewers have written to Home and Away to complain about Miles ' eating habits . 
 Miles ' storylines have often centred on his friendships and romantic relationships with other characters . He has become a surrogate father to several teenagers , including Jai Fernandez ( Jordan Rodrigues ) and Melody Jones ( Celeste Dodwell ) . Miles and Kirsty Sutherland ( Christie Hayes ) had a long relationship together , during which they lost an unborn child . Kirsty eventually left town , ending their relationship . After sharing a long friendship , Miles and Leah Patterson @-@ Baker ( Ada Nicodemou ) entered into a romantic relationship in 2011 . Leah becomes pregnant and Miles proposes to her . Miles has earned a generally positive reception , while Quong Tart has been nominated for three Inside Soap Awards . 
 = = Creation and casting = = 
 The character of Miles was introduced to Home and Away in 2007 , as Sally Fletcher 's ( Kate Ritchie ) brother , whom she had always referred to as " Milco " . For twenty years , viewers had been led to assume Milco was just Sally 's imaginary friend . Channel Seven ran an on @-@ air promotion campaign , which promised viewers " a 20 @-@ year @-@ old mystery " would be solved . In the 2007 season finale , Miles mysteriously arrives in Summer Bay and writes " Milco " in the sand on the beach . Quong Tart was cast in the role of Miles . He previously starred in the Home and Away spin @-@ off <unk> as Will Monk . In 2010 , Miles was briefly written out of the serial , while Quong Tart took a break from filming to rehearse for a play at the Sydney Opera House . 
 In October 2011 , Quong Tart announced his departure from Home and Away . Of his time in the show , Quong Tart told TV Week , " I couldn 't have imagined how much fun I would have and the friends I would make on Home and Away . Playing Miles was a gift . " Rebecca Davies from Digital Spy reported the actor had already filmed his final scenes , while TV Week said the way in which Miles leaves the Bay was being kept secret . Miles departed on 23 November 2011 . 
 = = Character development = = 
 = = = Characterisation and career = = = 
 Quong Tart told Channel 5 that he liked the way Miles looks at the world and revealed that he shared similarities with the character 's personality . Miles is often shown consuming large amounts of food on @-@ screen . Miles enjoys his food because of his time spent living hungry on the streets . This was a character choice made by Quong Tart . He thought it was important that viewers see his eating habits , staying true to " representing human beings . " However , Quong Tart stated that it sometimes reached a " point where it might not be very pleasant to watch . " Viewers had written letters to Quong Tart requesting that Miles should stop " <unk> out on television . " 
 In 2011 , Miles returns to Home and Away with a new look . Miles had lost weight , cut his hair short and grew a beard . Off @-@ screen Quong Tart had such a busy schedule that he lost weight . When he revealed his new look to producers , they were so impressed they decided to change Miles ' image , because it suited the storyline . 
 Miles secures employment as a teacher at Summer Bay High . One of his students , Ruby Buckton ( Rebecca Breeds ) , develops romantic feelings for him . Breeds said it was a " genuine teenage infatuation " and Ruby was drawn to Miles ' maturity rather than his physical appearance . Quong Tart said Miles was " taken back " when he was faced with accusations of kissing Ruby . He manages to prove they are false . 
 = = = Relationship with Kirsty Sutherland = = = 
 One of Miles ' first relationships is with Kirsty Sutherland ( Christie Hayes ) , which develops from a friendship . Miles is left upset over his foster child Jai Fernandez ( Jordan Rodrigues ) . His emotional state has an effect on Kirsty and she kisses him . Hayes told TV Week that as Kirsty 's feelings " take over in the moment " , Miles is left surprised because he had been harbouring feelings for her too . Hayes also said Miles did not want to scare Kirsty away and they agree to take their relationship slowly . Hayes later said that Miles and Kirsty 's relationship worked so well because " they talk about things and they 're mature about their relationship . " Kirsty decides that she needs to raise money for her husband Kane Phillips ' ( Sam Atwell ) trial . She secretly begins work as an escort behind Miles ' back . Hayes ' explained Kirsty was " terrified " that Miles would find out and hated lying to him , but " has no choice . " When Miles discovers the truth about Kirsty 's escorting , he feels " totally betrayed " and ends their relationship . However , when Kirsty nearly sleeps with a client , Miles comes to her aid . At this point Leah Patterson @-@ Baker ( Ada Nicodemou ) tries to kiss Miles , as the two previously shared a connection . However , Miles defends Kirsty when he learns Leah had argued with Kirsty over her deceit . The state of their relationship remained troubled , though Hayes correctly predicted the couple would reunite . 
 In 2009 Hayes quit the serial and her exit storyline played out the same year . It was initially left unclear what impact her departure would have on Miles ' . Their relationship deteriorates after Kirsty miscarries their unborn baby . Kirsty is left distraught and feels she has to move with her life without Miles . However , Kirsty does not tell Miles she is leaving and leaves him a goodbye letter . Speaking of the scenes , Hayes said " I don 't agree with what she did or how she did it but Kirsty in her warped , grieving mind thinks it 's best for everybody . " She felt that Kirsty 's actions were " horrible and selfish . " She also described her as " emotionally detached " and Miles would have tried to talk her out of leaving if he had been made aware of her departure . Viewers were not shown the full content of the goodbye letter . Hayes said it was good because she wrote a private goodbye letter to Quong Tart , and noted the personal element was best left between the two . After Miles chances of a family are again ruined , Miles loses control . He starts drinking and on one occasion he tries to kiss Leah . Producers decided to introduce a character named Rabbit ( Mitzi Ruhlmann ) , who " brings a little fun back into Miles ' life . " Though Rabbit later turns out to be his dead daughter and a figment of Miles ' imagination . 
 = = = Relationship with Leah Patterson @-@ Baker = = = 
 In 2008 , Miles and Leah develop feelings for one another . Nicodemou who plays Leah said her character becomes " freaked out " when she realises they share a connection . At this point in the series Leah was still grieving for her late husband Dan Baker ( Tim Campbell ) . Leah is so ashamed of herself she " cuts Miles off " . Nicodemou added that the characters " bonded straight away " because Miles understands Leah and has supported her when she needed help . However , Miles " cannot deny the attraction " which sends Leah further into denial . She decides she is not ready to move on , Nicodemou said this was to respect Dan 's memory . Though , she concluded that Leah sees Miles as an " old sock you just feel comfortable with . " 
 In January 2011 , Quong Tart revealed Miles was set to have a new love interest . The actor said he found his character 's new romance intriguing and explained Miles is " more surprised than anyone that it happens . " A few months later , the Daily Star reported Miles would confess his love to Leah , who is shocked by the declaration . Miles is left wondering whether he has ruined their friendship by revealing his feelings to her . An insider told the paper , " Miles and Leah have both been unlucky in love so if they could find happiness together it would be pretty special . Leah is shocked but once the confession starts to sink in she wonders whether they could work as a couple . She begins to consider making a go of it with him . " Nicodemou explained that Leah and Miles have tried to get together in the past , but the timing has never been right for them . She later told RTÉ TEN that she thinks Miles and Leah are well suited and hoped they find happiness with each other . Miles and Leah discuss their situation and Leah decides to take the first step and kisses Miles to see if they have any chemistry . Nicodemou said once Leah realises she and Miles have chemistry , she decides to go for it and they begin dating . 
 In August 2011 , Leah discovers she is pregnant . She realises that she does not want a baby as she previously had a miscarriage , which made her decide not to have children again . Of the impact the storyline would have on Miles and Leah , Nicodemou said " It 's a really interesting storyline for them . It makes everything serious because things have been quite light , so it 's good to see that side of them . There are some rocky times ahead for them because there are differences of opinion . " A week later it was announced Miles would propose to Leah in a bid to " solidify " their relationship . Miles confides in Alf Stewart ( Ray Meagher ) about his plans and Quong Tart said Alf is very excited and encourages Miles . Of Miles ' decision to propose to Leah , Quong Tart said " They 've dated for a while and they know each other so well , and I think it 's just one of those things that makes sense . " 
 = = = Other relationships = = = 
 Miles starts a relationship with Shandi Palmer ( Samantha <unk> ) , TV Week described them as a " kooky " pairing . However their relationship was short @-@ lived , lasting only a number of weeks . Quong Tart said " It came and went like every romance in his life . " Miles " couldn 't believe his luck " with Shandi because of her attractive appearance . They were compatible because she was " beachy and hippy " and like Miles enjoyed to talk about the meaning of life . Miles drunkenly sleeps with Roo Stewart ( Georgie Parker ) , the next morning she reacts badly . A Home and Away spokesperson said Miles was one of the " nicest blokes in the Bay " and felt like a humiliated " idiot " . 
 In various storylines Miles has taken in teenagers without homes . Jai Fernandez ( Jordan Rodrigues ) is the first to be taken into Miles ' care . Miles knew Jai from the Boxing Day Tsunami in which they both lost their families . Rodrigues said that Jai is " angry at the world " because Miles " ditched " him in Phuket . Miles tries to help Jai because he realises that he is having a tough time at the refuge . Off @-@ screen Quong Tart mentored Rodrigues to improve his acting skill . He later takes in Melody Jones ( Celeste Dodwell ) , though she makes life hard for Miles by causing chaos at the school formal and running away to Melbourne . In the latter storyline Miles and Charlie Buckton ( Esther Anderson ) travel to Melbourne to search for Melody . The episodes marked the first time the cast had filmed in Melbourne . Location shoots took place at Queen Victoria Market , Docklands Studios Melbourne and St Kilda . Anderson told Inside Soap that " It 's a nice self @-@ contained little storyline " and described it as a treat for British and Irish viewers . She added that Melody ends up on the streets and Charlie and Miles fail to locate her straightaway . The situation leaves them feeling " vulnerable " and they kiss . Anderson opined the kiss was " a rebound thing " and they feel " awkward the following morning . " 
 Miles lets teenagers Nicole Franklin ( Tessa James ) and Romeo Smith ( Luke Mitchell ) , and adult character Marilyn Chambers ( Emily Symons ) move in with him . Together they form a new character unit , Meagher who plays Alf praised the dynamic . He said as none of them have external relationships at the time , there was a " genuine caring for the well @-@ being of the other people in the house . " 
 = = Storylines = = 
 = = = Backstory = = = 
 Miles and his twin Sally initially lived together with their alcoholic father Aaron ( Timothy Walter ) and mother Diana . Aaron used to beat Diana , so she left him and took Sally with her . When Miles was eight years old , Aaron read that Diana and her new husband Derek Wilson had been killed in a boating accident . Aaron and Miles went to find Sally , but after seeing Sally was better off with the Fletcher family , they left . In the serial Sally constantly insisted her imaginary friend Milco was real , it was actually Miles she was thinking about , but no one believed Sally and her bullying foster brother Brian " Dodge " Forbes ( Kelly Dingwall ) eventually stopped her believing in him . Aaron died of alcohol @-@ related illness , so Miles became an English teacher . He married a woman called Louise and they had a daughter called Amber . They both died in the Boxing Day Tsunami whilst on holiday in Phuket . He then went on a downward spiral and became a homeless drifter . 
 = = = 2007 – 11 = = = 
 Miles turns up in Summer Bay and decides to stick around after he thinks it is a familiar setting . He has nowhere to live and is starving . Irene Roberts ( Lynne McGranger ) becomes annoyed with him for stealing food out of the bins , but Roman Harris ( Conrad Coleby ) takes pity on him and feeds him . He sees Sally on the beach and writes Milco in the sand . They later become friends and she feels like she has a close connection . He reveals his family 's death to be the reason why he became a drifter . He eventually reveals the truth to Sally , that he is Milco and her twin brother . After it sinks in she is delighted with this and they become close . Miles stays with her and one night forgets to lock the door . Johnny Cooper ( Callan Mulvey ) enters the house and stabs Sally , however she survives but he blames himself . He decides to get his life back on track and becomes an English teacher at the school . Aden Jefferies ( Todd Lasance ) initially gives him a hard time , but he is well liked after he and Ric Dalby ( Mark Furze ) arrange a leaving party for Sally , who has decided to move away . At the party Steven Matheson ( Adam Willits ) and Carly Morris ( Sharyn Hodgson ) are startled to meet the person they heard so much about whilst growing up . 
 Miles becomes the new owner of the caravan park . He becomes good friends with Leah and falls in love with her . She feels it is to soon after husband Dan 's death and does not feel the same , leaving him upset . Morag Bellingham ( Cornelia Frances ) then helps him track down Jai , a boy from Phuket whom he told he would help , but never did . He comes to live with Miles , their relationship is strained by Jai 's reluctance to trust him , eventually they become close . Religious Christine Jones ( Elizabeth Alexander ) later starts a campaign to have Miles removed from his job when she does not agree with his choice of book used for teaching . Morag later helps rid of Christine and saves his career . He lets Melody Jones stay with him , but she <unk> and causes trouble for him with her new @-@ found bad attitude . He then has a brief relationship with Jazz Curtis ( Rachel Gordon ) . 
 He gives Kirsty a place to stay . They start a relationship and he falls in love with her , however he finds out she has been working as an escort to raise money for husband Kane Phillips ' ( Sam Atwell ) trial and throws her out . Melody becomes more wild and runaway from home , he tracks her down with the help of Charlie , who he shares a kiss with . He lets Melody leave to live in New Zealand with her mother . Kirsty returns with Kane who attacks him and he has to admit they were never together . After Trey Palmer ( Luke Bracey ) makes advances on Kirsty and Miles supports her , they reconcile . Trey tries to attack Kirsty , but Miles pushes him over , Miles is then under investigation for assault , later Trey drops the charges . Whilst out fishing Miles falls overboard and is nearly eaten by a shark , he discovers Lou De Bono 's ( David Roberts ) body in the process . He promises to look after Nicole after Roman is sent to prison . Miles then decides he wants to try for a baby with Kirsty , she agrees but he is angry when he sees her taking the pill . She says he thought he would leave her , he reassures her this is not the case . Kirsty starts university studying teaching . He resents her for spending time at university with her new friends , he suspects she is having affair . Upon confrontation she admits she is actually pregnant . She is unhappy about it , but agrees to keep the baby . He breaks his promise of keeping the pregnancy a secret , Kirsty starts to feel more at ease about the baby . Kirsty has a series of fits causing her to miscarry . Their relationship becomes strained and Kirsty 's mother Shelley ( Paula Forrest ) convinces her to run away to the city with her . Miles is devastated she has left and becomes withdrawn from everyone . 
 After VJ Patterson ( Felix Dean ) is bullied by Riley Radcliffe ( Tani Edgecombe ) he goes to see his father Ian ( Ben Simpson ) but he laughs it off . Miles is attacked and beaten and presumes it was Ian . He later finds out it was in fact Riley and his friends . He tries to drag Riley to the police station but he breaks his wrist . Miles is arrested for assault . Ian blackmails him saying he will drop the charges for money , the police find out Ian was responsible for the injuries . However the newspapers published an article on Miles branding him a thug . Miles destroys a classroom and Gina Austin ( Sonia Todd ) forces him to take leave . He starts drinking heavily again , makes a pass at Leah and sleeps on the beach . Miles begins having visions of a girl called Rabbit , who tells him about future events . She convinces him to do good deeds . Miles becomes good friends with Elijah Johnson ( Jay Laga <unk> ) and he goes to Africa with him . On his return he is assaulted by Heath Braxton ( Daniel Ewing ) . He then gets drunk and kisses Roo Stewart ( Georgie Parker ) and wakes up next to her in the morning . He later confesses his love to Leah and they start a relationship . Elijah is initially annoyed , but they repair their friendship . Leah learns she is pregnant , which delights Miles . Leah is initially hesitant about going ahead with the pregnancy , but she and Miles talk and she decides to keep the baby . Miles proposes to Leah , but she turns him down , saying they are not ready . She later asks him to move in with her and VJ . Leah suffers a miscarriage , which devastates Miles . The couple struggle with their grief and Miles moves out . He and Leah later break up . Miles learns Elijah is still in love with Leah . Miles tells Marilyn that Sally has got him a teaching job in Thailand and he leaves the Summer Bay . 
 = = Reception = = 
 For his portrayal of Miles , Quong Tart was nominated for " Best Newcomer " at the 2008 Inside Soap Awards . The following year he received a nomination for " Best Actor " . At the 2011 Inside Soap Awards he was nominated for " Best Daytime Star " . The episode where Miles conquers his fear of water to save Jai Fernandez who feigns drowning earned Writer Sean Nash an Australian Writer 's Guild award nomination for " Best Television Serial " in 2009 . The episode featuring Miles finally letting go of his visions of Rabbit won the Australian Writers ' Guild Award in the same category the following year and was presented to the episode 's writer , Sam Meikle . 
 The week ahead of the serial 's airing , Mark Patrick of the Sun @-@ Herald said <unk> , " an imaginary friend of one of the brats " was his favorite character . Michael Idato writing for The Sydney Morning Herald said Milco being not being imaginary seemed " ludicrous " . He said that Milco being revealed to be Miles , was Home and Away delivering a " plot twist equal to the genre 's best . " He opined that Miles ' " timely " arrival softened the blow of Sally 's departure . They said it was " a tender baton change that evokes memories of the iconic ' 80s soap Sons And Daughters " Idato later said Miles and Sally 's story was an example of " strong legacy storylines " Home and Away creates . 
 Ruth Deller of entertainment website Lowculture placed Miles at number nine on her best characters of February 2009 list . In July 2010 , she placed Miles second on her list of best soap characters . She spoke about how " ridiculous storylines " turn out to be great onscreen and referred to Miles 's visions of Rabbit , which she went on to praise . She said " Miles 's grief , his visions of Rabbit and his torment at everyone telling him she wasn 't real were devastating to watch , and this was a really interesting avenue to take one of the soap 's best @-@ loved characters down that could have spectacularly backfired , but instead , had people bawling their eyes out . " Holy Soap have said that Miles 's most memorable moment is " When he found student Trey trying to kiss Kirsty , Miles pushed him and found his job as a teacher in jeopardy " . The website also named Miles as one their Summer Bay hunks . In 2010 , the Daily Record said that " poor old Miles " had a so many problems that " he was probably happier when everybody thought he was just sister Sally 's friend " . After Miles became involved with Shandi , they stated that true love " never ran smoothly in Summer Bay " and that with Shandi ; Miles got " a lot more than he first bargained for " . Australian television website <unk> , said Miles looked completely different after Quong Tart lost weight . They said he looks " a lot older , thinner , has a new hair style and is sporting a dark beard ! " 
 Jaci Stephen of the Daily Mail criticised Home and Away for the amount of car accidents it features . When Miles nearly crashed his car , she asked if anyone in Summer Bay is capable of " sitting atop four wheels " without nearly getting killed . Stephen was not a fan of Miles ' long hair . When he returned in 2011 , she said " we can only hope that he ’ s seen a hairdresser since his departure . " When he left the series , Sarah Ellis of Inside Soap said that Home and Away " won 't be the same without Miles ' shaggy barnet " . Laura Morgan of All About Soap said that she and her colleagues were " in mourning " over Miles ' exit . She added that they " sorely missed " him . 
 = Bristol Britannia = 
 The Bristol Type 175 Britannia was a British medium @-@ to @-@ long @-@ range airliner built by the Bristol Aeroplane Company in 1952 to fly across the British Empire . During development two prototypes were lost and the turboprop engines proved susceptible to inlet icing which delayed entry into service while solutions were sought . 
 By the time development was completed , " pure " jet airliners from France , United Kingdom and the United States were about to enter service , and consequently , only 85 Britannias were built before production ended in 1960 . Nevertheless , the Britannia is considered one of the landmarks in turboprop @-@ powered airliner design and was popular with passengers . It became known by the title of " The Whispering Giant " for its quiet exterior noise and smooth flying , although the passenger interior remained less tranquil . 
 Canadair purchased a licence to build the Britannia in Canada , adding another 72 variants . These were the stretched Canadair CL @-@ 44 / Canadair CC @-@ 106 Yukon , and the greatly modified Canadair CP @-@ 107 Argus patrol aircraft . 
 = = Design and development = = 
 = = = Origins = = = 
 In 1942 , during the Second World War , Allied aircraft construction saw the UK of necessity concentrating on heavy bombers , leaving the production of transport aircraft to the USA . This would have left the UK with little experience in transport construction at the end of the war , so in 1943 , a committee under Lord Brabazon of Tara investigated the future of the British civilian airliner market . The Brabazon Committee called for several different aircraft to be developed to specifications composed by the committee for roles felt to fulfil Britain 's civilian aviation needs . 
 Bristol won the Type I and Type III contracts , delivering their Type I design , the Bristol Brabazon in 1949 . The requirement for the 1946 British Overseas Airways Corporation ( BOAC ) Medium Range Empire ( <unk> ) Requirements coincided with the Type III , Specification <unk> / 47 , issued in April 1947 by the Minister of Supply . The specifications called for an airliner capable of carrying 48 passengers and powered with Bristol Centaurus radial engines or Napier Nomad turbo @-@ compound diesel engine . <unk> options were also considered , but they were so new that Bristol could not guarantee the performance specifications . 
 Although in @-@ company Proposals " X " for conversions of Lockheed Constellations to Centaurus 662 powerplants or " Y " for licence production of the Constellation were considered in late 1946 , BOAC decided that an entirely new design was preferred . After wrangling between the Ministry of Supply and BOAC over costs , the go @-@ ahead for the project assigned the company designation Model 175 was given in July 1948 . Three prototypes were ordered as Mk 1 ( Centaurus 662 ) , with the second and third prototypes designated the Mk 2 ( to be convertible to Bristol Proteus turboprops , then under development ) . 
 In October 1947 , with work already underway , Bristol had settled on a Centaurus @-@ powered design , with an all @-@ up weight of 103 @,@ 000 lb ( 47 @,@ 000 kg ) and a payload of 13 @,@ 300 lb ( 6 @,@ 000 kg ) . The anticipated Karachi @-@ Cairo run necessitated a 48 @-@ seat limit with a requirement for sufficient fuel for the lengthy stage . On 5 July 1949 , the Ministry of Supply ordered five prototypes to this specification with the understanding that BOAC would contract for an additional 25 production examples . BOAC purchased options for 25 aircraft on 28 July , to be powered initially with the Bristol Centaurus engine but to be re @-@ fitted with the Bristol Proteus when available . In November 1948 , the Type 175 design was revised again to accommodate 74 passengers and a longer span wing in a contemplated long @-@ range version aimed at long @-@ haul Empire and transatlantic routes rather than the medium @-@ haul Empire routes originally planned . On reflection , BOAC decided that only a Proteus @-@ engined aircraft was worth working on , necessitating a further redesign with Bristol eliminating the Centaurus option . Senior figures within BOAC such as the Deputy Chairman Whitney Straight , however , considered the Proteus engine to be " an obsolete contraption " . Despite BOAC 's desire to have a turboprop engine , the Type 175 project was contingent on the Proteus passing a 150 @-@ hour Type Test . 
 = = = Prototypes and production = = = 
 The name , " Britannia " was chosen in April 1950 with Britannia 101 the designation for first two prototypes powered by the early series Proteus 625 , the follow @-@ up from the 600 series engine that had successfully completed its type trials . The first prototype , registered G @-@ ALBO , with Bristol Chief Test Pilot A.J. " Bill " Pegg at the controls , flew for the first time on 16 August 1952 at Filton Aerodrome . The maiden flight was eventful as the over @-@ sensitive flying controls led to a wild pitching before Pegg restored control . During the landing approach , smoke filled the cockpit and the main undercarriage bogie was stuck in its cycle , only fully deploying seconds before landing . The " snags " proved to be minor and by September , the prototype was cleared to perform at the 1952 SBAC Display at Farnborough where spectators commented on the " quietness " of the giant airliner . In November 1952 , Popular Science reported that by 1954 BOAC would have 25 of these aircraft on routes such as London @-@ to @-@ Tokyo over the Arctic and North Pole . However , in 1953 and 1954 , three de Havilland Comets crashed without explanation , and the Air Ministry demanded the Britannia undergo lengthy tests . Further delays were attributed to teething problems with the engine resulting in the loss in December 1953 of the second prototype , G @-@ <unk> , caused by a failed reduction gear that led to an engine fire and the aircraft landing on the mudflats of the Severn Estuary . Resolving easily avoidable inlet icing issues - by selecting a slightly different cruising height than that specified - which were exaggerated by BOAC destroying the Britannia 's sales prospects and delaying the Britannia 's introduction by two years , also took time . The first prototype G @-@ ALBO was subsequently modified to more closely approximate a production standard but was retained by the company to undergo engine testing and development . 
 Bristol revised the design into a larger transatlantic airliner for BOAC , resulting in the Series 200 and 300 , with the Britannia 300LR ( Long @-@ Range ) seen as " eminently suitable " for BOAC 's services between London and Sydney . Qantas had been considering purchasing a fleet of Britannia aircraft , but the extended development time had worn away the advantage the aircraft would hold until newer aircraft such as the Douglas DC @-@ 8 and de Havilland Comet 4 came onto the market . Route @-@ proving trials continued through 1955 , although orders were on the books from El Al and Canadian Pacific Air Lines as well as BOAC 's standing order . 
 The purchase price paid by BOAC for each Britannia 100 @-@ series aircraft agreed on in 1955 was £ 768 @,@ 000 . 
 During the first eight months of operational trials , a total of 16 in @-@ flight engine failures and 49 unscheduled engine changes punctuated the ongoing engine dilemma and delayed the in @-@ service date until February 1957 , roughly two years late . The Britannia received a fair amount of attention in both the popular press and the British House of Commons , especially when it was revealed that BOAC had contemplated fitting Rolls @-@ Royce Tynes to their fleet of Douglas DC @-@ 7s as an interim measure until the Britannia was cleared for service . 
 Aviation historian Peter Pigott summarised the impact of the delays : 
 = = = Related development = = = 
 In 1954 , a licence was issued to Canadair to build the derivative Canadair CL @-@ 28 / CP @-@ 107 Argus , and the Canadair CL @-@ 44 / Canadair CC @-@ 106 Yukon . Based on the Britannia , the design of the Argus maritime patrol and anti @-@ submarine warfare aircraft was optimised for endurance on long @-@ range patrol , not speed , and used four Wright R @-@ 3350 @-@ <unk> Turbo @-@ Compound engines that used less fuel at low altitude . Unlike its Britannia forebear , the Argus was a hybrid using the Britannia wings , tail surfaces and landing gear matched to a " purpose @-@ built " , unpressurised fuselage . Another significant departure was being " Americanized " , substituting North American materials and standard parts for the British ones . The interior was well equipped with the tools to conduct anti @-@ submarine warfare : navigation , communication and tactical electronic equipment along with weapon loads that included bombs , torpedoes , mines and depth charges . A total of 33 Argus aircraft were built in two series ( Mk 1 and Mk 2 ) , serving the Royal Canadian Air Force ( RCAF ) and Canadian Forces from 1957 to 1982 . 
 Canadair also built 37 turboprop Rolls Royce Tyne @-@ powered CL @-@ 44 passenger / cargo variants for the civil market , most of which were used as freighters . Four were built as CL @-@ <unk> with lengthened fuselages for service with the Icelandic " budget " airline <unk> . Four CL @-@ <unk> were also built with swing @-@ tails to allow straight @-@ in cargo loading and served with a variety of carriers , most notably Flying Tiger Line . The similar CC @-@ 106 Yukon was used by the RCAF in a solely passenger configuration . A final unique " one @-@ off " development was the Conroy <unk> , nicknamed Guppy , based on a Canadair CL @-@ <unk> <unk> . The most prominent modification was an enlarged fuselage , like the Mini Guppy which was produced by Jack Conroy 's previous company , Aero <unk> . After a long operational career as a freighter , the Guppy was stored at Bournemouth Airport in 2003 and has recently been sold . 
 = = Operational history = = 
 Following a long period of uneventful development flying trials and the fitting of a modified Proteus 765 series engine that greatly reduced breakdowns , a full Certificate of Airworthiness was awarded at the end of 1955 . The first two Model 102s were delivered to BOAC on 30 December 1955 for crew training . The Model 102 began scheduled service on 1 February 1957 with a BOAC flight from London to Johannesburg , flights to Sydney following in March and to Tokyo in July . By August 1957 , the first 15 Model 102 aircraft had been delivered to BOAC . The last 10 aircraft of the order were built as Series 300 aircraft for transatlantic flights . In April 1959 , a Model 102 Britannia was leased by BOAC to Ghana Airways for flights between Accra and London , and several more Britannias were purchased by the airline in the early 1960s . The Model 102 was eventually made available to other BOAC associates , including Cathay Pacific , Central Africa , East African , Nigeria and Malayan airlines . 
 The next production series was based on the long @-@ range , mixed passenger / freight Model 200 series that was intended for civil airline use but ultimately Bristol offered the series to the Royal Air Force ( RAF ) instead . The production series of three Model 252 and 20 Model 253 aircraft were purchased by RAF Transport Command in 1959 , assigned the designation Britannia <unk> ( first Model 252 series ) and C.1 ( Model 253 series ) . Those in RAF service were allocated the names of stars , such as " Arcturus " , " Sirius " and " Vega " . On retirement from the RAF in 1975 , many Model 200 series were subsequently used by independent civil operators for cargo operations , harkening back to their original intended role . 
 Although the Bristol Model 302 was built first as part of the original BOAC order , BOAC released this series to other airlines ; Aeronaves de Mexico took two Model 302s which entered service in December 1957 . The 18 Bristol Britannia <unk> for BOAC were delivered from September 1957 with its service introduction on the first @-@ ever non @-@ stop flight from London to Canada on 19 December 1957 . In late December 1957 BOAC began regular Britannia flights from London to New York . Other airlines , such as Israel 's El Al , used the Britannia on transatlantic routes . In 1959 BOAC started flying the Britannia across the Pacific to Tokyo and Hong Kong , thus extending their network round the world . The westbound routing in 1959 for these intercontinental BOAC Britannia flights between the U.K. and Asia was London @-@ New York @-@ San Francisco @-@ Honolulu @-@ Wake Island @-@ Tokyo @-@ Hong Kong . 
 On 1 April 1958 Canadian Pacific Air Lines took delivery of the first of six Model 314 Britannias , with an additional two Model <unk> ( built to a 320 standard ) arriving later and sold to Cathay Pacific in 1961 . BOAC ordered seven Model 302s but never took delivery , instead they were taken on by airlines including Aeronaves de México and Ghana Airways . The main long @-@ range series were the <unk> , of which BOAC took 18 and , after deliveries began in September 1957 , put them into service between London and New York ; in March 1964 BOAC owned 50 aircraft , 10 being Britannia <unk> . BOAC 's last scheduled Britannia flight was April 1965 . 
 The 310 series ( the Model 318 ) also saw transatlantic service with Cubana de Aviación starting in 1958 , in spite of the Cuban Revolution the airline had a special accord with British aircraft manufacturers to maintain this model of aircraft . In 1975 Cuban Britannias were used to transport hundreds of soldiers of the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces to Angola in Operation Carlota , a proxy war . Cubana de Aviación continued using various Britannias until March 1990 . 
 Most aircraft were built by Bristol at Filton but 30 were built at Belfast by Short Brothers and Harland . Due to the extended development instead of a projected production of 180 Britannias , only 80 were sold . The negative experience with the development of the Britannia caused BOAC to be more cautious towards other British @-@ made aircraft such as the Vickers VC @-@ 10 . Throughout the Britannia 's lifespan , the engine icing condition remained a " continual potential hazard " that flight crews ultimately learned to manage with a " high @-@ lo " flight regime that minimized the danger , although the problems of the Britannia can mainly be linked to that of a manufacturer undertaking an innovative airframe design matched to an unproven engine , a design syndrome that remained particularly daunting . Squadron Leader David Berry who had 5 @,@ 000 hours on the type characterised his experiences as flying " Beauty and the Beast . " A more fitting epitaph was recently proffered by the editors of Aeroplane as the " 100 Great British Aircraft " ( 2008 ) were analysed with the Bristol Britannia counted among the " greats " . 
 Following purchase of remaining spare parts from Royal Aircraft Establishment and Cubana , <unk> airlines continued to operate Bristol Britannia into the early 1990s on regular cargo flights from N 'djili Airport to various destinations within the country . 
 = = Variants = = 
 = = = Bristol Model 175 = = = 
 Mk 1 
 Prototype powered by Bristol Centaurus 662 , fuselage length of 114 ft ( 35m ) , span 120 ft ( 36 @.@ 5 m ) , seating for 48 passengers , not built 
 Mk 2 
 Two prototypes powered by either Bristol Centaurus 662 or Bristol Proteus 600 ; with the Proteus , the fuselage length of 114 ft ( 35m ) was fitted with a longer wingspan 140 ft ( 43 m ) and reduced seating for 36 passengers , two prototypes planned , none built . 
 = = = Series 100 = = = 
 Seventy @-@ four passenger airliner with 114 ft ( 35m ) fuselage and powered by four Bristol Proteus 705 
 101 
 Prototypes , two initially powered by Proteus 625 and soon after re @-@ engined with the Proteus 755 , later the first prototype G @-@ ALBO was used for development testing of the Bristol Orion in 1956 and the Proteus 765 in 1957 . 
 102 
 Production aircraft for BOAC , 25 ordered with the last 10 cancelled in favour of the 300 series , 15 built . 
 = = = Series 200 = = = 
 All cargo variant with a 124 ft 3 in ( 38 m ) fuselage , BOAC option for five was cancelled , none built . 
 = = = Series 250 = = = 
 Similar to the 200 series , but mixed passenger and freight . 
 252 
 Originally ordered by the Ministry of Supply for intended lease to charter operators , but delivered to the Royal Air Force , as the Britannia C2 . Fitted with a heavy @-@ duty floor in forward area of fuselage and cargo door , three built . 
 253 
 Passenger / freight variant for the Royal Air Force , designated Britannia C1 . Fitted with full length heavy @-@ duty floor and provision for rearwards @-@ facing seats as preferred by the RAF . Capacity for 115 troops or equivalent in cargo , 20 built . Aircraft later sold on the civil market as freighters designated Series <unk> . 
 = = = Series 300 = = = 
 Passenger only " stretched " version of the 200 series , incorporating 123 inches ( 3 @.@ 1 m ) longer fuselage , capable of carrying up to 139 ( originally 99 ) passengers , medium @-@ fuel capacity . 
 301 
 One Filton @-@ built company prototype , used the same wing and fuel capacity of the Model 100 ; first flew : 31 July 1956 . 
 302 
 Belfast @-@ built production , 10 ordered by BOAC but cancelled in favour of 305 ; seven were begun to this standard with two delivered to Aeronaves de Mexico . 
 305 
 Five Belfast @-@ built 302s modified for longer @-@ range but with limited takeoff weight due to thinner fuselage skin and lighter landing gear . Originally ordered by Capital Airlines which were cancelled and then for Northeast Airlines which also cancelled . All modified to other variants . 
 306 
 One former Series 305 leased to El Al pending delivery of last Series 315 . Later converted to Series 307 . 
 307 
 Two of the ex @-@ BOAC Northeast 305 order ( one formerly the El AL Series 307 ) to Air Charter Limited September 1958 and March 1959 , with a new designation : Model 307 . Later to British United Airways . 
 <unk> 
 1960 's conversion of 307 to freighter ( both converted ) . 
 308 
 Two former <unk> ordered by Transcontinental SA of Argentina in 104 @-@ passenger configuration . 
 <unk> 
 1960 's conversion of 308 to freighter for British Eagle ( both converted ) . 
 309 
 One former 305 ( leased to Ghana Airways ) . 
 = = = Series 310 = = = 
 As 305 series , but with strengthened fuselage skin and undercarriage . Long @-@ range fuel capacity and was originally known as 300LR . 
 311 
 One prototype originally known as a 300LR . 
 312 
 Production aircraft for BOAC , 18 built . 
 <unk> 
 1960s conversion of 312 to freighter ( five converted ) . 
 313 
 Production aircraft for El Al , four built . 
 314 
 Production aircraft for Canadian Pacific Air Lines , six built . 
 317 
 Production aircraft for Hunting @-@ Clan Air Transport in 124 passenger trooping configuration , two built . 
 318 
 Production aircraft for Cubana de Aviación , four built . Delivery taking place on 15 December 1958 , later one leased to Cunard Eagle in 1960 – 1961 and this same airliner leased to CSA in 1962 . 
 319 
 Last production Britannia sold to Ghana Airways , modified from original Model 310 / 311 series . 
 320 
 Variant for North American market , order for Trans World Airlines not concluded , two built were completed as Series <unk> . 
 324 
 Two Series 320s built for Canadian Pacific Air Lines , later purchased by Cunard Eagle Airways in 1961 . 
 = = Operators = = 
 = = = Civilian operators = = = 
 Argentina 
 <unk> Entre Rios 
 Transcontinental SA 
 Australia 
 Southern Cross International ( leased ) 
 Belgium 
 Young Cargo 
 Burundi 
 Centre Air Afrique 
 Canada 
 Canadian Pacific Air Lines 
 Cuba 
 <unk> 
 Cubana de Aviación 
 Czechoslovakia 
 CSA leased two aircraft from Cubana de Aviación ( 1961 – 1964 and 1963 – 1969 ) . 
 Dubai 
 Air Faisal 
 Ghana 
 Ghana Airways 
 Gemini Air Transport 
 Indonesia 
 Indonesian <unk> Civil Air Transport 
 Ireland 
 Aer <unk> 
 <unk> 
 Israel 
 El Al - An El Al Bristol Britannia was used by Israel to fly Adolf Eichmann out of Argentina after his kidnap in 1960 . 
 Kenya 
 African Cargo Airlines 
 African Safari Airways 
 Liberia 
 Liberia World Airways 
 Mexico 
 Aeronaves de México 
 Spain 
 Air Spain 
 Switzerland 
 Globe Air operated two former El Al <unk> between 1964 and 1967 . 
 United Arab Emirates 
 <unk> Air Cargo ( United Arab Emirates ) 
 United Kingdom 
 Air Charter 
 BKS Air Transport 
 BOAC 
 Britannia Airways 
 British Eagle 
 British United Airways 
 Caledonian Airways 
 Cathay Pacific 
 Cunard Eagle Airways 
 Donaldson International Airways 
 Hunting @-@ Clan Air Transport 
 International Air Services 
 Invicta International Airlines 
 Lloyd International Airways 
 Monarch Airlines 
 Redcoat Air Cargo 
 <unk> Airways 
 Zaire 
 Domaine de <unk> 
 <unk> Air Transport 
 <unk> Air Services 
 <unk> Cargo 
 = = = Military operators = = = 
 United Kingdom 
 Aeroplane and Armament Experimental Establishment 
 Royal Air Force 
 No. 99 Squadron RAF 
 No. 511 Squadron RAF 
 Cuba 
 Cuban Air Force 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 Fourteen Britannias were lost with a total of 365 fatalities between 1954 and 1980 . The worst accident was the 1967 Nicosia Britannia disaster with a loss of life totalling 126 . 
 On 4 February 1954 , the second Britannia prototype crashed at Severn Beach , Gloucestershire . During the test flight , beginning with a loss of oil pressure , the No. 3 engine was shut down and restarted with a fire breaking out that could not be contained , consequently , No. 4 was shut down as a precaution . On approach to Filton Airport , there was concern that the uncontrolled fire would lead to a failure of the main spar , the pilot , William " Bill " Pegg , electing to make an emergency landing on the mudflats of the Severn Estuary . There were no fatalities . 
 On 6 November 1957 , the 300 series prototype crashed during a test flight , killing the 15 occupants . 
 On 24 December 1958 , a BOAC Britannia 312 on a test flight crashed at <unk> , killing nine of the passengers and crew on board . 
 On 12 October 1967 , " Sirius " a Royal Air Force C1 was damaged beyond repair after over @-@ running the runway at RAF <unk> , Aden . 
 On 22 July 1962 , a Canadian Pacific Air Lines Flight 301 a Britannia 314 was destroyed during an attempted " go @-@ around " following a three @-@ engined approach at Honolulu Airport , Hawaii . 
 On 29 February 1964 , British Eagle International Airlines Flight 802 crashed into the <unk> mountain near Innsbruck killing all 83 people aboard . 
 On 1 September 1966 , a Britannia Airways Flight 105 crashed while landing at Ljubljana , Yugoslavia , resulting in a total of 98 fatalities out of 117 passengers and crew . The probable cause was the flight crew having failed to set their altimeter to <unk> instead of QNH , creating a 980 feet ( 300 m ) error in indicated altitude . 
 On 20 April 1967 , a Globe Air Britannia 313 was on a flight from Bangkok to Basel with intermediate stops at Colombo , Mumbai ( Bombay ) and Cairo . The crew didn 't fly to Cairo , but elected to fly to Nicosia instead , where a missed approach and subsequent low circuit ended in impact near the airport perimeter . 
 On 30 September 1977 , an <unk> Britannia <unk> was on a ferry flight , on approach to Shannon Airport severe vibration was experienced at an height of 300 feet . The approach to runway 24 was abandoned and an overshoot was commenced . The aircraft continued to sink and collided with the ground short and to the right of the runway . The Britannia aircraft bounced , the right wing broke off . The aircraft then skidded and caught fire . 
 On 16 February 1980 , a Britannia <unk> of Redcoat Air Cargo crashed at Billerica , Massachusetts , shortly after taking off from Boston . The probable cause of the accident was degraded aerodynamic performance beyond the flight capabilities of the aircraft resulting from an accumulation of ice and snow on the airframe before takeoff and a further accumulation of ice when the aircraft was flown into moderate to severe icing conditions following takeoff . Contributing to the cause of the accident were encounters with wind shear , downdrafts , and turbulence during the climb . Of eight crew and passengers on board , there were seven fatalities with one seriously injured . 
 = = Survivors = = 
 Britannia 101 ( G @-@ <unk> ) 
 Forward fuselage is with the Bristol Aero Collection This is the second prototype aircraft , destroyed in the Severn Estuary crash . 
 Britannia <unk> ( G @-@ <unk> ) 
 Removed from Kemble , and reassembled in early 2007 in Liverpool , England . Under restoration on the former airside apron behind the Crowne Plaza Liverpool John Lennon Airport Hotel , which was the original terminal building of Liverpool Speke Airport . 
 Britannia 312 ( G @-@ <unk> ) 
 On display at the Royal Air Force Museum , RAF Cosford , England , in Royal Air Force Air Support Command colours as <unk> " <unk> " . 
 Britannia <unk> ( G @-@ <unk> ) 
 Derelict fuselage on the fire training dump at London Luton Airport , Luton , England , in Redcoat Air Cargo colours as G @-@ <unk> " Christian " . Is visible from the Wigmore Valley Park playing fields . 
 Britannia 312 ( G @-@ <unk> ) 
 On display at the Imperial War Museum Duxford , England , in Monarch Airlines colours . 
 Britannia C.1 ( <unk> ) Regulus 
 On display at Kemble Airfield , England , in RAF colours . 
 Britannia <unk> ( 5Y @-@ <unk> ) 
 Cockpit preserved in Burnham on Sea , Somerset , England . 
 = = Notable appearances in media = = 
 An Aeronaves de Mexico Model 302 Britannia was the aircraft in the 1959 movie Jet Over the Atlantic ; the audience is informed that the aircraft is a turboprop . 
 = = Specifications ( Series 310 ) = = 
 Data from Britannia ... Last of the Bristol Line 
 General characteristics 
 Crew : 4 @-@ 7 
 Capacity : 139 passengers ( coach class ) 
 Length : 124 ft 3 in ( 37 @.@ 88 m ) 
 Wingspan : 142 ft 3 in ( 43 @.@ 36 m ) 
 Height : 37 ft 6 in ( 11 @.@ 43 m ) 
 Wing area : 2 @,@ 075 ft ² ( 192 @.@ 8 m ² ) 
 Empty weight : 86 @,@ 400 lb ( 38 @,@ 500 kg ) 
 Max. takeoff weight : 185 @,@ 000 lb ( 84 @,@ 000 kg ) 
 Powerplant : 4 × Bristol Proteus 765 turboprops , 4 @,@ 450 <unk> ( 3 @,@ 320 kW ) each 
 Performance 
 Maximum speed : 397 mph ( 345 knots , 639 km / h ) 
 Cruise speed : 357 mph ( 310 kn , 575 km / h ) at 22 @,@ 000 ft ( 6 @,@ 700 m ) 
 Range : 4 @,@ 430 mi ( 3 @,@ 852 nmi , 7 @,@ 129 km ) 
 Service ceiling : 24 @,@ 000 ft ( 7 @,@ 300 m ) 
 Avionics 
 EKCO <unk> weather radar 
 = Tales ( series ) = 
 The Tales series , known in Japan as the Tales of series ( 「 テイルズ オブ 」 <unk> , " Teiruzu Obu " Shirīzu ) , is a franchise of fantasy Japanese role @-@ playing video games published by Bandai Namco Entertainment ( formerly Namco ) , and developed by its subsidiary , Namco Tales Studio until 2011 and presently by Bandai Namco . First begun in 1995 with the development and release of Tales of Phantasia for the Super Famicom , the series currently spans sixteen main titles , multiple spin @-@ off games and supplementary media in the form of manga series , anime series , and audio dramas . 
 While entries in the series generally stand independent of each other with different characters and stories , they are commonly linked by their gameplay , themes and high fantasy settings . The series is characterized by its art style , which draws from Japanese manga and anime , and its action @-@ based fighting system called the " Linear Motion Battle System " . Multiple people have become linked with the series , including character designers Kōsuke Fujishima and Mutsumi Inomata , producers Hideo Baba and Makoto Yoshizumi , and composer Motoi Sakuraba . The series was created by Yoshiharu <unk> . 
 Most of the main Tales games have been localized for North America and Europe , although almost all of the spinoff titles have not been released abroad . While generally seen as a niche series in English speaking regions , Tales is considered a high @-@ profile property in Japan , just behind other series such as Final Fantasy and Dragon Quest . The series has been gaining popularity in the West since the release of Tales of Symphonia , which is still considered one of its most popular titles . As of December 2013 , the series has sold 16 million units worldwide . 
 = = Titles = = 
 = = = Games = = = 
 Since the first installment was released in 1995 , the Tales series has grown to include the main entries and multiple spin @-@ offs that derive multiple gameplay and narrative elements from the main entries . Except when indicated by naming , the main Tales entries are separate from each other apart from gameplay mechanics and themes . While Tales titles are often ported to new consoles after their original release , these remakes are rarely localized . The 2007 Nintendo DS game Tales of the Tempest was originally seen as a main entry in the series , but in 2007 was classified as a spin @-@ off . 
 = = = = Main series = = = = 
 The series debuted on the Super Famicom with Tales of Phantasia in 1995 , and introduced multiple elements that would become staples of the Tales series . It was released in the west on the Game Boy Advance in 2006 . It was also ported to the PlayStation , PlayStation Portable and iOS . The PlayStation received two original Tales games : Tales of Destiny in 1997 , which was the first title to be released in North America , and Tales of Eternia in 2000 , which was released in North America as Tales of Destiny 2 in 2001 . 
 Five titles have been released on the PlayStation 2 . The true direct sequel to Destiny , Tales of Destiny 2 , was released on the PlayStation 2 in 2001 across Asian territories , and ported to the PlayStation Portable in Japan in 2007 ; both versions have yet to receive a western release . Tales of Symphonia was released in Japan on the PS2 and Nintendo GameCube . The GameCube version was also released North America and Europe . It was the first entry to feature 3D graphics for its characters and environments and the first to be released in Europe . Tales of Rebirth was released in 2004 , ported to the PlayStation Portable in 2008 , and has yet to receive a western localization . Tales of Legendia and Tales of the Abyss were both released in Japan in 2005 , with both being released in North America the following year . Legendia was the first and only Tales game developed by Namco internal development team " Project <unk> " , while Abyss was developed by the same team that developed Symphonia , and used its same graphics engine . Abyss was later ported to the Nintendo 3DS , and released in Japan , North America and Europe . 
 Tales of Innocence was released in Japan on the Nintendo DS in 2007 . A remake of the game , Innocence R was released on the PlayStation Vita in 2012 . Neither version has been released in the west . The first release on seventh @-@ generation consoles , Tales of Vesperia for Xbox 360 , was released in Japan and North America in 2008 and in Europe in 2009 . A Japan @-@ exclusive PlayStation 3 port was released in 2009 as well . Tales of Hearts was released on the Nintendo DS in 2008 . A remake , Hearts R , was released in 2013 in Japan and 2014 in North America and Europe . 
 The twelfth entry , Tales of Graces , released on the Wii in Japan in 2009 . A PlayStation 3 port , Graces f , was released in 2009 in Japan , and in 2012 in North America and Europe . Tales of Xillia , the series ' 15th anniversary title , was released in Japan for PlayStation 3 in 2011 , and in North America and Europe in 2013 . Xillia 's direct sequel and the fourteenth main title , Tales of Xillia 2 , was released in 2012 in Japan and 2014 in North America and Europe . The fifteenth main title , Tales of Zestiria , was released in January 2015 in Japan and it was released in North America on October 20 , 2015 . The sixteenth main title , Tales of Berseria , is in production for PS3 and PlayStation 4 . 
 = = = = Sequels and spin @-@ offs = = = = 
 The series has received a small number of sequels , and a large amount of spin @-@ off titles and subseries . With the exception of Tempest , worked on by multiple staff from the main series and treated a precursor to Innocence , they are derivative rather than original works . Three direct sequels have been produced : Destiny 2 , Xillia 2 and Tales of Symphonia : Dawn of the New World . Eternia received an MMORPG spin @-@ off for PC platforms titled Tales of Eternia Online . Multiple crossover games have been made for mobile platforms , including Tales of Link , the Tales of Mobile series , Tales of Card Evolve , Tales of <unk> and Tales of <unk> . Two titles for the PlayStation Portable have been released in Japan : Tales of <unk> in 2009 , and Tales of the Heroes : Twin Brave in 2012 . The main spin @-@ off subseries is Tales of the World , which has grown to include ten games beginning with Tales of Phantasia : <unk> Dungeon , released in Japan on the Game Boy Color in 2000 . Only Tales of the World : Radiant Mythology has been released in the west . A second subseries , Tales of Fandom , includes two games released respectively for the PlayStation and PlayStation 2 in 2002 and 2007 . 
 = = = Related media = = = 
 The Tales series has expanded into other media , including CD dramas , manga and anime . Multiple Tales games have been adapted into anime <unk> and TV series . The Symphonia OAV was released in three parts between 2007 and 2011 , and released as a single collection in 2013 . Abyss was adapted into a 26 @-@ episode TV series between October 2008 and March 2009 . Phantasia and Eternia have also received anime adaptations . The series ' first theatrical film , a prequel to Vesperia called Tales of Vesperia : The First Strike , was released in 2009 in Japan and 2012 in North America . A made @-@ for @-@ television anime based on the opening sections of Zestiria , Dawn of the Shepard , was produced as part of the 20th anniversary celebrations related to the title . It was also released on the game disc . A full series based on Zestiria will air in 2016 . 
 Books and audio dramas have also been made . Phantasia received multiple CD dramas , including four collected into anthologies in January and March 2000 @.@ and a stand @-@ alone drama in December 2001 . Symphonia received seven audio dramas following the game 's plot . Two CD dramas for Legendia were respectively released in August and September 2005 . A manga of Phantasia was written and serialized in 2008 and 2009 , while Abyss received three manga adaptations in the years after its release . Symphonia was adapted in both novelizations and a manga serial . Others to receive adaptations of these kinds are Destiny , Graces and Xillia . 
 = = Common elements = = 
 = = = Gameplay = = = 
 The Tales series is classified as a role @-@ playing video game series . Multiple gameplay elements carry over from entry to entry . The main unifying element is the combat system , the Linear Motion Battle System ( LMBS for short ) . Considered as one of the mainstays and building blocks for every main entry in the series , it undergoes multiple incremental changes and alterations from one installment to the next . Introduced in Phantasia , it is a real @-@ time fighting system similar to a brawler , as opposed to the majority of RPGs at the time of Phantasia 's release which primarily used turn @-@ based battle systems . 
 Some features introduced in certain games have proven popular enough to remain in future installments like " Free Running " ( the ability for a character to freely roam the battlefield ) . Elements of turn @-@ based combat are also present , though to a lesser degree : an example of this is Destiny 's " Chain Capacity " feature ( the number of skills a character can perform ) , which appears in later games in the series . The battle system for Legendia was deliberately designed to be similar to a brawler : the stated reason was that the team wished to combine brawler combat with the story and leveling mechanics of a Tales game . Characters generally use Artes , which are special attacks characters can perform in battle . Players can usually only control one character , though a multiplayer option was implemented for Destiny and has reappeared in later Tales games . 
 The battle system 's name for each installment is augmented with descriptive titles representative of features of that game 's battle system : examples are the " Style Shift " system from Graces ( characters shifting between two types of Artes ) and the " <unk> @-@ Chain " system from Zestiria ( a human character merging with a magical character for a brief period to deal greater damage ) . Characters are awarded with " Titles " , nicknames which sometimes grant boons to them in battle when assigned to them . In the majority of Tales games , when navigating the overworld or environment and encountering an enemy , combat took place on a separate battle screen . For Zestiria , combat took place in the same space as exploration . 
 Most Tales games have skits , side conversations between different characters that can be both dramatic and comedic in nature . They are commonly portrayed as character portraits or profiles , with text along the bottom of the screen . They were first introduced in Tales of Destiny , though the majority were cut from the English release . In the original English GameCube release of Symphonia , the voice track for the skits was removed , but for its HD re @-@ release , the Japanese voice track , and consequently the skit voice tracks , were included . The first English release to include fully voiced skits was Vesperia : they had been planned for Abyss , but were cut due to space issues . Another recurring feature is the Cooking system , where characters learn and prepare dishes to restore health and forms of experience points . 
 = = = Themes , plots and characters = = = 
 The prominent narrative theme of the Tales series is the issue of coexistence between different races . A particular example of this is Tales of Rebirth , which extensively explores themes of racism . Scenario writer Hiramatsu Masaki was inspired by the ethnic conflicts seen in Yugoslavia . Another recurring feature is the plot and characters , which are often rooted in and revolve around themes such as justice or faith . The theme for each entry in the series is decided by the series producer based on current world events . The chosen theme helps dictate what the game will be called : once the theme is decided , the team search through various languages to find a suitable representative word . The narratives of each story were described by Gamasutra as " very typical " during a 2008 interview with staff members , although it was not elaborated upon by the interviewer . The interviewees suggested that this point of view was based on the fact that western fans were not generally experienced in Japanese culture , and so would see the stories in each entry as similar . The writers for each game are hired on a per @-@ project basis , with both freelancers and in @-@ house story writers being involved . Two of the recurring writers are Takumi Miyajima ( Symphonia and Abyss ) , and Naoki Yamamoto ( Hearts , Xillia , Zestiria ) . There are very few mainline games that share a setting : Symphonia takes place along the same " time axis " as Phantasia , while Zestiria and Berseria take place on the same world at different time periods . 
 The settings for the stories are primarily high fantasy worlds , with the producers opting not to use a dark or science fiction @-@ based setting . An exception is Xillia 2 , which mostly took place in a modern setting , and explored darker themes than usual . This direction was confirmed as a one @-@ off experiment for the series . The main characters play a key role in the Tales games , as it is partially through them that the main theme of each entry is depicted . For Abyss , it was decided to take a risk and create an unorthodox protagonist that would be initially unlikable . For Vesperia , the team opted to raise the age limit of the target audience , showing this in the game by making the main protagonist a more mature type . A female main protagonist was included for the first time in Xillia in the form of Milla Maxwell alongside male protagonist Jude Mathis , although at the time it was stated that there were no solid plans to create a game with a single female protagonist . A sole female character , called Velvet , was eventually included in Berseria . The way the characters interact with each other during the narrative forms one of the core aspects of designing each game . Another main priority is for players to see a part of themselves in the characters . 
 = = = Terminology = = = 
 Unique terminology is used when referring to games within the series . In 2007 , Yoshizumi announced two classes of Tales games , " Mothership Titles " and " Escort Titles " . " Mothership " essentially means " Main series " , where as " Escort " essentially means " Spinoff " . One of the recurring differences between the two game types internally is that " Escort " titles don 't supply inspiration for main entries in the series , but draw the most popular elements from them . The games are also frequently given what is called a " Characteristic Genre Name " , which is essentially a short subtitle or phrase that outlines the game 's overall theme . The main reason for this , as stated by Yoshizumi , was that the series was not seen as a role @-@ playing series by the development team , but rather " Character Playing Game " , with the player learning about the game 's characters and watching them grow rather than using them as avatars : the genre names are meant to distinguish them from other role @-@ playing games . The terms , however , are largely removed from the English localized versions . There are also terms that are used in remakes or ports of games : " R " stands for " remake " or " Re @-@ imagination " ( as in Hearts R ) , while " F " in Graces f stood for " future " , in reference to the game 's extra story content . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = History = = = 
 The Tales series originated when Phantasia began production , based on an unpublished novel titled Tale Phantasia ( <unk> , <unk> <unk> ) , written by the game 's scenario writer and lead programmer Yoshiharu <unk> . During the story development process , several elements of the original novel were dropped or changed . The game was developed by Wolf Team , an independent game development studio founded in 1986 . Due to bad experiences at Telenet Japan , the previous employer of multiple Wolf Team members , the staff sought an independent publisher for the game . After an unsuccessful pitch to Enix , they entered a publishing contract with Bandai Namco ( then Namco ) . Phantasia had a troubled development cycle for the original Super Famicom version , with many creative disagreements between Wolf Team and Namco . The disagreements led to most of the Wolf Team staff leaving after the game in order to start a new company , tri @-@ Ace , which would go on to make the Star Ocean series . Remaining members would continue to develop games in the Tales series . 
 The studio remained independent until 2003 , when it was acquired by Bandai Namco and renamed Namco Tales Studio . The studio 's shares were divided between Bandai Namco , Telenet Japan and series director Eiji Kikuchi . In 2006 , Namco bought Telenet 's shares , then later Kikuchi 's , giving them full control over the studio . In mid 2011 , a financial report indicated that Namco Tales was in serious financial trouble , having a debt of 21 million dollars and posting a loss for the previous financial year . The studio 's absorption into its parent company was formally announced in November of that year . After the absorption of Namco Tales , former series brand manager Hideo Baba was appointed as series producer . He had previously been the producer of the original version of Hearts . Alongside Baba , the chief series producer is Makoto Yoshizumi , who had produced multiple titles including Destiny and Innocence . 
 = = = Art design = = = 
 The series is distinguished by its art style , which emulates manga and anime . According to Baba , the character designs are created once the main character 's story , personality , and environment are determined by the rest of the production team . Beyond that , the artist is allowed to use their imagination , though they can be asked to alter things like costume details , and facial expressions . One of the main designers for the series is manga artist Kōsuke Fujishima . He was first brought in to design the characters for Phantasia , and has since designed for multiple entries including Abyss and Xillia . Another designer , Mutsumi Inomata , first designed for the series with Destiny , and has contributed designs for multiple entries including Eternia , Rebirth and Xillia . A third regular artist is Daigo Okumura , who designed characters for Vesperia and Xillia 2 , as well as Dawn of the New World . Other designers to work on the series include Kazuto Nakazawa ( Legendia ) , Kouichi Kimura ( Xillia 2 ) , and Minoru Iwamoto ( Zestiria ) . The art design for each game 's world and characters has ranged between a cel @-@ shaded anime style ( Vesperia ) to a more realistic style ( Xillia 2 ) . Skit character images are also directly inspired by anime art . The art style for each title is determined by the theme and story decided upon by the developers . 
 Anime cutscenes are included in each game , and are a primary focus for the production team as they help make the first impression on players . The series aims to avoid standard anime tropes and common narrative elements with each installment . The first game to feature such cutscenes was Destiny . The cutscenes were animated by Production I.G , which has provided cutscenes for the series until Xillia . For Xillia , aiming to demonstrate a new artistic direction for the series , production of the anime cutscenes was given to Ufotable . For the Nintendo DS release of Hearts , two identical versions of the game were released as an experiment by the production team , with one featuring traditional anime animation by Production I.G. , and one featuring computer @-@ generated cutscenes by Shirogumi Ltd . The CGI cutscenes proved less popular with fans than the established anime style . 
 = = = Technology and development teams = = = 
 The engines for the games are generally developed in @-@ house : the cited reasons for this included problems with outsourced development . Until Vesperia , the team worked on a by @-@ project basis , creating new development tools and engines for each installment . Due to cost increases , the development process was altered and streamlined as more user @-@ friendly software engines became available . The studio was divided into two teams : Team Destiny worked on 2D Tales titles such as Tales of Destiny , while Team Symphonia developed 3D titles . In @-@ house , major distinctions were made between the two studios except for some core staff Namco Tales produced the majority of the mainline Tales games until its absorption in 2011 . The notable exceptions are Legendia , which was developed by an internal staff group at Bandai Namco , and Innocence , which was developed by Alfa System . Alfa System also developed many of the portable spin @-@ off titles . After the absorption of Namco Tales by Bandai Namco , the teams and staff transferred to the new in @-@ house development studio called Bandai Namco Studios . The size of the teams was reduced and the previous studio 's main divisions were merged . This allowed production to be streamlined , but also meant that the team could only focus on one game at a time , rather than working on two games simultaneously as they had done before . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The regular main composer for the Tales series is Motoi Sakuraba . His first work on the series was for Phantasia , and has since contributed to nearly every main entry since there in the capacity of a freelance composer . Sakuraba has become noted for his signature musical style , which is present in the majority of his Tales scores . He also frequently collaborates with Shinji Tamura . The entries Sakuraba has not worked on are Legendia , which was composed by Go Shiina , an in @-@ house composer , and Innocence , whose composer was Kazuhiro Nakamura . Sakuraba and Shiina had collaborated on the score for Zestiria . Multiple titles in the series use licensed theme songs by multiple Japanese artists : among the artists are <unk> Crow ( Eternia ) , Deen ( Destiny / Hearts ) , Kokia ( Innocence ) and Ayumi Hamasaki ( Xillia / Xillia 2 ) . One recurring aspect of many earlier localizations was the removal of the Japanese theme song , such as with Symphonia , which had its theme song replaced with an orchestral version . The first western release of a Tales title to feature the theme song used in Japan was Vesperia . 
 = = = Localization = = = 
 Multiple Tales titles , the majority of which are spin @-@ offs , have not been localized for the west or have only been released in North America : two examples of the former case for entries in the main series are Rebirth and Innocence , while an example of the latter is Legendia . Speaking in 2013 , Baba explained that the main priority for localizations was for the main series rather than spin @-@ offs . In addition to this , he stated that their localization team was limited and they needed to " pick and choose " which game to bring to the west . For its western release , Eternia 's name was changed to " Destiny 2 " : this was due to a possible trademark conflict and the wish to exploit the popularity of Destiny . The 2006 PSP port of Eternia retained its original title . With Zestiria , Bandai Namco planned to attempt releasing the game in the west in the same year it was released in Japan . The deciding factor in this resolution was the delayed release of Xillia and its sequel , and the reaction of western fans to this . Fan localizations have also been created , such as for the original versions of Phantasia and Innocence . While the option of the Japanese voice tracks have been heavily requested for western releases by fans , licensing issues have mostly prevented Bandai Namco from implementing it . Localization for mobile titles is also a low priority due to them being co @-@ developed by Japan @-@ based mobile developers . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 The series has generally sold well during its lifetime . The series ' strongest sales base has been Japan : in 2007 , sales distribution was 87 % in Japan , 8 % in North America , 3 % in Europe and 2 % in mainland Asia . The best @-@ selling titles of the series at the time were Symphonia ( 953 @,@ 000 copies for the GameCube , 486 @,@ 000 for PlayStation 2 ) , Destiny ( 1 @.@ 1 million copies for PlayStation ) , Xillia ( 1 million copies for PlayStation 3 ) and Destiny 2 ( 977 @,@ 000 copies for PlayStation 2 ) . The sales data did not include mobile and online games . The success of entries has also been linked with the consoles they are released on : Vesperia 's release on the Xbox 360 caused the console to sell out for the first time in Japan , while Namco decided to release Zestiria on the PlayStation 3 due to the low sales prospects for next @-@ gen consoles in their target audience . As of December 2013 , the series has shipped 16 million units worldwide across 100 different countries . 
 While keeping a lower profile in English @-@ speaking regions , in Japan , it is regarded as one of the biggest role @-@ playing video game series . 1UP.com 's Jeremy Parish , speaking in 2001 , referred to it as the third biggest RPG series in Japan behind Final Fantasy and Dragon Quest . Gamasutra 's Brandon Sheffield echoed these sentiments , stating that " While the series doesn 't have quite the cultural cache of Final Fantasy in the West or Dragon Quest in Japan , it 's still a very popular brand worldwide " . IGN 's Anoop Gantayat additionally referred to it as the third biggest Japanese role @-@ playing series in regards to sales . Multiple entries in the series , notably Destiny and Legendia have been favorably compared with fighting games and brawlers , especially the Street Fighter series . GameTrailers ranked the Linear Motion Battle System , with particular reference to Graces , as one of the top five JRPG battle systems . Their stories and characters have generally received a more mixed response from western critics : opinions on entries such as Legendia , Abyss , Xillia were mixed to positive , while others such as Symphonia , Graces and Xillia 2 were criticized . The main criticism for these games and Legendia was that the story was either predictable or cliché . The in @-@ game graphics have also drawn mixed responses for several games in the series , including Destiny , Eternia , Graces and Xillia . 
 In 2013 , leading up to the release of Tales of Symphonia Chronicles , Baba called Symphonia the most successful title in the series in the west thus far , although the series ' main target audience was still in Japan . In an earlier interview , Baba commented that the team behind the series put a large amount of effort and development in keeping the series fresh while retaining the base elements across each installment . The positive reaction of gamers in the US to Symphonia influenced the way the various teams developed titles after that point . Speaking in 2014 , production manager Denis Lee said that , since Symphonia 's release , the popularity of the series has grown . In response , Bandai Namco have focused on getting more entries out in western territories . Much of their research about what titles to release or develop in the future revolves around direct conversation with Tales series fans at gaming conventions and special events . 
 = Zimbabwe women 's national field hockey team at the 1980 Summer Olympics = 
 The 1980 Zimbabwe women 's national field hockey team won the gold medal in women 's field hockey at that year 's Summer Olympics in Moscow , the capital of the Soviet Union . The squad of 16 women , all from Zimbabwe 's white minority , was assembled less than a month before the Olympics began to help fill the gaps the American @-@ led Olympic boycott created in the women 's hockey competition . Zimbabwe 's subsequent victory in the round @-@ robin tournament with three wins and two draws was regarded as a huge upset , particularly considering the team 's lack of preparation and experience ; it has been called an " irresistible fairy story " . Won at a time of great political transition in Zimbabwe , the gold medal was the country 's first Olympic medal of any colour . 
 The 1980 Olympics were first to feature women 's hockey , and the first to include Zimbabwe under that name — barred from the last three Olympics for political reasons , the country had last competed as Rhodesia in 1964 . The women 's hockey matches , held between 25 and 31 July , were all played on artificial turf , which none of the Zimbabwean team members had ever seen ; they had also never played together until that month . After beating Poland and the USSR and drawing with Czechoslovakia and India , the Zimbabweans won the competition on the final day with a 4 – 1 victory over Austria . Dubbed the " Golden Girls " by the media of Zimbabwe , they were met by cheering crowds on their return home , and were briefly national celebrities . Zimbabwe did not win another Olympic medal until 2004 . 
 = = Invitation and team selection = = 
 The 1980 Summer Olympics in Moscow , the capital of the Soviet Union , were the first to include a competition in women 's field hockey . Pre @-@ tournament favourites included Australia , the Netherlands and West Germany , but the American @-@ led Western boycott of the Moscow Olympics led to these teams and others withdrawing , leaving only the Soviets in the women 's hockey event . The Soviet and international Olympic authorities filled the gaps by inviting teams from countries that had not qualified . Among the nations invited was Zimbabwe , which had become an internationally recognised country in April 1980 following seven years of civil war . Moscow marked the southern African nation 's return to the Olympics after 16 years ; as Rhodesia it had been excluded from the 1968 , 1972 and 1976 Games for political reasons following the mostly white government 's declaration of independence from Britain in 1965 . The Zimbabwe Olympic Committee received the invitation to send men 's and women 's hockey squads to Moscow on 14 June 1980 , 35 days before the Olympics were due to start . They were taken totally by surprise — they had not prepared hockey teams for the Games — but nevertheless agreed to send a women 's squad . No women 's hockey team representing the country had ever played overseas before . 
 A squad of 16 members , built around the core of the former Rhodesia team , was hastily assembled by Liz Dreyer , the president of the national women 's hockey association , who became the team 's manager . Every player and official was white . Ann Grant , the team 's 25 @-@ year @-@ old sweeper , was appointed captain . Anthea Stewart , who had played for South Africa 25 times before retiring in 1974 , both coached the squad and played herself . Liz Chase , the only other team member with international experience ( having also represented South Africa ) was made vice @-@ captain . At 35 years old , Stewart was the team 's oldest player , while Arlene Boxall , the 18 @-@ year @-@ old reserve goalkeeper , was the youngest . The squad included twin sisters in Sandy Chick and Sonia Robertson . 
 Entirely amateur , the team mostly comprised players with professions unrelated to sport — Grant , for example , was a bookkeeper , while Boxall was an operations clerk in the Air Force of Zimbabwe . Several had sporting relatives , most prominently Grant , whose brother was the international cricketer Duncan Fletcher . Audrey Palmer , a seasoned hockey official and referee who had played for Rhodesia from 1953 to 1961 , travelled with the team as a medic , trainer and general supervisor . The squad left on 7 July , travelling first to the Zambian capital Lusaka and then to Luanda in Angola , from where they flew to Moscow on an aircraft usually used for freighting meat . " The stench was terrible " , Grant later said . " There were no seats , so we all sat on the floor , strapped in and set off into the unknown . We didn 't even have the right shoes to play on the artificial hockey surface . " 
 = = Tournament = = 
 The event was organised as a round @-@ robin tournament in which each of the six teams would play each other once between 25 and 31 July . Two points were awarded for a win and one for a draw ; the team with the most points at the end would be the winner . The other competitors were Austria , Czechoslovakia , India , Poland and the USSR ; apart from the Soviets , all of these teams were competing as a result of the boycott , having failed to qualify initially . All of the matches were played at Dynamo Minor Arena in Moscow . Zimbabwe arrived two weeks before the hockey tournament was due to start , and warmed up with a number of matches against local teams . The players ' lack of preparation and unfamiliarity with artificial turf — " none of us had ever seen it before " , Chick recalled — were offset by what several members of the squad have described as a very strong team spirit . They considered themselves serious underdogs and did not expect to win a medal . 
 Zimbabwe played in the first women 's Olympic hockey match , facing Poland on 25 July . Pat McKillop scored the first goal to put Zimbabwe ahead before Pat Davies , Linda Watson and Chase each added one more to round off a 4 – 0 victory . On 27 July , Zimbabwe and Czechoslovakia drew 2 – 2 ; McKillop and Chase scored . The next day , the Zimbabweans beat the Soviets 2 – 0 , McKillop scoring both goals . A 1 – 1 draw with India on 30 July put Zimbabwe in first place before the final round of matches on the 31st . Zimbabwe had to beat Austria to be sure of winning the gold . 
 Stewart declared the team 's first @-@ choice white @-@ and @-@ blue outfit " lucky " on the basis that both Zimbabwe 's victories had been won wearing it ( as opposed to the two draws wearing green ) , and expressed joy that they would again be wearing white and blue in the deciding match . According to Glen Byrom , covering the event for the Herald newspaper , the Zimbabweans appeared nervous during the opening stages of the game , and were fortunate not to go behind after 15 minutes , when Austria missed a clear chance . Chick opened the scoring after 28 minutes , receiving the ball from a corner before cleanly stroking it into the net . Austria 's Brigitte Kindler equalised two minutes later from a penalty stroke , flicking the ball beyond Zimbabwean goalkeeper Sarah English into the top @-@ left corner of the goal . With the score 1 – 1 at half time , Brenda Phillips replaced Christine Prinsloo at right @-@ half . 
 Urged on by a small but loud group of fellow Zimbabwean Olympians , the Zimbabweans improved after the break and , according to Byrom , " ke [ pt ] the Austrian goal under siege " throughout the second half . With 50 of the match 's 70 minutes gone , McKillop powerfully stroked a short corner that deflected off an opposing player 's stick and flew high into the net to give Zimbabwe the lead . Now appearing supremely confident , Byrom reported , the Zimbabweans " simply overran Austria with a splendid display of fast , attacking hockey " , forcing eight short corners and four long corners during the second period to Austria 's one long corner . Gillian Cowley made it 3 – 1 on 60 minutes , following up to score after Sandy Chick 's free hit was blocked . McKillop rounded up the win four minutes later , collecting a through pass from Chase and smashing the ball home . Byrom reported " incredible scenes of unrestrained joy " at the final buzzer — " the Zimbabweans , tears streaming from their eyes , danced about the field hugging and kissing each other " . Finally they hoisted Grant onto their shoulders and carried her off the field . 
 A few hours later , the Zimbabwean players returned to the field wearing their blue skirts and blue Zimbabwe Olympic blazers for the medals ceremony . After the third @-@ placed Soviets and second @-@ placed Czechoslovakians had received their medals , Grant led the team up to the podium to receive the first ever Olympic gold medal for women 's hockey . It was their country 's first Olympic medal of any colour . All 16 players received medals ; they then led the Czechoslovakian and Soviet teams on a walking lap of honour around the field . 
 Zimbabwe finished the tournament undefeated , having scored the most goals and conceded the fewest of any team . The six goals from Pat McKillop , a housewife from Bulawayo , made her the competition 's joint top scorer with the USSR 's Natella <unk> . Chase , despite nursing a knee injury , played in all five matches and scored three goals . All of the Zimbabwean squad members played at least one match except for Boxall , who never came off the bench , but still received a gold medal . 
 = = Reactions and legacy = = 
 The victorious hockey players were immediately dubbed the " Golden Girls " by Zimbabwean reporters . They were greeted by huge crowds on their return to Zimbabwe and briefly became national celebrities . Prime Minister Robert Mugabe welcomed them home at an official function . Each member of the team was promised an ox by the Prime Minister 's wife Sally , but ultimately received a polystyrene package of meat instead at a ceremony hosted by Mrs Mugabe . Many of the players emigrated over the following years , mostly to South Africa . Their victory continues to be celebrated in Zimbabwe today . The country did not win another Olympic medal until Kirsty Coventry won three swimming medals in Athens in 2004 . Robert Mugabe promptly applied the " golden girl " nickname to her on her return home . 
 The Zimbabwean hockey team 's victory at the 1980 Olympics was widely considered a great upset . Sports historians have called it a " fairytale " and an " irresistible fairy story " . While the Zimbabweans were overjoyed by their unlikely status as the first ever Olympic gold medallists in women 's hockey , some , including Robert Sullivan of Sports Illustrated , felt that the Zimbabwean victory epitomised how the Western boycott had lowered competitive standards and , in their opinion , " ruined " the 1980 Olympics . While acknowledging this to an extent , Cathy Harris asserted in her 2008 retrospective on the team , published in The Sunday Times , that the victory still deserved to be recognised as a great achievement . " They freely acknowledge that they won the gold medal without competing against the best in the world " , she concludes , " but , like many athletes in Moscow in 1980 , they seized their chance . " 
 = Air Greenland = 
 Air Greenland A / S is the flag carrier airline of Greenland , a subsidiary of the SAS Group , owned by the SAS Group , The Greenlandic Government and The Danish Government . It operates a fleet of 32 aircraft , including 1 airliner used for transatlantic and charter flights , 9 fixed @-@ wing aircraft primarily serving the domestic network , and 22 helicopters feeding passengers from the smaller communities into the domestic airport network . Flights to heliports in the remote settlements are operated on contract with the government of Greenland . 
 Founded in 1960 as Grønlandsfly , the airline started its first services with Catalina water planes and within the decade expanded to include DHC @-@ 3 Otters as well as Sikorsky S @-@ 61 helicopters , some of which remain in active service . The majority of operations were based on helicopters until the newly established Greenland Home Rule began investing in a network of short takeoff and landing airfields . These were very expensive to construct and Greenland 's airport fees are still among the highest in the world ; they also required a new fleet : DHC @-@ 7 turboprops uniquely suited to the harsh terrain and weather conditions in Greenland . The reliability of connections improved as the domestic airport network expanded in the 1990s : increasing use of the Dash 7s made the airline less restricted by inclement weather . In the late 1990s and early 2000s , Air Greenland acquired a Boeing 757 and an Airbus A330 , allowing it to open connections to Copenhagen , until then operated by SAS which also competed mid to late 2000s . In the 21st century , it competes with Air Iceland for international connections and small charter services domestically . 
 Besides running scheduled services and government @-@ contracted flights to most villages in the country , the airline also supports remote research stations , provides charter services for tourists and Greenland 's energy and mineral @-@ resource industries , and permits medivac during emergencies . Air Greenland has seven subsidiaries , an airline , hotels , tour operators , a travel agency specialized in Greenlandic tourism and the Arctic Umiaq Line , an unprofitable but government @-@ subsidized ferry service . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1960s = = = 
 The airline was established on 7 November 1960 as Grønlandsfly A / S by the Scandinavian Airlines System ( now SAS ) and <unk> Øresund , a Danish mining company involved with the cryolite operations at <unk> to provide transport and logistics for four American radar bases in Greenland . In 1962 , interests in the firm were acquired by the Provincial Council ( now the Greenland Home Rule Government ) and the Royal Greenland Trade Department ( now KNI ) . 
 The first flights serving the American bases in Greenland operated lightweight DHC @-@ 3 Otters and Sikorsky S @-@ 55 helicopters chartered from Canada . After a crash in 1961 , Grønlandsfly used PBY Catalina water planes and DHC @-@ 6 Twin Otters on domestic routes . One of the Catalinas then crashed in 1962 . In 1965 , the Douglas DC @-@ 4 became the line 's first larger airplane . It was followed by Sikorsky S @-@ 61 helicopters , which have remained in use : in 2010 , they still served the communities of <unk> municipality in southern Greenland year @-@ round and those of Disko Bay during the winter . 
 = = = 1970s = = = 
 During the 1970s , Grønlandsfly upgraded its DC @-@ 4 to the newer DC @-@ 6 , but principally focused on expanding its helicopter fleet , purchasing five more S @-@ 61s . By 1972 , it opened up service to east Greenland with a helicopter based in <unk> , and established <unk> Charter . Mining at <unk> in the Uummannaq Fjord required still more helicopters , and the airline purchased Bell <unk> for the route . Grønlandsfly also picked up a Danish government contract to fly reconnaissance missions regarding the sea ice around Greenland . 
 By the end of 1979 , the number of Grønlandsfly passengers served annually exceeded 60 @,@ 000 , more than the population of Greenland . That year , the airline 's first international route was also opened , running between Greenland 's capital Nuuk and the town of Iqaluit in northern Canada . The route connected Greenland 's Kalaallit with Canada 's Inuit and was operated in conjunction with the Canadian First Air line , but the planes were generally run empty and the route was shuttered 13 years later . 
 = = = 1980s = = = 
 The establishment of the Greenland Home Rule Government in 1979 led to investment in a regional network of true airports , with short take @-@ off and landing ( STOL ) airfields constructed in Nuuk , Ilulissat ( 1984 ) , and Kulusuk . ( These early airports were built without de @-@ icing equipment , a situation which has proven problematic during Greenland 's winters and continues to cause delays and losses for the airline . ) The decade also saw the company train and hire its first native Kalaallit pilots . 
 To service the enlarged network , Grønlandsfly began acquiring DHC @-@ 7s , planes particularly suited to the often severe weather conditions in Greenland . The first was delivered on 29 September 1979 , followed by more over the next decade . These planes remain in active service , serving every airport except <unk> <unk> near Ittoqqortoormiit , whose operation is handled by Air Iceland under contract with Greenland Home Rule . 
 In 1981 , Grønlandsfly opened its first route to Iceland , linking Reykjavík Airport to its main hub at Kangerlussuaq via Kulusuk . In 1986 , a route to Keflavík allowed the company to break SAS 's monopoly on flights between Greenland and Denmark via a Keflavík @-@ Copenhagen leg operated by Icelandair . By 1989 , the airline employed more than 400 Greenlanders and carried more than 100 @,@ 000 passengers annually . 
 = = = 1990s = = = 
 The company saw its activity curtailed as the mines at <unk> ( 1987 ) and <unk> ( 1990 ) closed operation , leading to a recession in the Greenlandic economy . 
 As the situation improved , the network of regional STOL airports was extended with Sisimiut Airport , Maniitsoq Airport , and Aasiaat Airport built in mid @-@ western Greenland and <unk> Airport and Upernavik Airport built in northwestern Greenland . With the purchase of a fifth Dash 7 , Grønlandsfly was – for the first time since its inception – able to provide plane services to all major towns in Greenland . ( Uummannaq is served by <unk> Airport in conjunction with its heliport . ) 
 Grønlandsfly also purchased its first jet aircraft , a Boeing 757 – 200 which began operation in May 1998 . The airliner was named <unk> in honor of the Greenlandic explorer and ethnologist Knud Rasmussen , whose bust decorates in the terminal of Kangerlussuaq hub . The airliner allowed the company to run the profitable Kangerlussuaq – Copenhagen route directly , without affiliates or a layover in Iceland . Thus , in 1999 , the airline served 282 @,@ 000 passengers , nearly triple the number at the end of the previous decade . 
 = = = 2000s = = = 
 Around the turn of the millennium , the airline renewed its aging fleet , retiring several of its S @-@ 61 and 206 helicopters and replacing them with Bell <unk> and Eurocopter <unk> . The company also sacked its CEO Peter <unk> , who had proven unable to balance Greenland Home Rule 's demands for local <unk> service with the board 's for expanded tourism , lower fares , and higher profits . Under his replacement Finn <unk> , Grønlandsfly initially posted a DKK 30 million loss as contractual obligations maintained unprofitable service while a strike ruined the summer tourist season and Post Greenland relocated a lucrative mail contract to the Danish @-@ owned Air Alpha Greenland . In response , the company successfully pushed back against Greenland Home Rule 's large demands , high fees , and low subsidies and rebranded itself , <unk> its name to Air Greenland and adopting a new logo and livery on 18 April 2002 . 
 In 2003 , Finn <unk> left to head Maersk Air and was replaced as CEO by Flemming Knudson . Air Greenland opened a route from Copenhagen to Akureyri in Iceland ; the service lasted for six years before finally being deemed unprofitable and ended . Also in 2003 , SAS abandoned its Greenland service , leading Air Greenland to purchase its second airliner , an Airbus A330 @-@ 200 named <unk> . ( SAS briefly revived the service during the peak season in 2007 before dropping it again in January 2009 . ) Owing to SAS 's withdrawal from the market , Air Greenland received its contract with the U.S. Air Force for passenger service to and from Thule Air Base . Running from February 2004 , the contract was renewed for another five @-@ year period in 2008 despite SAS 's brief return to the market . 
 The first takeover of another airline took place on 28 July 2006 : Air Greenland acquired the Danish carrier Air Alpha 's Greenland subsidiary . Air Alpha Greenland had operated helicopter flights in Disko Bay and in eastern Greenland . Since the takeover , the acquired Bell 222 helicopters have been used for passenger transfers between <unk> <unk> Airport and Ittoqqortoormiit Heliport . 
 In 2007 , Flemming Knudson was moved to head the Royal Greenland fishing concern and current CEO Michael <unk> was hired with a mandate to lead the company towards greater commercialization and self @-@ sufficiency under the <unk> 2012 ( " Arrow 2012 " ) plan . On 13 June , SAS announced its intention to sell its stake in Air Greenland , a move later incorporated into its restructuring program , but as of 2012 it has not found any buyers . On 1 October , the airline introduced its e @-@ ticket system . Also in 2007 , Air Greenland began direct service with Baltimore / Washington International Airport in the United States of America . After sixty American visitors were stranded by a strike of Air Greenland employees and the company refused to make alternate arrangements for their return , ticket sales slumped and the route was closed in March 2008 . 
 In 2009 , the airline carried 399 @,@ 000 passengers . 
 = = = 2010s = = = 
 In the 2010s , Air Greenland has curtailed some services . On 1 January 2010 , Air Greenland suspended its participation in SAS 's <unk> frequent @-@ flyer program . In 2011 , nonstop service from Narsarsuaq to Copenhagen was suspended . 
 However , some expansion is planned . In order to compete with Air Iceland , which operates service from Reykjavik Airport to Nuuk , Narsarsuaq , Ilulissat , and the east coast of Greenland and now controls about 15 % the market in Greenland @-@ bound travel , Air Greenland may open a nonstop route between Nuuk and Keflavík International Airport in Iceland . Also , owing to improved technology and higher commodity prices , the <unk> mines were due to reopen in November 2010 with zinc and iron ore reserves projected to last 50 years . As in the 1970s , the mine 's supply flights to the mine will be operated by Air Greenland , using Bell helicopters ( <unk> ) based out of the Uummannaq Heliport . 
 Air Greenland 's last remaining Twin Otter was sold in 2011 to <unk> in exchange for cash and a one @-@ fourth interest in the Icelandic company . 
 Reopening the connection to Iqaluit , now the capital of Nunavut , was considered by Air Greenland in late 2009 , but finally happened in 2012 . However , this service ceased in 2015 . 
 = = Destinations = = 
 Air Greenland 's domestic airport network includes all 13 civilian airports within Greenland . Outside Greenland , the airline currently operates transatlantic flights to Keflavík International Airport in Iceland , Copenhagen Airport in Denmark , and Iqaluit Airport in Canada . 
 Two international airports capable of serving large airliners – Kangerlussuaq Airport and Narsarsuaq Airport – were constructed as U.S. Air Force military bases during World War II and continue to be used for transatlantic flights . All other regional airports are STOL @-@ capable and are served with Dash 7 and Dash 8 fixed @-@ wing aircraft . 
 Smaller communities are served via heliports which connect with hubs located at Upernavik Airport in the Upernavik Archipelago in northwestern Greenland ; at Uummannaq Heliport in the Uummannaq Fjord region in northwestern Greenland ; at Ilulissat and Aasiaat Airports in the Disko Bay region in western Greenland ; at Qaqortoq and <unk> Heliports in southern Greenland ; and at <unk> Heliport in southeastern Greenland . Of the 45 heliports in use , 8 are primary and <unk> with a tarmac , a terminal building , and permanent staff . The other heliports are <unk> with either a gravel or grass landing area . Often helicopters need to make more than one flight for each connection to a fixed @-@ wing flight because of passenger capacity , causing longer total travel time . 
 Air Greenland also performs charter flights within Europe on behalf of European travel agencies using its Airbus A330 . 
 = = = Interline agreements = = = 
 The agreement makes it again possible to combine a trip , in one ticket . 
 Air Greenland has interline agreements with the following airlines : 
 DAT ( Denmark ) 
 Icelandair ( International ) 
 SAS ( Scandinavia / Europe / International ) 
 = = Fleet = = 
 As of April 2015 , the Air Greenland fleet includes the following active aircraft : 
 = = = Fixed @-@ wing fleet = = = 
 The Bombardier Dash 8 <unk> is the airline 's primary aircraft , operating on all domestic airport @-@ to @-@ airport routes . In 2010 , the airline acquired its first Dash 8 aircraft . 
 As of 5 March 2015 there are one outstanding aircraft order , with the airline operating the following fleet : 
 = = = Helicopter fleet = = = 
 The Bell 212 is the primary helicopter used for flights to district villages . The older Sikorsky S @-@ <unk> machines are stationed in Ilulissat Airport and Qaqortoq Heliport . With a capacity to seat 25 passengers , the S @-@ 61 based in southern Greenland was used to shuttle passengers arriving from Copenhagen at Narsarsuaq Airport . The sale of the Boeing 757 in April 2010 contributed to the long @-@ term decline of the airport , with the airline planning to remove the old helicopter from the fleet . Three of the Bell 222 helicopters are taken out of active service and remain stationed in Kangerlussuaq Airport having been put up for sale . 
 = = = Historical Fleet = = = 
 In the past , Air Greenland ( Grønlandsfly ) also used the following aircraft : 
 = = Management and structure = = 
 The Greenlandic Government and the SAS Group are the largest shareholders of the airline , owning a 37 @.@ 5 % stake each . The Danish Government owns the remaining 25 % of the stock . The Ministry of Housing , Infrastructure , and Transport oversees the development of the transport industry in Greenland and controls <unk> , the airport authority in Greenland . Between them , they control mandatory services , airport taxes , pricing policies , maritime connections , and tourism development , effectively allowing Greenland Home Rule to control the company in spite of the other stakeholders . 
 The board of directors , chaired by Julia Pars of Greenland Home Rule , includes representatives of all three shareholders and the airline employees . Michael <unk> , previously heading the airline 's marketing and sales department , has been holding the position of chief executive officer since June 2007 . 
 Headquartered in Nuuk , the airline had 668 employees in December 2009 . The airline 's technical base is located at Nuuk Airport . 
 = = = Charter = = = 
 The charter unit within Air Greenland is led by Hans Peter Hansen and employs 8 people , with 13 helicopters and 3 fixed @-@ wing aircraft at its disposal . Excess capacity of airplanes is used for regular charters to tourist destinations in Europe , Asia , and Africa . 
 The helicopters , primarily the AS350 , are used for special flights , such as search and rescue , air ambulance , charter flights to the Thule Air Base on contract with the U.S. Air Force , geological exploration , and supply flights to the mining sites and the research stations on the Greenland ice sheet . During the peak summer season , the helicopter crew is supplemented by freelance pilots from Norway and Sweden . 
 Other charter flights include heliskiing shuttles , services for the energy industry such as facilitating oil exploration or surveying for hydroelectric stations , and environmental research counting polar bears and tracking other large Arctic fauna . 
 = = = Subsidiary companies = = = 
 = = = = Arctic Umiaq Line = = = = 
 Air Greenland co @-@ owns the Arctic Umiaq Line jointly ( 50 % each ) with Royal Arctic , Greenland 's government @-@ owned shipping line . Arctic Umiaq runs the ferry M / S <unk> <unk> among Greenland 's coastal communities from Ilulissat in the north to <unk> in the south . 
 The ferry has been unprofitable since its founding in 2006 , but Greenland Home Rule provided the owners with a loss guarantee through 2011 , allowing the subsidiary to break even . The deficit was DKK 8 @.@ 1 million for 2011 and , on 16 March 2010 , Air Greenland announced plans to divest its stock . Greenland Home Rule avoided this by undertaking to continue the guarantee at least through 2016 . 
 = = = = Tourism = = = = 
 Air Greenland wholly owns Hotel Arctic A / S , a hotel and travel agency based in Ilulissat . Hotel Arctic in turn partially owns World of Greenland , an outfitter company also based in Ilulissat . The airline also owns Greenland Travel , a package @-@ tour travel agency based in Copenhagen . 
 = = Service = = 
 = = = In @-@ flight service = = = 
 = = = = Economy class = = = = 
 Air Greenland offers flexible and restricted economy class on all flights operated with fixed @-@ wing aircraft , with complimentary snacks and drinks . On transatlantic flights to Copenhagen , both economy class and business class seats are available , with in @-@ flight meals served in all classes . Air Greenland publishes a quarterly Suluk ( Kalaallisut : " Wing " ) in @-@ flight magazine , with general information about current political and cultural events in Greenland and with news from the airline . 
 = = = = Business class = = = = 
 A flexible business class – named " Business @-@ Class " – is offered by Air Greenland on transatlantic flights aboard <unk> , its Airbus A330 @-@ 200 . The service includes a personal video screen , an in @-@ seat power source , an amenity kit , blankets , and a selection of newspapers . Passengers travelling on this class are eligible to use the Novia Business Class Lounge at Copenhagen Airport . 
 = = = Settlement flights = = = 
 Air Greenland operates helicopter flights to most settlements in Greenland ( " settlement flights " ) on contract with the government of Greenland , with the destination network subsidized and coordinated by the Ministry of Housing , Infrastructure , and Transport . Settlement flights are not featured in the company 's timetable , although they can be pre @-@ booked . 
 Departure times for these flights as specified during booking are by definition approximate , with the settlement service optimized on the fly depending on local demand for a given day . Settlement flights in the Disko Bay region are unique in that they are operated only during winter and spring . During summer and autumn , transportation between settlements is only by sea , with services operated by <unk> , a government @-@ contracted ferry service based in Ilulissat . 
 = = Accidents and incidents = = 
 On 29 August 1961 , a DHC @-@ 3 Otter ( registration CF @-@ <unk> ) crashed 20 kilometers ( 12 mi ) from Kangerlussuaq . The aircraft was a non @-@ scheduled service en route from Kangerlussuaq Airport to Aasiaat Airport when a fuel leak caused an in @-@ flight fire . One of the pilots was killed , while the other pilot and the four passengers survived . 
 On 12 May 1962 , a PBY Catalina flying boat ( registration CF @-@ IHA ) crashed during landing at Nuuk Airport . The accident was caused by a mechanical malfunction in the nose wheel doors preventing them from closing during landing on water , resulting in the aircraft sinking . The accident killed 15 of the 21 people on board . 
 On 25 October 1973 , the <unk> ( " Grouse " ) , an Air Greenland S @-@ <unk> ( registration OY @-@ <unk> ) , crashed about 40 kilometers ( 25 mi ) south of Nuuk , resulting in the loss of 15 lives . It was en route to <unk> from Nuuk . The same helicopter had had an emergency landing on the Kangerlussuaq fjord 2 years earlier , due to a double flameout on both engines because of ice in its intake . 
 On 7 June 2008 , a Eurocopter AS350 crashed on the runway at Nuuk Airport . There were no injuries , but the helicopter was damaged beyond repair . 
 On 29 January 2014 , the <unk> an Air Greenland Dash 8 @-@ <unk> ( registration OY @-@ GRI ) , was involved in a runway excursion accident at Ilulissat Airport ( <unk> ) , Greenland . Flight <unk> originated in Kangerlussuaq Airport ( <unk> ) , <unk> four passengers were taken to the hospital for observation , there were no fatalities or serious injuries . Evidence available so far indicates that the airplane landed on runway 07 at the time of the accident . It then went off the left side of the runway . It then went down a 10 – 15 m dropoff and came to rest on rocky terrain approximately abeam the runway 25 threshold . The weather at the time of the incident was reported : Wind 110 degrees at 29 knots , gusting at 40 knots 
 = Murali Kartik = 
 Murali Kartik ( Tamil : <unk> <unk> ் <unk> ் <unk> ் pronunciation , born 11 September 1976 ) is an Indian cricketer who sporadically represented the India national cricket team from 2000 to 2007 . He is a specialist slow left arm orthodox bowler known for his loopy trajectory and ability to spin and bounce , but has found international selection blocked during his prime years by the presence of Anil Kumble and Harbhajan Singh . He is also a left @-@ handed batsman , and although he has had some success with the bat at first @-@ class level with 19 half @-@ centuries , he has not been able to repeat this at international level . 
 After starting out in the Delhi junior system , Kartik moved through the age group ranks at Railways , was selected for the Indian Under @-@ 19 team . He made his first @-@ class debut in 1996 – 97 and after a few productive seasons at domestic level , made his Test debut in early @-@ 2000 as Kumble 's bowling partner . However , he ran into disciplinary problems and was expelled from the National Cricket Academy in the same year , while new national captain Sourav Ganguly was reluctant to entrust him with responsibility . Ganguly called for off spinner Harbhajan to be recalled in 2001 , and was rewarded with a series @-@ winning performance against Australia . This entrenched the off spinner in the team and left Kartik on the outer . 
 For the next four years , Kartik was on the fringes of selection . He made his ODI debut in 2002 and had a short stint before being dropped and missing the 2003 Cricket World Cup because of mediocre performance . He was recalled in late @-@ 2003 for limited overs matches and played in around half of India 's matches for a six @-@ month period , as well as one Test after Harbhajan suffered a serious injury . In late @-@ 2004 Kartik played in three Tests as India fielded three spinners , and claimed his only man @-@ of @-@ the @-@ match award in Tests against Australia in Mumbai , but was again dropped two matches later . In late @-@ 2005 , Kartik became a regular member of the ODI team for a few months when the International Cricket Council introduced an experimental rule that allowed one substitute to be used , opening an extra vacancy in the national team . However , Kartik was unable to secure his position in the team and the rule was later revoked . In late @-@ 2007 , Kartik broke back into the ODI team and took 6 / 27 in one victory over Australia , but lost form soon after and was again dropped . He has not represented India since then . Aside from domestic cricket , Kartik plays for Royal Challengers Bangalore in the Indian Premier League and has been in demand in English county cricket as an overseas player , representing Lancashire , Middlesex , Somerset and Surrey . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Born in <unk> Murali Karthik wanted to be a genetic engineer , he was a medium pacer in his early years , before switching to a left arm finger spinner in the classical mould , Kartik grew up trying to emulate past Indian orthodox spinners <unk> Singh Bedi , <unk> Singh and Venkatapathy Raju . He also garnered attention for what was perceived to be a fiery attitude , but took pride in coach Kapil Dev saying of him " I have never seen a player with such an attitude towards the game in my 20 years of international cricket " . 
 Kartik started out in the junior system at Delhi . He broke into their Under @-@ 16 team in December 1992 , and took a match total of 10 / 74 on debut against Himachal Pradesh , as well as scoring 52 not out in an innings victory . He took 2 / 91 in the next match against Haryana , but could no longer play in the Under @-@ 16s because of his advancing age . He could not break into the Under @-@ 19s at Delhi , and played no further youth domestic matches for two years , when he transferred to Railways and broke into their Under @-@ 19 team . 
 In five matches for his new team during the 1994 – 95 , he took 24 wickets at 14 @.@ 58 including a haul of 5 / 28 against Vidarbha . He was rewarded with selection in the Under @-@ 19 Central Zone team for the zonal one @-@ day tournament , taking five wickets at 25 @.@ 00 in four matches . He had little success with the bat , scoring 47 on one occasion during the season , but otherwise only aggregating nine runs in six innings . 
 The following season in 1995 – 96 , Kartik had a more successful season for Railways Under @-@ 19s . He started with 5 / 73 and 5 / 55 against Madhya Pradesh and made it three five @-@ wicket hauls in a row with 5 / 42 against Vidarbha . He took another five @-@ wicket haul later in the season against Rajasthan and ended the competition with 38 wickets at 18 @.@ 94 in seven matches . Railways made the final , where they faced Punjab . Kartik was Railways ' most effective bowler , taking 4 / 57 in Punjab 's first innings of 310 . He then made 14 not out as Railways ceded a first innings lead , which was enough to give Punjab the title as the match ended in a draw . Kartik took 3 / 138 in the second innings . After the final , newly crowned champions took on the Rest of India , and Kartik took 2 / 25 and 4 / 89 to help his team to a six @-@ wicket victory . Kartik had a less successful time in the zonal one @-@ dayers for Central , taking only one wicket in three matches . He also improved his batting marginally , scoring 57 and three other double @-@ digit scores . 
 As a result of his performances during the season , Kartik was called up to the Indian Under @-@ 19 team for an international series against their counterparts from South Africa . In the youth Test , he took 4 / 40 as India dismissed South Africa for 159 to take a 19 @-@ run lead . In the second innings , he took 3 / 30 as South Africa fell for 107 in pursuit of 277 . In two youth one @-@ day internationals that followed , Kartik was prominent in the Indian victories , taking 3 / 23 and 3 / 33 respectively . 
 = = Senior domestic debut = = 
 The following season , 1996 – 97 , Kartik was promoted into the senior ranks of major cricket . In his first match , a List A fixture against Madhya Pradesh , Kartik took 2 / 27 from his allotment of ten overs but was unable to prevent a four @-@ wicket loss . He made his first @-@ class debut the next day against the same team and sent down 16 overs taking a total of 1 / 18 in a drawn match . In a close @-@ run match , Madhya Pradesh were 8 / 89 , 17 runs short with two wickets in hand when time ran out . Kartik had scored a rearguard 47 in the second innings , without which Madhya Pradesh would have won . In his next first @-@ class match , against Vidarbha , he took a hat trick in the first innings , ending with 6 / 28 , helping to bowl Vidarbha out for 130 . He then took 3 / 27 in the second innings as Vidarbha made only 95 to cede victory to Railways . He ended the season with 16 wickets at 19 @.@ 37 , and 185 runs at 20 @.@ 55 including a 74 against Bengal , but was overlooked for the Central Zone selection for the Duleep Trophy after taking only six wickets in his last four matches for the season . In four one @-@ dayers for Railways , Kartik took seven wickets at 12 @.@ 42 , including a match @-@ winning 4 / 13 against Rajasthan . 
 The following season he managed 14 wickets at 18 @.@ 42 in four matches , but was dropped in the later stages of the tournament . After taking a match total of 7 / 74 in helping to orchestrate an innings victory over Rajasthan in his third match of the season , Kartik went wicketless in the next match against Madhya Pradesh , and was dropped . He scored 70 runs at 23 @.@ 33 during the tournament . In four one @-@ dayers for Railways , he took four wickets at 29 @.@ 75 at an economy rate of 3 @.@ 30 . Despite being dropped by Railways , Kartik was called up to make his senior debut for Central Zone . He took two wickets at 63 @.@ 00 in two first @-@ class matches , and then took three wickets at 43 @.@ 00 at an economy rate of 4 @.@ 30 in three matches . 
 Despite the modest returns during the season , Kartik was selected for an India A tour of Pakistan in February and March 1998 . In four first @-@ class matches , which were persistently curtailed by the weather , Kartik bowled only 31 overs , and only two in the two matches against Pakistan A. He finished with four wickets at 27 @.@ 50 . In the two one @-@ dayers , he proved expensive , taking 1 / 53 and 0 / 73 from ten overs each , as Pakistan won both matches easily . 
 At the start of the 1998 – 99 season , Kartik took 23 wickets for Vijay Cricket Club in the Chennai League . He played more regularly in the 1998 – 99 Ranji Trophy , taking 29 wickets in seven matches at 19 @.@ 3 to be the 13th highest wicket @-@ taker . This included a 3 / 8 and 4 / 62 in an innings win over Rajasthan , and 5 / 84 and 5 / 55 in the last two matches of the campaign against Tamil Nadu and Delhi . He also added 29 and 53 with the bat against Tamil Nadu to help stave off a defeat after his team had trailed by over 200 on the first innings . 
 He was rewarded with selection for Central Zone and after taking 4 / 133 against North Zone , claimed 5 / 73 and 2 / 22 in the final to help them defeat West Zone by 112 runs in Aurangabad to claim the Duleep Trophy , and was the leading wicket @-@ taker during the tournament . He scored a total of 183 runs at 18 @.@ 30 for the entire Indian first @-@ class season . He took five wickets at 26 @.@ 60 in four zonal one @-@ dayers , and tasted victory in all four fixtures . 
 = = Early international career = = 
 Kartik had a truncated but productive 1999 – 2000 Indian season . After taking a solitary wicket in a truncated match for India A against the touring New Zealand , Kartik snared 6 / 62 and 6 / 31 against Vidarbha , He then went on an India A tour to the West Indies , so his only other first @-@ class match was a Ranji Trophy encounter against Rajasthan in which he took 4 / 53 . In four first @-@ class matches in the Caribbean , Kartik took 18 wickets at 16 @.@ 38 . This included two matches against West Indies A , in which he took 6 / 75 before claiming 3 / 64 and 5 / 73 in the second match , although he was unable to force a victory in either . In two one @-@ day matches against their West Indian counterparts , Kartik took two wickets at 26 @.@ 00 at an economy rate of 3 @.@ 46 . Returning to India , he took 12 wickets at 13 @.@ 08 in five matches for Railways and the Indian Board president 's XI , before playing in the zonal one @-@ dayers with less success , managing only two wickets at 91 @.@ 50 at an economy rate of 4 @.@ 57 . Despite these struggles , he was selected for the India A team for the Challenger Trophy , where he took four wickets at 38 @.@ 00 at the expensive economy rate of 5 @.@ 84 . 
 Despite the downturn in his limited overs fortunes towards the end of the season , Kartik 's form was enough to earn him selection in the Indian Board president 's XI for the tour match against the visiting South Africans before the Tests . He had a match total of 2 / 122 , which was enough for him to secure national selection , playing in both Tests against South Africa in early 2000 at Mumbai and Bangalore as India sought a second spinner to accompany Anil Kumble , after Harbhajan Singh 's performance in the role in the previous season had been deemed inadequate . Kartik scored 14 before being bowled by Shaun Pollock as India batted first and made 225 . He then took 2 / 28 from 18 overs as the Indians restricted the tourists to 176 , before collapsing to be all out for 113 in the second innings , Kartik scoring only two before Pollock had him caught behind . Kartik took 1 / 50 in the second innings as South Africa ground their way to the target of 163 with four wickets in hand . In the Second Test , Kartik took 3 / 123 and scored a duck and two as India were crushed by an innings . Overall , Kartik performed steadily , taking six wickets at 33 @.@ 50 . 
 Kartik was selected in 2000 for the first intake of the National Cricket Academy in Bangalore , after earlier having made his Test debut in early 2000 in a home series against South Africa . However , his stay was cut short along with that of Harbhajan , when they were expelled by the director <unk> Singh over disciplinary issues . 
 In the 2000 – 01 season , Kartik started in fine form as he set out to maintain a Test position . In the Irani Trophy , the traditional season opener between the reigning Ranji champions — Mumbai — and the Rest of India , Kartik orchestrated the demise of the title @-@ holders . After taking 4 / 73 in Mumbai 's 260 , Kartik scored 22 in the Rest of India 's 389 . He then took 9 / 70 to cut down Mumbai for 184 , and his batting colleagues accumulated the 55 needed for victory without loss . Kartik then took 3 / 82 and 1 / 45 against Madhya Pradesh to secure his spot in the Test team . 
 Kartik then played in one Test against Bangladesh and Zimbabwe respectively in India , taking match totals of 1 / 42 and 2 / 66 . He scored 43 in the nine @-@ wicket win over Bangladesh but was not required to bat in the seven @-@ wicket win over Zimbabwe . New captain Sourav Ganguly — who had taken over after Sachin Tendulkar resigned following the South African whitewash — did not show much confidence in him , by only affording him frequent but short spells . Kartik was dropped from the team after the First Test against Zimbabwe , and did not have an opportunity to immediately prove his captain wrong , as the one @-@ day domestic circuit was in progress at the time . Kartik took nine wickets at 25 @.@ 22 at an economy rate of 4 @.@ 02 , and then had a chance to stake his claims for a Test recall in the Duleep Trophy . 
 Kartik struggled , taking 2 / 129 against East and then 0 / 178 in the first innings as North Zone accumulated 8 / 690 declared . He then had to endure the humiliation of not being trusted to bowl in the second innings as North reached 8 / 233 . In the last match against South , Kartik could only aggregate 1 / 87 . Although Kartik had scored 45 and 27 in his two innings , he totalled only three Duleep Trophy wickets at an average of 131 @.@ 33 . The selectors were unsatisfied by these performances , and despite a shoulder injury to Kumble , Kartik was discarded as India hosted Australia in the 2001 Border Gavaskar Trophy . Harbhajan was recalled and took 32 wickets at 17 to engineer an Indian series win and permanently establish himself as India 's leading spinner alongside Kumble . Kartik played in one more match for Railways at the end of the season , and his poor season continued , managing only a total of 2 / 152 , although he did score 79 with the bat . 
 Kartik started the new 2001 – 02 season well , taking 20 wickets at 15 @.@ 40 in the first four first @-@ class matches of the season , including five @-@ wicket hauls against Rajasthan and Vidarbha , and 3 / 84 against the touring English Test team for a Board president 's XI , but this was not enough to force the selectors to recall him for the Tests . He continued his form for Railways in the one @-@ dayers , taking seven wickets at 20 @.@ 57 in four matches at an economy rate of 4 @.@ 00 , before suffering a serious back injury that forced him to travel to Adelaide for treatment , which was funded by the Board of Control for Cricket in India . He made a successful comeback in January after a month @-@ long layoff , and ended as fourth @-@ highest wicket taker in the Ranji Trophy , with 34 at an average of 17 , taking 5 / 51 and 3 / 7 , and scoring 69 in his final match of the season to secure a win over Baroda . He batted well in the second half of the season , also scoring 42 and 58 . He also performed well in the Challenger Trophy and zonal one @-@ dayers after his surgery , taking ten wickets at 21 @.@ 70 in seven matches . At the end of the season , Kartik was rewarded with his debut in One Day Internationals ( ODIs ) ; he was punished by the Zimbabwean batsmen , conceding 47 runs without taking a wicket from eight overs , but India still won by five wickets . 
 = = Fringe player = = 
 Since then , Kartik was India 's third choice Test spinner behind Kumble and Harbhajan for most of the decade , only playing due to their injuries or when India selected three spinners . At the end of the 2001 – 02 season , Kartik was selected for an India A tour of South Africa . He struggled in the first two first @-@ class matches , before taking 6 / 101 and scoring 59 in the second match against South Africa A to end the three games with ten wickets at 32 @.@ 50 . He had more success in the one @-@ dayers , taking four wickets at 17 @.@ 50 at an economy rate of 2 @.@ 50 in three matches . 
 The West Indies toured India at the start of the 2002 – 03 season and Kartik had a chance to press his claims for Test selection in two tour matches against the visitors . However , he had little impact , taking 2 / 92 for the Board president 's XI and 0 / 117 for Railways against the Caribbean tourists , although he scored 72 with the bat in the latter match . He then took a total of 2 / 135 as Railways , the reigning Ranji Trophy holders , defeated the Rest of India in the Irani Trophy . With these lean returns , Kartik was overlooked for the Tests . 
 Kartik had opportunities in the ODI format following his strong form in domestic limited overs matches , playing in four consecutive matches against the West Indies . After going wicketless in the first of these matches , he broke through in the next match to take his maiden ODI wicket in his third appearance . Kartik then took 3 / 36 in the next match as India scraped home by three wickets , but he was punished in his fourth outing of the series , conceding 69 runs in nine overs without success , after which he was dropped . He had taken four wickets at 47 @.@ 25 , at an economy rate of 4 @.@ 84 . 
 Kartik was called into the Test squad to tour New Zealand in late 2002 after Kumble withdrew , but in the warm @-@ up match he bowled one only over , in which he was hammered for 23 runs . He then watched from the sidelines as India only fielded one spin bowler — Harbhajan — in the Tests , held on green , pace @-@ friendly surfaces . Kartik returned to India and was ineffective in the zonal one @-@ dayers , taking a total of 1 / 148 from 24 overs in three matches , conceding more than a run a ball . Combined with his results against the West Indies , the poor returns saw him left out of the 2003 Cricket World Cup squad , with Harbhajan and Kumble preferred . 
 While the World Cup was in progress , Kartik toured the West Indies with India A , playing against the domestic teams in five first @-@ class matches . He took 14 wickets at 30 @.@ 50 including a 5 / 105 against Barbados and 4 / 57 against Trinidad and Tobago . India A then toured England during the northern hemisphere summer and Kartik took 10 wickets at 40 @.@ 00 and scored 79 runs at 26 @.@ 33 including a 50 in four first @-@ class matches , and three wickets at 44 @.@ 33 in one @-@ dayers . 
 At the start of the 2003 – 04 season , Kartik took 2 / 118 and 2 / 41 for India A in a match against the touring New Zealanders , and was overlooked for the Test series against the visitors . He managed only a total of 1 / 84 from 18 overs in the Challenger Trophy but was called into the ODI team and gained semi @-@ regular appearances during the TVS Trophy against New Zealand and Australia , competing with Kumble and Harbhajan for a regular position in the team . In four matches during the competition , he was economical although not very penetrative , taking four wickets at 38 @.@ 25 at an economy rate of 3 @.@ 82 . 
 = = Occasional international appearances in 2004 and 2005 = = 
 After taking match figures of 6 / 117 and 5 / 140 for India A against Sri Lanka A , Kartik made his first overseas appearance for India , replacing the injured Harbhajan midway through the 2003 – 04 tour of Australia . He had little success in his first tour match , taking 1 / 64 and 1 / 53 against Australian A. He played in the final Test at the Sydney Cricket Ground when India fielded two spinners for the only time in the series . He was punished by the Australian batsmen , taking a total <unk> / 211 from 45 overs , a run rate of 4 @.@ 68 , in a high @-@ scoring draw . 
 Kartik then made sporadic appearances in the VB triangular ODI series , playing in four of India 's ten matches , as he and Kumble were brought in and out of the team in an attempt to challenge the Australian superiority . He continued to be punished by the Australian batsmen , taking a total of 1 / 178 from 26 overs , an economy rate of 6 @.@ 84 . However , he did manage to resist the Australians with the bat ; in his only two innings he made 32 not out and 23 as the Indian batting was dismissed for only 203 and 151 respectively . 
 Despite these performances , Kartik was retained for the ODI tour of Pakistan with Harbhajan still injured , taking five wickets at 32 @.@ 80 at an economy of 5 @.@ 46 . He played in three of the five matches and India won all of these . Kartik was also in the Test squad , but saw not action as India opted to field only Kumble and took the series 2 – 1 . 
 Kartik started the 2004 – 05 season by scoring 56 and 16 and taking 2 / 42 and 2 / 49 as the Rest of India defeated Mumbai in the Irani Trophy , but it was not enough to prevent Harbhajan from resuming his position in the team for the home Test series against Australia . He got an opportunity in the Third Test in Nagpur , when Harbhajan was ill , taking 3 / 57 and 2 / 74 as India were 342 runs to lose their first home series to Australia since 1969 – 70 . Kartik held his place when Harbhajan returned for the final Test in Mumbai as India fielded three spinners , and took 4 / 44 and 3 / 32 in a man of the match performance which saw India win by 13 runs . Both of these performances occurred under the captaincy of Rahul Dravid with Ganguly injured , in which Kartik netted his wickets at an average of 17 @.@ 50 compared to 51 @.@ 08 under Ganguly 's leadership . Kartik played the last of his eight Tests in a subsequent opening match against South Africa in Kanpur , taking a total of 2 / 93 under Ganguly 's command , being dropped after India chose to only use two spinners in subsequent matches . Kartik spent the next month watching from the sidelines as the reserve slow bowler , as only Kumble and Harbhajan played during the tour of Bangladesh . During this campaign , he was allowed to play in the second ODI , taking 2 / 43 as India lost to Bangladesh for the first time . Kartik returned to India and took seven wickets at 35 @.@ 42 at an economy rate of 4 @.@ 69 in the zonal one @-@ dayers and Challenger Trophy , and then played four first @-@ class matches to end the season , taking 10 wickets at 19 @.@ 10 . At the end of the season , he took 2 / 54 in a home ODI against Pakistan , who scored 7 / 319 to overhaul the target . 
 He enjoyed more opportunities in the ODI arena in 2005 , when Kumble was dropped by newly appointed coach Greg Chappell due to his lack of athleticism , as well as the introduction of the experimental rules which allowed the use of one substitute , thus opening an extra position in the team . Kartik had a modest start under the new regime , taking 1 / 52 from nine overs in a win over a depleted host Zimbabwe team . He returned to India and started the new season in fine all @-@ round form . After taking 2 / 34 in the first innings , he scored his highest first @-@ class score of 96 to guide Railways to 311 , giving them a first @-@ innings lead of 88 runs over the Rest of India in the Irani Trophy . He then took 3 / 28 to dismiss the Rest of India for 137 in their second innings , setting up a nine @-@ <unk> win . He then took seven wickets at 16 @.@ 85 at an economy rate of 4 @.@ 56 in three matches for India Seniors in the Challenger Trophy , including a match @-@ winning 5 / 29 in the final against India B. 
 Kartik was thus selected in the Indian ODI team for the home summer , and played in ten of the twelve ODIs that India hosted in late @-@ 2005 . He started well with 3 / 48 in a 152 @-@ run crushing of Sri Lanka in Nagpur , and went on to finish the series with eight wickets at 30 @.@ 25 , playing in six of the seven matches . However , his form dissipated and he went wicketless in the South African series , conceding 126 runs in 28 overs , and giving away more than a run a ball in the last two matches . Kumble remained in favour for the Tests along with Harbhajan , and Kartik returned to Ranji competition while they bowled against Sri Lanka in the five @-@ dayers . Kartik took 5 / 95 against Mumbai and then 8 / 40 against Delhi , and in three Ranji Trophy matches took 17 wickets at 19 @.@ 94 . 
 Despite his ineffectiveness against South Africa , Kartik was retained in the ODI squad , but after conceding 64 runs from nine overs in the first ODI loss against Pakistan , he was replaced in early @-@ 2006 in the Test and ODI squad by 17 @-@ year @-@ old legspinner Piyush Chawla and off @-@ spinner Ramesh Powar respectively . 
 = = <unk> again = = 
 In late @-@ 2006 , India 's ODI team began to hit rocky waters . After losing a bilateral series in the West Indies , they were knocked out of a triangular tournament in Malaysia ahead of the finals , and were eliminated in the first round of the 2006 ICC Champions Trophy on home soil . Kartik took four wickets at 34 @.@ 00 and an economy rate of 5 @.@ 36 in the Challenger Trophy and could not earn a recall . He had a steady domestic first @-@ class season , taking 26 wickets at 25 @.@ 53 in nine matches , never taking more than five wickets in a match . He took 13 wickets at 27 @.@ 92 in eight one @-@ day matches for the season , and was overlooked as Kumble and Harbhajan were the spinners selected for the 2007 Cricket World Cup . India were knocked out in the first round after losing to Bangladesh , and Harbhajan was dropped while Kumble retired from ODIs , but Kartik did not do enough to persuade the selectors to hand him a recall . 
 In 2004 , Kartik played in the Lancashire League with Ramsbottom as their professional . In 19 games , he took 80 wickets at 9 @.@ 92 and scored 464 runs at 25 @.@ 77 . He scored three fifties with a best of 83 against Colne and took nine five @-@ wicket innings hauls including a best of 9 / 30 against Enfield in addition to two other matches in which he took seven wickets . 
 In 2005 , he returned to Ramsbottom as their professional for a second season , with more effect . He took 83 wickets at 9 @.@ 19 and scored 519 runs at 37 @.@ 07 in 20 matches . He scored five fifties including a best of 66 , and took eight five @-@ wicket innings hauls including a best of 9 / 47 against Church as well as 7 / 27 against Lowerhouse . These performances earned him notice , and in late @-@ 2005 , he appeared as a late @-@ season overseas player substitute for Lancashire , and became the first overseas Lancashire player to take ten wickets on their debut , with 10 / 168 against Essex . This 5 / 93 and 5 / 75 helped Lancashire to an eight @-@ wicket win , and in his only other first @-@ class match , he took 4 / 43 and 2 / 49 was not enough as the Roses went down to Leicestershire by four runs . His sixteen wickets at 16 @.@ 25 placed him second on the season 's bowling averages , and helped the team to be promoted from Second Division . In two one @-@ day games , Kartik took five wickets at 13 @.@ 40 . 
 Despite these performances , he was not initially offered a contract for 2006 . Eventually in August 2006 , he was again signed as a late @-@ season overseas player for Lancashire just in time to appear in the C & G Trophy final against Sussex , taking 2 / 28 and scoring a duck in a 15 @-@ run defeat . He took eight wickets at 17 @.@ 25 in four one @-@ dayers , and six wickets at 39 @.@ 00 in three first @-@ class matches with a best of 3 / 89 , as well a 40 with the bat against Hampshire . 
 In 2007 , he joined Middlesex as an overseas registration . He made his debut as the county club 's 700th first @-@ class cricketer against Somerset at Taunton in April 2007 . He took 51 wickets at 24 @.@ 96 in 12 matches and agreed to sign on for a further season in 2008 . A highlight of Kartik 's stint was a haul of 6 / 21 and 3 / 52 that helped set up an innings win over Glamorgan , and 6 / 85 and 3 / 83 that secured a 38 @-@ run win over Leicestershire . A third five @-@ wicket haul , 5 / 38 against Derbyshire , was not enough to prevent a 15 @-@ run defeat . With the bat , Kartik contributed 209 runs at 19 @.@ 00 with a best of 35 . Kartik was also prolific for his new county in the one @-@ dayers , taking 21 wickets at 23 @.@ 52 in 15 matches , taking three wickets in a match twice , both of which resulted in wins . During the T20 tournament , Kartik took nine wickets at 10 @.@ 77 and an economy rate of 5 @.@ 70 , including a haul of 5 / 13 in a vain attempt to halt an Essex run @-@ chase . 
 = = Brief international return and later career = = 
 In late @-@ 2007 , Kartik was recalled to the ODI team in place of the struggling Powar mid @-@ way through the series against Australia . He played his first ODI in 18 months when he returned for the fourth match at Mohali . He took 1 / 48 , and conceded only two runs in the 48th over as Australia stumbled in a tight run chase to give India their first win of the series . 
 Kartik took only one wicket in the next two matches , which Australia won . In the seventh and final match , Kartik took a career best of 6 / 27 from 10 overs at the Wankhede Stadium in Mumbai to bowl Australia out for 193 . The tourists had reached 2 / 117 after 19 @.@ 4 overs , scoring at over six runs and over before Kartik removed Brad Hodge and Andrew Symonds from consecutive balls . He failed to get his hat @-@ trick , but in the 32nd over he removed Brad Haddin from the first ball , and then Brad Hogg and Brett Lee from the fourth and fifth balls . Again Kartik missed the hat @-@ trick opportunity , but returned to claim his six wicket . In reply , India had fallen to 8 / 143 before Kartik chipped in with an unbeaten 21 from 34 balls in an unbroken 52 @-@ run stand with Zaheer Khan , guiding India to a two @-@ wicket victory . Kartik was recognised by being selected as the man of the match . Kartik then made his T20 international debut , taking 0 / 27 from four overs in an Indian win over Australia . 
 In the following series against Pakistan , Kartik was only selected in the first , third and fifth matches , and took two wickets at an average of 68 @.@ 00 at an economy rate of 5 @.@ 23 . As a result , Kartik was omitted from the ODI tour of Australia in favour of Chawla . 
 Due to his international commitments , Kartik made only sporadic appearances during the Indian domestic scene in 2007 – 08 . He took nine wickets at 44 @.@ 22 and scored 77 runs at 19 @.@ 25 in three first @-@ class fixtures . After being dropped from India 's limited @-@ overs team , Kartik continued his strong one @-@ day form at domestic level , taking six wickets at 25 @.@ 33 at an economy rate of only 3 @.@ 16 in six matches . 
 Kartik was purchased by the Kolkata Knight Riders in the inaugural 2008 Indian Premier League . He played in six matches , taking three wickets at 42 @.@ 33 , but was dropped because his economy rate was beyond eight runs an over . All of these came in one match in which he took 3 / 17 . 
 Kartik was part of the Middlesex team that won the 2008 Twenty20 Cup in England , their first domestic title for 15 years . He played in 11 matches and took 14 wickets at 20 @.@ 14 at an economy rate of 6 @.@ 71 , claiming at least one wicket in all but one of the matches . Kartik represented Middlesex in the Stanford competition in October , taking two wickets at 25 @.@ 50 at an economy rate of 6 @.@ 37 . 
 His second first @-@ class season with Middlesex was much less successful than the first ; Kartik took only 16 wickets at 34 @.@ 06 in seven matches , with a best of 4 / 101 against Derbyshire . He scored 161 runs at 20 @.@ 12 with a best of 44 against Warwickshire . His one @-@ day form was also lean , yielding six wickets at 33 @.@ 00 in six matches . 
 Kartik returned to India and took 16 wickets at 32 @.@ 75 in six matches for Railways in the Ranji Trophy . After taking 5 / 85 in the first innings of the season opener against Karnataka , his performances fell away and he managed only four wickets in his last three matches . Nevertheless , he was selected for Central Zone in the Duleep Trophy and took a total of 2 / 98 as they lost on first innings to South and were eliminated after one match . Kartik made some contributions with the bat , scoring 197 runs at 24 @.@ 62 for the season , including a score of 56 against Maharashtra and two other efforts of 30 . Playing for both Railways and Central , Kartik took 12 wickets at 23 @.@ 50 in the one @-@ day matches for the season . He also scored 65 runs at 13 @.@ 00 . 
 During the 2009 IPL season , which was held in South Africa , Kartik played in ten matches and took four wickets at 50 @.@ 25 , but he was one of the most economical bowlers , conceding only 5 @.@ 91 runs per over . Kolkata were wracked by infighting and came last . Kartik also scored 21 runs without being dismissed . In the 2009 English season , Kartik resumed service for Middlesex , and as in the IPL he was most effective as a stock bowler , taking only four wickets at 51 @.@ 50 in eight T20 fixtures at an economy rate of 6 @.@ 86 , never taking multiple wickets in a match . Middlesex , who had won the domestic title the previous year , only tasted victory in two of the Twenty20 matches that Kartik played in . 
 Kartik played in ten first @-@ class matches for Middlesex , taking 33 wickets at 22 @.@ 87 . He took his season 's innings best of 5 / 65 and then 2 / 26 in the season opener against cross @-@ London rivals Surrey , and then took 3 / 32 and 4 / 53 in a hard @-@ fought 47 @-@ run win over Kent , and a total of 6 / 139 in the next match against Essex , but his season fell away at the end , managing only six wickets in the last three matches . With the bat , he made 336 runs at 24 @.@ 00 , the most prolific season of his career with the willow , including 62 against Essex and 57 not out against Gloucestershire . He played in a solitary one @-@ dayer , taking 2 / 19 against Northamptonshire . 
 At the end of the 2009 season , it was announced that Kartik would join Somerset as their overseas player for the 2010 season . 
 During the 2009 – 10 Indian season , Kartik played in seven matches for Railways in the Ranji Trophy , taking 17 wickets at 25 @.@ 05 including a best of 5 / 81 against Mumbai . He also scored 44 against the team and ended with 97 runs at 12 @.@ 12 for the season . However his figures were not enough to gain selection for Central Zone in the Duleep Trophy . 
 = = Environment Concerns = = 
 Murali Kartik has done many advertisement for the PETA India , including the ' Save Your Chicks ' campaign , which aimed for awareness against flesh farming of poultry . 
 = 2001 Gator Bowl = 
 The 2001 Gator Bowl was a post @-@ season American college football bowl game between the Virginia Tech Hokies and the Clemson Tigers at Alltel Stadium in Jacksonville , Florida on January 1 , 2001 . The game was the final contest of the 2000 NCAA Division I @-@ A football season for both teams , and ended in a 41 – 20 victory for Virginia Tech . 
 Virginia Tech entered the game headed by star quarterback Michael Vick , who led the Hokies to a 10 – 1 regular @-@ season record despite being injured for a part of the season . Clemson entered the game with a regular @-@ season record of 9 – 2 under the command of head coach Tommy Bowden , who was in the second year of his tenure . The contest featured two high @-@ scoring offenses that emphasized different aspects of the game . These aspects were exemplified in the game , which saw Clemson pass for more yards than Virginia Tech , while the Hokies ran for more yards than the Tigers . 
 Virginia Tech jumped out to an early lead and maintained it throughout the game . Vick had a 23 @-@ yard touchdown run on the game 's opening drive , then helped the Hokies expand their lead to 14 – 0 by the end of the first quarter . The Tigers narrowed Tech 's lead to 14 – 10 in the second quarter , but the Hokies scored another touchdown before halftime and went into the second half with a 21 – 10 lead . Injuries knocked Clemson 's two leading running backs out of the game , and starting Clemson quarterback Woodrow Dantzler was removed from the game after he proved ineffective against the Virginia Tech defense . Despite these changes , the Tigers were unable to reduce Virginia Tech 's lead , which stood at 34 – 13 at the end of the third quarter . A late Clemson touchdown moved the Tigers within two touchdowns , but Virginia Tech answered with a touchdown of its own , making the final score 41 – 20 . 
 In recognition of his performance in leading his team to a victory , Vick was named the game 's most valuable player . It was his final collegiate game , and four months after the Gator Bowl , he was selected with the first overall selection in the 2001 NFL Draft . A handful of other players who participated in the Gator Bowl also were selected in the draft . 
 = = Team selection = = 
 For the 2000 – 2001 college football season , the Gator Bowl had the right to select the No. 2 bowl @-@ eligible team from both the Atlantic Coast Conference ( ACC ) and the Big East Conference . The bowl game 's administrators also had a contract to include Notre Dame if that school met certain entry requirements . The conference champions of the ACC and Big East were guaranteed a spot in a Bowl Championship Series game , and there also was the possibility of an at @-@ large BCS selection for any team in each conference if it finished high enough in the BCS Poll but did not win the conference championship . 
 = = = Virginia Tech = = = 
 During the 1999 – 2000 college football season , Virginia Tech went undefeated during the regular season but lost to Florida State in the 2000 BCS National Championship Game . In the offseason following the championship @-@ game loss , Tech fans and pundits anticipated a possible repeat of the Hokies ' undefeated regular season and national championship run . In the annual preseason poll of media members covering Big East Conference football , Virginia Tech was picked to finish second ; Tech received nine first @-@ place votes to Miami 's 15 . In the preseason Associated Press college football poll , Virginia Tech was 11th . 
 When games for the 2001 college football season were scheduled , Virginia Tech was picked to host the annual Black Coaches & Administrators Classic , the opening game of the national Division I @-@ A season . Georgia Tech was picked as the opponent , but on the day of the game , severe lightning storms hit the Blacksburg , Virginia area . ESPN commentator Lee Corso 's rental car was struck by lightning , and the game was postponed due to severe weather . It was never rescheduled and eventually was canceled . 
 After the BCA Classic was canceled , Virginia Tech opened the regular season with a 52 – 23 blowout win over Akron . This was followed by a 45 – 28 win over East Carolina and a 49 – 0 shutout of Rutgers . The three wins typified the early part of Virginia Tech 's schedule , which also featured wins against Boston College , Temple , West Virginia , Syracuse , and Pittsburgh . By virtue of winning its first eight games of the season , Tech rose to a No. 2 national ranking prior to facing No. 3 Miami on November 4 . 
 Virginia Tech star quarterback Michael Vick suffered a severely sprained ankle in the game against Pittsburgh , and strong @-@ performing wide receiver Andre Davis was temporarily crippled by bursitis in his left foot . Despite these injuries , commentators predicted a high @-@ scoring game that was sometimes referred to as " the Big East 's game of the year " . It was predicted that the winner likely would be a shoo @-@ in for that year 's national championship game . With Vick injured , backup quarterback Dave Meyer started the game for the Hokies , who fell behind 14 – 0 in the first quarter . In desperation , Vick tried to play despite his injury , but he participated in only 19 plays before leaving the game for good . Miami quarterback Ken Dorsey threw three long touchdown passes , and Miami won the game , 41 – 21 . 
 The loss knocked Tech out of contention for the national championship and the conference championship , since Miami was a fellow member of the Big East . The Hokies also fell to No. 8 in the AP Poll during the week after the game . In that week , they rebounded by beating the University of Central Florida , 44 – 21 . Ranked No. 6 after the win , Tech defeated in @-@ state rival Virginia , 42 – 21 , in the annual battle for the Commonwealth Cup . 
 Though the loss to Miami knocked the Hokies out of contention for the Big East championship and its accompanying automatic BCS bid , there was the possibility that Tech could receive an at @-@ large BCS game bid if it scored high enough in the final BCS poll and the administrators of a BCS game wanted to invite the Hokies . Tech was considered a long shot due to the availability of Oregon State and Notre Dame , two teams with large followings that would attract greater television revenue and ticket sales . Gator Bowl officials made plans based on different possibilities . If Virginia Tech was selected for a BCS bowl but Notre Dame was not , the Fighting Irish would play in the Gator Bowl . If both were selected , Big East No. 3 Pittsburgh would be given the nod for the Gator Bowl . On December 3 , the BCS selections were announced : The Fiesta Bowl selected No. 5 Oregon State and No. 10 Notre Dame instead of No. 6 Virginia Tech . This left the Hokies available for the Gator Bowl , which picked them on the next day . 
 = = = Clemson = = = 
 The Clemson Tigers entered the 2000 – 2001 college football season after a 6 – 6 season in 1999 under first @-@ year head coach Tommy Bowden . Fans and college football analysts predicted Bowden would continue Clemson 's resurgence from a 3 – 8 season during the year before Bowden was hired . Some pointed to Bowden 's undefeated season in the second year after assuming the head coaching job at Tulane University as a sign of what to expect from Clemson . Most analysts , however , anticipated a more moderate improvement over the previous year . In the annual preseason poll of media who covered Atlantic Coast Conference football , Clemson tied for second with Georgia Tech . Both teams were far behind perennial favorite Florida State , however . Nationally , Clemson debuted at No. 17 in the preseason AP Poll and No. 20 in the preseason coaches ' poll . 
 The Tigers opened their season against Division I @-@ AA opponent The Citadel , whom they beat handily , 38 – 0 . That victory was followed by two blowout wins : 62 – 9 against Missouri and 55 – 7 against ACC opponent Wake Forest . Those three games were typical of Clemson 's first eight , which the Tigers won in succession . After the win against Wake Forest , Clemson beat Virginia , Duke , North Carolina State , Maryland , and North Carolina . In the final win of that streak , starting quarterback Woodrow Dantzler was replaced by backup Willie Simmons in the second quarter due to an injury to Dantzler . 
 With an 8 – 0 record and a No. 5 national ranking , Clemson hosted Georgia Tech . In the game , the Yellow Jackets posted a school @-@ record offensive effort in an upset victory over the Tigers . Clemson took a 28 – 24 lead with 1 : 52 remaining in the game , but the Yellow Jackets drove 80 yards in 11 plays before ending with a one @-@ handed catch for a touchdown , giving Clemson its first loss of the season . The defeat eliminated the Tigers from national championship contention , but they still had a chance to win the conference championship if they defeated Florida State the following week . 
