 The city 's influx of French @-@ speaking Belgians had an impact on the town . The south side ( south of Lick Creek ) became known as Belgium Town . Most Belgians were Catholic , and they built the city 's Catholic church near their homes on the city 's south side . The church 's Father <unk> was a native of France and was also involved with glass making . During the early 1900s , the local Blackford County Gazette claimed to be the " only newspaper in State that prints French and circulates among the window glass and iron workers , the highest paid skilled mechanics in the world . " 
 The Belgian workforce also had an impact on the city 's north side . Hartford City 's Presbyterian Church , which is now part of the National Register of Historical Places , was built one block north of the courthouse in 1894 — and features large stained glass windows imported from Belgium . For over 50 years , the bigger of two huge windows was considered the largest single @-@ frame window in the state of Indiana . These stained @-@ glass windows , plus at least four smaller ones , were installed by the local ( and mostly Catholic ) Belgian glass workers . 
 = = Infrastructure = = 
 Construction of Hartford City 's new glass works was completed in early January 1891 , and production started shortly thereafter . The glass works was located on Hartford City 's south side , and originally occupied 12 acres ( 4 @.@ 9 ha ) . Natural gas was the plant 's original fuel source for both the furnace used to make the glass and the ovens used to gradually cool it . 
 In the United States , two systems were used during the 1890s to create molten glass . The older system used a pot furnace , where ceramic pots were heated inside the furnace to melt the batch of ingredients needed to make the molten glass . The newer system used a large brick tank that could be operated continuously or by the batch . The Hartford City plant used the tank system , and it was originally the " largest tank window glass factory in the world " . The tank had a capacity equivalent to 30 pots , giving the Hartford City plant more than double the capacity of some of the window glass plants built a few years earlier in Ohio . 
 With its size , newest technology , and newly built facilities , the plant was " said to be the largest and best arranged window glass works in the world . " During its existence , the plant was always one of the largest window glass works in the United States . 
 Initial production at the Hartford City plant continued until June , when the works was shut down to decrease inventories . Summer shutdowns were normal in the glass industry at that time . The heat from the furnaces combined with summer weather made extremely uncomfortable working conditions , justifying the summer months as the best time to shut down for maintenance ( or for manipulation of inventories ) . In the case of the first year 's shutdown for the Hartford City Glass works , production was restarted in October . 
 = = = Expansion = = = 
 In 1892 , management decided to expand the factory 's capacity by adding a second tank . The new tank would add approximately 50 pots of capacity . In early April , construction of the facilities for the new tank began . " Modern and improved methods in all departments of the works " were used , improving the efficiency in manufacturing and shipping . The new buildings were made fire @-@ resistant by using stone , brick , and iron for construction materials . They were also well ventilated , which made the work environment more comfortable for the glass workers . The expansion increased total capacity to about 90 pots . This made the works the second @-@ largest glass factory in the United States . Expenditures necessary to finance the expansion were $ 100 @,@ 000 ( over $ 2 @.@ 5 million in 2012 dollars ) . 
 During 1893 , the company considered adding a third tank , which would add another 60 pots of capacity . The expansion cost estimate was $ 150 @,@ 000 ( over $ 3 @.@ 8 million in 2012 dollars ) , and was said to " give employment to 350 men . " Two major concerns voiced by management to community leaders were adequate fire protection and housing for the workers . Community leaders did not respond soon enough , and the expansion was postponed . However , it is no coincidence that Hartford City 's waterworks began operations in 1894 , and the plant was built on the city 's south side . The city also acquired a chemical fire engine from the Chicago Fire Extinguisher Company , which was delivered in February 1894 . 
 Although the third tank was not added in 1893 , a new ware room was built . The room was 60 feet ( 18 @.@ 3 m ) long by 120 feet ( 36 @.@ 6 m ) wide , and could hold 20 @,@ 000 boxes . The roof and walls were covered in iron . By September ( without the capacity expansion ) , the plant had a payroll of $ 45 @,@ 000 ( over $ 1 @.@ 1 million in 2012 dollars ) per month , and employed 500 glass workers . 
 In 1896 , the plant employed 550 people , and produced about 2 million square feet of window glass per month . In addition to window glass , the company was the nation ’ s largest producer of chipped glass , with capacity double that of the second @-@ largest manufacturer . Chipped glass was a popular ornamental glass used for interiors of office buildings and with furniture . At that time , the plant was the second @-@ largest window glass producer in the country , although it became the third @-@ largest later in the year . Its grounds had grown to cover 25 acres ( 10 @.@ 1 ha ) , and included a railroad spur off of the Pennsylvania Railroad . The grounds contained two melting rooms , two warehouses , a blacksmith shop , and a machine shop . The tank in one of the melting rooms was 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) long , 18 feet ( 5 @.@ 5 m ) wide , and 6 feet ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) deep . One tank required 4 flattening ovens and a cutting room . 
 Plans for the addition of another tank began again in late 1896 . A third tank would make the Hartford City plant the largest in the country . As part of the conditions for expansion , the plant owners requested housing for its potential new workers . Although the houses were built , the company was not satisfied , as the expansion was never consummated . Without the third tank , the workforce still grew to 600 by 1898 . 
 = = Acquisition = = 
 In 1898 , a group of men led by James A. Chambers organized a glass trust called American Window Glass Company . The company was formed from the American Glass Company , but did not incorporate until 1899 . The trust planned to acquire 70 glass plants , " some of which it will close to bring the production down to the demand . " The prices offered for the glass plants were very generous . Owners of the glass plants could sell their plant for either cash or a combination of cash and stock in the new company . Many owners chose to receive stock . 
 The trust was incorporated effective August 2 , 1899 . James A. Chambers continued as president , and Hartford City ’ s H.B. Smith was one of the directors of the newly incorporated company . Initial acquisitions included over 20 major window glass plants , including Hartford City Glass Company . Most of the original acquisitions were from Indiana and Pennsylvania . Those glass plants were important enough to enable American Window Glass to control 85 percent of the window glass production in the United States . 
 Many of the Indiana glass works acquired by the trust were from the East Central Indiana Gas Belt . Among those plants were the Hartford City Glass Company ; and the nearby Muncie plants of Maring , Hart , and Company and C. H. Over . Other plants were located in Anderson , Dunkirk , and Fairmount , Indiana . The Hartford City Glass Company became known as Plant Number 3 of the American Window Glass Company . J. R. Johnston , already manager for Hartford City Glass Company , was named manager of the American Window Glass version of the same plant in December . A second window glass factory from Hartford City , Jones Glass Company , was also acquired — and became plant No. 32 . Eventually , the company acquired 41 glass factories . 
 = = American Window Glass = = 
 After the acquisition , the Hartford City Glass works became known as plant number 3 of the American Window Glass Company . The plant employed 450 people in 1901 . As natural gas supplies in Indiana became depleted , many manufacturers moved or did not survive . The major plants of the American Window Glass successfully changed energy sources from natural gas to gas made from coal . The company also had a technological advantage . Instead of using a glass blower , American Window Glass plants extracted molten glass with a machine . The machine , which was not immediately utilized at all American Window Glass plants , was known as the Lubbers blowing machine . <unk> to the machine and glass @-@ making process were made at the Hartford City works by plant manager Harry G. <unk> . Production records for the entire company were set at the Hartford City plant in 1905 and 1907 — using the Lubbers machines . 
 = = = Lubbers machine = = = 
 The glass blowing machine used by American Window Glass factories was created by Pittsburgh resident John H. Lubbers , and he continued to contribute improvements to the machine over the next decade . By using the Lubbers machine , human glass blowers were replaced with a machine operator paid 30 percent of the glass blower wage . The machine was also five times more productive than the human blowers . It could make windows four times as large because a larger cylinder was extracted from the tank of molten glass . Thus , the highest – paid skilled workers in the United States were considered obsolete . In the case of Hartford City , machines replaced most of the human glass blowers by 1908 . 
 = = = Consolidation = = = 
 During the spring of 1900 , rumors circulated that American Window Glass planned to move production from smaller plants in nearby Dunkirk and <unk> ( factories 17 , 30 , 34 , and 41 ) to the large southside Hartford City plant . If the Hartford City plant would have its capacity expanded equal to the capacity of the plants to be consolidated , then Hartford City would have " become the greatest window glass town in the world . " The plant would have employed nearly 1000 people , equaling the largest window glass plant in the world in capacity . That plant in combination with Hartford City 's two other window glass factories , not even considering the flint glass plants or bottle plants , would make the city 's window glass capacity the highest in the world . The rumor had some truth — smaller plants were eventually closed . However , Hartford City 's large southside plant was not expanded . 
 In 1905 American Window Glass sold some of its smaller plants , including Hartford City 's plant number 32 . Plant number 3 still continued operations . It employed 500 people in 1910 . Before the start of World War I , American Window Glass Company was still the dominant window glass manufacturer , accounting for over half of the nation 's window glass manufacturing capacity . In 1913 , the company continued to close many of its smaller plants , while the large plants were equipped with the glass blowing machines . Plant number 3 was the third largest window glass factory in the United States , and the largest west of Pennsylvania . The Belgian portion of Hartford City 's glassmaking workforce was dramatically reduced because of two factors : the glass @-@ blowing machine replaced human glass blowers ; and Belgians had difficulty returning from summer vacations in their European homeland after the start of World War I. 
 American Window Glass made record profits in 1920 . All of the company 's small plants had been sold or closed by that time . The glass @-@ blowing machines were still being used to extract molten glass . The company was described as having " six large and well @-@ equipped plants located near the Pittsburgh district , and one large plant at Hartford City , Ind . " 
 = = Decline = = 
 During the beginning of the 20th century , competitors of the American Window Glass trust used a different approach to gain a technological advantage . The machines used by American Window Glass replaced glass blowers , but still used the same blowing and cutting process used in the 1880s — although the company was constantly working to make the process more efficient . Competitors such as American inventor Irving W. Colburn began working on a machine that produced window glass using a different process . Colburn patented his work during the first decade of the 20th century . Although he filed for bankruptcy in 1912 , his patents were purchased by Edward Drummond Libbey and Michael J. Owens — who hired Colburn to continue work on the machine . Owens was the creator of the Owens Bottling Machine that revolutionized the glass bottle industry . Working with Colburn , Owens improved the window glass machine enough that it began being used for production in 1921 . By 1926 , Libbey @-@ Owens had gained a window glass market share of 29 percent , while American Window Glass 's share was 59 percent . During the 1920s , Pittsburgh Plate Glass also developed a new process for making window glass , creating even more competition in the window glass industry . 
 Because of the improved technology and processes utilized by competitors , many of the American Window Glass patents , and much of its machinery , became obsolete . By the late 1920s , American Window Glass was forced to begin re @-@ equipping its plants with new machinery . The company underwent a financial reorganization in 1929 . Dividends on its preferred stock were lowered . Although a few plants were re @-@ equipped , the Hartford City plant was not . Hartford City 's natural gas supply was depleted , and the type of sand used to produce glass was in better supply near other American Window Glass plants in Pennsylvania . Thus , American Window Glass Company plant number 3 , the former Hartford City Glass Company , was closed in 1929 . 
 = Byzantine Empire = 
 The Byzantine Empire , sometimes referred to as the Eastern Roman Empire , was the continuation of the Roman Empire in the East during Late Antiquity and the Middle Ages , when its capital city was Constantinople ( modern @-@ day Istanbul , originally founded as Byzantium ) . It survived the fragmentation and fall of the Western Roman Empire in the 5th century AD and continued to exist for an additional thousand years until it fell to the Ottoman Turks in 1453 . During most of its existence , the empire was the most powerful economic , cultural , and military force in Europe . Both " Byzantine Empire " and " Eastern Roman Empire " are historiographical terms created after the end of the realm ; its citizens continued to refer to their empire as the Roman Empire ( Ancient Greek : Βασιλεία τῶν Ῥωμαίων , tr . Basileia <unk> Rhōmaiōn ; Latin : Imperium Romanum ) , or Romania ( <unk> ) , and to themselves as " Romans " . 
 Several signal events from the 4th to 6th centuries mark the period of transition during which the Roman Empire 's Greek East and Latin West divided . Constantine I ( r . 324 – 337 ) reorganised the empire , made Constantinople the new capital , and legalised Christianity . Under Theodosius I ( r . 379 – 395 ) , Christianity became the Empire 's official state religion and other religious practices were proscribed . Finally , under the reign of Heraclius ( r . 610 – 641 ) , the Empire 's military and administration were restructured and adopted Greek for official use instead of Latin . Thus , although the Roman state continued and Roman state traditions were maintained , modern historians distinguish Byzantium from ancient Rome insofar as it was centred on Constantinople , oriented towards Greek rather than Latin culture , and characterised by Orthodox Christianity . 
 The borders of the Empire evolved significantly over its existence , as it went through several cycles of decline and recovery . During the reign of Justinian I ( r . 527 – 565 ) , the Empire reached its greatest extent after reconquering much of the historically Roman western Mediterranean coast , including North Africa , Italy , and Rome itself , which it held for two more centuries . During the reign of Maurice ( r . 582 – 602 ) , the Empire 's eastern frontier was expanded and the north stabilised . However , his assassination caused the Byzantine – Sasanian War of 602 – 628 , which exhausted the Empire 's resources and contributed to major territorial losses during the Muslim conquests of the seventh century . In a matter of years the Empire lost its richest provinces , Egypt and Syria , to the Arabs . 
 During the Macedonian dynasty ( 10th – 11th centuries ) , the Empire again expanded and experienced the two @-@ century long Macedonian Renaissance , which came to an end with the loss of much of Asia Minor to the Seljuk Turks after the Battle of Manzikert in 1071 . This battle opened the way for the Turks to settle in Anatolia as a homeland . 
 The Empire recovered again during the Komnenian restoration , such that by the 12th century Constantinople was the largest and wealthiest European city . However , it was delivered a mortal blow during the Fourth Crusade , when Constantinople was sacked in 1204 and the territories that the Empire formerly governed were divided into competing Byzantine Greek and Latin realms . Despite the eventual recovery of Constantinople in 1261 , the Byzantine Empire remained only one of several small rival states in the area for the final two centuries of its existence . Its remaining territories were progressively annexed by the Ottomans over the 15th century . The Fall of Constantinople to the Ottoman Empire in 1453 finally ended the Byzantine Empire . 
 = = Nomenclature = = 
 The first use of the term " Byzantine " to label the later years of the Roman Empire was in 1557 , when the German historian Hieronymus Wolf published his work Corpus <unk> <unk> , a collection of historical sources . The term comes from " Byzantium " , the name of the city of Constantinople before it became Constantine 's capital . This older name of the city would rarely be used from this point onward except in historical or poetic contexts . The publication in 1648 of the Byzantine du Louvre ( Corpus <unk> Historiae <unk> ) , and in 1680 of Du Cange 's Historia <unk> further popularised the use of " Byzantine " among French authors , such as Montesquieu . However , it was not until the mid @-@ 19th century that the term came into general use in the Western world . 
 The Byzantine Empire was known to its inhabitants as the " Roman Empire " , the " Empire of the Romans " ( Latin : Imperium Romanum , Imperium Romanorum ; Greek : Βασιλεία τῶν Ῥωμαίων Basileia tōn Rhōmaiōn , <unk> τῶν Ῥωμαίων <unk> tōn Rhōmaiōn ) , " Romania " ( Latin : Romania ; Greek : <unk> <unk> ) , the " Roman Republic " ( Latin : Res Publica Romana ; Greek : <unk> τῶν Ῥωμαίων <unk> tōn Rhōmaiōn ) , <unk> ( Greek : <unk> ) , and also as <unk> ( Greek : <unk> ) . The inhabitants called themselves Romaioi and Graikoi , and even as late as the 19th century Greeks typically referred to their modern language as <unk> and <unk> . 
 Although the Byzantine Empire had a multi @-@ ethnic character during most of its history and preserved Romano @-@ Hellenistic traditions , it became identified by its western and northern contemporaries with its increasingly predominant Greek element . The occasional use of the term " Empire of the Greeks " ( Latin : Imperium Graecorum ) in the West to refer to the Eastern Roman Empire and of the Byzantine Emperor as Imperator Graecorum ( Emperor of the Greeks ) were also used to separate it from the prestige of the Roman Empire within the new kingdoms of the West . 
 The authority of the Byzantine emperor as the legitimate Roman emperor was challenged by the coronation of Charlemagne as Imperator Augustus by Pope Leo III in the year 800 . Needing Charlemagne 's support in his struggle against his enemies in Rome , Leo used the lack of a male occupant of the throne of the Roman Empire at the time to claim that it was vacant and that he could therefore crown a new Emperor himself . Whenever the Popes or the rulers of the West made use of the name Roman to refer to the Eastern Roman Emperors , they usually preferred the term Imperator <unk> ( meaning Emperor of Romania ) instead of Imperator Romanorum ( meaning Emperor of the Romans ) , a title that they applied only to Charlemagne and his successors . 
 No such distinction existed in the Islamic and Slavic worlds , where the Empire was more straightforwardly seen as the continuation of the Roman Empire . In the Islamic world , the Roman Empire was known primarily as Rûm . The name millet @-@ i Rûm , or " Roman nation , " was used by the Ottomans through the 20th century to refer to the former subjects of the Byzantine Empire , that is , the Orthodox Christian community within Ottoman realms . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Early history = = = 
 The Roman army succeeded in conquering many territories covering the entire Mediterranean region and coastal regions in southwestern Europe and north Africa . These territories were home to many different cultural groups , both urban populations and rural populations . Generally speaking , the eastern Mediterranean provinces were more urbanised than the western , having previously been united under the Macedonian Empire and Hellenised by the influence of Greek culture . 
 The West also suffered more heavily from the instability of the 3rd century AD . This distinction between the established Hellenised East and the younger Latinised West persisted and became increasingly important in later centuries , leading to a gradual estrangement of the two worlds . 
 = = = Decentralization of power = = = 
 To maintain control and improve administration , various schemes to divide the work of the Roman Emperor by sharing it between individuals were tried between 285 and 324 , from 337 to 350 , from 364 to 392 , and again between 395 and 480 . Although the administrative subdivisions varied , they generally involved a division of labour between East and West . Each division was a form of power @-@ sharing ( or even job @-@ sharing ) , for the ultimate imperium was not divisible and therefore the empire remained legally one state — although the co @-@ emperors often saw each other as rivals or enemies . 
 In 293 , emperor Diocletian created a new administrative system ( the tetrarchy ) , to guarantee security in all endangered regions of his Empire . He associated himself with a co @-@ emperor ( Augustus ) , and each co @-@ emperor then adopted a young colleague given the title of Caesar , to share in their rule and eventually to succeed the senior partner . The tetrarchy collapsed , however , in 313 and a few years later Constantine I reunited the two administrative divisions of the Empire as sole Augustus . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 In 330 , Constantine moved the seat of the Empire to Constantinople , which he founded as a second Rome on the site of Byzantium , a city strategically located on the trade routes between Europe and Asia and between the Mediterranean and the Black Sea . Constantine introduced important changes into the Empire 's military , monetary , civil and religious institutions . As regards his economic policies in particular , he has been accused by certain scholars of " reckless <unk> " , but the gold solidus he introduced became a stable currency that transformed the economy and promoted development . 
 Under Constantine , Christianity did not become the exclusive religion of the state , but enjoyed imperial preference , because the emperor supported it with generous privileges . Constantine established the principle that emperors could not settle questions of doctrine on their own , but should summon instead general ecclesiastical councils for that purpose . His convening of both the Synod of Arles and the First Council of Nicaea indicated his interest in the unity of the Church , and showcased his claim to be its head . The rise of Christianity was briefly interrupted on the accession of the emperor Julian in 361 , who made a determined effort to restore polytheism throughout the empire and was thus dubbed " Julian the Apostate " by the Church . However this was reversed when Julian was killed in battle in 363 . 
 Theodosius I ( 379 @-@ 395 ) was the last Emperor to rule both the Eastern and Western halves of the Empire . In 391 and 392 he issued a series of edicts essentially banning pagan religion . Pagan festivals and sacrifices were banned , as was access to all pagan temples and places of worship . The last Olympic Games are believed to have been held in 393 . In 395 , Theodosius I bequeathed the imperial office jointly to his sons : Arcadius in the East and Honorius in the West , once again dividing Imperial administration . In the 5th century the Eastern part of the empire was largely spared the difficulties faced by the West — due in part to a more established urban culture and greater financial resources , which allowed it to placate invaders with tribute and pay foreign mercenaries . This success allowed Theodosius II to focus on the codification of Roman law and further fortification of the walls of Constantinople , which left the city impervious to most attacks until 1204 . Large portions of the Theodosian Walls are preserved to the present day . 
 To fend off the Huns , Theodosius had to pay an enormous annual tribute to Attila . His successor , Marcian , refused to continue to pay the tribute , but Attila had already diverted his attention to the West . After his death in 453 , the Hunnic Empire collapsed , and many of the remaining Huns were often hired as mercenaries by Constantinople . 
 = = = Loss of the Western Roman Empire = = = 
 After the fall of Attila , the Eastern Empire enjoyed a period of peace , while the Western Empire deteriorated due to continuing migration and expansion by the Germanic nations ( its end is usually dated in 476 when the Germanic Roman general Odoacer deposed the usurper Western Emperor Romulus Augustulus ) . 
 In 480 with the death of the Western Emperor Julius Nepos , Eastern Emperor Zeno became sole Emperor of the empire . Odoacer , now ruler of Italy , was nominally Zeno 's subordinate but acted with complete autonomy , eventually providing support to a rebellion against the Emperor . 
 Zeno negotiated with the invading Ostrogoths , who had settled in Moesia , convincing the Gothic king Theodoric to depart for Italy as magister militum per <unk> ( " commander in chief for Italy " ) with the aim of deposing Odoacer . By urging Theodoric to conquer Italy , Zeno rid the Eastern Empire of an unruly subordinate ( Odoacer ) and moved another ( Theodoric ) further from the heart of the Empire . After Odoacer 's defeat in 493 , Theodoric ruled Italy de facto , although he was never recognised by the eastern emperors as " king " ( rex ) . 
 In 491 , Anastasius I , an aged civil officer of Roman origin , became Emperor , but it was not until 497 that the forces of the new emperor effectively took the measure of Isaurian resistance . Anastasius revealed himself as an energetic reformer and an able administrator . He perfected Constantine I 's coinage system by definitively setting the weight of the copper follis , the coin used in most everyday transactions . He also reformed the tax system and permanently abolished the <unk> tax . The State Treasury contained the enormous sum of 320 @,@ 000 lb ( 150 @,@ 000 kg ) of gold when Anastasius died in 518 . 
 = = = Justinian dynasty = = = 
 The Justinian dynasty was founded by Justin I , who though illiterate , rose through the ranks of the military to become Emperor in 518 . He was succeeded by his nephew Justinian I in 527 , who may already have exerted effective control during Justin 's reign . One of the most important figures of late antiquity and possibly the last Roman emperor to speak Latin as a first language , Justinian 's rule constitutes a distinct epoch , marked by the ambitious but only partly realized <unk> imperii , or " restoration of the Empire " . His wife Theodora was particularly influential . 
 In 529 , Justinian appointed a ten @-@ man commission chaired by John the Cappadocian to revise Roman law and create a new codification of laws and jurists ' extracts , known as the " Corpus Juris Civilis " . In 534 , the Corpus was updated and , along with the enactments promulgated by Justinian after 534 , formed the system of law used for most of the rest of the Byzantine era . The Corpus forms the basis of civil law of many modern states . 
 In 532 , attempting to secure his eastern frontier , Justinian signed a peace treaty with Khosrau I of Persia agreeing to pay a large annual tribute to the Sassanids . In the same year , he survived a revolt in Constantinople ( the Nika riots ) , which solidified his power but ended with the deaths of a reported 30 @,@ 000 to 35 @,@ 000 rioters on his orders . The western conquests began in 533 , as Justinian sent his general Belisarius to reclaim the former province of Africa from the Vandals who had been in control since 429 with their capital at Carthage . Their success came with surprising ease , but it was not until 548 that the major local tribes were subdued . In Ostrogothic Italy , the deaths of Theodoric , his nephew and heir Athalaric , and his daughter Amalasuntha had left her murderer , Theodahad ( r . 534 – 536 ) , on the throne despite his weakened authority . 
 In 535 , a small Byzantine expedition to Sicily met with easy success , but the Goths soon stiffened their resistance , and victory did not come until 540 , when Belisarius captured Ravenna , after successful sieges of Naples and Rome . In 535 – 536 , Theodahad sent Pope Agapetus I to Constantinople to request the removal of Byzantine forces from Sicily , Dalmatia , and Italy . Although Agapetus failed in his mission to sign a peace with Justinian , he succeeded in having the Monophysite Patriarch Anthimus I of Constantinople denounced , despite empress Theodora 's support and protection . 
 The Ostrogoths were soon reunited under the command of King Totila and captured Rome in 546 . Belisarius , who had been sent back to Italy in 544 , was eventually recalled to Constantinople in 549 . The arrival of the Armenian eunuch Narses in Italy ( late 551 ) with an army of 35 @,@ 000 men marked another shift in Gothic fortunes . Totila was defeated at the Battle of <unk> and his successor , <unk> , was defeated at the Battle of Mons Lactarius ( October 552 ) . Despite continuing resistance from a few Gothic garrisons and two subsequent invasions by the Franks and Alemanni , the war for the Italian peninsula was at an end . In 551 , Athanagild , a noble from Visigothic Hispania , sought Justinian 's help in a rebellion against the king , and the emperor dispatched a force under Liberius , a successful military commander . The empire held on to a small slice of the Iberian Peninsula coast until the reign of Heraclius . 
 In the east , the Roman – Persian Wars continued until 561 when the envoys of Justinian and Khosrau agreed on a 50 @-@ year peace . By the mid @-@ 550s , Justinian had won victories in most theatres of operation , with the notable exception of the Balkans , which were subjected to repeated incursions from the Slavs and the Gepids . Tribes of Serbs and Croats were later resettled in the northwestern Balkans , during the reign of Heraclius . Justinian called Belisarius out of retirement and defeated the new <unk> threat . The strengthening of the Danube fleet caused the Kutrigur Huns to withdraw and they agreed to a treaty that allowed safe passage back across the Danube . 
 Although polytheism had been suppressed by the state since at least the time of Constantine in the 4th century , traditional Greco @-@ Roman culture was still influential in the Eastern empire in the 6th century . Philosophers such as John Philoponus drew on <unk> ideas in addition to Christian thought and empiricism . Nevertheless , Hellenistic philosophy began to be gradually supplanted by or amalgamated into newer Christian philosophy . The closure of the Platonic Academy in 529 was a notable turning point . Hymns written by Romanos the Melodist marked the development of the Divine Liturgy , while the architects Isidore of Miletus and Anthemius of Tralles worked to complete the new Church of the Holy Wisdom , Hagia Sophia , which was designed to replace an older church destroyed during the Nika Revolt . Completed in 537 , the Hagia Sophia stands today as one of the major monuments of Byzantine architectural history . During the 6th and 7th centuries , the Empire was struck by a series of epidemics , which greatly devastated the population and contributed to a significant economic decline and a weakening of the Empire . 
 After Justinian died in 565 , his successor , Justin II refused to pay the large tribute to the Persians . Meanwhile , the Germanic Lombards invaded Italy ; by the end of the century only a third of Italy was in Byzantine hands . Justin 's successor , Tiberius II , choosing between his enemies , awarded subsidies to the Avars while taking military action against the Persians . Though Tiberius ' general , Maurice , led an effective campaign on the eastern frontier , subsidies failed to restrain the Avars . They captured the Balkan fortress of Sirmium in 582 , while the Slavs began to make inroads across the Danube . 
 Maurice , who meanwhile succeeded Tiberius , intervened in a Persian civil war , placed the legitimate Khosrau II back on the throne and married his daughter to him . Maurice 's treaty with his new brother @-@ in @-@ law enlarged the territories of the Empire to the East and allowed the energetic Emperor to focus on the Balkans . By 602 , a series of successful Byzantine campaigns had pushed the Avars and Slavs back across the Danube . However , Maurice 's refusal to ransom several thousand captives taken by the Avars , and his order to the troops to winter in the Danube caused his popularity to plummet . A revolt broke out under an officer named Phocas , who marched the troops back to Constantinople ; Maurice and his family were murdered while trying to escape . 
 = = = Shrinking borders = = = 
 = = = = Heraclian dynasty = = = = 
 After Maurice 's murder by Phocas , Khosrau used the pretext to reconquer the Roman province of Mesopotamia . Phocas , an unpopular ruler invariably described in Byzantine sources as a " tyrant " , was the target of a number of Senate @-@ led plots . He was eventually deposed in 610 by Heraclius , who sailed to Constantinople from Carthage with an icon affixed to the prow of his ship . 
 Following the accession of Heraclius , the Sassanid advance pushed deep into the Levant , occupying Damascus and Jerusalem and removing the True Cross to Ctesiphon . The counter @-@ attack launched by Heraclius took on the character of a holy war , and an <unk> image of Christ was carried as a military standard ( similarly , when Constantinople was saved from a combined Avar - Sassanid - Slavic siege in 626 , the victory was attributed to the icons of the Virgin that were led in procession by Patriarch Sergius about the walls of the city ) . In this very siege of Constantinople of the year 626 , amidst the climactic Byzantine – Sasanian War of 602 – 628 , the combined Avar , Sassanid , and Slavic forces unsuccessfully besieged the Byzantine capital between June and July . After this , the Sassanid army was forced to withdraw to Anatolia . The loss came just after news had reached them of yet another Byzantine victory , where Heraclius 's brother Theodore scored well against the Persian general Shahin . Following this , Heraclius led an invasion into Sassanid Mesopotamia once again . 
 The main Sassanid force was destroyed at Nineveh in 627 , and in 629 Heraclius restored the True Cross to Jerusalem in a majestic ceremony , as he marched into the Sassanid capital of Ctesiphon , where anarchy and civil war reigned as a result of the enduring war . Eventually , the Persians were obliged to withdraw all armed forces and return Sassanid @-@ ruled Egypt , the Levant and whatever imperial territories of Mesopotamia and Armenia were in Roman hands at the time of an earlier peace treaty in c . 595 . The war had exhausted both the Byzantines and Sassanids , however , and left them extremely vulnerable to the Muslim forces that emerged in the following years . The Byzantines suffered a crushing defeat by the Arabs at the Battle of Yarmouk in 636 , while Ctesiphon fell in 637 . 
 = = = = Siege of Constantinople ( 674 – 678 ) = = = = 
 The Arabs , now firmly in control of Syria and the Levant , sent frequent raiding parties deep into Asia Minor , and in 674 – 678 laid siege to Constantinople itself . The Arab fleet was finally repulsed through the use of Greek fire , and a thirty @-@ years ' truce was signed between the Empire and the Umayyad Caliphate . However , the Anatolian raids continued unabated , and accelerated the demise of classical urban culture , with the inhabitants of many cities either refortifying much smaller areas within the old city walls , or relocating entirely to nearby fortresses . Constantinople itself dropped substantially in size , from 500 @,@ 000 inhabitants to just 40 @,@ 000 – 70 @,@ 000 , and , like other urban centres , it was partly <unk> . The city also lost the free grain shipments in 618 , after Egypt fell first to the Persians and then to the Arabs , and public wheat distribution ceased . 
 The void left by the disappearance of the old semi @-@ autonomous civic institutions was filled by the theme system , which entailed dividing Asia Minor into " provinces " occupied by distinct armies that assumed civil authority and answered directly to the imperial administration . This system may have had its roots in certain ad hoc measures taken by Heraclius , but over the course of the 7th century it developed into an entirely new system of imperial governance . The massive cultural and institutional restructuring of the Empire consequent on the loss of territory in the 7th century has been said to have caused a decisive break in east Mediterranean Romanness and that the Byzantine state is subsequently best understood as another successor state rather than a real continuation of the Roman Empire . 
 The withdrawal of large numbers of troops from the Balkans to combat the Persians and then the Arabs in the east opened the door for the gradual southward expansion of Slavic peoples into the peninsula , and , as in Asia Minor , many cities shrank to small fortified settlements . In the 670s , the Bulgars were pushed south of the Danube by the arrival of the Khazars . In 680 , Byzantine forces sent to disperse these new settlements were defeated . 
 In 681 , Constantine IV signed a treaty with the Bulgar khan Asparukh , and the new Bulgarian state assumed sovereignty over a number of Slavic tribes that had previously , at least in name , recognised Byzantine rule . In 687 – 688 , the final Heraclian emperor , Justinian II , led an expedition against the Slavs and Bulgarians , and made significant gains , although the fact that he had to fight his way from Thrace to Macedonia demonstrates the degree to which Byzantine power in the north Balkans had declined . 
 Justinian II attempted to break the power of the urban aristocracy through severe taxation and the appointment of " outsiders " to administrative posts . He was driven from power in 695 , and took shelter first with the Khazars and then with the Bulgarians . In 705 , he returned to Constantinople with the armies of the Bulgarian khan <unk> , retook the throne , and instituted a reign of terror against his enemies . With his final overthrow in 711 , supported once more by the urban aristocracy , the Heraclian dynasty came to an end . 
 = = = = Isaurian dynasty to the accession of Basil I = = = = 
 Leo III the Isaurian turned back the Muslim assault in 718 and addressed himself to the task of reorganising and consolidating the themes in Asia Minor . His successor , Constantine V , won noteworthy victories in northern Syria and thoroughly undermined Bulgarian strength . 
 Taking advantage of the Empire 's weakness after the Revolt of Thomas the Slav in the early 820s , the Arabs re @-@ emerged and captured Crete . They also successfully attacked Sicily , but in 863 general Petronas gained a decisive victory against Umar al @-@ Aqta , the emir of Melitene ( Malatya ) . Under the leadership of emperor Krum , the Bulgarian threat also re @-@ emerged , but in 815 – 816 Krum 's son , Omurtag , signed a peace treaty with Leo V. 
 = = = = Religious dispute over iconoclasm = = = = 
 The 8th and early 9th centuries were also dominated by controversy and religious division over Iconoclasm , which was the main political issue in the Empire for over a century . Icons ( here meaning all forms of religious imagery ) were banned by Leo and Constantine from around 730 , leading to revolts by <unk> ( supporters of icons ) throughout the empire . After the efforts of empress Irene , the Second Council of Nicaea met in 787 and affirmed that icons could be venerated but not worshiped . Irene is said to have endeavoured to negotiate a marriage between herself and Charlemagne , but , according to Theophanes the Confessor , the scheme was frustrated by Aetios , one of her favourites . 
 In the early 9th century , Leo V reintroduced the policy of iconoclasm , but in 843 empress Theodora restored the veneration of icons with the help of Patriarch <unk> . Iconoclasm played a part in the further alienation of East from West , which worsened during the so @-@ called <unk> schism , when Pope Nicholas I challenged the elevation of Photios to the patriarchate . 
 = = = Macedonian dynasty and resurgence ( 867 – 1025 ) = = = 
 The accession of Basil I to the throne in 867 marks the beginning of the Macedonian dynasty , which would rule for the next two and a half centuries . This dynasty included some of the most able emperors in Byzantium 's history , and the period is one of revival and resurgence . The Empire moved from defending against external enemies to reconquest of territories formerly lost . 
 In addition to a reassertion of Byzantine military power and political authority , the period under the Macedonian dynasty is characterised by a cultural revival in spheres such as philosophy and the arts . There was a conscious effort to restore the brilliance of the period before the Slavic and subsequent Arab invasions , and the Macedonian era has been dubbed the " Golden Age " of Byzantium . Though the Empire was significantly smaller than during the reign of Justinian , it had regained significant strength , as the remaining territories were less geographically dispersed and more politically , economically , and culturally integrated . 
 = = = = Wars against the Arabs = = = = 
 In the early years of Basil I 's reign , Arab raids on the coasts of Dalmatia were successfully repelled , and the region once again came under secure Byzantine control . This enabled Byzantine missionaries to penetrate to the interior and convert the Serbs and the principalities of modern @-@ day Herzegovina and Montenegro to Orthodox Christianity . An attempt to retake Malta ended disastrously , however , when the local population sided with the Arabs and massacred the Byzantine garrison . 
 By contrast , the Byzantine position in Southern Italy was gradually consolidated so that by 873 Bari had once again come under Byzantine rule , and most of Southern Italy would remain in the Empire for the next 200 years . On the more important eastern front , the Empire rebuilt its defences and went on the offensive . The Paulicians were defeated and their capital of Tephrike ( <unk> ) taken , while the offensive against the Abbasid Caliphate began with the recapture of Samosata . 
 Under Basil 's son and successor , Leo VI the Wise , the gains in the east against the now @-@ weak Abbasid Caliphate continued . However , Sicily was lost to the Arabs in 902 , and in 904 Thessaloniki , the Empire 's second city , was sacked by an Arab fleet . The weakness of the Empire in the naval sphere was quickly rectified , so that a few years later a Byzantine fleet had re @-@ occupied Cyprus , lost in the 7th century , and also stormed Laodicea in Syria . Despite this revenge , the Byzantines were still unable to strike a decisive blow against the Muslims , who inflicted a crushing defeat on the imperial forces when they attempted to regain Crete in 911 . 
 The death of the Bulgarian tsar Simeon I in 927 severely weakened the Bulgarians , allowing the Byzantines to concentrate on the eastern front . Melitene was permanently recaptured in 934 , and in 943 the famous general John Kourkouas continued the offensive in Mesopotamia with some noteworthy victories , culminating in the reconquest of Edessa . Kourkouas was especially celebrated for returning to Constantinople the venerated Mandylion , a relic purportedly imprinted with a portrait of Christ . 
 The soldier @-@ emperors Nikephoros II Phokas ( reigned 963 – 969 ) and John I Tzimiskes ( 969 – 976 ) expanded the empire well into Syria , defeating the emirs of north @-@ west Iraq . The great city of Aleppo was taken by Nikephoros in 962 , and the Arabs were decisively expelled from Crete in 963 . The recapture of Crete put an end to Arab raids in the Aegean , allowing mainland Greece to flourish once again . Cyprus was permanently retaken in 965 , and the successes of Nikephoros culminated in 969 with the recapture of Antioch , which he incorporated as a province of the Empire . His successor John Tzimiskes recaptured Damascus , Beirut , Acre , Sidon , Caesarea , and Tiberias , putting Byzantine armies within striking distance of Jerusalem , although the Muslim power centres in Iraq and Egypt were left untouched . After much campaigning in the north , the last Arab threat to Byzantium , the rich province of Sicily , was targeted in 1025 by Basil II , who died before the expedition could be completed . Nevertheless , by that time the Empire stretched from the straits of Messina to the Euphrates and from the Danube to Syria . 
 = = = = Wars against the Bulgarian Empire = = = = 
 The traditional struggle with the See of Rome continued through the Macedonian period , spurred by the question of religious supremacy over the newly Christianised state of Bulgaria . Ending eighty years of peace between the two states , the powerful Bulgarian tsar Simeon I invaded in 894 but was pushed back by the Byzantines , who used their fleet to sail up the Black Sea to attack the Bulgarian rear , enlisting the support of the Hungarians . The Byzantines were defeated at the Battle of <unk> in 896 , however , and agreed to pay annual subsidies to the Bulgarians . 
 Leo the Wise died in 912 , and hostilities soon resumed as Simeon marched to Constantinople at the head of a large army . Though the walls of the city were impregnable , the Byzantine administration was in disarray and Simeon was invited into the city , where he was granted the crown of basileus ( emperor ) of Bulgaria and had the young emperor Constantine VII marry one of his daughters . When a revolt in Constantinople halted his dynastic project , he again invaded Thrace and conquered Adrianople . The Empire now faced the problem of a powerful Christian state within a few days ' marching distance from Constantinople , as well as having to fight on two fronts . 
 A great imperial expedition under Leo Phocas and Romanos I Lekapenos ended with another crushing Byzantine defeat at the Battle of Achelous in 917 , and the following year the Bulgarians were free to ravage northern Greece . Adrianople was plundered again in 923 , and a Bulgarian army laid siege to Constantinople in 924 . Simeon died suddenly in 927 , however , and Bulgarian power collapsed with him . Bulgaria and Byzantium entered a long period of peaceful relations , and the Empire was now free to concentrate on the eastern front against the Muslims . In 968 , Bulgaria was overrun by the Rus ' under Sviatoslav I of Kiev , but three years later , John I Tzimiskes defeated the Rus ' and re @-@ incorporated Eastern Bulgaria into the Byzantine Empire . 
 Bulgarian resistance revived under the rule of the Cometopuli dynasty , but the new emperor Basil II ( r . 976 – 1025 ) made the submission of the Bulgarians his primary goal . Basil 's first expedition against Bulgaria , however , resulted in a humiliating defeat at the Gates of Trajan . For the next few years , the emperor would be preoccupied with internal revolts in Anatolia , while the Bulgarians expanded their realm in the Balkans . The war dragged on for nearly twenty years . The Byzantine victories of <unk> and Skopje decisively weakened the Bulgarian army , and in annual campaigns , Basil methodically reduced the Bulgarian strongholds . At the Battle of Kleidion in 1014 the Bulgarians were annihilated : their army was captured , and it is said that 99 out of every 100 men were blinded , with the hundredth man left with one eye so he could lead his compatriots home . When Tsar Samuil saw the broken remains of his once formidable army , he died of shock . By 1018 , the last Bulgarian strongholds had surrendered , and the country became part of the Empire . This victory restored the Danube frontier , which had not been held since the days of the emperor Heraclius . 
 = = = = Relations with the Kievan Rus ' = = = = 
 Between 850 and 1100 , the Empire developed a mixed relationship with the new state of the Kievan Rus ' , which had emerged to the north across the Black Sea . This relationship would have long @-@ lasting repercussions in the history of the East Slavs , and the Empire quickly became the main trading and cultural partner for Kiev . The Rus ' launched their first attack against Constantinople in 860 , pillaging the suburbs of the city . In 941 , they appeared on the Asian shore of the Bosphorus , but this time they were crushed , an indication of the improvements in the Byzantine military position after 907 , when only diplomacy had been able to push back the invaders . Basil II could not ignore the emerging power of the Rus ' , and , following the example of his predecessors , he used religion as a means for the achievement of political purposes . Rus ' – Byzantine relations became closer following the marriage of Anna <unk> to Vladimir the Great in 988 , and the subsequent Christianisation of the Rus ' . Byzantine priests , architects , and artists were invited to work on numerous cathedrals and churches around Rus ' , expanding Byzantine cultural influence even further , while numerous Rus ' served in the Byzantine army as mercenaries , most notably as the famous Varangian Guard . 
 Even after the Christianisation of the Rus ' , however , relations were not always friendly . The most serious conflict between the two powers was the war of 968 – 971 in Bulgaria , but several Rus ' raiding expeditions against the Byzantine cities of the Black Sea coast and Constantinople itself are also recorded . Although most were repulsed , they were often followed by treaties that were generally favourable to the Rus ' , such as the one concluded at the end of the war of 1043 , during which the Rus ' gave an indication of their ambitions to compete with the Byzantines as an independent power . 
 = = = = Apex = = = = 
 By 1025 , the date of Basil II 's death , the Byzantine Empire stretched from Armenia in the east to Calabria in Southern Italy in the west . Many successes had been achieved , ranging from the conquest of Bulgaria to the annexation of parts of Georgia and Armenia , and the reconquest of Crete , Cyprus , and the important city of Antioch . These were not temporary tactical gains but long @-@ term reconquests . 
 Leo VI achieved the complete codification of Byzantine law in Greek . This monumental work of 60 volumes became the foundation of all subsequent Byzantine law and is still studied today . Leo also reformed the administration of the Empire , redrawing the borders of the administrative subdivisions ( the <unk> , or " Themes " ) and tidying up the system of ranks and privileges , as well as regulating the behaviour of the various trade guilds in Constantinople . Leo 's reform did much to reduce the previous fragmentation of the Empire , which henceforth had one center of power , Constantinople . However , the increasing military success of the Empire greatly enriched and empowered the provincial nobility with respect to the peasantry , who were essentially reduced to a state of serfdom . 
 Under the Macedonian emperors , the city of Constantinople flourished , becoming the largest and wealthiest city in Europe , with a population of approximately 400 @,@ 000 in the 9th and 10th centuries . During this period , the Byzantine Empire employed a strong civil service staffed by competent aristocrats that oversaw the collection of taxes , domestic administration , and foreign policy . The Macedonian emperors also increased the Empire 's wealth by fostering trade with Western Europe , particularly through the sale of silk and metalwork . 
 = = = = Split between Orthodox Christianity and Catholicism ( 1054 ) = = = = 
 The Macedonian period also included events of momentous religious significance . The conversion of the Bulgarians , Serbs and Rus ' to Orthodox Christianity permanently changed the religious map of Europe and still resonates today . Cyril and Methodius , two Byzantine Greek brothers from Thessaloniki , contributed significantly to the Christianization of the Slavs and in the process devised the Glagolitic alphabet , ancestor to the Cyrillic script . 
 In 1054 , relations between the Eastern and Western traditions within the Christian Church reached a terminal crisis , known as the East – West Schism . Although there was a formal declaration of institutional separation , on July 16 , when three papal legates entered the Hagia Sophia during Divine Liturgy on a Saturday afternoon and placed a bull of excommunication on the altar , the so @-@ called Great Schism was actually the culmination of centuries of gradual separation . 
 = = = Crisis and fragmentation = = = 
 The Empire soon fell into a period of difficulties , caused to a large extent by the undermining of the theme system and the neglect of the military . Nikephoros II , John Tzimiskes , and Basil II changed the military divisions ( <unk> , tagmata ) from a rapid response , primarily defensive , citizen army into a professional , campaigning army , increasingly manned by mercenaries . Mercenaries were expensive , however , and as the threat of invasion receded in the 10th century , so did the need for maintaining large garrisons and expensive fortifications . Basil II left a burgeoning treasury upon his death , but he neglected to plan for his succession . None of his immediate successors had any particular military or political talent and the administration of the Empire increasingly fell into the hands of the civil service . Efforts to revive the Byzantine economy only resulted in inflation and a debased gold coinage . The army was now seen as both an unnecessary expense and a political threat . Native troops were therefore cashiered and replaced by foreign mercenaries on specific contract . 
 At the same time , the Empire was faced with new enemies . Provinces in southern Italy faced the Normans , who arrived in Italy at the beginning of the 11th century . During a period of strife between Constantinople and Rome culminating in the East @-@ West Schism of 1054 , the Normans began to advance , slowly but steadily , into Byzantine Italy . Reggio , the capital of the tagma of Calabria , was captured in 1060 by Robert Guiscard , followed by Otranto in 1068 . Bari , the main Byzantine stronghold in Apulia , was besieged in August 1068 and fell in April 1071 . The Byzantines also lost their influence over the Dalmatian coastal cities to Peter Krešimir IV of Croatia ( r . 1058 – 1074 / 1075 ) in 1069 . 
 The greatest disaster took place in Asia Minor , however , where the Seljuq Turks made their first explorations across the Byzantine frontier into Armenia in 1065 and 1067 . The emergency lent weight to the military aristocracy in Anatolia , who in 1068 secured the election of one of their own , Romanos Diogenes , as emperor . In the summer of 1071 , Romanos undertook a massive eastern campaign to draw the Seljuks into a general engagement with the Byzantine army . At the Battle of Manzikert , Romanos suffered a surprise defeat by Sultan Alp Arslan , and he was captured . Alp Arslan treated him with respect and imposed no harsh terms on the Byzantines . In Constantinople , however , a coup put in power Michael Doukas , who soon faced the opposition of Nikephoros Bryennios and Nikephoros Botaneiates . By 1081 , the Seljuks had expanded their rule over virtually the entire Anatolian plateau from Armenia in the east to Bithynia in the west , and they had founded their capital at Nicaea , just 90 kilometres ( 56 miles ) from Constantinople . 
 = = = Komnenian dynasty and the crusaders = = = 
 During the Komnenian , or <unk> , period from about 1081 to about 1185 , the five emperors of the Komnenos dynasty ( Alexios I , John II , Manuel I , Alexios II , and Andronikos I ) presided over a sustained , though ultimately incomplete , restoration of the military , territorial , economic , and political position of the Byzantine Empire . Although the Seljuk Turks occupied the heartland of the Empire in Anatolia , most Byzantine military efforts during this period were directed against Western powers , particularly the Normans . 
 The Empire under the Komnenoi played a key role in the history of the Crusades in the Holy Land , which Alexios I had helped bring about , while also exerting enormous cultural and political influence in Europe , the Near East , and the lands around the Mediterranean Sea under John and Manuel . Contact between Byzantium and the " Latin " West , including the Crusader states , increased significantly during the Komnenian period . Venetian and other Italian traders became resident in large numbers in Constantinople and the empire ( there were an estimated 60 @,@ 000 Latins in Constantinople alone , out of a population of three to four hundred thousand ) , and their presence together with the numerous Latin mercenaries who were employed by Manuel helped to spread Byzantine technology , art , literature and culture throughout the Latin West , while also leading to a flow of Western ideas and customs into the Empire . 
 In terms of prosperity and cultural life , the Komnenian period was one of the peaks in Byzantine history , and Constantinople remained the leading city of the Christian world in size , wealth , and culture . There was a renewed interest in classical Greek philosophy , as well as an increase in literary output in vernacular Greek . Byzantine art and literature held a pre @-@ eminent place in Europe , and the cultural impact of Byzantine art on the west during this period was enormous and of long lasting significance . 
 = = = = Alexios I and the First Crusade = = = = 
 After Manzikert , a partial recovery ( referred to as the Komnenian restoration ) was made possible by the Komnenian dynasty . The first Komnenian emperor was Isaac I ( 1057 – 1059 ) , after which the Doukas dynasty held power ( 1059 – 81 ) . The Komnenoi attained power again under Alexios I in 1081 . From the outset of his reign , Alexios faced a formidable attack by the Normans under Robert Guiscard and his son Bohemund of Taranto , who captured Dyrrhachium and Corfu , and laid siege to Larissa in Thessaly . Robert Guiscard 's death in 1085 temporarily eased the Norman problem . The following year , the Seljuq sultan died , and the sultanate was split by internal rivalries . By his own efforts , Alexios defeated the Pechenegs ; they were caught by surprise and annihilated at the Battle of Levounion on 28 April 1091 . 
 Having achieved stability in the West , Alexios could turn his attention to the severe economic difficulties and the disintegration of the Empire 's traditional defences . However , he still did not have enough manpower to recover the lost territories in Asia Minor and to advance against the Seljuks . At the Council of Piacenza in 1095 , envoys from Alexios spoke to Pope Urban II about the suffering of the Christians of the East , and underscored that without help from the West they would continue to suffer under Muslim rule . 
 Urban saw Alexios 's request as a dual opportunity to cement Western Europe and reunite the Eastern Orthodox Church with the Roman Catholic Church under his rule . On 27 November 1095 , Pope Urban II called together the Council of Clermont , and urged all those present to take up arms under the sign of the Cross and launch an armed pilgrimage to recover Jerusalem and the East from the Muslims . The response in Western Europe was overwhelming . 
 Alexios had anticipated help in the form of mercenary forces from the West , but he was totally unprepared for the immense and undisciplined force that soon arrived in Byzantine territory . It was no comfort to Alexios to learn that four of the eight leaders of the main body of the Crusade were Normans , among them Bohemund . Since the crusade had to pass through Constantinople , however , the Emperor had some control over it . He required its leaders to swear to restore to the empire any towns or territories they might reconquer from the Turks on their way to the Holy Land . In return , he gave them guides and a military escort . 
 Alexios was able to recover a number of important cities and islands , and in fact much of western Asia Minor . Nevertheless , the Catholic / Latin crusaders believed their oaths were invalidated when Alexios did not help them during the siege of Antioch ( he had in fact set out on the road to Antioch but had been persuaded to turn back by Stephen of Blois , who assured him that all was lost and that the expedition had already failed ) . Bohemund , who had set himself up as Prince of Antioch , briefly went to war with the Byzantines , but he agreed to become Alexios ' vassal under the Treaty of Devol in 1108 , which marked the end of the Norman threat during Alexios ' reign . 
 = = = = John II , Manuel I and the Second Crusade = = = = 
 Alexios 's son John II Komnenos succeeded him in 1118 and ruled until 1143 . John was a pious and dedicated Emperor who was determined to undo the damage to the empire suffered at the Battle of Manzikert , half a century earlier . Famed for his piety and his remarkably mild and just reign , John was an exceptional example of a moral ruler at a time when cruelty was the norm . For this reason , he has been called the Byzantine Marcus Aurelius . 
 During his twenty @-@ five year reign , John made alliances with the Holy Roman Empire in the West and decisively defeated the Pechenegs at the Battle of <unk> . He thwarted Hungarian and Serbian threats during the 1120s , and in 1130 he allied himself with the German emperor Lothair III against the Norman king Roger II of Sicily . 
 In the later part of his reign , John focused his activities on the East , personally leading numerous campaigns against the Turks in Asia Minor . His campaigns fundamentally altered the balance of power in the East , forcing the Turks onto the defensive , while restoring many towns , fortresses , and cities across the peninsula to the Byzantines . He defeated the <unk> Emirate of Melitene and reconquered all of Cilicia , while forcing Raymond of Poitiers , Prince of Antioch , to recognise Byzantine suzerainty . In an effort to demonstrate the Emperor 's role as the leader of the Christian world , John marched into the Holy Land at the head of the combined forces of the Empire and the Crusader states ; yet despite his great vigour pressing the campaign , his hopes were disappointed by the treachery of his Crusader allies . In 1142 , John returned to press his claims to Antioch , but he died in the spring of 1143 following a hunting accident . Raymond was emboldened to invade Cilicia , but he was defeated and forced to go to Constantinople to beg mercy from the new Emperor . 
 John 's chosen heir was his fourth son , Manuel I Komnenos , who campaigned aggressively against his neighbours both in the west and in the east . In Palestine , Manuel allied with the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem and sent a large fleet to participate in a combined invasion of Fatimid Egypt . Manuel reinforced his position as overlord of the Crusader states , with his hegemony over Antioch and Jerusalem secured by agreement with Raynald , Prince of Antioch , and Amalric , King of Jerusalem . In an effort to restore Byzantine control over the ports of southern Italy , he sent an expedition to Italy in 1155 , but disputes within the coalition led to the eventual failure of the campaign . Despite this military setback , Manuel 's armies successfully invaded the Southern parts of Kingdom of Hungary in 1167 , defeating the Hungarians at the Battle of Sirmium . By 1168 , nearly the whole of the eastern Adriatic coast lay in Manuel 's hands . Manuel made several alliances with the Pope and Western Christian kingdoms , and he successfully handled the passage of the Second Crusade through his empire . 
 In the east , however , Manuel suffered a major defeat in 1176 at the Battle of Myriokephalon , against the Turks . Yet the losses were quickly recovered , and in the following year Manuel 's forces inflicted a defeat upon a force of " picked Turks " . The Byzantine commander John Vatatzes , who destroyed the Turkish invaders at the Battle of Hyelion and Leimocheir , not only brought troops from the capital but also was able to gather an army along the way , a sign that the Byzantine army remained strong and that the defensive program of western Asia Minor was still successful . 
 = = = = 12th @-@ century Renaissance = = = = 
 John and Manuel pursued active military policies , and both deployed considerable resources on sieges and on city defences ; aggressive fortification policies were at the heart of their imperial military policies . Despite the defeat at Myriokephalon , the policies of Alexios , John and Manuel resulted in vast territorial gains , increased frontier stability in Asia Minor , and secured the stabilisation of the Empire 's European frontiers . From c . 1081 to c . 1180 , the Komnenian army assured the Empire 's security , enabling Byzantine civilisation to flourish . 
 This allowed the Western provinces to achieve an economic revival that continued until the close of the century . It has been argued that Byzantium under the Komnenian rule was more prosperous than at any time since the Persian invasions of the 7th century . During the 12th century , population levels rose and extensive tracts of new agricultural land were brought into production . Archaeological evidence from both Europe and Asia Minor shows a considerable increase in the size of urban settlements , together with a notable upsurge in new towns . Trade was also flourishing ; the Venetians , the Genoese and others opened up the ports of the Aegean to commerce , shipping goods from the Crusader kingdoms of Outremer and Fatimid Egypt to the west and trading with the Empire via Constantinople . 
 In artistic terms , there was a revival in mosaic , and regional schools of architecture began producing many distinctive styles that drew on a range of cultural influences . During the 12th century , the Byzantines provided their model of early humanism as a renaissance of interest in classical authors . In Eustathius of Thessalonica , Byzantine humanism found its most characteristic expression . In philosophy , there was resurgence of classical learning not seen since the 7th century , characterised by a significant increase in the publication of commentaries on classical works . In addition , the first transmission of classical Greek knowledge to the West occurred during the Komnenian period . 
 = = = Decline and disintegration = = = 
 = = = = <unk> dynasty = = = = 
 Manuel 's death on 24 September 1180 left his 11 @-@ year @-@ old son Alexios II Komnenos on the throne . Alexios was highly incompetent at the office , but it was his mother , Maria of Antioch , and her Frankish background that made his regency unpopular . Eventually , Andronikos I Komnenos , a grandson of Alexios I , launched a revolt against his younger relative and managed to overthrow him in a violent coup d 'état . Utilizing his good looks and his immense popularity with the army , he marched on to Constantinople in August 1182 and incited a massacre of the Latins . After eliminating his potential rivals , he had himself crowned as co @-@ emperor in September 1183 . He eliminated Alexios II , and took his 12 @-@ year @-@ old wife Agnes of France for himself . 
 Andronikos began his reign well ; in particular , the measures he took to reform the government of the Empire have been praised by historians . According to George Ostrogorsky , Andronikos was determined to root out corruption : Under his rule , the sale of offices ceased ; selection was based on merit , rather than favouritism ; officials were paid an adequate salary so as to reduce the temptation of bribery . In the provinces , Andronikos 's reforms produced a speedy and marked improvement . The aristocrats were infuriated against him , and to make matters worse , Andronikos seems to have become increasingly unbalanced ; executions and violence became increasingly common , and his reign turned into a reign of terror . Andronikos seemed almost to seek the extermination of the aristocracy as a whole . The struggle against the aristocracy turned into wholesale slaughter , while the Emperor resorted to ever more ruthless measures to shore up his regime . 
 Despite his military background , Andronikos failed to deal with Isaac Komnenos , Béla III of Hungary ( r . 1172 – 1196 ) who reincorporated Croatian territories into Hungary , and Stephen Nemanja of Serbia ( r . 1166 – 1196 ) who declared his independence from the Byzantine Empire . Yet , none of these troubles would compare to William II of Sicily 's ( r . 1166 – 1189 ) invasion force of 300 ships and 80 @,@ 000 men , arriving in 1185 . Andronikos mobilised a small fleet of 100 ships to defend the capital , but other than that he was indifferent to the populace . He was finally overthrown when Isaac Angelos , surviving an imperial assassination attempt , seized power with the aid of the people and had Andronikos killed . 
 The reign of Isaac II , and more so that of his brother Alexios III , saw the collapse of what remained of the centralised machinery of Byzantine government and defence . Although the Normans were driven out of Greece , in 1186 the Vlachs and Bulgars began a rebellion that led to the formation of the Second Bulgarian Empire . The internal policy of the Angeloi was characterised by the squandering of the public treasure and fiscal maladministration . Imperial authority was severely weakened , and the growing power vacuum at the center of the Empire encouraged fragmentation . There is evidence that some Komnenian heirs had set up a semi @-@ independent state in Trebizond before 1204 . According to Alexander Vasiliev , " the dynasty of the Angeloi , Greek in its origin , ... accelerated the ruin of the Empire , already weakened without and disunited within . " 
 = = = = Fourth Crusade = = = = 
 In 1198 , Pope Innocent III broached the subject of a new crusade through legates and encyclical letters . The stated intent of the crusade was to conquer Egypt , now the centre of Muslim power in the Levant . The crusader army that arrived at Venice in the summer of 1202 was somewhat smaller than had been anticipated , and there were not sufficient funds to pay the Venetians , whose fleet was hired by the crusaders to take them to Egypt . Venetian policy under the ageing and blind but still ambitious Doge Enrico Dandolo was potentially at variance with that of the Pope and the crusaders , because Venice was closely related commercially with Egypt . The crusaders accepted the suggestion that in lieu of payment they assist the Venetians in the capture of the ( Christian ) port of Zara in Dalmatia ( vassal city of Venice , which had rebelled and placed itself under Hungary 's protection in 1186 ) . The city fell in November 1202 after a brief siege . Innocent tried to forbid this political attack on a Christian city , but was ignored . Reluctant to jeopardise his own agenda for the Crusade , he gave conditional absolution to the crusaders — not , however , to the Venetians . 
 After the death of Theobald III , Count of Champagne , the leadership of the Crusade passed to Boniface of Montferrat , a friend of the Hohenstaufen Philip of Swabia . Both Boniface and Philip had married into the Byzantine Imperial family . In fact , Philip 's brother @-@ in @-@ law , Alexios Angelos , son of the deposed and blinded Emperor Isaac II Angelos , had appeared in Europe seeking aid and had made contacts with the crusaders . Alexios offered to reunite the Byzantine church with Rome , pay the crusaders 200 @,@ 000 silver marks , join the crusade and provide all the supplies they needed to get to Egypt . Innocent was aware of a plan to divert the Crusade to Constantinople and forbade any attack on the city , but the papal letter arrived after the fleets had left Zara . 
 = = = = Crusader sack of Constantinople ( 1204 ) = = = = 
 The crusaders arrived at Constantinople in the summer of 1203 and quickly attacked , started a major fire that damaged large parts of the city , and briefly seized control . Alexios III fled from the capital , and Alexios Angelos was elevated to the throne as Alexios IV along with his blind father Isaac . However , Alexios IV and Isaac II were unable to keep their promises and were deposed by Alexios V. The crusaders again took the city on 13 April 1204 , and Constantinople was subjected to pillage and massacre by the rank and file for three days . Many priceless icons , relics , and other objects later turned up in Western Europe , a large number in Venice . According to Choniates , a prostitute was even set up on the Patriarchal throne . When Innocent III heard of the conduct of his crusaders , he castigated them in no uncertain terms . But the situation was beyond his control , especially after his legate , on his own initiative , had absolved the crusaders from their vow to proceed to the Holy Land . When order had been restored , the crusaders and the Venetians proceeded to implement their agreement ; Baldwin of Flanders was elected Emperor of a new Latin Empire , and the Venetian Thomas Morosini was chosen as Patriarch . The lands divided up among the leaders included most of the former Byzantine possessions , though resistance would continue through the Byzantine remnants of the Nicaea , Trebizond , and Epirus . Although Venice was more interested in commerce than conquering territory , it took key areas of Constantinople , and the Doge took the title of " Lord of a Quarter and Half a Quarter of the Roman Empire " . 
 = = = Fall = = = 
 = = = = Empire in exile = = = = 
 After the sack of Constantinople in 1204 by Latin crusaders , two Byzantine successor states were established : the Empire of Nicaea , and the Despotate of Epirus . A third , the Empire of Trebizond , was created by Alexios I of Trebizond a few weeks before the sack of Constantinople . Of the three successor states , Epirus and Nicaea stood the best chance of reclaiming Constantinople . The Nicaean Empire struggled to survive the next few decades , however , and by the mid @-@ 13th century it had lost much of southern Anatolia . The weakening of the Sultanate of Rûm following the Mongol invasion in 1242 – 43 allowed many beyliks and ghazis to set up their own principalities in Anatolia , weakening the Byzantine hold on Asia Minor . In time , one of the Beys , Osman I , created an empire that would eventually conquer Constantinople . However , the Mongol invasion also gave Nicaea a temporary respite from Seljuk attacks , allowing it to concentrate on the Latin Empire to its north . 
 = = = = Reconquest of Constantinople = = = = 
 The Empire of Nicaea , founded by the <unk> dynasty , managed to reclaim Constantinople from the Latins in 1261 and defeat Epirus . This led to a short @-@ lived revival of Byzantine fortunes under Michael VIII Palaiologos , but the war @-@ ravaged Empire was ill @-@ equipped to deal with the enemies that now surrounded it . To maintain his campaigns against the Latins , Michael pulled troops from Asia Minor and levied crippling taxes on the peasantry , causing much resentment . Massive construction projects were completed in Constantinople to repair the damage of the Fourth Crusade , but none of these initiatives was of any comfort to the farmers in Asia Minor suffering raids from Muslim ghazis . 
 Rather than holding on to his possessions in Asia Minor , Michael chose to expand the Empire , gaining only short @-@ term success . To avoid another sacking of the capital by the Latins , he forced the Church to submit to Rome , again a temporary solution for which the peasantry hated Michael and Constantinople . The efforts of Andronikos II and later his grandson Andronikos III marked Byzantium 's last genuine attempts in restoring the glory of the Empire . However , the use of mercenaries by Andronikos II would often backfire , with the Catalan Company ravaging the countryside and increasing resentment towards Constantinople . 
 = = = = Rise of the Ottomans and fall of Constantinople = = = = 
 The situation became worse for Byzantium during the civil wars after Andronikos III died . A six @-@ year @-@ long civil war devastated the empire , allowing the Serbian ruler Stefan Dušan ( r . 1331 – 1346 ) to overrun most of the Empire 's remaining territory and establish a Serbian Empire . In 1354 , an earthquake at Gallipoli devastated the fort , allowing the Ottomans ( who were hired as mercenaries during the civil war by John VI Kantakouzenos ) to establish themselves in Europe . By the time the Byzantine civil wars had ended , the Ottomans had defeated the Serbians and subjugated them as vassals . Following the Battle of Kosovo , much of the Balkans became dominated by the Ottomans . 
 The Byzantine emperors appealed to the West for help , but the Pope would only consider sending aid in return for a reunion of the Eastern Orthodox Church with the See of Rome . Church unity was considered , and occasionally accomplished by imperial decree , but the Orthodox citizenry and clergy intensely resented the authority of Rome and the Latin Rite . Some Western troops arrived to bolster the Christian defence of Constantinople , but most Western rulers , distracted by their own affairs , did nothing as the Ottomans picked apart the remaining Byzantine territories . 
 Constantinople by this stage was underpopulated and dilapidated . The population of the city had collapsed so severely that it was now little more than a cluster of villages separated by fields . On 2 April 1453 , Sultan Mehmed 's army of 80 @,@ 000 men and large numbers of irregulars laid siege to the city . Despite a desperate last @-@ ditch defence of the city by the massively outnumbered Christian forces ( c . 7 @,@ 000 men , 2 @,@ 000 of whom were foreign ) , Constantinople finally fell to the Ottomans after a two @-@ month siege on 29 May 1453 . The last Byzantine emperor , Constantine XI Palaiologos , was last seen casting off his imperial regalia and throwing himself into hand @-@ to @-@ hand combat after the walls of the city were taken . 
 = = = Political aftermath = = = 
 By the time of the fall of Constantinople , the only remaining territory of the Byzantine Empire was the Despotate of the Morea ( Peloponnese ) , which was ruled by brothers of the last Emperor , Thomas Palaiologos and Demetrios Palaiologos . The Despotate continued on as an independent state by paying an annual tribute to the Ottomans . <unk> rule , failure to pay the annual tribute and a revolt against the Ottomans finally led to Mehmed II 's invasion of Morea in May 1460 . Demetrios asked the Ottomans to invade and drive Thomas out . Thomas fled . The Ottomans moved through the Morea and conquered virtually the entire Despotate by the summer . Demetrios thought the Morea would be restored to him to rule , but it was incorporated into the Ottoman fold . 
 A few holdouts remained for a time . The island of Monemvasia refused to surrender and it was first ruled for a short time by an Aragonese corsair . When the population drove him out they obtained the consent of Thomas to place themselves under the Pope 's protection before the end of 1460 . The Mani Peninsula , on the Morea 's south end , resisted under a loose coalition of the local clans and then that area came under Venice 's rule . The very last holdout was <unk> , in the Morea 's northwest . <unk> Palaiologos was the military commander there , stationed at <unk> Castle . While the town eventually surrendered , <unk> and his garrison and some town residents held out in the castle until July 1461 , when they escaped and reached Venetian territory . 
 The Empire of Trebizond , which had split away from the Byzantine Empire just weeks before Constantinople was taken by the Crusaders in 1204 , became the last remnant and last de facto successor state to the Byzantine Empire . Efforts by the Emperor David to recruit European powers for an anti @-@ Ottoman crusade provoked war between the Ottomans and Trebizond in the summer of 1461 . After a month @-@ long siege , David surrendered the city of Trebizond on 14 August 1461 . The Empire of Trebizond 's Crimean principality , the Principality of Theodoro ( part of the <unk> ) , lasted another 14 years , falling to the Ottomans in 1475 . 
 A nephew of the last Emperor , Constantine XI , Andreas Palaiologos claimed to have inherited the title of Byzantine Emperor . He lived in the Morea until its fall in 1460 , then escaped to Rome where he lived under the protection of the Papal States for the remainder of his life . Since the office of emperor had never been technically hereditary , Andreas ' claim would have been without merit under Byzantine law . However , the Empire had vanished , and Western states generally followed the Roman @-@ church @-@ sanctioned principles of hereditary sovereignty . Seeking a life in the west , Andreas styled himself Imperator <unk> ( " Emperor of Constantinople " ) , and sold his succession rights to both Charles VIII of France and the Catholic Monarchs . However , no one ever invoked the title after Andreas 's death . 
 Constantine XI died without producing an heir , and had Constantinople not fallen he might have been succeeded by the sons of his deceased elder brother , who were taken into the palace service of Mehmed II after the fall of Constantinople . The oldest boy , re @-@ christened as Has Murad , became a personal favorite of Mehmed and served as <unk> ( Governor @-@ General ) of the Balkans . The younger son , renamed <unk> Pasha , became Admiral of the Ottoman fleet and <unk> Beg ( Governor ) of the Province of Gallipoli . He eventually served twice as Grand Vizier under Mehmed 's son , Bayezid II . 
 Mehmed II and his successors continued to consider themselves heirs to the Roman Empire until the demise of the Ottoman Empire in the early 20th century . They considered that they had simply shifted its religious basis as Constantine had done before , and they continued to refer to their conquered Eastern Roman inhabitants ( Orthodox Christians ) as Rûm . Meanwhile , the Danubian Principalities ( whose rulers also considered themselves the heirs of the Eastern Roman Emperors ) harboured Orthodox refugees , including some Byzantine nobles . 
 At his death , the role of the emperor as a patron of Eastern Orthodoxy was claimed by Ivan III , Grand duke of Muscovy . He had married Andreas ' sister , Sophia <unk> , whose grandson , Ivan IV , would become the first Tsar of Russia ( tsar , or czar , meaning caesar , is a term traditionally applied by Slavs to the Byzantine Emperors ) . Their successors supported the idea that Moscow was the proper heir to Rome and Constantinople . The idea of the Russian Empire as the successive Third Rome was kept alive until its demise with the Russian Revolution . 
 = = Economy = = 
 The Byzantine economy was among the most advanced in Europe and the Mediterranean for many centuries . Europe , in particular , could not match Byzantine economic strength until late in the Middle Ages . Constantinople operated as a prime hub in a trading network that at various times extended across nearly all of Eurasia and North Africa , in particular as the primary western terminus of the famous Silk Road . Until the first half of the 6th century and in sharp contrast with the decaying West , the Byzantine economy was flourishing and resilient . 
 The Plague of Justinian and the Arab conquests would represent a substantial reversal of fortunes contributing to a period of stagnation and decline . Isaurian reforms and , in particular , Constantine V 's repopulation , public works and tax measures , marked the beginning of a revival that continued until 1204 , despite territorial contraction . From the 10th century until the end of the 12th , the Byzantine Empire projected an image of luxury and travellers were impressed by the wealth accumulated in the capital . 
 The Fourth Crusade resulted in the disruption of Byzantine manufacturing and the commercial dominance of the Western Europeans in the eastern Mediterranean , events that amounted to an economic catastrophe for the Empire . The Palaiologoi tried to revive the economy , but the late Byzantine state would not gain full control of either the foreign or domestic economic forces . Gradually , it also lost its influence on the modalities of trade and the price mechanisms , and its control over the outflow of precious metals and , according to some scholars , even over the minting of coins . 
 One of the economic foundations of Byzantium was trade , fostered by the maritime character of the Empire . Textiles must have been by far the most important item of export ; silks were certainly imported into Egypt , and appeared also in Bulgaria , and the West . The state strictly controlled both the internal and the international trade , and retained the monopoly of issuing coinage , maintaining a durable and flexible monetary system adaptable to trade needs . 
 The government attempted to exercise formal control over interest rates , and set the parameters for the activity of the guilds and corporations , in which it had a special interest . The emperor and his officials intervened at times of crisis to ensure the provisioning of the capital , and to keep down the price of cereals . Finally , the government often collected part of the surplus through taxation , and put it back into circulation , through redistribution in the form of salaries to state officials , or in the form of investment in public works . 
 = = Science , medicine and law = = 
 The writings of Classical antiquity never ceased to be cultivated in Byzantium . Therefore , Byzantine science was in every period closely connected with ancient philosophy , and metaphysics . In the field of engineering Isidore of Miletus , the Greek mathematician and architect of the Hagia Sophia , produced the first compilation of Archimedes works c . 530 , and it is through this tradition , kept alive by the school of mathematics and engineering founded c . 850 during the " Byzantine Renaissance " by Leo the <unk> that such works are known today ( see Archimedes Palimpsest ) . Indeed , geometry and its applications ( architecture and engineering instruments of war ) remained a specialty of the Byzantines . 
 Though scholarship lagged during the dark years following the Arab conquests , during the so @-@ called Byzantine Renaissance at the end of the first millennium Byzantine scholars re @-@ asserted themselves becoming experts in the scientific developments of the Arabs and Persians , particularly in astronomy and mathematics . The Byzantines are also credited with several technological advancements , particularly in architecture ( e.g. the pendentive dome ) and warfare technology ( e.g. Greek fire ) . 
 Although at various times the Byzantines made magnificent achievements in the application of the sciences ( notably in the construction of the Hagia Sophia ) , and although they preserved much of the ancient knowledge of science and geometry , after the 6th century Byzantine scholars made few novel contributions to science in terms of developing new theories or extending the ideas of classical authors . 
 In the final century of the Empire , Byzantine grammarians were those principally responsible for carrying , in person and in writing , ancient Greek grammatical and literary studies to early Renaissance Italy . During this period , astronomy and other mathematical sciences were taught in Trebizond ; medicine attracted the interest of almost all scholars . 
 In the field of law , Justinian I 's reforms had a clear effect on the evolution of jurisprudence , and Leo III 's Ecloga influenced the formation of legal institutions in the Slavic world . In the 10th century , Leo VI the Wise achieved the complete codification of the whole of Byzantine law in Greek , which became the foundation of all subsequent Byzantine law , generating interest to the present day . 
 = = Religion = = 
 The Byzantine Empire was a theocracy , said to be ruled by God working through the Emperor . Jennifer <unk> <unk> argues , " The Byzantine Empire became a theocracy in the sense that Christian values and ideals were the foundation of the empire 's political ideals and heavily entwined with its political goals . " Steven Runciman says in his book on The Byzantine Theocracy ( 2004 ) : 
 The constitution of the Byzantine Empire was based on the conviction that it was the earthly copy of the Kingdom of Heaven . Just as God ruled in Heaven , so the Emperor , made in his image , should rule on earth and carry out his commandments ... It saw itself as a universal empire . Ideally , it should embrace all the peoples of the Earth who , ideally , should all be members of the one true Christian Church , its own Orthodox Church . Just as man was made in God 's image , so man 's kingdom on Earth was made in the image of the Kingdom of Heaven . " The survival of the Empire in the East assured an active role of the Emperor in the affairs of the Church . The Byzantine state inherited from pagan times the administrative , and financial routine of administering religious affairs , and this routine was applied to the Christian Church . Following the pattern set by Eusebius of Caesarea , the Byzantines viewed the Emperor as a representative or messenger of Christ , responsible particularly for the propagation of Christianity among pagans , and for the " externals " of the religion , such as administration and finances . As Cyril Mango points out , the Byzantine political thinking can be summarised in the motto " One God , one empire , one religion " . 
 The imperial role in the affairs of the Church never developed into a fixed , legally defined system . With the decline of Rome , and internal dissension in the other Eastern Patriarchates , the Church of Constantinople became , between the 6th and 11th centuries , the richest and most influential center of Christendom . Even when the Empire was reduced to only a shadow of its former self , the Church continued to exercise significant influence both inside and outside of the imperial frontiers . As George Ostrogorsky points out : 
 The Patriarchate of Constantinople remained the center of the Orthodox world , with subordinate metropolitan sees and archbishoprics in the territory of Asia Minor and the Balkans , now lost to Byzantium , as well as in Caucasus , Russia and Lithuania . The Church remained the most stable element in the Byzantine Empire . 
 The official state Christian doctrine was determined by the first seven ecumenical councils , and it was then the emperor 's duty to impose it to his subjects . An imperial decree of 388 , which was later incorporated into the Codex Justinianus , orders the population of the Empire " to assume the name of Catholic Christians " , and regards all those who will not abide by the law as " mad and foolish persons " ; as followers of " heretical dogmas " . 
 Despite imperial decrees and the stringent stance of the state church itself , which came to be known as the Eastern Orthodox Church or Eastern Christianity , the latter never represented all Christians in Byzantium . Mango believes that , in the early stages of the Empire , the " mad and foolish persons " , those labelled " heretics " by the state church , were the majority of the population . Besides the pagans , who existed until the end of the 6th century , and the Jews , there were many followers – sometimes even emperors – of various Christian doctrines , such as Nestorianism , Monophysitism , Arianism , and <unk> , whose teachings were in some opposition to the main theological doctrine , as determined by the Ecumenical Councils . 
 Another division among Christians occurred , when Leo III ordered the destruction of icons throughout the Empire . This led to a significant religious crisis , which ended in mid @-@ 9th century with the restoration of icons . During the same period , a new wave of pagans emerged in the Balkans , originating mainly from Slavic people . These were gradually Christianised , and by Byzantium 's late stages , Eastern Orthodoxy represented most Christians and , in general , most people in what remained of the Empire . 
 Jews were a significant minority in the Byzantine state throughout its history , and , according to Roman law , they constituted a legally recognised religious group . In the early Byzantine period they were generally tolerated , but then periods of tensions and persecutions ensued . In any case , after the Arab conquests , the majority of Jews found themselves outside the Empire ; those left inside the Byzantine borders apparently lived in relative peace from the 10th century onwards . 
 Georgian monasteries first appear in Constantinople and on Mount Olympos in northwestern Asia Minor in the second half of the ninth century , and from then on Georgians played an increasingly important role in the Empire . 
 = = Art and literature = = 
 Surviving Byzantine art is mostly religious and with exceptions at certain periods is highly <unk> , following traditional models that translate carefully controlled church theology into artistic terms . Painting in fresco , illuminated manuscripts and on wood panel and , especially in earlier periods , mosaic were the main media , and figurative sculpture very rare except for small carved ivories . Manuscript painting preserved to the end some of the classical realist tradition that was missing in larger works . Byzantine art was highly prestigious and sought @-@ after in Western Europe , where it maintained a continuous influence on medieval art until near the end of the period . This was especially so in Italy , where Byzantine styles persisted in modified form through the 12th century , and became formative influences on Italian Renaissance art . But few incoming influences affected Byzantine style . By means of the expansion of the Eastern Orthodox church , Byzantine forms and styles spread to all the Orthodox world and beyond . Influences from Byzantine architecture , particularly in religious buildings , can be found in diverse regions from Egypt and Arabia to Russia and Romania . 
 In Byzantine literature , four different cultural elements are recognised : the Greek , the Christian , the Roman , and the Oriental . Byzantine literature is often classified in five groups : historians and annalists , encyclopaedists ( Patriarch Photios , Michael <unk> , and Michael Choniates are regarded as the greatest encyclopaedists of Byzantium ) and essayists , and writers of secular poetry . The only genuine heroic epic of the Byzantines is the Digenis <unk> . The remaining two groups include the new literary species : ecclesiastical and theological literature , and popular poetry . 
 Of the approximately two to three thousand volumes of Byzantine literature that survive , only three hundred and thirty consist of secular poetry , history , science and pseudo @-@ science . While the most flourishing period of the secular literature of Byzantium runs from the 9th to the 12th century , its religious literature ( sermons , liturgical books and poetry , theology , devotional treatises , etc . ) developed much earlier with Romanos the Melodist being its most prominent representative . 
 = = Music = = 
 The ecclesiastical forms of Byzantine music , composed to Greek texts as ceremonial , festival , or church music , are , today , the most well @-@ known forms . Ecclesiastical chants were a fundamental part of this genre . Greek and foreign historians agree that the ecclesiastical tones and in general the whole system of Byzantine music is closely related to the ancient Greek system . It remains the oldest genre of extant music , of which the manner of performance and ( with increasing accuracy from the 5th century onwards ) the names of the composers , and sometimes the particulars of each musical work 's circumstances , are known . 
 The 9th century Persian geographer Ibn <unk> ( d . 911 ) ; in his lexicographical discussion of instruments cited the lyra ( <unk> ) as the typical instrument of the Byzantines along with the urghun ( organ ) , <unk> ( probably a type of harp or lyre ) and the <unk> ( probably a bagpipe ) . The first of these , the early bowed stringed instrument known as the Byzantine lyra , would come to be called the lira da braccio , in Venice , where it is considered by many to have been the predecessor of the contemporary violin , which later flourished there . The bowed " lyra " is still played in former Byzantine regions , where it is known as the <unk> lyra ( lit . " lyra of the City " i.e. Constantinople ) in Greece , the Calabrian lira in Southern Italy , and the <unk> in Dalmatia . The second instrument , the organ , originated in the Hellenistic world ( see <unk> ) and was used in the Hippodrome during races . A pipe organ with " great leaden pipes " was sent by the emperor Constantine V to Pepin the Short King of the Franks in 757 . Pepin 's son Charlemagne requested a similar organ for his chapel in Aachen in 812 , beginning its establishment in Western church music . The final Byzantine instrument , the bagpipes , known as <unk> ( from ancient Greek : <unk> ( <unk> <unk> ) " the container " ) , had been played even in Roman times . Dio Chrysostom wrote in the 1st century of a contemporary sovereign ( possibly Nero ) who could play a pipe ( tibia , Roman <unk> similar to Greek aulos ) with his mouth as well as by tucking a bladder beneath his armpit . The bagpipes continued to be played throughout the empire 's former realms through to the present . ( See Balkan <unk> , Greek <unk> , Pontic Tulum , Cretan <unk> , Armenian <unk> , and Romanian <unk> . ) 
 = = Cuisine = = 
 The Byzantine culture was , initially , the same as Late Greco @-@ Roman , but over the following millennium of the empire 's existence it slowly changed into something more similar to modern Balkan and Anatolian culture . The cuisine still relied heavily on the Greco @-@ Roman fish @-@ sauce condiment <unk> , but it also contained foods still familiar today , such as the cured meat <unk> ( known as " <unk> " in Byzantine Greek ) , baklava ( known as <unk> <unk> ) , <unk> ( known as <unk> <unk> or <unk> <unk> ) , and the famed medieval sweet wines ( Commandaria and the eponymous <unk> wine ) . <unk> , wine flavored with pine resin , was also drunk , as it still is in Greece today , producing similar reactions from unfamiliar visitors ; " To add to our calamity the Greek wine , on account of being mixed with pitch , resin , and plaster was to us undrinkable , " complained Liutprand of Cremona , who was the ambassador sent to Constantinople in 968 by the German Holy Roman Emperor Otto I. The <unk> fish sauce condiment was also not much appreciated by the unaccustomed ; Liutprand of Cremona described being served food covered in an " exceedingly bad fish liquor . " The Byzantines also used a soy sauce like condiment , <unk> , a fermented barley sauce , which , like soy sauce , provided <unk> flavoring to their dishes . 
 = = Recreation = = 
 Byzantines were avid players of <unk> ( Byzantine Greek : <unk> ) , a game known in English as backgammon , which is still popular in former Byzantine realms , and still known by the name <unk> in Greece . Byzantine nobles were devoted to horsemanship , particularly <unk> , now known as polo . The game came from Sassanid Persia in the early period and a <unk> ( stadium for playing the game ) was built by Theodosius II ( r . 408 – 450 ) inside the Great Palace of Constantinople . Emperor Basil I ( r . 867 – 886 ) excelled at it ; Emperor Alexander ( r . 912 – 913 ) died from exhaustion while playing , Emperor Alexios I Komnenos ( r . 1081 – 1118 ) was injured while playing with Tatikios , and John I of Trebizond ( r . 1235 – 1238 ) died from a fatal injury during a game . Aside from Constantinople and Trebizond , other Byzantine cities also featured <unk> , most notably Sparta , Ephesus , and Athens , an indication of a thriving urban aristocracy . The game was introduced to the West by crusaders , who developed a taste for it particularly during the pro @-@ Western reign of emperor Manuel I Komnenos . 
 = = Government and bureaucracy = = 
 In the Byzantine state , the emperor was the sole and absolute ruler , and his power was regarded as having divine origin . The Senate had ceased to have real political and legislative authority but remained as an honorary council with titular members . By the end of the 8th century , a civil administration focused on the court was formed as part of a large @-@ scale consolidation of power in the capital ( the rise to pre @-@ eminence of the position of sakellarios is related to this change ) . The most important administrative reform , which probably started in the mid @-@ 7th century , was the creation of themes , where civil and military administration was exercised by one person , the strategos . 
 Despite the occasionally derogatory use of the terms " Byzantine " and " Byzantinism " , the Byzantine bureaucracy had a distinct ability for reconstituting itself in accordance with the Empire 's situation . The elaborate system of titulature and precedence gave the court prestige and influence . Officials were arranged in strict order around the emperor , and depended upon the imperial will for their ranks . There were also actual administrative jobs , but authority could be vested in individuals rather than offices . 
 In the 8th and 9th centuries , civil service constituted the clearest path to aristocratic status , but , starting in the 9th century , the civil aristocracy was rivalled by an aristocracy of nobility . According to some studies of Byzantine government , 11th @-@ century politics were dominated by competition between the civil and the military aristocracy . During this period , Alexios I undertook important administrative reforms , including the creation of new courtly dignities and offices . 
 = = = Diplomacy = = = 
 After the fall of Rome , the key challenge to the Empire was to maintain a set of relations between itself and its neighbours . When these nations set about forging formal political institutions , they often modelled themselves on Constantinople . Byzantine diplomacy soon managed to draw its neighbours into a network of international and inter @-@ state relations . This network revolved around treaty making , and included the welcoming of the new ruler into the family of kings , and the assimilation of Byzantine social attitudes , values and institutions . Whereas classical writers are fond of making ethical and legal distinctions between peace and war , Byzantines regarded diplomacy as a form of war by other means . For example , a Bulgarian threat could be countered by providing money to the Kievan Rus ' . 
 Diplomacy in the era was understood to have an intelligence @-@ gathering function on top of its pure political function . The Bureau of Barbarians in Constantinople handled matters of protocol and record keeping for any issues related to the " barbarians " , and thus had , perhaps , a basic intelligence function itself . John B. Bury believed that the office exercised supervision over all foreigners visiting Constantinople , and that they were under the supervision of the Logothetes tou dromou . While on the surface a protocol office – its main duty was to ensure foreign envoys were properly cared for and received sufficient state funds for their maintenance , and it kept all the official translators – it probably had a security function as well . 
 Byzantines availed themselves of a number of diplomatic practices . For example , embassies to the capital would often stay on for years . A member of other royal houses would routinely be requested to stay on in Constantinople , not only as a potential hostage , but also as a useful pawn in case political conditions where he came from changed . Another key practice was to overwhelm visitors by sumptuous displays . According to Dimitri Obolensky , the preservation of the ancient civilisation in Europe was due to the skill and resourcefulness of Byzantine diplomacy , which remains one of Byzantium 's lasting contributions to the history of Europe . 
 = = = Flags and insignia = = = 
 For most of its history , the Byzantine Empire did not know or use heraldry in the West European sense . Various emblems ( Greek : <unk> , <unk> ; sing. <unk> , <unk> ) were used in official occasions and for military purposes , such as banners or shields displaying various motifs such as the cross or the labarum . The use of the cross , and of images of Christ , the Virgin Mary and various saints is also attested on seals of officials , but these were personal rather than family emblems . 
 Double @-@ headed eagle 
 <unk> cross 
 = = Language = = 
 Apart from the Imperial court , administration and military , the primary language used in the eastern Roman provinces even before the decline of the Western Empire was Greek , having been spoken in the region for centuries before Latin . Following Rome 's conquest of the east its ' Pax Romana ' , <unk> political practices and development of public infrastructure , facilitated the further spreading and entrenchment of Greek language in the east . Indeed , early on in the life of the Roman Empire , Greek had become the common language of the Church , the language of scholarship and the arts , and , to a large degree , the lingua franca for trade between provinces and with other nations . Greek for a time became diglossic with the spoken language , known as Koine ( eventually evolving into Demotic Greek ) , used alongside an older written form until Koine won out as the spoken and written standard . 
 The use of Latin as the language of administration persisted until formally abolished by Heraclius in the 7th century . Scholarly Latin would rapidly fall into disuse among the educated classes although the language would continue to be at least a ceremonial part of the Empire 's culture for some time . Additionally , Vulgar Latin remained a minority language in the Empire , mainly along the Dalmatian coast ( Dalmatian ) and among the Romanian peoples . 
 Many other languages existed in the multi @-@ ethnic Empire , and some of these were given limited official status in their provinces at various times . Notably , by the beginning of the Middle Ages , Syriac had become more widely used by the educated classes in the far eastern provinces . Similarly Coptic , Armenian , and Georgian became significant among the educated in their provinces , and later foreign contacts made Old Church Slavic , Middle Persian , and Arabic important in the Empire and its sphere of influence . 
 Aside from these , since Constantinople was a prime trading center in the Mediterranean region and beyond , virtually every known language of the Middle Ages was spoken in the Empire at some time , even Chinese . As the Empire entered its final decline , the Empire 's citizens became more culturally homogeneous and the Greek language became integral to their identity and religion . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Byzantium has been often identified with absolutism , orthodox spirituality , orientalism and exoticism , while the terms " Byzantine " and " Byzantinism " have been used as <unk> for decadence , complex bureaucracy , and repression . In the countries of Central and Southeast Europe that exited the Eastern Bloc in the late 1980s and early 1990s , the assessment of Byzantine civilisation and its legacy was strongly negative due to their connection with an alleged " Eastern authoritarianism and autocracy . " Both Eastern and Western European authors have often perceived Byzantium as a body of religious , political , and philosophical ideas contrary to those of the West . Even in 19th @-@ century Greece , the focus was mainly on the classical past , while Byzantine tradition had been associated with negative connotations . 
 This traditional approach towards Byzantium has been partially or wholly disputed and revised by modern studies , which focus on the positive aspects of Byzantine culture and legacy . Averil Cameron regards as undeniable the Byzantine contribution to the formation of the medieval Europe , and both Cameron and Obolensky recognise the major role of Byzantium in shaping Orthodoxy , which in turn occupies a central position in the history and societies of Greece , Romania , Bulgaria , Russia , Georgia , Serbia and other countries . The Byzantines also preserved and copied classical manuscripts , and they are thus regarded as transmitters of the classical knowledge , as important contributors to the modern European civilization , and as precursors of both the Renaissance humanism and the Slav Orthodox culture . 
 As the only stable long @-@ term state in Europe during the Middle Ages , Byzantium isolated Western Europe from newly emerging forces to the East . Constantly under attack , it distanced Western Europe from Persians , Arabs , Seljuk Turks , and for a time , the Ottomans . From a different perspective , since the 7th century , the evolution and constant reshaping of the Byzantine state were directly related to the respective progress of Islam . 
 Following the conquest of Constantinople by the Ottoman Turks in 1453 , Sultan Mehmed II took the title " <unk> @-@ i Rûm " ( the Ottoman Turkish equivalent of Caesar of Rome ) , since he was determined to make the Ottoman Empire the heir of the Eastern Roman Empire . According to Cameron , regarding themselves as " heirs " of Byzantium , the Ottomans preserved important aspects of its tradition , which in turn facilitated an " Orthodox revival " during the post @-@ communist period of the Eastern European states . 
 = = Annotations = = 
 = = = Byzantine studies , resources and bibliography = = = 
 Fox , Clinton R. What , If Anything , Is a Byzantine ? ( Online Encyclopedia of Roman Emperors ) 
 Byzantine studies homepage at Dumbarton Oaks . Includes links to numerous electronic texts . 
 Byzantium : Byzantine studies on the Internet . Links to various online resources . 
 Translations from Byzantine Sources : The Imperial Centuries , c . 700 – 1204 . Online sourcebook . 
 De Re Militari . Resources for medieval history , including numerous translated sources on the Byzantine wars . 
 Medieval Sourcebook : Byzantium . Numerous primary sources on Byzantine history . 
 Bibliography on Byzantine Material Culture and Daily Life . Hosted by the University of Vienna ; in English . 
 Constantinople Home Page . Links to texts , images and videos on Byzantium . 
 Byzantium in Crimea : Political History , Art and Culture . 
 Institute for Byzantine Studies of the Austrian Academy of Sciences ( with further resources and a repository with papers on various aspects of the Byzantine Empire ) 
 = Apatosaurus = 
 Apatosaurus ( / <unk> / ; meaning " deceptive lizard " ) is a genus of extinct sauropod dinosaurs that lived in North America during the Late Jurassic period . Othniel Charles Marsh described and named the first @-@ known species , A. ajax in 1877 , and a second species , A. louisae , was discovered and named by William H. Holland in 1916 . They lived about 152 to 151 million years ago ( mya ) , during the early Tithonian age , and are now known from fossils in the Morrison Formation of modern @-@ day Colorado , Oklahoma , and Utah , in the United States . Apatosaurus had an average length of 21 – 22 @.@ 8 m ( 69 – 75 ft ) , and an average mass of 16 @.@ 4 – 22 @.@ 4 t ( 16 @.@ 1 – 22 @.@ 0 long tons ; 18 @.@ 1 – 24 @.@ 7 short tons ) . A few specimens indicate a maximum length of 11 – 30 % greater than average and a mass of 32 @.@ 7 – 72 @.@ 6 t ( 32 @.@ 2 – 71 @.@ 5 long tons ; 36 @.@ 0 – 80 @.@ 0 short tons ) . 
 The cervical vertebrae of Apatosaurus are less elongated and more heavily constructed than those of Diplodocus , a diplodocid like Apatosaurus , and the bones of the leg are much stockier despite being longer , implying that Apatosaurus was a more robust animal . The tail was held above the ground during normal locomotion . Apatosaurus had a single claw on each forelimb and three on each hindlimb . The skull of Apatosaurus , long thought to be similar to Camarasaurus , is much more similar to that of Diplodocus . Apatosaurus was a generalized browser that likely held its head elevated . To lighten its vertebrae , Apatosaurus had air sacs that made the bones internally full of holes . Like that of other diplodocids , its tail may have been used as a whip to create loud noises . 
 The skull of Apatosaurus was confused with that of Camarasaurus and Brachiosaurus until 1909 , when the holotype of A. louisae was found , and a complete skull just a few meters away from the front of the neck . Henry Fairfield Osborn disagreed with this association , and went on to mount a skeleton of Apatosaurus with a Camarasaurus skull cast . Until 1970 , Apatosaurus skeletons were mounted with speculative skull casts , when McIntosh showed that more robust skulls assigned to Diplodocus were more likely from Apatosaurus . 
 Apatosaurus is a genus in the family Diplodocidae . It is one of the more basal genera , with only Amphicoelias , and possibly a new , unnamed genus more primitive . While the subfamily Apatosaurinae was named in 1929 , the group was not used validly until an extensive 2015 study . Only Brontosaurus is also in the subfamily , with the other genera being considered as synonyms or reclassified as diplodocines . Brontosaurus has long been considered a junior synonym of Apatosaurus ; its only species was reclassified as A. excelsus in 1903 . However , the 2015 study concluded that Brontosaurus was a valid genus of sauropod distinct from Apatosaurus . Nevertheless , not all paleontologists agree with this division . As it existed in North America during the late Jurassic , Apatosaurus would have lived aside dinosaurs such as Allosaurus , Camarasaurus , Diplodocus , and Stegosaurus . 
 = = Description = = 
 Apatosaurus was a large , long @-@ necked , quadrupedal animal with a long , whip @-@ like tail . Its forelimbs were slightly shorter than its hindlimbs . Most size estimates are based on specimen CM 3018 , the type specimen of A. louisae . In 1936 , this was measured to be 21 @.@ 8 m ( 72 ft ) , by measuring the vertebral column . Current estimates are similar , which find the individual was 21 – 22 @.@ 8 m ( 69 – 75 ft ) long and had a mass of 16 @.@ 4 – 22 @.@ 4 t ( 16 @.@ 1 – 22 @.@ 0 long tons ; 18 @.@ 1 – 24 @.@ 7 short tons ) . A 2015 study that estimated the mass of volumetric models of <unk> , Apatosaurus , and Giraffatitan estimates CM 3018 at 21 @.@ 8 – 38 @.@ 2 t ( 21 @.@ 5 – 37 @.@ 6 long tons ; 24 @.@ 0 – 42 @.@ 1 short tons ) , similar in mass to <unk> . Past estimates have put the creature 's mass as high as 35 @.@ 0 t ( 34 @.@ 4 long tons ; 38 @.@ 6 short tons ) . Some specimens of A. ajax ( like OMNH 1670 ) represent individuals 11 – 30 % longer , suggesting masses twice that of CM 3018 or 32 @.@ 7 – 72 @.@ 6 t ( 32 @.@ 2 – 71 @.@ 5 long tons ; 36 @.@ 0 – 80 @.@ 0 short tons ) , potentially rivalling the largest titanosaurs . 
 The skull is small in comparison with the size of the animal . The jaws are lined with spatulate ( chisel @-@ like ) teeth suited to a herbivorous diet . The snout of Apatosaurus and similar diplodocoids are squared , with only Nigersaurus having a squarer skull . The braincase of Apatosaurus is well preserved in specimen BYU <unk> , which also preserved much of the skeleton . A phylogenetic analysis found that the braincase had a similar morphology to those of other diplodocoids . Some skulls of Apatosaurus have been found still in articulation with their teeth . Those teeth that have the enamel surface exposed do not show any scratches on the surface ; instead they display a sugary texture and little wear . 
 Like those of other sauropods , the neck vertebrae are deeply bifurcated ; they carried neural spines with a large trough in the middle , resulting in a wide , deep neck . The vertebral formula for the holotype of A. louisae is 15 cervicals , 10 dorsals , 5 sacrals , and 82 caudals . The caudal vertebra number may vary , even within species . The cervical vertebrae of Apatosaurus and Brontosaurus are stouter and more robust than those of other diplodocids , were found to be most similar to Camarasaurus by Charles Whitney Gilmore . In addition , they support cervical ribs that extend farther towards the ground than in diplodocines , and have the vertebrae and ribs narrower towards the top of the neck , making the neck nearly triangular in cross @-@ section . In Apatosaurus louisae , the atlas @-@ axis complex of the first cervicals is nearly fused . The dorsal ribs are not fused or tightly attached to their vertebrae , instead being loosely articulated . Apatosaurus has ten dorsal ribs on either side of the body . The large neck was filled with an extensive system of weight @-@ saving air sacs . Apatosaurus , like its close relative Supersaurus , has neural tall spines , which make up more than half the height of the individual bones of its vertebrae . The shape of the tail is unusual for a diplodocid ; it is comparatively slender because of the rapidly decreasing height of the vertebral spines with increasing distance from the hips . Apatosaurus also had very long ribs compared to most other diplodocids , giving it an unusually deep chest . As in other diplodocids , the tail transformed into a whip @-@ like structure towards its end . 
 The limb bones are also very robust . Within Apatosaurinae , the scapula of Apatosaurus louisae is intermediate in morphology between those of A. ajax and Brontosaurus excelsus . The arm bones are stout , so the humerus of Apatosaurus resembles that of Camarasaurus , as well as Brontosaurus . However , the humeri of Brontosaurus and A. ajax are more similar to each other than they are to A. louisae . In 1936 , Charles Gilmore noted that previous reconstructions of Apatosaurus forelimbs erroneously proposed that the radius and ulna could cross ; in life they would have remained parallel . Apatosaurus had a single large claw on each forelimb , a feature shared by all sauropods more derived than Shunosaurus . The first three toes had claws on each hindlimb . The phalangeal formula is 2 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 @-@ 1 , meaning the innermost finger ( phalanx ) on the forelimb has two bones and the next has one . The single manual claw bone ( ungual ) is slightly curved and squarely truncated on the anterior end . The pelvic girdle includes the robust ilia , and the fused ( co @-@ ossified ) pubes and ischia . The femora of Apatosaurus are very stout ; some of the most robust femora of any member of Sauropoda . The tibia and fibula bones are different from the slender bones of Diplodocus , but are nearly indistinguishable from those of Camarasaurus . The fibula is longer and more slender than the tibia . The foot of Apatosaurus has three claws on the innermost digits ; the digit formula is 3 @-@ 4 @-@ 5 @-@ 3 @-@ 2 . The first metatarsal is the stoutest , a feature shared among diplodocids . 
 = = Discovery and species = = 
 The name Apatosaurus ajax was coined in 1877 by Othniel Charles Marsh , Professor of Paleontology at Yale University , based on a nearly complete skeleton ( holotype , YPM 1860 ) discovered the eastern foothills of the Rocky Mountains in Gunnison County , Colorado . The composite term Apatosaurus comes from the Greek words <unk> ( <unk> ) / <unk> ( <unk> ) meaning " deception " / " deceptive " , and sauros ( σαῦρος ) meaning " lizard " ; thus , " deceptive lizard " . Marsh gave it this name based on the chevron bones , which are dissimilar to those of other dinosaurs ; instead , the chevron bones of Apatosaurus showed similarities with those of mosasaurs . During excavation and transportation , the bones of the holotype skeleton were mixed with those of another Apatosaurus individual originally described as Atlantosaurus <unk> ; as a consequence , some elements cannot be ascribed to either specimen with confidence anymore . Marsh distinguished the new genus Apatosaurus from Atlantosaurus on the basis of the number of sacral vertebrae , with Apatosaurus possessing three and Atlantosaurus four . Two years later , Marsh announced the discovery of a larger and more complete specimen at Como Bluff , Wyoming . Marsh decided to give this specimen a new name , because conventions and the relative sparse fossil record at that time meant that features then used to distinguish genera and species have now been found to be more widespread among sauropods . He named the new species Brontosaurus excelsus . All specimens currently considered Apatosaurus were from the Morrison Formation , the location of the excavations of Marsh and his rival Edward Drinker Cope . 
 Another specimen , in American Museum of Natural History and under the specimen number 460 , which is occasionally assigned to Apatosaurus , is very complete ; only the head , feet , and sections of the tail are missing , and it was the first sauropod skeleton mounted . The specimen was found north of Medicine Bow , Wyoming in 1898 by Walter Granger , and took the entire summer to extract . To complete the mount , sauropod feet that were discovered at the same quarry and a tail fashioned to appear as Marsh believed it should — which had too few vertebrae — were added . In addition , a sculpted model of what the museum thought the skull of this massive creature might look like was made . This was not a delicate skull like that of Diplodocus — which was later found to be more accurate — but was based on " the biggest , thickest , strongest skull bones , lower jaws and tooth crowns from three different quarries " . These skulls were likely those of Camarasaurus , the only other sauropod for which good skull material was known at the time . The mount construction was overseen by Adam Hermann , who failed to find Apatosaurus skulls . Hermann was forced to sculpt a stand @-@ in skull by hand . Osborn said in a publication that the skull was " largely conjectural and based on that of Morosaurus " ( now Camarasaurus ) . 
 In 1903 , Elmer Riggs published a study that described a well @-@ preserved skeleton of a diplodocid from the Grand River Valley near Fruita , Colorado , Field Museum of Natural History specimen <unk> . Riggs thought that the deposits were similar in age to those of the Como Bluff in Wyoming , from which Marsh described Brontosaurus . Most of the skeleton was found , and after comparison with both Brontosaurus and Apatosaurus ajax , Riggs realized that the holotype of A. ajax was immature , and thus the features distinguishing the genera were not valid . Since Apatosaurus was the earlier name , Brontosaurus should be considered a junior synonym of Apatosaurus . Because of this , Riggs recombined Brontosaurus excelsus as Apatosaurus excelsus . Based on comparisons with other species proposed to belong to Apatosaurus , Riggs also determined that the Field Columbian Museum specimen was likely most similar to A. excelsus . 
 Despite Riggs ' publication , Henry Fairfield Osborn , who was a strong opponent of Marsh and his taxa , labeled the Apatosaurus mount of the American Museum of Natural History Brontosaurus . Because of this decision the name Brontosaurus was commonly used outside of scientific literature for what Riggs considered Apatosaurus , and the museum 's popularity meant that Brontosaurus became one of the best known dinosaurs , even though it was invalid throughout nearly all of the 20th and early 21st centuries . 
 It was not until 1909 that an Apatosaurus skull was found during the first expedition , led by Earl Douglass , to what would become the Carnegie Quarry at Dinosaur National Monument . The skull was found a short distance from a skeleton ( specimen CM 3018 ) identified as the new species Apatosaurus louisae , named after Louise Carnegie , wife of Andrew Carnegie who funded field research to find complete dinosaur skeletons in the American West . The skull was designated CM 11162 ; it was very similar to the skull of Diplodocus . Another smaller skeleton of A. louisae was found nearby CM 11162 and CM 3018 . The skull was accepted as belonging to the Apatosaurus specimen by Douglass and Carnegie Museum director William H. Holland , although other scientists — most notably Osborn — rejected this identification . Holland defended his view in 1914 in an address to the Paleontological Society of America , yet he left the Carnegie Museum mount headless . While some thought Holland was attempting to avoid conflict with Osborn , others suspected Holland was waiting until an articulated skull and neck were found to confirm the association of the skull and skeleton . After Holland 's death in 1934 , museum staff placed a cast of a Camarasaurus skull on the mount . 
 While most other museums were using cast or sculpted Camarasaurus skulls on Apatosaurus mounts , the Yale Peabody Museum decided to sculpt a skull based on the lower jaw of a Camarasaurus , with the cranium based on Marsh 's 1891 illustration of the skull . The skull also included forward @-@ pointing nasals — something different to any dinosaur — and fenestrae differing from the drawing and other skulls . 
 No Apatosaurus skull was mentioned in literature until the 1970s when John Stanton McIntosh and David Berman redescribed the skulls of Diplodocus and Apatosaurus . They found that though he never published his opinion , Holland was almost certainly correct , that Apatosaurus had a Diplodocus @-@ like skull . According to them , many skulls long thought to pertain to Diplodocus might instead be those of Apatosaurus . They reassigned multiple skulls to Apatosaurus based on associated and closely associated vertebrae . Even though they supported Holland , it was noted that Apatosaurus might have possessed a Camarasaurus @-@ like skull , based on a disarticulated Camarasaurus @-@ like tooth found at the precise site where an Apatosaurus specimen was found years before . On October 20 , 1979 , after the publications by McIntosh and Berman , the first true skull of Apatosaurus was mounted on a skeleton in a museum , that of the Carnegie . In 1998 , the Felch Quarry skull that Marsh included in his 1896 skeletal restoration was suggested to belong to Brachiosaurus instead . In 2011 , the first specimen of Apatosaurus where a skull was found articulated with its cervical vertebrae was described . This specimen , CMC VP <unk> , was found to differ in both skull and neck features from A. louisae , but shared many features of the cervical vertebrae with A. ajax . Another well @-@ preserved skull is Brigham Young University specimen <unk> , a well preserved skull and skeleton , with a preserved braincase . The specimen was found in Cactus Park Quarry of western Colorado . 
 Almost all modern paleontologists agreed with Riggs that the two dinosaurs should be classified together in a single genus . According to the rules of the ICZN ( which governs the scientific names of animals ) , the name Apatosaurus , having been published first , has priority as the official name ; Brontosaurus was considered a junior synonym and was therefore long discarded from formal use . Despite this , at least one paleontologist — Robert T. Bakker — argued in the 1990s that A. ajax and A. excelsus were in fact sufficiently distinct for the latter to merit a separate genus . 
 In 2015 Emanuel Tschopp , Octávio Mateus , and Roger Benson released a paper on diplodocoid systematics , and proposed that genera could be diagnosed by 13 differing characters , and species separated based on 6 . The minimum number for generic separation was chosen based on the fact that A. ajax and A. louisae differ in 12 characters , and Diplodocus carnegiei and D. hallorum differ in 11 characters . Thus , 13 characters were chosen to validate the separation of genera . The 6 differing features for specific separation were chosen by counting the number of differing features in separate specimens generally agreed to represent one species , with only one differing character in D. carnegiei and A. louisae , but five differing features in B. excelsus . Therefore , Tschopp et al. argued that Apatosaurus excelsus , originally classified as Brontosaurus excelsus , had enough morphological differences from other species of Apatosaurus that it warranted being reclassified as a separate genus again . The conclusion was based on a comparison of 477 morphological characteristics across 81 different dinosaur individuals . Among the many notable differences are the wider — and presumably stronger — neck of Apatosaurus species compared to B. excelsus . Other species previously assigned to Apatosaurus , such as <unk> parvus and <unk> yahnahpin were also reclassified as Brontosaurus . Some features proposed to separate Brontosaurus from Apatosaurus include : posterior dorsal vertebrae with the centrum longer than wide ; the scapula rear to the <unk> edge and the distal blade being excavated ; the <unk> edge of the distal scapular blade bears a rounded expansion ; and the ratio of the <unk> length to transverse breadth of the astragalus is 0 @.@ 55 or greater . Paleontologist Michael D <unk> made a critique . Palaeontologist Donald Prothero criticized the mass media reaction to this study as superficial and premature , concluding : 
 Until someone has convincingly addressed the issue , I ’ m going to put “ Brontosaurus ” in quotes and not follow the latest media fad , nor will I overrule Riggs ( 1903 ) and put the name in my books as a valid genus . 
 = = = Valid species = = = 
 Multiple species of Apatosaurus have been designated from scant material . Marsh named as many species as he could , which resulted in many being based upon fragmentary and indistinguishable remains . In 2005 , Paul Upchurch and colleagues published a study that analyzed the species and specimen relationships of Apatosaurus . They found that A. louisae was the most basal species , followed by FMNH <unk> , and then a polytomy of A. ajax , A. parvus , and A. excelsus . Their analysis was revised and expanded with many additional diplodocid specimens in 2015 , which resolved the relationships of Apatosaurus slightly differently , and also supported separating Brontosaurus from Apatosaurus . 
 Apatosaurus ajax was named by Marsh in 1877 after Ajax , a hero from Greek mythology . Marsh designated the incomplete , juvenile skeleton YPM 1860 as its holotype . The species is less studied then Brontosaurus and A. louisae , especially because of the incomplete nature of the holotype . In 2005 , many specimens in addition to the holotype were found assignable to A. ajax , YPM 1840 , <unk> @-@ PV <unk> , YPM 1861 , and AMNH 460 . The specimens date from the late Kimmeridgian to the early Tithonian ages . In 2015 , only the A. ajax holotype YPM 1860 assigned to the species , with AMNH 460 found either to be within Brontosaurus , or potentially its own taxon . However , YPM 1861 and <unk> @-@ PV <unk> only differed in a few characteristics , and cannot be distinguished specifically or generically from A. ajax . YPM 1861 is the holotype of " Atlantosaurus " <unk> , which means it might be a junior synonym of A. ajax . 
 Apatosaurus louisae was named by Holland in 1916 , being first known from a partial skeleton that was found in Utah . The holotype is CM 3018 , with referred specimens including CM <unk> , CM 11162 , and LACM <unk> . The former two consist of a vertebral column ; the latter two consist of a skull and a nearly complete skeleton , respectively . Its specimens all come from the late Kimmeridgian of Dinosaur National Monument . In 2015 , Tschopp et al. found the type specimen of Apatosaurus <unk> to nest closely with CM 3018 , meaning the former is likely a junior synonym of A. louisae . 
 The cladogram below is the result of an analysis by Tschopp , Mateus , and Benson ( 2015 ) . The authors analyzed most diplodocid type specimens separately to deduce which specimen belonged to which species and genus . 
 = = = Reassigned species = = = 
 Apatosaurus grandis was named in 1877 by Marsh in the article that described A. ajax . It was briefly described , figured , and diagnosed . Marsh later mentioned it was only provisionally assigned to Apatosaurus when he reassigned it to his new genus Morosaurus in 1878 . Since <unk> has been considered a synonym of Camarasaurus , C. grandis is the oldest @-@ named species of the latter genus . 
 Apatosaurus excelsus was the original type species of Brontosaurus , first named by Marsh in 1879 . Elmer Riggs reclassified Brontosaurus as a synonym of Apatosaurus in 1903 , transferring the species B. excelsus to A. excelsus . In 2015 , Tschopp , Mateus , and Benson argued that the species was distinct enough to be placed in its own genus so they reclassified it back into Brontosaurus . 
 Apatosaurus parvus , first described from a juvenile specimen as <unk> in 1902 by Peterson and Gilmore , was reassigned to Apatosaurus in 1994 , and then to Brontosaurus in 2015 . Multiple other , more mature specimens were assigned to it following the 2015 study . 
 Apatosaurus minimus was originally described as a specimen of Brontosaurus sp. in 1904 by Osborn . In 1917 , Henry Mook named it as its own species , A. minimus , for a pair of ilia and their sacrum . In 2012 , Mike P. Taylor and Matt J. Wedel published a short abstract describing the material of " A. " minimus , finding it hard @-@ to @-@ place among either Diplodocoidea or Macronaria . While it was placed with Saltasaurus in a phylogenetic analysis , it was thought to represent instead some form with convergent features from many groups . The study of Tschopp et al. did find that a <unk> position for the taxon was supported , but noted that the position of the taxon was found to be highly variable and there was no clearly more likely position . 
 Apatosaurus alenquerensis was named in 1957 by Albert @-@ Félix de Lapparent and Georges <unk> . It was based on post cranial material from Portugal . In 1990 , this material was reassigned to Camarasaurus , but in 1998 it was given its own genus , Lourinhasaurus . This was further supported by the findings of Tschopp et al. in 2015 , where Lourinhasaurus was found to be sister to Camarasaurus and other <unk> . 
 Apatosaurus yahnahpin was named by James <unk> and Patrick Redman in 1994 . Bakker made A. yahnahpin the type species of a new genus , <unk> in 1998 , and Tschopp reclassified it as Brontosaurus yahnahpin in 2015 . 
 = = Classification = = 
 Apatosaurus is a member of the family Diplodocidae , a clade of gigantic sauropod dinosaurs . The family includes some of the longest creatures ever to walk the earth , including Diplodocus , Supersaurus , and Barosaurus . Apatosaurus is sometimes classified in the subfamily Apatosaurinae , which may also include Suuwassea , Supersaurus , and Brontosaurus . Othniel Charles Marsh described Apatosaurus as allied to Atlantosaurus within the now @-@ defunct group <unk> . In 1878 , Marsh raised his family to the rank of suborder , including Apatosaurus , Atlantosaurus , Morosaurus ( = Camarasaurus ) and Diplodocus . He classified this group within Sauropoda , a group he erected in the same study . In 1903 , Elmer S. Riggs said the name Sauropoda would be a junior synonym of earlier names ; he grouped Apatosaurus within <unk> . Sauropoda is still used as the group name . In 2011 , John Whitlock published a study that placed Apatosaurus a more basal diplodocid , sometimes less basal than Supersaurus . 
 Cladogram of the Diplodocidae after Tschopp , Mateus , and Benson ( 2015 ) . 
 = = Palaeobiology = = 
 It was believed throughout the 19th and early 20th centuries that sauropods like Apatosaurus were too massive to support their own weight on dry land . It was theorized that they lived partly submerged in water , perhaps in swamps . Recent findings do not support this ; sauropods are now thought to have been fully terrestrial animals . A study of diplodocid snouts showed that the square snout , large proportion of pits , and fine , subparallel scratches of the teeth of Apatosaurus suggests it was a ground @-@ height , nonselective browser . It may have eaten ferns , <unk> , seed ferns , horsetails , and algae . Stevens and Parish ( 2005 ) speculate that these sauropods fed from riverbanks on submerged water plants . 
 A 2015 study of the necks of Apatosaurus and Brontosaurus found many differences between them and other diplodocids , and that these variations may have shown that the necks of Apatosaurus and Brontosaurus were used for intraspecific combat . Various uses for the single claw on the forelimb of sauropods have been proposed . One suggestion is that they were used for defense , but their shape and size makes this unlikely . It was also possible they were for feeding , but the most probable use for the claw was grasping objects such as tree trunks when rearing . 
 Trackways of sauropods like Apatosaurus show that they may have had a range of around 25 – 40 km ( 16 – 25 mi ) per day , and they could potentially reach a top speed of 20 – 30 km ( 12 – 19 mi ) per hour . The slow locomotion of sauropods may be due to their minimal muscling , or to recoil after strides . A trackway of a juvenile has led some to believe that they were capable of bipedalism , though this is disputed . 
 = = = Neck posture = = = 
 <unk> like Apatosaurus are often portrayed with their necks held high up in the air , allowing them to browse on tall trees . Some studies state diplodocid necks were less flexible than previously believed because the structure of the neck vertebrae would not have allowed the neck to bend far upwards , and that sauropods like Apatosaurus were adapted to low browsing or ground feeding . 
 Other studies by Taylor find that all tetrapods appear to hold their necks at the maximum possible vertical extension when in a normal , alert posture ; they argue the same would hold true for sauropods barring any unknown , unique characteristics that set the soft tissue anatomy of their necks apart from that of other animals . Apatosaurus , like Diplodocus , would have held its neck angled upwards with the head pointing downwards in a resting posture . Kent Stevens and Michael Parrish ( 1999 and 2005 ) state Apatosaurus had a great feeding range ; its neck could bend into a U @-@ shape laterally . The neck 's range of movement would have also allowed the head to feed at the level of the feet . 
 Matthew Cobley et al . ( 2013 ) dispute this , finding that large muscles and cartilage would have limited movement of the neck . They state the feeding ranges for sauropods like Diplodocus were smaller than previously believed and the animals may have had to move their whole bodies around to better access areas where they could browse vegetation . As such , they might have spent more time foraging to meet their minimum energy needs . The conclusions of Cobley et al. are disputed by Taylor , who analyzed the amount and positioning of intervertebral cartilage to determine the flexibility of the neck of Apatosaurus and Diplodocus . He found that the neck of Apatosaurus was very flexible . 
 = = = Physiology = = = 
 Given the large body mass and long neck of sauropods like Apatosaurus , physiologists have encountered problems determining how these animals breathed . Beginning with the assumption that like crocodilians , Apatosaurus did not have a diaphragm , the dead @-@ space volume ( the amount of unused air remaining in the mouth , trachea and air tubes after each breath ) has been estimated at about 0 @.@ 184 m3 ( 184 l ) for a 30 t ( 30 long tons ; 33 short tons ) specimen . Paladino calculates its tidal volume ( the amount of air moved in or out during a single breath ) at 0 @.@ 904 m3 ( 904 l ) with an avian respiratory system , 0 @.@ 225 m3 ( 225 l ) if mammalian , and 0 @.@ 019 m3 ( 19 l ) if reptilian . 
 On this basis , its respiratory system would likely have been <unk> , with multiple pulmonary air sacs as in avian lungs , and a flow @-@ through lung . An avian respiratory system would need a lung volume of about 0 @.@ 60 m3 ( 600 l ) compared with a mammalian requirement of 2 @.@ 95 m3 ( 2 @,@ 950 l ) , which would exceed the space available . The overall thoracic volume of Apatosaurus has been estimated at 1 @.@ 7 m3 ( 1 @,@ 700 l ) , allowing for a 0 @.@ 50 m3 ( 500 l ) , four @-@ chambered heart and a 0 @.@ 90 m3 ( 900 l ) lung capacity . That would allow about 0 @.@ 30 m3 ( 300 l ) for the necessary tissue . Evidence for the avian system in Apatosaurus and other sauropods is also present in the pneumaticity of the vertebrae . Though this plays a role in reducing the weight of the animal , Wedel ( 2003 ) states they are also likely connected to air sacs , as in birds . 
 James <unk> et al . ( 1991 ) concludes that the large body size of sauropods would have made them unable to maintain high metabolic rates because they would not be able to release enough heat . They assumed sauropods had a reptilian respiratory system . Wedel says that an avian system would have allowed it to dump more heat . Some scientists state that the heart would have had trouble sustaining sufficient blood pressure to oxygenate the brain . Others suggest that the near @-@ horizontal posture of the head and neck would have eliminated the problem of supplying blood to the brain because it would not have been elevated . 
 James Farlow ( 1987 ) calculates that an Apatosaurus @-@ sized dinosaur about 35 t ( 34 long tons ; 39 short tons ) would have possessed 5 @.@ 7 t ( 5 @.@ 6 long tons ; 6 @.@ 3 short tons ) of fermentation contents . Assuming Apatosaurus had an avian respiratory system and a reptilian resting @-@ metabolism , Frank Paladino et al . ( 1997 ) estimate the animal would need to consume only about 262 litres ( 58 imp gal ; 69 US gal ) of water per day . 
 = = = Growth = = = 
 A 1999 microscopic study of Apatosaurus and Brontosaurus bones concluded the animals grew rapidly when young and reached near @-@ adult sizes in about 10 years . In 2008 , a study on the growth rates of sauropods was published by Thomas Lehman and Holly Woodward . They said that by using growth lines and length @-@ to @-@ mass ratios , Apatosaurus would have grown to 25 t ( 25 long tons ; 28 short tons ) in 15 years , with growth peaking at 5 @,@ 000 kg ( 11 @,@ 000 lb ) in a single year . An alternative method , using limb length and body mass , found Apatosaurus grew 520 kg ( 1 @,@ 150 lb ) per year , and reached its full mass before it was about 70 years old . These estimates have been called unreliable because the calculation methods are not sound ; old growth lines would have been obliterated by bone remodelling . One of the first identified growth factors of Apatosaurus was the number of sacral vertebrae , which increased to five by the time of the creatures ' maturity . This was first noted in 1903 and again in 1936 . 
 Long @-@ bone histology enables researchers to estimate the age that a specific individual reached . A study by Eva <unk> et al . ( 2013 ) examined long bone histological data and concluded the Apatosaurus sp . SMA 0014 weighed 20 @,@ 206 kg ( 22 @.@ 3 short tons ) , reached sexual maturity at 21 years , and died aged 28 . The same growth model indicated Apatosaurus sp . BYU 601 – <unk> weighed 18 @,@ 178 kg ( 20 @.@ 0 short tons ) , reached sexual maturity at 19 years , and died aged 31 . 
 = = = = Juveniles = = = = 
 Compared with most sauropods , a relatively large amount of juvenile material is known from Apatosaurus . Multiple specimens in the OMNH are from juveniles of an undetermined species of Apatosaurus ; this material includes partial shoulder and pelvic girdles , some vertebrae , and limb bones . OMNH juvenile material is from at least two different age groups and based on overlapping bones likely comes from more than three individuals . The specimens exhibit features that distinguish Apatosaurus from its relatives , and thus likely belong to the genus . Juvenile sauropods tend to have proportionally shorter necks and tails , and a more pronounced forelimb @-@ hindlimb disparity than in adults . 
 = = = Tail = = = 
 An article published in 1997 reported research of the mechanics of Apatosaurus tails by Nathan <unk> and paleontologist Philip J. Currie . <unk> carried out a computer simulation of the tail , which in diplodocids like Apatosaurus was a very long , tapering structure resembling a bullwhip . This computer modeling suggested sauropods were capable of producing a whiplike cracking sound of over 200 decibels , comparable to the volume of a cannon being fired . 
 A pathology has been identified on the tail of Apatosaurus , caused by a growth defect . Two caudal vertebrae are seamlessly fused along the entire articulating surface of the bone , including the arches of the neural spines . This defect might have been caused by the lack or inhibition of the substance that forms intervertebral disks or joints . It has been proposed that the whips could have been used in combat , but the tails of diplodocids were quite light and narrow compared to Shunosaurus and <unk> , and thus to injure another animal with the tail would severely injure the tail itself . 
 = = Paleoecology = = 
 The Morrison Formation is a sequence of shallow marine and alluvial sediments which , according to radiometric dating , dates from between 156 @.@ 3 mya at its base , and 146 @.@ 8 mya at the top , placing it in the late Oxfordian , Kimmeridgian , and early Tithonian stages of the Late Jurassic period . This formation is interpreted as originating in a locally semiarid environment with distinct wet and dry seasons . The Morrison Basin , where dinosaurs lived , stretched from New Mexico to Alberta and Saskatchewan ; it was formed when the precursors to the Front Range of the Rocky Mountains started pushing up to the west . The deposits from their east @-@ facing drainage basins were carried by streams and rivers and deposited in swampy lowlands , lakes , river channels , and floodplains . This formation is similar in age to the Lourinhã Formation in Portugal and the Tendaguru Formation in Tanzania . 
 Apatosaurus was the second @-@ commonest sauropod in the Morrison Formation ecosystem , after Camarasaurus . Apatosaurus may have been more solitary than other Morrison Formation dinosaurs . Supersaurus has a greater total length and is the greatest of all sauropods from the Morrison Formation . Apatosaurus fossils have only been found in the upper levels of the formation . Those of Apatosaurus ajax are known exclusively from the upper Brushy Basin Member , about 152 – 151 mya . A. louisae fossils are rare , known only from one site in the upper Brushy Basin Member ; they date to the late Kimmeridgian stage , about 151 mya . Additional Apatosaurus remains are known from similarly aged or slightly younger rocks , but they have not been identified as any particular species , and thus may instead belong to Brontosaurus . 
 The Morrison Formation records a time when the local environment was dominated by gigantic sauropod dinosaurs . Dinosaurs known from the Morrison Formation include the theropods Allosaurus , Ceratosaurus , Ornitholestes , Saurophaganax and Torvosaurus ; the sauropods Brontosaurus , Brachiosaurus , Camarasaurus , and Diplodocus ; and the ornithischians Camptosaurus , Dryosaurus , and Stegosaurus . Apatosaurus is commonly found at the same sites as Allosaurus , Camarasaurus , Diplodocus , and Stegosaurus . Allosaurus accounted for 70 – 75 % of theropod specimens and was at the top trophic level of the Morrison food web . Many of the dinosaurs of the Morrison Formation are of the same genera as those seen in Portuguese rocks of the Lourinhã Formation — mainly Allosaurus , Ceratosaurus , and Torvosaurus — or have a close counterpart — Brachiosaurus and Lusotitan , Camptosaurus and Draconyx , Apatosaurus and Dinheirosaurus . Other vertebrates that are known to have shared this paleo @-@ environment include ray @-@ finned fishes , frogs , salamanders , turtles , sphenodonts , lizards , terrestrial and aquatic crocodylomorphans , and several species of pterosaur . Shells of bivalves and aquatic snails are also common . The flora of the period has been evidenced in fossils of green algae , fungi , mosses , horsetails , cycads , ginkgoes , and several families of conifers . Vegetation varied from river @-@ lining forests of tree ferns and ferns ( gallery forests ) , to fern savannas with occasional trees such as the Araucaria @-@ like conifer Brachyphyllum . 
 = Partners in Crime ( Doctor Who ) = 
 " Partners in Crime " is the first episode of the fourth series of the British science fiction television series Doctor Who . It was broadcast on BBC One on 5 April 2008 . The episode reintroduced comedian Catherine Tate as Donna Noble , who had previously appeared in " The Runaway Bride " . Donna and the Doctor ( David Tennant ) meet while separately investigating Adipose Industries , a company that has created a revolutionary diet pill . Together , they attempt to stop the death of thousands of people in London after the head of the company , the alien Miss Foster ( Sarah Lancashire ) , creates the Adipose , short white aliens made from human body fat . 
 The episode 's alien creatures , the Adipose , were created using the software <unk> , commonly used for crowd sequences in fantasy and science fiction films . The episode is stylistically different from other Doctor Who episodes ; " Partners in Crime " has no clear antagonist , and the creatures are in a different style to Doctor Who 's regular " big [ and ] scary " monsters . 
 " Partners in Crime " features the return of three supporting characters : Jacqueline King reprises her role as Sylvia Noble from " The Runaway Bride " ; Bernard Cribbins reprises his role as Wilfred Mott from " Voyage of the Damned " , to replace the character of Geoff Noble after actor Howard Attfield died ; and Billie Piper briefly reprises her role as Rose Tyler for the first time since the second series ' finale " Doomsday " , in a scene that was not included in preview showings . 
 The episode received many positive reviews . Most critics liked the special effects used to create the Adipose . Critics also praised Tate 's subdued acting in comparison to " The Runaway Bride " ; Donna was changed from a " shouting fishwife " to a more emotional person when she became a full @-@ time companion . Critics ' opinions were split over the episode 's plot : opinion on executive producer Russell T Davies ' writing ranged from " pure pleasure " to " the back of a fag packet " . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Donna Noble has become disenchanted with her normal life for two years since meeting the Doctor in " The Runaway Bride " . She finds herself regretting her decision to decline the Doctor 's invitation to travel in the TARDIS . She has started investigating conspiracy theories in the hope that she will find him again . She confides her regrets to her grandfather Wilfred Mott , who met the Doctor before in " Voyage of the Damned " . 
 The Doctor and Donna , neither one aware of the other 's involvement , both investigate Adipose Industries , which is marketing a special diet pill to the people of London . They find that the pill 's slogan , The Fat Just Walks Away , is literal . The pills use latent body fat to parthenogenetically create small white aliens called Adipose that spawn at night and leave the host 's body . The Doctor and Donna separately infiltrate the offices of Adipose Industries , each unaware that the other is there . Donna hides out in a toilet cubicle until they close , the Doctor stays in a storage room . As they explore the building , they suddenly encounter each other through opposite windows in an office . They are confronted by Miss Foster , an alien who is using Britain 's overweight population to create the Adipose babies for the <unk> First Family . Miss Foster pursues the Doctor and Donna around the building , finally catching them in an office . She tells the Doctor that the Adipose lost their breeding planet and hired Miss Foster to find a replacement . The Doctor uses Miss Foster 's sonic pen and his sonic screwdriver to create a diversion and escape . 
 Miss Foster accelerates her plans , knowing that the Doctor will attempt to stop her . Throughout London , the Adipose begin to spawn and soon number several thousand . The Doctor and Donna prevent total emergency parthenogenesis occurring , which would have killed those who had taken the pill , and the remainder of the young Adipose make their way to Adipose Industries . The <unk> First Family arrive in a spaceship and begin collecting their young . The Doctor tries to warn Miss Foster about her safety , but she disregards him and is killed when the Adipose drop her from their transport beam to her death , to cover their unsanctioned colonization efforts . The Doctor refrains from killing the young Adipose because they are children , to which Donna remarks that his previous companion Martha Jones made him more human . 
 At the end of the episode , Donna accepts the Doctor 's original offer to travel in the TARDIS . The Doctor makes it clear to her that he only wants to be friends and nothing more , and she emphatically agrees . She makes a detour to leave her car keys in a litter bin , telling her mother Sylvia to collect them later . While there , she meets a blonde woman and asks her to help Sylvia find the keys . The woman turns out to be Rose Tyler , who fades from view as she walks away from the area . In the final scene , Donna asks the Doctor to fly by her grandfather , Wilfred . He sees her in his telescope and celebrates on his allotment . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 " Partners in Crime " features several actors returning to the series . Catherine Tate was offered the opportunity to return as Donna Noble during lunch with executive producer Julie Gardner . Tate , who expected Gardner would ask about appearing in a biopic , later admitted it was " the furthest thing from [ her ] mind " . Tate 's return was controversial amongst Doctor Who fans ; the criticism she received was compared to Daniel Craig after he was cast as James Bond . Howard Attfield , who appeared as Donna 's father Geoff in " The Runaway Bride " , filmed several scenes for this episode , but died before his scenes for the remainder of the season were completed . The producers retired his character out of respect , and dedicated him in the closing credits for the episode . Producer Phil Collinson suggested transferring his traits to the unrelated character Stan Mott from " Voyage of the Damned " , and rewriting his role as Donna 's grandfather . Executive producers Russell T Davies and Gardner liked the idea and recalled Bernard Cribbins to the role to re @-@ film Attfield 's scenes , with the character renamed as Wilfred — a name Davies favoured for Donna 's grandfather — in time for the credits of " Voyage of the Damned " to be changed . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Davies took a different approach while writing the episode . David Tennant and Sarah Lancashire noted the character of Miss Foster had good intentions but was morally ambiguous . The premise of the Adipose pill was equally ambiguous with rare side @-@ effects , but was a " win @-@ win situation " for anyone involved . Davies based the character of Miss Foster on <unk> star Jo Frost and Argentine philanthropist and politician Eva Perón , and Lancashire compared her character to Mary Poppins . The Adipose are a different style to regular Doctor Who villains ; antagonists such as Lazarus in " The Lazarus Experiment " or the werewolf in " Tooth and Claw " were singular monsters designed to scare the audience ; the Adipose were written as " cute " to provide a " bizarre [ and ] surreal " experience . 
 Davies made some changes to Donna 's character . The character was " rounded ... out from being a shouting fishwife to someone who 's quite vulnerable and emotional " . Donna was written to provide a " caustic " and " grown @-@ up " attitude towards the Doctor , in opposition to Rose and Martha , who fell in love with him . Tate considered Donna to be more equal to the Doctor because her character did not romanticise him , allowing her to question his morality more easily . 
 = = = = Donna 's mime = = = = 
 In this production , the script requires Catherine Tate , as Donna Noble , to reintroduce herself to the Doctor in mime . The stage directions by writer Russell T Davies are as follows . 
 Donna does a little mime : " I came here , trouble , read about it , internet , I thought , trouble = you ! And this place is weird ! Pills ! So I hid . Back there . <unk> along . Looked . You . Cos they ... " 
 Tate says Davies had suggested that she might come up with something on the day . She improvised her mime during filming . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The episode was in the fourth production block in the season , and was filmed in October 2007 . The out @-@ of @-@ sequence filming allowed producers to use props to " seed " later episodes ; ATMOS , a plot device in the episodes " The Sontaran Stratagem " and " The Poison Sky " , is referred to by a sticker on a taxi 's windscreen . As the episode mostly takes place at night , many scenes were filmed in the early morning . 
 The scene where Donna and the Doctor investigate Adipose was difficult to film . The scene took thirty shots to complete , and Tennant and Tate experienced problems avoiding each other on @-@ screen . The scene was filmed in Picture Finance 's call centre on the outskirts of Newport on an early Sunday morning , with the company 's <unk> serving as extras . 
 Exterior shots of Adipose Industries were filmed at the British Gas building ( <unk> House ) in Cardiff 's city centre . For health and safety reasons , Tennant was prohibited from performing his own stunts in the window cleaning platform . His only shot that required stunts was when he catches Miss Foster 's sonic pen , a shot that took several takes to perfect . 
 = = = Adipose = = = 
 The Adipose were inspired by a stuffed toy Davies owned . The name comes from the scientific name for body fat , adipose tissue . Davies ' brief outlined a " cute " child @-@ friendly creature shaped like a block of lard , similar to the Pillsbury Doughboy . Further consultation with post @-@ production team The Mill resulted in the ears and the singular fang each Adipose has . Stephen <unk> , who won an Academy Award for his software Massive , flew to London to supervise the creation of the crowd special effects . <unk> , a Doctor Who fan , was enthusiastic about helping The Mill with special effects , stating that " When I first found out that the Mill was working on Doctor Who , I was quietly hoping that Massive might be used to create hordes of Daleks or Cybermen and with series 4 , I jumped at the opportunity to be involved . " The Mill created two types of Adipose : extras with artificial intelligence and independent movement , and " hero " Adipose , which were hand @-@ animated . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 = = = Broadcast and ratings = = = 
 The episode was broadcast on 5 April 2008 at 18 : 20 , the earliest timeslot since the show 's revival in 2005 . Davies criticised the BBC 's scheduling department and claimed the show could lose 1 @.@ 5 million viewers . The show retained a similar time of broadcast for a further four episodes , before returning to around 19 : 00 @.@ from " The Doctor 's Daughter " onwards . 
 The preview version of the episode supplied to the press and aired at the press launch omitted the scene that features Rose ; before broadcast , only the production team , Tate , and Tennant had seen the scene . The scene contains Rose 's departure theme , " Doomsday " . Tennant commented " on the night of transmission ... the Radio Times won 't have told you it 's coming , it 'll come as a genuine [ ... ] prickle up the spine " . 
 Overnight figures estimated the show was watched by 8 @.@ 4 million viewers , with a peak of 8 @.@ 7 million , 39 @.@ 4 % of the television audience . The consolidated rating was 9 @.@ 1 million viewers . Doctor Who was therefore the most watched show on 5 April , although the Grand National had a higher peak with 10 @.@ 1 million viewers . The episode 's Appreciation Index was 88 ( considered " Excellent " ) , the highest for any television show aired on 5 April . 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 The episode received many positive reviews . John Preston , writing for The Daily Telegraph , called the episode an " undiluted triumph " . Opening his review , he said " last night 's episode struck me as being as close to 50 minutes of pure pleasure as you 're likely to get on television " . He noted the episode 's clever tackling of the topical theme of obesity , and its mixture of emotion and special effects . In closing , he said " the dejected critic , denied even the smallest nit to pick , walks glumly away " . Scott Matthewman of The Stage lamented that the Adipose were not threatening enough . He liked the Adipose 's execution of Miss Foster , a " momentary pause in mid @-@ air , gravity only kicking in when the character looks down " , comparing it to Wile E. Coyote and Chuck Jones , which " [ was ] a nice little touch in an episode ... full of them " . He also appreciated Tate , saying that " David Tennant finally has a partner who is approaching an equal " . Sam Wollaston of The Guardian wrote that Tate was " not right for this role " and " too hysterical , too comedy , not cool enough " , and felt her inclusion was an attempt to trade on the popularity of her own series and " broaden the appeal of [ Dr Who ] still further " . He also found the music " a bit oppressive " but concluded that , despite these criticisms , the show was " still awfully nice television " . Keith Watson of Metro gave the episode 4 stars out of 5 . He admitted that despite his dislike of Tate , " she isn 't that bad " . His review of the Adipose was positive , citing them as a reason of the quality of the show . Closing , he said " it split [ his ] sides " . 
 Jon Wise of The People said " Doctor Who is a super @-@ galactic way of spending a Saturday night indoors " , and appreciated that Donna was not romantically interested in the Doctor , unlike Martha or Rose . Ben Rawson @-@ Jones gave the episode a wholly positive review , summarising it as containing " pure fantastic family fun , delivering a winning blend of action , comedy , poignancy and one unexpected shock cameo " . 
 The episode received several negative reviews . Andrew Billen , writing for The Times , lamented that Davies had " forgotten that Doctor Who 's main task is to send children scuttling behind sofas while entertaining their fathers with the odd philosophical idea , the occasional classical reference , a joke or two they would probably not wish to explain and a wee bit of space totty " . Billen also criticised the writing and acting , but commended Tate for a " toned down performance " . Alan Stanley Blair of SyFy Portal summarised it as " a runaway Saturday morning cartoon in desperate need to a solid story " . Blair found flaws with the comedy and the music in the episode , but was impressed with Tate 's acting and Piper 's cameo . Kevin O 'Sullivan of the Sunday Mirror criticised Tate and Tennant for overacting , and had concerns about the writing : " It didn 't exactly ooze tension . All we got in the way of terrifying space enemies was Sarah Lancashire hamming it up as an intergalactic super nanny , a couple of security guards with guns and lots of cute little fat babies . " Ian Hyland of News of the World criticised the child @-@ friendly storyline , comparing it to " the back of a fag packet " . He also criticised Tennant for appearing " jaded " and Tate for " still shouting " . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Partners in Crime " reviews at The Doctor Who Ratings Guide 
 = Jacob Svetoslav = 
 Jacob Svetoslav ( Bulgarian : <unk> <unk> , Yakov Svetoslav ) ( ca . 1210s / 1220s – 1275 or 1276 / 1277 ) was a prominent 13th @-@ century Bulgarian noble ( <unk> ) of princely Russian origin . <unk> the title of despot , Jacob Svetoslav was the ruler of a widely autonomous domain of the Second Bulgarian Empire most likely located around Sofia . Seeking further independence and claiming the title of Emperor of Bulgaria , he twice changed allegiance from Bulgaria to the Kingdom of Hungary and vice versa , and the Hungarians recognized his Bulgarian royal rank as their vassal and ruler of Vidin ( medieval Bdin ) . 
 = = Bulgarian despot = = 
 Jacob Svetoslav 's exact origin is not clear , though he is known to have been either a Russian noble himself or the son of one . Jacob or his father most likely arrived in Bulgaria with the wave of Russians fleeing the Mongol invasion of Rus ' in the first half of the 13th century . Historian Plamen Pavlov theorizes that Jacob Svetoslav was a descendant of the princes ( <unk> ) of Kievan Rus ' , and estimates his birth date as being in the 1210s or 1220s . In the late 1250s , Jacob Svetoslav was already an influential noble . He married a daughter of Theodore II Laskaris from his marriage with Tsar Ivan Asen II 's daughter Elena . By 1261 , he had become a despot , a high @-@ ranking noble in the Bulgarian hierarchy . The title was awarded to him probably by his own suzerain , the ruler of Bulgaria , rather than a Byzantine emperor , possibly Constantine Tih . Jacob Svetoslav was close to the Bulgarian court and pledged loyalty to Constantine . Thus , the tsar made him the ruler of a domain usually considered to have been south of the Vidin region in the west of the Bulgarian Empire . Byzantine sources indicate his possessions lay " near Haemus " , thus close to Sofia , between the Hungarian possessions to the north and Macedonia to the south . 
 In 1261 , he commanded the Bulgarian forces in a war against Hungary near Severin ( western Wallachia ) , and in 1262 he possibly fought against Byzantium , as a Byzantine army invaded his lands in the following year during an anti @-@ Bulgarian campaign . Jacob Svetoslav 's continuing ties to his Russian homeland are evidenced by his request to the Bulgarian patriarch . Jacob requested the making of a copy of the <unk> which was then sent to Cyril III , the Metropolitan of Kiev . It was supplemented by a letter from Jacob in which the noble calls the metropolitan " the bishop of the entire Russian land ... of my ancestors " . The copy finishes with a passage in which Jacob is called a " Bulgarian despot " . He also minted his own coins bearing the imperfect images of Saint Demetrius of Thessaloniki or Jacob himself , dressed as a warrior wearing a helmet and holding a sword . 
 = = Hungarian and Bulgarian ruler of Vidin = = 
 In 1263 , the situation in Bulgaria was far from stable , as Constantine was facing both the threat of his predecessor Mitso Asen 's throne ambitions and a large @-@ scale Byzantine invasion . Because Constantine was unable to assist Jacob against the advancing Byzantines , Jacob sought aid from his northern neighbour , Hungarian king Stephen V. The Hungarians drove the Byzantines out of Jacob 's domain and themselves invaded Byzantine @-@ controlled territories . Rescued from the Byzantine threat , Jacob Svetoslav submitted to Hungarian suzerainty . Stephen V placed him as the ruler of the Vidin province on the Danube River , previously governed for Hungary by the then @-@ deceased Rostislav Mikhailovich , and allowed him to retain his lands to the south . Had it not been for the appointment of Jacob Svetoslav as a Hungarian vassal at Vidin , Bulgaria would have re @-@ established control over the city in 1263 . 
 In 1264 , however , Hungary was precipitated into another civil war between Stephen V and his father Béla IV . Fearing Bulgarian retribution and lack of Hungarian support should Béla IV come out victorious , in 1265 Jacob Svetoslav changed allegiance to Bulgaria and acknowledged the authority of Constantine Tih . The two crossed the Danube in 1265 and raided the Hungarian fortresses north of the river . By the spring of 1266 , however , Stephen V had established himself as the sole ruler of Hungary , and on 23 June 1266 , conquered Vidin back from Jacob after a brief siege . Two waves of Hungarian raids proceeded to devastate the Vidin province and enter the possessions of Constantine . In spite of Bulgarian resistance , the Hungarians subjugated a number of cities including Pleven . Jacob Svetoslav 's previous defection to Bulgarian suzerainty notwithstanding , the Hungarians restored him as the puppet ruler of the Vidin region . In 1266 , he was even referred to as " Tsar of the Bulgarians " ( imperator <unk> ) in Hungarian sources , possibly to encourage a rivalry between Constantine and Jacob Svetoslav for the Bulgarian throne or simply to satisfy Jacob 's ambitions . 
 = = Final submission to Bulgaria and death = = 
 The death of Stephen V in 1272 meant that he was succeeded by his infant son Ladislaus IV , with the widowed consort and mother of the boy , Elizabeth , as his regent . At the time , Jacob Svetoslav still held Vidin as a Hungarian vassal . Possibly in 1273 , Hungarian rule in Braničevo , west of Jacob 's domain , was put to an end by two Cuman – Bulgarian nobles , Darman and <unk> . Cut off from his Hungarian suzerains and facing the menace of a Bulgarian attack from the east , Jacob Svetoslav once again submitted to Bulgarian rule . He arrived in the capital Tarnovo to negotiate his submission with Constantine 's consort Maria Palaiologina Kantakouzene , who was the dominant figure in the empire at the time due to the Tsar 's paralysis . There , Jacob was formally adopted by the much younger Maria as her second son , after the infant heir Michael Asen II . This adoption solidified Jacob 's ties to the court and meant that he could safely retain his autonomous domain as a Bulgarian vassal . He also harboured hopes to ascend to the throne by ousting Michael when Constantine died . Suspicious of these disloyal intentions of Jacob 's , Constantine 's consort Maria is thought to have poisoned him , and he died in 1275 or 1276 / 1777 , shortly before the Uprising of Ivaylo . 
 While the fate of the city of Vidin itself is unclear , at least part of Jacob 's possessions were certainly restored to direct Bulgarian rule in the wake of his death . One such territory was the <unk> region lying southwest of Vidin , which in 1278 was documented as belonging to Bulgaria . 
 = Melly Goeslaw = 
 <unk> Goeslaw Hoed ( [ <unk> <unk> ̯ <unk> ̚ ] ; born 7 January 1974 ) , better known by her stage name " Melly Goeslaw " , is an Indonesian singer and songwriter . She began singing while in the fifth grade , then began writing songs and took work as a backing vocalist for <unk> <unk> in high school . This led to her family and her moving to Jakarta to further her career . While providing backing vocals for a promotional tour by <unk> <unk> , she met Anto Hoed and Andi <unk> . After marrying Hoed , the three formed the band Potret in 1993 . Their 1995 debut album was well received , bringing Goeslaw and her bandmates to fame . After releasing several albums with Potret , Goeslaw attempted to begin a solo career , releasing her self @-@ titled debut album Melly in 1999 . Although Melly sold well , she became more popular as a solo artist after providing the soundtrack for the 2002 hit film Ada Apa dengan Cinta ? together with her husband . Her later releases include solo albums and soundtracks . In 2005 , she released a collection of short stories to celebrate her tenth year anniversary as a popular musician ; four years later , she directed a concert to celebrate the bicentenary of Bandung city . As of 2011 , she has written over 500 songs . 
 Goeslaw 's onstage persona has been compared to Björk , with " eccentric " costumes , heavy make @-@ up , and " wild " hair colours . Her early songs have been described by The Jakarta Post as being " deliberately antagonistic " , with controversial themes including materialism , sadomasochism , and violence against women . Two of her songs with Potret , " Salah " and " Bunda " , were selected by Rolling Stone Indonesia as some of the best Indonesian songs of all time , while her work with Ada Apa dengan Cinta ? garnered her and her husband a Citra Award at the 2004 Indonesian Film Festival . However , Rolling Stone notes a decline in song quality after Ada Apa dengan Cinta ? . According to The Jakarta Post , Goeslaw is one of the most sought after movie songwriters in Indonesia . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Goeslaw was born in Bandung on 7 January 1974 . She is the daughter of Melky Goeslaw , a singer and songwriter , and his wife <unk> <unk> . After her parents ' divorce , Goeslaw was raised by her mother ; her sister Yuli , who now serves as her manager , was born from a second marriage . While in elementary school , she enjoyed writing poetry , later recalling that she " was happiest when doodling on paper , writing [ her ] poetry " . While she was in the fifth grade , she began singing after being convinced by her mother , who was convinced that Goeslaw could sing like her father ; originally she did not want to be a singer . 
 She later switched to songwriting while in high school , writing lyrics on napkins and schoolbooks and recording her humming on a Walkman because she could not play any instruments . During high school , she worked as a backing vocalist for <unk> <unk> . Her family eventually moved to Jakarta to further her singing career , and she was requested to be a backing vocalist for three different pop singers . At one point , she was recording at three different studios every day . The money that she earned convinced her to continue singing . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = 1995 @-@ 99 : Potret band = = = 
 After replacing a backing vocalist for <unk> <unk> 's promotional tour for the album <unk> , Goeslaw met Anto Hoed and his friend Arie <unk> . After marrying Anto later that year , they went on to form the band Potret . The band 's first album was released in 1995 , with the song " <unk> " ( " Seduced " ) , dealing with " the ultimate material girl " , becoming instantly popular . The band was very popular between 1995 and 1998 . While with Potret , Goeslaw wrote numerous songs . Some were written conservatively as they were ordered by singers such as Krisdayanti and Ruth <unk> ; other songs , generally the more " biting " ones , were used for Potret 's albums . 
 One of the her songs on Potret 's third album , " Diam " ( " Silent " ) , which dealt with the abuse of women , caused some controversy due to the perceived amount of violence in the music video . Despite this controversy , " Diam " won Video Musik Indonesia 's award for best interpretation of a song . 
 = = = 1999 @-@ 2009 : Solo career = = = 
 In 1999 , Goeslaw started her solo career with her self @-@ titled debut album , which sold well . Her second album , the soundtrack for the 2002 teen movie Ada Apa dengan Cinta ? ( What 's Up with Love ) , in which most songs were sung by her and written by her and her husband , led to her being more popular as a solo artist than with Potret ; she was also given the nickname the Queen of Movie Music . Ada Apa Dengan Cinta 's soundtrack later won Best Soundtrack at the Indonesian Film Festival . 
 Goeslaw later provided the soundtracks for 2003 's Eiffel I 'm in Love , 2005 's Apa <unk> Cinta ( What does Love Mean ) , 2007 's The Butterfly , and 2009 's Ketika Cinta Bertasbih ( When Love <unk> ) . She considered the writing of songs for Ketika Cinta Bertasbih to be more difficult than her previous work in teen romances , as it was a religious film . As such , she felt that she had to be extra careful . 
 In 2005 Goeslaw released a collection of short stories that she had written to celebrate her tenth year as a singer . One of the stories , " Tentang Dia " ( " About Him / Her " ) , was later filmed by Rudy Soedjarwo , the director of Ada Apa dengan Cinta ? . In 2008 Goeslaw wrote and sang " <unk> Cinta " ( " <unk> by Love " ) for the soundtrack of <unk> 2 – Planet Hitam ( <unk> 2 – Black Planet ) with Malaysian singer and director of the film <unk> , from the band <unk> . Melly requested permission to help with the scoring after watching the original <unk> Man . 
 After initially refusing to perform solo concerts because of creative differences with the event managers , in 2009 Goeslaw held her first concert , " Glow , Melly Live in Concert " , at <unk> Stadium in Jakarta . The concert , directed by John Fair <unk> and presented by Krisdayanti 's KD Productions , featured a " virtual duet " with Goeslaw 's deceased father and was divided into two portions , one featuring songs from her time with Potret , and one with songs from her solo career . It also featured new songs written by Hoed especially for the concert . The following year she was head of Kampung <unk> , an organising committee for a concert celebrating the 200th year since the founding of Bandung . 
 = = = 2010 @-@ present : Mentoring new singers = = = 
 Goeslaw is also active scouting for new singers and assisting others , having supported the careers of pop singers Irwansyah and Acha <unk> . In 2011 she invited aspiring singers to post videos of themselves singing her songs to YouTube or her Facebook profile , later noting that she had already discovered several new talents in that manner . As of 2011 , she has written over 500 songs . Goeslaw released a compilation album , Balance , in January 2013 . 
 From September through November 2015 , Goeslaw served as a judge on the reality television series La Academia Junior Indonesia for its second season . 
 = = Songwriting = = 
 Goeslaw has noted that her most popular songs are generally those which are written quickly , citing the award @-@ winning " <unk> Hari " ( " Counting the Days " ) , which was written in four days , as an example . She has noted that she abandons songs which leave her with a writer 's block , as even when they are finished they are not well received . Her husband does the arrangement , sometimes meaning that songs are put on hold because he is busy . 
 The Jakarta Post has described her lyrics as being " deliberately antagonistic " , to which Goeslaw has agreed . Her songs written while with Potret include themes of materialism , sexual deviation , " misbehaving women " , flatulence , and sadomasochism ; she has said that she tries to avoid writing about " issues of ethnicity , religion , race and intergroup relations , especially political matters " . The Jakarta Post also calls her a " deft satirist " . She does not consider herself a feminist , as her songs are written about real women and not about female empowerment ; she has said that her lyrics are not of the " ' hear me roar ' type " . 
 = = Fashion = = 
 Goeslaw is known for wearing " eccentric " costumes when performing , leading to her being compared to Icelandic singer Björk , whom she admires . She also dyed her hair in " wild colors " and applied heavy stage make up in the late 1990s , when contemporary Indonesian singers were focusing on " conventional " beauty . In 2008 , Goeslaw said that her make up and hairstyles used to hide her insecurity when she was first starting . She has continued to use them because it is " part of the package " , although she now discusses ideas with her creative team . 
 = = Awards and recognition = = 
 Goeslaw 's songs have won awards . In the first Indonesian Film Festival ( after the festival 's twelve @-@ year hiatus between 1992 and 2004 ) , Goeslaw and her husband won Best Soundtrack for their work in Ada Apa Dengan Cinta ? ; it was one of three awards won by the movie at the festival , which covered films from 2002 to 2004 . The Jakarta Post calls her Indonesia 's most sought after movie songwriter , and notes that her songs have been successfully covered by other singers . Her work as a songwriter has led to her becoming an active proponent of intellectual property rights . 
 In 2009 , Rolling Stone Indonesia listed two songs that Goeslaw performed while with Potret in its list of the 150 Best Indonesian Songs of All Time , both of which were from the album Potret II . " Salah " ( " Wrong " ) was ranked 74th , being noted as the best example of Goeslaw 's " fresh , direct , and often provocative nuances " when writing songs and writing that her " sweet " vocals challenged the paradigm that a singer singing about an affair should be either a victim or full of revenge . The other song , " Bunda " ( " Mother " ) was ranked at 110 ; it was noted being capable of making anyone , " even the most cruel man " , pause for a moment to think of their mother . Rolling Stone Indonesia noted a decrease in the quality of Goeslaw 's songs since Ada Apa Dengan Cinta ? . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Goeslaw is married to guitarist Anto Hoed . Together they have two children , <unk> Lelaki Hoed and Lelaki <unk> Hoed ( literally My Son Hoed and Boy Named Hoed ) . In her spare time she enjoys shopping , playing with her children , and browsing the internet ; she has stated that she finds it increasingly difficult to enjoy shopping due to being constantly recognised . She has stated that she prefers being backstage over giving concerts , as she does not have to wear make @-@ up or rehearse . 
 = = Discography = = 
 <unk> <unk> ( 1988 ) – listed as <unk> <unk> 
 Melly ( 1999 ) 
 Ada Apa dengan Cinta ? ( OST ; 2002 ) 
 Eiffel I 'm in Love ( OST ; 2003 ) 
 <unk> ( 2005 ) 
 Apa <unk> Cinta ? ( OST ; 2005 ) 
 <unk> ( 2007 ) 
 The Butterfly ( OST ; 2008 ) 
 Ketika Cinta Bertasbih ( 2009 ) 
 Glow ( 2009 ) 
 Dancing In The Silence ( 2011 ) 
 <unk> ( 2009 ) 
 Ada Apa dengan Cinta ? 2 ( OST ; 2016 ) 
 = = Filmography = = 
 Kabayan Jadi <unk> ( 2010 ) 
 = Down Street tube station = 
 Down Street , also known as Down Street ( Mayfair ) , is a disused station on the London Underground , located in Mayfair , west London . It was opened in 1907 by the Great Northern , Piccadilly and Brompton Railway . It was latterly served by the Piccadilly line and was situated between Dover Street ( now named Green Park ) and Hyde Park Corner stations . 
 The station was little used and trains often passed through it without stopping . Its lack of patronage coupled with its proximity to other stations resulted in its closure in 1932 . During the Second World War it was used as a bunker by prime minister Winston Churchill and his War Cabinet . The station building survives today and is close to Down Street 's junction with Piccadilly . Part of it is now converted to a retail outlet . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Operation = = = 
 The station is in Down Street in Mayfair , just off Piccadilly and a short distance from Park Lane . It lies between Green Park ( originally named Dover Street ) and Hyde Park Corner on the Piccadilly line . It was opened by the Great Northern , Piccadilly and Brompton Railway ( GNP & BR ; the precursor to the Piccadilly line ) on 15 March 1907 , a few months after the rest of the line opened . The delay was due to difficulties in purchasing the site for the station building and agreeing a safe layout of the passages below ground with the Board of Trade . The surface building was designed by the Underground Electric Railways Company of London 's ( UERL 's ) architect Leslie Green in the UERL house style of a two @-@ storey steel @-@ framed building faced with red glazed terracotta blocks , with wide semi @-@ circular windows on the upper floor . The station had a pair of Otis lifts , with the platforms located 22 @.@ 2 metres ( 73 ft ) below the street level of Piccadilly . 
 Down Street was never a busy station , as the surrounding area was largely residential and its residents mostly wealthy enough to travel by other means . The neighbouring stations were also close by , with Dover Street station about 550 metres ( 600 yd ) to the east and Hyde Park Corner 500 metres ( 550 yd ) to the west , . From 1909 , like Brompton Road , Down Street was often skipped by trains . From 1918 it was closed on Sundays . 
 In 1929 , Down Street was one of the stations suggested for closure in connection with the extension of the Piccadilly line : the elimination of less @-@ busy stations in the central area would improve both reliability and journey times for long @-@ distance commuters . Additionally , the neighbouring stations were being rebuilt with escalators in place of lifts and their new entrances were even nearer to Down Street , further squeezing its catchment area . The station was permanently closed on 21 May 1932 . 
 After the station was closed it was almost immediately modified . The western headwalls of both platform tunnels were rebuilt to allow a step plate junction to be installed , providing access from the eastbound and westbound tunnels to a new siding located between Down Street and Hyde Park Corner . The siding is mainly used to reverse westbound trains , but could also be used for servicing trains . The siding tunnel is accessible at its western end through a small foot tunnel constructed from Hyde Park Corner station . The lifts were removed and the shafts adapted to provide additional tunnel ventilation . 
 = = = Wartime use and after = = = 
 The station was selected for use as an underground bunker in early 1939 as part of a programme of developing deep shelters to protect government operations from bombing in the event of war . The platform faces were bricked up and the enclosed platform areas and space in the circulation passages were divided up into offices , meeting rooms and dormitories . The engineering and structural work was carried out by the London Passenger Transport Board and the fitting @-@ out of the rooms and installation of the power and communications equipment was done by the London , Midland and Scottish Railway . A two @-@ person lift was installed in the original emergency stairwell and a telephone exchange , toilets and bathrooms were added . The main occupant of the shelter was the Railway Executive Committee , but it was also used by prime minister Winston Churchill and his war cabinet until the Cabinet War Rooms were ready for use . Churchill called the establishment at Down Street " The Barn " . 
 Since the end of the war , the station has been used only as an emergency exit point from the Underground . 
 In April 2015 , Transport for London announced that it was seeking proposals for the commercial use of parts of the surface building , disused lift shaft and underground passages . Suggested possible uses included a restaurant , a bar , a theatre , a gallery or retail space . 
 = = Use in media = = 
 Down Street is the inspiration for a location in the television series and novel Neverwhere , where it provides an entrance to an underground labyrinth . A much modified and expanded version of the station appears as a part of a level in the video game Shadow Man . 
 Part of the 2004 British horror film Creep was set in Down Street station , although the scenes were actually shot at the disused Aldwych station and on studio sets . The British band Hefner released a song titled " Down Street " on their 2006 album Catfight ; according to its sleeve notes , it is set in the early 1930s and tells the story of two lovers who meet at the station . Steve Hackett also recorded a song titled " Down Street " on his 2006 album Wild Orchids , about the station . 
 The station features in Billy Connolly 's World Tour Of England , Ireland and Wales , Dan Cruickshank 's National Geographic Channel series Great Railway Adventures and the 2012 TV Series The Tube . 
 = Closure ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Closure " is the eleventh episode of the seventh season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files , and the 150th episode overall . It was directed by Kim Manners and written by series creator Chris Carter and Frank Spotnitz . The installment explores the series ' overarching mythology and is the conclusion of a two @-@ part episode revolving around the final revelation of what really happened to Fox Mulder 's ( David Duchovny ) sister , Samantha . Originally aired by the Fox network on February 13 , 2000 , " Closure " received a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 1 and was seen by 15 @.@ 35 million viewers . The episode received mostly positive reviews from critics ; many felt that the final reveal was emotional and powerful , although some were unhappy with the resolution . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . Mulder is a believer in the paranormal , while the skeptical Scully has been assigned to debunk his work , but the two have developed a deep friendship . In this episode , after Mulder is forced to accept that his mother ’ s death was by her own hand , he is led by a man whose son disappeared years earlier to another truth : that his sister , Samantha , was among the souls taken by ‘ walk @-@ ins ’ , saving the souls of children doomed to live unhappy lives . 
 " Closure " was a story milestone for the series , finally revealing Samantha 's fate ; this story @-@ arc had driven a large part of the series ' earlier episodes . The episode was written as a continuation to the previous episode , " Sein und Zeit , " but branched off into different territory . Although a majority of the episode was filmed on a soundstage , several scenes were shot on location , such as the scenes at the former Norton Air Force Base in San Bernardino , California . Several of the sequences , specifically those featuring the souls of dead children , required elaborate filming techniques . The episode has been analyzed due to its themes of belief and hope . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 For the first five seasons of the series , FBI federal agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) sought to gain understanding about the disappearance of Mulder 's sister , Samantha , who was abducted when Mulder was 12 years old . In the previous episode , " Sein und Zeit " , Mulder and Scully tracked down a serial killer who targeted children . While investigating the case , Mulder began to get emotionally involved , due to the similarities with his sister 's disappearance . 
 = = = Events = = = 
 Mulder and Scully aid the Sacramento Police in the investigation of a brutal murder committed by Truelove , the owner of the Santa Village . As the remains of more children are discovered , he admits killing twenty @-@ four children , but denies murdering Amber Lynn LaPierre , who disappeared from her home in the previous episode . Mulder is approached by psychic Harold Piller , who tells Mulder that he has helped law enforcement across the world , and has proved in various cases that children had been taken by " walk @-@ ins " , beings composed of starlight . Piller believes that walk @-@ ins save children who suffer terrible fates . 
 Scully becomes worried about Piller 's influence over Mulder . The agents return to Washington , D.C. , where Mulder keeps searching for evidence in the case . Meanwhile , Piller gets another vision of Samantha , leading Mulder to April Air Force Base . Scully finds evidence that Samantha 's disappearance is linked to The Smoking Man ( William B. Davis ) ; when she returns to her apartment , she finds him waiting for her . He tells her that he had called off the search for Mulder 's sister when she vanished because he knew she was dead . 
 When Mulder returns to April Air Force Base , he uncovers proof that Samantha lived with the Smoking Man along with his son , Jeffrey Spender , and that she was forced to undergo painful tests . Scully finds a 1979 police report of a girl matching Samantha 's description , and learns that she was taken to a hospital emergency room . She and Mulder find the nurse who treated her , and the nurse describes how Samantha disappeared the same way as Amber — without a trace . Mulder later walks through the forest and receives a vision of Samantha along with the spirits of other children . Upon telling Scully and Piller — who reacts badly upon hearing that his son is dead — of his vision , Mulder accepts that his sister is dead and in a better place . When Scully comforts Mulder and asks if he is all right , he responds with a choked " I 'm fine . I 'm free . " 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 " Closure , " written by series creator Chris Carter and executive producer Frank Spotnitz , brought an end to Mulder 's quest for his sister , Samantha , who had been abducted when he was a child . The idea to close the story arc received mixed reactions from various production and crew members . However , many of the show 's producers realized that the time had come to answer one of the show 's biggest questions . Spotnitz explained that , " I think [ series star , David Duchovny ] grew tired of playing the man who is missing his sister . [ ... ] I told him , ' This is going to be the last time you 're going to have to play [ that part ] . ' " Paul Rabwin noted that , " It 's been seven years . I don 't think any of us are going to miss Samantha Mulder . That device and motivation were very strong in the early years of the show . But as the years have gone by , the speculation kind of melted away . " 
 " Closure " continued the story of the previous episode " Sein und Zeit " and branched off into different territory . Carter later explained that , " emotionally , it was heavy stuff for everybody , but necessarily so . These episodes involved two very personal cases , the search for a serial killer [ in ' Sein und Zeit ' ] and the search for Mulder 's sister [ in ' Closure ' ] . " Marc Shapiro , in his book All Things : The Official Guide to The X @-@ Files , Vol . 6 noted that , in addition to bringing an end to the Samantha story arc , the episode was " very much a [ Smoking Man ] episode " in that it explored his involvement in Samantha 's abduction and revealed to the audience that he was seriously ill . The episode 's tagline was changed from the usual " The Truth is Out There " to " Believe to Understand " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Manners noted that " Closure " was one of the first episodes in which the production staff was able to " shoot in Los Angeles with the sun out " . According to Manners , the show was struggling with the fact that " we weren 't in Vancouver anymore and that our show had suddenly become very bright and cheery " . To amend this , Bill Roe , director of photography , used tree branches and c @-@ stands to block out the sunlight . The first scene with the walk @-@ ins rising up from their grave , shot at Griffith Park above the playground , was " tricky , " according to director Kim Manners . Manners felt uncomfortable telling the children to rise out of " graves " , feeling it could psychologically hurt them , so instead the crew called the holes in the ground " forts . " The scenes taking place at April Air Force Base was shot in San Bernardino , California at a closed airfield , the former Norton Air Force Base . On the airbase was a large abandoned house complex of over 400 buildings constructed and used by the United States military . According to Manners , the entire area was " eerie " , and many of the houses still had furniture in them . Originally , the producers wanted to name the fictitious air force March Air Force Base . However , the presence of an actual air force base with the same name necessitated a change to April Air Force Base . One of the shots in the April Air Force Base was filmed at a sound stage in Los Angeles . The scene at the restaurant was shot in a location on Sepulveda Boulevard , at a hotel that had been standing there for 30 to 40 years . 
 During filming , David Duchovny decided to act out the reunion scene in a manner contrary to what the script called for . Manners later noted , " In the script , it called for his sister to run up and hug him , and Mulder was to start crying . David didn 't want to cry . I said , ' David , you 're finally realizing your sister is , in fact , dead . [ … ] He said , ' Just watch what I do ; trust me . ' And , he held that little girl actress — there was a beatific smile on his face that was absolutely astounding . " Manners was very happy with the change and included it in the final cut of the episode . To create the scene featuring the ghosts of the dead children interacting with the characters , various layers of film had to be overlaid onto each other . Many passes of the shot were taken , which took hours to complete . After the shots had been secured , the film of the ghosts had to be made transparent . The scenes wherein Mulder is interacting with the walk @-@ ins was actually shot in daylight . However , specialized " day for night " photography was used to make the finished scene look as if it had been filmed at night . To achieve this , the subjects were illuminated with bright lights and the sky was completely avoided . The entire scene was shot at 48 frames a second , twice that of normal speed . Rebecca Toolan was flown down from Vancouver specifically for this episode , and " Sein Und Zeit " . To create her ghostly apparition , the production staff had to shoot multiple frames , which were then spliced into footage of Duchovny . Manners played the part of the hypnotist in the video which Scully watches of Mulder under hypnosis . Manners later noted that " I only act when you can 't actually see my face " . Manners was critical of Duchovny 's wig — which had been added to make the footage seem older . He sardonically noted that " this is [ not ] one of the episodes that Cheri Medcalf [ the show 's make @-@ up director ] won an Emmy for . " 
 Composer Mark Snow described his score as possessing a " sense of biblical fervor and religiosity — an elegy — a feeling about it that was so poignant and touching to me . " " My Weakness " , a song by Moby from his 1999 album Play , is used in this episode , during the first scene when the FBI discover the mass grave and near the end when Mulder encounters his sister 's spirit . Carter never told Snow about the decision to use someone else 's music , although Snow has since said that his reaction to the use of the song was very positive and that the song was a " perfect " fit for the scenes in which it can be heard . Another Moby song , " The Sky is Broken " also from Play , would be featured in the late seventh season episode " all things " . 
 = = Themes = = 
 According to Amy M. Donaldson in her book We Want to Believe : Faith and Gospel in The X @-@ Files , Mulder 's opening monologue may be an example of " Mulder now being more receptive to the possibility of God 's intervention " . Throughout much of the series , Mulder has shown a disdain for religion . However , in " Closure " , Donaldson points out that " Mulder 's belief in God , as always , revolves around his beliefs about his sister 's fate " . As such , Mulder expresses hope that those who die in a cruel fashion " live on in some other way " . Furthermore , she argues that because " Closure " opens with the tagline " Believe to understand " , Mulder must " take the leap of faith " in order to find enlightenment , and ultimately the truth about his sister . The first half of the episode plays out according to the tagline ; Mulder first believes in " his desire stated in the opening voiceover " , and then finds closure . 
 Donaldson also parallels elements in the episode to the plots of other episodes such as the fourth season entry " Paper Hearts " , wherein it is suggested that a serial killer murdered Samantha . In " Paper Hearts " , a father of a victim notes that the uncertainty of his daughter 's murder allowed those who were involved to " consider the possibilities , both for the best and for the worst " . However , once it is revealed that his daughter was murdered , all hope was removed . Conversely , Mulder holds onto the possibility that Samantha is alive through much of the series , but when he realizes that she is indeed dead in " Closure " , hope is removed but in its place is found peace . To parallel Mulder 's acceptance , Harold Piller refuses to believe his son is dead ; as such , he " cling [ s ] to the possibility [ because ] uncertainly allows him hope . " 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Closure " first aired in the United States on February 13 , 2000 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 9 @.@ 1 , with a 13 share . Nielsen ratings are audience measurement systems that determine the audience size and composition of television programming in the U.S. This means that roughly 9 @.@ 1 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 13 percent of households watching television , were watching the episode . It was viewed by 15 @.@ 35 million viewers in the United States . On May 28 , 2000 the episode debuted on Sky 1 in the United Kingdom and gathered 0 @.@ 68 million viewers , making it the eighth most watched program shown on Sky 1 that week , in front of Angel and The Simpsons . The episode was later included on The X @-@ Files Mythology , Volume 3 – Colonization , a DVD collection that contains episodes involved with the alien Colonist 's plans to take over the earth . 
 = = = Initial reviews = = = 
 Initial reviews were mixed , with some critics applauding the story 's conclusion , and others deriding it . Tom Kessenich , in his book Examinations : An Unauthorized Look at Seasons 6 – 9 of the X @-@ Files , opined that the episode worked best " if some of the previous Samantha @-@ related clues were forgotten " , such as when the Alien Bounty Hunter told Mulder that she was still alive in " End Game " . Despite this , he wrote that " it was only right that Samantha be dead since Mulder 's life had always been defined by what he has lost , not what he has found " . He surmised that the episode was not " perfect " , but that its " <unk> greatly outweighed any missteps along the way " . He was also complimentary towards " the ethereal quality of the final few moments " , writing that they " lifted this episode up and made it one of the season 's most memorable " . Kenneth Silber from Space.com was pleased with the episode , and wrote , " ' Closure ' is a satisfying episode , one that puts to bed the now @-@ tiresome search for Mulder 's sister Samantha . " Jeremy Conrad from IGN referred to the episode as " excellent " and noted that a large portion of The X @-@ Files mythology ended with the resolution of Samantha 's abduction , saying , " [ ' Closure ' is ] a final , and concrete , answer to the single thing that was driving Mulder for the entire run of the series . In some ways , when he got that answer a major part of The X @-@ Files story ended . " 
 Not all reviews were positive . Paula Vitaris from CFQ gave the episode a negative review and awarded it one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half stars out of four . She wrote , " Instead of a grand , breath @-@ taking , heart @-@ breaking finale that should be the climax of Mulder 's search for Samantha , the story expires limply with some nonsense about Samantha being of the starlight children . " Bobby Bryant and Tracy Burlison of The State named the episode the " Worst Conspiracy " episode . The two noted that because " a tenet of The X @-@ Files was that Mulder 's sister , Samantha , had been ( a ) kidnapped by aliens or ( b ) kidnapped by government conspirators " , the fact that she had actually been turned into a spirit " insanely offers a supernatural explanation to a science @-@ fiction mystery " . 
 = = = Later reviews = = = 
 Later reviews , however , have seen " Closure " in a much more positive light , with many critics praising its ending . Zack Handlen of The A.V. Club awarded the episode an " A – " . He argued that the episode worked due to two scenes : the sequence in which Mulder reads aloud from Samantha 's diary , and the final shot of Mulder being reunited with his sister . He wrote that the " stark simplicity " of the former made it emotionally powerful , and that the latter was " a bit sappy , a bit surreal , a bit lovely " but nonetheless " a beautiful moment " . Meghan Deans of Tor.com felt that the story was " silly " , but that , when paired with the idea that Samantha was truly an innocent victim , successfully becomes a " comfort " . She called it a move that " the show must give Mulder , and us , in order to shut down this storyline for good . " Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five , and called it " brave " . The two noted that while some of the sentimentality is pushed too far — such as when Mulder finds his sister 's diary speaking to him , or when Mulder talks about all lost souls being stars — the " critical moment " featuring Mulder reuniting with his sister 's spirit is " extraordinarily moving " . 
 = El Ejemplo = 
 El Ejemplo ( The Example ) is a studio album by Mexican recording artists Los Tigres del Norte . It was released by Fonovisa Records on May 2 , 1995 and includes fourteen tracks written by Teodoro Bello and Enrique Valencia , which span musical genres such as ballad , bolero , corrido , cumbia and ranchera . 
 The album was a commercial success peaking at number eight in the Billboard Top Latin Albums in the United States , where it was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America . To promote the album , Los Tigres del Norte released four singles , " La Fama de la Pareja " , the title track and " Golpes en el Corazón " that reached top ten in the Billboard Hot Latin Songs , while the single " No Puedo Más " peaked at number 15 in the same chart . " Golpes en el Corazón " , was later included in the setlist of their live album MTV Unplugged : Los Tigres del Norte and Friends as a duet with Mexican singer Paulina Rubio . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 Mexican band Los Tigres del Norte released their twenty @-@ sixth studio album titled El Ejemplo on May 2 , 1995 . The album included twelve tracks written by Teodoro Bello and two songs written by Enrique Valencia . Four corridos ( " El <unk> " , " Tiempos de Mayo " , " La Fama de la Pareja " and " Morir Matando " ) , seven rancheras ( " El Ejemplo " , " <unk> " , " No Puedo Más " , " Quién " , " Como <unk> y Como el Agua " , " Un Mar de Vino " and " Te He de <unk> " ) , one cumbia ( " Me <unk> a la <unk> " ) , one ballad ( " Golpes en el Corazón " ) and one bolero ( " Nos <unk> la Ropa " ) were recorded . The website AllMusic gave the album four stars out of five . Billboard magazine named the album a " likable batch of moving anecdotal corridos , spirited rancheras , and a pair of ballads that would be superb singles : ' Golpes en el Corazón ' and ' Nos <unk> la Ropa ' . " The first single " La Fama de la Pareja " also received praise , being referred to as a " highlight " of the album . 
 = = Singles = = 
 The album lead single " La Fama de la Pareja " ( " The Fame of the Couple " ) , a corrido about a husband and wife dedicated to contraband and drug trafficking , peaked at number five in the Billboard Top Latin Songs chart and at number four in the Regional Mexican Songs chart . The title track was selected as the second single , and is a ranchera track about a love relationship that ended and the impossibility of getting a divorce , staying married for the sake of their children . " El Ejemplo " ( " The Example " ) reached number six at the Billboard Hot Latin Songs and three at the Regional Mexican Songs charts , respectively . " Golpes en el Corazón " ( " Punches to the Heart " ) was released as third single and became the biggest hit of the album , peaking at number two in the Billboard Hot Latin Songs chart for a month ( blocked at the top by " Tú Sólo Tú " by Selena and " Si Nos Dejan " by Luis Miguel for two weeks each ) . " Golpes en el Corazón " , about a failed love relationship , spent eight non @-@ consecutive weeks at the top of the Regional Mexican Songs chart and at the Broadcast Music , Inc. awards of 1997 won the Latin Song of the Year award . It was also nominated Regional Mexican Song of the Year at the 1996 Lo Nuestro Awards . The track regained interest when was included in the setlist for the MTV Unplugged : Los Tigres del Norte and Friends recorded by the band in 2011 with the participation of Mexican singer Paulina Rubio . This version was nominated for Record of the Year at the 12th Latin Grammy Awards ceremony . " No Puedo Más " ( " I Can 't Take it Anymore " ) was chosen as the fourth and last single , peaking at number 15 in the Billboard Top Latin Songs and at number nine in the Regional Mexican Songs charts , respectively . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Source : 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 El Ejemplo debuted and peaked at number eight in the Billboard Top Latin Albums chart in the week of May 13 , 1995 , being the second highest debut of the week after Cuando los Ángeles <unk> by Maná at number seven . The album reached a peak of number two in the Regional Mexican Albums chart in the week of September 16 , 1995 , being held at the top by Selena 's Amor Prohibido . The band earned the Regional Mexican Album of the Year , Duo or Group Award at the Billboard Latin Music Awards of 1996 . El Ejemplo was certified Gold by the Recording Industry Association of America , the first for the band . By 1999 , the album had sold over 650 @,@ 000 copies . 
 = Cyclone Lua = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Lua affected a sparsely populated region of Western Australia during mid @-@ March 2012 . Originating in a broad low pressure area that formed northwest of Australia by 8 March , the storm was plagued by inhibiting wind shear for the duration of its formative stages . However , it gradually organized , and received the name Lua on 13 March . The cyclone meandered for the first several days of its existence , caught between weak and competing steering currents . After the cyclone drifted northwestward , a building ridge of high pressure to the north drove Lua southeastward toward the Pilbara region . Ultimately intensifying into a borderline Category 4 severe tropical cyclone with maximum sustained 10 @-@ minute winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) , Lua made landfall near the remote community of Pardoo , about 150 km ( 95 mi ) east of Port Hedland . It steadily weakened as it progressed south over interior Western Australia , diminishing below tropical cyclone status on 18 March . 
 The threat of the impending cyclone halted local industries such as oil production and iron ore mining and exporting . The Port of Port Hedland , a highly important iron ore shipping terminal , was forced to close for about 52 hours , contributing to inflated iron ore prices and delayed shipments . Multiple companies suspended work at oil fields and mines throughout the region , cutting national oil production by 25 % and iron ore exports by 4 @.@ 7 % versus the previous month . Overall , Lua is attributed to $ 217 million ( 2012 AUD ; $ 230 million 2012 USD ) in lost revenue . Lua produced strong winds and widespread rainfall on land , but damage was limited by the lack of population in the storm 's path . The Pardoo Roadhouse bore the brunt of the storm , and damage was reported at several other cattle stations and homesteads ; at these sites , the storm damaged the exteriors of various structures and brought down swaths of trees . Central Western Australia endured several days of record @-@ breaking rainfall and cool weather . The Government of Western Australia provided disaster relief funds to the hardest @-@ hit areas , and Lua was later retired from the list of tropical cyclone names . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 Cyclone Lua originated in a broad area of disturbed weather that was spawned by a deep trough of low pressure and enhanced by a Madden – Julian oscillation pulse . The precursor to Lua was first identified through satellite imagery by 8 March 2012 , while situated about 1 @,@ 100 km ( 680 mi ) to the north @-@ northwest of Learmonth . Analysis of the disturbance revealed a diffuse low @-@ level center of circulation loosely bounded by sporadic , but multiplying , convection . On 9 March , the Bureau of Meteorology 's ( BoM ) Tropical Cyclone Warning Center ( TCWC ) in Perth recognized the developing system and remarked on the potential for tropical cyclone formation over the following several days . The low pressure area meandered for several days , making some progress toward the east , and gradually consolidated . 
 By 12 March , the system had developed persistent deep convection over the eastern half of its core and organized banding features elsewhere . Moderate vertical wind shear initially hampered intensification , though the BoM designated the system Tropical Low <unk> ; at the time , it was centered roughly 230 km ( 140 mi ) northwest of Karratha , Western Australia . At 2300 UTC on 12 March , the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) issued a Tropical Cyclone Formation Alert . With increasingly favorable environmental conditions — including warm ocean waters and dwindling wind shear — the low organized significantly between 12 and 13 March , and at 0600 UTC on the 13th , TCWC Perth upgraded the low to Tropical Cyclone Lua . Simultaneously , the JTWC issued its first tropical cyclone warning on 17S . Contrary to real @-@ time operations , the official BoM " best track " database does not list the storm as having attained Category 1 tropical cyclone intensity until 0000 UTC on 14 March . 
 At the time of its designation , Lua was nearly stationary in terms of forward movement , caught in the equilibrium between a blocking ridge to the southwest and increasing monsoonal winds from the northwest . The ridge began to drive Lua north @-@ northwestward at up to 20 km / h ( 12 mph ) , before the storm resumed its slow pace on 14 March . The storm remained relatively disorganized , its strengthening limited by moderate wind shear and dry air entering its center . Consequently , a large void of thunderstorm activity created a " horseshoe pattern " . Nonetheless , Lua proved resilient , and good outflow helped compensate for the adverse shear . The southwesterly steering currents weakened , causing the storm to begin its anticipated curve toward the east and east @-@ southeast . According to the JTWC , the storm completed a small loop as a result of competing steering factors . At the same time , the upper levels of the atmosphere became far more conducive to the cyclone 's intensification , and the storm 's banding pattern tightened . With a building ridge to its north , Lua accelerated east @-@ southeastward on 15 March , and with wind shear oscillating but generally decreasing , the storm became a Category 3 severe tropical cyclone at 1800 UTC . 
 Continuing to intensify , Lua began to exhibit an ill @-@ defined eye on visible satellite imagery on 16 March . The storm was expansive , producing storm @-@ force winds in a circular area 850 km ( 530 mi ) across . Still , the deepest convection and most favorable outflow was focused away from the eastern semicircle due to persistent light easterly wind shear . The storm 's structure improved throughout the day and into the night , and at 2000 UTC on 16 March , the storm attained its peak 10 @-@ minute maximum sustained winds of 165 km / h ( 105 mph ) , classifying it as a low @-@ end Category 4 severe tropical cyclone . Early on 17 March , the storm turned due south toward the Pilbara coast , and the JTWC reported that Lua 's peak strength was marked by 1 @-@ minute sustained winds of 175 km / h ( 110 mph ) , at 0600 UTC . At its deepest , the storm possessed a central barometric pressure of 930 hPa ( 27 inHg ) . Lua made landfall near Pardoo , about 150 km ( 95 mi ) east @-@ northeast of Port Hedland , at 0700 UTC while still at peak intensity . The cyclone steadily weakened as it progressed southward , tracking directly over the Yarrie mine before passing about halfway between Newman and <unk> . With little extant convection and a shallow , exposed center , Lua deteriorated below tropical cyclone status early on 18 March near Wiluna . The cyclone 's remnants later entered the Goldfields @-@ Esperance region . 
 = = Preparations and economic impact = = 
 The BoM hoisted its first Cyclone Watch on 14 March for coastal areas between Mardie Station and Cape Leveque . A Cyclone Warning was posted the next day for a smaller stretch of coastline within that range . As Lua approached the coastline , the Cyclone Warning was in place from Cape Leveque to Dampier . Communities between Bidyadanga and Port Hedland were under a Red Alert , the highest level of caution issued by the Fire and Emergency Services Authority of Western Australia ( <unk> ) . The alert advised included residents to " go to shelter immediately " . Localities elsewhere between Broome and Whim Creek were on Yellow Alert , while a Blue Alert was issued between Whim Creek and Dampier , to the west of the Yellow Alert area . Work at multiple oil fields and mining sites was suspended or slowed , with non @-@ essential staff being removed at the sites remaining in operation . It was estimated that national oil production was reduced by about 25 % during the storm 's approach . 
 Officials of the Port of Port Hedland , an important iron ore exporting terminal , closed and evacuated the port by the morning of 16 March , operating under standard emergency preparedness procedure . Overall , nearly 40 ships in the port were relocated from the port out of the path of the storm . The Port of Dampier was also closed . The Port of Port Hedland reopened to shipping on 18 March , about 52 hours after its closure , with little or no damage reported , though the downtime drove iron ore prices up for a time , and reduced exports of the raw material by 4 @.@ 7 % compared to the previous month . In total , Lua cost natural resources companies over $ 217 million ( 2012 AUD ; $ 230 million 2012 USD ) in stunted industry , accounting for nearly all of the monetary losses resulting from the storm . 
 With the destruction wrought by Cyclone Laurence in 2009 still fresh in their minds , residents , business owners , and farmers worked hurriedly to prepare their properties and livestock for Lua 's onslaught . Horizon Power temporarily redirected power supply in the towns of Marble Bar and Nullagine from solar power stations to diesel generator stations . Evacuation shelters were opened to refugees of the storm with no safe living arrangements starting 16 March . About 110 individuals sought shelter at one such location in Nullagine . As the storm moved inland , flood warnings were posted throughout the Kimberley and the Pilbara , where officials closed public access to Karijini National Park . The impending cyclone forced the closure of the Great Northern and North West Coast highways , while flights to and from several airports were cancelled . 
 = = Meteorological effects and aftermath = = 
 On coming ashore , <unk> Lua produced strong winds , gusting to 150 km / h ( 93 mph ) at Port Hedland , and appreciable rainfall , peaking at 88 @.@ 6 mm ( 3 @.@ 49 in ) at Bidyadanga . The precipitation was widespread , affecting a large area of interior Western Australia . The overcast weather led to abnormally cool temperatures , which broke monthly records in portions of the central and eastern Pilbara . For instance , the Port Hedland Airport recorded a maximum temperature of 24 @.@ 1 ° C on 17 March , the coldest March day in the station 's history ; the previous record of 25 @.@ 8 ° C was set 64 years prior . As the remnants of Lua continued poleward , they continued to drop heavy rainfall , including a daily total ( 19 March ) of 75 @.@ 0 mm ( 2 @.@ 95 in ) at <unk> , setting the record for the wettest March day there . A barometer reading of 939 hPa ( 27 @.@ 7 inHg ) at Rowley Shoals represented the lowest observed pressure associated with the storm . 
 Striking a relatively isolated area , the cyclone 's effects were limited , and no fatalities or injuries were reported . Indeed , a <unk> official noted that initial reports of damage were " scant " . Preliminary assessments suggested that Pardoo Roadhouse and the small surrounding community bore the brunt of the storm , as most towns and farms in the region escaped relatively unscathed . The manager of the roadhouse relayed that the height of the storm was " absolutely horrific " , downing numerous trees and causing some structural damage . Some destruction was also observed at the Yarrie Homestead , where return to normalcy was expected to take as long as 12 months . Numerous buildings on the <unk> Homestead sustained damage such as compromised roofs and doors , which amounted to an estimated $ 70 @,@ 000 ( 2012 AUD ; 74 @,@ 000 2012 USD ) . Several head of cattle were killed by the storm . Moderate to major flooding took place in several areas , especially along the De Grey River drainage basin , though the rainfall proved beneficial in much of the climatologically dry area . The above @-@ normal precipitation allowed farmers to get a head @-@ start on planting winter crops . 
 In the aftermath of the storm , the Western Australia state government allocated relief funds to offset the cost of recovery and cleanup in several of the affected towns . Individuals and families became eligible to apply for personal grants and small business owners would be considered for special interest rates on new loans . Local government entities listed under the proclamation were the shires of Ashburton , Broome , East Pilbara , Meekatharra , and the Town of Port Hedland . Disaster assistance money in these jurisdictions would be used to restore public assets and infrastructure impaired by the storm . The name Lua was later retired from the cyclical list of tropical cyclone names due to the system 's adverse effects on land and was replaced by the name Luana . 
 = South Park ( season 13 ) = 
 The thirteenth season of South Park , an American animated television comedy series , originally aired in the United States on Comedy Central between March 11 and November 18 , 2009 . The season was headed by the series creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone , who served as executive producers along with Anne Garefino . The season continued to focus on the exploits of protagonists Stan , Kyle , Cartman , Kenny and Butters in the fictional Colorado mountain town of South Park . 
 The season was the first of three new seasons Parker and Stone agreed to produce for the network under a renewal deal . It consisted of fourteen 22 @-@ minute episodes , which aired in two groups of seven episodes separated by a six @-@ month gap . Prior to the season 's premiere , all South Park episodes were made available for free viewing on the official series website , South Park Studios . The 13th season was the first to be broadcast in high definition and in widescreen . Continuing their practice from previous seasons , Parker and Stone wrote and produced each episode within the week before its broadcast date . 
 The 13th season satirized such topics as the ACORN scandal , Japanese whaling , piracy in Somalia and the marketing tactics of the Walt Disney Company . Celebrities were spoofed throughout the season , including the Jonas Brothers , Kanye West , Carlos Mencia , Paul Watson and Glenn Beck , all of whom publicly responded to their portrayals . The episode " Fishsticks " attracted particular media attention due to rapper Kanye West 's declaration that its jokes about his arrogance were funny but hurt his feelings . " The F Word " , in which the central characters attempt to change the definition of the word " fag " , was especially controversial and prompted complaints from the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation . A broadcast of " Pinewood Derby " in Mexico was pulled , allegedly due to its depiction of Mexican President Felipe Calderón . " Fatbeard " was praised by the crew of the USS Bainbridge , which was involved in the 2009 rescue of the MV Maersk Alabama from Somali pirates . 
 The 13th season received mixed reviews : some critics called it one of South Park 's strongest seasons , while others claimed the series was starting to decline in quality . The season maintained the average Nielsen rating viewership for the series , around 3 million viewers per episode . The episode " Margaritaville " , which satirized the global recession then affecting much of the industrialized world , won the 2009 Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program ( for Programming Less Than One Hour ) . 
 = = Episodes = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Crew = = = 
 Series creators Trey Parker and Matt Stone were the executive producers of the 13th season of South Park , along with Anne Garefino . The season was distributed by Comedy Central , where the series has aired since its inception in 1997 . Frank C. Agnone II served as supervising producer , while Eric Stough , Adrien Beard , Vernon Chatman , Bruce Howell and Erica Rivinoja worked as producers . Parker also served as director and writer for the thirteenth season . Saturday Night Live cast member Bill Hader , who had previously worked as a consultant on the show , was credited as a producer starting in season 13 . Hader said of his role with the show , " It 's really Trey and Matt who kind of write everything , and you 're just in the room kind of helping them . Basically , I 'm friends with them and they 're just nice enough to invite me into the room and let me goof around . " Ryan Quincy served as director of animation during the 13th season . 
 = = = Development = = = 
 South Park was set to expire in 2008 , but in August 2007 it was announced the series would be renewed for at least three more seasons , extending it through 2011 . The new seasons , 13 , 14 and 15 , were each to consist of 14 episodes . Stone said of the announcement , " Three more years of South Park will give us the opportunity to offend that many more people . " Parker and Stone also announced they would partner with Comedy Central to create a Los Angeles – based digital animation studio called South Park Digital Studios , which would serve as the center for all digital extensions of the South Park franchise and other animated projects . 
 Prior to the broadcast of the 13th season , Parker and Stone made every episode from the previous 12 seasons of South Park available for free viewing on the official series website , South Park Studios . New episodes from the 13th season were made available for one week after the original airdate , then removed for 30 days , after which they were returned to the site permanently . The episodes were uncensored and ad @-@ supported , so no membership fees were required to view the shows . In a statement , Parker and Stone said , " We got really sick of having to download our own show illegally all the time . So we gave ourselves a legal alternative . " 
 Two months before the 13th season premiered , South Park Studios announced that it would be the first season to be broadcast in high definition and presented in widescreen . Episodes from previous seasons were also converted to high definition . The season 's episodes first aired in the United States on Wednesdays at 10 p.m. Eastern Standard Time on Comedy Central , and were repeated Wednesdays at 12 a.m. , Thursdays at 10 p.m. and 12 a.m. , and Sundays at 11 p.m. and 2 a.m. , all EST . The first seven episodes of the season aired from March 11 , 2009 , premiering with " The Ring " , and ended on April 22 with the mid @-@ season finale " Fatbeard " . The season returned with seven more episodes , resuming on October 7 with " Dead Celebrities " , and ending on November 18 with the season finale , " Pee " . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Continuing their practice from previous seasons , Parker and Stone wrote and produced each episode within the week before its broadcast date , although as in previous seasons , only Parker was listed as writer in the end credits . The duo conceived a list of episode ideas at the start of the season , but said they preferred to wait until the last minute to start working . Deadline pressure , they explained , energized them as if they were doing a live show . Stone said of the practice , " We kind of need that [ chaos ] to work . We 're , like , ' We have to do something right now . It 's going on the air in just a few minutes . ' " For example , three days before the broadcast of the season premiere , " The Ring " , the script was only half @-@ finished and the animation was incomplete . Likewise , they did not start work on " Whale Whores " until five days before the episode aired , and the scripts for " Margaritaville " and " Pee " were both still being finished the day before the episodes were first broadcast . Parker and Stone said " Dead Celebrities " was a particularly challenging episode to make — they were up all night working on it the day before it aired , and did not finish until 11 a.m. on its broadcast date . Some critics have said that this short turnaround process helps South Park stay fresh and allows the show to address current events in a timely fashion . 
 The 13th season introduced the characters Katie and Katherine , stars of a television show , The Queef Sisters , that consists largely of vaginal flatulence jokes . They are female equivalents of long @-@ time characters Terrance and Phillip , who are initially angered at the competition from Katie and Katherine , but end up romantically involved with them . Season 13 also marked the final appearance of long @-@ time supporting character Gordon Stoltski , the third grade student who read the morning announcements for South Park Elementary . In the episode " Dances with Smurfs " , Gordon is murdered while reading the announcements by a gunman who mistakes him for a truck driver who slept with his wife . Some critics found the scene disturbing and inappropriate in the light of recent school shootings in the United States . 
 The running gag of killing protagonist Kenny McCormick continued , though he was killed only three times during the season : in the episode " The Ring " , he contracts syphilis after engaging in oral sex ; in " W.T.F. " , he is shot by a rocket launcher during a professional wrestling match ; and in " Pee " , he drowns in the urine that <unk> the water park . During the final half of the season , aliens were hidden in images throughout the episodes as part of a contest offered by South Park Studios . Viewers able to find the alien in the episode could enter a contest , with the grand winner getting an animated version of himself or herself placed in the South Park opening credits starting the next season . In December 2009 , Matthew <unk> was announced winner of the contest . 
 = = = Cultural references = = = 
 The 13th season also continued a South Park tradition of lampooning celebrities and timely issues . The episode " Margaritaville " satirized the global recession affecting much of the industrialized world at the time of the episode 's broadcast . Parker and Stone said they had long planned to do an episode about the recession , but did not want to rush it because they wanted to make sure the script was strong . " Fatbeard " was based on real @-@ life piracy in Somalia , which began receiving increasing international media attention in 2008 ; the Somali pirates are portrayed in a sympathetic light in the episode . " Dances with Smurfs " parodied the political commentary of Glenn Beck , a nationally syndicated radio show host and Fox News Channel political pundit . In the episode , Cartman makes outrageous claims with no basis in fact under the guise that he is simply asking rhetorical questions and seeking further discussion , a practice for which Beck has been criticized . 
 The episode " Whale Whores " addressed the controversies surrounding Japanese whaling , condemning not only the whalers who engaged in the practice , but shows like Whale Wars and activists like television celebrity Paul Watson who profit from fighting whaling . " Butters ' Bottom Bitch " featured a scene in which Butters visits an ACORN office seeking benefits for prostitutes working for him , a reference to a similar 2009 scandal . The episode " Eat , Pray , Queef " demonstrated a double standard between rights of men and women by showing the South Park men , who have no problem with farting , strongly objecting to vaginal flatulence from women . The season finale , " Pee " , satirized the disaster film genre , especially the movie 2012 , which was released five days before the episode aired . Cartman interprets the large number of minorities at his favorite water park as a sign of the 2012 phenomenon , the prediction that cataclysmic events will occur in the year 2012 , which is said to be the end of the Mayan Long Count calendar . 
 " The Ring " featured parodies of the pop @-@ rock boy band Jonas Brothers and a foul @-@ mouthed , greedy , physically violent Mickey Mouse , satirizing the Walt Disney Company 's exploitation of family @-@ friendly morals to disguise its profit motive . " The Coon " served as a parody of dark @-@ toned comic book movies , like The Dark Knight ( 2008 ) , The Spirit ( 2008 ) and Watchmen ( 2009 ) . " Dead Celebrities " mocked numerous recently deceased celebrities , including Michael Jackson , Billy Mays and David Carradine , as well as the show Ghost Hunters . " Dances with Smurfs " mocked the 2009 James Cameron film Avatar , suggesting the plot borrows heavily from the film Dances with Wolves and comparing Avatar 's blue aliens to the cartoon Smurfs . The episode " W.T.F. " parodied professional wrestling in general and World Wrestling Entertainment in particular , highlighting the soap opera aspects of wrestling storylines and fans who believe the stories are real . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Several original songs written by Parker and Stone were featured in the 13th season . The episode " Fatbeard " features a song , " Somalian Pirates , We " , in which Cartman and his crew of pirates sing in the style of the Golden Age of Piracy . In response to fan requests , the full 90 @-@ second version of the song was made available for download on South Park Studios the week the episode aired . The season finale , " Pee " , features a tune sung by Cartman , " ( Too Many Minorities ) Not My Water Park " , in which he despairs over the large number of African @-@ American , Hispanic @-@ American and Asian @-@ American patrons at his water park . Among other topics , Cartman expresses his anger about long lines full of minorities and park employees speaking Spanish rather than English . The episode " Eat , Pray , Queef " features " Queef Free " , a charity single recorded by the men of South Park after they realize women should be free to queef just as men are free to fart . The song has been described as a parody of such celebrities @-@ for @-@ charity songs as " We Are The World " . 
 The 13th season also featured or spoofed real @-@ life songs and bands . The episode " Fishsticks " , which prominently featured rapper Kanye West , includes a two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half minute song , " Gay Fish " , that parodies West 's " Heartless " . " Gay Fish " satirizes the rapper 's tendency to rely on audio processing to correct his mistakes in pitch . After " Fishsticks " aired , the full song was made available for download on South Park Studios . Several fake Jonas Brothers songs , with lyrics about the band members ' physical attractiveness , were written for " The Ring " . Some songs also emphasize the band 's belief in sexual abstinence , with lyrics like , " Who needs sex and drugs and partying when we can cook a meal and sit around and watch Netflix ? " The strongly erotic reactions of the young girls at their concert parody the frenzied female fan reactions the Jonas Brothers tend to elicit , even though their image projects wholesomeness and chastity . In the episode " Whale Wars " , Cartman plays the video game Rock Band and performs a rendition , praised by critics , of the Lady Gaga song " Poker Face " . On March 16 , 2010 , Rock Band developer Harmonix released this version of the song ( along with the original version ) as downloadable content for the game . In " W.T.F. " , during an audition for the boys ' professional wrestling league , one of the participants sings a Broadway @-@ style number — parodying the song " Nothing " from A Chorus Line — about why he wants to be a wrestler . The episode " Fatbeard " received considerable press attention after Ike stated in a letter he would " vomit his balls out through his mouth " if he had to hear anything more about Susan Boyle , the Scottish amateur singer who had recently gained worldwide attention for her performance of " I Dreamed a Dream " on Britain 's Got Talent . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Ramsey Isler of IGN said South Park continued to be the " best animated comedy show on TV " during its 13th season . He said the season had some low points , particularly " Eat , Pray Queef " , but that episodes like " The F Word " and " Dances with Smurfs " delivered significant social commentary . Isler described " Fishsticks " as a well @-@ timed , hilarious episode that became a " phenomenon " . Ben Flanagan of The Tuscaloosa News said the 13th season was one of the strongest yet for South Park , and that the series continued its tradition of entertainingly combining gross @-@ out comedy with social satire . He wrote , " Whether they tackle the Jonas Brothers , Somali pirates , Kanye West , The Dark Knight , the current economic woes or just the frequent greed and foolishness of the human race , the show continues to solidify itself as not only the funniest show on TV , but the best . " 
 Not all reviews of the season were positive . A.V. Club writer Sean O 'Neal called it " one of the more hit @-@ or @-@ miss seasons of South Park in the show ’ s history " , but said he was confident the series could do better and that it had yet not entered the " staggering animal begging to be put out of its misery stage of a show 's lifetime " . He described the season as a " weekly exercise in South Park schizophrenia " , with some episodes faring better than others , although he said the first half of the season was generally strong . Josh Modell , also of the A.V. Club , agreed that the season was uneven , with several episodes " you kinda shrugged your shoulders at " , but others like " Butters ' Bottom Bitch " that he found " pretty damn funny " . 
 " Fishsticks " particularly attracted media attention , and some critics declared it one of the best episodes of the season . In the episode , Jimmy writes a joke that becomes a national sensation , while Cartman tries to steal the credit . A fictionalized version of rapper Kanye West fails to understand the joke . He cannot admit that he does not get it because , in reference to a perceived ego problem on the part of the real West , he considers himself a genius . On September 13 , 2009 , during the MTV Video Music Awards , West interrupted an acceptance speech by country singer Taylor Swift , walking on stage , grabbing the microphone and praising her competitor Beyoncé Knowles . The incident received considerable press coverage and , as a result , Comedy Central rebroadcast " Fishsticks " for two straight hours on September 15 . 
 " The F Word " was especially controversial , even by South Park standards . In the episode , the South Park boys attempt to change the official definition of the word " fag " from an anti @-@ homosexual slur to a term describing loud and obnoxious Harley bikers . The uncensored word is voiced casually and very frequently throughout the episode . A.V. Club critic Genevieve Koski argued that " The F Word " advocates a philosophy that language is ever @-@ changing and that taboo words receive their stigma purely due to social circumstance . Although some LGBT activists accepted that the episode had noble intentions , the Gay & Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation nevertheless objected to it , claiming that it still used " fag " as a means of insulting others and could be unintentionally harmful to the gay community . Some critics praised the episode and said it addressed an important and difficult issue , whereas others felt the satire was ineffective and unfunny . 
 = = = Celebrity reactions = = = 
 Some celebrities who were spoofed in 13th season episodes responded to their portrayals . The day after " Fishsticks " aired , West wrote on his blog , " South Park murdered me last night and it 's pretty damn funny . It hurts my feelings but what can you expect from South Park ! " West thanked the South Park writers in his blog entry and acknowledged he has a problem with his ego , but said he was trying to change . The blog post drew substantial media attention ; Daniel Kreps of Rolling Stone said : " Many have tried , all have failed , but in the end it only took four animated children from Colorado to topple Kanye West 's ego . " Carlos Mencia , host of the Comedy Central show Mind of Mencia , was also spoofed in " Fishsticks " . He is portrayed as knowingly stealing credit for a joke he did not write , which is a reference to accusations other comedians have made that Mencia plagiarizes jokes from other people . After the episode aired , Mencia wrote on his Twitter feed , " They just made fun of me on South Park . I thought it was hysterical . Catch the rerun . " 
 In " The Coon " , Butters suspects heavyset comedian Bruce Vilanch is Cartman 's superhero alter ego based on his physique . After the episode aired , Vilanch sent a card to Parker and Stone thanking them for referring to him . Shortly after " Whale Whores " aired , Paul Watson said he was not offended by his portrayal in the episode , and was glad South Park brought the issue of dolphin and whale slaughter , and the Japanese role in it , to a large audience . After Billy Mays appeared in " Dead Celebrities " , his son Billy Mays III said he loved the episode and found its portrayal of his father tasteful and respectful . Jason Hawes and Grant Wilson , the stars of Ghost Hunters who were also mocked in " Dead Celebrities " , said they loved the parody and encouraged fans to watch the show on their Twitter accounts . The day after " Dances with Smurfs " originally aired , Glenn Beck discussed the episode on his radio program and said he took the parody as a compliment . The Jonas Brothers ' publicist specifically forbade reporters from asking the band members about their portrayal in " The Ring " . Nevertheless , Nick Jonas said , " We are always open to make fun of ourselves . " 
 " Pinewood Derby " drew considerable media attention in Mexico when it first aired due to its depiction of Mexican President Felipe Calderón . The episode was due to air in Spanish on MTV Latin America on February 8 , 2010 , but it was pulled a few hours before the scheduled time . Media reports indicated the decision stemmed from the episode 's depiction of Calderón irritating the international community and frivolously spending alien @-@ provided " space cash " on water parks . MTV said the South Park creators did not get a special permit needed to broadcast an image of Mexico 's flag , but the explanation was met with skepticism by Mexican South Park fans , some of whom accused MTV of censorship . 
 " Fatbeard " included prominent references to the April 2009 hijacking of the MV Maersk Alabama by Somalian pirates . The crew of the USS Bainbridge , the Arleigh Burke – class guided @-@ missile destroyer that participated in the rescue of Richard Phillips from Maersk Alabama , contacted the South Park creators to commend them on the episode . Ensign Jonathan Sieg , the Bainbridge public relations officer , wrote , " Pretty much everyone onboard our ship — from Captain to seaman — is a huge fan of South Park , and when we heard about the episode ' Fatbeard ' , as you can imagine , we were thrilled and very interested to watch . " 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 The 13th season of South Park generally maintained the average Nielsen rating viewership for the series , around 3 million viewers per episode . The season premiere , " The Ring " , was seen in 3 @.@ 41 million households . That would prove to be the largest individual viewership for any Comedy Central show that season , outperforming even a highly anticipated and publicized episode of The Daily Show involving Jon Stewart 's ongoing feud with CNBC and pundit Jim Cramer . The 13th season of South Park received its lowest viewership in the episodes " Dances with Smurfs " , seen in 1 @.@ 47 million households ; " W.T.F. " , seen in 1 @.@ 37 million households ; and " The F Word " , seen in 1 @.@ 99 million households . However , " The F Word " was the highest rated show of the season among viewers between ages 18 and 49 , and outperformed The Jay Leno Show , NBC 's primetime talk show . The season finale , " Pee " , was seen in 2 @.@ 87 million households , which made it the most watched cable show of the night . Likewise , " The Coon " , seen in 3 @.@ 27 million households , was the most watched cable program among ages 18 to 49 the week it aired . Several episodes from the 13th season of South Park were the most watched Comedy Central shows the week they aired , including " Margaritaville " ( 2 @.@ 77 million households ) , " Fatbeard " ( 2 @.@ 59 million households ) , " Eat , Pray , Queef " ( 3 million households ) and " Fishsticks " ( 3 @.@ 1 million households ) . The latter two episodes were watched by over 1 million more viewers than the network 's second @-@ highest @-@ rated shows in their respective weeks . 
 = = = Awards = = = 
 Parker and Stone decided to submit " Margaritaville " for an Emmy Award because they had received a large amount of positive feedback about the episode from adult viewers . Since most Emmy voters are older , they decided " Margaritaville " stood the best chance of winning . Stone joked , " If an Emmy voter were to watch this , they might think the show was smarter than it was , so they might be fooled into voting for us . " " Margaritaville " ultimately won the 2009 Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program for Programming Less Than One Hour against competing nominees Robot Chicken , The Simpsons and American Dad ! . The victory marked the third consecutive Emmy win for South Park , which won in the same category in 2007 for the 10th season episode " Make Love , Not Warcraft " , and won the award for Outstanding Animated Program for Programming One Hour or More for the 11th season episode " Imaginationland " . Parker , Stone , Agnone , Stough , Beard , Howell , Rivinoja , Chatman , Hader and Quincy were all recipients of the Emmy . 
 In February 2010 , " Whale Whores " was nominated for a Genesis Award in the television comedy category . The Genesis Awards honor news and entertainment media for outstanding work that raises public understanding of animal issues . " Whale Whores " ultimately lost to the Family Guy episode " Dog Gone . " 
 = = Home release = = 
 The season was released by Paramount Home Entertainment in the United States on March 16 , 2010 , on both DVD ( as a three @-@ disc set ) and Blu @-@ ray ( as a two @-@ disc set ) . Each set included all 14 uncensored episodes in 1080p video and Dolby TrueHD sound , as well as brief audio commentaries by Parker and Stone for each episode , seven deleted scenes , codes for unlocking a character and challenge levels in South Park Let 's Go Tower Defense Play ! on Xbox Live Arcade , and a special mini @-@ feature , Inside Xbox : A Behind @-@ the @-@ Scenes Tour of South Park Studios , describing the show 's animation process . 
 = Dust My Broom = 
 " Dust My Broom " is a blues song originally recorded as " I Believe I 'll Dust My Broom " by American blues artist Robert Johnson in 1936 . It is a solo performance in the Delta blues @-@ style with Johnson 's vocal accompanied by his acoustic guitar . As with many of his songs , it is based on earlier blues songs , the earliest of which has been identified as " I Believe I 'll Make a Change " , recorded by the Sparks brothers as " Pinetop and Lindberg " in 1932 . Johnson 's guitar work features an early use of a boogie rhythm pattern , which is seen as a major innovation , as well as a repeating triplets figure . " I Believe I 'll Dust My Broom " was issued before blues records were tracked by recording industry trade publications and , as with most of Johnson 's recordings , has not been otherwise identified as a big seller at the time . 
 However , Elmore James ' 1951 recording as " Dust My Broom " " made it the classic as we know it " , according to blues historian Gerard Herzhaft . James ' slide guitar adaptation of Johnson 's triplet figure has been identified as one of the most famous blues guitar riffs and has inspired many rock performers . The song has become a blues standard , with numerous renditions by a variety of musicians . It also has been selected for the Blues Foundation Blues Hall of Fame , the Grammy Hall of Fame , and the Library of Congress ' National Recording Registry . 
 = = Earlier songs = = 
 Elements of " Dust My Broom " have been traced back to several earlier blues songs . Blues researcher @-@ writer Edward Komara has suggested that Johnson may have begun developing his version as early as 1933 . The Sparks brothers ' 1932 recording of " I Believe I 'll Make A Change " and Jack Kelly 's " Believe I 'll Go Back Home " in 1933 both use a similar melody and lyrics . Some verses are also found in Carl Rafferty 's 1933 " Mr. Carl 's Blues " : 
 Kokomo Arnold , whose " Old Original Kokomo Blues " served as the basis for Johnson 's " Sweet Home Chicago " , recorded two songs with similar lines , " <unk> Woman Blues " in 1934 : 
 and " Sissy Man Blues " in 1935 : 
 The melody that Johnson uses is also found in 1934 recordings of " I Believe I 'll Make a Change " by Leroy Carr and Josh White . 
 = = Lyrics and interpretation = = 
 Johnson 's " I Believe I 'll Dust My Broom " combines lyrics , also identified as " floating verses " , from the earlier songs and adds two new verses of his own . Music historian Elijah Wald calls the result " a more cohesive lyric than either of the Arnold pieces [ and ] concentrates on the theme of traveling , and being away from the girl he loves " . Attempts have been made to read a hoodoo significance into the phrase " dust my broom " . However , bluesman Big Joe Williams , who knew Johnson and was familiar with folk magic , explained it as " leaving for good ... I 'm putting you down , I won 't be back no more " . Music writer Ted Gioia also likens the phrase to the biblical passages about shaking the dust from the feet and symbolizing " the rambling ways of the blues musician " : 
 While Johnson is disillusioned with one woman , he also yearns for another : 
 The last verse shows Johnson 's unusual use of geographical references . These are taken from topical events , including the Second Italo @-@ Ethiopian War , the Japanese invasion of Manchuria , and the creation of the Commonwealth of the Philippines . However , their use in Johnson 's song is seen as escapism by music writer Greil Marcus . Music writer Thomas Beebee notes that while the world of many blues listeners was limited to the Mississippi Delta , 
 The last stanza of the song raises the stakes , exploding into a fantastic geography — the singer 's voice trails a bit behind the guitar line here , as if burdened by the imaginative leap involved ... Mixed with all the bitterness , after all , is a geographic expansiveness that suddenly stretches the thirty miles of Arkansas backroads into a trip around the world . 
 " Sweet Home Chicago " ( the next song Johnson recorded ) includes the refrain " Back to the land of California , to my sweet home Chicago " . Comparing the two , Marcus comments , " ' Chicago ' functioned in the lyric as a place as distant as ' the Philippine Islands ' ; ' California ' was a place as mythical as ' Ethiopia ' " . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " I Believe I 'll Dust My Broom " was recorded by Johnson during his first recording session on November 23 , 1936 . The recording took place in a makeshift studio in Room 414 at the Gunter Hotel in San Antonio , Texas , and was produced by Art Satherley and Don Law . It was the second song that Johnson recorded and followed " Kind Hearted Woman Blues " . As with most of his recordings , it appears that a second take of the song was recorded and assigned a reference number . Stephen <unk> , who manages Johnson 's recording legacy , notes that this take , along with several others , " remain [ s ] <unk> , if ever issued ; destroyed after being recorded ( if ever ) ; or otherwise unknown to collectors " . 
 Johnson recorded the song as an upbeat boogie shuffle . As with several other Johnson songs and typical of Delta blues from the era , he does not adhere to a strict twelve @-@ bar blues structure , but rather varies the timing to suit his whim . The song is performed in the key of E at a moderate tempo of 100 – 105 beats per minute . Unlike some of the earlier songs that influenced Johnson , " I Believe I 'll Dust My Broom " does not feature a bottleneck or slide guitar . Instead , Johnson employs a fingerstyle guitar in which melodic lines are played against a driving bass boogie figure , creating an effect similar to the then popular combination of piano and guitar accompaniment . Wald has identified the use of the boogie bass line , adapted for guitar from the piano boogie style , as a major innovation by Johnson , although it had been used in a 1935 recording by Johnny Temple , titled " Lead Pencil Blues ( It Just Won 't Write ) " . To facilitate his fingerpicking style , Johnson also used an open tuning . Komara describes it as a modified open @-@ A tuning with the fifth string retuned from A to B , giving a new tuning of E – B – E – A – C ♯ – E or a standard open E tuning of E – B – E – G ♯ – B – E. 
 The song also features Johnson 's use of a repeating guitar figure consisting of fast high @-@ note triplets . This riff came to define the song , although Johnson also used it in several other of his songs , including a slide version for " Ramblin ' on My Mind " . 
 = = Releases = = 
 " I Believe I 'll Dust My Broom " was released in 1937 by three related record companies : Vocalion Records ( using catalogue number <unk> ) , ARC ( no . 7 @-@ 02 @-@ 81 ) , and Conqueror Records ( no . <unk> ) . These were issued on the then standard ten @-@ inch 78 rpm record , backed with Johnson 's " Dead Shrimp Blues " . The single was Johnson 's third record of eleven released during his lifetime . 
 As one of three Johnson songs to become early blues standards , Wald questions why " I Believe I 'll Dust My Broom " was not included on the first reissue of his recordings , the King of the Delta Blues Singers album released by Columbia in 1961 . Authors Pearson and McCulloch note that its place on the album " would have connected Johnson to the rightful inheritors of his musical ideas — big @-@ city African American artists whose high @-@ powered , electrically amplified blues remained solidly in touch with Johnson 's musical legacy " . In 1970 , the song was included on Columbia 's second Johnson compilation , King of the Delta Blues Singers , Vol . II , in 1990 , on the The Complete Recordings box set , and on several compilation albums . 
 = = Elmore James renditions = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 " Dust My Broom " was one of the earliest songs Elmore James performed regularly while he was still living in the Mississippi Delta in the late 1930s . Blues historian Ray Topping has suggested that James may have encountered Robert Johnson during this time , when he learned how to play the song . James often performed with Aleck Rice Miller , better known as Sonny Boy Williamson II as a duo . However , his music career was interrupted by a stint in the U.S. Navy during World War II . After his discharge , he again joined up with Williamson , who regularly performed on radio . In January 1951 , Williamson was offered the opportunity to record some songs for Trumpet Records , where , by one account , he was accompanied by James . In August , the duo auditioned " Dust My Broom " for Trumpet owner Lillian McMurry , who signed James to a recording contract . Meanwhile , two versions of " Dust My Broom " were recorded — Arthur " Big Boy " Crudup in 1949 and Robert Lockwood in 1951 . Neither rendition appeared in the record charts . 
 = = = Recording and composition = = = 
 On August 5 , 1951 , after a Sonny Boy Williamson II recording session , Elmore James recorded " Dust My Broom " at Ivan Scott 's Radio Service Studio in Jackson , Mississippi . James , who provided the vocals and amplified slide guitar , is accompanied by Williamson on harmonica , Leonard Ware on bass , and Frock O 'Dell on drums . The recording studio had not made the transition to tape technology , so the group was recorded direct @-@ to @-@ disc using one microphone . It was the only song recorded by James ; Trumpet 's McMurray felt that his other songs were not suitable for recording . However , Williamson and James ' cousin , Homesick James , later claimed that McMurry secretly taped the performance and that Elmore was so upset that he was unable to record a B @-@ side . McMurray denied this and presented a check made out to and endorsed by James the day before the session to show his knowledge of and agreement to participate in the recording . 
 To record his song , Elmore James used Robert Johnson 's first four verses and concluded with one similar to that found in Arthur Crudup 's 1949 recording : 
 James ' song also followed Johnson 's melody , key , and tempo , but adhered more closely to the chord changes of a typical twelve @-@ bar blues . However , according to musicologist Robert Palmer , he " transformed what had been a brisk country blues into a rocking , heavily amplified shuffle " . Besides the backing musicians , the most notable addition to the song is James ' overdriven slide guitar , which plays the repeating triplet figure and adds a twelve @-@ bar solo after the fifth verse . Compared to Johnson guitar work , Gioia describes them as " more insistent , firing out a machine @-@ gun triplet beat that would become a defining sound of the early rockers " . His use of vibrato with the slide has been called as " his distinctive jangling guitar style " by musicologist Charlie Gillett . Music critic Cub Koda notes that , in James ' hands , " this may be the most famous blues riff of all time , [ n ] <unk> to the four @-@ note intro of Bo Diddley 's ' I 'm a Man ' " . 
 = = = Releases and charts = = = 
 Elmore James never recorded any more of his own material for Trumpet , although he later appeared as a sideman . McMurry , who was unaware of prior recordings of the song , arranged to copyright " Dust My Broom " in James ' name and subsequently issued the single , with a rendition of " Catfish Blues " by Bobo Thomas as the B @-@ side . Both songs listed the performer as " Elmo James " , although James does not perform with Thomas . Regional record charts show that " Dust My Broom " gradually gained popularity in different parts of the U.S. It eventually entered Billboard magazine 's national Top R & B singles chart April 5 , 1952 and peaked at number nine . In 1955 , after the release of an updated version by another record label , McMurray leased the recording to Ace Records , who re @-@ released it . Jewel Records also re @-@ released the original Trumpet recording as a single in 1965 . 
 Since it was originally released by Trumpet , the original recording does not appear on many of James ' early compilation albums by Crown / Kent . However , it is included on King Biscuit Time , a Sonny Boy Williamson II collection by Arhoolie Records , and a James box set , The Early Classic Recordings 1951 – 1956 . The versions of " Dust My Broom " that appear on many Fire / Fury / Enjoy / Sphere / Sue compilations , such as King of the Slide Guitar , were recorded during his first session in Chicago in 1959 and last session in New York in late @-@ 1962 or early @-@ 1963 . These later renditions do not include harmonica , but have piano accompaniment . 
 = = = Derivatives and " Dust My Blues " = = = 
 The success of the single by the relatively small Trumpet Records led other record companies to pursue James in the hope of landing his follow @-@ up singles . Joe Bihari , who owned Los Angeles @-@ based Modern Records with his brothers , and his talent scout Ike Turner were one of the first . A later session in Chicago produced " I Believe " , a " Dust My Broom " knockoff , that became a number nine charting single and the first issued on the new Modern subsidiary Meteor Records in 1953 . Being able to score two hits within a year with essentially the same song by the same artist prompted record companies to exploit it as much as possible . Thus , many re @-@ workings of " Dust My Broom " with small variations were recorded by James for different record labels during his career . 
 In 1955 , Flair Records , another Bihari label , issued a reworking of the song titled " Dust My Blues " ( catalogue no . 1074 ) . Recorded in New Orleans at Cosimo Matassa 's J & M Studios , James was backed by veteran New Orleans musicians , including bassist Frank Fields , drummer Earl Palmer , and pianist Edward Frank . Topping calls it " a powerful reincarnation of the old broom theme " and Gillett adds that it is " a fine hard driving song " . " Dust My Blues " is perhaps the definitive re @-@ recording of the James ' original , with an updated accompaniment . It appeared in some regional charts when the single was reissued in the 1960s . Following the 1964 UK release of " Dust My Blues " , James ' slide guitar sound was adapted by many British blues @-@ oriented guitarists . 
 = = = Recognition = = = 
 Elmore James ' " Dust My Broom " was inducted into the Blues Foundation Blues Hall of Fame in 1983 ; Jim O 'Neal that it received more votes than any other record in the first year of balloting for singles . His song was also inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame in 1998 . In 2003 , the original 1951 Trumpet recording was selected for preservation in the U.S. Library of Congress ' National Recording Registry , which commented " James is known to have tinkered with his guitar pickups and fans still argue about how he achieved his signature sound . Whatever combination of guitar and pickup was used in his slide guitar opening , Elmore James created the most recognizable guitar riff in the history of the blues " . 
 = Law school of Beirut = 
 The law school of Beirut ( also known as the law school of Berytus and the school of Roman law at Berytus ) was a center for the study of Roman law in classical antiquity located in Beirut ( Latin : Berytus ) . It flourished under the patronage of the Roman emperors and functioned as the Roman Empire 's preeminent center of jurisprudence until its destruction in A.D. 551 . 
 The law schools of the Roman Empire established organized repositories of imperial constitutions and institutionalized the study and practice of jurisprudence to relieve the busy imperial courts . The archiving of imperial constitutions facilitated the task of jurists in referring to legal precedents . The origins of the law school of Beirut are obscure . The earliest written mention of the school dates to 239 , when its reputation had already been established . The school attracted young , affluent Roman citizens , and its professors made major contributions to the Codex of Justinian . The school achieved such wide recognition throughout the Empire that Beirut was known as the " Mother of Laws " . Beirut was one of the few schools allowed to continue teaching jurisprudence when Byzantine emperor Justinian I shut down other provincial law schools . 
 The course of study at Beirut lasted for five years and consisted in the revision and analysis of classical juridic texts and imperial constitutions , in addition to case discussions . Justinian took a personal interest in the teaching process , charging the bishop of Beirut , the governor of Phoenicia Maritima and the teachers with discipline maintenance in the school . 
 The school 's facilities were destroyed in the aftermath of a massive earthquake that hit the Phoenician coastline . It was moved to Sidon but did not survive the Arab conquest of 635 . Ancient texts attest that the school was next to the ancient Anastasis church , vestiges of which lie beneath the Saint George Greek Orthodox Cathedral in Beirut 's historic center . 
 = = Background = = 
 As the guarantor of justice , the Roman emperor was expected to devote substantial amounts of time to judicial matters . He was the chief magistrate whose major prerogative ( jus ) was the ordering of all public affairs , for which he could demand assistance from anyone at any time . 
 With legal appeals , petitions from subjects and judicial queries of magistrates and governors , the emperors were careful to consult with the jurists ( iuris <unk> ) , who were usually secretaries drafted from the equestrian order . From the reign of Augustus ( 27 BC – AD 14 ) , jurists began compiling organized repositories of imperial edicts ( <unk> ) , and juristic scholarship became an imperially sponsored function of administration . Every new judicial decision was founded on archived legal precedents and earlier deliberations . The edict repositories and the imperially sponsored juristic scholarship gave rise to the earliest law school system of the Western world , aimed specifically at training professional jurists . 
 = = History = = 
 During the reign of Augustus , Beirut was established under the name Colonia Iulia Augusta Felix Berytus ( and granted the status of <unk> <unk> ) as a colony for Battle of Actium veterans from the fifth Macedonian and the third Gallic legions . It was chosen as a regional center instead of the more prominent Phoenician cities of Tyre and Sidon , which had a history of belligerence against Rome . 
 Beirut was first mentioned in writing as a major center for the study of law in the 239 works of Gregory Thaumaturgus , the bishop of Neo @-@ Caesarea . Other early written sources do not mention when the law school was established , and the date is much debated among modern historians and scholars . Edward Gibbon suggested its founding may have been directed by locally born Emperor Alexander Severus , who reigned during A.D. 222 – 235 ; this hypothesis had been supported by Gilles Ménage , a late 17th @-@ century French scholar . Italian jurist Scipione Gentili , however , attributed the school 's foundation to Augustus , while 19th @-@ century German theologian Karl Hase advocated its establishment shortly after the victory at Actium ( 31 BC ) . Adolf Friedrich <unk> dated it to the reign of Hadrian , while Franz Peter Bremer suggested that it opened around 200 , based on Thaumaturgus . 
 Theodor Mommsen linked the establishment of the law school in Beirut with the need for jurists , since the city was chosen to serve as a repository for Roman imperial edicts concerning the eastern provinces . After arriving in Beirut , these were translated into Greek , published and archived . This function was first recorded in 196 , the date of the earliest constitutions contained in the Gregorian Codex , but the city is thought to have served as a repository since earlier times . The proximity of the repository to the law school allowed the <unk> jurists to consult archived documents and for students to learn of the most recent imperial decrees — an advantage that the law schools of Caesarea Maritima and Alexandria lacked . 
 The 3rd @-@ century emperors Diocletian and Maximian issued constitutions exempting the students of the law school of Beirut from compulsory service in their hometowns . In the 4th century , the Greek rhetorician Libanius reported that the school attracted young students from affluent families and deplored the school 's instructional use of Latin , which was gradually abandoned in favor of Greek in the course of the century . By the 5th century , Beirut had established its leading position and repute among the Empire 's law schools ; its teachers were highly regarded and played a chief role in the development of juristic learning in the East to the point that they were dubbed " <unk> Masters " . From 425 , the law school of Constantinople became a rival center of law study and was the only school , along with Beirut 's , to be maintained after Justinian I closed those of Alexandria , Caesarea Maritima and Athens in 529 because their teachings contradicted with Christian faith . 
 On July 9 , 551 , the Phoenician coastal cities were devastated by a high @-@ magnitude earthquake . In Beirut the earthquake was followed by a tsunami and a fire that obliterated the city . In the aftermath , 30 @,@ 000 people lost their lives , including many students from abroad . Justinian allocated funds to rebuild Beirut , and the law school was temporarily moved to the southern Phoenician city of Sidon , pending reconstruction ; the best teachers , however , moved to Constantinople . Misfortune hit Beirut again in 560 when a massive fire ravaged the recovering city . The law school was not reopened , and all prospect for its return was abandoned with the Arab conquest in 635 . 
 = = Academia = = 
 The study course at the law school of Beirut was restricted to Roman law ; it did not cover the local laws of the province of Phoenicia . Ancient texts provide an idea of the curriculum , the teaching method , the course languages and its duration . 
 = = = Preparatory studies = = = 
 Potential students were expected to have undergone grammar , rhetoric and encyclopedic sciences studies . Another prerequisite was the mastery of Greek and Latin , given that the classical juridic references and imperial constitutions used in the teaching program were written in Latin . The aspirants could pursue their preparatory studies in public schools or have private tutors . 
 = = = Curriculum = = = 
 Little is known about the Beirut law school 's curriculum before the 5th century . The Scholia <unk> and the Scholia to the Basilica provide glimpses of the school 's teaching method , comparable to the method of rhetoric schools at the time . The lecturer would discuss and analyze juridic texts by adding his own comments , which included references to analogous passages from imperial constitutions or from the works of prominent classical Roman jurists , such as Ulpian . He would then formulate the general legal principles and use these to resolve legal problems inspired from actual , practical cases . This method differed from the scheme of classical times in which the student had to master the law basics before engaging in case studies . 
 Jurisprudence was taught in Latin , even in the law schools of the East , but toward the end of the fourth and the beginning of the 5th century , Latin was supplanted by Greek at Beirut , which was the long @-@ established lingua franca of the eastern territories of the Roman Empire . A similar shift probably occurred at the school of Constantinople at about the same time . 
 The Omnem constitution at the beginning of the Digest is the only source of information about the existing study system in the 5th century until the Justinian reforms of 533 . The old program was a four @-@ year course to be completed before the age of 25 . The courses were based on the works of Gaius , Ulpian , Papinian and Paulus . Students attended lectures for three years and spent the fourth year in private study of Paulus ' Responsa ; they had the option to stay for a fifth year to study imperial constitutions . The students of each year were distinguished by special nicknames : first year , <unk> ; second , <unk> ; third , <unk> ; fourth , <unk> . 
 Justinian 's Omnem constitution fixed the duration of the legal course in the schools of Beirut and Constantinople at five years . The courses consisted of lectures and self @-@ study using materials advanced in his Corpus Juris Civilis , namely the Institutiones ( Institutes ) , Digesta ( Digest ) and Codex ( Code ) . First @-@ year students were lectured on the Institutes and on the first part of the Digest ; second @-@ year students were taught the greater part of the Digest , and third @-@ year students had to learn various texts from Papinian and the leges <unk> . There were no lectures during the course 's fourth year but the pupils studied the remainder of the Digest . Nicknames were still given according to the year of study , but Justinian changed the name of first @-@ year students from the frivolous <unk> ( which means " two pennies " ) to Iustiniani novi and dubbed fifth @-@ year students <unk> . At the end of the course , graduands were given certificates allowing them to work as court advocates or in the imperial civil service . 
 = = = Professorial body = = = 
 Ancient texts reveal the names and deeds of some of the most notable law professors at the Beirut school . The scarce sources include historical accounts , juridic works , anthologies , ancient correspondences and funerary inscriptions . 
 Antioch @-@ based rhetoric teacher Libanius wrote many letters of correspondence to Domninus the Elder , a 4th @-@ century law school professor . In 360 , Libanius invited Domninus to leave Beirut and teach with him at the rhetoric school of Antioch . Domninus apparently declined the offer , since later correspondence to him from Libanius , between 361 and 364 , served as recommendations for law school candidates . 
 The most brilliant era of Beirut 's law school , spanning the century between 400 and 500 , was known as the era of the " Ecumenical Masters " ( Greek : τῆς <unk> <unk> ) . During this period , a succession of seven highly esteemed law masters was largely responsible for the revival of legal education in the Eastern Roman Empire . The seven revered masters , cited with praise by 6th @-@ century scholars , were Cyrillus , Patricius , Domninus , Demosthenes , Eudoxius , Leontius and <unk> . 
 Cyrillus was the founder of the ecumenical school of jurists . He is believed to have taught as of c . 400 or c . 410 . Styled " the great " due to his reputation as a teacher , he was known for his direct use of ancient sources of law and for interpreting jurists such as Ulpian and Papinian . Cyrillus wrote a precise treatise on definitions that supplied the materials for many important scholia appended to the first and second titles of the eleventh book of the Basilica . Patricius was praised in the third preface of the Justinian Digest ( Tanta @-@ <unk> ) as a distinguished professor of the Beirut law school . Archaeological excavations done in Beirut at the turn of the 20th century revealed a funerary monument believed to have belonged to Patricius . The son of Eudoxius , Leontius was described by ecclesiastical historian Zacharias Rhetor , who was his first @-@ year student in 487 or 488 , to have a great reputation in the legal field . He was raised to the office of Praetorian prefect of the East under Emperor Anastasius I between 503 and 504 , and became Magister militum in 528 . Leontius was also involved as a commissioner in the preparation of the first codex of Justinian . His contemporary , <unk> , wrote a commentary on Ulpian 's Libri ad Edictum . 
 Historical sources also tell of <unk> , a teacher at the Beirut law school who taught during the times of the " Ecumenical Masters " . <unk> was the brother of the city 's bishop Eustathius and was involved in the 460 religious controversy caused by Timothy Aelurus , which opposed the Miaphysites to the followers of the Council of Chalcedon . Dorotheus , Anatolius ( son of Leontius ) and Julianus were school professors contemporary to Justinian I. The first two were summoned to the imperial court and commissioned to draft the Digesta . Under the supervision of Tribonian , Dorotheus also collaborated with Theophilus , a Constantinopolitan law teacher , in drafting the Institutiones . Julianus , the last known professor of Beirut 's law school , was extolled by <unk> as " the light of the law " . After the earthquake , Julianus left Beirut and settled in Constantinople , where he authored the Epitome <unk> in 555 . 
 Under Justinian , there were eight teachers in the law schools of the Byzantine Empire , presumably four in each of Beirut and Constantinople 's schools . Justinian mandated the supervision and enforcement of discipline in the school of Beirut to the teachers , the city 's bishop and the governor of Phoenicia Maritima . 
 = = = Notable students = = = 
 While most of the law school 's students are not remembered by history , ancient historians and sources recount the stories of some of those who were deemed notable and achieved fame . 
 According to Eusebius of Caesarea , Pamphilus of Caesarea was born into a rich family in Beirut in the latter half of the 3rd century and attended its law school . Pamphilus later became the presbyter of Caesarea Maritima and the founder of its extensive Christian library . He is celebrated as a martyr by both the Roman Catholic Church and the Eastern Orthodox Church . Eusebius also tells of martyred brothers <unk> and <unk> , born to a noble Lycian family . They converted to Christianity while studying law in Beirut and were persecuted and executed for their beliefs . 
 Fourth @-@ century historian Eunapius wrote of Anatolius , a high @-@ ranking Roman official known to his enemies as <unk> . Anatolius occupied the offices of consul of Syria , vicarius of the Diocese of Asia , proconsul of Constantinople , urban prefect of Constantinople in 354 , and Praetorian prefect of Illyricum until his death in 360 . In his account of Anatolius , Eunapius summarized : " He reached the summit of the science of law . Nothing about this is surprising because Beirut , his homeland , is the mother and nurse of these studies " . Libanius ' correspondence with <unk> of Tyre discusses the latter 's achievements after his graduation from the law school of Beirut ; <unk> became the consular governor of Phoenicia in 362 . Gazan lawyer and church historian Sozomen , also a law student at Beirut , wrote in his Historia Ecclesiastica about <unk> , a convert to Christendom who became the bishop of Nicosia . <unk> received juridic training in Beirut and was criticized by his teacher Saint Spyridon for his <unk> and for using legal vocabulary instead of that of the Bible . 
 Zacharias Rhetor studied law at Beirut between 487 and 492 , then worked as a lawyer in Constantinople until his imperial contacts won him the appointment as bishop of Mytilene . Among Rhetor 's works is the biography of Severus , the last <unk> patriarch of Antioch and one of the founders of the Syriac Orthodox Church , who had also been a law student in Beirut as of 486 . Another late 5th @-@ century student was John Rufus , an anti @-@ Chalcedonian priest who moved to Maiuma after the expulsion of his master , Peter the Fuller . In Maiuma , John Rufus authored the <unk> and the Life of Peter the Iberian . 
 = = Location = = 
 Historically , Roman stationes or auditoria , where teaching was done , stood next to public libraries housed in temples . This arrangement was copied in the Roman colony at Beirut . The first mention of the school 's premises dates to 350 , but the description does not specify its location . In the 5th century , Zacharias Rhetor reported that the school stood next to the " Temple of God " , the description of which permitted its identification with the Byzantine Anastasis cathedral . 
 At the turn of the 20th century , archaeological excavations in the souq between the Saint George Greek Orthodox Cathedral and Saint George Cathedral of the Maronites unearthed a funerary stele etched with an epitaph to a man named Patricius , " whose career was consecrated for the study of law " . The epitaph was identified as being dedicated to the famous 5th @-@ century law school professor . In 1994 , archaeological diggings underneath the Saint George Greek Orthodox Cathedral in Beirut Central District 's <unk> Square identified structural elements of the Anastasis cathedral , but they were restricted to an area of 316 square metres ( 3 @,@ 400 sq ft ) and failed to unearth the interred school . 
 = = Reputation and legacy = = 
 The law school of Beirut supplied the Roman Empire , especially its eastern provinces , with lawyers and magistrates for three centuries until the school 's destruction . The influx of students was abundant and persistent because of the affluence , honor and secured employment offered by the profession . A degree in law became highly sought following an edict issued in 460 by Emperor Leo I. The edict ordered that candidates for the bar of the Eastern praetorian prefecture had to produce certificates of proficiency from the law teachers who instructed them at one of the recognized law schools of the Empire . 
 The in @-@ depth studies of the juridic classical works in Beirut , and later in Constantinople , conferred an unprecedented scientific dimension to jurisprudence ; this academic movement gave rise to the minds behind Justinian 's juridic reforms . As a result of the new understanding of the classical juridic texts , the imperial laws of the late 5th and early 6th centuries were clearer and more coherent than those of the early <unk> Era , according to legal historian George <unk> and other scholars . 
 The school garnered accolades throughout its existence and was bestowed with the title Berytus Nutrix Legum ( Beirut , Mother of Laws ) by Eunapius , Libanius , Zacharias Rhetor and finally by Emperor Justinian . His 533 Omnem constitution read : 
 These three works which we have composed we desire should be put in their hands in royal cities as well as in the most fair city of Berytus , which may well be styled the nursing mother of law , as indeed previous Emperors have commanded , but in no other places which did not enjoy the same privilege in old times , as we have heard that even in the brilliant city of Alexandria , and in Caesarea and others , there have been ignorant men who , instead of doing their duty , conveyed spurious lessons to their pupils , and such as these we desire to make desist from that attempt by laying down the above limits , so that , if they should hereafter be guilty of such conduct and carry on their duties outside the royal cities and the metropolis Berytus , they may be punished by a fine of ten pounds of gold and be expelled from the city in which instead of teaching the law they transgress the law . 
 From the 3rd century , the school tolerated Christian teachings , producing a number of students who would become influential church leaders and bishops , such as Pamphilus of Caesarea , Severus of Antioch and <unk> . Under Cyrillus , the first of the Ecumenical Masters , the Christian faith was consolidated as an integral element of the juristic training . 
 Two professors from the law school of Beirut , Dorotheus and Anatolius , had such a repute for their wisdom and knowledge that they were especially praised by Justinian in the opening of his Tanta constitution . The emperor summoned both professors to assist his minister Tribonian in compiling the Codex of Justinian , the Empire 's body of civil laws issued between 529 and 534 . The Tanta passage reads : 
 Dorotheus , an illustrious man , of great eloquence and <unk> rank , whom , when he was engaged in delivering the law to students in the most brilliant city of Berytus , we , moved by his great reputation and renown , summoned to our presence and made to share in the work in question ; again , Anatolius , an illustrious person , a magistrate , who , like the last , was invited to this work when acting as an exponent of law at Berytus , a man who came of an ancient stock , as both his father Leontius and his grandfather Eudoxius left behind them an excellent report in respect of legal learning ... 
 For centuries following its compilation , the work of Justinian 's commission was studied and incorporated into the legal systems of different nations and has profoundly impacted the Byzantine law and the Western legal tradition . Peter Stein asserts that the texts of ancient Roman law have constituted " a kind of legal supermarket , in which lawyers of different periods have found what they needed at the time . " 
 The Corpus Juris Civilis remained the basis of Byzantine law until the publication of the Ecloga legum in 741 by Emperor Leo III and his son and co @-@ regent Constantine V. The Ecloga was a shortened and more philanthropic version of the Codex of Justinian , whose dispositions were more in tune with Christian values . It was written in Greek , since Latin had fallen into disuse , and its provisions continued to be applied in later centuries in the neighboring Balkan and Asia Minor regions , with surviving translations in Slavic , Armenian and Arabic . Emperor Basil I , who ruled in the 9th century , issued the <unk> and the <unk> , which were legal compilations invalidating parts of the Ecloga and restoring the Justinian laws . The <unk> served as the basis for the legal writings of the 12th @-@ century first archbishop of Serbia , Saint Sava . His legal compilation was intended for the Serbian church but the influential work was adopted as the basic constitution for the Bulgarian and Russian orthodox churches . Around 900 , Emperor Leo VI commissioned the Basilica , a Greek rewriting of the Justinian laws that is considered the ancestor of modern Greece 's law until the enactment of the Code of 1940 . 
 The Codex of Justinian also had a great influence on Western law , particularly on the juridic history and tradition of western Europe and its American colonies . In Italy , a single complete copy of the Justinian Digest survived and lay forgotten until its rediscovery in 1070 . In 1088 , <unk> , a jurist and teacher of the liberal arts in Bologna , was the first to teach the newly recovered Digest and the rest of Justinian 's books . He and his successors explained the Roman laws to their students by means of glosses or explanatory notes written on the edges or between the text lines . The Roman legal concepts resulting from the studies of these " <unk> " spread to the universities and law courts of Europe . The Roman law revival that started in Italy , during the Middle Ages , was taken up by France , the Netherlands and Germany in later centuries . The enactment of the German Civil Code in 1900 put an end to the application of extant forms of law derived from the Justinian codes in most European states . 
 The reputation of Beirut as " mother of laws " reemerged in modern times . In 1913 , Paul <unk> , the first dean of the newly established Université Saint @-@ Joseph 's Faculty of Law , dedicated the inaugural speech to the classical law school of Beirut in an effort to confer legitimacy to the new academy . The epithet Berytus Nutrix Legum is used as a motto and as part of the emblem of the Beirut Bar Association , founded in 1919 . It is also featured in the seal and flag of the Municipality of Beirut . 
 = Ralambo = 
 Ralambo was the ruler of the Kingdom of Imerina in the central Highlands region of Madagascar from 1575 to 1612 . Ruling from Ambohidrabiby , Ralambo expanded the realm of his father , Andriamanelo , and was the first to assign the name of Imerina to the region . Oral history has preserved numerous legends about this king , including several dramatic military victories , contributing to his heroic and near @-@ mythical status among the kings of ancient Imerina . The circumstances surrounding his birth , which occurred on the highly auspicious date of the first of the year , are said to be supernatural in nature and further add to the mystique of this sovereign . 
 Oral history attributes numerous significant and lasting political and cultural innovations to King Ralambo . He is credited with popularizing the consumption of beef in the Kingdom of Imerina and celebrating this discovery with the establishment of the fandroana New Year 's festival which traditionally took place on the day of Ralambo 's birth . According to legend , circumcision and polygamy were also introduced under his rule , as was the division of the noble class ( andriana ) into four sub @-@ castes . Oral history furthermore traces the tradition of royal idols ( sampy ) in Imerina to the reign of Ralambo , who made heavy use of these supernatural objects to expand his realm and consolidate the divine nature of his sovereignty . Due to the enduring cultural legacy left by this king , Ralambo is often considered a key figure in the development of Merina cultural identity . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born in the sacred highland village of Alasora to King Andriamanelo and Queen Randapavola , Ralambo was the only one of his parents ' children to survive to adulthood . According to one legend , as a child he may have been known by the name Rabiby , being given the name Ralambo after successfully killing a particularly ferocious wild boar ( <unk> ) in the woods . Another story attributes his name to a wild boar that walked past the threshold of the house where his mother was resting shortly after giving birth to him . However , both of these explanations are likely to have originated at some point after his reign ; it is more probable that he took the name Ralambo after propagating the consumption of the meat of the zebu , called <unk> in the proto @-@ Malagasy language and the Malayo @-@ Polynesian tongue from which it derived . 
 A popular legend imbues the birth of Ralambo with a mystical character . The legend relates that his mother , who was known in her youth as Ramaitsoanala ( " Green Forest " ) , was the daughter of the Vazimba water goddess <unk> ( " Great Bird " ) . With the assistance of her celestial mother , Ramaitsoanala confronted and overcame numerous obstacles . After her marriage to Andriamanelo ( whereupon she assumed the name Queen Randapavola ) , one of these obstacles took the form of reproductive difficulties : six consecutive times Randapavola miscarried or lost her children in infancy . When she was pregnant with her seventh child , the queen was especially afraid for her unborn child because the number seven was traditionally associated with death . This time , Randapavola sought the guidance of an astrologer to protect the unborn child from an evil fate . On his advice she chose to defy the tradition of delivering the baby at her parents ' home village of Ambohidrabiby , rather choosing the village of Alasora , to the north of Antananarivo , because this cardinal direction embodied great power . According to the tale , the queen gave birth in a house built to resemble a boat ( called a <unk> ) evocative of the transoceanic origins of the Malagasy people . There , Randapavola took the name <unk> upon delivering a healthy son , Ralambo , on the first day of the first month of the year ( <unk> ) , the most auspicious date for the birth of a sovereign . 
 = = Reign = = 
 Ralambo 's many enduring and significant political and cultural achievements of his reign have earned him a heroic and near mythical status among the greatest ancient sovereigns of Merina history . Ralambo was the first to assign the name of Imerina ( " Land of the Merina people " ) to the central highland territories where he ruled . He moved his capital from Alasora to Ambohidrabiby , location of the former capital of his maternal grandfather King Rabiby . The first sub @-@ divisions of the andriana noble caste were created when Ralambo split it into four ranks . He introduced the traditions of circumcision and family intermarriage ( such as between parent and step @-@ child , or between half @-@ siblings ) among Merina nobles , these practices having already existed among certain other Malagasy ethnic groups . The practice of sanctifying deceased Merina sovereigns is also believed to have originated with this king . 
 Ralambo is credited with introducing the tradition of polygamy in Imerina . The Merina legend of the origin of this practice was recorded in the 19th @-@ century collection of Merina andriana oral history and genealogy entitled Tantara ny Andriana eto Madagasikara . According to this source , Ralambo had already married once when his servant encountered the beautiful princess <unk> and four female companions gathering edible greens in a valley west of Ambohidrabiby . Upon hearing of her beauty , Ralambo instructed the servant to make her a marriage offer on his behalf . The servant asked three times , and each time the princess refused to give her consent , instead replying " If Ralambo is king and I am queen . " The fourth time , after Ralambo had instructed his servant to carry her to him by force , the princess agreed to marry on the condition that it be done properly with the consent of her parents , a condition to which the king agreed . Ralambo then informed his first wife of his intention to marry again , to which she replied , " I approve your decision , " and the marriage was made . Ralambo ultimately took four wives in total : <unk> , <unk> , <unk> and <unk> . These marriages produced three daughters and twelve sons , the eldest of whom , Andriantompokoindrindra , was passed over for Ralambo 's succession in favor of his second son , Andrianjaka . 
 Ralambo expanded and defended his realm through a combination of diplomacy and successful military action aided by the procurement of the first firearms in Imerina by way of trade with kingdoms on the coast . According to legend , when a group of warriors from a village near the Ikopa river attempted to attack the village of <unk> , Ralambo so frightened the warriors with the noise of a single shotgun blast that every warrior ran into the Ikopa river and drowned . Imposing a capitation tax for the first time ( the <unk> @-@ <unk> , or " price of secure life " ) , he was able to establish the first standing Merina royal army and established units of blacksmiths and silversmiths to equip them . He famously repelled an attempted invasion by an army of the powerful western coastal Betsimisaraka people at a site now known as <unk> ( " Lazy " ) at <unk> , north of Alasora . The Betsimisaraka traditionally only fought at night and so were found asleep in their camp by Ralambo and his men and were easily vanquished . In another famous incident , Ralambo 's army set a trap for a Vazimba king named <unk> who claimed to control thunder . Ralambo 's emissary , a man named <unk> , was sent to the Vazimba king to invite him to participate in a contest of superiority against Ralambo . While <unk> traveled to join Ralambo for the competition , <unk> set fire to the Vazimba capital of Imerinkasinina . The Vazimba king saw the smoke and began to hasten back to the village but was captured in an ambush laid by Ralambo 's troops and was forced to exile himself in the forests far to the east . 
 = = = Fandroana = = = 
 According to oral history , the wild zebu cattle that roamed the Highlands were first domesticated for food in Imerina under the reign of Ralambo . Different legends attribute the discovery that zebu were edible to the king 's servant or to Ralambo himself . Ralambo disseminated this discovery throughout his realm , as well as the practice and design of cattle pen construction . Ralambo is likewise credited with founding the traditional ceremony of the fandroana ( the " Royal Bath " ) , although others have suggested he merely added certain practices to the celebration of a long @-@ standing ritual . Among the Merina , legend characterizes the fandroana as a festival established by Ralambo to celebrate his culinary discovery . 
 According to one version of the story , while traversing the countryside , Radama and his men came across a wild zebu so exceptionally fat that the king decided to make a burnt offering of it . As the zebu flesh cooked , the enticing smell led Ralambo to taste the meat . He declared zebu meat to be fit for human consumption . In honor of the discovery , he decided to establish a holiday called fandroana that would be distinguished by the consumption of well @-@ fattened zebu meat . The holiday was to be celebrated on the day of his birth , which coincided with the first day of the year . To this end , the holiday symbolically represented a community @-@ wide renewal that would take place over a period of several days before and after the first of the year . 
 Although the precise form of the original holiday cannot be known with certainty and its traditions have evolved over time , 18th- and 19th @-@ century accounts provide insight into the festival as it was practiced at that time . Accounts from these centuries indicate that all family members were required to reunite in their home villages during the festival period . Estranged family members were expected to attempt to reconcile . Homes were cleaned and repaired and new housewares and clothing were purchased . The symbolism of renewal was particularly embodied in the traditional sexual permissiveness encouraged on the eve of the fandroana ( characterized by early 19th @-@ century British missionaries as an " orgy " ) and the following morning 's return to rigid social order with the sovereign firmly at the helm of the kingdom . On this morning , the first day of the year , a red rooster was traditionally sacrificed and its blood used to anoint the sovereign and others present at the ceremony . Afterward the sovereign would bathe in sanctified water , then sprinkle it upon attendees to purify and bless them and ensure an auspicious start to the year . Children would celebrate the fandroana by carrying lighted torches and lanterns in a nighttime processional through their villages . The zebu meat eaten over the course of the festival was primarily grilled or consumed as jaka , a preparation reserved uniquely for this holiday . This delicacy was made during the festival by sealing shredded zebu meat with suet in a decorative clay jar . The confit would then be conserved in an underground pit for twelve months to be served at the next year 's fandroana . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 Amulets and idols fashioned from assorted natural materials have occupied an important place among many ethnic groups of Madagascar for centuries . <unk> , personal amulets believed to protect or allocate powers to the wearer , were commonplace objects possessed by anyone from slave children to kings . The name sampy was given to those amulets that , while physically indistinguishable from ody , were distinct in that their powers extended over an entire community . The sampy were often personified — complete with a distinct personality — and offered their own house with guardians dedicated to their service . Ralambo amassed twelve of the most reputed and powerful sampy from neighboring communities . He furthermore transformed the nature of the relationship between sampy and ruler : whereas previously the sampy had been seen as tools at the disposal of community leaders , under Ralambo they became divine protectors of the leader 's sovereignty and the integrity of the state which would be preserved through their power on the condition that the line of sovereigns ensured the sampy were shown the respect due to them . By collecting the twelve greatest sampy — twelve being a sacred number in Merina cosmology — and transforming their nature , Ralambo strengthened the supernatural power and legitimacy of the royal line of Imerina . 
 The Tantara ny Andriana eto Madagasikara , the 19th @-@ century transcription of Merina oral history , offers an account of the idols ' introduction into Imerina . According to legend , one day during Ralambo 's reign a woman named Kalobe arrived in Imerina carrying a small object wrapped in banana leaves and grass . She had traveled from her village located at <unk> in Betsileo country to the south which had been destroyed by fire , walking the great distance and traveling only at night in order to deliver to the king what she called Kelimalaza ( " the Little Famous One " ) , giving the impression that it was no less than the greatest treasure in the land . Ralambo took the sampy and built a house for it in a nearby village . He then selected a group of adepts who were to study under Kalobe to learn the mysteries of Kelimalaza . Oral history maintains that Kalobe was " made to disappear " after the adepts ' training was completed in order to prevent her from absconding with the precious idol . 
 Not long after , the legend continues , a group of Sakalava ( or , by some accounts , Vazimba ) warriors were preparing to attack a village north of Alasora called <unk> . Ralambo announced that it would be sufficient to throw a rotten egg at the warriors , and Kelimalaza would take care of the rest . According to oral history , the egg was thrown and hit a warrior in the head , killing him on contact ; his corpse fell onto another warrior and killed him , and this corpse fell onto another and so forth , until the warriors had all been destroyed , <unk> confirming the power of Kelimalaza as the protector of the kingdom in the minds of the Merina populace . Similarly , at the besieged Imerina village of <unk> , invoking Kelimalaza was said to have produced a massive hailstorm that wiped out the enemy warriors . 
 The honored place that Ralambo awarded to Kelimalaza encouraged others like Kalobe to bring their own sampy to Ralambo from neighboring lands where they had been introduced long before by the Antaimoro . First after Kelimalaza was <unk> , said to control snakes and repel attacks . The next arrival , Manjakatsiroa , protected the sovereignty of the king from rivals and became the favorite of Ralambo , who kept it always near him . Afterward came Rafantaka , believed to protect against injury and death ; others followed , all of Antaimoro origin with the possible exception of <unk> , which had come from the Tanala forest people to the east . The propagation of similar sampy at the service of less powerful citizens consequently increased throughout Imerina under Ralambo 's rule : nearly every village chief , as well as many common families , had one in their possession and claimed the powers and protection their communal sampy offered them . These lesser sampy were destroyed or reduced to the status of ody ( personal talismans ) by the end of the reign of Ralambo 's son , Andrianjaka , officially leaving only twelve truly powerful sampy ( known as the <unk> <unk> : the " Royal <unk> " ) which were all in the possession of the king . These royal sampy , including Kelimalaza , continued to be worshiped until their supposed destruction in a bonfire by Queen Ranavalona II upon her public conversion to Christianity in 1869 . 
 = = Death and succession = = 
 Ralambo is believed to have died around 1612 . He was buried in the traditional stone tomb of his grandfather , King Rabiby , which still stands at the highland village of Ambohidrabiby . According to a 19th @-@ century source , his death was mourned for a full year . His burial reportedly took place at night and a royal mausoleum ( trano masina ) was constructed over his tomb , a royal Merina tradition that would continue until the collapse of the 19th century Kingdom of Madagascar . The rules of succession established by Andriamanelo obliged Ralambo to pass over his eldest son ( by his second wife ) in favor of the succession of Andrianjaka , his younger son by his first wife , Rafotsindrindramanjaka . 
 = Petersen Rock Garden = 
 Petersen Rock Garden , formerly Petersen 's Rock Garden and also known as the Petersen Rock Gardens , is a rock garden and museum on 4 acres ( 1 @.@ 6 ha ) , located between the cities of Bend and Redmond in Deschutes County , Oregon , United States . Rasmus Petersen , a Danish immigrant who settled in Central Oregon in the early 1900s , began constructing the garden in 1935 using rocks he found within an 85 @-@ mile ( 137 km ) radius of his family home . Petersen constructed detailed miniature castles , churches and other small buildings and monuments from a variety of rock types . He incorporated other design elements such as bridges , water features and natural landscaping . Petersen worked on the garden until his death in 1952 ; the garden has remained in his family 's care since then . The garden , considered a roadside attraction with novelty architecture , includes roaming peafowl and a museum with a gift shop that sells rocks . 
 In 2011 , Petersen Rock Garden was named one of Oregon 's Most Endangered Places by the Historic Preservation League of Oregon ( now known as Restore Oregon ) . In 2012 , accidental damage to one of the stone bridges by a contractor catalyzed an effort to document the garden using laser scanning and other technologies . The garden was closed temporarily in 2013 to undergo repair and review for listing on the National Register of Historic Places . Petersen has been praised for his creative work , and the garden has received a positive reception for its uniqueness and local significance . Listing on the National Register was achieved on October 30 , 2013 . 
 = = Description = = 
 Petersen Rock Garden , considered a roadside attraction with " eclectic " novelty architecture , is located 3 miles ( 4 @.@ 8 km ) off U.S. Route 97 , 10 miles ( 16 km ) north of Bend and 7 miles ( 11 km ) south of Redmond . It contains dozens of " fanciful " and " intricately detailed " miniature buildings , including castles , churches and cottages , constructed from agate , jasper , lava , malachite , obsidian , petrified wood and <unk> . The 4 @-@ acre ( 1 @.@ 6 ha ) grounds also contain roaming peafowl and a small museum with a gift shop that sells rocks , including crystals , fossils and semiprecious gemstones . The museum features a fluorescent room with miniature castles constructed from manganese , tungsten , uranium and zinc that glow in the dark . Petersen Rock Garden is open every day from 9 a.m. until closing time , which varies depending on the season . As of 2009 , admission is $ 4 @.@ 50 for adults , at self @-@ pay stations . It is not a member of the Oregon Museums Association . 
 = = History = = 
 Rasmus Petersen , a Danish immigrant who settled in Central Oregon in the early 1900s at age 17 , began constructing the rock garden on the grounds of his family home in 1935 . The " eccentric " farmer used rocks that he found within an 85 @-@ mile ( 137 km ) radius . He attempted to evoke his native country with his designs , but also created monuments to the United States , including a concrete American flag and a 7 @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) replica of the Statue of Liberty . Petersen incorporated other design elements such as bridges , water features ( lagoons , lily ponds and streams ) and natural landscaping . He worked on the garden until his death in 1952 ; the garden has remained in his family 's care since then . A bronze plaque in front of the Statue of Liberty replica reads : " Enjoy yourself : it 's later than you think . " Petersen 's Rock Garden became known as Petersen Rock Garden in the mid @-@ 1950s . At its height , supported by traffic from the Old Bend @-@ Redmond Highway , the garden drew approximately 150 @,@ 000 visitors a year . 
 The garden is managed and owned by Petersen 's grand @-@ stepdaughter , Susan <unk> , and her family , who has struggled to maintain the lawns and dozens of sculptures . In 2011 , the garden was named one of Oregon 's Most Endangered Places by the Historic Preservation League of Oregon ( now known as Restore Oregon ) . The " Endangered Places " program raises awareness of the state 's " historic treasures in need of the advocacy and support to save them from demise " . According to the League , the deteriorating garden needed " maintenance , a business plan and a publicity campaign to ensure stewardship and funds are available to overcome vandalism , theft , and condition issues " . In 2012 , a contractor accidentally damaged one of the stone bridges , catalyzing an effort to document the garden using laser scanning and other technologies . The Portland @-@ based company i @-@ Ten measured and archived the site 's geospatial data , allowing potential future rebuilding to match the original construction . 
 The garden was closed from February 1 through May 24 , 2013 to undergo repair and review for listing on the National Register of Historic Places . The family and ten volunteers worked for nearly six months to restore the grounds . The cleanup process included the removal of dead vegetation and junk from outbuildings , and an estate sale that included items from before Petersen 's death . On May 25 , 2013 , Petersen Rock Garden hosted its " grand reopening " . The opening was attended by members of the Confederated Tribes of Warm Springs , who sang and blessed the garden . <unk> has considered opening a cafe on the grounds , and turning the family home into a bed and breakfast . Owen Evans , a friend of the family who has assisted with the restoration , has also envisioned a museum reorganization , a small amphitheater to host outdoor concerts and other events , and additional rock sculptures mimicking Petersen 's style . 
 Petersen Rock Garden was added to the National Register of Historic Places on October 30 , 2013 . 
 = = Reception = = 
 According to the Northwest Digital Archives , photographer Myron Symons typed the following description of the garden during the 1940s within a photo album that is now part of University of Washington Libraries , Special Collections : 
 Miniature castles , picturesque fountains and beautiful terraces within the grounds pictured here , on the Rasmus Peterson [ sic ] place between Bend and Redmond , Oregon , tell their own stories , but unless the visitor inspects the grounds carefully , and with a questing heart , he will fail to read the strange stories told by the ancient stones used in the construction .... Look twice at that bit of petrified wood , for it is a remnant of a great redwood forest that once flourished in Central Oregon .... Examine that banded rock carefully : It is a bit of a thunderegg hatched in the lavas of old Oregon .... Feel the cool surface of those glass @-@ like rocks : They are volcanic glasses melted in plutonic fires .... Trace the growth rings on that bit of petrified sequoia : They tell a story of weather born of oceans that swept over beaches now elevated into Oregon mountains . Enjoy the blooms of these rock gardens , but do not overlook the stories of the rocks . 
 Petersen Rock Garden has attracted visitors from around the world . In 2009 , The Oregonian 's Terry Richard wrote that Petersen 's work is " more than a half @-@ century old , but it 's still amazing " . The Historic Preservation League of Oregon considers the garden a " real gem " for its local significance and its " unique expression of mid @-@ century roadside architecture " . Moon Publications described it as a " full @-@ fledged rock fantasy " and a " rock garden to end all rock gardens " , with a " funky " museum . Via , the online magazine for the American Automobile Association 's West Coast club , called the garden " folksy " and Petersen " imaginative " for his work . 
 The garden has inspired at least one other Oregon resident to construct rock sculptures . Following his visit to Petersen Rock Garden in the early 1980s , Ira <unk> built nearly a dozen castles on the terraces of his Rowena home ; some of them have since been relocated to his daughter 's house , located 5 miles ( 8 @.@ 0 km ) west of The Dalles along the Historic Columbia River Highway ( U.S. Route 30 ) . In 2013 , <unk> Brae released a music video for the song " Don 't Know Nothing ' Bout Love " , which was filmed at Petersen Rock Garden . 
 = Nicholas Fuller ( lawyer ) = 
 Sir Nicholas Fuller ( 1543 – 23 February 1620 ) was an English barrister and Member of Parliament . After studying at Christ 's College , Cambridge , Fuller became a barrister of Gray 's Inn . His legal career there began <unk> — he was employed by the Privy Council to examine witnesses — but was hampered later by his representation of The Puritans , a religious group which did not conform with the established Church of England . Fuller was repeatedly in contention with the ecclesiastical courts , including the Star Chamber and Court of High Commission , and was once expelled for the zeal with which he defended his client . In 1593 he was returned as the Member of Parliament for St Mawes , where he campaigned against the extension of recusancy laws . Outside of Parliament , he successfully brought a patents case which not only undermined the right of the Crown to issue patents but accurately predicted the attitude taken by the Statute of Monopolies two decades later . 
 Returned to Parliament in 1604 for the City of London , Fuller became considered the " leader of the opposition " due to his conflict with the government over policy , fighting the impositions on currants , the patent on blue starch , and opposing the proposed union with Scotland on legal and economic grounds . In 1607 , in what became known as Fuller 's Case , he again began challenging the Court of High Commission , and eventually got the Court of Common Pleas under Sir Edward Coke to agree that the common law courts had the power to free imprisoned ecclesiastical prisoners . These encounters with the ecclesiastical courts were described as " bruising " , but by 1610 he was considered an " elder statesman " , introducing bills on ecclesiastical reform and the statutory management of customs duties . He continued to sit in Parliament until his death on 23 February 1620 . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Fuller was born in 1543 to Nicholas Fuller of Neat 's Hall on the Isle of Sheppey , a merchant from London . In December 1560 he was admitted to Christ 's College , Cambridge , and graduated in 1563 , joining Gray 's Inn during the same year . After an initial upset ( on 26 May 1579 , it was noted that " Mr Fuller , Reader of Staple Inn , is discharged for negligence , and fined £ 1 " ) , Fuller was highly successful at Gray 's ; he became Reader on 26 May 1587 , Dean of the chapel on 8 February 1588 and Treasurer in 1591 . Fuller was a Puritan , and much engaged in their legal and other activities , for example , he arranged a lecturer for St Christopher le Stocks , a church in London , in April 1577 . 
 From December 1588 he was employed repeatedly by the Privy Council to examine witnesses , and in 1590 was charged with interrogating Sir Thomas Fitzherbert . Although his career had begun promisingly , Fuller soon found himself at odds with the authorities due to his religion , and the religion of those he chose to represent . A favoured barrister of Puritans prosecuted based on their faith , Fuller represented John Udall at Croydon assizes , when Udall was charged with having written A Discovery of the Discipline , an allegedly seditious book . The judge instructed the jury to find Udall guilty , and " leave the felony to us " ; Fuller protested so vociferously at this that he was forced out of the court . In 1591 , following the collapse of their case in front of the Court of High Commission , Thomas Cartwright and other Puritan ministers were tried by the Star Chamber ; Fuller provided legal representation . The case was made more complicated when several of the ministers , on 16 July 1591 , " proclaimed Elizabeth deposed , and William Hacket the new messiah and king of Europe " ; this certainly was sedition , and saw the ministers confined to Fleet Prison , along with Fuller for offering to represent them . Cartwright and several other ministers were never convicted , however , which is attributed to " the highly professional resistance of the puritan lawyers [ which ] perhaps owed much to Nicholas Fuller " . Fuller was confined until 15 August . 
 = = Parliament = = 
 = = = Puritanism and patents = = = 
 Fuller was returned for St Mawes in 1593 , apparently thanks to the influence of William Cecil , and immediately began campaigning against government attempts to extend recusancy laws to Protestant splitters from the Church of England . The government introduced two such bills ; the second , sent down from the House of Lords on 5 April 1593 , was protested down by Fuller as " dangerous to good subjects " , because it made " schisms to be equal with seditions and treasons , which is against the equity of the former law " . According to records , " upon a motion of Mr Fuller ’ s , the whole committee assented to the striking out of the title and the whole preamble . No man spake for it " . While an MP , Fuller became involved in patents cases , which continued after he left Parliament in 1597 . 
 Patents were initially intended to provide protection to merchants of new industries , making England an attractive country to conduct business in . The granting of these patents was highly popular with the monarch , both before and after the statute of Monopolies , because of the potential for raising revenue . A patentee was expected to pay heavily for the patent , and unlike a tax raise ( another method of raising Crown money ) any public unrest as a result of the patent was normally directed at the patentee , not the monarch . Over time , this became more and more problematic : instead of temporary monopolies on specific , imported industries , long @-@ term monopolies came about over common commodities , including salt and starch . These " odious monopolies " led to a showdown between the Crown and Parliament , in which it was agreed , on 28 November 1601 , to turn the power to administer patents over to the common law courts ; at the same time , Elizabeth revoked a number of the more restrictive and damaging monopolies . One of the monopolies capable of being addressed at the common law was that over playing cards , which was granted to Edward Darcy on 13 June 1600 . Darcy , in 1602 , began proceedings against a Mr Allen for infringing on this patent . 
 The Crown was represented by Sir Edward Coke , then Attorney @-@ General for England and Wales , while George Croke and Fuller appeared for Allen . Coke argued that the Crown had the right to restrict " games of common good " , while Croke said that the free trade principles of the City of London rendered the patent invalid . Fuller , however , " stole the show " . He stated that only a new trade , or " a new engine tending to the furtherance of a trade that never was used before ; and that for the good of the realm , the King may grant him a monopoly patent for some reasonable time until the subjects may learn the same , in consideration of the good that he doth bring by his invention , otherwise not " . In this he accurately predicted the attitude taken by the Statute of Monopolies two decades later . 
 = = = Leader of the opposition = = = 
 Fuller did not stand for election to the Commons in 1597 ; after its dissolution , he was returned for the City of London in the 1604 Parliament of James I. He was highly active in opposing the government , to the point where academics consider him the " leader of the opposition " , although this was not a formal title at the time . During his first year , Fuller opposed the impositions on currants , the patent on blue starch , presented a petition on economic grievances ( which delayed the passage of the subsidy bill ) , supported the restoration of removed ministers and further attacked the powers of the Court of High Commission . 
 In 1606 , the government announced plans for a formal union between England and Scotland . This project was treated with great suspicion in the House of Commons , and Fuller took the lead in opposing it . Although he used racist language , saying in December 1606 that " the Scots in other countries are more like <unk> than merchants " , this was aimed at drumming up support from xenophobic elements , and Wright concludes he was not himself a <unk> . His main concern , rather , was over economic issues . Fuller argued that the Scottish merchants would undercut and impoverish English ones , and that the markets could not handle such an influx , saying that it was " fit that we seek room to place them in before we admit them " . There was also a legal and constitutional element . The proposal was to allow all Scottish citizens , born before or after the union , to become English citizens , exercisable through the Royal Prerogative . Fuller argued that this right was only exercisable by Parliament , and believed that the extension of the Royal Prerogative would lead to future encroachment on the civil liberties of English citizens . 
 = = Fuller 's Case and the Case of Prohibitions = = 
 In 1607 , Fuller began challenging the Court of High Commission yet again , an ecclesiastical court established by the monarch with near unlimited power . The High Commission was vastly unpopular amongst both common lawyers and Members of Parliament , as the idea of " prerogative law " challenged both authorities . The appointment of Richard Bancroft as Archbishop of Canterbury in 1604 caused the issue to grow in importance ; Bancroft 's zeal and strictness " could hardly fail to produce an atmosphere in which principles and issues would crystallize , in which logic would supplant reasonableness " . The judges , particularly Sir Edward Coke , began to unite with Parliament in challenging the High Commission . The High Commission tried people for heresy , based on their internal thoughts and private beliefs , in " a trap to catch unwary or ingenuous men - ' an unlawful process of poking about in the speculation of finding something chargeable ' " . 
 In what became known as Fuller 's Case , Fuller had several clients fined by the High Commission for non @-@ conformity , and stated that the High Commission 's procedure was " popish , under jurisdiction not of Christ but of anti @-@ Christ " . For this , Fuller was held in custody for contempt of court . The Court of King 's Bench argued that this was a lay matter , while the High Commission claimed it fell under their jurisdiction . In the end Fuller was convicted by the High Commission , although of heresy rather than contempt , and sent to Fleet prison . On 6 November 1608 , the common law judges and members of the High Commission were summoned before the King and told that they would argue and allow him to decide . Unable to even argue properly , instead " [ standing ] sullen , merely denying each other 's statements " , the group were dismissed and reconvened a week later . Sir Edward Coke , speaking for the judges , argued that ecclesiastical courts only had jurisdiction as long as no temporal matters were involved ; once this happened , it became a matter for the common law courts . 
 At this point the King 's own position in relation to the law , and his authority to decide this matter , was brought up , in what became known as the Case of Prohibitions . James stated that " In cases where there is not express authority in law , the King may himself decide in his royal person ; the Judges are but delegates of the King " . Coke challenged this , saying " the King in his own person cannot adjudge any case , either criminal - as treason , felony etc , or betwixt party and party ; but this ought to be determined and adjudged in some court of justice , according to the Law and Custom of England " . Coke further stated that " The common law protecteth the King " , to which James replied " The King protecteth the law , and not the law the King ! The King maketh judges and bishops . If the judges interpret the laws themselves and suffer none else to interpret , they may easily make , of the laws , shipmen 's hose ! " . Coke rejected this , stating that while the monarch was not subject to any individual , he was subject to the law . Until he had gained sufficient knowledge of the law , he had no right to interpret it ; he pointed out that such knowledge " demanded mastery of an artificial reason ... which requires long study and experience , before that a man can attain to the cognizance of it " . Victorious , Coke freely left , and continued to issue writs of prohibition against the High Commission . 
 = = Later career and death = = 
 By 1610 , Fuller was considered an " elder statesman " within Parliament , " although his influence may have been somewhat weakened by the bruising encounters with high commission and star chamber " . He introduced two bills to reform or remove ecclesiastical committees and courts , which passed in the House of Commons of England on 21 May and 20 June , though both were later rejected by the Lords . On 3 November he began campaigning to have customs duties put into a statutory framework , again against the Court of High Commission , which , he claimed , as an unelected and autonomous body could not be trusted , but rather Parliament should be given jurisdiction . In a speech on 23 June 1610 he said that " the laws of England are the most high inheritance of the land , whereby both king and subjects are directed and guided " . Customs were " not at the king ’ s pleasure to be increased without the consent of the subjects " , and " impositions and customs laid on subjects ’ goods and merchandise ... was always done by several acts of parliament " . Wright notes that this was apparently greeted with complete silence , possibly because , while the MPs agreed that civil liberties had been eroded , they felt it was too dangerous to reclaim them . On 23 February 1620 , Fuller died at his home , <unk> , at <unk> in Thatcham , Berkshire and was buried at the village 's parish church on 2 March . Most of his estate was passed to his wife , Sarah ( sister of Samuel Backhouse MP ) , and his eldest son , Nicholas , who died only four months later , leaving a three @-@ year @-@ old son . 
