 = Night of the Blood Beast = 
 Night of the Blood Beast is a 1958 American science @-@ fiction horror film about a team of scientists who are stalked by an alien creature , which implants its embryos in an astronaut 's body during a space flight . Produced by exploitation filmmaker Roger Corman and his brother Gene , it was one of the first films directed by Bernard L. Kowalski and was written by first @-@ time screenwriter Martin Varno , who was 21 years old . It starred several actors who had regularly worked with Roger Corman , including Michael Emmet , Ed Nelson , Steve Dunlap , Georgianna Carter and Tyler McVey . 
 It took Varno six weeks to write the script , the original working title of which was Creature from Galaxy 27 . The story was partially influenced by the real @-@ life Space Race and the Howard Hawks film The Thing from Another World ( 1951 ) . Screenwriters Jerome Bixby and Harold Jacob Smith gave Varno uncredited assistance with the dialogue . With a budget of about $ 68 @,@ 000 , it was shot over seven days at the Charlie Chaplin Studios , Bronson Canyon and a television station on Mount Lee in Hollywood . 
 The Blood Beast alien costume was also previously used in the Roger Corman film Teenage Cave Man ( 1958 ) , which was filmed just two weeks earlier . Art director Daniel Haller , who built the rocket @-@ ship and other props , slept at the sound stage between work sessions . Following dissatisfaction with his treatment by the Cormans , Varno pursued two successful arbitration cases , one of which was for underpayment . The other was in response to Gene Corman 's original story writing credit , even though Varno claimed to have written the entire story himself . 
 The film was featured in a 1996 episode of the comedy television series , Mystery Science Theater 3000 . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A rocket @-@ ship carrying astronaut John Corcoran ( Michael Emmet ) launches and orbits the Earth , marking the United States ' first manned space launch . Shortly after taking off , the ship is struck by an unknown object , forcing Corcoran to abort the mission and land . However , the equipment cannot handle the fast descent back into the atmosphere and the ship crash lands in the woods , killing Corcoran . Dave Randall ( Ed Nelson ) and Donna Bixby ( Georgianna Carter ) , two technicians from a nearby space agency tracking station , locate the crashed ship and recover Corcoran 's body . They are baffled , however , by what appears to be a giant tear in the side of the destroyed spacecraft and a mud @-@ like substance covering some of the wreckage . Randall and Bixby are joined by lead scientist Dr. Alex Wyman ( Tyler McVey ) , technician Steve Dunlap ( John Baer ) and physician Julie Benson ( Angela Greene ) , who was also Corcoran 's fiancee . Wyman observes that Corcoran 's body exhibits no signs of rigor mortis , and that the blood pooling beside him is not livid as it should be . The team brings the corpse back to their lab to run tests and find further irregularities . Although the body lacks a heartbeat or pulse , it maintains the blood pressure of a living human being . After looking at his blood in a microscope , they find unusual , unidentifiable cells that seem resistant to destruction from human white blood cells . 
 The team tries to call for further assistance , but find the radio is no longer working . Randall heads outside to check the power transformers , and is attacked by a large creature ( Ross Sturlin ) hiding in the underbrush around the station . Randall fires a few shots at the creature with his pistol and escapes unscathed . Although he did not get a good look at the creature , he describes it to the rest of the team as similar in size to a bear . Later , the team finds the infirmary has been trashed and Corcoran 's body is gone . They initially believe the creature has broken in and stole the corpse , but are shocked to instead find Corcoran has mysteriously regained consciousness . Upon checking his blood again , there is no trace of the mysterious cells from before , but after investigating Corcoran 's body , they find the cells have changed into lizard @-@ like fetuses and entered into his abdominal cavity . The creature later breaks into the lab again , this time beheading Dr. Wyman . Randall and Dunlap are initially suspicious that Corcoran was involved in the death , which he denies , but it appears he has some sort of telepathic connection with the creature . Despite Wyman 's death , Corcoran does not believe the creature is evil , but rather simply misunderstood . He implores the others to give the creature a chance to explain its actions , and asks that they not condemn it as a monster simply because it is different . 
 As the others plot to destroy the creature with improvised gas bombs and flares , Corcoran flees the station and finds the creature in a nearby cave . After consuming Wyman 's brain , the creature is now able to speak with the scientist 's voice and has absorbed his knowledge . Corcoran asks whether Wyman 's death was needed , but the creature insists it was a necessary sacrifice . The others arrive to destroy the creature , but hesitate because Corcoran will not step aside and let them throw their bombs . The creature insists it is not an evil monster , but an intelligent alien who has come to Earth to save the human race from its own self @-@ destructive tendencies . It explains that Corcoran 's body has been implanted with its embryos , which will allow the alien species to multiply and take over the human race , which the creature claims is the only way to truly save humanity . Upon realizing the creature is forcing the will of its species on the human race , Corcoran concludes the creature is evil after all and commits suicide so its embryos cannot come to fruition . The others then throw their explosives and kill the creature , which in its dying breaths warns that others from his species are waiting in space and will return one day to conquer humanity . 
 = = Cast = = 
 John Baer ... Steve Dunlap 
 Angela Greene ... Dr. Julie Benson 
 Ed Nelson ... Dave Randal 
 Georgianna Carter ... Donna Bixby 
 Michael Emmet ... Maj. John Corcoran 
 Tyler McVey ... Dr. Alex Wyman 
 Ross Sturlin ... The Creature 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Night of the Blood Beast was one of several films produced by B movie filmmaker Roger Corman and his brother , Gene Corman . The two also partnered together in making Hot Car Girl ( 1958 ) , Beast from Haunted Cave ( 1959 ) , Attack of the Giant Leeches ( 1959 ) and The Premature Burial ( 1962 ) . Jerome Bixby , the science fiction screenwriter who wrote It ! The Terror from Beyond Space ( 1958 ) , was originally approached for the job , but Bixby was working on another project and recommended his close friend Martin Varno for the job . Varno , the son of veteran actor Roland Varno , was 21 years old at the time . He met with Roger and Gene Corman , who discussed with him what Varno called " some sort of a weird idea for the picture " . They offered Varno a couple hundred dollars for the job , which was below the minimum compensation rates known as " scale " , but Varno was not part of the Writers Guild of America at the time and did not know about the guidelines . He accepted the offer and signed a contract . Although Varno had a rough idea it would be a low @-@ budget film , he said the Cormans set no specific guidelines for him : " I gave them the impression that I knew pretty much what I was doing , and they sort of got the idea that I wasn 't going to use 50 @,@ 000 extras and things . " 
 It took about six weeks to write the Blood Beast script . It was written under the working title Creature from Galaxy 27 , which was conceived by Varno , but the Corman brothers later changed it to Night of the Blood Beast . Gene Corman received film credit for conceiving the film 's story , but Varno claimed he wrote the film almost entirely himself and that Corman had little to do with the story : " He had some rambling ideas but they didn 't have very much to do with the movie that became Night of the Blood Beast . " Varno also said of him : " Gene didn 't open his mouth , really , until Roger told him he could . " Varno said he wrote the screenplay alone and showed parts of it to Roger and Gene Corman as he went along . Varno researched medical and aerospace technology at a library in Hollywood near Vine Street . The story , which fictionally portrays America 's manned voyage into space , was heavily influenced by the real life Space Race ongoing between the United States and Soviet Union at the time . Gene Corman said another major inspiration was The Thing from Another World ( 1951 ) , a Howard Hawks @-@ directed science fiction film about a group of soldiers and scientists threatened by an alien creature in a remote Arctic research outpost . He said of the film , " How could you not be [ influenced ] ? We had to be , if only indirectly or subconsciously . That was a classic film then , a classic film today . " However , Varno said any influence from The Thing was only subconscious : " I loved some of the scenes in The Thing and I 'm sure that crept in one way or another , but not overtly . " 
 Varno said he received uncredited assistance from his friends and fellow screenwriters Jerome Bixby and Harold Jacob Smith , the latter of whom won an Academy Award for Best Original Screenplay for the film The Defiant Ones ( 1958 ) . Varno ran lines and ideas by both men and sought advice . Smith in particular inspired lines for the speech made by the monster at the end of the film , in which the creature discusses how the human characters consider him the embodiment of evil simply because he is different from them . Varno said much of that dialogue from Smith , however , ended up getting cut from the final film . One of the primary themes of the film , as embodied in John Corcoran 's attempts to defend the alien creature , was that simply because someone or something is ugly or different does not necessarily make it evil . However , the script also followed a common trait of most horror films of the 1950s that even somewhat understandable monsters are not entirely sympathetic , and the Blood Beast creature proves itself evil by impregnating Corcoran against his will and pursuing world domination . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 The Cormans cast the film together with director Bernard L. Kowalski , who was 28 years old at the time . Kowalski also directed Roger Corman 's Hot Car Girl . Night of the Blood Beast was one of Kowalski 's first directorial credits and his first science fiction film , although he later went on to direct Attack of the Giant Leeches . For the Blood Beast cast , they mostly selected actors that had worked on other Roger Corman films . Michael Emmet had worked with Kowalski on the Western television series Boots and Saddles , where Kowalski directed most of the episodes Emmet had a major role in and was impressed with the actor 's work ethic . Emmet later starred in the Roger Corman film Attack of the Giant Leeches . Ed Nelson also worked on several Roger Corman films , including Swamp Women ( 1955 ) , Attack of the Crab Monsters ( 1957 ) , Teenage Doll ( 1957 ) and She Gods of Shark Reef ( 1958 ) . When asked what Nelson remembered about the film during a 2003 interview , he admitted , " Not much " , but he said Roger and Gene Corman were very knowledgeable about film and treated the material " light @-@ heartedly " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 The film was shot over seven days with a budget of about $ 68 @,@ 000 . Both Roger and Gene Corman were present for most of the film 's production and involved creatively as well as financially . Gene was more involved with running the day @-@ to @-@ day operations while the more experienced Roger Corman supervised and provided guidance to both Gene and Kowalski . Martin Varno was also present for shooting . They operated out of the Charlie Chaplin Studios , which was called Kling Studios at the time . Some rewriting was done as the filming progressed , and director Bernard L. Kowalski called it a collaborative process that involved himself , the Cormans and the whole crew . Varno , however , said he was not happy with how the filming process went , and that the Cormans changed dialogue and story elements without his consultation or permission . He said it reached the point where he called his agent and said , " I am not working for these sons of bitches any more ! I am sick and tired of the whole thing ! " 
 All of the interior scenes were shot at sound stages inside Kling Studios . Most of the exterior shots were filmed as Bronson Canyon , a set of caves at Griffith Park in Los Angeles that was a popular shooting location for low @-@ budget films . The exterior scenes of the tracking station were shot at a television station on Mount Lee , not far from the Hollywood Sign . Varno said it was the first television station built in Los Angeles , but was only being used for emergency broadcasts when Blood Beast was filmed ; it had also been used during World War II to send information and propaganda to the Allied Forces ' overseas allies . Varno secured permission to film there simply by calling the city of Los Angeles and asking permission , something he said nobody else considered trying because they assumed the city would not allow it . Varno was familiar with the station because his father , Roland Varno , appeared in the first dramatic television show released in Los Angeles and it was transmitted from that station . For the Blood Beast shoot , Los Angeles charged a fee of $ 8 per actor to shoot at the station , but the crew could be any size . All shooting took place outside the station and none inside . Most of the station night scenes there were shot during the day , and the film crew often had to find shadows to shoot in or block out the sun to give the impression of nighttime . Gene Corman said of the shooting : " That was one of the more mobile units I 've ever been involved with . Normally , everybody chases the sun ; we were chasing the shadows . " 
 The alien costume featured in Night of the Blood Beast was the same as the one used in another Roger Corman film , Teenage Cave Man ( 1958 ) . This was done to save money , as the Cormans often tried to incorporate existing sets , costumes and other elements from previous films into new ones for financial savings . Varno said the Corman brothers were so conscious of their spending that " ' cheap ' was the main word in their vocabulary " . The monster costume scenes in Teenage Cave Man and Night of the Blood Beast were shot within about two weeks of each other . The costume was modified slightly for Blood Beast ; Varno claimed somebody on the set said " the nose looks too Jewish " , so it was cut down slightly to more resemble a beak . Ross Sturlin wore the costume for the scenes in both Teenage Cave Man and Night of the Blood Beast . Filming was very difficult for Sturlin because it grew extremely hot inside the costume during the exterior shots . John Mathew <unk> , Jr. was director of photography for the film , and Jack Bohrer was the production manager . Daniel Haller , who went on to become a film director himself , worked as art director on Night of the Blood Beast . Haller did much of the manual construction work on the set himself , and brought a trailer in to the sound stage so he could sleep there and between work sessions . Among the props he built was the rocket @-@ ship , the frame of which was made of plywood that had been cut into circles , then covered with a plastic sheet and spray @-@ painted to look metallic . Haller also created blood cells that the characters looked at under a microscope , and the baby aliens ( which resembled seahorses ) they looked at under a <unk> . Alexander Laszlo composed the music for the film . Almost the entire crew went on to work on Attack of the Giant Leeches with the Corman brothers and Kowalski . 
 = = WGA arbitration = = 
 Martin Varno 's dissatisfaction with the Cormans eventually led him to take them into formal arbitration proceedings . Although Varno was not a member of the Writers Guild of America when he wrote the Blood Beast script , he was encouraged by actor Jay <unk> to discuss the matter with them . According to Varno , <unk> claimed several actors and writers had similar problems with the Cormans in the past , but were not taking action because the Cormans provided them continued work in their films . After meeting with the Writers Guild , Varno became a member and filed arbitration papers against the Cormans for not paying him enough . Roger Corman was in the process of editing the film when he received the arbitration notice , and he became so angry he started screaming and throwing things in the cutting room . Varno claims one of the film crew members approached him and promised the Cormans would hire Varno to work on many of their future films if he dropped the matter , but Varno refused . 
 Varno later filed a second arbitration upon learning that Gene Corman was to receive writing credit for the original story . Varno claimed Corman had nothing to do with the story , and produced large amounts of dated notes he claimed proved he wrote it himself . Varno won both arbitration matters . However , Roger Corman refused to pay Varno , and as a result he was not allowed to use Writers Guild of America members on his films . Corman used non @-@ union writers for several years , but he finally agreed to pay Varno when he wanted to use a union writer on one of his films . Varno said he would have sought more money for the delay , but he was out of the country when Corman paid the money and missed his opportunity . Additionally , despite winning arbitration in the writing credit matter , Gene Corman was given on @-@ screen original story credit in Night of the Blood Beast . When contacted by the distributor , American International Pictures , he was told removing Corman 's credit would mean recalling all of the prints and changing them , which would have cost thousands of dollars , and Varno agreed to allow it remain unchanged . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Distribution = = = 
 Night at the Blood Beast was distributed by American International Pictures . It was test @-@ screened for audiences in unadvertised sneak previews , in which audiences attending a different film were surprised with a screening of Blood Beast instead . Coincidentally , Martin Varno attended one of these sneak previews without any advance knowledge of what it was . The screening was also attended by Roger and Gene Corman , who were not pleased by Varno 's presence . It was the first time the screenwriter had seen the completed film , which he did not enjoy , and he said of watching it : " On my left side was sitting <unk> Ackerman , and on my right side was sitting Jerry Bixby . And their main job was to keep my hands held down so I wouldn 't cut my throat . " During its theatrical release , Night of the Blood Beast was a double feature co @-@ billed with She Gods of Shark Reef . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 John L. Flynn , a Towson University English professor who has written extensively about science @-@ fiction film , unfavorably compared Night of the Blood Beast to The Creeping Terror ( 1964 ) , which was also about an astronaut returning from space with a stowaway alien creature . Although Flynn said it lacked the " epic pretentiousness " of that film , he nevertheless said of Blood Beast : " Corman made a career out of making cheap knock @-@ offs of popular films , but he seems to be scraping the bottom of the barrel here " . The Washington Post writer Tom Shales said " it would be hard to find a worse movie " and that the monster " looks like the San Diego Chicken after having been tarred and feathered " . Film critic and historian Steven H. Scheuer said the plot was a good idea but criticized what he called a " sloppy execution " . Literary and film critic John Kenneth Muir said he considered the film a failure because the monster " simply could not live up to expectations once revealed " . Leonard Maltin 's Movie Guide gave the film one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half out of four stars with the entry : " Well directed , but too low budget to succeed . " Night of the Blood Beast was among several films universally considered terrible that film reviewer Michael Adams watched as part of a book about his quest to find the worst film of all time . However , Adams said he enjoyed it on a B movie level , calling it " cheap but enjoyable and buoyed by its ideas " . John Stanley , who hosted the San Francisco television show Creature Features about science @-@ fiction films , said Night of the Blood Beast deliberately imitated the best scenes from The Thing from Another World . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 Night of the Blood Beast was featured in the seventh season premiere episode of Mystery Science Theater 3000 . It was originally broadcast on November 23 , 1995 as a Thanksgiving special . The film ran along with Once Upon a Honeymoon ( 1956 ) , a short film about a married couple forced to postpone their honeymoon even further so that the husband can write a song for a telephone company and an angel who helps them out . Night of the Blood Beast was one of several Roger Corman @-@ produced or -directed films that were featured on the show , along with It Conquered the World ( 1956 ) , The Viking Women and the Sea Serpent ( 1957 ) , Teenage Cave Man ( 1958 ) , and Attack of the Giant Leeches ( 1959 ) . Night of the Blood Beast was featured along with three other episodes in the DVD box @-@ set " Mystery Science Theater 3000 : Volume XVI " , which was released on December 1 , 2009 . 
 = Oscar Pistorius = 
 Oscar Leonard Carl Pistorius <unk> ( / <unk> / ; Afrikaans pronunciation : [ <unk> ] ; born 22 November 1986 ) is a South African sprint runner and convicted murderer . Both of Pistorius ' legs were amputated below the knee when he was 11 months old . He was the first athlete to compete at the Paralympic Games and Olympic Games , competing in sprint events for below @-@ knee amputees in Paralympic events , and in non @-@ disabled sprint events . 
 After becoming a Paralympic champion , Pistorius attempted to enter non @-@ disabled international competition , over persistent objections of the IAAF and charges that his artificial limbs gave an unfair advantage . Pistorius eventually prevailed in this legal dispute . At the 2011 World Championships in Athletics , Pistorius became the first amputee to win a non @-@ disabled world track medal . At the 2012 Summer Olympics , Pistorius became the first double @-@ leg amputee to participate in the Olympics . 
 On Valentine 's Day ( 14 February ) in 2013 , Pistorius fatally shot his girlfriend , model Reeva Steenkamp , in his Pretoria home . He claimed he had mistaken Steenkamp for an intruder hiding in the bathroom , but he was arrested and charged with murder . At his trial the following year , Pistorius was found guilty of culpable homicide . He received a five @-@ year prison sentence for culpable homicide and a concurrent three @-@ year suspended prison sentence for a separate reckless endangerment conviction . 
 In November 2014 , prosecutors asked the sentencing judge for permission to appeal the verdict . Permission was granted in December , and the case was presented to a five @-@ person panel at the Supreme Court of Appeal . He was released on house arrest , and on 3 December 2015 the Appeal Court overturned the culpable homicide verdict and convicted him of murder . Pistorius appeared in court on 13 June 2016 to start the sentence hearing for the murder conviction which concluded on 15 June 2016 after Judge Thokozile Masipa adjourned the sentencing until 6 July 2016 when she sentenced Pistorius to six years imprisonment for murder . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Oscar Pistorius was born to Henke and Sheila Pistorius on 22 November 1986 in Sandton , Johannesburg , in what was then Transvaal Province ( now Gauteng Province ) of South Africa . He grew up in a Christian home and has an elder brother , Carl , and a younger sister , Aimée . Pistorius credits his mother , who died at the age of 43 when Pistorius was 15 years old , as a major influence in his life . He is a white South African with Italian ancestry from his mother 's grandfather , an Italian emigrant to Kenya . He is an Afrikaner with Afrikaans as a mother tongue and is also fluent in English . 
 Pistorius was born with fibular <unk> ( congenital absence of the fibula ) in both legs . When he was 11 months old , his legs were amputated halfway between his knees and ankles . He attended Constantia <unk> Primary School and Pretoria Boys High School , where he played rugby union in the school 's third XV team . He played water polo and tennis at provincial level between the ages of 11 and 13 . In addition , Pistorius took part in club Olympic wrestling , and trained at Jannie Brooks 's garage gym in Pretoria , South Africa . After a serious rugby knee injury in June 2003 , he was introduced to running in January 2004 while undergoing rehabilitation at the University of Pretoria 's High Performance Centre with coach Ampie Louw , and " never looked back " . His first racing blades were fitted by South African prosthetist Francois van der Watt . Because he was unable to find suitable running blades in Pretoria , Van der Watt ordered some to be made by a local engineer . However , as these quickly broke , Van der Watt referred Pistorius to American prosthetist and Paralympic sprinter Brian Frasure to be fitted for blades by Icelandic company Össur . 
 Pistorius began studying for a Bachelor of Trade & Commerce ( <unk> ) in business management with sports science at the University of Pretoria in 2006 . In a June 2008 interview for his University 's website , he joked : " I won 't graduate soon . With all the training I have had to cut down on my subjects . Hopefully I 'll finish by the time I 'm 30 ! " Asked by a journalist for his " sporting motto " , he said : " You 're not disabled by the disabilities you have , you are able by the abilities you have . " 
 = = Sporting career = = 
 Pistorius competes in T44 ( single below @-@ knee amputees ) events though he is actually classified in T43 ( double below knee amputee ) . Sometimes referred to as the " Blade Runner " and " the fastest man on no legs " , Pistorius took part in the 2004 Summer Paralympics in Athens and came third overall in the T44 ( one leg amputated below the knee ) 100 @-@ metre event . Despite falling in the preliminary round for the 200 metres , he qualified for the final . He went on to win the final in a world record time of 21 @.@ 97 seconds , beating a pair of American runners both possessing a single amputation , Marlon Shirley and Brian Frasure . 
 In 2005 , Pistorius finished sixth in the non @-@ disabled South African Championships over 400 metres with a world @-@ record time of 47 @.@ 34 seconds , and at the Paralympic World Cup in the same year , he won gold in the 100 metres and 200 metres , beating his previous 200 @-@ metre world record . At the 2006 IPC Athletics World Championships , Pistorius won gold in the 100- , 200- and 400 @-@ metre events , breaking the world record over 200 metres . On 17 March 2007 , he set a disability sports world record for the 400 metres ( 46 @.@ 56 seconds ) at the South African Senior Athletics Championships in Durban ; and at the <unk> Championships for the Physically Disabled held in Johannesburg in April 2007 , he became the world record holder of the 100- and 200 @-@ metre events with times of 10 @.@ 91 and 21 @.@ 58 seconds respectively . 
 Pistorius was invited by the IAAF to take part in what would have been his first international non @-@ disabled event , the 400 @-@ metre race at the IAAF Grand Prix in Helsinki , Finland , in July 2005 . He was unable to attend , however , because of school commitments . On 13 July 2007 , Pistorius ran in the 400 @-@ metre race at Rome 's Golden Gala and finished second in run B with a time of 46 @.@ 90 seconds , behind Stefano <unk> who ran 46 @.@ 72 seconds . This was a warm @-@ up for his appearance at the 400 metres at the Norwich Union British Grand Prix at the Don Valley Stadium in Sheffield on 15 July 2007 . As American Olympic champion Jeremy Wariner stumbled at the start of the race and stopped running , Pistorius took seventh place in a field of eight in wet conditions with a time of 47 @.@ 65 seconds . However , he was later disqualified for running outside his lane . The race was won by American Angelo Taylor with a time of 45 @.@ 25 seconds . Pistorius had ambitions of competing in other non @-@ disabled events . In particular , he had set his sights on competing at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing , China , but was ultimately not selected by the South African Olympic Committee ( see below ) . 
 = = = Dispute over prosthetics = = = 
 Pistorius has been the subject of criticism because of claims that his artificial limbs give him an advantage over runners with natural ankles and feet . He runs with J @-@ shaped carbon @-@ fibre prosthetics called the " Flex @-@ Foot Cheetah " developed by biomedical engineer Van Phillips and manufactured by Össur . 
 On 26 March 2007 , the IAAF amended its competition rules to include a ban on the use of " any technical device that incorporates springs , wheels or any other element that provides a user with an advantage over another athlete not using such a device " . It claimed that the amendment was not specifically aimed at Pistorius . To decide whether he was running with an unfair advantage , the IAAF monitored his track performances using high @-@ definition cameras to film his race against Italian club runners in Rome on 13 July , and his 400 metres in Sheffield on 15 July 2007 , at which he placed last . 
 In November 2007 , Pistorius was invited to take part in a series of scientific tests at the Cologne Sports University under the guidance of Professor of Biomechanics Dr Peter Brüggemann in conjunction with Elio Locatelli , who was responsible with the IAAF of all technical issues . After two days of tests , Brüggemann reported on his findings on behalf of the IAAF . The report claimed that Pistorius 's limbs used 25 % less energy than runners with complete natural legs to run at the same speed , and that they led to less vertical motion combined with 30 % less mechanical work for lifting the body . In December , Brüggemann told Die Welt newspaper that Pistorius " has considerable advantages over athletes without prosthetic limbs who were tested by us . It was more than just a few percentage points . I did not expect it to be so clear . " Based on these findings , on 14 January 2008 , the IAAF ruled Pistorius 's prostheses ineligible for use in competitions conducted under the IAAF rules , including the 2008 Summer Olympics . Pistorius called the decision " premature and highly subjective " and pledged to continue fighting for his dream . His manager Peet van Zyl said his appeal would be based on advice from United States experts who had said that the report " did not take enough variables into consideration " . 
 Pistorius subsequently appealed against the adverse decision to the Court of Arbitration for Sport ( CAS ) in Lausanne , Switzerland , and appeared before the tribunal at the end of April 2008 . After a two @-@ day hearing , on 16 May 2008 , the Court of Arbitration for Sport upheld Pistorius 's appeal and the IAAF council decision was revoked with immediate effect . The CAS panel unanimously determined that Dr Brüggemann tested Pistorius 's biomechanics only at full @-@ speed when he was running in a straight line ( unlike a real 400 @-@ metre race ) ; that the report did not consider the disadvantages that Pistorius suffers at the start and acceleration phases of the race ; and that overall there was no evidence that he had any net advantage over non @-@ disabled athletes . In response to the announcement , Pistorius said : " My focus throughout this appeal has been to ensure that disabled athletes be given the chance to compete and compete fairly with non @-@ disabled athletes . I look forward to continuing my quest to qualify for the Olympics . " 
 = = = Attempts to qualify for 2008 Summer Olympics = = = 
 To have a chance of representing South Africa at the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing in the individual 400 @-@ metre race , Pistorius had to attain the Olympic " A " standard time of 45 @.@ 55 seconds ; the " B " qualifying time of 45 @.@ 95 seconds if no other athlete from his country achieved the faster time did not apply . Each national athletics federation is permitted to enter three athletes in an event if the " A " standard is met , and only one athlete if the " B " standard is met . However , he was eligible for selection as a member of the relay squad without qualifying . His best chance was to try for a time of close to 46 seconds to make the 4 × 400 @-@ metre relay team . However , he said : " If I make the team I don 't want to be the reserve for the relay , I want to be in the top four . I want to bring something to the race and make the relay stronger . " To give him a chance of making the South African Olympic team , selectors delayed naming the team until 17 July . 
 On 2 July 2008 , Pistorius competed in the 400 metres in the B race of the <unk> International in Milan but was " disappointed " when he failed to achieve the minimum Olympic qualification time , completing the race in fourth place in 47 @.@ 78 seconds . His performance on 11 July 2008 at the Rome Golden Gala was an improvement of more than a second , though his sixth @-@ place time of 46 @.@ 62 seconds in the B race was still short of the Olympic qualification time . Nonetheless , he was pleased with his performance , commenting that he felt he could improve on it . 
 On 15 July 2008 , IAAF general secretary Pierre Weiss commented that the world athletics body preferred that the South African Olympic Committee not select Pistorius for its 4 × 400 metres relay team " for reasons of safety " , saying that Pistorius could cause " serious damage " and risk the physical safety of himself and other athletes if he ran in the main pack of the relay . Pistorius branded this as the IAAF 's " last desperate attempt " to get him not to qualify , and threatened legal action if the Federation did not confirm that it had no objections to his participation in the relay . The IAAF responded by issuing a statement saying that Pistorius was welcome to seek qualification for the Olympics and future competitions under IAAF rules : " The IAAF fully respects the recent CAS decision regarding the eligibility of Oscar Pistorius to compete in IAAF competitions , and certainly has no wish to influence the South African Olympic Committee , who has full authority to select a men 's <unk> relay team for the Beijing Olympics . " 
 Coming third with a personal best time of 46 @.@ 25 seconds at the <unk> <unk> meeting in Lucerne on 16 July 2008 , Pistorius failed to qualify for the 400 metres at the 2008 Summer Olympics by 0 @.@ 70 seconds . Athletics South Africa later announced that he would also not be selected for the 4 × 400 metres relay team as four other runners had better times . Had Pistorius been selected , he would have been one of the first competitors with a leg amputation to participate in the Olympic Games . Pistorius 's compatriot Natalie du Toit , a swimmer whose left leg was amputated above the knee after a traffic accident , duly became the first athlete with an amputation to qualify for the 2008 Summer Olympics . Asked about the possibility of the IAAF offering him a wild card to take part in the Olympics , Pistorius responded : " I do not believe that I would accept . If I have to take part in the Beijing Games I should do it because I qualified . " He expressed a preference for focusing on qualification for the 2012 Summer Olympics in London , stating that it was a more realistic target as " [ s ] printers usually reach their peak between 26 and 29 . I will be 25 in London and I 'll also have two , three years ' preparation . " 
 = = = 2008 Summer Paralympics = = = 
 Pistorius participated in the 2008 Summer Paralympics in Beijing in the 100 , 200 and 400 metres ( T44 ) . On 9 September , in the heats of the 100 metres , he set a Paralympic record with his time of 11 @.@ 16 seconds . Later , following a slow start , he rallied to snatch gold from the United States ' Jerome Singleton in the 100 metres in a time of 11 @.@ 17 seconds , 0 @.@ 03 seconds ahead of the silver medallist . Four days later , on 13 September , the defending Paralympic champion in the 200 @-@ metre sprint won his second gold in the event in a time of 21 @.@ 67 seconds , setting another Paralympic record . He completed a hat @-@ trick by winning gold in the 400 metres in a world @-@ record time of 47 @.@ 49 seconds on 16 September , calling it " a memory that will stay with me for the rest of my life " . 
 = = = 2011 and qualification for 2012 Summer Olympics = = = 
 In January 2011 , a slimmer , trimmer Pistorius won three IPC Athletics World titles in New Zealand but was beaten for the first time in seven years in the 100 metres by American Jerome Singleton . He subsequently won the T44 400 metres in 47 @.@ 28 seconds and the 100 metres in 11 @.@ 04 seconds at the BT Paralympic World Cup in May to reassert himself as the world 's leading Paralympic sprinter . 
 Pistorius competed across a number of non @-@ disabled races in the summer of 2011 and posted three times under 46 seconds , but it was at the 19th Internazionale di <unk> Sports Solidarity Meeting in Lignano , Italy , on 19 July that he set a personal best of 45 @.@ 07 seconds in the 400 metres , attaining the World Championships and Olympic Games " A " standard qualification mark . Pistorius won the 400 @-@ metres event with a posted time that ranked him as 15th fastest in the world . 
 On 8 August 2011 it was announced that he had been included in the South African team for the World Championships in Daegu , South Korea , and had been selected for the 400 @-@ metre and the 4 × 400 metre relay squad . In the heats of the 400 metres , Pistorius ran in 45 @.@ 39 seconds and qualified for the semifinal . However , in the semifinal , he ran 46 @.@ 19 seconds and was eliminated . 
 In the heats of the 4 × 400 metres relay , Pistorius ran the opening leg as South Africa advanced to the finals with a national record time of 2 minutes 59 @.@ 21 seconds . However , he was not selected to run in the finals based on having the slowest split time of 46 @.@ 20 . This caused a controversy , as the first leg is normally Pistorius 's slowest since it requires a start from blocks , and he was restricted to the first leg by Athletics South Africa " on safety grounds " . He initially tweeted " Haven 't been included in final . Pretty gutted . " , but later added " Well done to the SA 4 × 400m team . Was really hard watching , knowing I deserved to be part of it . " Pistorius still won the silver medal because he ran in the heats , becoming the first amputee to win an non @-@ disabled world track medal . Reflecting on his World Championship debut , Pistorius said : " I really enjoyed the whole experience . I ran my second fastest time ever in the heats and was really pleased to have reached the semifinals . In the relay I was unbelievably chuffed to have broken the South African record , and hopefully my name will stay on that for a long time to come . " 
 On 4 July 2012 , the South African Sports Confederation and Olympic Committee ( SASCOC ) announced that Pistorius had been included in the Olympic team for the 400 @-@ metre and the 4 × 400 metres relay races . 
 = = = 2012 Summer Olympics = = = 
 At the 2012 Summer Olympics on 4 August 2012 , Pistorius became the first amputee runner to compete at an Olympic Games . In the 400 metres race , he took second place in the first heat of five runners , finishing with a time of 45 @.@ 44 seconds ( his best time of the season so far ) to advance to the semifinals on 5 August . He ran in the second semifinal , where he finished eighth and last with a time of 46 @.@ 54 seconds . 
 In the first semifinal of the 4 × 400 metres relay race on 9 August , the second runner of the South African team , <unk> <unk> , fell and was injured before reaching Pistorius , who was to have run the third leg . South Africa was passed into the final on appeal to the IAAF , due to interference by Vincent <unk> , the Kenyan athlete who downed <unk> . The South African relay team eventually finished eighth out of the field of nine in the final on 10 August . However , it established a season 's best time for the team of 3 minutes 3 @.@ 46 seconds , with Pistorius running the final leg in 45 @.@ 9 seconds . Pistorius was chosen to carry the South African flag for the closing ceremony . 
 = = = 2012 Summer Paralympics = = = 
 Pistorius also carried the flag at the opening ceremony of the 2012 Summer Paralympics on 29 August . He entered the T44 classification men 's 100 metres , 200 metres and 400 metres races , and the T42 – T46 4 × 100 metres relay . 
 In the 200 @-@ metre competition , Pistorius established a new T43 world record of 21 @.@ 30 seconds in his heat on 1 September , but he was defeated in the final the next day by Alan Oliveira of Brazil . Pistorius took silver , and then created a controversy by complaining about the length of Oliveira 's blades . He later apologised for the timing of his remarks , but not the content of his complaint . The IPC confirmed the length of Oliveira ’ s blades were proportional to his body , with all the finalists measured before the race . The IPC also confirmed that Pistorius had raised the issue of blade length with it six weeks prior to the race . SASCOC issued a statement welcoming Pistorius 's apology for his outburst and declared their full support for him and promised to assist him in discussions with the IPC about the issue of lengthened prosthetics after the conclusion of the Games . The IPC expressed willingness to engage with Pistorius about the issue . Australian runner Jack Swift , USA runner Jerome Singleton , and other athletes also expressed support for Pistorius 's position . 
 Pistorius won a gold medal on 5 September running the anchor leg as part of the South African 4 × 100 metres relay team . The team set a world record time of 41 @.@ 78 seconds . He was unsuccessful in defending his Beijing Olympics 100 @-@ metre title when he came fourth with a season 's best time of 11 @.@ 17 seconds , and the race was won by Great Britain 's Jonnie Peacock . On 8 September , the last full day of competition , Pistorius won gold in the T44 400 metres with a time of 46 @.@ 68 seconds , breaking the Paralympic record . 
 = = Achievements = = 
 = = = Disability sports events = = = 
 = = = Non @-@ disabled sports events = = = 
 = = = Other awards and accolades = = = 
 In 2006 , Pistorius was conferred the Order of <unk> in Bronze ( <unk> ) by the President of South Africa for outstanding achievement in sports . On 9 December 2007 , Pistorius was awarded the BBC Sports Personality of the Year Helen Rollason Award , which is conferred for outstanding courage and achievement in the face of adversity . 
 In May 2008 , Pistorius made the " Time 100 " – Time magazine 's annual list of the world 's most influential people – appearing third in the " Heroes & Pioneers " section . Erik <unk> , the first blind person to climb Mount Everest , wrote in an essay that Pistorius was " on the cusp of a paradigm shift in which disability becomes ability , disadvantage becomes advantage . Yet we mustn 't lose sight of what makes an athlete great . It 's too easy to credit Pistorius ' success to technology . Through birth or circumstance , some are given certain gifts , but it 's what one does with those gifts , the hours devoted to training , the desire to be the best , that is at the true heart of a champion . " In 2012 he made the list again . 
 In February 2012 , Pistorius was awarded the Laureus World Sports Award for Sportsperson of the Year with a Disability for 2012 . On 22 August 2012 , he was honoured with the unveiling of a large mural depicting his achievements in the town of Gemona , Italy . 
 On 9 September 2012 , Pistorius was shortlisted by the IPC for the Whang Youn Dai Achievement Award as a competitor " who is fair , honest and is uncompromising in his or her values and prioritises the promotion of the Paralympic Movement above personal recognition " . According to director Craig Spence , he was nominated by an unnamed external organisation from South Korea . The award went to two other athletes . 
 After the 2012 Summer Paralympics , the University of Strathclyde in Glasgow announced they would confer on Pistorius , among others , an honorary doctorate . 
 = = Sponsorship and charitable activities = = 
 Pistorius has sponsorship deals worth US $ 2 million a year with Össur , BT , Nike , Oakley and Thierry Mugler . In 2011 , Pistorius participated as a model in an advertising campaign for a Thierry Mugler fragrance called A * Men . 
 In 2008 , Pistorius collaborated in the release of a music CD called Olympic Dream . Produced in Italy , it consists of disco remixes of music pieces that Pistorius finds inspirational , and two tracks written for him , " Olympic Dream " and " Run Boy Run " , for which he provided voiceovers . Part of the CD 's proceeds of sale went to charity . Pistorius also actively supports the <unk> Foundation , a charity that works to raise awareness for landmine victims and has a support programme to provide prosthetics for victims . 
 On 21 February 2013 , after previously suspending adverts that featured Pistorius and the line " I am the bullet in the chamber " in the wake of his shooting of Reeva Steenkamp , sportswear manufacturer Nike suspended its contract with Pistorius . A company spokesperson stated : " We believe Oscar Pistorius should be afforded due process and we will continue to monitor the situation closely . " 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Pistorius has two visible tattoos . The dates of his mother 's birth and death ( " LVIII V VIII – II III VI " – 8 May 1958 – 6 March 2002 ) are tattooed on the inside of his right arm . The other tattoo , which is on his back , is the Bible verse 1 Corinthians 9 : 26 – 27 which begins , " I do not run like a man running aimlessly . " He used to own a house in South Africa which was sold in June 2014 , and used to train for the European season in Gemona del Friuli , Italy . Aside from running , his interests include architecture , <unk> , and breeding race horses . 
 Pistorius 's autobiography , Dream Runner , was published in Italian in 2008 with Gianni Merlo , a journalist with La Gazzetta dello Sport . An English version entitled Blade Runner was released in 2009 . In 2010 , Pistorius appeared on L <unk> dei <unk> , an Italian version of Celebrity Survivor . On 7 January 2012 , he appeared as a special guest on the Italian version of Dancing with the Stars called <unk> con le Stelle at Auditorium Rai in Rome , where he danced a tango with Annalisa Longo to ABBA 's " The Winner Takes It All " . On 9 October 2012 , Pistorius appeared on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno . He was also scheduled to appear on Piers Morgan Tonight and the Larry King Now show at later dates . 
 In February 2009 , Pistorius was seriously injured when he was thrown from a boat in an accident on the Vaal River near Johannesburg . He was airlifted to <unk> Hospital , where he underwent surgery to repair broken facial bones including his nose and jaw . There were initial concerns about his fitness , but he recovered fully . However , the accident affected his training and running schedule for that year . 
 Pistorius was scheduled as an amateur golfer in the 2012 Alfred Dunhill Links Championship held at St Andrews , Carnoustie and <unk> in Scotland . Pistorius has a 21 handicap in South Africa , but played off an 18 handicap for the Championship . In 2010 he played in the Laureus World Sports Awards Golf Challenge at the Abu Dhabi Golf Club in Abu Dhabi , United Arab Emirates and the Help @-@ net Fund Celebrity Charity Golf Day . 
 = = Murder of Reeva Steenkamp = = 
 In the early morning of Thursday , 14 February 2013 , Pistorius shot and killed South African model Reeva Steenkamp at his home in Pretoria . Pistorius acknowledged that he shot Steenkamp , causing her death , but said that he mistook her for a possible intruder . 
 Pistorius ' trial for murder began on 3 March 2014 in Pretoria . On 20 May 2014 , the trial proceedings were adjourned until 30 June to enable Pistorius to undergo psychiatric evaluation to establish whether he could be held criminally responsible for shooting Steenkamp . Judge Thokozile Masipa agreed to a request for the evaluation by prosecutor Gerrie Nel after forensic psychiatrist <unk> Vorster testified for the defence that she had diagnosed Pistorius with generalized anxiety disorder . On 30 June 2014 , the trial resumed after the evaluation reports which said Pistorius could be held criminally responsible . The state prosecutor was quoted as saying , " Mr. Pistorius did not suffer from a mental illness or defect that would have rendered him criminally not responsible for the offence charged " . The defence closed its case on 8 July and closing arguments were heard on 7 and 8 August . 
 On 12 September , Pistorius was found guilty of culpable homicide and one firearm @-@ related charge , of reckless endangerment related to discharging a firearm in a restaurant . He was found not guilty of two firearm @-@ related charges relating to illegal possession of ammunition and firing a firearm through the sunroof of a car . On 21 October 2014 , he received a prison sentence of a maximum of five years for culpable homicide and a concurrent three @-@ year suspended prison sentence for the separate reckless endangerment conviction . 
 = = = Prison term = = = 
 Pistorius ' brother Carl told a South African weekly that his brother did not receive any special privileges during his first six weeks in prison . He was incarcerated for 17 hours per day in his cell and was allowed one hour of outdoor exercise and one hour in the weight room daily . He did not have a private bathroom , but was given a stool to use in the communal shower room . According to his brother , Pistorius advised inmates in the hospital wing about exercise , and wanted to initiate a prison basketball program . 
 In June 2015 , Pistorius was recommended for early release as early as August . South African Commissioner of Correctional Services Zach <unk> told the BBC of the decision by the case management committee at the <unk> <unk> II prison in Pretoria , where Pistorius was being held : " Under South African law he is eligible for release under ' correctional supervision ' having served a sixth of his sentence . " 
 After Pistorius served approximately one @-@ sixth of his prison term , his release date to house arrest was announced for 21 August 2015 . This release was based on good behavior and the fact that he was not considered a danger to the community . Pistorius was expected to remain under house arrest and correctional supervision , and was expected to perform community service as part of his continuing sentence . Regardless of his release from prison , Pistorius could not return to official athletic competition until the whole five years of his sentence was complete . On 19 August 2015 , his release was unexpectedly blocked by South Africa 's Justice Minister Michael <unk> . According to <unk> , the parole board 's decision for early release was " premature . " Legal experts noted that the move was likely due to political pressure and had implications for other cases of pending early release . He was released from prison on 19 October 2015 . 
 = = = Case appeal = = = 
 On 4 November 2014 , prosecutors applied to the sentencing judge for permission to appeal the culpable homicide verdict , stating that the five @-@ year prison term was " shockingly light , inappropriate and would not have been imposed by any reasonable court " . Judge Thokozile Masipa ruled on 10 December 2014 that the prosecution could challenge her ruling of acquitting Pistorius of premeditated murder and the lesser charge of culpable homicide . However , she ruled that the state could not appeal the length of the sentence . The case was then set for appeal in front of a five @-@ person panel at the Supreme Court of Appeal . 
 The date for prosecutors to submit court papers outlining their arguments was set for 17 August 2015 , and the date for the defense team 's response was set for 17 September 2015 . The date for the appeal hearing was set for November 2015 . The prosecutors ' argument rested on Judge Masipa 's application of the legal principle of dolus <unk> ( whether an accused did actually foresee the outcome of his actions , rather than whether he or she should have ) , and that the judge made an error in concluding Pistorius had not foreseen that by firing four shots through the closed door of the toilet cubicle , he would kill or injure whoever was behind the door . 
 The appeal was heard on 3 November 2015 , in the Supreme Court of Appeal , Bloemfontein . The matter was heard before 5 Supreme Court judges . By a unanimous decision , the court overturned Pistorius ' culpable homicide conviction and found him guilty of murder in the death of Reeva Steenkamp . Judge Eric Leach read the summary of judgment . The panel of five judges found for the prosecutor 's argument that Pistorius must have known that someone would die if he fired through the closed door into a small toilet cubicle . In the words of Judge Leach , " Although he may have been anxious , it is inconceivable that a rational person could have believed he was entitled to fire at this person with a heavy @-@ calibre firearm , without taking even that most elementary precaution of firing a warning shot , which the accused said he elected not to fire as he thought the ricochet might harm him . " 
 According to the judgement , the person who Pistorius thought was in the cubicle had nothing to do with the results of his actions . The culpable homicide verdict was replaced with a murder conviction , and the case was referred back to the trial court for a sentencing hearing when it reconvenes on 18 April 2016 . 
 On 8 December 2015 , it was announced Pistorius would continue to remain free on bail but under house arrest pending his appeal to the Constitutional Court . On 3 March 2016 it was announced Pistorius had been denied his right to appeal , and will next be due in court on 13 June 2016 to begin a 5 @-@ day sentencing hearing for the murder conviction , concluding on 17 June 2016 . 
 On 15 June 2016 , the sentencing was adjourned by Judge Thokozile Masipa until 6 July 2016 . 
 = = = Second prison term = = = 
 On 6 July 2016 Pistorius was sentenced to six years imprisonment for murder by Judge Thokozile Masipa ; once again he was incarcerated on the hospital wing at the <unk> <unk> II jail . It is anticipated that Pistorius will be eligible for release on parole after serving between 2 – 4 years of his sentence . 
 = Battle for Henderson Field = 
 The Battle for Henderson Field , also known as the Battle of Henderson Field or Battle of Lunga Point by the Japanese , took place from 23 – 26 October 1942 on and around Guadalcanal in the Solomon Islands . The battle was a land , sea , and air battle of the Pacific campaign of World War II and was fought between the Imperial Japanese Army and Navy and Allied ( mainly United States ( U.S. ) Marine and U.S. Army ) forces . The battle was the third of the three major land offensives conducted by the Japanese during the Guadalcanal campaign . 
 In the battle , U.S. Marine and Army forces , under the overall command of Major General Alexander Vandegrift , repulsed an attack by the Japanese 17th Army , under the command of Japanese Lieutenant General Harukichi Hyakutake . The U.S. forces were defending the Lunga perimeter , which guarded Henderson Field on Guadalcanal , that had been captured from the Japanese by the Allies in landings on Guadalcanal on 7 August 1942 . Hyakutake 's force was sent to Guadalcanal in response to the Allied landings with the mission of recapturing the airfield and driving the Allied forces off of the island . 
 Hyakutake 's soldiers conducted numerous assaults over three days at various locations around the Lunga perimeter , all repulsed with heavy Japanese losses . At the same time , Allied aircraft operating from Henderson Field successfully defended U.S. positions on Guadalcanal from attacks by Japanese naval air and sea forces . 
 The battle was the last serious ground offensive conducted by Japanese forces on Guadalcanal . After an attempt to deliver further reinforcements failed during the Naval Battle of Guadalcanal in November 1942 , Japan conceded defeat in the struggle for the island and evacuated many of its remaining forces by the first week of February 1943 . 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Guadalcanal campaign = = = 
 On 7 August 1942 , Allied forces ( primarily U.S. ) landed on Guadalcanal , Tulagi , and Florida Islands in the Solomon Islands . The landings on the islands were meant to deny their use by the Japanese as bases for threatening the supply routes between the U.S. and Australia , and to secure the islands as starting points for a campaign with the eventual goal of isolating the major Japanese base at Rabaul while also supporting the Allied New Guinea campaign . The landings initiated the six @-@ month @-@ long Guadalcanal campaign . 
 Taking the Japanese by surprise , by nightfall on 8 August , the 11 @,@ 000 Allied troops — under the command of then Major General Alexander Vandegrift and mainly consisting of U.S. Marine Corps units — had secured Tulagi and nearby small islands , as well as an airfield under construction at Lunga Point on Guadalcanal . The airfield was later named " Henderson Field " by Allied forces . The Allied aircraft that subsequently operated out of the airfield became known as the " Cactus Air Force " ( CAF ) after the Allied codename for Guadalcanal . To protect the airfield , the U.S. Marines established a perimeter defense around Lunga Point . 
 In response to the Allied landings on Guadalcanal , the Japanese Imperial General Headquarters assigned the Imperial Japanese Army 's 17th Army — a corps @-@ sized command based at Rabaul and under the command of Lieutenant @-@ General Harukichi Hyakutake — with the task of retaking Guadalcanal from Allied forces . On 19 August , various units of the 17th Army began to arrive on Guadalcanal with the goal of driving Allied forces from the island . 
 Because of the threat by CAF aircraft based at Henderson Field , the Japanese were unable to use large , slow transport ships to deliver troops and supplies to the island . Instead , the Japanese used warships based at Rabaul and the Shortland Islands to carry their forces to Guadalcanal . The Japanese warships , mainly light cruisers or destroyers from the Eighth Fleet under the command of Vice Admiral Gunichi Mikawa , were usually able to make the round trip down " The Slot " to Guadalcanal and back in a single night , thereby minimizing their exposure to CAF air attack . Delivering the troops in this manner , however , prevented most of the soldiers ' heavy equipment and supplies , such as heavy artillery , vehicles , and much food and ammunition , from being carried to Guadalcanal with them . These high speed warship runs to Guadalcanal occurred throughout the campaign and were later called the " Tokyo Express " by Allied forces and " Rat Transportation " by the Japanese . 
 The first Japanese attempt to recapture Henderson Field failed when a 917 @-@ man force was defeated on 21 August in the Battle of the Tenaru . The next attempt took place from 12 – 14 September , with the 6 @,@ 000 soldiers under the command of Major General Kiyotake Kawaguchi being defeated in the Battle of Edson 's Ridge . After their defeat at Edson 's Ridge , Kawaguchi and the surviving Japanese troops regrouped west of the Matanikau River on Guadalcanal . 
 Hyakutake immediately began to prepare for another attempt to recapture Henderson Field . The Japanese navy promised to support Hyakutake 's next offensive by delivering the necessary troops , equipment , and supplies to the island , and by stepping @-@ up air attacks on Henderson Field and sending warships to bombard the airfield . 
 As the Japanese regrouped , the U.S. forces concentrated on shoring up and strengthening their Lunga defenses . On 18 September , an Allied naval convoy delivered 4 @,@ 157 men from the U.S. 7th Marine Regiment to Guadalcanal . This regiment had previously formed part of the 3rd Provisional Marine Brigade and was fresh from garrison duty in Samoa . These reinforcements allowed Vandegrift , beginning on 19 September , to establish an unbroken line of defense completely around the Lunga perimeter . 
 General Vandegrift and his staff were aware that Kawaguchi 's troops had retreated to the area west of the Matanikau and that numerous groups of Japanese stragglers were scattered throughout the area between the Lunga Perimeter and the Matanikau River . Vandegrift , therefore , decided to conduct a series of small unit operations around the Matanikau Valley . 
 The first U.S. Marine operation against Japanese forces west of the Matanikau , conducted between 23 and 27 September 1942 by elements of three U.S. Marine battalions , was repulsed by Kawaguchi 's troops under Colonel Akinosuke Oka 's local command . In the second action , between 6 and 9 October , a larger force of U.S. Marines successfully crossed the Matanikau River , attacked newly landed Japanese forces from the 2nd ( Sendai ) Infantry Division under the command of generals Masao Maruyama and Yumio Nasu and inflicted heavy casualties on the Japanese 4th Infantry Regiment . The second action forced the Japanese to retreat from their positions east of the Matanikau . 
 In the meantime , Major General Millard F. Harmon , commander of U.S. Army forces in the South Pacific , convinced Vice Admiral Robert L. Ghormley , commander of Allied forces in the South Pacific Area , that U.S. Marine forces on Guadalcanal needed to be reinforced immediately if the Allies were to successfully defend the island from the next expected Japanese offensive . Thus on 13 October , a naval convoy delivered the 2 @,@ 837 @-@ strong 164th U.S. Infantry Regiment , a North Dakota Army National Guard formation from the U.S. Army 's Americal Division , commanded by Colonel Robert Hall , to Guadalcanal . 
 Mikawa 's ships continued nocturnal deliveries of men and materiel to Guadalcanal . Between 1 and 17 October , Japanese convoys delivered 15 @,@ 000 Japanese troops , comprising the remainder of the 2nd Infantry Division and one regiment of the 38th Infantry Division , plus artillery , tanks , ammunition , and provisions , to Guadalcanal . One of these — on 9 October — landed General Hyakutake on the island to personally lead the Japanese forces in the planned offensive . Mikawa also sent heavy cruisers on several occasions to bombard Henderson Field . On the night of 11 October , one of these bombardment missions was intercepted by U.S. naval forces and defeated in the Battle of Cape Esperance . 
 On 13 October , in order to help protect the transit of an important supply convoy to Guadalcanal that consisted of six slower cargo ships , the Japanese Combined Fleet commander Isoroku Yamamoto sent a naval force from Truk — commanded by Vice @-@ Admiral Takeo Kurita — to bombard Henderson Field . Kurita 's force — consisting of the battleships Kongō and Haruna , escorted by one light cruiser and nine destroyers — approached Guadalcanal unopposed and opened fire on Henderson Field at 01 : 33 on 14 October . Over the next 83 minutes , they fired nine hundred and seventy @-@ three 14 in ( 360 mm ) shells into the Lunga perimeter , most of them falling in and around the 2 @,@ 200 m ² area of the airfield . The bombardment heavily damaged the airfield 's two runways , burned almost all of the available aviation fuel , destroyed 48 of the CAF 's 90 aircraft , and killed 41 men , including six CAF aircrew . 
 Despite the heavy damage , Henderson personnel were able to restore one of the runways to operational condition within a few hours . Over the next several weeks , the CAF gradually recovered as Allied forces delivered more aircraft , fuel , and aircrew personnel to Guadalcanal . Observing the Japanese deliveries of troops and supplies to the island , American forces were expecting an imminent offensive by Japanese ground forces , but they were not sure where and when it would take place . 
 = = = Troop movement = = = 
 Because of the loss of their positions on the east side of the Matanikau , the Japanese decided that an attack on the U.S. defenses along the coast would be prohibitively difficult . Thus , after observation of the American defences around Lunga Point by his staff officers , Hyakutake decided that the main thrust of his planned attack would be from south of Henderson Field . His 2nd Division ( augmented by one regiment from 38th Division ) , under Lieutenant General Masao Maruyama and comprising 7 @,@ 000 soldiers in three infantry regiments of three battalions each was ordered to march through the jungle and attack the American defences from the south near the east bank of the Lunga River . The 2nd Division was split into three units ; the Left Wing Unit under Major General Yumio Nasu containing the 29th Infantry Regiment , the Right Wing Unit under Major General Kiyotake Kawaguchi consisting of the 230th Infantry Regiment ( from the 38th Infantry Division ) , and the division reserve led by Maruyama comprising the 16th Infantry Regiment . The date of the attack was set for 22 October . To distract the Americans from the planned attack from the south , Hyakutake 's heavy artillery plus five battalions of infantry ( about 2 @,@ 900 men ) under Major General Tadashi Sumiyoshi were to attack the American defenses from the west along the coastal corridor . The Japanese estimated that there were 10 @,@ 000 American troops on the island , when in fact there were about 23 @,@ 000 . 
 At this time , the Lunga perimeter was defended by four American regiments comprising 13 infantry battalions . The 164th Infantry Regiment guarded the easternmost sector . Extending from the 164th south and west across Edson 's Ridge to the Lunga River was the 7th Marine Regiment . Covering the sector west of the Lunga to the coast were the 1st and 5th Marine Regiments . Defending the mouth of the Matanikau for the Americans were two battalions under the command of Lieutenant Colonel William J. McKelvy : the 3d Battalion , 1st Marines , and the 3d Battalion , 7th Marines . McKelvy 's force was separated from the Lunga perimeter by a gap that was covered by patrols . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Prelude = = = 
 On 12 October , a company of Japanese engineers began to break a trail , called the " Maruyama Road " , from the Matanikau towards the southern portion of the U.S. Lunga perimeter . The trail traversed some 15 mi ( 24 km ) of the most difficult terrain on Guadalcanal , including numerous rivers and streams , deep , muddy ravines , steep ridges , and dense jungle . Between 16 and 18 October , the 2nd Division began their march along the Maruyama Road , led by Nasu 's unit and followed in order by Kawaguchi and Maruyama . Each soldier had been ordered to carry one artillery shell plus his pack and rifle . 
 Early on the morning of 20 October , Maruyama reached the Lunga River . Believing that his units were about 4 mi ( 6 @.@ 4 km ) south of the airfield , he ordered the left and right wing units to advance abreast of each other parallel to the Lunga north towards the American lines and set the time of the attack for 18 : 00 on 22 October . Maruyama , however , was mistaken . He and his troops were actually 8 mi ( 13 km ) south of the airfield . By the evening of 21 October , it was clear to Maruyama that his units would not be in position to attack the next day , so he postponed the attack to 23 October and put his men on half rations to conserve their dwindling food supply . At nightfall on 22 October , much of the 2nd Division still remained strung out along the Maruyama Road , but Maruyama ruled out any postponement of the attack . 
 During this time , Sumiyoshi prepared his command to attack the American forces from the west . On 18 October , he began shelling Henderson Field with 15 150 mm ( 5 @.@ 9 in ) howitzers . What remained of the 4th Infantry Regiment under Colonel Nomasu Nakaguma began to gather openly near Point Cruz ( on the coast just west of the Matanikau ) . On 19 October , Colonel <unk> Oka led the 1 @,@ 200 troops of his 124th Infantry Regiment inland across the Matanikau and began moving up the east bank towards high ground east of the river . 
 On 23 October , Maruyama 's forces struggled through the jungle to reach the American lines . Kawaguchi , on his own initiative , began to shift his right wing unit to the east , believing that the American defenses were weaker in that area . Maruyama — through one of his staff officers — ordered Kawaguchi to keep to the original attack plan . When he refused , Kawaguchi was relieved of command and replaced by Colonel Toshinari Shoji , commander of the 230th Infantry Regiment . That evening , after learning that the left and right wing forces were still struggling to reach the American lines , Hyakutake postponed the attack to 19 : 00 on 24 October . The Americans remained completely unaware of the approach of Maruyama 's forces . 
 On this day , the Japanese 11th Air Fleet under Jinichi Kusaka based at Rabaul sent 16 Mitsubishi G4M2 " Betty " bombers and 28 A6M2 Zero fighters to attack Henderson Field . In response , 24 F4F @-@ 4 Wildcats and four P @-@ 400 Airacobras from the CAF ( Cactus Air Force ) rose to meet them , resulting in a large aerial battle . The Japanese appeared , to Allied observers , to lose several aircraft in the day 's engagements , but their actual losses are unknown . The CAF lost one Wildcat to battle damage but the pilot was uninjured . 
 = = = Nakaguma 's attack on the Matanikau = = = 
 Sumiyoshi was informed by Hyakutake 's staff of the postponement of the offensive to 24 October , but was unable to contact Nakaguma to inform him of the delay . Thus , at dusk on 23 October , two battalions of Nakaguma 's 4th Infantry Regiment and the nine tanks of the 1st Independent Tank Company launched attacks on the U.S. Marine defenses at the mouth of the Matanikau . 
 Nakaguma 's tanks attacked in pairs across the sandbar at the mouth of the Matanikau behind a barrage of artillery . Marine 37 mm ( 1 @.@ 46 in ) anti @-@ tank guns and artillery quickly destroyed all nine tanks . At the same time , four battalions of Marine artillery , totalling 40 howitzers , fired over 6 @,@ 000 rounds into the area between Point Cruz and the Matanikau , causing heavy casualties in Nakaguma 's infantry battalions as they tried to approach the Marine lines . Nakaguma 's attacks ended by 01 : 15 on 24 October , inflicting only light casualties on the Marines and gaining no ground . 
 Partly in response to Nakaguma 's attacks , on 24 October the 2nd Battalion , 7th Marines under Lieutenant Colonel Herman H. Hanneken deployed to the Matanikau . After Oka 's forces were sighted approaching the Marine Matanikau positions from the south , Hanneken 's battalion was placed on a ridge facing south which formed a continuous extension of the inland flank of the Marine 's horseshoe @-@ shaped Matanikau defenses . A gap , however , still remained between Hanneken 's left ( east ) flank and the main perimeter . 
 = = = Maruyama 's first attacks on the perimeter = = = 
 With the redeployment of Hanneken 's battalion , the 700 troops of 1st Battalion , 7th Marines under Lieutenant Colonel Chesty Puller were left alone to hold the entire 2 @,@ 500 yd ( 2 @,@ 300 m ) line on the southern face of the Lunga perimeter east of the Lunga River . Late on 24 October , Marine patrols detected Maruyama 's approaching forces , but it was now too late in the day for the Marines to rearrange their dispositions . 
 At 14 : 00 on 24 October , Maruyama 's left and right wing units began to deploy for their attacks . Maruyama 's troops had very little artillery or mortar support for their upcoming assault , having abandoned most of their heavy cannons along the Maruyama Road . Between 16 : 00 and 21 : 00 , heavy rain fell , delaying the Japanese approach and causing " chaos " in the Japanese formations , already exhausted from the long march through the jungle . Shoji 's right wing force accidentally turned parallel to the Marine lines , and all but one battalion failed to make contact with the Marine defenses . Shoji 's 1st Battalion , 230th Infantry Regiment " stumbled " into Puller 's lines about 22 : 00 and were driven off by Puller 's men . For unknown reasons , Maruyama 's staff then reported to Hyakutake that Shoji 's men had overrun Henderson Field . At 00 : 50 on 25 October , Hyakutake signaled Rabaul that , " A little before 23 : 00 the Right Wing captured the airfield . " 
 At about this time , Nasu 's left wing battalions finally began to reach the Marine defenses . At 00 : 30 on 25 October , the 11th Company of Nasu 's 3rd Battalion under Captain Jiro Katsumata found and attacked Company A of Puller 's battalion . Katsumata 's attack was impeded by heavy barbed wire in front of the Marine line and then hit heavily by American machine gun , mortar , and artillery fire . By 01 : 00 , the Marine fire had killed most of Katsumata 's company . 
 Further west , the 9th Company of Nasu 's 3rd Battalion charged straight into Puller 's Company C at 01 : 15 . Within five minutes , a Marine machine gun section led by Sergeant John Basilone killed almost every member of the 9th Company . By 01 : 25 , heavy fire from the Marine divisional artillery was falling into Nasu 's troop assembly and approach routes , causing heavy casualties . 
 Recognizing that a major Japanese attack was underway , Puller requested reinforcement . At 03 : 45 , the 3rd Battalion , 164th Infantry , commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Robert Hall and being held in reserve , was fed piecemeal into Puller 's line . In spite of the darkness and intermittent heavy rain , the Army National Guard troops were placed in Puller 's defences before daybreak . 
 Just before dawn , Colonel Masajiro Furimiya , the commander of the 29th Infantry , with two companies from his 3rd Battalion plus his headquarters staff , was able to penetrate the Marine artillery fire and reach Puller 's lines about 03 : 30 . Most of Furimiya 's troops were killed during their assault , but about 100 broke through the American defenses and carved a salient 150 yd ( 140 m ) in width and 100 yd ( 91 m ) deep in the center of Puller 's line . After sunrise , Furimiya 's 2nd Battalion joined in the assault on Puller , but were thrown back . At 07 : 30 , Nasu decided to withdraw most of the remainder of his troops back into the jungle and prepare for another attack that night . 
 During the day of 25 October , Puller 's men attacked and eradicated the salient in their lines and hunted small groups of Japanese infiltrators , killing 104 Japanese soldiers . More than 300 of Maruyama 's men in total were killed in their first attacks on the Lunga perimeter . At 04 : 30 , Hyakutake rescinded the message announcing the capture of the airfield , but at 07 : 00 declared that the results of Maruyama 's attack were unknown . 
 = = = Naval and air attacks = = = 
 The Japanese 8th Fleet had task units ready to support the Army 's attacks on Guadalcanal . Upon receipt of Hyakutake 's message declaring success at 00 : 50 on 24 October , the task units went into action . The light cruiser Sendai and three destroyers patrolled west of Guadalcanal to interdict any Allied ships that tried to approach the island . A First Assault Unit with three destroyers and a Second Assault Unit with the light cruiser Yura and five destroyers approached Guadalcanal to attack any Allied ships off the island 's north or east coast and to provide gunfire support for Hyakutake 's forces . 
 At 10 : 14 , the First Assault Unit arrived off Lunga Point and chased away two old U.S. destroyers converted to minesweepers — Zane and Trevor — which were delivering aviation fuel to Henderson Field . The Japanese destroyers then sighted and sank the U.S. tugboat Seminole and patrol boat YP @-@ 284 before beginning their bombardment of the U.S. positions around Lunga Point . At 10 : 53 , a Marine shore gun hit and damaged the destroyer Akatsuki , and all three Japanese destroyers withdrew while being strafed by four CAF Wildcat fighters . 
 As the Second Assault Unit approached Guadalcanal through Indispensable Strait , it was attacked by five CAF SBD @-@ 3 Dauntless dive bombers . Bomb hits caused heavy damage to Yura , and the unit reversed course to try to escape . More CAF air attacks on Yura throughout the day caused further damage , and the cruiser was abandoned and scuttled at 21 : 00 that night . 
 Meanwhile , 82 Japanese bombers and fighters from the 11th Air Fleet and from the aircraft carriers Junyō and Hiyō attacked Henderson Field in six waves throughout the day and were engaged by CAF fighters and Marine anti @-@ aircraft guns . By the end of the day , the Japanese had lost 11 fighters , two bombers , and one reconnaissance aircraft along with most of the aircrews in the downed aircraft . Two CAF fighters were destroyed in the day 's fighting but both pilots survived . The Japanese air attacks caused only light damage to Henderson Field and the American defenses . The Americans later referred to this day as " Dugout Sunday " because the continuous Japanese air , naval , and artillery attacks kept many of the Lunga defenders in their foxholes and shelters throughout the day . 
 = = = Maruyama 's second attacks on the perimeter = = = 
 Throughout the day of 25 October , the Americans redeployed and improved their defences against the Japanese attack they were expecting that night . In the west , Hanneken and the 5th Marines closed the gap between their two forces . Along the southern portion of the perimeter , Puller 's and Hall 's troops <unk> and repositioned . Puller 's men fortified the western 1 @,@ 400 yd ( 1 @,@ 300 m ) of the sector and the 164th soldiers took the eastern 1 @,@ 100 yd ( 1 @,@ 000 m ) segment . The division reserve , the 3rd Battalion , 2nd Marine Regiment was placed directly behind Hall 's and Puller 's positions . 
 Maruyama committed his reserve force , the 16th Infantry Regiment , to Nasu 's left wing unit . Beginning at 20 : 00 on 25 October , and extending into the early morning hours of the 26th , the 16th and what remained of Nasu 's other units conducted numerous , unsuccessful frontal assaults on Puller 's and Hall 's lines . U.S. Marine and Army rifle , machine gun , mortar , artillery and direct canister fire from 37 mm anti @-@ tank guns " wrought terrible carnage " on Nasu 's men . Colonel Toshiro <unk> , the commander of the 16th , and most of his staff as well as four Japanese battalion commanders were killed in the assaults . Nasu was hit by rifle fire and mortally wounded , dying a few hours later . A few small groups of Nasu 's men broke through the American defenses , including one led by Colonel Furimiya , but were all hunted down and killed over the next several days . Shoji 's right wing units did not participate in the attacks , choosing instead to remain in place to cover Nasu 's right flank against a possible attack in that area by U.S. forces that never materialized . 
 = = = Oka 's attack = = = 
 At 03 : 00 on 26 October , Oka 's unit finally reached and attacked the Marine defenses near the Matanikau . Oka 's troops assaulted all along an east @-@ west saddle ridge held by Hanneken 's battalion but concentrated particularly on Hanneken 's Company F , which defended the extreme left flank of the Marine positions on the ridge . A Company F machine gun section under Mitchell Paige killed many of the Japanese attackers , but Japanese fire eventually killed or injured almost all the Marine machine gunners . At 05 : 00 , Oka 's 3rd Battalion , 4th Infantry succeeded in scaling the steep slope of the ridge and pushed the surviving members of Company F off of the crest . 
 Responding to the Japanese capture of part of the ridgeline , Major Odell M. Conoley — Hanneken 's battalion executive officer — quickly gathered a counterattack unit of 17 men , including communications specialists , <unk> , a cook , and a bandsman . Conoley 's scratch force was joined by elements of Hanneken 's Company G , Company C , and a few unwounded survivors from Company F and attacked the Japanese before they could consolidate their positions on top of the ridge . By 06 : 00 , Conoley 's force had pushed the Japanese back off of the ridge , effectively ending Oka 's attack . The Marines counted 98 Japanese bodies on the ridge and 200 more in the ravine in front of it . Hanneken 's unit suffered 14 killed and 32 wounded . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 = = = Retreat = = = 
 At 08 : 00 on 26 October , Hyakutake called off any further attacks and ordered his forces to retreat . Maruyama 's men recovered some of their wounded from near the American lines on the night of 26 – 27 October , and began to withdraw back into the deep jungle . The Americans recovered and buried or burned as quickly as possible the remains of 1 @,@ 500 of Maruyama 's men left lying in front of <unk> 's and Hall 's lines . Said one U.S. Army participant , John E. Stannard , of the scene after the battle , " The carnage of the battlefield was a sight that perhaps only the combat infantryman , who has fought at close quarters , could fully comprehend and look upon without a feeling of horror . One soldier , after a walk among the Japanese dead , said to his comrade : ' My God , what a sight . There 's dead Japs stretched from the Corner back along the edge of the jungle for a half a mile . ' " 
 Maruyama 's left wing survivors were ordered to retreat back to the area west of the Matanikau River while Shoji 's right wing was told to head for Koli Point , east of the Lunga perimeter . The left wing soldiers , who had run out of food several days before , began the retreat on 27 October . During the retreat , many of the Japanese wounded succumbed to their injuries and were buried along the Maruyama road . One of Maruyama 's men , Lieutenant <unk> Minegishi , noted in his diary , " I never dreamed of retreating over the same mountainous trail through the jungle we crossed with such enthusiasm ... we haven 't eaten in three days and even walking is difficult . On the up hill my body swayed around unable to walk . I must rest every two meters . " 
 Leading elements of the 2nd Division reached the 17th Army headquarters area at Kokumbona , west of the Matanikau on 4 November . The same day , Shoji 's unit reached Koli Point and made camp . Decimated by battle deaths , combat injuries , malnutrition , and tropical diseases , the 2nd Division was incapable of further offensive action and would fight as a defensive force for the rest of the campaign . Later in November , U.S. forces drove Shoji 's soldiers from Koli Point back to the Kokumbuna area , with a battalion @-@ sized Marine patrol attacking and harassing them almost the entire way . Only about 700 of Shoji 's original 3 @,@ 000 men ultimately returned to Kokumbuna . 
 = = = Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands = = = 
 At the same time that Hyakutake 's troops were attacking the Lunga perimeter , Japanese warships under the overall direction of Isoroku Yamamoto moved into a position near the southern Solomon Islands . From this location , the Japanese naval forces hoped to engage and decisively defeat any Allied ( primarily U.S. ) naval forces , especially carrier forces , that responded to Hyakutake 's ground offensive . Allied naval carrier forces in the area , now under the command of William Halsey , Jr. who had replaced Ghormley , also hoped to meet the Japanese naval forces in battle . 
 The two opposing carrier forces confronted each other on the morning of October 26 , in what became known as the Battle of the Santa Cruz Islands . After an exchange of carrier air attacks , Allied surface ships were forced to retreat from the battle area with the loss of one carrier sunk and another heavily damaged . The participating Japanese carrier forces , however , also retreated because of high aircraft and aircrew losses and significant damage to two carriers . Although an apparent tactical victory for the Japanese in terms of ships sunk and damaged , the loss of many irreplaceable , veteran aircrews by the Japanese provided a long @-@ term strategic advantage for the Allies , whose aircrew losses in the battle were relatively low . 
 = = = Later events = = = 
 Although the Japanese Army 's attack on the Allied Lunga perimeter was decisively defeated in this battle , the Japanese were not yet ready to give up the struggle for Guadalcanal . The Japanese Army and navy made immediate plans to move the rest of the 38th Division to the island , along with the 51st Infantry Division , to try a further offensive against Henderson Field in November 1942 . 
 The Japanese again planned to bombard Henderson Field with battleships in order to allow a convoy of transport ships to deliver the 38th 's troops and heavy equipment . In contrast , however , to what occurred on 14 October , this time the U.S. Navy moved to intercept the battleship forces sent by Yamamoto from Truk to shell the airfield . During the ensuing Naval Battle of Guadalcanal from 13 – 15 November , Allied naval and air forces turned back two Japanese attempts to bombard Henderson Field and almost completely destroyed the transport convoy carrying the remainder of the 38th Division . After this failure to deliver significant additional troops to the island , the Japanese commanders finally conceded defeat in the battle for Guadalcanal and evacuated most of their surviving troops by the first week of February 1943 . Building on their success at Guadalcanal and elsewhere , the Allies continued their island @-@ hopping campaign against Japan , ultimately culminating in Japan 's defeat and the end of World War II . 
 = = = Print = = = 
 Dull , Paul S. ( 1978 ) . A Battle History of the Imperial Japanese Navy , 1941 – 1945 . Naval Institute Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 87021 @-@ 097 @-@ 1 . 
 Frank , Richard ( 1990 ) . Guadalcanal : The Definitive Account of the Landmark Battle . New York : Random House . ISBN 0 @-@ 394 @-@ 58875 @-@ 4 . 
 Gilbert , Oscar E. ( 2001 ) . Marine Tank Battles in the Pacific . Da Capo . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 050 @-@ 8 . 
 Griffith , Samuel B. ( 1963 ) . The Battle for Guadalcanal . Champaign , Illinois , USA : University of Illinois Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 252 @-@ 06891 @-@ 2 . 
 Jersey , Stanley Coleman ( 2008 ) . Hell 's Islands : The Untold Story of Guadalcanal . College Station , Texas : Texas A & M University Press . ISBN 1 @-@ 58544 @-@ 616 @-@ 5 . 
 <unk> , John B. ( 2005 ) . First Team And the Guadalcanal Campaign : Naval Fighter Combat from August to November 1942 ( New ed . ) . Naval Institute Press . ISBN 1 @-@ <unk> @-@ 472 @-@ 8 . 
 Miller , Thomas G. ( 1969 ) . Cactus Air Force . Admiral Nimitz Foundation . ISBN 0 @-@ <unk> @-@ 17 @-@ 9 . 
 Morison , Samuel Eliot ( 1958 ) . The Struggle for Guadalcanal , August 1942 – February 1943 , vol . 5 of History of United States Naval Operations in World War II . Boston : Little , Brown and Company . ISBN 0 @-@ 316 @-@ 58305 @-@ 7 . 
 Rottman , Gordon L. ( 2004 ) . US Marine Corps Pacific Theatre of Operations 1941 – 43 . Dr. Duncan Anderson ( consultant editor ) . Oxford : Osprey . ISBN 1 @-@ 84176 @-@ 518 @-@ X. 
 Rottman , Gordon L. ( 2005 ) . Japanese Army in World War II : The South Pacific and New Guinea , 1942 – 43 . Dr. Duncan Anderson ( consultant editor ) . Oxford and New York : Osprey . ISBN 1 @-@ 84176 @-@ 870 @-@ 7 . 
 Smith , Michael T. ( 2000 ) . Bloody Ridge : The Battle That Saved Guadalcanal . New York : Pocket . ISBN 0 @-@ 7434 @-@ 6321 @-@ 8 . 
 = = = Web = = = 
 Anderson , Charles R. ( 1993 ) . Guadalcanal . The U.S. Army Campaigns of World War II . United States Army Center of Military History . CMH Pub 72 @-@ 8 . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 07 @-@ 09 . 
 Cagney , James ( 2005 ) . " The Battle for Guadalcanal " ( javascript ) . <unk> Retrieved 2006 @-@ 05 @-@ 17 . – Interactive animation of the battle 
 Chen , C. Peter ( 2004 – 2006 ) . " Guadalcanal Campaign " . World War II Database . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 05 @-@ 17 . 
 <unk> , Peter ( 2004 ) . " Guadalcanal Battle Sites , 1942 – 2004 " . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 08 @-@ 02 . – Web site with many pictures of Guadalcanal battle sites from 1942 and how they look now . 
 Hackett , Bob ; Sander <unk> . " <unk> Yura : <unk> Record of Movement " . Imperial Japanese Navy Page ( <unk> ) . Archived from the original on 14 May 2006 . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 06 @-@ 14 . 
 Hough , Frank O. ; Ludwig , Verle E. ; Shaw , Henry I. , Jr . " Pearl Harbor to Guadalcanal " . History of U.S. Marine Corps Operations in World War II . Archived from the original on 27 June 2006 . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 05 @-@ 16 . CS1 maint : Multiple names : authors list ( link ) 
 Miller , John Jr . ( 1949 ) . Guadalcanal : The First Offensive . United States Army in World War II . Washington , D.C. : United States Army Center of Military History . CMH Pub 5 @-@ 3 . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 07 @-@ 04 . 
 Shaw , Henry I. ( 1992 ) . " First Offensive : The Marine Campaign For Guadalcanal " . Marines in World War II Commemorative Series . Archived from the original on 14 June 2006 . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 07 @-@ 25 . 
 Zimmerman , John L. ( 1949 ) . " The Guadalcanal Campaign " . Marines in World War II Historical Monograph . Archived from the original on 19 June 2006 . Retrieved 2006 @-@ 07 @-@ 04 . 
 = Entoprocta = 
 Entoprocta , whose name means " anus inside " , is a phylum of mostly sessile aquatic animals , ranging from 0 @.@ 1 to 7 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 004 to 0 @.@ 3 in ) long . Mature individuals are goblet @-@ shaped , on relatively long stalks . They have a " crown " of solid tentacles whose cilia generate water currents that draw food particles towards the mouth , and both the mouth and anus lie inside the " crown " . The superficially similar Bryozoa ( Ectoprocta ) have the anus outside a " crown " of hollow tentacles . Most families of entoprocts are colonial , and all but 2 of the 150 species are marine . A few solitary species can move slowly . 
 Some species eject unfertilized ova into the water , while others keep their ova in brood chambers until they hatch , and some of these species use placenta @-@ like organs to nourish the developing eggs . After hatching , the larvae swim for a short time and then settle on a surface . There they metamorphose , and the larval gut rotates by up to 180 ° , so that the mouth and anus face upwards . Both colonial and solitary species also reproduce by cloning — solitary species grow clones in the space between the tentacles and then release them when developed , while colonial ones produce new members from the stalks or from corridor @-@ like stolons . 
 Fossils of entoprocts are very rare , and the earliest specimens that have been identified with confidence date from the Late Jurassic . Most studies from 1996 onwards have regarded entoprocts as members of the Trochozoa , which also includes molluscs and annelids . However , a study in 2008 concluded that entoprocts are closely related to bryozoans . Recently , the Maotianshan Shales fossil , Cotyledion tylodes , has been reevaluated as being an ancient , sclerite @-@ bearing entoproct ( originally having been identified as a putative <unk> echinoderm ) . This entoproct interpretation of Cotyledion , however , has been questioned by Mark McMenamin , who considers it best interpreted as a stem group echinoderm based on the morphology of its stem sclerites . 
 = = Names = = 
 " Entoprocta " , coined in 1870 , means " anus inside " . The alternative name " <unk> " , meaning " bent " or " curved " animals , was assigned in 1929 . Some authors use " Entoprocta " , while others prefer " <unk> " . 
 = = Description = = 
 Most species are colonial , and their members are known as " zooids " , since they are not fully independent animals . Zooids are typically 1 millimetre ( 0 @.@ 039 in ) long but range from 0 @.@ 1 to 7 millimetres ( 0 @.@ 004 to 0 @.@ 3 in ) long . 
 = = = Distinguishing features = = = 
 Entoprocts are superficially like bryozoans ( ectoprocts ) , as both groups have a " crown " of tentacles whose cilia generate water currents that draw food particles towards the mouth . However , they have different feeding mechanisms and internal anatomy , and ectoprocts undergo a metamorphosis from larva to adult that destroys most of the larval tissues ; their colonies also have a founder zooid which is different from its " daughters " . 
 = = = Zooids = = = 
 The body of a mature entoproct zooid has a goblet @-@ like structure with a calyx mounted on a relatively long stalk that attaches to a surface . The rim of the calyx bears a " crown " of 8 to 30 solid tentacles , which are extensions of the body wall . The base of the " crown " of tentacles is surrounded by a membrane that partially covers the tentacles when they retract . The mouth and anus lie on opposite sides of the atrium ( space enclosed by the " crown " of tentacles ) , and both can be closed by sphincter muscles . The gut is U @-@ shaped , curving down towards the base of the calyx , where it broadens to form the stomach . This is lined with a membrane consisting of a single layer of cells , each of which has multiple cilia . 
 The stalks of colonial species arise from shared attachment plates or from a network of stolons , tubes that run across a surface . In solitary species , the stalk ends in a muscular sucker , or a flexible foot , or is cemented to a surface . The stalk is muscular and produces a characteristic nodding motion . In some species it is segmented . Some solitary species can move , either by creeping on the muscular foot or by somersaulting . 
 The body wall consists of the epidermis and an external cuticle , which consists mainly of criss @-@ cross collagen fibers . The epidermis contains only a single layer of cells , each of which bears multiple cilia ( " hairs " ) and microvilli ( tiny " pleats " ) that penetrate through the cuticle . The stolons and stalks of colonial species have thicker cuticles , stiffened with chitin . 
 There is no coelom ( internal fluid @-@ filled cavity lined with peritoneum ) and the other internal organs are embedded in connective tissue that lies between the stomach and the base of the " crown " of tentacles . The nervous system runs through the connective tissue and just below the epidermis , and is controlled by a pair of ganglia . Nerves run from these to the calyx , tentacles and stalk , and to sense organs in all these areas . 
 = = Feeding , digestion , excretion , circulation and respiration = = 
 A band of cells , each with multiple cilia , runs along the sides of the tentacles , connecting each tentacle to its neighbors , except that there is a gap in the band nearest the anus . A separate band of cilia grows along a groove that runs close to the inner side of the base of the " crown " , with a narrow extension up the inner surface of each tentacle . The cilia on the sides of the tentacles create a current that flows into the " crown " at the bases of the tentacles and exits above the center of the " crown " . These cilia pass food particles to the cilia on the inner surface of the tentacles , and the inner <unk> produce a downward current that drives particles into and around the groove , and then to the mouth . 
 Entoprocts generally use one or both of : ciliary sieving , in which one band of cilia creates the feeding current and another traps food particles ( the " sieve " ) ; and downstream collecting , in which food articles are trapped as they are about to exit past them . In entoprocts , downstream collecting is carried out by the same bands of cilia that generate the current ; <unk> larvae also use downstream collecting , but use a separate set of cilia to trap food particles . 
 In addition , glands in the tentacles secrete sticky threads that capture large particles . A non @-@ colonial species reported from around the Antarctic Peninsula in 1993 has cells that superficially resemble the cnidocytes of cnidaria , and fire sticky threads . These unusual cells lie around the mouth , and may provide an additional means of capturing prey . 
 The stomach and intestine are lined with microvilli , which are thought to absorb nutrients . The anus , which opens inside the " crown " , ejects solid wastes into the outgoing current after the tentacles have filtered food out of the water ; in some families it is raised on a cone above the level of the groove that conducts food to the mouth . Most species have a pair of protonephridia which extract soluble wastes from the internal fluids and eliminate them through pores near the mouth . However , the freshwater species Urnatella gracilis has multiple nephridia in the calyx and stalk . 
 The zooids absorb oxygen and emit carbon dioxide by diffusion , which works well for small animals . 
 = = Reproduction and life cycle = = 
 Most species are simultaneous hermaphrodites , but some switch from male to female as they mature , while individuals of some species remain of the same sex all their lives . Individuals have one or two pairs of gonads , placed between the atrium and stomach , and opening into a single gonopore in the atrium . The eggs are thought to be fertilized in the ovaries . Most species release eggs that hatch into planktonic larvae , but a few brood their eggs in the gonopore . Those that brood small eggs nourish them by a placenta @-@ like organ , while larvae of species with larger eggs live on stored yolk . The development of the fertilized egg into a larva follows a typical <unk> pattern : the cells divide by spiral cleavage , and mesoderm develops from a specific cell labelled " 4d " in the early embryo . There is no coelom at any stage . 
 In some species the larva is a trochophore which is planktonic and feeds on floating food particles by using the two bands of cilia round its " equator " to sweep food into the mouth , which uses more cilia to drive them into the stomach , which uses further cilia to expel undigested remains through the anus . In some species of the genera <unk> and <unk> , the larva produces one or two buds that separate and form new individuals , while the trochophore disintegrates . However , most produce a larva with sensory tufts at the top and front , a pair of pigment @-@ cup ocelli ( " little eyes " ) , a pair of protonephridia , and a large , cilia @-@ bearing foot at the bottom . After settling , the foot and frontal tuft attach to the surface . Larvae of most species undergo a complex metamorphosis , and the internal organs may rotate by up to 180 ° , so that the mouth and anus both point upwards . 
 All species can produce clones by budding . Colonial species produce new zooids from the stolon or from the stalks , and can form large colonies in this way . In solitary species , clones form on the floor of the atrium , and are released when their organs are developed . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 The phylum consists of about 150 recognized species , grouped into 4 families : 
 = = Evolutionary history = = 
 = = = Fossil record = = = 
 Since entoprocts are small and soft @-@ bodied , fossils have been extremely rare . In 1977 , Simon Conway Morris provided the first description of <unk> , a sessile animal with calyx , stalk and holdfast , found in Canada 's Burgess Shale , which was formed about 505 million years ago . Morris regarded this animal as the earliest known entoproct , since its mouth and anus lay inside a ring of structures above the calyx , but noted that these structures were flat and rather stiff , while the tentacles of modern entoprocts are flexible and have a round cross @-@ section . 
 In 1992 J.A. Todd and P.D. Taylor concluded that <unk> was not an entoproct , because it did not have the typical rounded , flexible tentacles , and the fossils showed no other features that clearly resembled those of entoprocts . In their opinion , the earliest fossil entoprocts were specimens they found from Late Jurassic rocks in England . These resemble the modern colonial genus <unk> in many ways , including : upright zooids linked by a network of stolons encrusting the surface to which the colony is attached ; straight stalks joined to the stolons by bulky sockets with transverse bands of wrinkles ; overall size and proportions similar to that of modern species of <unk> . 
 Another species , Cotyledion tylodes , first described in 1999 , was larger than extant entoprocts , reaching 8 – 56 mm in height , and unlike modern species , was " armored " with sclerites , scale @-@ like structures . C. tylodes did have a similar sessile lifestyle to modern entoprocts . The identified fossils of C. tylodes were found in 520 @-@ million @-@ year @-@ old rocks from southern China . This places early entoprocts in the period of the Cambrian explosion . 
 = = = Family tree = = = 
 When entoprocts were discovered in the nineteenth century , they and bryozoans ( ectoprocts ) were regarded as classes within the phylum Bryozoa , because both groups were sessile animals that filter @-@ fed by means of a " crown " of tentacles that bore cilia . However , from 1869 onwards , increasing awareness of differences , including the position of the entoproct anus inside the feeding structure and the difference in the early pattern of division of cells in their embryos , caused scientists to regard the two groups as separate phyla . " Bryozoa " then became just an alternative name for ectoprocts , in which the anus is outside the feeding organ . However , studies by one team in 2007 and 2008 argue for sinking Entoprocta into Bryozoa as a class , and resurrecting Ectoprocta as a name for the currently identified bryozoans . 
 The consensus of studies from 1996 onwards has been that entoprocts are part of the Trochozoa , a protostome " superphylum " whose members are united in having as their most basic larval form the trochophore type . The <unk> also include molluscs , annelids , flatworms , nemertines and others . However , scientists disagree about which phylum is mostly closely related to <unk> within the <unk> . An analysis in 2008 re @-@ introduced the pre @-@ 1869 meaning of the term " Bryozoa " , for a group in which entoprocts and ectoprocts are each other 's closest relatives . 
 = = Ecology = = 
 = = = Distribution and habitats = = = 
 All species are sessile . While the great majority are marine , two species live in freshwater : <unk> <unk> , reported in 2004 in central Thailand , and Urnatella gracilis , found in all the continents except Antarctica . Colonial species are found in all the oceans , living on rocks , shells , algae and underwater buildings . The solitary species , which are marine , live on other animals that feed by producing water currents , such as sponges , ectoprocts and sessile annelids . 
 = = = Interaction with other organisms = = = 
 Some species of nudibranchs ( " sea slugs " ) , particularly those of the genus <unk> , as well as turbellarian flatworms , prey on entoprocts . 
 Small colonies of the freshwater entoproct Urnatella gracilis have been found living on the aquatic larvae of the <unk> <unk> <unk> . The ectoprocts gain a means of dispersal , protection from predators and possibly a source of water that is rich in oxygen and nutrients , as colonies often live next to the gills of the larval flies . In the White Sea , the non @-@ colonial entoproct <unk> <unk> prefers to live attached to bryozoan ( ectoproct ) colonies , mainly on the edges of colonies or in the " chimneys " , gaps by which large bryozoan colonies expel water from which they have sieved food . Observation suggests that both the entoprocts and the bryozoans benefit from the association : each enhances the water flow that the other needs for feeding ; and the longer cilia of the entoprocts may help them to capture different food from that caught by the bryozoans , so that the animals do not compete for the same food . 
 Entoprocts are small and have been little studied by zoologists . Hence it is difficult to determine whether a specimen belongs to a species that already occurs in the same area or is an invader , possibly as a result of human activities . 
 = Castiel ( Supernatural ) = 
 Castiel / <unk> / is a fictional character portrayed by Misha Collins on the CW Television Network 's American television series Supernatural . An Angel of the Lord , he first appears in the fourth season , and is used to introduce the theme of Christian theology to the series . In the series , Castiel brings Dean Winchester back from Hell and frequently helps him and his brother Sam in their battles with various demons and angels along the way . During his travels with the Winchesters , Castiel develops friendships with both men . As an angel , he possesses a number of supernatural abilities , including the ability to kill demons . Initially , the character demonstrates complete devotion to God and little emotion . However , his interactions and experiences with Dean Winchester and Sam Winchester , as well as certain revelations about God and his fellow angels , have a humanizing effect on him . This , despite the stress and harm it causes his character , allows him to develop an independent will as the series progresses and helps the show address topics related to free will . 
 Unlike the stereotypical portrayal of television angels , Castiel does not always help people , and is willing to kill innocents if needed . Collins originally read for the part of a demon , as series creator Eric Kripke did not want fans to find out that angels were being introduced to the series . Collins prepared for the role by reading the Book of Revelation , and based his portrayal on his younger brother . Critics and fans have responded highly favorably to the character . In response , the show 's creators expanded his role in the series , upgrading him to a main cast member in the fifth and sixth seasons . After being a special guest star in the seventh and eighth seasons , Collins was upgraded once again to regular cast member status for the ninth season . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = Arrival on Earth = = = 
 At the end of the third season of Supernatural , main character Dean Winchester is in Hell after being killed by the hellhounds of the demonic antagonist Lilith . In the season four premiere " Lazarus Rising " , the angel Castiel is introduced as the one who brought Dean back from Hell and resurrected him . Because merely perceiving his actual form typically results in blindness , he takes a human host – James " Jimmy " Novak , a " devout man " who prayed for it – to communicate with Dean , and tells him that he has been brought back because God has work for him . Lilith is breaking the 66 seals in order to free Lucifer , and Dean must stop her . 
 Castiel continues to appear throughout the season , at one point sending Dean back in time and later tasking him and his brother Sam with stopping witches from breaking another seal . He returns with fellow angel Uriel at the end of the episode " I Know What You Did Last Summer " , seeking to kill Anna Milton , a fallen angel with the ability to " hear " the communications between angels . In the following episode , " Heaven and Hell " , Anna uses an ancient Enochian sigil to send the angels away , though they manage to track them down later . Once there , Castiel expresses regret at having to kill Anna . Before they can carry out their duty , however , they are confronted by the demon Alastair and two of his minions . A fight ensues , and Castiel is nearly defeated in the battle by Alastair . He is saved by Dean , and they in turn are rescued when Anna regains her powers . Although Uriel nearly vents his frustration on Dean , Castiel stops him , and the two leave . Castiel later becomes suspicious of Uriel and confronts him in " On the Head of a Pin " . Uriel admits he and certain other angels are now working together to free Lucifer , having grown weary of never hearing from God and jealous of His favoritism for humanity . He asks Castiel to join him , but Castiel refuses and attacks him . Uriel eventually overpowers Castiel , but is killed by Anna before he can strike the finishing blow . During this time , the orders he is getting from Heaven of questionable morality and the influence of Anna cause him to start to have doubts about Heaven 's plans . He later returns in " The Monster At the End of This Book " to explain Chuck 's role as a Prophet and later when Dean calls him to help save Sam . Castiel informs Dean he can 't interfere due to how important Prophets are , but he impresses upon Dean how the archangel protecting a Prophet will intervene if said Prophet is in trouble to secretly let him know a way to save Sam . 
 = = = Jimmy Novak alone = = = 
 In " The Rapture " , Castiel enters Dean 's dreams and arranges a meeting to tell him something important . However , when Sam and Dean go to meet him , they instead find Jimmy , Castiel 's vessel , who claims to have little memory of his life as a vessel . Anna theorizes Castiel must have angered his superiors , prompting him to be taken back to Heaven . When Jimmy is shot at the end of the episode trying to save his family from demons , Castiel returns , taking Jimmy 's daughter as his new vessel . After the demons are killed , a dying Jimmy begs Castiel to take him back as a host so his daughter will not have to go through what he did , and the angel acquiesces . Dean then asks him what he needed to tell him , but Castiel coldly replies his loyalty is to Heaven , not to mankind or to him . 
 = = = Servant of Heaven = = = 
 In " When the Levee Breaks " , Castiel has Dean take the oath of allegiance to God and His angels , to which Dean agrees under the impression it will keep Sam safe . Later in the episode , Castiel releases Sam , who is on detox from Ruby 's demon blood , from Bobby 's Panic Room . When Anna confronts him about his actions , other angels appear and capture her . 
 With Sam closing in on Lilith , Castiel and Zachariah imprison Dean within an idyllic waiting room , where he will be made comfortable until the time comes for him to play his role in stopping the Apocalypse . Dean refuses to remain idle , and continually requests to be able to see Sam , which is denied . Once Dean discovers the angels are allowing the Apocalypse to happen , he implores for Castiel to help him stop the final seal from being broken . Though Castiel refuses at first , he returns ready to help not long after . He takes Dean to see the prophet Chuck for information on Sam . Their presence does not fall in line with Chuck 's Gospel , so the Archangel Raphael begins to descend . Castiel sends Dean to Sam , remaining behind to hold back the archangel and any others who might come . He is subsequently killed , with his host 's body being blown to pieces . 
 = = = Fall to Earth = = = 
 However , Castiel later returns – still in Jimmy Novak 's body – in the fifth season premiere , " Sympathy for the Devil " , killing two fellow angels in order to save Sam and Dean . He is uncertain as to how he was resurrected , but alludes to Zachariah it may have been God 's doing . After ordering Zachariah away , Castiel carves Enochian sigils into Sam and Dean 's ribs to hide them from all angels , including Lucifer . Castiel later returns to the brothers in " Good God Y 'All ! " , and reveals his plans to find God . He borrows Dean 's amulet , as it burns hot in God 's presence , and departs . He has also been completely cut off from Heaven as a result of his rebellion and has lost some of his powers as a result , including his ability to heal injuries . He remains on Earth hunting for God , although acquires a cellphone so that the Winchesters can call for his aid when dealing with particularly challenging cases , such as their discovery of the Antichrist or their latest confrontation with the Trickster ( who is revealed to be the lost archangel Gabriel ) . 
 In " Abandon All Hope ... " , Castiel helps the Winchesters retrieve the Colt , and joins them on their hunt for Lucifer . However , he ventures off after discovering hundreds of Reapers are already in the town , hoping to discover what has called them there . He soon becomes imprisoned by Lucifer , who tries to tempt Castiel into joining him , pointing out they are both targets of Heaven , but Castiel refuses . He later manages to free himself , but finds he no longer has the power to kill demons . After Sam and Dean fail in their attempt to kill the Devil , Castiel teleports them to safety . After exhausting most of his remaining power to take Sam and Dean back in time to save their parents from renegade angel Anna , Castiel aids the Winchesters in their battle with Famine , the Horseman of the Apocalypse – the brothers having already defeated War – but his weakened powers render him susceptible to Famine 's influence , Famine attacking Jimmy 's hunger for red meat to make Castiel more interested in eating burgers than actually fighting . When the brothers are killed by vengeful hunters in " Dark Side of the Moon " , Castiel – unable to return to Heaven – briefly communicates with them . He tasks them with finding the angel Joshua , who communicates directly with God . Although Joshua reveals God is alive , he claims He is apathetic to the Apocalypse ; having saved the brothers and Castiel , God feels He has done enough . When relayed to Castiel , his hopes and faith are shattered , leading him to drink heavily in the subsequent episode " 99 Problems " when Sam summons him for answers about the actions of the people in a town . Castiel reveals that they are dealing with the Whore of Babylon and provides the stake that can kill her , but as he is no longer a true servant of Heaven , is unable to do it himself . He gets Pastor Gideon so they can have him do it and tries to hold the Whore in place so the Pastor can stab her . However , she casts a spell that causes him great pain and knocks him out of the fight . In the end , Dean stabs her with the stake , identifying himself as a true servant of heaven . 
 = = = Powerless = = = 
 In " Point of No Return , " Castiel helps Sam to keep Dean from becoming Michael 's vessel . He leaves after hearing a signal from the angels , and finds a resurrected Adam Milligan – Sam and Dean 's half @-@ brother who had been previously killed by ghouls . When Dean escapes and tries to contact the angels , Castiel finds him , and angrily attacks him for making Castiel 's rebelling against Heaven worthless . Later , he carves a banishing sigil into his own chest and activates it in the presence of multiple angels in order to clear the way for Sam and Dean to attack Zachariah and save Adam . The effects of the sigil send him onto a fishing boat , now completely human . Despite his lack of power , he is able to defeat the Horseman <unk> using what appears to be what little is left of his angelic strength , and assists Bobby and Sam in preventing nationwide distribution of the <unk> virus . In the fifth season finale , " Swan Song " , Castiel loses faith after Sam fails to overpower Lucifer when he possesses him and suggests they get drunk and wait for the end to come . When Dean refuses to give up , Castiel and Bobby follow him and Castiel uses a Molotov cocktail of Holy Fire to temporarily banish Michael to buy Dean time to try to reach Sam . Angry that Castiel attacked his brother , Lucifer obliterates Castiel with a snap of his fingers . After Sam and Dean avert the Apocalypse , Castiel is resurrected once more by God , now more powerful than ever . He heals Dean 's injuries and resurrects Bobby and reminds Dean that he got what he wanted : no Apocalypse , no Paradise , just more of the same . Castiel then heads back to Heaven to restore order and become its new leader , believing it to be in chaos as Sam trapped Michael in Lucifer 's Cage as well . 
 = = = Post @-@ Apocalyptic alliances = = = 
 A year after the Apocalypse , Castiel returns to Earth in " The Third Man " to get Sam and Dean 's help to find the Staff of Moses , which , along with many other weapons of Heaven , has been stolen during the war . They soon discover that the angel Balthazar has stolen it and sold pieces of it to people in exchange for their souls . They confront Balthazar , but are interrupted by Raphael . Before Raphael is able to get his revenge against Castiel , Balthazar destroys Raphael 's vessel and sends him back to Heaven . After trapping Balthazar within a ring of ignited holy oil and forcing him to restore the souls he has taken , Castiel sets him free , claiming his debt has been paid off . 
 In " Family Matters " , Castiel returns to " diagnose " Sam by asking him several questions . Sam , still dizzy and unsure of what is going on after being knocked unconscious by Dean , reveals that he no longer sleeps and has become a better hunter . Castiel has an idea of what 's wrong and decides to read Sam 's soul by reaching inside him , and the truth is finally revealed : that Sam has no soul , and it was locked in the cage with Lucifer . Both Dean and Castiel are unsure whether Sam is still Sam without his soul , but they let Sam go and Castiel heals his wounds from being beaten by Dean . 
 In " Caged Heat " , Sam tries to trick Castiel into coming to Earth to help the brothers get Sam 's soul back . When he comes , Sam threatens Castiel saying that if he does not help , then he will hunt him down and kill him . Despite knowing Sam never could , he helps them . Later , while Sam and Dean are doing research , Castiel discovers porn on TV ; when Dean asks why he was watching porn , he replies , " It was there . " 
 Castiel later discovers Sam and Dean are working with a demon named Meg , whom he refers to as an abomination . When Crowley admits that he cannot get Sam 's soul back , Castiel burns Crowley 's human remains . 
 At the end of the episode Castiel explains to Sam and Dean that the celestial war is not going well for him and he would rather be on Earth with them , but leaves anyway to continue fighting , but promises to take care of Crowley 's captured monsters first . After acquiring the holy weapons from Balthazar in " The French Mistake " , Castiel suggests that he now has a military advantage in the war . Unfortunately , this advantage seems limited ; he orders Balthazar in " My Heart Will Go On " to save the Titanic , spawning 50 @,@ 000 new souls to empower his side . However , Fate works to undo the impossible births and begins killing them . Once the brothers encounter the string of odd deaths Fate takes this opportunity to eliminate them due to their part of undoing the destined Apocalypse . This forces Castiel to concede the loss and re @-@ sink the Titanic . 
 In " <unk> , " Sam and Dean call for Castiel to send them back in time as they have learned that the ashes of a Phoenix can kill Eve and that Samuel Colt killed one in the past with The Colt . Rachel , Castiel 's lieutenant comes instead and berates the boys for only calling for him when they need something of him , but Castiel arrives himself and sends Rachel away . Castiel is able to send Dean and Sam back in time , but warns them that he has to retrieve them in 24 hours or they 'll be stuck in the past forever and tells Bobby to pray for him when the time comes . While waiting , Rachel approaches him about his plans and attacks him . Castiel kills her , but is left weakened by a stab wound she managed to inflict on him first . Castiel manages to teleport to Bobby 's and draws a sigil to hide himself from the other angels before passing out . He wakes in time to retrieve the Winchesters , but his weakened state prevents this so he is forced to draw power from Bobby 's soul . While Dean killed the Phoenix , Castiel brought them back before they could gather the ashes so it all appears for nothing and he lacks the power to send them back . Luckily , Samuel Colt collected the ashes and sent a package with them to be delivered to Bobby 's after the boys return . 
 In " Mommy Dearest " , it is discovered that there is a possibility Crowley may have faked his death and might still be alive ; suggesting that perhaps Castiel had burned the wrong bones by mistake . Eve reveals this to Sam and Dean when they try to hunt her down . During the hunt , Eve is able to suppress Castiel 's powers as she is older than him . After Dean kills Eve , Castiel 's powers return and he kills all of her monsters with a blast of white light before transporting the group to the home of the uncle of two young boys who were turned into monsters . There , they find them dead , having been killed by demons , and Castiel promises to look into Crowley 's possible survival to find out for sure if he 's dead or not . However , Castiel is instead seen with a very alive Crowley who states that he is " tired of cleaning up after [ Castiel 's ] messes , " implying that Castiel had full knowledge of burning the wrong bones and that both he and Crowley have some sort of agreement between them and / or may be working together as partners . 
 In " The Man Who Would Be King " , it is revealed that Castiel was the one who partially raised Sam from Hell , though due to the complication of the cage it was impossible to retrieve his soul , and that he has made a deal with Crowley in a desperate attempt to win the war . Sam and Dean also learn of his partnership with Crowley when he slips up and reveals he is spying on them . 
 In " Let it Bleed , " Castiel is enraged to learn that Lisa and Ben Braeden have been kidnapped by Crowley and tries to get him to reveal where they are to no avail . Castiel saves Dean from a demon and tries and fails to convince him to back off . Later , after Lisa is mortally wounded by a demon possessing her in an attempt to force Dean not to exorcise her , Castiel arrives at the hospital and without being asked , heals her wounds and at Dean 's request , erases all of her and her son Ben 's memories of Dean . He does this as a final act of friendship towards Dean though both admit it doesn 't change the fact that they are now enemies . Castiel also spends the episode one step ahead of Bobby investigating H.P. Lovecraft 's opening of Purgatory in an attempt to find a way to open it himself . 
 = = = Godhood = = = 
 In " The Man Who Knew Too Much " , Castiel tricks Crowley and Raphael , eventually absorbing the souls from Purgatory . He demonstrates his new power by killing Raphael with a simple snap of his fingers . While talking to Dean , who unsuccessfully begs him to give up the power , Sam sneaks up behind them and attempts to kill him with an angelic blade by stabbing Castiel in the back , but it has no effect . Castiel removes the blade , explains that he is no longer an angel , declaring himself their new God . He then glances at the three hunters before delivering an ultimatum : to profess their own loyalty and love unto him , or be destroyed . 
 In " Meet the New Boss " , Castiel begins exacting his new supremacy over the planet , working miracles and punishing religious hypocrites alike . However , when Castiel 's vessel begins to become damaged and he begins to lose control of his power , Death reveals that he also absorbed creatures known as Leviathans from Purgatory . The Leviathans will destroy him if they are not released . Castiel seeks out the Winchesters ' help , and reopens the portal with Death 's assistance . Although the souls are returned , the Leviathans evade reentering Purgatory and take control of Castiel 's vessel . In " Hello , Cruel World " , the vessel begins to quickly break down . The Leviathans are forced to leave , dispersing into the local water supply nearby and leaving behind only Castiel 's trench coat . 
 = = = Return to madness = = = 
 In " The Born @-@ Again Identity " , it 's revealed that Castiel survived . After the Leviathans left him , he made his way out of the river , naked , and ran into his future wife Daphne . However , the experience renders Castiel amnesic , but with his angelic powers intact . Going by the name " Emanuel , " Castiel used his powers to heal people , though he didn 't know where that ability and his power to see demon 's true faces came from . After Sam is committed to a mental hospital as a result of the hallucinations of Lucifer he is suffering due to Castiel breaking his " mental wall " , Dean searches for " Emanuel " and kills a demon that is holding his wife hostage . Castiel agrees to help Dean who doesn 't tell him who he really is , but mentions what " Cas " had done to Sam . The two are joined by Meg , but upon reaching the hospital , find demons surrounding the entrance . As Castiel is the only one who can take them all down , Dean is forced to tell him the truth about who he really is and insists he has the power to kill the demons . Castiel manages to summon his power to kill demons and kills all of them , but doing so restores his memories . Castiel shows remorse for his previous actions and initially wants to leave , but Dean is able to convince him to help by giving him back his trench coat . Castiel finds Sam in time to save him from a demon torturing him to death with electro @-@ shock therapy and tries to restore his mental wall , but can 't as it 's completely gone . Feeling sorry for what he had done , Castiel transfers the problem to himself and is haunted by visions of Lucifer like Sam was . Castiel is committed to the mental hospital , but is safe from the demons as only Meg knows he 's alive and she takes a job at the hospital , presumably to look after him . In " Party On , Garth , " Dean calls Meg and she reveals that Castiel 's in the same condition , which Sam feels guilty about . 
 In " Reading is Fundamental " , Castiel is awakened when the Word of God – a tablet with information inscribed by an angel as dictated by God – is found by Sam and Dean . Although his torment has driven him insane , he explains that taking on Sam 's pain has helped relieve some of his past burdens . He then explains what the Word of God is , but is unable to read it . Two angels from his former garrison arrive in pursuit of Kevin , a prophet who was awakened by the Word of God and drawn to it . The angel Hester tries to kill Castiel out of anger for his past actions , but she is instead killed by Meg . The other angel offers Castiel the chance to return to Heaven with him , but Castiel declines , explaining that he feels he no longer belongs there . The other angel then leaves , taking Kevin away to safety . Castiel comments to the Winchesters that he finds it amazing that he does not know what he is going to do next , and teleports away after giving them his blood . 
 In " Survival of the Fittest , " after finding his garrison wiped out , Castiel has Meg take him to the Winchesters where he explains what he has discovered . Crowley arrives and is furious to see him , but Castiel no longer has a wish to fight and when Crowley realizes he 's insane , he decides to put off his feud with Castiel for a time when he 's sane again . Crowley , after giving them his blood , disappears but tells them Castiel can help them kill Dick . Castiel refuses to help as he doesn 't want to fight and after he disappears to retrieve a board game , Meg explains that since Castiel had the Leviathans within him , he is able to tell them apart even in their human forms and can pick out the real Dick Roman . Castiel watches as Sam and Dean burn Bobby 's flask and put him at rest and later takes Dean to where he has stored the Impala and agrees to help . Castiel , Sam and Dean infiltrate <unk> thanks to a distraction from Meg and he and Dean confront Dick Roman in the labs . Dick throws Castiel across the room when he tries to attack , but after Dean fails to kill Dick , Castiel holds his head in place from behind allowing Dean to stab Dick through the neck with the weapon , killing him . As a result of this , Castiel and Dean are sucked into Purgatory with Dick 's soul and after letting Dean know this and that they are more likely to die than get out , Castiel disappears , leaving Dean alone . 
 = = = Out of Purgatory = = = 
 In " We Need To Talk About Kevin , " Dean escapes Purgatory with the help of the vampire Benny , but Castiel is not with him . He later tells Sam that things got hairy near the end and that Castiel didn 't make it , that he " let go . " While Dean doesn 't elaborate , he is clearly affected by this . In a flashback scene , Dean is shown looking for Castiel in Purgatory , interrogating a vampire for his location . As a result , he meets Benny and only agrees to Benny 's deal to get out if they find Castiel first and help him escape too . Castiel appears in flashbacks in the following episode , where he reveals that he fled Dean to keep him safe from the Leviathans and other monsters that are angry at Castiel , but Dean refuses to leave Purgatory without Castiel . When talking with another angel at an auction for the second Word of God tablet , Dean again states that Castiel did not make it out of Purgatory . He later escapes with the aid of an army of angels sent to rescue him – having initially remained behind as penance for his actions to stop a duo of Leviathans that were trying to attack Dean and Benny as they left Purgatory – but the other angels not only erase his memory that they were responsible for his escape , but also erase his memory of their subsequent ' check @-@ ins ' to discuss the Winchesters ' actions , with Castiel forced to tell them about the Winchesters ' progress in the search for the tablet . Apparently back to full power , Castiel helps the Winchesters save Kevin from <unk> who has been abducting future Prophets to try to find another means of reading the Word of God <unk> and destroy the tablet to prevent Crowley using it , retaining half of the tablet while Crowley flees with the other half . Afterwards , in " <unk> <unk> , " Castiel cuts off his ability to listen into the other angels and decides to become a full @-@ time hunter to avoid facing the other angels about what he has done . Castiel proves instrumental in solving the case , using his abilities to enter the mind of a man with reality warping powers , allowing Sam to bring him back to reality with a speech about not running from it . Later , at the request of the man , Fred , Castiel strips him of his powers so he is no longer a danger to anyone though it leaves him mentally damaged . Castiel , having listened to Sam 's speech about running from reality as well as Fred , decides to return to Heaven to try to make up for what he did , but is forbidden by Naomi , the angel who ordered his rescue . Instead , Castiel stays to watch out for Fred for a while , but accepts that he can no longer run from what he has done . 
 In " Torn and <unk> , " as his penance , Castiel has turned back on his " angel radio " and travels around helping people who have need of help or healing . He demonstrates this by healing a sick infant that won 't stop crying . After getting a distress call from Samandriel , Naomi summons Castiel to rescue the angel . Castiel enlists Dean 's help and repeatedly wonders where Sam is , unaware that Sam and Dean are currently not getting along . After getting the ingredients for a " demon bomb , " Castiel gets Sam as they will need all the help they can get to rescue Samandriel and yells at Sam and Dean for their behavior . At the warehouse , Castiel tells Sam and Dean what symbols to neutralize and where so he can enter and gives Sam his sword so he has a weapon against demons . After Sam and Dean clear the way , Castiel enters , but is weakened by the other sigils in the building . Samandriel 's screams cause him to remember being tied down by Naomi who approaches his eye with a mysterious instrument and is unable to help Sam and Dean in breaking into the room where Samandriel is . After they get in , Castiel frees Samandriel while Sam and Dean deal with the demons guarding him and takes the other angel outside . There , Samandriel begs for Castiel not to return him to Heaven and tries to warn him that " they " are controlling him . Before Samandriel can explain , Naomi forces Castiel to kill him for being a " traitor . " Castiel is horrified by this , but Naomi reveals that Samandriel telling Crowley about the angel Word of God tablet puts all in angels in danger and Castiel is a hero . Under her orders , he claims to Sam and Dean that he was forced to kill Samandriel in self @-@ defense and that he is taking him back to Heaven to put him to rest ( in reality so Naomi can determine just how much he broke ) , but his weird behavior and the fact that his eye starts bleeding arouses Sam and Dean 's suspicions that he is being controlled . 
 = = = On the run from Heaven = = = 
 In " Goodbye Stranger , " Castiel has been completely brainwashed by Naomi and has killed thousands of copies of Dean ruthlessly . Castiel is sent to find the angel tablet and tortures and kills the demons also looking for it , drawing Sam and Dean 's attention . Sam and Dean track down someone who knows the location of one of Lucifer 's <unk> where the angel tablet is and in ensuing scuffle , Sam ends up in trouble . Castiel saves Sam and captures one of the demons , claiming under Naomi 's orders that he is searching for the second half of the demon tablet and that the demons are searching for a parchment that will allow them to translate it without a Prophet . Castiel tortures the demon who tells them where to find Meg , but kills her before she can reveal the truth to Sam and Dean . Castiel heads off alone and rescues Meg who explains what the demons really want . While Naomi initially wants her killed to prevent that , Castiel is able to make a case to keep her alive . The group then go to the warehouse where the crypt is and before heading inside with Dean , Castiel reveals that Sam is damaged by his trials on a level that even Castiel can 't fix . Castiel and Dean locate the angel tablet and Castiel has to have Dean get it as it is warded against angels . However , Naomi orders Castiel to kill Dean and though he fights it , he has no control over his actions . As he is about to kill him , Dean manages to break through to Castiel 's heart and he breaks free of Naomi 's influence . He picks up the angel tablet which completely severs Naomi 's connection to and control over him . Castiel heals Dean and explains what happened , but senses that he must now protect the tablet from everyone , even Dean . Castiel is later seen traveling on a bus to an unknown destination with the tablet . Despite losing the tablet , Naomi is somewhat satisfied as according to her , Castiel is doing what he is supposed to be doing . Naomi later comes to Dean . In an attempt to gain his trust , presumably because she knows Castiel is one of his weak spots , she lies to Dean about Castiel and claims that he misinterpreted everything she has done and is still insane . Dean , of course , doesn 't believe her . Despite this , Castiel is eventually captured by Naomi 's forces , but the angel tablet is claimed by Crowley after one of Naomi 's angels betrays their location , although this gives Castiel time to escape and reunite with the Winchesters after killing the angel guarding him . 
 = = = Metatron 's betrayal = = = 
 With Heaven in chaos , Metatron ( the Scribe of God , recently rediscovered ) convinces Castiel that they must seal the gates of Heaven to force the angels together to make peace . The first trial is to cut out the heart of a <unk> , the child of a human and an angel , which Castiel is forced to kill when the selected target attacks him . They manage to complete the second trial ( retrieving the bow of a cupid ) , but Metatron subsequently reveals that his true intentions are to exile all the angels from Heaven for forcing him to leave Heaven ages ago . He takes Castiel 's grace from him as the third ingredient for this spell , leaving Castiel human and banished to Earth before the other angels begin to fall as well . 
 = = = Back to humanity = = = 
 With the angels expelled from Heaven , many of them begin searching for Castiel , whom they believe is responsible . Castiel decides he wants to help his fallen brethren find " direction " when he encounters an angel named Hale who requests his guidance . When Castiel contacts the Winchesters , however , Dean tells him to leave Hale and make his way the Men of Letters bunker where he will be safe from the angels hunting him . Following this , Castiel attempts to leave Hale behind but is captured by her instead whereby she reveals her plans to possess him . Castiel escapes and kills Hale then continues to make his way to the bunker , abandoning his usual attire along the way . Castiel is nearly caught several times by the angels searching for him and gets a tattoo that will ward him against angels . In response , the angels send freelance Reapers after him and he is eventually caught by one of them . The Reaper tortures Castiel and kills him when the Winchesters show up to rescue him . Dean has the angel secretly possessing Sam heal Castiel and takes him back to the bunker but later asks him to leave when Ezekiel , the angel inside Sam , requests it . 
 Castiel gets a job at a gas station and attempts to adjust to his new life as a human . He helps Dean hunt a rogue angel that is killing people in emotional pain , but later prays for help when Dean sends him away for the second time on Ezekiel 's orders . Castiel is found by the neutral angel Muriel who heard his prayer . Muriel agrees to provide information but the two are captured by angels that have been trailing Muriel . Castiel and Muriel are taken to the anarchist angel Malachi , the leader of one side of the angel civil war ( the other side being headed by the angel Bartholomew ) , and tortured for information on Metatron . Muriel is killed in the process . 
 = = = Stolen Grace = = = 
 Eventually , Malachi leaves Castiel with the angel Theo who tells Castiel he wants to defect to Metatron 's side . Castiel tricks Theo into releasing him and steals his Grace , transforming Castiel into an angel once more and at least restoring his powers . Castiel calls Dean and tells him that while he was held captive by Malachi he learned that the angel Ezekiel is dead and so the angel possessing Sam must be an impostor . 
 After being contacted by Dean , Castiel , now wearing a new suit and trenchcoat and driving a stolen car as he can no longer teleport , returns to the bunker where he comes up with the plan to have Crowley help expel Gadreel from Sam . Castiel knocks Gadreel out and comforts Dean when the torture they have Crowley perform to bring forth Sam 's mind proves too much for Dean . Castiel is furious to learn that it is Gadreel , blaming him for all the evil in the universe , but Dean calms him down . When Gadreel proves resistant to their efforts to expel him , Dean tries to have Castiel possess Sam to let him know of the situation but he can 't without Sam 's permission . Crowley agrees to do it instead in exchange for his freedom and though Castiel is reluctant , he removes Sam 's anti @-@ possession tattoo . The plan works and Sam expels Gadreel . After leaving Crowley to deal with Abaddon , Castiel heals Sam 's injuries from the torture and informs him he can finish his healing from the Trials over time as Gadreel did most of the job . He remains behind with Sam as Dean leaves on his own . 
 = = = Facing Metatron = = = 
 With his angelic powers partially restored , Castiel sets out to try and stop the angelic civil war . Having killed Bartholomew in self @-@ defence , Castiel takes command of most of the Earth @-@ bound angels , but finds himself opposed by Metatron , who is rallying angels to his side with the intention of painting Castiel as the villain of the piece . Although Castiel learns that his stolen grace will kill him eventually , he refuses Metatron 's offer to side with him , eventually convincing Gadreel to ally with him in opposing Metatron 's attempt to stage a coup of Heaven even as Metatron tricks the other angels into follow him by presenting Castiel as a despot willing to destroy everything to win the war , convincing angels to ' suicide bomb ' themselves and claim that Castiel told them to do it . Having gained access to Heaven 's ' back door ' after Gadreel sacrifices himself , Castiel defeats Metatron and throws him into Heaven 's prison . 
 = = = Lack of Grace = = = 
 Despite his defeat of Metatron and access to Heaven having been restored , Castiel continues to face challenges on a personal and large scale , as some angels prefer to remain on Earth and his stolen Grace continues to consume him . Although Metatron has hinted that he may be able to help Castiel with a remaining fragment of his original Grace , Castiel has rejected the option of making a deal with Metatron to save his own life . Sam and Dean remain ignorant of Castiel 's fate , although Crowley is aware of Castiel 's condition , at one point killing another angel to transfer her Grace to Castiel so that Castiel could help Sam cure the now @-@ demonic Dean after he was transformed by the Mark of Cain . 
 When Hannah decides to return to Heaven to give her vessel a chance at returning to her life , Castiel is prompted to look up Jimmy 's daughter Claire , revealing that Jimmy has been ' dead ' and in Heaven ever since Jimmy 's body was destroyed during his first confrontation with Raphael . Although Claire initially resents Castiel 's return to her life , she comes to accept him and the Winchesters after they save her from being sold as a prostitute by a man she believed had been helping her . 
 = = = Grace restored = = = 
 Seeking to help Dean find a cure for the Mark of Cain , Castiel breaks Metatron out of Heaven and removes his Grace so that the Winchesters can interrogate him . Although he fails to provide any new information , Metatron is able to lead Castiel to the library where he hid the remaining fragments of Castiel 's Grace . With his powers restored , Castiel helps Claire find her long @-@ lost mother , but although Amelia sacrifices herself to save Claire , Claire accepts that the Winchesters and Castiel meant well , even speculating that she will become a Hunter herself . When Rowena – Crowley 's long @-@ lost mother – casts a spell to remove the Mark , she also casts a spell that causes Castiel to attack Crowley while she escapes , leaving Castiel driven by a greater rage to the point that he kills two angels until Rowena is forced to cure him . 
 = = = Lucifer 's Vessel = = = 
 Faced with the threat of the <unk> revealed over the course of the series to be God 's ' sister ' , sacrificed to create the <unk> Castiel agrees to act as Lucifer 's vessel when Lucifer claims to be the only one with the power to defeat the Darkness , since God is absent and all other archangels are dead or insane . After killing Rowena , apparently the only person capable of re @-@ opening the Cage , Lucifer spends some time re @-@ establishing his power base in Hell while acting as Castiel to interact with the Winchesters and follow their research into Amara , but his true identity is revealed after the Winchesters attempt to travel back in time to recover a Hand of God from a submarine before it sank in 1943 . Castiel is able to regain control long enough to explain the situation to Sam and stop himself killing his friend , Dean subsequently banishing Lucifer and vowing to find a way to free Castiel from his control . Crowley , forced to act as Lucifer 's slave , is forced on the run after he fails to kill Lucifer with another salvaged Hand of God . The Winchesters manage to get through to Castiel when preparing for a new confrontation with Amara , but Castiel resolves to remain as Lucifer 's Vessel until her defeat , only for the Hand of God to fail against Amara 's power . With Castiel / Lucifer now Amara 's prisoner , she decides to torture an archangel to try and lure God out , leaving the Winchesters to speculate that Lucifer couldn 't use the Hand of God due to the fact that he is a fallen archangel . 
 = = Characterization = = 
 Castiel typically displays very little emotion and always exhibits an extremely somber disposition . Although it has been suggested angels possibly do not possess the ability to truly feel emotion , Castiel frequently exhibits affection towards Dean . This attachment and growing ability to feel even causes him to be " demoted " , as his superiors fear emotions are clouding his judgment . Throughout his appearances in the fourth season , he also seems to , at the very least , come close to expressing regret , hesitance , and anger several times , and has once quietly laughed at a joke Dean made in " It 's the Great Pumpkin , Sam Winchester " . Actor Misha Collins feels , through Dean , " [ Castiel is ] learning a little bit about humanity and re @-@ learning something about [ his ] own humanity from that exposure . So ... there ’ s a humanizing of Castiel going on . " Castiel begins having an internal struggle between what is right and what is wrong , and whether or not to obey orders from Heaven . Collins feels this is because interactions with Sam and Dean have made the angel " uncertain " and " more fragile " . Collins believes Castiel envies Dean 's decisiveness and desires to emulate him . Having lost his connection to Heaven in the fifth season , Castiel 's humanization seems to have quickened by the episode " Free to Be You and Me " , as he appears extremely anxious while in a whorehouse , is visibly distraught when asking Dean for help , and refers to the Archangel Raphael as " my little bitch " . Despite becoming very arrogant when he becomes the " new God , " Castiel still shows his caring side and ultimately returns the souls to Purgatory and shows remorse for his actions , promising to Dean to find a way to redeem himself in Dean 's eyes , showing that he cares about how Dean views him . After losing his memory , Castiel is more human than ever , but still displays some of his emotionless side . After his memory returns , he shows real regret when he can 't undo the damage he did to Sam and essentially sacrifices himself to save him out of remorse for his actions . After Castiel wakes up from his catatonic state , he is now depicted as insane with tendencies to ramble about random topics . However , parts of Castiel 's original personality are still shown with him still being happy to help Sam and Dean out and still knowledgeable about various supernatural things , but not willing to actually fight anymore even when his life is threatened . Castiel describes himself as " bad luck " and doesn 't believe he should be around the Winchesters as a result . After traveling to Purgatory , Castiel regained his sanity , but still carries a lot of guilt about his previous actions . He is also now less distant from Sam and Dean and more appreciative of human things such as television . 
 Contrary to depictions of angels in popular culture , Castiel and his peers are not out helping people in need . Contrary to his angel siblings he has a conscience and cares about humanity 's welfare — he finds humans to be " works of art " . Speaking of his character , actor Misha Collins stated , " I think that these angels are at least loosely derived from some Biblical angel stories , and those angels are [ very tough ] . They just destroy . I picked up Revelations , and they destroy , they destroy , they destroy . There ’ s no mention of cherubs and harps or any of that . " 
 = = Development = = 
 The character was created for the fourth season to introduce Christian mythology to the series . With series creator Eric Kripke wanting to keep the introduction of an angel a secret , the character was described as a demon during auditions . Once Collins got the part , the main direction Kripke gave him of the character was there is " an otherworldly quality to the character , and that he hasn 't been up close with human beings . He 's been watching human beings from a great distance for the last two thousand years , so angels haven 't been on Earth mingling with human beings for the last two thousand years . So when [ he is ] interacting with human beings , there 's a naive curiosity about their behavior . It 's as if [ he is ] inspecting some sort of alien beings . " As well , director Kim Manners wanted to see a " piousness " to Castiel . Kripke based Castiel 's appearance on the comic book character John Constantine . 
 To prepare for the role , Collins read the Book of Revelation . As well , Collins has said he somewhat based his character around his younger brother , who has something " angelic about him " , as he " has this way of , very calmly , just staring into someone 's eyes " making one feel " like he can get into your soul . " To avoid the biblically toned dialogue from sounding too " campy " , Collins does his best to " play it as real as possible " . Because Castiel 's true voice shattered windows in his premiere episode , Collins decided to use a " gruff , resonant voice " for the character . However , when portraying the angel 's host Jimmy Novak , he tried to create a distinction between the two characters , providing different physical and personality traits , as well as using a " more boyish kind of sound " for Jimmy 's voice . 
 Speaking of the fifth season and Castiel 's more frequent interactions with humans , Collins commented , " Obviously the big joke is that he doesn 't understand human beings and how they behave . And there is something inherently funny in that , especially if he 's the straight man . " The actor noted he was a little hesitant at making the character into " the funny guy " , and was apprehensive about some moments in the early episodes of the season . However , he believes the writers have found " the line " , allowing for the jokes to be " more subtle " and " a little more believable " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Critical response to the character has been extremely favorable . Castiel ranked ninth on TV.com 's top ten list of best new supporting characters of 2008 . The staff and voters of <unk> both agreed Castiel was the 2008 – 2009 Most Welcome New Character on television , and BuddyTV 's John Kubicek listed him as one of the ten " TV Characters Who Deserve Their Own Spin @-@ Offs " . TV Squad ranked him as the top reason to watch the series , noting the " slightly awkward , frighteningly precise angel ... has done an amazing job of selling the underlying menace and vengefulness of God 's most heavenly creatures . " 
 Karla Peterson of The San Diego Union @-@ Tribune described the concept of Castiel as " genius " and the actor Collins as " fabulous " . Deeming Castiel to be a " fascinating new element " , Diana Steenbergen of IGN ranked Castiel fourth in her list of the " Ten Things We Love About Supernatural " . She posited that Collins plays the role with " somber intensity " , and " brings a sense of curiosity about humans to the character " . The angel 's interactions with Dean were " one of the highlights of the [ fourth ] season " . She especially praised Collins for his dual role as Castiel and the angel 's host Jimmy Novak in the episode " The Rapture " , and wrote , " It is a tribute to Collins 's acting that the audience knows immediately that the person we are seeing is not Castiel . " 
 Fan response to the character has also been positive . Collins believed that the character would end up being just another role for him , and never expected such a reaction from the fans . According to him , " The enthusiasm that I 've been met with is something new and not something I 'm really prepared for . " The character was originally intended for only a six @-@ episode story arc , but his role was rewritten to continue throughout the rest of the season . Upon Supernatural 's renewal for a fifth season , Collins was promoted to a series regular , something he believes to be mainly due to fan support . 
 = 2002 – 03 South Pacific cyclone season = 
 The 2002 – 03 South Pacific cyclone season was the most active and longest tropical cyclone season since 1997 – 98 , with ten tropical cyclones occurring within the South Pacific basin between 160 ° E and 120 ° W. The season started earlier than normal , with two systems developing before the official start of the season on November 1 , 2002 , while the final system dissipated on June 9 , 2003 , after the season had officially ended on April 30 . During the season , tropical cyclones were officially monitored by the Regional Specialized Meteorological Centre ( RSMC ) in Nadi , Fiji and the Tropical Cyclone Warning Centres in Brisbane , Australia and Wellington , New Zealand . The United States Armed Forces through the Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) , also monitored the basin and issued unofficial warnings for American interests . RSMC Nadi attaches a number and an F suffix to tropical disturbances that occur within the basin , while the JTWC designates significant tropical cyclones with a number and a P suffix . RSMC Nadi , TCWC Wellington and TCWC Brisbane all use the Australian Tropical Cyclone Intensity Scale and estimate windspeeds over a ten @-@ minute period , while the JTWC estimates sustained winds over a one @-@ minute period , which are subsequently compared to the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale ( SSHS ) . 
 The season began with Tropical Depression 17F on July 3 , several months prior to the official start of the season . In late December , the strongest cyclone of the season , Cyclone Zoe severely affected many islands in the South Pacific , particularly the island of Tikopia . Zoe remains the strongest cyclone recorded in the Southern Hemisphere . Shortly after , in mid @-@ January , Cyclone Ami struck Fiji as a Category 3 cyclone , where it caused US $ 51 @.@ 2 million in damage . Cyclone Erica caused considerable damage to New Caledonia as a Category 4 cyclone , causing numerous power outages . The final storm of the season , Cyclone Gina , formed well outside the bounds of the conventional tropical cyclone season , existing entirely in the month of June and causing some damage to Tikopia . As a result of tropical cyclones in the 2002 – 03 season , US $ 67 @.@ 2 million in damages was caused , along with 20 fatalities . 
 = = Seasonal forecasts = = 
 During November 2002 , New Zealand 's National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research predicted that there would be an eastwards shift in activity during the season , with more tropical cyclones than normal expected to the east of the date line , due to well established weak to moderate El Niño conditions . As a result , the island nations of Wallis and Futuna , Niue , Samoa , Tokelau , and the Southern Cook Islands were predicted to experience a higher than average number of tropical cyclones . The Solomon Islands , Fiji , Tuvalu , Tonga , French Polynesia , New Zealand and the Northern Cook Islands were predicted to experience an average number of tropical cyclones , while Southern Papua New Guinea , Vanuatu and New Caledonia were predicted to experience a reduced number of tropical cyclones . In January 2003 , <unk> issued an updated outlook , listing the Northern Cook Islands and French Polynesia as areas predicted to experience an above average number of tropical cyclones . In contrast , Vanuatu was predicted to experience below average cyclone activity . The Solomon Islands and Tonga were now predicted to experience a reduced number of tropical cyclones , with all other countries expected to face the same risk as the November outlook . 
 = = Seasonal summary = = 
 After three seasons of below average cyclone activity , the 2002 – 03 season was slightly above average , featuring ten cyclones and seven severe tropical cyclones . One of the cyclones , Cyclone Erica , originated from the Australian region but later moved into the South Pacific , where it impacted New Caledonia . Throughout the season , a moderately warm El Niño – Southern Oscillation ( ENSO ) generated a shift of cyclone activity away from Australia and towards the open waters of the southern Atlantic . As a result , the Southern Oscillation Index ( SOI ) between November 2002 and June 2003 was negative , averaging <unk> . Sea surface temperatures ( SSTs ) in the Pacific were above average ; for most of the tropical regions , SSTs were above 29 ° C ( 84 ° C ) . At various times , Madden – Julian oscillation ( MJO ) pulses increased convective activity and thus cyclone development in the basin . Five pulses of the MJO and Equatorial Rossby waves ( ER ) were responsible for most of the cyclone activity during the season . Cyclone Zoe , the strongest cyclone of the season , was the only cyclone with no connection to any identified MJO or ER wave . By April , an easterly trade wind anomaly took place , signifying the end of the El Niño pattern that had persisted for much of the year . 
 Over the course of the season , cyclones were active for a total of 40 days , and severe tropical cyclones were active for a total of 19 days , both above average . A total of five tropical disturbances formed during 2002 , of which two were cyclones . The first disturbance of the season , Tropical Depression 17F , along with another depression , 01F , formed well before the start of the cyclone season on July 3 and October 21 respectively . Cyclone Yolande was the first cyclone of the season , forming on November 29 , but did not impact any land masses . In December , two disturbances formed , Tropical Depression 03F and Cyclone Zoe . The latter was the season 's strongest cyclone and the strongest cyclone ever recorded in the Southern Hemisphere , affecting areas of the Solomon Islands . 
 In the first half of 2003 , thirteen disturbances formed , of which eight developed into tropical cyclones ; six intensified further and became severe tropical cyclones . January 2003 featured four disturbances and three cyclones . Cyclones Ami and Beni were both severe tropical cyclones , with the first extensively impacting Fiji . The month of February was less active compared to January ; only two disturbances formed , Cyclone Dovi and Tropical Disturbance 10F , although Dovi would become a Category 5 cyclone on the Australian cyclone scale . March was slightly more active than February ; the month featured three tropical depressions and two severe tropical cyclones , Cyclone Erica and Cyclone Eseta , although Erica originally formed west of 160 ° E. After an easterly wind anomaly arose in April , cyclone activity was suppressed during the month , totalling three tropical disturbances and one cyclone . In June , Cyclone Gina formed as a result of a strong ER wave and later became a severe tropical cyclone , well after the end of the season . Its dissipation on June 9 marked the end of the cyclone season . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Yolande = = = 
 Cyclone Yolande developed on November 29 from a broad area of thunderstorms embedded within a monsoonal trough , originating from a westerly wind burst associated with El Niño conditions ; the same area of disturbed weather would later generate Typhoon Pongsona on December 2 . At the time , the tropical depression was moving towards the southeast , but strong wind shear displaced the cyclone 's strongest winds and convection northeast of its circulation center . Convective activity fluctuated under strong diurnal temperature variation . After moving into an area of less wind shear , the system was able to organize and develop good outflow currents . This was reflected with a slight drop in minimum barometric pressure down to 995 mbar ( 29 @.@ 4 inHg ) . As a result , at <unk> UTC on December 4 , the depression attained cyclone status and was given the name Yolande , east of Tonga . After being named , Cyclone Yolande began to accelerate into an area of strong wind shear , and convection became increasingly displaced from the center of circulation . By 1200 UTC on December 5 , the convection was already sheared 160 km ( 100 mi ) from the northwest of the circulation center , and as such the cyclone was downgraded to depression status . By this time , Yolande had completed a transition into an extratropical cyclone , after interacting with a baroclinic zone to the southwest . Yolande 's extratropical remnants continued to track towards the southeast before dissipating entirely on December 11 , 2700 km ( 1700 mi ) to the southeast of Papeete , French Polynesia . As a result of remaining at sea , Yolande only caused minimal damage . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Cyclone Zoe = = = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Zoe was the most intense tropical cyclone in the Southern Hemisphere in recorded history , severely affecting areas of the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu . Cyclone Zoe developed from the South Pacific Convergence Zone ( SPCZ ) on January 23 , east of Tuvalu . Initially developing slowly as a tropical depression , the predecessor to Zoe moved toward the west @-@ southwest under the influence of a high pressure area . However , the storm entered an area of very favorable cyclone conditions . After reaching cyclone strength on December 25 , rapid intensification ensued . By the next day , Zoe had already strengthened to a severe tropical cyclone . On December 27 , Zoe attained wind speeds equivalent to Category 5 status on both the Australian and Saffir – Simpson hurricane scales . An upper – level trough of low pressure forced Zoe towards the southwest , moving into the vicinity of the Solomon Islands . The next day , Zoe intensified to a record low barometric pressure of 890 mbar ( 26 @.@ 28 inHg ) , with winds of 290 km / h ( 180 mph ) . However , conditions would deteriorate , and the cyclone would consequently weaken . By January 1 , the storm had already degenerated into an extratropical cyclone , and its remnants dissipated just three days later . 
 Cyclone Zoe severely impacted the islands of the Solomon island chain , particularly the islands of Tikopia and Anuta . In Anuta , agricultural activities were disrupted . Various fruit trees and crops , especially in gardens on the island 's hills , were destroyed by high winds and heavy rain . In addition , communications with other islands were disrupted . The impact on Tikopia was much greater ; agricultural productivity on the island was said to have been wiped out . Fruit trees were estimated only to begin producing fruit again at least two years after Zoe 's impact . <unk> was left dry by the cyclone , preventing any immediate replacement of lost crops . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Cyclone Ami = = = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Ami was one of the worst cyclones ever to affect Fiji . Cyclone Ami developed from a low @-@ pressure area east of Tuvalu on January 12 . The storm moved slowly towards the southwest early in its existence . Influenced by an upper @-@ level trough , Ami slowed down and began moving towards the south and then southeast . The cyclone attained severe tropical cyclone intensity on January 13 . Ami made its first landfall at Vanua Levu , before subsequently making another landfall on Taveuni . Ami reached peak intensity as an equivalent Category 3 cyclone on the Australian cyclone scale on January 14 . Accelerating to the southeast , the cyclone began to cross over cool sea surface temperatures and encountered wind shear . Ami transitioned into an extratropical cyclone the day after . 
 Cyclone Ami severely impacted parts of Fiji , mainly through flooding . Numerous landslides and power outages were caused by the heavy rains . The damage was particularly severe in Labasa , where the entire city was inundated . Sugar cane production decreased by 15 % , and other crops also suffered heavily . In Tonga , damage was not as severe , but two ships were grounded . Ami caused F $ 104 @.@ 4 million ( US $ 51 @.@ 2 million ) in damages and 14 deaths , primarily on Fiji . Following the deaths and damage , the name " Ami " was later retired . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Cyclone Beni = = = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Beni was an intense tropical cyclone that affected areas of the southern Pacific Ocean , particularly in New Caledonia . It developed from a tropical disturbance on January 20 south of the Solomon Islands , and at first moved slowly towards the west . On January 25 , the disturbance gained enough strength and organization to be named Beni . It quickly made a clockwise loop , maintaining its intensity , and later headed south . After fluctuating in intensity , Beni entered more conducive conditions and began to strengthen , this time heading southeast . Traveling between Vanuatu and New Caledonia , Beni reached its peak intensity as a Category 5 tropical cyclone on January 29 , the highest rating on the Australian cyclone scale , with winds of 235 km / h ( 146 mph ) . It only maintained this intensity for a short time before an increase in wind shear and less favorable conditions induced its weakening . After nearing Vanuatu , a strengthening ridge forced Beni towards the southwest , away from Vanuatu . The cyclone made its closest approach to the island of New Caledonia on January 30 , but only as a marginal Category 1 cyclone . Continuing to weaken under strong wind shear , Beni was downgraded to a tropical depression the same day . After crossing New Caledonia , Beni exited the South Pacific basin and entered the Australian region . 
 During Beni 's existence , parts of the Solomon Islands , Vanuatu , and Queensland were affected by the storm . The cyclone caused flooding and a food shortage in the Solomon Islands . An estimated 2 @,@ 000 people were evacuated as a result . Rough seas and storm surge , as well as strong gusts , were the primary effects of Beni on Vanuatu and New Caledonia . New Caledonia was hit by power outages , and Vanuatu mainly suffered beach erosion . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Cilla = = = 
 Cyclone Cilla affected several islands in the South Pacific . The cyclone developed from a monsoon trough on January 26 northwest of Fiji , and initially moved to the east in conditions unfavourable for cyclones . After wind shear lessened , Cilla reached its peak intensity on January 28 , attaining maximum winds of 75 km / h ( 45 mph ) sustained over 10 minutes . After slightly weakening , Cilla was able to intensify again to match this intensity on January 29 . Strong vertical wind shear conditions then returned , and Cilla transitioned into an extratropical cyclone . 
 Cilla dropped heavy rainfall over islands along its path . As a depression the storm dropped rain over Fiji , which had already been effected by Cyclone Ami just two weeks earlier . Damage in Tonga was mostly limited to vegetation and fruit trees ; damage to infrastructure was relatively minor . Rain also fell on American Samoa , although no damage was reported . After the season , the name " Cilla " was retired . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Cyclone Dovi = = = 
 Cyclone Dovi developed on February 5 from an area of circulation within the SPCZ near the northern Cook Islands . Dovi therefore saw favourable conditions throughout much of its existence . Due to a mid – level ridge to the east , the cyclone progressed on a southward track . Dovi eventually steered to the southwest , and continued to intensify steadily after fluctuating due to diurnal temperature variations , becoming a Category 1 equivalent on the Saffir – Simpson hurricane scale on February 8 . An anticyclone positioned to the west of the system moved closer to Dovi , providing an improved environment . After developing an eye later that day , Dovi attained its maximum wind speeds of 205 km / h ( 125 mph ) sustained over 10 minutes . The cyclone then again steered towards the south , encountering high wind shear and cooler sea surface temperatures . As a result , Dovi quickly weakened as its convection was displaced . While its outflow in its western and southern quadrants remained favorable , elsewhere outflow was deteriorating . On February 10 , Dovi 's minimum barometric pressure was 980 mbar ( 28 @.@ 94 inHg ) as it moved south – southeast at 11 km / h ( 7 mph ) . The weakening Dovi became an extratropical cyclone on February 11 . The remnants continued drifting southwest ; the Meteorological Service of New Zealand in Wellington stopped issuing information on it on February 13 . 
 Despite its close proximity to islands along its path , Dovi caused only minimal damage . Oceanic swells and storm surge were felt in some coastal areas . Strong winds were reported in the southern Cook Islands and Niue . Damage to banana plantations on Palmerston Island was reported , but Dovi caused no fatalities . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Cyclone Eseta = = = 
 Cyclone Eseta developed on March 10 from an area of disturbed weather that originated in the vicinity of Vanuatu . At the time the cyclone was in very favourable conditions , in an area with warm sea – surface temperatures , low wind shear , and with development enhanced by an MJO pulse traversing the area at the time . After convection began to wrap around the center of circulation , the low – pressure area was named Eseta . The Joint Typhoon Warning Center ( JTWC ) began issuing warnings on Eseta at 1200 UTC on March 10 ; Eseta had a minimum pressure of 995 mbar ( 29 @.@ 39 inHg ) at the time . As the cyclone was on the western periphery of a mid – level ridge , it moved in a south – <unk> direction , initially at 13 km / h ( 8 mph ) . It then intensified quickly , and the next day developed a ragged eye . As it began to curve around the mid – level ridge , its forward speed increased to 21 km / h ( 13 mph ) . Favorable conditions continued on March 12 , and Eseta underwent rapid intensification , with its barometric pressure falling 40 mbar ( 1 @.@ 2 inHg ) to a minimum of 930 mbar ( 27 @.@ 46 inHg ) . Wind speeds increased to 185 km / h ( 115 mph ) sustained for 10 minutes . However , the cyclone only maintained this intensity for 12 hours before entering an area of strong vertical wind shear . It continued to accelerate in forward speed , but shower activity became elongated and the eye dissipated . The next day , Eseta had a forward speed of 55 km / h ( 35 mph ) . As a result , the cyclone lost tropical characteristics on March 14 . The JTWC issued its last warning on Eseta at 0000 UTC on March 4 as it became extratropical . Eseta was absorbed by a front the next day . 
 Although Eseta was well offshore of any islands in the Pacific , rains and wind caused some damage . Western regions of Fiji reported heavy rain and flooding as the cyclone passed to its south . As a weakening cyclone , Eseta passed over the Tongan island of Eua , destroying fruit trees and kava crops . No deaths were reported due to Eseta . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Cyclone Erica = = = 
 Severe Tropical Cyclone Erica was a powerful cyclone considered the worst to affect New Caledonia since Cyclone Beti . It developed from a monsoonal trough on March 4 just off Queensland in the Australian cyclone region . Once it entered the South Pacific cyclone region on March 12 , Erica steadily intensified in a favourable environment , reaching peak intensity on March 13 as a Category 5 equivalent on the Saffir – Simpson Hurricane Scale . On that day Erica paralleled the coast of New Caledonia , before making landfall on the southern end of the island at L 'Île @-@ des @-@ Pins . At the same time the cyclone entered an area with strong wind shear and thus began to weaken . After passing the island , an extratropical transition began , weakening the cyclone as it moved southeast . On March 15 , Erica completed its transition into an extratropical cyclone and fully dissipated the next day . 
 Cyclone Erica severely impacted the island nation of New Caledonia , causing intense winds and heavy rain . An estimated 892 families were affected by the cyclone on the island , and two people were killed . As many as 60 % of people on the west coast lost power . On March 17 only seventeen of the sixty @-@ six secondary schools on the island were functioning . After the storm it was feared that the existing dengue fever epidemic on the island would spread . Erica caused US $ 15 million in damages , primarily on New Caledonia . 
 = = = Tropical Cyclone Fili = = = 
 Cyclone Fili formed on April 13 from an area of convection northeast of Fiji . As marginal windshear abated , the disturbance began to organise , and cyclonic rotation was noted . A tropical upper tropospheric trough to the southwest helped enhance upper – level divergence in the system . RSMC Nadi began issuing warnings at 0000 UTC on April 14 . Despite forecasts that Fili would merge with an extratropical cyclone , overnight convective organisation improved . Dvorak satellite estimates gave a rating of 3 @.@ 0 , implying winds of 85 km / h ( 55 mph ) . The JTWC issued their only warning on Fili at 0600 UTC on April 14 . RSMC Nadi named the storm Fili at 1800 UTC on the same day , east – southeast of Tongatapu . At the time , Fili was travelling southeast at 35 km / h ( 20 mph ) . During the day a nearby upper – level trough helped accelerate Fili southeast and then southward . However , Fili quickly lost tropical characteristics under intense wind shear , becoming an extratropical cyclone the next day and merging with a cold front by 1200 UTC on March 15 . No damage was reported as a result of Fili due to its distance from land masses . 
 = = = Severe Tropical Cyclone Gina = = = 
 A westward @-@ moving tropical disturbance persisted northeast of Vanuatu , with persistent convection extending toward the Solomon Islands . On June 4 , both the JTWC and RSMC Nadi classified the system as a tropical depression . With a ridge to the south , it moved to the west @-@ southwest , quickly intensifying into Tropical Storm Gina by June 5 about 970 km ( 600 mi ) east @-@ southeast of Honiara . By 0000 UTC on June 7 , the JTWC upgraded Gina to the equivalent of a minimal hurricane , after an eye became evident on satellite images . Interaction with the nearby remnants of Tropical Cyclone Epi caused convection to decrease . On June 7 , FMS reported that Gina attained peak intensity as a low @-@ end Category 3 tropical cyclone on the Australian intensity scale , with winds of 140 km / h ( 90 mph ) . The JTWC recorded winds of 170 km / h ( 105 mph ) . A compact cyclone with a well @-@ defined eye , Gina encountered stronger wind shear and cooler waters . After turning southeast and then east @-@ southeast in response to a rapidly approaching trough , Gina quickly deteriorated as the convection became displaced from the centre . By June 9 , the centre became uncertain as Gina stalled to the west @-@ northwest of Port Vila . Winds diminished below gale force the next day . 
 Gina struck the island of Tikopia that had already sustained catastrophic damage from Cyclone Zoe less than two months previously . The storm brought high winds and torrential rains that triggered landslides . Dozens of homes were damaged and many areas newly re @-@ planted after Cyclone Zoe were devastated again . The impacts of Gina reportedly set back recovery efforts by nearly six months . A total of 112 newly built houses and 128 newly built kitchens were severely damaged , and another 37 homes sustained minor damage . The newly planted winter crop was lost due to sea spray , and 143 bags of rice , given as relief supplies after Cyclone Zoe , were lost . Following the storm , additional relief supplies and food were rushed to residents to ensure their safety . These consisted of local foods , sago and mesh wiring , worth $ 14 @,@ 400 . A ship carrying five people became stranded in the Coral Sea during the storm when their engine failed on June 7 . A mayday signal was put out by the captain but rough seas produced by the storm hampered rescue efforts . The five were safely rescued later that day , but two more people were discovered to be missing . 
 = = = Other systems = = = 
 During the opening days of the tropical cyclone year 2002 @-@ 03 , a westerly wind burst occurred and lead to the formation of Typhoon Chataan and Tropical Depression 17F . The system was first noted as a tropical depression during July 3 , while it was located about 800 km ( 495 mi ) to the northwest of Honiara in the Solomon Islands of Guadalcanal . Over the next couple of days the system moved westwards before it was last noted during July 5 . During October 21 , Tropical Disturbance 01F developed about 410 km ( 250 mi ) to the northwest of Port Vila , Vanuatu . It moved southeast and developed into a poorly organised tropical depression . It remained disorganized and accelerated towards the southeast , and was last noted by RSMC Nadi at 1800 UTC on October 22 . On December 10 , RSMC Nadi reported that Tropical Disturbance 03F had developed within a trough of low pressure , about 635 km ( 395 mi ) to the northeast of Pago @-@ Pago on the American Samoan island of Tutuila . The depression drifted towards the south , and was classified as a tropical depression the next day . Further development of the depression was prevented by dry air wrapping into the system and vertical windshear displacing convection . The depression was no longer monitored by RSMC Nadi on December 15 after it had become sheared , but it was briefly referred to as a " weak tropical depression " on December 19 and 20 . 
 On January 30 , the poorly organised Tropical Disturbance 08F developed within a convergence zone about 325 km ( 200 mi ) to the northeast of Apia on the Samoan island of Upolu . Over the next few days the system remained weak and poorly organized , and was classified as a tropical depression during February 5 . The depression then moved westwards , before dissipating on February 9 . Tropical Disturbance 10F developed on February 15 , about 170 km ( 105 mi ) to the north of the Fijian Dependency of Rotuma Island . The system was poorly defined and disorganised , while convection surrounding the system was mostly confined to the southern and eastern flanks of the low level circulation . Over the next few days the disturbance remained weak and was last noted during February 21 , while nestled within the Solomon Islands . On March 6 , Tropical Depression 11F developed under an upper trough of low pressure about 220 km ( 140 mi ) to the northeast of Nadi , Fiji . Convection surrounding the depression was displaced to the north of the low level circulation center . The depression remained weak over the next couple of days , and was last noted during March 8 . A fairly disorganized tropical disturbance developed during April 6 , within a monsoonal convergence zone , about 236 km ( 145 mi ) to the northeast of Port Vila , Vanuatu . It was initially located within an area of weak vertical windshear , but was expected to move into an area of stronger vertical windshear over the following 24 hours and gradually become extratropical . During the next day , as the disturbance moved southwards , it was assigned the designation 14F , before it was dropped by RSMC Nadi during April 8 , as convection surrounding the system became sheared and displaced . On April 13 , Tropical Disturbance <unk> developed within a monsoon trough , about 355 km ( 220 mi ) to the southeast of Apia , Samoa . The system moved towards the south , with convection surrounding it poorly organised , and displaced to the north of the depression 's low level circulation centre . The depression was then last noted , during the next day as Tropical Depression 16F developed into Tropical Cyclone Fili . 
 = = Seasonal effects = = 
 = Vidyasagar Setu = 
 Vidyasagar Setu ( <unk> Setu ) , also known as the Second Hooghly Bridge ( <unk> <unk> Setu ) , is a toll bridge over the Hooghly River in West Bengal , India , linking the cities of Kolkata ( previously known as Calcutta ) and Howrah . 
 With a total length of 823 metres ( 2 @,@ 700 ft ) , Vidyasagar Setu is the longest cable – stayed bridge in India . It was the second bridge to be built across the Hooghly River ; the first , the Howrah Bridge ( also known as Rabindra Setu ) 3 @.@ 7 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 3 mi ) to the north , was completed in 1943 . Named after the educationist reformer Pandit Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar , it cost ₹ 3 @.@ 88 billion to build . The project was a joint effort between the public and private sectors , under the control of the Hooghly River Bridge Commissioners ( HRBC ) . 
 Initially , under the toll collection regime of the HRBC , daily traffic was recorded to be a minimum of 28 @,@ 000 vehicles and a maximum of 39 @,@ 000 vehicles in 2000 , but fell to a maximum of around 30 @,@ 000 vehicles by December 2002 , when the management of the toll plaza was handed over to a private firm . Subsequently , the daily traffic reached a minimum of 45 @,@ 000 vehicles and a maximum of 61 @,@ 000 vehicles by early 2008 , against a maximum capacity of 85 @,@ 000 vehicles per day . The original management of the toll revenue collection by HRBC was consequently criticized for corruption and significant loss of revenue . 
 = = History = = 
 Population and commercial activity grew rapidly after India gained independence in August 1947 . The only link across the Hooghly River , the Howrah Bridge , between Howrah and Kolkata , was subject to much traffic congestion , with over 85 @,@ 000 vehicles every day . This necessitated planning for a new bridge across the river so that it could connect to the major cities of Mumbai ( Bombay ) , Delhi and Chennai ( Madras ) through the national highways located close to the bridge . 
 The foundation stone for the bridge was laid by Indira Gandhi on 20 May 1972 . The bridge took more than 22 years to complete and cost Indian Rupees 3 @.@ 88 billion , but in seven of those years there was no construction activity . The bridge is named after the 19th @-@ century Bengali educationist reformer Pandit Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar . Work on the cable @-@ stayed bridge started with the construction of the well curb on the Calcutta bank end on 3 July 1979 . 
 There are three other bridges on the Hooghly River connecting Kolkata with Howrah district : Vivekananda Setu built in 1932 , ( road @-@ cum @-@ rail bridge ) – the first to be commissioned , and which had become old and needed repairs ; Howrah Bridge , a cantilever bridge commissioned in 1943 , now renamed as Rabindra Setu ( since 1965 in honour of the Noble Laurette Rabindranath Tagore ) ; and Nivedita Setu ( named after Sister Nivedita ) , also known as the Second Vivekananda Setu , which is 50 metres ( 160 ft ) downstream of the old Vivekananda Setu and was commissioned on 4 June 2007 . 
 = = Construction = = 
 The bridge was designed by <unk> <unk> & Partner , and checked by Freeman Fox & Partners and Bharat <unk> <unk> Nigam Limited . Construction was carried out by the consortium of " The Braithwaite Burn and Jessop Construction Company Limited " ( BBJ ) . The Hooghly River Bridge Commission ( HRBC ) was responsible for the commissioning operations of the bridge . 
 Construction began on 3 July 1979 , and the bridge was commissioned on 10 October 1992 by the Hooghly River Bridge Commission . 
 = = Architectural features = = 
 Vidyasagar Setu is a cable @-@ stayed bridge , with 121 cables in a fan arrangement , built using steel pylons 127 @.@ 62 metres ( 418 @.@ 7 ft ) high . With a total length of 823 metres ( 2 @,@ 700 ft ) , Vidyasagar Setu is the longest cable – stayed bridge in India . The deck is made of composite steel @-@ reinforced concrete with two carriageways . The total width of the bridge is 35 metres ( 115 ft ) , with 3 lanes in each direction and a 1 @.@ 2 metres ( 3 ft 11 in ) -wide footpath on each side . The deck over the main span is 457 @.@ 20 metres ( 1 @,@ 500 @.@ 0 ft ) long . The two side spans are supported by parallel wire cables and are 182 @.@ 88 metres ( 600 @.@ 0 ft ) long . Vidyasagar Setu is a toll bridge . It has capacity to handle more than 85 @,@ 000 vehicles in a day . 
 The design of the bridge differs slightly from other bridges , which are of live load composite construction . The difference is in the dead load design concept adopted for this bridge and concreting of the side spans done with support provided by the intermediate trestle . The deck is designed with a grid structure of girders . One set of girders are at the end and another set in the middle , which are braced by girders spaced on an average at 4 @.@ 2 metres ( 14 ft ) centre to centre . 
 A deck crane was used for the construction of the main span of the bridge . A specially designed crane of 45 tonne capacity was used to erect the pylons of the bridge . The structural steel used in the bridge weighs about 13 @,@ 200 tonnes . The pylons , which are 128 metres ( 420 ft ) in height , are designed as free standing portals . They are provided with two cross portal members , one at the bottom and another at the top , below the pylon head . The deck is connected to the end piers by bolts embedded in the chambers of the piers . Pylons made of 4 m × 4 m ( 13 ft × 13 ft ) steel boxes of riveted construction were raised on the two side spans of the bridge ; one set is on the Calcutta side and the other is on the Howrah side . The six pylons on the Calcutta side of the bridge were installed using 75 MT and 50 MT cranes , while on the Howrah end , a single 50 MT crane was used . Anchorage of the pylon with the base of piers was effected through <unk> rods , duly anchored in the piers . Cables were erected from the four pylon heads with the help of 32 MT hoist frames . The hoist frames were mounted on top of each pylon . <unk> blocks , winches and snatch blocks were used to facilitate the lifting , and cables inside the pylons were stressed with jacks . Pressure grouting was performed to fill the voids between the wire and the high @-@ density polyethylene ( HDPE ) tubes . A two tonne tower crane , fixed inside the pylons , lifted the cables into position . 
 The bridge has been subject to prototype wind tunnel tests at the Indian Institute of Science in Bangalore . Bearings are used in vertical and horizontal directions , with grouted collars in four segments at the two end piers and horizontal bearings at the two middle piers to achieve stability against lateral movement . Maurer Söhne expansion joints were provided to allow for 400 millimetres ( 16 in ) horizontal expansion at the free ends . Fixed end slab seal type expansion joints 115 millimetres ( 4 @.@ 5 in ) were used for horizontal expansion of the joints . Other essential components provided in the bridge structure are the handrails , lightning arresters , crash barriers , gas service support structures , telephone and electric lines , lifts in the pylons , and a maintenance gantry . 
 = = Post @-@ construction Scenario = = 
 Over the years , several accidents have occurred on the bridge resulting in traffic congestion , and sometimes closure of the bridge for a few hours . To relieve the heavy traffic congestion at the entry to the bridge , the Hooghly River Bridge Commissioners ( HRBC ) plan to build two one @-@ way @-@ exit and entry – ramps . These are planned with a semi @-@ circular layout in the form of side wings , which will facilitate easy flow of traffic , before the toll plaza , on roads leading to the Howrah railway station . There are also plans to improve the lighting on the bridge by installing LED lamps and search lights covering the four pylons , the bridge spans , cables and under @-@ deck . An electronic toll collection system is scheduled to be introduced by 2014 , to help improve the flow of traffic across the bridge . 
 The traffic projections for the bridge at the planning stage have not been achieved . A traffic survey carried out for a week during June 2012 recorded traffic of 29 @,@ 000 vehicles over the bridge in comparison to a projected 85 @,@ 000 . A survey conducted during the same period in June 2012 indicated a figure of 31 @,@ 865 vehicles , though it is reported by the concerned traffic and transportation engineer that the rate of increase in traffic has been one percent per year on the basis of traffic surveys carried out from the time of commissioning of the bridge . The reason for the fall in traffic during 2012 is attributed to the peak monsoon effect during the survey period . 
 = HM Armed Smack Inverlyon = 
 His Majesty 's or HM Armed Smack Inverlyon was a fishing smack that was converted to a Q @-@ ship during the First World War . Q @-@ ships served as decoys to lure German submarines near enough so that concealed weapons could be brought to bear and sink the submarines . On 15 August 1915 , Inverlyon succeeded in luring German submarine UB @-@ 4 within range and sinking her with nine shots from her gun . The Royal Navy Gunner in command of the vessel , Ernest Martin Jehan , received the Distinguished Service Cross and members of Inverlyon 's crew shared the bounty offered for German submarines . After Inverlyon 's Q @-@ ship career ended , she returned to fishing , but was sunk by U @-@ 55 on 1 February 1917 . 
 = = Career = = 
 Inverlyon was a fishing smack of 59 tons burthen that was a part of the fishing fleet at Lowestoft on the Suffolk coast . The wooden boat had a flush deck , two masts , and no engine . Inverlyon 's sails were fore @-@ and @-@ aft rigged and may have been red ochre in colour , the traditional sail colour for British smacks . 
 In February 1915 , Germany began its first submarine offensive of the First World War . During this campaign , enemy vessels in the German @-@ defined war zone ( German : Kriegsgebiet ) , which encompassed all waters around the United Kingdom , were to be sunk , and the British fishing fleet was not exempt . In mid @-@ June , for example , the German submarine UB @-@ 2 had sunk six smacks off Lowestoft in a two @-@ day period . 
 One method devised to deal with U @-@ boat attacks was the decoy or Q @-@ ship , designed to lure submarines that were targeting merchant shipping close enough so that concealed guns or other weapons could sink them . Inverlyon was selected to become a Q @-@ ship , was outfitted with either a 3 @-@ pounder ( 47 mm ) or a 6 @-@ pounder ( 57 mm ) gun , and entered the service of the Royal Navy on 2 August 1915 . Inverlyon 's fishing crew and skipper were all temporarily inducted into the Trawler section of the Royal Naval Reserve . Regular Royal Navy Gunner Ernest Martin Jehan and three other gunners from HMS Dryad — a former torpedo boat operating as a minesweeper out of Lowestoft — were assigned to Inverlyon , with Jehan in command . 
 On 14 August , the 59 @-@ ton smack Bona Fide was stopped by a U @-@ boat , boarded , and sunk with explosives 35 nautical miles ( 65 km ) east @-@ northeast from Lowestoft . This attack was likely by UB @-@ 4 , because she was operating in that area on her fourteenth patrol . Regardless of the identity of Bona Fide 's attacker , UB @-@ 4 did approach a group of smacks in the vicinity the next day . Unbeknown to UB @-@ 4 's commander , Oberleutnant zur See Karl Gross , one of the fishing vessels was the disguised Inverlyon . 
 Around 20 : 20 , UB @-@ 4 surfaced near Inverlyon , and Gross , on the conning tower of UB @-@ 4 , began shouting out commands to Inverlyon 's crew in German . Jehan , after waiting until UB @-@ 4 closed to within 30 yards ( 27 m ) of Inverlyon , ordered the White Ensign raised and gave the command to open fire . A burst of three rounds from the Inverlyon 's weapon scored hits on the conning tower , the second shot destroying part of the bridge and sending Gross into the water . UB @-@ 4 , with no one at the helm , drifted behind Inverlyon , and when clear , Inverlyon 's gunner unleashed another six shots into the hull of UB @-@ 4 at point @-@ blank range . All the while , small arms fire from Inverlyon 's crew peppered the submarine . The U @-@ boat began going down by the bow , becoming nearly vertical before disappearing below the surface . Inverlyon 's fishing skipper , a man named Phillips , dived in to attempt the rescue of a crewman from UB @-@ 4 . Phillips was unable to reach him before the crewman went under and met same fate as Gross and UB @-@ 4 's twelve other crewmen . 
 As UB @-@ 4 went down she fouled Inverlyon 's nets — which had been deployed to keep up the appearance of a real fishing boat — essentially anchoring Inverlyon in place . The Q @-@ ship 's crew , not having a wireless set on board , sent word of the encounter with another smack . This was followed up by releasing messenger pigeons the following morning , requesting instructions on what to do with UB @-@ 4 . The thought of salvaging the snagged U @-@ boat was rejected , so the nets were cut , freeing UB @-@ 4 to sink to the bottom . UB @-@ 4 's wreck lies at position 52 ° 43 ′ N 2 ° 18 ′ E. On 19 November 1915 Jehan was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross ( DSC ) for the sinking of UB @-@ 4 , and the crewmen of Inverlyon split the submarine bounty paid by the Admiralty . 
 About three weeks after she sank UB @-@ 4 , Inverlyon had the opportunity to sink another U @-@ boat , but was unsuccessful . The U @-@ boat encountered may have been either UB @-@ 2 or UB @-@ 16 , which both sank fishing vessels in the area on 7 and 8 September . By 1916 , Inverlyon had ended her short @-@ lived Q @-@ ship career and returned to being a fishing boat . Jehan , in addition to his DSC , was subsequently specially promoted to lieutenant on 4 January 1916 for his war service ; he retired from the Royal Navy on 29 October 1920 . 
 On 1 February 1917 , the German submarine U @-@ 55 shelled and sank Inverlyon 15 nautical miles ( 28 km ) from Trevose Head at position 50 ° 47 ′ N 5 ° 5 ′ W ; there were no reported casualties . 
 = Improbable ( The X @-@ Files ) = 
 " Improbable " is 13th episode of the ninth season and the 195th episode overall of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . The episode first aired in the United States and Canada on April 7 , 2002 on Fox , and subsequently aired in the United Kingdom . It was written and directed by series creator and executive producer Chris Carter . The episode is a " monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ week " episode , a stand @-@ alone plot which is unconnected to the mythology , or overarching fictional history , of The X @-@ Files . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 5 @.@ 1 and was viewed by 9 @.@ 1 million viewers . The episode received mostly positive reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files ; this season focuses on the investigations of John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) , Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) , and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) . In this episode , Reyes and her fellow agents investigate a serial killer who uses numerology to choose his victims . Soon , Reyes and Scully meet an unusual man who may prove more of a hindrance than a help . 
 " Improbable " features Burt Reynolds playing God . Reynolds was chosen after he expressed his desire to appear in an episode of The X @-@ Files to Robert Patrick . Carter approved the idea and Reynolds thoroughly enjoyed filming the episode . " Improbable " contains several elaborate effects , such as a cityscape rendered to look like Reynolds ' head . Furthermore , the episode contains themes pertaining to fate , free will , and numerology . The tagline for this episode is " Dio Ti Ama " , meaning " God loves you " in Italian , replacing the usual phrase " The Truth is Out There . " 
 = = Plot = = 
 Agent Monica Reyes ( Annabeth Gish ) is investigating a series of cases that she believes are linked by numerology . While explaining the case to Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) , Scully spots another possible link - a mark made by the killer 's ring on the victims ' faces . On consulting a numerologist , Reyes ties the murders together . However , the killer also finds the numerologist , murdering her . 
 Meanwhile , the killer is shown meeting up with a mysterious man ( Burt Reynolds ) who seems to know a lot about him and his murderous ways . He speaks in an enigmatic way , but his words do not seem to make any difference to the killer . Reyes ' numerology theories do not go down well at the FBI , but the pattern of the killings , when viewed on a map , seem to show a spiral . Scully and Reyes revisit the murdered numerologist 's office and meet the killer in the elevator . Scully recognizes the ring on the killer 's hand as the agents exit the elevator , and draws her gun on him . The killer slips back into the elevator and gets to the parking lot first . Reyes and Scully arrive only to see a car fleeing the garage and the gate closing behind it . 
 They meet another person hiding in a car and demand that he come out . It is the strange man . To pass the time , Burt engages Reyes and Scully in a game of checkers , whose colors ( red & black ) are surrogates for Scully ( a redhead ) and Reyes ( a brunette ) . These are the anticipated hair @-@ colors of the next two victims . The exiting car was assumed to contain the killer , but realizing the killer might still be inside , they search the garage and are surprised by the killer . However , John Doggett ( Robert Patrick ) arrives in the nick of time to shoot him . The mysterious man has completely disappeared . In a nearby Italian neighborhood , a party is in progress . Two men sing a jovial song and lead a crowd through the streets . The camera zooms out to reveal that the entire neighborhood , when viewed from above , suggests the appearance of Burt 's face , hinting to the fact that he might be God . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Carter later explained that humorous episodes were important to the show , especially during the " pitch @-@ black " ninth season . He reasoned " there are the <unk> , and then you need the relief in the tension . " The name Vicki Burdick came from a high school student Chris Carter knew . Carter felt that he needed to kill the character " all out of fondness . " Before casting Ellen Greene , Carter had first spotted her on the movie , The Little Shop of Horrors both in " New York and Los Angeles . " The first scene shot for Greene 's character took a " long day " . Carter called her a " trouper " and said she was open to the direction he gave her . She had a lot of information to remember , which made the scene even more difficult . The set for that scene was created by Tim Stepeck who was the set decorator during the ninth season . Annabeth Gish later revealed that her lines were difficult to remember . She explained , " I remember learning my lines and thinking , ' Oh my God . I 've got to memorize this . It 's scary . Like physics united theory , all of that . " 
 This was the last episode filmed by Carter to feature Scully in the FBI autopsy scene at 20th Century Fox . The different numbers seen in this scene was used to " conceit , this idea that numerology is an important part of our life and plays a part , but it really is just used here to illustrate the idea of patterns , patterns of behavior , of the ways in which numbers rule both the universe and our lives and our ability to solve things , to solve our mysteries of life , to solve these cases , which will lead them , as we 'll see as the act comes to a close here , they are both [ Scully and Reyes ] believers of the numerological episode . " The tagline for this episode is " Dio Ti Ama " , meaning " God loves you " in Italian , replacing the usual phrase " The Truth is Out There . " The normal line " Executive Producer : Chris Carter " is also rendered in Italian , reading , " <unk> <unk> : Chris Carter " . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Burt Reynolds was chosen for " Improbable " after he expressed his desire to appear in an episode of The X @-@ Files to Robert Patrick . Carter approved the idea and told Patrick that he would " write something good " . He later noted that " as a young man , [ Reynolds ] meant something to me " and that the opportunity to work with him was " surreal " . After Carter had written the script , he presented it to Reynolds for his approval ; Reynolds approved of the script and agreed to be in the episode . Robert Patrick later noted that Reynolds " had a great time , and he loved working with everybody . " Ray McKinnon ( Dead Man 's Walk , The Missing , Needful Things ) plays the role of the gambling serial killer Mad <unk> . 
 = = = Effects and music = = = 
 The final scene , featuring Burt 's face superimposed onto the cityscape , was created by special effects supervisor Mat Beck . The only actual footage in the scene is a pull @-@ back shot of the carnival that was filmed 110 feet in the air via crane . A CGI cityscape was then created that resembled Burt Reynolds ' head . The two shots were sewn together , and a blur effect was added to " [ make ] it sell " . An alternate version of the scene was created that featured Chris Carter 's head instead of Reynolds ' . This version was included as a bonus feature on the season nine DVD set . The score for the episode , like the rest of the series , was composed by Mark Snow . Snow based much of the music in the episode on records made by Karl <unk> , on the request of Carter . Carter later noted that " I had heard his music and it was so far out and it fit with exactly what I wanted to do because I wanted to recreate [ the yearly celebration in ] Little Italy . [ ... ] I wanted to create that festival . " 
 = = Themes = = 
 According to Chris Carter , the whole idea behind the episode was about numbers and that the " significance of numbers in our lives starts here on the card table where the players are being dealt a hand each . " He continued with " the idea is that we 're all dealt hands , genetic hands , and maybe even numerological hands that give us basically the tools with which we deal and / or use for our lives . " He further stated that the idea was that it was " free will " and " fate " , continued with that fate was determined by our own genetics . 
 The villain in the story , Mad Wayne , had been dealt a bad hand in life . Because of his situation , he acts on his bad impulses . Carter elaborated , " Is it fate that Wayne is about , the character , this is what I was interested in exploring here . As we 'll see with the introduction in a moment of a character who throws all of this into question – God – we 're going to see what his place is in all of this , or at least explore what Burt Reynolds , playing God here , has to do with the character Wayne . " The main idea behind the episode , was that God knows all the numbers , because they are his numbers and he is laying them down and is in " charge of the big game " . Being that God is trying to show us the game , as it was a " game " to be " won or lost " , and Wayne has lost this game . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Ratings = = = 
 " Improbable " first aired in the United States on April 14 , 2002 . The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 5 @.@ 1 , meaning that it was seen by an estimated 5 @.@ 1 % of the nation 's households . The episode was viewed by 5 @.@ 38 million households and 9 @.@ 1 million viewers " Improbable " was the 57th most watched episode of television that aired during the week ending April 14 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 " Improbable " received mostly positive reviews from critics . Jessica Morgan of Television Without Pity awarded the episode a " B + " . Robert Shearman and Lars Pearson , in their book Wanting to Believe : A Critical Guide to The X @-@ Files , Millennium & The Lone Gunmen , rated the episode four stars out of five , and called the script " very witty " . The two wrote that " the brilliance of Chris Carter 's direction " allowed the viewer of the episode to see it " from God 's point of view " . Shearman and Pearson concluded that the episode " is not as smart as it thinks it is . But it 's still pretty smart . " John Keegan , writing for Critical Myth , on the other hand , gave the episode a more mixed review and gave it a 6 out of 10 rating . He wrote that " overall , this episode was amusing enough , but there was nothing about it that would prompt me to rank it as highly as the more inspired " lite " episodes of previous seasons . And considering that the sixth and seventh seasons suffered tremendously from too many episodes like this , it 's a shame to see them do it again . " M.A. Crang , in his book Denying the Truth : Revisiting The X @-@ Files after 9 / 11 , called the episode " bizarre yet amusing " and said that the central numerology story " doesn 't feel like it 's enough to sustain an entire episode " . 
 The Guardian listed " Improbable " as one of the " 13 best X @-@ Files episodes ever " . UGO named God / Mr. Burt as one of the " Top 11 X @-@ Files Monsters " , noting that " as [ series creator Chris Carter ] imagines him , [ God ] is a benevolent deity , constantly prodding his creatures to look at the patterns before them , to see the overall plan that he 's laid out . He 's doomed to failure , and he knows it , though it doesn 't stop him from trying " . 
 = Hugh Cloberry Christian = 
 Sir Hugh Cloberry Christian KB ( 1747 – 23 November 1798 ) was an officer of the Royal Navy who saw service during the American War of Independence , and the French Revolutionary Wars . 
 Details of his early life are obscure , but he appears to have served initially in the English Channel and the Mediterranean , before obtaining the rank of captain and going out to North America with Commodore Joshua Rowley . Christian was Rowley 's flag @-@ captain on HMS Suffolk for several years , and saw action in several of the naval engagements of the American War of Independence . 
 Returning to Britain at the end of the war , he spent a period without active employment , before receiving a post as second captain aboard Lord Howe 's flagship , the 100 @-@ gun HMS Queen Charlotte , during the Spanish Armament . He temporarily left her when the crisis abated , but the outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars led to his return to Queen Charlotte . Christian stepped down from her in 1794 to join the Transport Board , and in 1795 was promoted to rear @-@ admiral . 
 He was made commander @-@ in @-@ chief in the West Indies and given the task of transporting a large troop convoy . Twice he attempted the crossing of the Atlantic , and twice he was forced back by severe gales which ravaged his fleet and wrecked a number of the merchant ships in the convoy . He made a third attempt in 1796 , and succeeded in shepherding the fleet to its destination . He was then active in using the troops and his naval forces to capture the islands of Saint Lucia , Saint Vincent and Grenada , before returning to England . He was made second in command at the Cape of Good Hope in 1797 , succeeding to commander @-@ in @-@ chief the following year , and he died while in command there in November 1798 . 
 = = Family and early life = = 
 Christian , descended from residents of the Isle of Man , was born at Hook Norton , Oxfordshire in 1747 . His father , Thomas Christian , was a captain with his own privateer , whilst his mother , Anne Penny was a poet . He followed his father into the navy in 1761 , spending time in the English Channel and the Mediterranean , but few details of his early service survive , other than that he took his lieutenant 's examination in 1767 , and received his commission on 21 January 1771 . He married Ann Leigh , resident of the Isle of Wight on 6 March 1775 , and was promoted to master and commander in 1778 . 
 = = American War of Independence = = 
 Christian received a further promotion to flag @-@ captain on 8 December 1778 and took command of the 74 @-@ gun HMS Suffolk , flying the broad pennant of Commodore Joshua Rowley . Rowley sailed from Spithead on 25 December in command of a squadron of seven ships of the line , which was part of the fleet under the overall command of Lord Shuldham escorting the trade convoys to the colonies . Rowley and the Suffolk were assigned to the West Indies @-@ bound convoy . The Suffolk arrived in the Leeward Islands on 12 February 1779 , and Christian remained with Rowley in the West Indies , serving with Vice @-@ Admiral John Byron at the Battle of Grenada on 6 July 1779 . Christian led the van of the British attack , and the Suffolk lost seven killed and 25 wounded . Byron returned to England after this , being replaced by Rear @-@ Admiral Hyde Parker , with Rowley retaining Suffolk as his flagship . Towards the end of 1779 intelligence reached Parker that three French ships had been sighted from Morne Fortune , sailing northward . Parker sent Rowley to intercept them , and after chasing them for several hours , all three were captured . They were revealed to be the 42 @-@ gun Fortunée , the 36 @-@ gun Blanche and the 28 @-@ gun Ellis , with all three being added to the Royal Navy . 
 Christian was again in action on 18 December , helping to capture and destroy a large French convoy off Martinique , and took part in the engagements off Martinique under Admiral George Rodney in April 1780 . Over the three engagements that took place , Suffolk lost one man killed , and 33 wounded . Rowley shifted his flag to the 74 @-@ gun HMS Conqueror after these clashes , and Christian was transferred to command the 38 @-@ gun HMS <unk> , the frigate he had helped to capture in 1779 . He was present at the Battle of the Chesapeake on 5 September 1781 , after which he returned to the West Indies . He and <unk> formed part of Sir Samuel Hood 's fleet , with Christian being present at the Battle of St. Kitts on 25 and 26 January 1782 , attached to the centre division . He was still with Rodney 's fleet when the Battle of the Saintes was fought against the Comte de Grasse on 9 to 12 April 1782 . 
 = = End of the war = = 
 Christian sailed north from Jamaica on 21 July 1782 with Admiral Hugh Pigot 's fleet , arriving at New York on 5 September . Returning to Port Royal with Hood 's fleet in February the following year , he spent several months cruising in the area . He returned to England with Hood in April 1783 , and left active service following the end of the war with the signing of the Treaty of Paris . He presumably did not receive any further employment until the Spanish Armament in 1790 , when he is recorded as being appointed as second captain aboard Lord Howe 's flagship , the 100 @-@ gun HMS Queen Charlotte . The easing of tensions meant that Queen Charlotte was paid off at the end of the year , and Christian again found himself without a ship . 
 = = French Revolutionary Wars = = 
 The outbreak of the French Revolutionary Wars in early 1793 provided Christian with further employment . Queen Charlotte was recommissioned , and he again became her second captain , still under Lord Howe . He stepped down from his post in August the following year , becoming a commissioner of the Transport Board , and on 1 June 1795 he was advanced to rear @-@ admiral of the blue . He was then appointed commander @-@ in @-@ chief of the West Indies station , and was instructed to take a fleet out with a convoy of transports , carrying soldiers for operations against the French and Dutch colonies there . He duly hoisted his flag aboard the 98 @-@ gun HMS Prince George and assembled his squadron and the transports , numbering over two hundred merchants carrying 16 @,@ 000 men , and making up the largest troop convoy to leave England to that date . 
 = = = Attempts to cross the Atlantic = = = 
 The fleet did not leave Spithead until 16 November , the departure having been delayed until late in the season . The delay proved disastrous : two days after departing , a westerly gale blew up , dispersing the fleet and driving the ships back to port . Several of the merchants were wrecked with heavy loss of life ; over 200 bodies were washed up on the coastline between Portland and Bridport . 
 Christian shifted his flag to the 90 @-@ gun HMS Glory , after deeming the Prince George to be too badly damaged to take to sea , and after gathering his fleet again , set sail on another attempt to cross the Atlantic on 9 December . Again the ships encountered severe gales that caused considerable damage , forcing nine of the warships and fifty of the merchants to struggle back to port on 29 January . Some of the convoy successfully made the crossing , while others were wrecked , or captured by enemy ships . The storms were afterwards alluded to as ' Christian 's Gales ' . Christian again shifted his flag , this time to the 74 @-@ gun HMS Thunderer while he waited for repairs to his ships to be completed , and the merchants gathered to make a third attempt to reach the West Indies . While ashore he was invested as a Knight Companion of the Order of the Bath on 17 February 1796 , and on 20 March he left Spithead again , bound for the West Indies . The third voyage was successful , and he arrived at Carlisle Bay , Barbados on 21 April . He joined with the forces of the station 's current commander , Sir John Laforey several days later , and took over the command from him . Christian assembled his forces , and on 26 April sailed to invade St Lucia , with a detachment of troops under Lieutenant @-@ General Sir Ralph Abercromby . The invasion was successful and the island was surrendered to the British on 25 May . Christian went on to use his naval forces to support the reduction and capture of the islands of Saint Vincent and Grenada . 
 = = Later years = = 
 Christian was succeeded as commander in the West Indies by Rear @-@ Admiral Henry Harvey , who had arrived in late June , and Christian returned to England in October aboard HMS Beaulieu . He was advanced to rear @-@ admiral of the white on 20 February 1797 , and was appointed as second in command of the Cape of Good Hope station later in the year and duly sailed to take up the post on the 44 @-@ gun HMS Virginie . He succeeded Admiral Thomas Pringle as the station commander in 1798 , but died on 23 November that year at the age of 51 . His wife , who had been seriously ill for sometime , died two months later , without having heard of her husband 's death . Hugh Cloberry Christian had been created a peer , and chose the title of Lord Ronaldsway to honour his ancestor , Manx politician <unk> <unk> , but died before the patent reached him . He was buried at the Cape . Of the two sons and three daughters he had had with his wife , one became a rear @-@ admiral , Hood <unk> Christian . 
 = Sheffield = 
 Sheffield ( / <unk> / ) is a city and metropolitan borough in South Yorkshire , England . Historically part of the West Riding of Yorkshire , its name derives from the River Sheaf , which runs through the city . With some of its southern suburbs annexed from Derbyshire , the city has grown from its largely industrial roots to encompass a wider economic base . The population of the City of Sheffield is 563 @,@ 749 ( mid @-@ 2014 est . ) and it is one of the eight largest regional English cities that make up the Core Cities Group . Sheffield is the third largest English district by population . The metropolitan population of Sheffield is 1 @,@ 569 @,@ 000 . 
 In the 19th century , Sheffield gained an international reputation for steel production . Many innovations were developed locally , including crucible and stainless steel , fuelling an almost tenfold increase in the population in the Industrial Revolution . Sheffield received its municipal charter in 1843 , becoming the City of Sheffield in 1893 . International competition in iron and steel caused a decline in these industries in the 1970s and 1980s , coinciding with the collapse of coal mining in the area . 
 The 21st century has seen extensive redevelopment in Sheffield along with other British cities . Sheffield 's gross value added ( GVA ) has increased by 60 % since 1997 , standing at £ 9 @.@ 2 billion in 2007 . The economy has experienced steady growth averaging around 5 % annually , greater than that of the broader region of Yorkshire and the Humber . 
 The city is in the valleys of the River Don and its four tributaries , the Loxley , the Porter Brook , the Rivelin and the Sheaf . 61 % of Sheffield 's entire area is green space , and a third of the city lies within the Peak District national park . There are more than 250 parks , woodlands and gardens in the city , and an estimated 2 million trees , giving Sheffield the highest ratio of trees to people of any city in Europe . The city has a long sporting heritage , and is home to the world 's oldest football club . 
 = = History = = 
 The area now occupied by the City of Sheffield is believed to have been inhabited since at least the late Upper Palaeolithic period , about 12 @,@ 800 years ago . The earliest evidence of human occupation in the Sheffield area was found at Creswell Crags to the east of the city . In the Iron Age the area became the southernmost territory of the Pennine tribe called the Brigantes . It is this tribe who are thought to have constructed several hill forts in and around Sheffield . Following the departure of the Romans , the Sheffield area may have been the southern part of the Celtic kingdom of Elmet , with the rivers Sheaf and Don forming part of the boundary between this kingdom and the kingdom of Mercia . Gradually , Anglian settlers pushed west from the kingdom of Deira . A Celtic presence within the Sheffield area is evidenced by two settlements called Wales and <unk> close to Sheffield . The settlements that grew and merged to form Sheffield , however , date from the second half of the first millennium , and are of Anglo @-@ Saxon and Danish origin . In Anglo @-@ Saxon times , the Sheffield area straddled the border between the kingdoms of Mercia and Northumbria . The Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle reports that King Eanred of Northumbria submitted to King Egbert of Wessex at the hamlet of Dore ( now a suburb of Sheffield ) in 829 , a key event in the unification of the kingdom of England under the House of Wessex . After the Norman conquest , Sheffield Castle was built to protect the local settlements , and a small town developed that is the nucleus of the modern city . 
 By 1296 , a market had been established at what is now known as Castle Square , and Sheffield subsequently grew into a small market town . In the 14th century , Sheffield was already noted for the production of knives , as mentioned in Geoffrey Chaucer 's The Canterbury Tales , and by the early 1600s it had become the main centre of cutlery manufacture in England outside London , overseen by the Company of Cutlers in Hallamshire . From 1570 to 1584 , Mary , Queen of Scots , was imprisoned in Sheffield Castle and Sheffield Manor . 
 During the 1740s , a form of the crucible steel process was discovered that allowed the manufacture of a better quality of steel than had previously been possible . In about the same period , a technique was developed for fusing a thin sheet of silver onto a copper ingot to produce silver plating , which became widely known as Sheffield plate . These innovations spurred Sheffield 's growth as an industrial town , but the loss of some important export markets led to a recession in the late 18th and early 19th century . The resulting poor conditions culminated in a cholera epidemic that killed 402 people in 1832 . The population of the town grew rapidly throughout the 19th century ; increasing from 60 @,@ 095 in 1801 to 451 @,@ 195 by 1901 . The town was incorporated as a borough in 1842 and was granted a city charter in 1893 . The influx of people also led to demand for better water supplies , and a number of new reservoirs were constructed on the outskirts of the town . The collapse of the dam wall of one of these reservoirs in 1864 resulted in the Great Sheffield Flood , which killed 270 people and devastated large parts of the town . The growing population led to the construction of many back @-@ to @-@ back dwellings that , along with severe pollution from the factories , inspired George Orwell in 1937 to write : " Sheffield , I suppose , could justly claim to be called the ugliest town in the Old World " . 
 A recession in the 1930s was halted by increasing international tensions as the Second World War loomed ; Sheffield 's steel factories were set to work manufacturing weapons and ammunition for the war effort . As a result , the city became a target for bombing raids , the heaviest of which occurred on the nights of 12 and 15 December 1940 , now known as the Sheffield Blitz . More than 660 lives were lost and many buildings destroyed . 
 In the 1950s and 1960s , many of the city 's slums were demolished , and replaced with housing schemes such as the Park Hill flats . Large parts of the city centre were also cleared to make way for a new system of roads . Increased automation and competition from abroad resulted in the closure of many steel mills . The 1980s saw the worst of this run @-@ down of Sheffield 's industries , along with those of many other areas of the UK . The building of the Meadowhall Centre on the site of a former steelworks in 1990 was a mixed blessing , creating much needed jobs but hastening the decline of the city centre . Attempts to regenerate the city were kick @-@ started when the city hosted the 1991 World Student Games , which saw the construction of new sporting facilities such as the Sheffield Arena , Don Valley Stadium and the Ponds Forge complex . 
 Sheffield is changing rapidly as new projects regenerate some of the more run @-@ down parts of the city . One such , the Heart of the City Project , has initiated a number of public works in the city centre : the Peace Gardens were renovated in 1998 , the Millennium Galleries opened in April 2001 , the Winter Gardens were opened in May 2003 , and a public space to link these two areas , the Millennium Square , was opened in May 2006 . Additional developments included the remodelling of Sheaf Square , in front of the recently refurbished railway station . The new square contains " The Cutting Edge " , a sculpture designed by Si Applied Ltd and made from Sheffield steel . 
 Sheffield was particularly hard @-@ hit during the 2007 United Kingdom floods and the 2010 Big Freeze . Many landmark buildings such as Meadowhall and the Sheffield Wednesday grounds flooded due to being close to nearby rivers that flow through the city . 
 = = Government = = 
 Sheffield is governed at the local level by Sheffield City Council . It consists of 84 councillors elected to represent 28 wards : three councillors per ward . Following the 2016 local elections , the distribution of council seats is Labour 57 , Liberal Democrats 19 , the Green Party 4 and UKIP 4 . The city also has a Lord Mayor ; though now simply a ceremonial position , in the past the office carried considerable authority , with executive powers over the finances and affairs of the city council . 
 For much of its history the council was controlled by the Labour Party , and was noted for its leftist sympathies ; during the 1980s , when Sheffield City Council was led by David Blunkett , the area gained the epithet the " Socialist Republic of South Yorkshire " . However , the Liberal Democrats controlled the Council between 1999 and 2001 and took control again from 2008 to 2011 . 
 The majority of council @-@ owned facilities are operated by independent charitable trusts . Sheffield International Venues runs many of the city 's sporting and leisure facilities , including Sheffield Arena and the English Institute of Sport . Museums Sheffield and the Sheffield Industrial Museums Trust take care of galleries and museums owned by the council . 
 The city returns five members of parliament to the House of Commons , with a sixth , the Member of Parliament for Penistone and Stocksbridge representing parts of Sheffield and Barnsley . The former Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg is also an MP for Sheffield , representing Sheffield Hallam . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Sheffield is located at 53 ° 23 ′ N 1 ° 28 ′ W. It lies directly beside Rotherham , from which it is separated largely by the M1 motorway . Although Barnsley Metropolitan Borough also borders Sheffield to the north , the town itself is a few miles further away . The southern and western borders of the city are shared with Derbyshire ; in the first half of the 20th century Sheffield extended its borders south into Derbyshire , annexing a number of villages , including Totley , Dore and the area now known as <unk> Townships . Directly to the west of the city are the Peak District National Park and the Pennine hill range , while the South Yorkshire Coalfield lies to the east . 
 Sheffield is a geographically diverse city . The city nestles in a natural amphitheatre created by several hills forming the eastern foothills of the Pennines , and the confluence of five rivers : Don , Sheaf , Rivelin , Loxley and Porter . As such , much of the city is built on hillsides with views into the city centre or out to the countryside . The city 's lowest point is just 29 metres ( 95 ft ) above sea level near Blackburn Meadows , while some parts of the city are at over 500 metres ( 1 @,@ 640 ft ) ; the highest point being 548 metres ( 1 @,@ 798 ft ) at High Stones , near Margery Hill . However , 79 % of the housing in the city is between 100 and 200 metres ( 330 and 660 ft ) above sea level . 
 Estimated to contain over two million trees , Sheffield has more trees per person than any other city in Europe , and according to Sheffield City Council , it is England 's greenest city , a claim that was reinforced when it won the 2005 Entente Florale competition . It has over 170 woodlands ( covering 10 @.@ 91 sq mi or 28 @.@ 3 km2 ) , 78 public parks ( covering 7 @.@ 07 sq mi or 18 @.@ 3 km2 ) and 10 public gardens . Added to the 52 @.@ 0 square miles ( 134 @.@ 7 km2 ) of national park and 4 @.@ 20 square miles ( 10 @.@ 9 km2 ) of water this means that 61 % of the city is greenspace . Despite this , about 64 % of Sheffield householders live further than 300 metres ( 328 yd ) from their nearest greenspace , although access is better in less affluent neighbourhoods across the city . Since 2012 there have been disputes between the city council and residents over the fate of the city 's 36 @,@ 000 highway trees , with 2000 having been felled by October 2015 as part of the £ 2 billion Streets Ahead road improvement scheme . 
 Sheffield also has a very wide variety of habitat , comparing favourably with any city in the United Kingdom : urban , parkland and woodland , agricultural and arable land , moors , meadows and freshwater @-@ based habitats . There are six areas within the city that are designated as sites of special scientific interest . 
 The present city boundaries were set in 1974 ( with slight modification in 1994 ) , when the former county borough of Sheffield merged with Stocksbridge Urban District and two parishes from the Wortley Rural District . This area includes a significant part of the countryside surrounding the main urban region . Roughly a third of Sheffield lies in the Peak District National Park . No other English city included parts of a national park within its boundary , until the creation in March 2010 of the South Downs National Park , part of which lies within Brighton and Hove . 
 = = = Climate = = = 
 Like the rest of the United Kingdom , the climate in Sheffield is generally temperate . The Pennines to the west of the city can create a cool , gloomy and wet environment , but they also provide shelter from the prevailing westerly winds , casting a " rain shadow " across the area . Between 1971 and 2000 Sheffield averaged 824 @.@ 7 millimetres ( 32 @.@ 47 in ) of rain per year ; December was the wettest month with 91 @.@ 9 millimetres ( 3 @.@ 62 in ) and July the driest with 51 @.@ 0 millimetres ( 2 @.@ 01 in ) . July was also the hottest month , with an average maximum temperature of 20 @.@ 8 ° C ( 69 @.@ 4 ° F ) . The average minimum temperature in January and February was 1 @.@ 6 ° C ( 34 @.@ 9 ° F ) , though the lowest temperatures recorded in these months can be between − 10 and − 15 ° C ( 14 and 5 ° F ) , although since 1960 , the temperature has never fallen below − 9 @.@ 2 ° C ( 15 @.@ 4 ° F ) , suggesting that urbanisation around the Weston Park site during the second half of the 20th century may prevent temperatures below − 10 ° C ( 14 ° F ) occurring . 
 The coldest temperature to be recorded in recent years was − 8 @.@ 2 ° C ( 17 @.@ 2 ° F ) . ( Note : The official Weston Park Weather Station statistics , which can also be viewed at Sheffield Central Library , has the temperature at − 8 @.@ 7 ° C ( 16 @.@ 3 ° F ) , recorded on 20 December , and states that to be the lowest December temperature since 1981 . ) 
 The coldest temperature ever recorded in the city of Sheffield at Weston Park , since records began in 1882 , is − 14 @.@ 5 ° C ( 5 @.@ 9 ° F ) , registered in February 1895 . The lowest daytime maximum temperature in the city since records began is − 5 @.@ 6 ° C ( 21 @.@ 9 ° F ) , also recorded in February 1895 . 
 More recently , a − 4 @.@ 4 ° C ( 24 @.@ 1 ° F ) was recorded as a daytime maximum at Weston Park , on 20 December 2010 . ( from the Weston Park Weather Station statistics , which also can be viewed at Sheffield Central Library . ) 
 On average , through the winter months of December to March , there are 67 days during which ground frost occurs . 
 The Weston Park Weather station , established in 1882 , is one of the longest running weather stations in the United Kingdom . It has recorded weather for more than 125 years , and a 2008 report showed that the climate of Sheffield is warming faster than it has at any time during this period , with 1990 and 2006 being the hottest years on record . In collaboration with the Stockholm Environment Institute , Sheffield developed a carbon footprint ( based on 2004 / 05 consumption figures ) of 5 @,@ 798 @,@ 361 tonnes per year . This compares to the UK 's total carbon footprint of 698 @,@ 568 @,@ 010 tonnes per year . The factors with the greatest impact are housing ( 34 % ) , transport ( 25 % ) , consumer ( 11 % ) , private services ( 9 % ) , public services ( 8 % ) , food ( 8 % ) and capital investment ( 5 % ) . Sheffield City Council has signed up to the 10 : 10 campaign . 
 = = = Subdivisions = = = 
 Sheffield is made up of many suburbs and neighbourhoods , many of which developed from villages or hamlets that were absorbed into Sheffield as the city grew . These historical areas are largely ignored by the modern administrative and political divisions of the city ; instead it is divided into 28 electoral wards , with each ward generally covering 4 – 6 areas . These electoral wards are grouped into six parliamentary constituencies . Sheffield is largely unparished , but Bradfield and Ecclesfield have parish councils , and Stocksbridge has a town council . 
 = = Demography = = 
 The United Kingdom Census 2001 reported a resident population for Sheffield of 513 @,@ 234 , a 2 % decline from the 1991 census . The city is part of the wider Sheffield urban area , which had a population of 640 @,@ 720 . In 2011 the racial composition of Sheffield 's population was 84 % White ( 81 % White British , 0 @.@ 5 % White Irish , 0 @.@ 1 % Gypsy or Irish Traveller , 2 @.@ 3 % Other White ) , 2 @.@ 4 % of mixed race ( 1 @.@ 0 % White and Black Caribbean , 0 @.@ 2 % White and Black African , 0 @.@ 6 % White and Asian , 0 @.@ 6 % Other Mixed ) , 8 % Asian ( 1 @.@ 1 % Indian , 4 % Pakistani , 0 @.@ 6 % Bangladeshi , 1 @.@ 3 % Chinese , 1 @.@ 0 % Other Asian ) , 3 @.@ 6 % Black ( 2 @.@ 1 % African , 1 % Caribbean , 0 @.@ 5 % Other Black ) , 1 @.@ 5 % Arab and 0 @.@ 7 % of other ethnic heritage . In terms of religion , 53 % of the population are Christian , 6 % are Muslim , 0 @.@ 6 % are Hindu , 0 @.@ 4 % are Buddhist , 0 @.@ 2 % are Sikh , 0 @.@ 1 % are Jewish , 0 @.@ 4 % belong to another religion , 31 % have no religion and 7 % did not state their religion . The largest <unk> group is 20- to 24 @-@ year @-@ olds ( 9 % ) because of the large university student population . 
 The population of Sheffield peaked in 1951 at 577 @,@ 050 , and has since declined steadily . However , the mid @-@ 2007 population estimate was 530 @,@ 300 , representing an increase of about 17 @,@ 000 residents since 2001 . 
 Although a city , Sheffield is informally known as " the largest village in England " , because of a combination of topographical isolation and demographic stability . It is relatively geographically isolated , being cut off from other places by a ring of hills . ( Local folklore insists that , like Rome , Sheffield was built " on seven hills " . ) The land surrounding Sheffield was unsuitable for industrial use , and now includes several protected green belt areas . These topographical factors have served to restrict urban spread , resulting in a relatively stable population size and a low degree of mobility . 
 = = Economy = = 
 After many years of decline , the Sheffield economy is going through a strong revival . The 2004 Barclays Bank Financial Planning study revealed that , in 2003 , the Sheffield district of Hallam was the highest ranking area outside London for overall wealth , the proportion of people earning over £ 60 @,@ 000 a year standing at almost 12 % . A survey by Knight Frank revealed that Sheffield was the fastest @-@ growing city outside London for office and residential space and rents during the second half of 2004 . This can be seen by the current surge of redevelopments , including the City Lofts Tower and accompanying St Paul 's Place , Velocity Living and the Moor redevelopment , the forthcoming <unk> and the recently completed Winter Gardens , Peace Gardens , Millennium Galleries and many projects under the Sheffield One redevelopment agency . The Sheffield economy grew from £ 5 @.@ 6 billion in 1997 ( 1997 GVA ) to £ 9 @.@ 2 billion in 2007 ( 2007 GVA ) . 
 The " UK Cities Monitor 2008 " placed Sheffield among the top ten " best cities to locate a business today " , the city occupying third and fourth places respectively for best office location and best new call centre location . The same report places Sheffield in third place regarding " greenest reputation " and second in terms of the availability of financial incentives . 
 Sheffield has an international reputation for metallurgy and steel @-@ making . Many innovations in these fields have been made in Sheffield , for example Benjamin Huntsman discovered the crucible technique in the 1740s at his workshop in Handsworth . This process was rendered obsolete in 1856 by Henry Bessemer 's invention of the Bessemer converter . Thomas Boulsover invented Sheffield Plate ( silver @-@ plated copper ) in the early 18th century . Stainless steel was invented by Harry Brearley in 1912 , and the work of F. B. Pickering and T. Gladman throughout the 1960s , 1970s and 1980s was fundamental to the development of modern high @-@ strength low @-@ alloy steels . Further innovations continue , with new advanced manufacturing technologies and techniques being developed on the Advanced Manufacturing Park by Sheffield 's universities and other independent research organisations . Organisations located on the AMP include the Advanced Manufacturing Research Centre ( <unk> , a research partnership between the Boeing Company and the University of Sheffield ) , Castings Technology International ( CTI ) , The Welding Institute ( <unk> ) , and William Cook Group . 
 <unk> , founded in 1805 , is the sole remaining independent steel works in the world and dominates the north east of Sheffield around the Lower Don Valley . The firm has a global reputation for producing the largest and most complex steel forgings and castings and is certified to produce critical nuclear components , with recent projects including the Royal Navy 's Astute class submarines . The firm also has the capacity for pouring the largest single ingot ( 570 tonnes ) in Europe and is currently in the process of expanding its capabilities . 
 While iron and steel have long been the main industries of Sheffield , coal mining has also been a major industry , particularly in the outlying areas , and the Palace of Westminster in London was built using limestone from quarries in the nearby village of <unk> . Other areas of employment include call centres , the City Council , universities and hospitals . 
 Sheffield is a major retail centre , and is home to many High Street and department stores as well as designer boutiques . The main shopping areas in the city centre are on The Moor precinct , Fargate , Orchard Square and the Devonshire Quarter . Department stores in the city centre include John Lewis , Marks and Spencer , <unk> and Debenhams . Sheffield 's main market was once Castle Market , built above the remains of the castle . This is due to be demolished . Sheffield Moor market opened in 2013 . Shopping areas outside the city centre include the Meadowhall shopping centre and retail park , <unk> Road , London Road , Hillsborough , Firth Park and the Crystal Peaks shopping centre . In a 2010 survey of forecast expenditure at retail centres in the United Kingdom , Meadowhall was ranked 12th and Sheffield City Centre 19th . 
 Sheffield has a District Energy system that exploits the city 's domestic waste , by incinerating it and converting the energy from it to electricity . It also provides hot water , which is distributed through over 25 miles ( 40 km ) of pipes under the city , via two networks . These networks supply heat and hot water for many buildings throughout the city . These include not only cinemas , hospitals , shops and offices , but also universities ( Sheffield Hallam University and the University of Sheffield ) , and residential properties . Energy generated in a waste plant produces 60 megawatts of thermal energy and up to 19 megawatts of electrical energy from 225 @,@ 000 tonnes of waste . 
 In 2012 , Sheffield City Region Enterprise Zone was launched to promote development in a number of sites in Sheffield and across the wider region . In March 2014 additional sites were added to the zone . 
 = = Transport = = 
 = = = National and international travel = = = 
 = = = = Road = = = = 
 Sheffield is linked into the national motorway network via the M1 and M18 motorways . The M1 skirts the north @-@ east of the city , linking Sheffield with London to the south and Leeds to the north , and crosses Tinsley Viaduct near Rotherham ; the M18 branches from the M1 close to Sheffield , linking the city with Doncaster , Robin Hood Doncaster Sheffield Airport , and the Humber ports . The Sheffield Parkway connects the city centre with the motorways . 
 = = = = Rail = = = = 
 Major railway routes through Sheffield railway station include the Midland Main Line , which links the city to London via the East Midlands , the Cross Country Route which links the East of Scotland and Northeast of England with the West Midlands and the Southwest , and the lines linking Liverpool and Manchester with Hull and East Anglia . With the redevelopment of London St Pancras station ( now St Pancras International ) complete , Sheffield has a direct connection to continental Europe . East Midlands Trains run services to St Pancras International and Eurostar run services from there to France and Belgium . The Master Cutler , a named passenger express train running from Sheffield railway station to London St Pancras , provides a direct connection to the capital . 
 The coalition government announced in October 2010 that Sheffield would be included in the proposed High Speed Rail network connecting the North of England with London . The plan will see Sheffield and Leeds served by the same line which will connect with another to Manchester just south of Birmingham , with London Euston station being the probable London terminus . Construction of the Yorkshire / East Midlands High Speed line is likely to begin 2025 and services begin operation in 2032 . 
 Other trains serving Sheffield ( apart from East Midland Trains ) are provided by CrossCountry , TransPennine Express and Northern . Aside from the main railway station there are five other stations in Sheffield . Meadowhall , a bus , rail and tram interchange , is the second largest station and accommodates a number of services including the long distance CrossCountry service . Dore and Totley , Woodhouse , Chapeltown and Darnall stations serve as commuter stations for suburban communities but are also connected to the national rail network . 
 = = = = Coach = = = = 
 Coach services running through Sheffield are operated by National Express and to a lesser extent Megabus , part of the Stagecoach Group . National Express services call at Sheffield Interchange , Meadowhall Interchange and <unk> Bus Stop . Megabus services only call at Meadowhall . National Express services 564 , 560 , 350 , 320 , 310 and 240 call at Sheffield , as do others on a less frequent basis . The 560 / 564 service is a direct connection to London Victoria Coach Station via Chesterfield and Milton Keynes , operating 12 times a day in both directions . The 350 and 240 services connect Sheffield to Manchester Airport and Heathrow / Gatwick Airports respectively . Two Megabus services , the M12 and M20 , call at Sheffield en route to London from Newcastle upon Tyne and Inverness respectively . 
 = = = = Canal = = = = 
 The Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation ( S & SY ) is a system of navigable inland waterways ( canals and canalised rivers ) in Yorkshire and Lincolnshire . Chiefly based on the River Don , it runs for a length of 43 miles ( 69 km ) and has 29 locks . It connects Sheffield , Rotherham and Doncaster with the River Trent at Keadby and ( via the New Junction Canal ) the Aire and Calder Navigation . 
 = = = = Air = = = = 
 Following the closure of Sheffield City Airport in 2008 , the closest international airport to Sheffield is Doncaster Sheffield Airport , which is located 18 miles ( 29 km ) less than 40 minutes from the city centre . It operates on the site of the former RAF Finningley . DSA airport opened on 28 April 2005 and is served mainly by charter and budget airlines . It handles about one million passengers a year . 
 A new link road , due to open in January 2016 , will connect Doncaster Sheffield Airport to the M18 motorway , reducing the journey time from Sheffield city centre from 40 to 25 minutes . 
 East Midlands Airport is within one hour 's drive of the city , and Manchester Airport is connected directly to Sheffield by a direct train every hour . 
 = = = Local travel = = = 
 The A57 and A61 roads are the major trunk roads through Sheffield . These run east – west and north – south respectively , crossing in the city centre , from where the other major roads generally radiate spoke @-@ like . An inner ring road , mostly constructed in the 1970s and extended in 2007 to form a complete ring , allows traffic to avoid the city centre , and an outer ring road runs to the east , south east and north , nearer the edge of the city , but does not serve the western side of Sheffield . 
 Sheffield does not have as extensive a suburban and inter @-@ urban railway network as other comparable British cities . However , there are several local rail routes running along the city 's valleys and beyond , connecting it with other parts of South Yorkshire , West Yorkshire , Nottinghamshire , Lincolnshire and Derbyshire . These local routes include the Penistone Line , the Dearne Valley Line , the Hope Valley Line and the Hallam Line . As well as the main stations of Sheffield and Meadowhall , there are five suburban stations , at Chapeltown , Darnall , Woodhouse , Dronfield and Dore . 
 The Sheffield Supertram ( not derived from the previous tramways ) , operated by Stagecoach , opened in 1994 , shortly after the similar Metrolink scheme in Manchester . Its network consists of 37 miles ( 60 km ) of track and three lines , from Halfway to Malin Bridge ( Blue Line ) , from Meadowhall to Middlewood ( Yellow Line ) , and from Meadowhall to <unk> Park ( Purple Line ) , with all three lines running via the city centre . The system contains both on @-@ street and segregated running , depending upon the section and line . 
 The Supertram serves as an important connection between areas in the North East of Sheffield ( namely Meadowhall and Valley <unk> ) and the city centre . Because it is operated by the Stagecoach Group , the ticketing system for the Supertram is integrated with Stagecoach buses in Sheffield , meaning passengers can switch between the two modes of transport without having to buy a separate ticket . The network is due to be extended to Rotherham Parkgate by 2017 , with a fleet of new " train @-@ trams " sharing a conventional rail line between Sheffield and Rotherham . 
 Sheffield 's local bus infrastructure has its main hub at Sheffield Interchange . Other bus stations lie at Halfway , Hillsborough and Meadowhall . A flurry of new operators was created after deregulation in 1986 , though a series of mergers has reduced the number . 
 There are numerous bus operators within Sheffield : First South Yorkshire , Stagecoach Yorkshire , TM Travel , <unk> of Baslow , Powells , G & J Holmes and Sheffield Community Transport . First South Yorkshire , became by far the largest bus operator and in recent years implemented a series of fare rises and service cuts which saw bus ridership drop . Recent developments have seen Stagecoach Sheffield taking over Yorkshire Terrier , Andrews and parent company Yorkshire Traction , thus forming one company and in the process expanding their bus services in the city . This has resulted in increased competition , and price drops on certain routes . A zero @-@ fare bus service , the <unk> ( Operated by First South Yorkshire ) , operated a circular route around the city centre from the Sheffield Interchange . The <unk> buses stopped in 2014 and is due to save £ 8 million . 
 In 2008 , the Bus Rapid Transit Scheme between Sheffield and Rotherham was approved by the Yorkshire and Humber Assembly 's Regional Transport Board . There are plans for two routes ; one ( the Northern route ) via Meadowhall and Templeborough , and the other via the developing employment centre and Waverley . 
 = = = = Cycling = = = = 
 For cycling , although hilly , Sheffield is compact and has few major trunk roads . It is on the Trans @-@ Pennine Trail , a National Cycle Network route running from West to East from Southport in Merseyside to Hornsea in the East Riding of Yorkshire and North to South from Leeds in West Yorkshire to Chesterfield in Derbyshire . There are many cycle routes going along country paths in the woods surrounding the city . 
 = = Education = = 
 = = = Universities and colleges = = = 
 Sheffield has two universities , the University of Sheffield and Sheffield Hallam University . The two combined bring about 65 @,@ 000 students to the city every year . Sheffield University was established in 1897 as University College Sheffield and became the University of Sheffield in 1905 . 
 Sheffield Hallam University ( SHU ) is a university on two sites in Sheffield . City Campus is located in the city centre , close to Sheffield railway station , and Collegiate Crescent Campus is about two miles away , adjacent to <unk> Road in south @-@ west Sheffield . The university is the third largest in the UK , with more than 37 @,@ 000 students ( of whom over 4 @,@ 000 are international students ) , 4 @,@ 170 staff and 747 courses . Sheffield Hallam University 's history goes back to 1843 with the establishment of the Sheffield School of Design . During the 1960s several independent colleges ( including the School of Design ) joined to become Sheffield Polytechnic ( Sheffield City Polytechnic from 1976 ) and was finally renamed Sheffield Hallam University in 1992 . 
 Sheffield has three main further education providers , The Sheffield College , Longley Park Sixth Form College and Chapeltown Academy . The Sheffield College is organised on a federal basis and was originally created from the merger of six colleges around the city , since reduced to just four : Sheffield City ( formerly Castle ) near the city centre , Hillsborough , serving the north of the city and Norton and Peaks to the south . 
 = = = Secondary , primary and pre @-@ school education = = = 
 There are 137 primary schools , 26 secondary schools – of which 9 have sixth forms : ( High Storrs , King <unk> , King Edward VII , Silverdale , <unk> , <unk> , UTC Sheffield , Notre Dame Catholic High and All Saints Catholic High ) – and a sixth @-@ form college , Longley Park Sixth Form College . The city 's five independent private schools include Birkdale School and the Sheffield High School . There are also 12 special schools and a number of Integrated Resource Units in mainstream schools which are , along with all other schools , managed by Sheffield City Council . All schools are non @-@ selective , mixed sex schools ( apart from Sheffield High School which is an all @-@ girls school ) . The Early Years Education and Childcare Service of Sheffield City Council manages 32 nurseries and children 's centres in the city . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Sheffield has a long sporting heritage . In 1857 a collective of cricketers formed the world 's first @-@ ever official football club , Sheffield F.C. , and the world 's second @-@ ever , Hallam F.C. , who also play at the world 's oldest football ground in the suburb of <unk> . Sheffield and Hallam are today Sheffield 's two major non @-@ league sides , although Sheffield now play just outside the city in nearby Dronfield , Derbyshire . Sheffield and Hallam contest what has become known as the Sheffield derby . By 1860 there were 15 football clubs in Sheffield , with the first ever amateur league and cup competitions taking place in the city . 
 Sheffield is best known for its two professional football teams , Sheffield United , known locally as The Blades , and Sheffield Wednesday , known locally as The Owls . United , who play at Bramall Lane south of the city centre , compete in the Football League One , whilst Wednesday , who play at Hillsborough in the north west of the city , compete in the Football League Championship . The two clubs contest the Steel City Derby , which is considered by many to be one of the most fierce football rivalries in English Football . In the pre @-@ war era , both Wednesday and United enjoyed large amounts of success and found themselves two of the country 's top clubs ; Sheffield Wednesday became champions of the Football League consecutively in 1902 – 03 and 1903 – 04 , then again in 1928 – 29 , whilst Sheffield United had won it in 1897 – 98 . In the FA Cup the teams were also two of the forerunners , United winning it on 4 occasions and Wednesday on 3 . Post war , and Wednesday were beaten finalists in the 1966 FA cup . During the 1970s and early 1980s the two sides fell from grace , with Wednesday finding themselves in the Third Division by the mid 70s and United as far as the Fourth Division in 1981 . Wednesday once again became one of England 's high @-@ flying clubs following promotion back to the First Division in 1984 , winning the League Cup in 1991 , competing in the UEFA Cup in 1992 – 93 , and reaching the final of both the League Cup and FA Cup in the same season . United and Wednesday were both founding members of the Premier League in 1992 , but The Blades were relegated in 1994 . The Owls remained until 2000 . Both clubs have gone into decline in the 21st Century , Wednesday twice relegated to League One and United suffering the same fate in 2011 , despite a brief spell in the Premier League in 2006 – 07 . Sheffield Wednesday 's new owner <unk> <unk> is aiming for promotion back to the Premier League by 2017 . 
 Rotherham United , who play in the Championship , did play their home games in the city between 2008 and 2012 , having moved to play at Sheffield 's Don Valley Stadium in 2008 following a dispute with their previous landlord at their traditional home ground of Millmoor , Rotherham . However , in July 2012 , the club moved to the new 12 @,@ 000 seat New York Stadium in Rotherham , whilst United and Wednesday contest the Steel City derby . There are also facilities for golf , climbing and bowling , as well as a newly inaugurated national ice @-@ skating arena ( <unk> ) . 
 Sheffield Eagles RLFC are the city 's professional Rugby league team who play their matches at <unk> Stadium . They currently play in the second tier of the professional league , the Championship and are current champions , having won back to back titles in 2012 and 2013 . Their most successful moment came in 1998 , when , against all the odds they defeated Wigan Warriors in the Challenge Cup final , despite being huge underdogs . The team then hit troubled times before reforming in 2003 . Since then they have played their rugby in the Championship ( second tier ) . In 2011 , they made the playoffs finishing in fifth place . They made the Grand Final , by defeating Leigh , who were huge favourites in a playoff semi final . In the final , they were comprehensively beaten by Featherstone . Sheffield also put in a bid to be a host city for the 2013 Rugby League World Cup , but their bid was unsuccessful . 
 Sheffield is also home to the Sheffield Steelers ice hockey team who play out of the 8 @,@ 500 seater Sheffield Arena . They play in the 10 team professional Elite Ice Hockey League . Many of Sheffield 's sporting facilities were built for the World Student Games , which the city hosted in 1991 , including Sheffield Arena and the Ponds Forge international diving and swimming complex . Ponds Forge is also the home of Sheffield City Swimming Club , a local swimming club competing in the Speedo league . The former Don Valley International Athletics Stadium , once the largest athletics stadium in the UK , was also constructed for the Universiade games . The Sheffield Ski Village was the largest artificial ski resort in Europe , before being destroyed in a series of suspected arson attacks in 2012 and 2013 . The city also has two indoor climbing centres . Sheffield was the UK 's first National City of Sport and is now home to the English Institute of Sport – Sheffield , where British athletes trained for the 2012 Olympics . 
 Sheffield also has close ties with snooker , with the city 's Crucible Theatre being the venue for the World Snooker Championships . The English Institute of Sport hosts most of the top fencing competitions each year , including the National Championships for Seniors , Juniors ( U20 's ) and Cadets ( U17 's ) as well as the 2011 Senior European Fencing Championships . The English squash open is also held in the city every year . The International Open and World Matchplay Championship bowls tournaments have both been held at Ponds Forge . The city also hosts the Sheffield Tigers rugby union , Sheffield Sharks basketball , Sheffield University Bankers hockey , Sheffield Steelers ice hockey and Sheffield Tigers speedway teams . Sheffield also has many golf courses all around the city . 
 Sheffield was selected as a candidate host city by the Football Association ( FA ) as part of the English 2018 and 2022 FIFA World Cup bid on 16 December 2009 . Hillsborough Stadium was chosen as the proposed venue for matches in Sheffield . The bid failed . 
 The National Hockey League 's Stanley Cup was made in Sheffield in 1892 . Sheffield is also home to the Sheffield Steel Rollergirls , a roller derby team . 
 Sheffield hosted the finish of Stage 2 of the 2014 Tour de France . Within the City limits and located just 4 kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) from the finish , was the ninth and final climb of the stage , the Category 4 Côte de Jenkin Road . The one point in the King of the Mountains Competition was claimed by Chris Froome of Team Sky . The climb was just 0 @.@ 8 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 50 mi ) long at an average gradient of 10 @.@ 8 % . The stage was won by the eventual overall winner , Vincenzo Nibali of Astana Pro Team . 
 = = Culture and attractions = = 
 Sheffield made the shortlist for the first city to be designated UK City of Culture , but in July 2010 it was announced that Derry had been selected . 
 = = = Attractions = = = 
 The Sheffield Walk of Fame in the City Centre honours famous Sheffield residents past and present in a similar way to the Hollywood version . Sheffield also had its own Ferris Wheel known as the Wheel of Sheffield , located atop Fargate shopping precinct . The Wheel was dismantled in October 2010 and moved to London 's Hyde Park . Heeley City Farm and Graves Park are home to Sheffield 's two farm animal collections , both of which are fully open to the public . 
 There are about 1 @,@ 100 listed buildings in Sheffield ( including the whole of the Sheffield postal district ) . Of these , only five are Grade I listed . Fifty @-@ nine are Grade II * , but the overwhelming majority are listed as Grade II . Compared to other English cities , Sheffield has few buildings with the highest Grade I listing : Liverpool , for example , has 26 Grade I listed buildings . This situation led the noted architecture historian Nikolaus Pevsner , writing in 1959 , to comment that the city was " architecturally a miserable disappointment " , with no pre @-@ 19th @-@ century buildings of any distinction . By contrast , in November 2007 , Sheffield 's Peace and Winter Gardens beat London 's South Bank to gain the Royal Institute of British Architects ' Academy of Urbanism " Great Place " Award , as an " outstanding example of how cities can be improved , to make urban spaces as attractive and accessible as possible " . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 Sheffield has been home to several well @-@ known bands and musicians , with a notably large number of synthpop and other electronic bands originating from the city . These include The Human League , Heaven 17 , ABC and the more industrially inclined Cabaret Voltaire & Clock DVA . This electronic tradition has continued : techno label Warp Records was a central pillar of the Yorkshire <unk> and Bass scene of the early 1990s , and has gone on to become one of the UK 's oldest and best @-@ loved dance music labels . More recently , other popular genres of electronic music such as bassline house have originated in the city . Sheffield was once home to a number of historically important nightclubs in the early dance music scene of the 1980s and 90s , <unk> One was one of the most popular clubs in the North of England until its destruction by fire on 18 June 2007 . 
 A number of major music acts , including Joe Cocker , Def Leppard , Paul Carrack ( of Mike + The Mechanics ) , Arctic Monkeys , Bring Me the Horizon , Pulp and Moloko , hail from the city . Indie band The Long Blondes originated from the city , as part of what the NME dubbed the New Yorkshire scene . 
 In 1999 , the National Centre for Popular Music , a museum dedicated to the subject of popular music , was opened in the city . It was not as successful as was hoped , however , and later evolved to become a live music venue ; then in February 2005 , the unusual steel @-@ covered building became the students ' union for Sheffield Hallam University . Live music venues in the city include the Harley Hotel , <unk> , West Street Live , the Boardwalk , Dove & Rainbow , The Casbah , The Cremorne , Corporation , New Barrack Tavern , The Broadfield Hotel , Redstone bar and nightclub , the City Hall , the University of Sheffield Students ' Union , the Studio Theatre at the Crucible Theatre , the O2 Academy Sheffield and The Grapes . 
 Sheffield hosts a number of festivals , the Grin Up North Sheffield Comedy Festival , the <unk> Music & Film Festival and the <unk> Festival . The <unk> Festival was launched as an annual music festival in 2009 , it is held throughout venues in Sheffield City Centre , and features local and national artists . The city is also home to several local orchestras and choirs , such as the Sheffield Symphony Orchestra , the Sheffield Philharmonic Orchestra , the Sheffield Chamber Orchestra , the City of Sheffield Youth Orchestra , the Sheffield Philharmonic Chorus and the Chorus UK community choir . 
 = = = Theatres = = = 
 Sheffield has two large theatres , the Lyceum Theatre and the Crucible Theatre , which together with the smaller Studio Theatre make up the largest theatre complex outside London , located in Tudor Square . The Crucible Theatre is the home ( since 1977 ) of the World Snooker Championships and hosts many well @-@ known stage productions throughout the year . The Lyceum , which opened in 1897 , serves as a venue for touring West End productions and operas by Opera North , as well as locally produced shows . Sheffield also has the Montgomery Theatre , a small 420 seater theatre located a short distance from Tudor Square , opposite the town hall on Surrey Street . There are also a large number of smaller amateur theatres scattered throughout the city . 
 = = = Museums = = = 
 Sheffield 's museums are managed by two distinct organisations . Museums Sheffield manages the Weston Park Museum ( a Grade II * listed Building ) , Millennium Galleries and Graves Art Gallery . Sheffield Industrial Museums Trust manages the museums dedicated to Sheffield 's industrial heritage of which there are three . Kelham Island Museum ( located just to the North of the city centre ) showcases the city 's history of steel manufacturing . Abbeydale Industrial Hamlet ( in the south of the city ) is a Grade I Listed building and a Scheduled Ancient Monument . Shepherd Wheel ( in the south @-@ East of the city ) is a former water @-@ powered grinding workshop , Grade II listed and a Scheduled Ancient Monument . 
 = = = Greenspace = = = 
 Sheffield has a reputed 2 million trees and is known as the greenest city in Europe . Consequently , there are many parks and woods throughout the city and beyond . There are 83 parks in Sheffield ( 13 ' City ' Parks , 20 ' District ' Parks and 50 ' Local ' Parks ) which are located throughout the city . Included in the city parks category are 3 of Sheffield 's 6 public gardens ( The Sheffield Botanical Gardens , The Peace Gardens and Hillsborough Walled Gardens , with the Sheffield Winter Gardens , Beauchief Gardens and Lynwood Gardens being the separate entities ) . 
 The Sheffield Botanical Gardens are on a 19 @-@ acre site located to the south west of the city centre and date back to 1836 . The site includes a large , Grade II listed , Victorian era glasshouse . The Peace Gardens , neighboured next to the Town Hall and forming part of the Heart of the City project , occupy a 0 @.@ 67 hectare site in the centre of the city . The site is dominated by its water features , principle among which is the Goodwin Fountain . Made up of 89 individual jets of water , this fountain lies at the corner of the quarter @-@ circle shaped Peace Gardens and is named after a notable Sheffield industrialist . Since their redevelopment in 1998 , the Peace gardens have received a number of regional and national accolades . Hillsborough Walled Garden is located in Hillsborough Park , to the north west of the city centre . The gardens date back to 1779 and have been dedicated to the victims of the Hillsborough Disaster since the redevelopment of the gardens in the early 1990s . The Winter Garden , lying within the Heart of the City , is a large wood framed , glass skinned greenhouse housing some 2 @,@ 500 plants from around the world . 
 Also within the city there are a number of nature reserves which when combined occupy 1 @,@ 600 acres ( 6 @.@ 5 km2 ) of land . There are also 170 woodland areas within the city , 80 of which are classed as ancient . 
 The South West boundary of the city overlaps with the Peak District National Park , the first national park in England ( est . 1951 ) . As a consequence , several communities actually reside within both entities . The Peak District is home to many notable , natural , features and also man @-@ made features such as Chatsworth House , the setting for the BBC series Pride and Prejudice . 
 Sheffield City Council has created a new chain of parks spanning the hill side behind Sheffield Station . The park , known as Sheaf Valley Park , has an open @-@ air amphitheatre and will include an arboretum . The site was once home to a medieval deer park , latterly owned by the Duke of Norfolk . 
 = = = Entertainment = = = 
 Sheffield has five cinema complexes , three of which are in the city centre and a further two in the Lower Don Valley . One of these complexes is located at Valley <unk> , a leisure and entertainment complex in the Don Valley . It was built on land previously occupied by steel mills near what is now Meadowhall and the Sheffield Arena . It is home to several restaurants , bars , a cinema multiplex and a bowling alley . It is also the largest Cineworld complex in the United Kingdom , containing 20 screens in one building . Odeon Sheffield , situated on Arundel Gate in the city Centre and Vue , located within Meadowhall Shopping Centre , are the two other mainstream cinemas in the city . The Showroom , an independent cinema showing non @-@ mainstream productions , is located in Sheaf Square , close to Sheffield station . In 2002 the Showroom was voted as the best Independent cinema in the country by Guardian readers . A Curzon Cinemas complex has also recently opened in the city centre , close to the existing Odeon complex . The cinema is based in the former Sheffield Banking Company building , located just off Arundel Gate . The cinema features 4K resolution projectors and was opened in January 2015 . 
 Owing to its long history , Sheffield has a large number of pubs throughout the city . West Street , running through the heart of the West End district of the city centre , is home to many pubs , bars and clubs and attracts many student visitors . A recent addition to the city 's nightlife is Leopold Square , situated just off the northern end of West Street . <unk> , an Indian restaurant in the square which serves Kashmiri cuisine , has recently been voted " Best Restaurant Group in the UK " at the prestigious British Curry Awards . 
 = = = Media and film = = = 
 Sheffield has two commercial newspapers , The Star and Sheffield Telegraph , both published by Johnston Press PLC . The Star has been published daily since 1897 ; the Sheffield Telegraph , now a weekly publication , originated in 1855 . 
 Sheffield has its own TV station ; Sheffield Live TV , a not @-@ for @-@ profit company which began broadcasting on 23 September 2014 . [ 2 ] <unk> has been awarded a 12 @-@ year licence to provide the digital terrestrial broadcasting service . Regional broadcasters BBC Yorkshire and Yorkshire Television also cover the city . Five local radio stations broadcast in the city . The professional services are BBC Radio Sheffield , the independent Hallam FM and its sister station Magic AM . Sheffield is also home to two FM licensed community radio stations : Sheffield Live 93 @.@ 2 , and <unk> Community Radio on 103 @.@ 1 . 
 HBS Radio ( Hospital Broadcasting Sheffield ) broadcasts a 24 @-@ hour service to the Royal Hallamshire , Jessop Wing , Northern General and Weston Park Hospitals . HBS is operated by volunteers from studios at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital and is provided free to bedside terminals via <unk> and on medium wave <unk> from a transmitter at the Northern General Hospital . 
 The films and plays The Full Monty , Threads , Looks and Smiles , When Saturday Comes , Whatever Happened to Harold Smith ? , The History Boys and Four Lions are set in the city . F.I.S.T. and Kill List also include several scenes filmed in Sheffield and a substantial part of Among Giants was filmed in the city . The documentary festival Sheffield Doc / Fest has been run annually since 1994 at the Showroom Cinema , and in 2007 Sheffield hosted the Awards of the International Indian Film Academy . 
 = = Public services = = 
 Sheffield is policed by South Yorkshire Police ( a territorial police force ) whose headquarters are in the city . Sheffield constitutes one of its four Basic Command Units ( Barnsley , Doncaster and Rotherham being the other three ) . The force polices an area of approximately 1 @,@ 554 square kilometres and is the 13th largest force in England , Wales and Northern Ireland . The force has in its possession one Police helicopter , known as Sierra Yankee 99 . 
 Medical services in Sheffield are provided by three NHS Foundation Trusts . Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust provides healthcare to people ( primarily adults ) throughout Sheffield and South Yorkshire . The trusts title includes the word ' teaching ' because it undertakes training of medical students at the University of Sheffield and has strong links to Sheffield Hallam University as well . The trust has two campuses : The West Campus containing the Royal Hallamshire Hospital , the Jessop Wing ( maternity wing ) , Weston Park Hospital ( specialist cancer treatment ) and Charles Clifford Dental Hospital . The Northern General Hospital is the second ' campus ' and is a large facility in the northern suburbs of Sheffield , containing the city 's A & E department . Sheffield Children 's NHS Foundation Trust provides healthcare for children within the city of Sheffield , South Yorkshire and the UK as a whole . 
 Sheffield Health and Social Care NHS Foundation Trust provides mental health services , services for people with learning disabilities , substance misuse services , long term neurological conditions , as well as a consortium of GP practises . The Sheffield Institute for Motor Neurone Disease ( also known as Sheffield Institute for Translational Neuroscience – <unk> ) has been developed by the University of Sheffield . 
 Ambulances are provided by the Yorkshire Ambulance Service , which itself is an NHS trust . Fire services in Sheffield are provided by South Yorkshire Fire and Rescue Service . For the purposes of fire @-@ fighting and rescue , Sheffield is divided into East and West sub @-@ divisions . 
 Domestic waste services in Sheffield are provided by Veolia Environmental Services under contract from and on behalf of the council . Domestic recycling services were recently improved with the addition of glass recycling bins for each home . 
 Council owned / run buildings are maintained by Kier Group Sheffield in partnership with the council . 
 = = Sister cities = = 
 The " Sheffield International Linking Committee " promotes Sheffield overseas , especially with five sister cities : 
 Chengdu , People 's Republic of China 
 Anshan , People 's Republic of China 
 Bochum , Germany 
 Donetsk , Ukraine 
 <unk> , Nicaragua 
 A further four cities have a Friendship Agreement with Sheffield : 
 Kawasaki , Japan 
 <unk> , Zambia 
 <unk> , Pakistan @-@ administered Kashmir 
 Pittsburgh , United States 
 Two roads in Sheffield have been named after sister cities ; a section of the <unk> in Norton is named Bochum Parkway , and a road in <unk> is named Donetsk Way . Likewise in Bochum , Germany there is a major road called the Sheffield @-@ Ring . 
 = Colorado Ranger = 
 The Colorado Ranger is a horse breed from the Colorado High Plains in the United States . The breed is descended from two stallions imported from Turkey to the US state of Virginia in the late 1800s . These stallions were then bred to ranch horses in Nebraska and Colorado , and in the early 1900s the two stallions who every registered Colorado Ranger traces to , Patches # 1 and Max # 2 , were foaled . The breed was championed by rancher Mike Ruby , who founded the Colorado Ranger Horse Association in 1935 . Original registry membership limits resulted in many Colorado Ranger horses being registered instead as Appaloosas , but pedigree research is ongoing to discover additional horses who trace their ancestry back to the original stallions . 
 By 2005 , more than 6 @,@ 000 Colorado Ranger horses had been registered . Colorado Rangers may be any solid color or carry leopard spotting patterns . Pinto coloration and American Paint Horse breeding are not allowed , nor are draft horse and pony breeding . Colorado Ranger horses may be dual registered with the Appaloosa Horse Club , and approximately 90 percent are . 
 = = Characteristics and registration = = 
 Colorado Ranger horses may be of any color except pinto , and pinto or American Paint Horse breeding is not allowed within five generations of any registered horse 's pedigree . They stand 14 @.@ 2 to 16 hands ( 58 to 64 inches , 147 to 163 cm ) high . The breed has a straight facial profile , long , muscular neck and deep chest . The shoulders and croup are sloping , connected by a short back . Colorado Ranger horses are still used for their original purpose as ranch horses . They are also shown , both in Western and English disciplines , although mainly the former , and used for trail and pleasure riding . They are known for their athleticism , good disposition and abilities as stock horses . 
 All registered Colorado Ranger Horses trace directly to one of two foundation sires in their pedigree . The first is Patches # 1 and the second is Max # 2 , a son of another horse named Max born in 1918 . Registered Colorado Rangerbreds may be bred to registered Thoroughbreds , American Quarter Horses , Appaloosas , Arabians and <unk> , and the resulting progeny registered as purebred Colorado Rangerbreds . Horses with draft horse or pony blood may not be registered . Colorado Ranger Horses may be double @-@ registered with the Appaloosa Horse Club , but Appaloosas may not be registered with the CRHA unless they have the proper bloodlines . Approximately 90 percent of Colorado Ranger horses are dual @-@ registered . 
 = = History = = 
 The original foundation ancestors of the Colorado Ranger were two stallions brought to the United States and given to US president Ulysses S. Grant by the Turkish Sultan Abdul Hamid II in 1878 . The first horse was a gray Barb named Linden Tree , foaled in 1874 . The second was a desertbred Arabian , also gray , named Leopard , foaled in 1873 . The two stallions reached Virginia in 1879 , after their voyage from Turkey . Upon reaching Virginia , they spent 14 years in the breeding herds of Randolph Huntington , a noted breeder of trotting and roadster horses . In 1896 , Randolph leased Leopard and Linden Tree to a friend of Grant 's , named General Colby , who used to stallions to breed a number of mares on his ranch in Nebraska . These breedings were successful at producing high @-@ quality ranch horses , and a few years later several ranches in Colorado collaborated to buy a group of horses , including one stallion , from the Colby Ranch . All of the mares were sired by one of the two imported sires , and the stallion , a few @-@ spot leopard Appaloosa , was a grandson of Leopard on both sides of his pedigree . The influence of Linden Tree and Leopard on American horse breeding was such that they are now listed in the studbooks for the Arabian Horse Association and the Jockey Club ( which registers Thoroughbreds ) , both major breed associations in the United States . 
 = = = 20th century = = = 
 The Colorado ranchers used the horses purchased from Colby to improve their existing ranch stock , and the progeny of these crossings became the Colorado Ranger Horse . Although leopard coloration was not originally an aim of the breeding program , many of the resulting horses bore spotted coat patterns , and breeders began to include the patterning as one of their goals . Two other stallions also became influential foundation sires of the breed . One was a Colorado @-@ born leopard @-@ spot colt named Max , foaled in 1918 . The second was a Barb stallion named <unk> , imported from North Africa in 1918 by the owner of the W.R. Thompson Cattle Company as a wedding gift for his daughter . This stallion provided another important infusion of Barb blood , which had been diluted in the breed since Linden Tree had been imported from Turkey . 
 Mike Ruby , a horseman from the Colorado High Plains , became interested in the breed and acquired Max and Patches , a son of the original Colby Ranch stallion . During his time breeding Colorado Ranger horses , he kept complete records of every horse that he bred , which became the initial pedigree record for the breed association . Ruby was invited to bring two stallions to the Denver Stock Show in 1934 , and chose to take Leopard # 3 and Fox # 10 . The names Colorado Rangers and Colorado Rangerbreds were coined during this show by members of the now @-@ Colorado State University faculty , in reference to the horses having been bred on the ranges of Colorado . Although " Colorado Ranger " is the official name of the breed , the nickname of " Rangerbreds " is still commonly used . 
 Ruby was influential in saving some of the highest @-@ quality Ranger stock during the severe drought of the 1930s , by driving them over 300 miles ( 480 km ) to better pasture in a history @-@ making journey . When the rains returned to eastern Colorado , he again made the drive to return the horses to their original pasture . After re @-@ establishing his herd , Ruby developed a practice of leasing groups of his <unk> horses to other ranchers throughout the western United States for use as breeding stock . Through this practice , Colorado Ranger horses influenced , and were in return influenced by , the Quarter Horse , Appaloosa and other western stock horse breeds . 
 In 1935 , Ruby founded the Colorado Ranger Horse Association ( CRHA ) , and was granted a corporate charter for the association in 1938 . Ruby remained president of the organization from 1935 until his death in 1942 . The registry initially imposed a 50 @-@ member limit , and many Ranger horses , whose breeders were not allowed to become members , were instead registered with the Appaloosa Horse Club . The member limit was lifted in 1964 , and since then pedigree research has continued to find and register horses with Ranger breeding that are un @-@ registered or registered as Appaloosas . During the 1980s , some Lusitano blood was allowed into the breed , but this practice has been discontinued . The CRHA states that up to 1 in 8 registered Appaloosas may have Colorado Ranger blood , and as such be eligible for registry with the CRHA . As of 2005 , there were more than 6 @,@ 000 horses registered with the CRHA , with between 100 and 125 new horses registered annually . While originally bred in the western US , today many Colorado Rangers are found in the midwest and eastern parts of the country , including the states of Michigan , Ohio and Pennsylvania . They are also found in Canada , where there is at least one large breeding farm . 
 = Mycena acicula = 
 Mycena acicula , commonly known as the orange bonnet , or the coral spring Mycena , is a species of fungus in the Mycenaceae family . It is found in Asia , the Caribbean , North America and Europe . The fruit bodies , or mushrooms , of the fungus grow on dead twigs and other woody debris of forest floors , especially along streams and other wet places . They have small orange @-@ red caps , up to 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 in ) in diameter , held by slender yellowish stems up to 6 cm ( 2 @.@ 4 in ) long . The gills are pale yellow with a whitish edge . Several other Mycena species look similar , but may be distinguished by differences in size and / or microscopic characteristics . M. acicula is considered inedible because of its small size . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 First named Agaricus acicula by the German scientist Jacob Christian Schäffer in 1774 , the species was also referred to as Agaricus <unk> by another German , naturalist August Batsch . It was given its current name in 1871 by Paul Kummer . Rolf Singer transferred the species to the genera Hemimycena and Marasmiellus , but the binomials resulting from these transfers are now considered synonyms . The fungus is classified in the section <unk> of the genus Mycena . 
 The specific epithet acicula is derived from the Latin word meaning " small needle " . The mushroom is commonly known as the " orange bonnet " , or the " coral spring Mycena " . 
 = = Description = = 
 The cap is initially convex , but as it matures , it expands to a bell @-@ shape , typically reaching 0 @.@ 3 to 1 cm ( 0 @.@ 1 to 0 @.@ 4 in ) in diameter . The cap sometimes has a small abrupt umbo ( a central bump ) , and the cap margin is pressed closely against the stem when young , often flaring or curving slightly inward . As the cap expands , a narrow sterile ( i.e. , without any reproductive cells typical of the hymenium ) band which frequently becomes lobed or irregularly @-@ jagged often forms at the extreme margin . The cap surface is smooth , faintly translucent @-@ striate when moist , at first pruinose but soon naked . The color is red when young , soon becoming yellowish toward the margin , and slowly fading to bright orange @-@ yellow . The flesh is thin , brittle , yellow , and has no distinctive odor or taste . 
 The gills are adnate ( with gills broadly attached to the stem , slightly above the bottom of the gill , with most of the gill fused to the stem ) or slightly rounded next to the stem . The individual gills are close to subdistant , with between 10 – 14 reaching the stem , and two or three tiers of lamellulae ( short gills that do not reach the stem ) . The gills are moderately broad , pale orange to whitish , often yellowish at the base and whitish along the edges . The stem is 1 to 6 cm ( 0 @.@ 4 to 2 @.@ 4 in ) long , and up to 1 mm thick ; flexuous ( winding from side to side ) , brittle , with the base covered with sharp , straight , and stiff white hairs . The surface is densely white @-@ pruinose initially , but soon becomes naked with a subsequent color shift to orange @-@ yellow or lemon yellow . This species has been described as " a delight to behold " , but " one usually has to get down on hands and knees to find it ! " 
 The fruit bodies of Mycena acicula are considered inedible , as they are too small and insubstantial to be considered for consumption . 
 = = = Microscopic characteristics = = = 
 The spores are roughly spindle @-@ shaped ( i.e. , tapering at each end ) , with dimensions of 9 – 11 by 3 @.@ 5 – 4 @.@ 5 µm . They are nonamyloid , meaning they do not take up iodine when stained with Melzer 's reagent . The spore @-@ bearing cells , the basidia , are club @-@ shaped , four @-@ spored and measure 20 – 22 by 5 – 6 µm . The <unk> and pleurocystidia ( cystidia found on the edge and face , respectively , of a gill ) are similar , club @-@ shaped to spindle @-@ shaped or egg @-@ shaped , and have apices that are often covered with a resinous secretion . The hyphae that comprise the cap cuticle are up to 3 @.@ 5 µm wide , clamped , and covered with cylindrical excrescences that measure 2 – 9 by 1 – 3 µm . The hyphae of the cortical layer of the stem are up to 4 @.@ 5 µm wide , clamped , and densely covered with simple to somewhat branched , cylindrical to inflated excrescences that are up to 20 by 5 µm . These latter excrescences are embedded in gelatinous matter . 
 = = = Similar species = = = 
 Mycena adonis , M. <unk> , and M. leptophylla are larger species belonging to the section <unk> of the genus Mycena . In that section , among other differences , the hyphae of the cortical layer ( the outer layer of tissue ) of the stem are smooth . M. oregonensis is similar in appearance to M. acicula , but the cap is yellower , the gills are broadly adnate or decurrent with a short tooth , the gill edge is orange to bright yellow , and the stem is dry , not sticky . The hyphae of the cortical layer of the stem are smooth and not embedded in gelatinous matter , and in European collections the basidia are two @-@ spored and do not have clamps . M. strobilinoides , a North American and European species , looks similar with its orange cap , but may be distinguished microscopically by the cheilocystidia which are densely covered by excrescences ; it also has a larger cap , up to 2 cm ( 0 @.@ 8 in ) . M. aurantiidisca can be distinguished by the reddish @-@ orange cap which tends to become paler at the margin . Mycena specialist Alexander H. Smith further noted of M. acicula that it could readily be mistaken for a Hygrophorus . 
 = = Habitat and distribution = = 
 The fruit bodies of Mycena acicula grow singly , in groups , or somewhat clustered on debris in wet places , especially along streams or the borders of swamps . The appearance of the fruit bodies is not significantly influenced by the effect of rainfall , perhaps because " such minute fungi are largely determined by the microenvironment prevailing under dense vegetation , etc . , which is no doubt less affected by recent rain than more exposed situations . " The fungus is widely distributed throughout the eastern United States and Canada and occurs in Washington , Oregon , and California along the Pacific Coast . It has also been reported from Trinidad , Britain , Norway , Spain , Korea , and the Ussuri River Valley in the northeast of China . 
 = Arthur Jackson ( sport shooter ) = 
 Lieutenant Colonel Arthur Charles Jackson ( May 15 , 1918 – January 6 , 2015 ) was an American competitive sport shooter . In his international career , he captured numerous medals across three Summer Olympic Games , three ISSF World Shooting Championships , and two editions of the Pan American Games . He began shooting in the seventh grade and joined the rifle team at Brooklyn Technical High School in 1934 . He competed in local and regional tournaments prior to World War II , during which he worked at the Sperry Corporation and later served as a bombardier in the Pacific Theater of Operations . His first international tournament was the 1948 Summer Olympics and his last was the 1956 edition , at which point he began a career in public service with the Central Intelligence Agency in Europe , Asia , and Latin America . He stopped competing at the international level in 1957 and retired from the CIA at the end of 1974 . After several years as an instructor and coach , he continued participating in smaller tournaments through the 1990s . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Jackson was born on May 15 , 1918 in Brooklyn . He first started shooting during the seventh grade , when his hobby of shooting marbles cost him his job at a dry cleaning and tailoring shop . He attended Brooklyn Technical High School , where he joined the rifle team after saving for a year to afford the fifteen cent ammunition fee for the tryouts . He won his first team event in 1934 at a tournament in New Haven , Connecticut , obtaining individual honors in the process , and followed it up in 1936 with a group trophy and another individual accolade at a competition held at his high school and sponsored by the New York Stock Exchange . Following graduation , he briefly worked at General Motors prior to taking up a position at an engineering firm that specialized in diesel engines . 
 Jackson also followed his sporting pursuits after graduation and soon joined the Woodhaven American Legion Auxiliary Rifle Club , where his coach was Morris Fisher , a five @-@ time Olympic gold medalist . After taking part in several regional tournaments , with varying degrees of success , he enrolled in the Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn ( now the Polytechnic Institute of New York University ) in 1939 and began competing in the collegiate league . His success in local and state events grew and he continued participating in these and regional tournaments prior to the United States ' entry into World War II . 
 = = World War II and competitive career = = 
 By 1942 Jackson had held a job at the Sperry Corporation for several years and his work was considered essential to the war effort . With a brother serving overseas , he was not permitted to train for combat until June 1944 , at which point he signed up for the Air Corps branch of the United States Army . He trained to be a bombardier at what is now Webb Air Force Base in Big Spring , Texas and graduated with the rank of second lieutenant . He served briefly as an instructor and then a combatant in the Pacific Theater of Operations until the surrender of Japan . He left the army in 1946 with the rank of First Lieutenant . 
 Upon his return to New York , Jackson joined the Long Island Antlers Club and resumed competitive sport shooting , as well as his career at Sperry 's . He was admitted into St. John 's University on a shooting scholarship , but declined , and instead entered the Clarence H. White School of Modern Photography . During his studies he earned a spot on the United States ' delegation to shooting at the 1948 Summer Olympics , where he finished 16th in a field of 36 competitors in the 300 metre rifle three positions event . He then took up a job at the Pratt Institute in the photography department and began training for the 1949 ISSF World Shooting Championships , where he won gold in the 50 + 100 m rifle prone position individual event and silver in the team version . In 1950 he turned down a position as head of promotions at the Winchester Repeating Arms Company so that he could continue competing , with his next international stop being the 1951 Pan American Games . Here he captured the only two gold medals not won by the Argentinians in individual events , the three positions and prone rifle competitions at 50 meters , as well as silver in the high power rifle , three positions at 50 meters tournament . Upon his return , he was ordered to Lowry Air Force Base in Denver , Colorado to join the Radar Photo Interpreters ' School . Following graduation , he reported to Strategic Air Command in Roswell , New Mexico . 
 Jackson was eventually sent to Selfridge Air National Guard Base in Michigan to help form the first Air Force Rifle Team and trained at Palm Beach Air Force Base in West Palm Beach , Florida during the winter months . His next international stop was the 1952 ISSF World Shooting Championships , where he took home gold in the 50 m rifle prone position with 60 ( individual and team ) and 40 shots ( individual ) and the bronze in the 300 m standard rifle ( individual ) and 50 m rifle prone position with 40 shots ( team ) . He then traveled to the 1952 Summer Olympics , where he won a bronze medal in the 50 metre rifle prone event and finished 12th in a field of 44 competitors in the 50 m rifle three positions tournament . Upon his return to the United States , he discovered that he had been promoted to the rank of Captain . 
 The 1954 ISSF World Shooting Championships were dominated by the Soviet Union , but Jackson still managed to take home a gold medal as a member of the United States ' 50 + 100 m rifle prone position team . He fared better at the 1955 Pan American Games , taking home gold medals in both the individual and team versions of the rifle , three positions and prone at 50 meters , as well as the team high power rifle , three positions at 50 meters . He married Nancy Ord in 1956 and began training for that year 's Summer Olympics , where he again finished 12th in a field of 44 competitors in the 50 m rifle three positions event and 31st in among 44 participants in the 50 metre rifle prone tournament . 
 = = Later life = = 
 Following the 1956 Games Jackson began working overseas with the Central Intelligence Agency , first in Germany where he joined the Rhein @-@ Main Gun Club . He participated in the 1957 Swiss National Championships and temporarily retired shortly thereafter . He was soon offered a chance to be a judge at the 1958 ISSF World Shooting Championships , but was forced to decline due to his obligations with the CIA . Following his activities in Europe , he settled down in Annandale , Virginia , resumed his CIA duties in Washington , D.C. , and became a member of the Fairfax Gun Club . He was sent to the Republic of China in 1962 , and then Japan the following year , before he was able to return to Virginia in 1965 , but by 1968 he was back in Japan for a four @-@ year stint . He next spent two years in the Panama Canal Zone before retiring from the CIA and the Air Force with the rank of Lieutenant colonel at the end of 1974 and soon moved to Wolfeboro , New Hampshire . From 1978 through 1983 he took up work as a shooting instructor and coach around New England and continued competing in tournaments through the 1990s . In 2011 was the presenter for the National Rifle Association 's Henry Fulton Trophy , awarded to the highest scorer in the team match of their Palma Championship . He was made a member of the Connecticut State Rifle and Revolver Association Shooters Hall of Fame in 1985 and the United States International Shooting Hall of Fame in 1999 . The Arthur C. Jackson Trophy , awarded by the NRA to the highest scorer at the World Black Powder Long Range International Championships , is named in his honor . He died at the age of 96 on January 6 , 2015 in Concord , New Hampshire . 
 = Doro ( musician ) = 
 Dorothee Pesch ( born 3 June 1964 ) , popularly known as Doro Pesch or Doro , is a German hard rock singer @-@ songwriter , formerly front @-@ woman of the heavy metal band Warlock . The name Doro has also been associated with the touring band accompanying the singer , whose members have continuously changed in more than twenty years of uninterrupted activity , the most stable presences guaranteed by bassist Nick Douglas and drummer Johnny Dee . 
 Doro started her career in garage bands in native Düsseldorf underground scene and achieved media visibility and some commercial success with Warlock in the 1980s . Warlock were starting to have an opening in the US market , when they went through many line @-@ up changes and Pesch was left the only original member of the band . She started a solo career under the name Doro , in order to avoid legal battles between her record label PolyGram and her former manager . She released two albums in the US with producers Joey Balin and Gene Simmons , but they were not the breakthrough that she hoped . 
 During the rise of grunge and alternative rock in the 1990s , her record label relegated her productions only to the European region , where she continued to tour extensively . She remained a successful charting artist in Germany , despite living and producing her albums in the US . When classic heavy metal found again the favour of the public , she returned to tour all over the world and her popularity as a veteran singer grew considerably , inspiring many new female metal artists . Doro is also known for her duets performed both live and in studio with other singers and musicians of the metal scene , whom she has befriended in her long career . 
 To this date , she has released sixteen studio albums , the latest being Raise Your Fist in 2012 . Doro continues her recording career and is prolific touring artist all over the world . When not on tour , she resides in New York City . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Beginnings = = = 
 Dorothee Pesch was born in Düsseldorf , Germany on 3 June 1964 , the only child of Walter , a truck driver , and Barbara Pesch . Doro 's first memory of rock music is the song " Lucille " by Little Richard , which she sang when she was three years old . She learned to play piano and started singing at the age of ten years , when she was exposed to the glam rock of bands like T. Rex , Sweet and Slade . When she was sixteen and after a life @-@ threatening form of tuberculosis , she decided to dedicate more of her time and energy to singing , without giving up her study of graphic design . In 1980 , she was accepted in her first band called Snakebite , which was playing rock music in a Düsseldorf basement used as rehearsal space by many other underground groups . The first recording with Doro on vocals was a cheap 7 @-@ track demo released by Snakebite for promotion . When Snakebite disbanded in 1981 , Doro went on to sing for the garage bands Beast and Attack , before forming Warlock with Peter Szigeti , Rudy Graf , Thomas <unk> , and Michael <unk> in 1982 . 
 = = = The Warlock years ( 1982 – 1988 ) = = = 
 Warlock signed their first recording contract with Mausoleum Records and released their debut album Burning the Witches in 1984 . Doro attracted immediately the attention of fans and press , becoming the spokesperson and the main means of promotion for the band . The mix of traditional heavy metal and power ballads , together with her voice and stage presence led Warlock to success , an exception in the 80s ' metal scene dominated by male @-@ fronted metal bands . Warlock signed a new contract with the major label Phonogram and released the albums Hellbound in 1985 and True as Steel in 1986 , sharing the stage of European rock festivals with some of the best hard rock and heavy metal bands of the period . On 16 August 1986 , Doro was the first woman to front a metal band at the Monsters of Rock festival in Castle Donington , England , the most important European rock meeting of the 80s . Warlock 's long tours in Europe , supporting W.A.S.P. and Judas Priest , pushed Doro to give up her day job as a graphic designer to devote her life to music . In this period she also received vocal coaching . 
 After the completion of the tour in support of True as Steel , Doro took charge of business and went to live in New York City , USA , where Warlock recorded their fourth and last studio album Triumph and Agony . The album was their most successful , going Gold in Germany and reaching No. 80 in the Billboard 200 US album chart . It includes the songs " All We Are " and " Für immer " ( Forever ) , Warlock 's best known tracks , also because of the intense rotation of their videos on MTV . Warlock opened for Dio in Europe and embarked on their only US tour , supporting Megadeth . At the end of the US tour , Doro remained the sole German in the band after all the other original members had quit , replaced by American musicians . In 1989 , while writing material for a new album , she lost a legal cause with the band 's former manager for the rights to the name and merchandise of Warlock . Her record label forced her to accept the publication of new albums under the name Doro , in order to continue her career . Doro persevered in the legal battle for the Warlock name and eventually regained the rights in 2011 . 
 = = = Doro in the US ( 1989 – 1990 ) = = = 
 What should have been the fifth Warlock release became Force Majeure , the first Doro album , published in February 1989 . It was recorded in the US by Joey Balin , and is the natural successor of Triumph and Agony , continuing the band 's drift towards radio @-@ friendly pop metal in contrast with the European power metal of Warlock ’ s earlier works . The album sold quite well in Europe , but it had limited success in the US , lurking at the bottom of the Billboard 200 chart . 
 Following the tour to promote Force Majeure , the final Warlock line @-@ up disbanded and Doro concentrated on her solo career . She decided to keep her Swiss manager Alex Grob , but renounced to be part of a band with whom to share songwriting duties and career decisions . She contacted KISS bassist and childhood idol Gene Simmons , who was taking a second career as talent scout and record producer . Simmons was willing to start a collaboration and produced the album Doro , with the help of Black ' n Blue guitarist Tommy Thayer and Pat Regan . Doro was recorded in California with large use of writers and session musicians from the KISS entourage . Doro recently declared that Simmons " was the best producer we ever had ! " 
 A band formed by the American musicians Thomas Jude on guitars , Paul Morris on keyboards , Nick Douglas on bass and Tom Coombs on drums was assembled for the supporting tour . Doro was a more commercial offering than the previous album , but resulted in a flop in the US . On the contrary , it sold well in Europe , accelerating PolyGram 's decision to interrupt the publication of Doro 's albums in America , where the commercial appeal of glam metal and classic rock acts was rapidly declining in favor of grunge and alternative rock . Doro concluded 1990 playing some dates in Germany , opening for Scorpions . 
 = = = Doro in Europe ( 1991 – 1999 ) = = = 
 The German singer experimented a new direction for her music in 1991 , when she recorded the album True at Heart in country music haven Nashville , Tennessee , with local musicians and mainstream producer Barry Beckett . Dann Huff of the melodic hard rock band Giant contributed his lead guitar work to the album . New band members Michael Tyrrell on guitar , Jeff Bruno on guitar and keyboards , and Tony Mac on drums were recruited for the following European tour . 
 Despite living in the US and losing visibility in the English @-@ spoken media , Doro remained very popular in Germany , where her albums always charted and where in 1991 she sang on a charity song by the " German Rock Project " called " Let Love Conquer the World " . 
 Returning in the US after the European tour , Doro was put in contact with Jack Ponti , a mainstream songwriter and producer from New Jersey , to work on her next two albums . Ponti at the time was the producer of some minor glam metal acts and the A & R manager of Skid Row and Nelson . The album Angels Never Die , released in 1993 , was produced and largely written and performed by Ponti himself and Vic Pepe with the help of various session musicians . It contains a mix of melodic hard rock songs and power ballads , typical of the commercial pop metal albums of the period . The album had limited success in Europe , but the video for the song " Bad Blood " was voted Best Anti @-@ Racism Video during the first MTV Europe Music Awards ceremony in 1994 . The tour in support of Angels Never Die introduced in the line @-@ up of Doro 's band the American musicians Joe Taylor ( ex @-@ Lita Ford Band ) on lead guitar , Jimmy DiLella ( ex @-@ <unk> , Mariah and <unk> ) on guitar and keyboards , and Chris Branco on drums ; Branco was soon replaced by Johnny Dee ( ex @-@ <unk> and Britny Fox ) and this line @-@ up recorded in 1993 the live album Doro Live , released also in VHS . Doro headlined her first Wacken Open Air festival on 20 August 1993 . 
 Machine II Machine , the second album produced by Jack Ponti , was created through the collaborative efforts of musicians with very different musical backgrounds . The result is an album that explores new grounds for Doro , bringing her sound closer to mainstream rock music . Machine II Machine was mixed by Kevin Shirley and released in 1995 . It was her last studio album published by PolyGram / Vertigo , finally fulfilling the ten @-@ year contract with the label that Warlock had signed in 1985 . PolyGram did not renovate her contract and Doro entered in negotiations with other record labels . Russ Irwin and Frank Ferrer replaced respectively DiLella and Dee for the following tour . In a pause of her touring schedule in October 1995 , Doro made her acting debut as a guest star on the German television soap opera <unk> Liebe ( Forbidden Love ) . In various interviews Doro remembered how " it was pretty difficult to carry on " as a heavy metal musician in those years and how she was sometimes reduced to odd jobs like singing at weddings and private parties . 
 Doro signed a worldwide contract with the major record label WEA ( now Warner Music Group ) at the end of 1995 and started writing new material with Jürgen Engler and Chris <unk> of the German industrial metal and EBM band Die Krupps , who she had met while working on remixes of songs from Machine II Machine . Doro also worked on other songs with Jimmy Harry and Fred Maher in the US . The resulting album , titled Love Me in Black , took three years to be completed and features a massive use of electronics and drum machines , along with a heavier sound than its predecessors . WEA judged the album unsuitable for the US market and published it only in Germany . American guitarist Mario <unk> ( ex @-@ <unk> and Fear of God ) joined Taylor , Douglas and the returning Johnny Dee in Doro 's band for the following tour , which included another participation at the Wacken Open Air festival . 
 After the " Love Me in Black " tour in 1998 , Doro parted ways with WEA , unsatisfied of the scarce promotion that the album had received , and signed with the German label SPV / <unk> . Through the decisive action of her American fan club , she also received and accepted a proposal from Koch Records for a US deal . 
 = = = The return ( 2000 – 2003 ) = = = 
 In 2000 , the album Calling the Wild was published in two different versions in Europe and in the US , with the latter containing also re @-@ recorded and remixed versions of songs from Love Me in Black . The tracks of Calling the Wild are played by a large number of session musicians and feature contributions from Bob <unk> , Slash , Al Pitrelli and Eric Singer . The album includes the songs " Love Me Forever " and " Alone Again " , recorded in California with the leader of the English band Motörhead Ian ' Lemmy ' <unk> , starting a tradition of singing duets that Doro maintained for all the 2000s and beyond . The music of Calling the Wild is straight hard rock and heavy metal , in Doro 's words going " from super heavy to super sensitive with good messages " , and leaves behind the experimental twists of her works of the 1990s . The song " Burn It Up " was written to be the anthem of the Düsseldorf – based NFL Europe football team Rhein Fire . 
 At the beginning of the century heavy metal was regaining the favors of the public worldwide and Doro made her comeback in the US with a date at New Jersey Metal Meltdown II festival in March . She then started her first US tour in ten years supporting Dio and Yngwie Malmsteen , and received a very warm welcome from the audience . Doro 's band toured also in Europe , visiting Russia for the first time , and Pesch made a guest appearance at Wacken Open Air 2001 for a duet with Sabina Classen of the German thrash metal band Holy Moses on the song " Too Drunk to Fuck " . 
 While touring with Dio in the US in late 2000 , Mario <unk> fell ill and died a short time later from an undiagnosed form of cancer . Oliver Palotai , a young German @-@ Hungarian classically trained musician , took his place on guitar and keyboards in Doro 's band after the end of the tour . 
 Doro was again in a recording studio to produce her eighth studio album , titled Fight , in 2002 . Before the album release , she played , among others , at the two largest German metal festivals , Wacken Open Air and Bang Your Head ! ! ! . The new album was the first to feature the creative contribution of all the members of her touring band , who played in all the tracks . Guest musicians on the album were Jean Beauvoir , Chris Caffery , Russ Ballard and Type O Negative singer Peter Steele , who sang in a duet with Doro on " Descent " . The song " Always Live to Win " replaced " Burn It Up " as Rhein Fire 's anthem , while the song " Fight " was the first of four anthems composed by Doro and used to introduce the fights of her friend and German female boxing champion Regina Halmich ( the others are " She 's Like Thunder " , " The Queen " and a new version of " All We Are " ) . Because of her friendship with Halmich , Doro was involved in an exhibition match on German RTL Television , which opposed her to Michaela <unk> . 
 = = = Metal Queen ( 2003 – present ) = = = 
 By this time , both fans , press and internet community often referred to Doro with the moniker Metal Queen , to show their respect and deference for the uninterrupted career of the German singer on the heavy metal scene . During her European tour with Saxon , Bonfire and Circle II Circle , Doro organized a special concert at Phillips Halle in Düsseldorf to celebrate the 20th anniversary of the release of her first album , Burning the Witches , and invited many musicians that she had befriended and collaborated with in her career . On 13 December 2003 , she performed in front of more than 6 @,@ 000 people with guests Blaze Bayley , Udo <unk> , Lemmy , Mikkey Dee , Jean Beauvoir , Claus <unk> and members of Saxon and Circle II Circle . During the show , Doro played three songs with her former bandmates of Warlock , in their line @-@ up of 1986 . The concert was released on a double DVD in 2006 with the title 20 Years – A Warrior Soul . 
 The long world tour to promote Fight brought Doro for the first time in some countries of Eastern Europe , in Australia and Thailand . Live footage from that tour was published in the double DVD Für <unk> of 2003 , which went Gold in Germany . She also held two concerts in Germany with a full symphonic orchestra , where she converted her rock songs to new acoustic and classical versions . These new live experiences pushed her to experiment the recording of a full acoustic and symphonic album , containing both new and re @-@ arranged songs . The production of Classic Diamonds took eight months , requiring a thirty @-@ elements symphonic orchestra and the arranging abilities of Oliver Palotai and producer Torsten Sickert to be completed . The album was released by AFM Records in September 2004 , and Doro went on tour in Europe with her usual touring band and elements of the orchestra to offer semi @-@ acoustic shows . The tour had started with a live performance of Doro and the Classic Night Orchestra at Wacken Open Air 2004 , the first time ever of a full symphonic orchestra at the renowned German metal festival . Her acoustic performance included also a duet with Blaze Bayley on the Iron Maiden song " Fear of the Dark " . In the same night , Doro was reunited again with her bandmates of Warlock to perform their old songs . 
 The EP Let Love Rain on Me , containing single versions of songs from Classic Diamonds , was an unexpected hit in Spain , where it reached No. 7 in the Singles chart . 
 In 2004 , Doro recorded with actor Dirk Bach a metal version of the song " Gimme Gimme Gimme " and performed it live on stage on the ABBA Mania Show of German RTL Television . 
 Doro Pesch was cast as the warrior <unk> in the prehistoric action movie Anuk @-@ Der Weg des <unk> ( Anuk @-@ The Way of the Warrior ) , written , directed and interpreted by Luke Gasser and shot in Switzerland in 2005 . The film was released in 2006 and features also Marc Storace , lead singer of the Swiss hard rock band Krokus . During the period of shooting , she wrote and recorded new songs in Switzerland with local session musicians and the production of Gasser , who used three of those songs for the soundtrack of the movie . More songs were recorded in Germany in the spare time between tours with her band and usual collaborators , and released in 2006 in the album Warrior Soul . The screenplay for a second movie with the same cast was written in the following years and Gasser finally found the funding to start production in 2012 . 
 In the same year , Doro Pesch contributed to the benefit CD for the museum association of Borussia Dortmund the song entitled " Tief in meinem Herzen " ( Deep in My Heart ) , a modified version of her classic " Für <unk> " re @-@ written for this purpose . She also did a live performance at the Westfalen Stadium before a game of Borussia Dortmund and was one of the first visitors in <unk> , when it opened . Her father was a fan of Borussia , she said in an interview with the spokesperson of the <unk> . 
