 In the following tour Doro was present at various festivals around the world . Among them , the band headlined the very first female @-@ fronted metal US festival Flight of the Valkyries on 27 June 2007 in Saint Paul , Minnesota . They were also at the Summer Breeze Open Air festival in <unk> , Bavaria in August 2007 , at the fifth edition of the Metal Female Voices Fest in <unk> , Belgium on 19 October 2007 , where she dueted with Sabina Classen on " All We Are " , and at the Heavy Christmas Meeting on 15 December 2007 in Düsseldorf . On July 2008 , they were at the Magic Circle Festival in Bad <unk> , Germany and at Hard Rock Hell in Prestatyn , Wales on 5 December 2008 . Doro 's band visited for the first time China in November 2008 . Chris Caffery replaced Joe Taylor on lead guitar for some US dates in 2007 , and also Oliver Palotai had to be replaced in various tour dates by Italian guitarist Luca Princiotta , because of his multiple commitments with Blaze , Kamelot and Sons of Seasons . 
 Both Taylor and Palotai were in the band on 13 December 2008 at the more than three @-@ hour special concert that Doro held at ISS Dome in Düsseldorf to celebrate her 25th anniversary of activity in front of 9 @,@ 000 spectators . The show was introduced by performances of the bands Holy Moses , Leaves ' Eyes and Arch Enemy . The main part began with songs from Doro 's career , including duets with Bobby Ellsworth ( Overkill ) , Jean Beauvoir , Chris <unk> ( Grave Digger ) , Axel Rudi Pell , Klaus Meine and Rudolf Schenker ( Scorpions ) , Tarja Turunen ( ex @-@ Nightwish ) , <unk> Dane ( Nevermore ) , Liv Kristine , Floor Jansen , Ji @-@ In Cho , Girlschool and other female singers who had sung in the single " Celebrate " , issued a few months before the show . The show included another reunion of the 1986 formation of Warlock and culminated with all the guests , other musicians ( like Alexander Krull , Tom <unk> , members of <unk> Mortis ) and friends of the German singer on stage to sing " All We Are " . The event was recorded and released in 2010 in the double DVD 25 Years in Rock ... and Still Going Strong by Nuclear Blast , Doro 's new record label . 
 A few days after the show and despite a precarious health state due to strong eye inflammation , Doro was in Tilburg , the Netherlands , to participate at the first edition of Christmas Metal Symphony , where she sang accompanied by a band of Dutch metal musicians and by a symphonic orchestra . 
 Doro 's album Fear No Evil was released in January 2009 and entered in many charts all over Europe . It was her last collaboration with guitarist Joe Taylor , who left to join Cycle of Pain . His place in the band was taken by the Dutch guitarist Bas Maas ( ex @-@ After Forever ) . The line @-@ up of Pesch , Maas , Princiotta , Douglas and Dee went on a world tour for most of 2009 and 2010 , reaching North and South America , Russia , China and , for the first time , Japan . Doro supported Saxon in their 2009 UK tour and Motörhead in Germany in 2010 . During this prolonged time on the road , guitarist Princiotta was sometimes substituted by Robert <unk> or by Harrison Young . Doro 's band appeared at festivals all over the world , including Wacken Open Air and Metal Female Voices Fest 7 ( where she dueted again with Tarja Turunen ) in 2009 , Hellfest in France , Bang Your Head ! ! ! in Germany and Bloodstock Open Air in Great Britain in 2010 . 
 In 2009 , she wrote the Wacken anthem " We Are the <unk> " for the 20th anniversary of Wacken Open Air festival . The song was released as single on 30 July 2009 and was performed by Doro Pesch and Wacken @-@ organizer Thomas Jensen 's ex @-@ band Skyline . 
 On 13 March 2010 , Doro celebrated her <unk> live show with a special concert in Düsseldorf with guests <unk> , Luke Gasser , Marc Storace , <unk> ( from the band Destruction ) , Sabina and Andy Classen . Always in 2010 , Doro , <unk> , Mille <unk> ( Kreator ) and Alf <unk> ( <unk> ) lent their voices to the German version of Metalocalypse , the US animated show about Dethklok , the world 's most popular death metal band . 
 Doro was again on tour in 2011 and participated at Metal Female Voices Fest 9 . She also toured Spain and Italy as guest vocalist for the tribute band Dio Disciples , formed by musicians of the band Dio which performed songs taken from the long career of the late Ronnie James Dio . In 2010 , she had already participated in Germany to a tribute benefit concert for the Stand Up and Shout Cancer foundation for cancer research , which celebrated the life and work of Dio . 
 In 2012 she recorded in the US , Germany and Scandinavia songs for a new album titled Raise Your Fist , released in October . The first single " Raise Your Fist in the Air " was released in August 2012 . 
 In June 2013 , the music magazine Metal Hammer assigned Doro the Golden God Legend award . 
 To celebrate her 30th stage anniversary , Doro held a two @-@ day concert at CCD Stadthalle in her hometown of Düsseldorf on 2 and 3 May 2014 . She was accompanied by the Classic Night Orchestra for the first show . Guest singers included Biff Byford , Chris Caffery , Udo <unk> , Blaze Bailey , Marc Storace , Tom <unk> , Mr Lordi and Hansi <unk> . Also the Lordi @-@ guitarist Amen was featured on the show on May 2 . 
 = = Duets = = 
 Doro Pesch is well known in the metal scene for her many duets with both expert singers and new artists . The duets started to indulge the wish of the German singer to work with artists that she admired and that had influenced her . She found the amicable availability of many musicians she had met in her career to contribute to her albums and live performances and , as an exchange of favors between singers , she appeared both in live shows and in studio albums of those same artists . This happened , for example , with Udo <unk> in the rock ballad " Dancing with an Angel " and with Twisted Sister on the song " White Christmas " on their album A Twisted Christmas of 2004 . 
 Also new bands and artists requested Doro 's vocals to enhance their productions , usually with the same mechanism of reciprocity , like After Forever on the song " Who I Am " and Tarja Turunen on the song " The Seer " . Both After Forever 's singer Floor Jansen and Turunen appeared also as guest singers in Doro 's albums and live shows . The band <unk> , which had opened for Doro in the tours of 2009 and 2010 , obtained a duet with Ji @-@ In Cho on their song " Victoria " in a similar way . 
 Frequent occasions for live duets happen during tours , such as the 2010 European tour with Motörhead , when Doro sang on stage with Lemmy their classic tunes " Killed by Death " and " Born to Raise Hell " , or with Saxon in 2011 on " Denim & Leather " . 
 More recently , Doro has contributed to the song " A Dream That Cannot Be " by Swedish melodic death metal band Amon Amarth , on their album <unk> , released in 2016 . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 In the 1980s the presence of women in rock , and in particular in heavy metal bands , was usually considered by press and fans more for glamour and sexual exploitation than for the musicianship showed . Doro Pesch was one of the few exceptions ; her qualities as vocalist and songwriter in Warlock , her commitment in promoting their music and her avoidance of posturing as a sex symbol won the respect of a solid fan base in the expanding European metal scene of that period , ensuring a long string of favorable articles and covers on the principal European metal magazines . In an interview in 2006 Doro remembered how " we lived in paradise and had not noticed it , ( ... ) we thought at the time , that now it goes on and on and the success would continue automatically , ( ... ) then came the great awakening " . 
 Warlock were starting to make a solid reputation in the US , when the taste of the audience for classic metal acts shifted in favor of grunge , leaving the singer 's mission to conquer the American market incomplete . On the contrary , in her home country fans and press remained always loyal and favorable to Doro , who received in her career five nominations for the German Echo music award , which she won in 1994 as Best National Female Artist . 
 Her frequent European tours in the 1990s maintained her visibility in the eyes of the fans and granted her enough income to survive the bleak period . She became so popular in Spain that she was voted for 13 times Best International Singer by the readers of the music magazine Heavy Rock in their annual polls . She often declared to live and tour for the fans and said that she " would never cancel a tour and everybody knows that about me " . Lemmy , in a 2003 interview , testified how nice and professional Doro is . 
 With the return of heavy metal in the charts worldwide and the diffusion on the internet of hundreds of <unk> and fanzines dedicated to hard rock , Doro became again a star of the metal scene , highly requested all over the world and treated by the media as a revered veteran and inspiration for new female singers . Her career and commitment are held in high esteem by the new generation of female heavy metal singers . As Floor Jansen of After Forever stated in a 2007 interview , to duet with Doro " was a huge honor and we chose her because she was a pioneer of the female fronted scene " . Doro herself was apparently aware early in her career to have the role " to give other women self @-@ confidence " in the metal world , acting as a pioneer for female fans and musicians . 
 As further evidence of her influence on the heavy metal scene , in December 2008 Pure Steel Records released Tribute to Steel : A Tribute to Warlock , the first official tribute album to Warlock and Doro ; the album includes contributions from bands like Custard , Crystal Viper , Sabaton and <unk> , paying homage to the songs of Doro 's first four albums with the participation of Warlock 's original members . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Doro Pesch has always been very reserved and careful in protecting her privacy off @-@ stage . She consciously renounced a family and children in order to dedicate all of her time to her musical career and her fans . The lyrics of the song " You Are My Family " , which opens the album Warrior Soul , exemplify this decision . After the death of her father in 2000 , her mother Barbara manages the Doro fan club . 
 She has homes in Düsseldorf , Germany and in Long Island , New York , where she usually resided when not on tour , until her house was destroyed by Hurricane Irene in August 2011 . She received her green card to live and work in the USA in 1991 . Doro owns , together with former Die Krupps members Chris <unk> and Jürgen Engler , Atom H recording studios in Düsseldorf , where she has recorded some of her albums . 
 Doro 's stage clothes are handmade , following models she designs and using synthetic materials which imitate leather after the singer 's adhesion to PETA . She also supports the no @-@ profit organization Terre des Femmes , which helps women and girls in need all over the world . Doro has been a trained Thai boxer , sport that she started practicing in 1995 . She still enjoys graphic arts and painting in her limited free time . 
 = = Touring band = = 
 Current line @-@ up 
 Doro Pesch ( 1988 – present ) – vocals 
 Nick Douglas ( 1990 – present ) – bass , keyboards , backing vocals 
 Johnny Dee ( 1993 – 1995 , 1998 – present ) – drums , percussion , backing vocals 
 Bas Maas ( 2008 – present ) – guitars , backing vocals 
 Luca Princiotta ( 2009 – present ) – guitar , keyboards , backing vocals 
 Former 
 Jon Levin ( 1988 – 1989 ) – guitars 
 Tommy Henriksen ( 1988 – 1989 ) – bass 
 Bobby Rondinelli ( 1988 – 1989 ) – drums 
 Paul Morris ( 1989 – 1990 ) – keyboards 
 Thomas Jude ( 1990 ) – guitars 
 Tom Coombs ( 1990 ) – drums 
 Michael Tyrrell aka Michael Shawn ( 1991 – 1992 ) – guitars 
 Jeff Bruno ( 1991 – 1992 ) – guitar , keyboards 
 Tony Mac ( 1991 – 1992 ) – drums 
 Chris Branco ( 1993 ) – drums 
 Jimmy DiLella ( 1993 – 1995 ) – guitar , keyboards 
 Joe Taylor ( 1993 – 2009 ) – guitars 
 Russ Irwin ( 1995 – 1996 ) – guitar , keyboards 
 Frank Ferrer ( 1995 – 1996 ) – drums 
 Mario <unk> ( 1998 – 2001 ) – guitar , keyboards 
 Oliver Palotai ( 2001 – 2011 ) – guitar , keyboards 
 Robert <unk> ( 2008 ) – guitars 
 Harrison Young ( 2009 – 2015 ) – guitar , keyboards , backing vocals 
 = = Discography = = 
 = = = With Warlock = = = 
 Burning the Witches ( 1984 ) 
 Hellbound ( 1985 ) 
 True as Steel ( 1986 ) 
 Triumph and Agony ( 1987 ) 
 = = = Solo albums = = = 
 Force Majeure ( 1989 ) 
 Doro ( 1990 ) 
 True at Heart ( 1991 ) 
 Angels Never Die ( 1993 ) 
 Machine II Machine ( 1995 ) 
 Love Me in Black ( 1998 ) 
 Calling the Wild ( 2000 ) 
 Fight ( 2002 ) 
 Classic Diamonds ( 2004 ) 
 Warrior Soul ( 2006 ) 
 Fear No Evil ( 2009 ) 
 Raise Your Fist ( 2012 ) 
 Strong and Proud ( 2016 ) 
 = Eric Nystrom = 
 Eric Thore Nystrom ( born February 14 , 1983 ) is an American professional ice hockey left winger who is currently an unrestricted free agent of the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . He was a first round selection of the Calgary Flames , taken 10th overall in the 2002 NHL Entry Draft , and made his NHL debut with Calgary in 2005 . Nystrom has also played for the Minnesota Wild , Dallas Stars and Nashville Predators . He played four seasons of college hockey with the Michigan Wolverines before he turned professional . On four occasions , Nystrom has played with the United States national team , most recently at the 2010 World Championship . He is the son of former NHL player Bob Nystrom . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Nystrom was born and raised in Syosset , New York , where his father , Bob , was an NHL player for the New York Islanders . Bob , who was himself born in Sweden but grew up in Hinton , Alberta , won four consecutive Stanley Cups between 1980 and 1983 . Bob coached his son during his formative years in hockey . Nystrom is Jewish as is his mother , and became a Bar Mitzvah . He attended high school at <unk> School in Locust Valley , New York . He has an older sister , Marissa . 
 Nystrom grew up playing several sports , including soccer and baseball , and only seriously considered a hockey career in his mid @-@ teens . While Eric was regarded as an NHL prospect himself , his father encouraged him to seek an education first , which the younger Nystrom did upon earning a scholarship to play for the University of Michigan Wolverines in 2000 . He spent four years at Michigan where he earned a degree in liberal arts . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior and college = = = 
 Nystrom established a hard @-@ working style similar to his father 's , which helped earn him an invite to play with the US National Development Program ( <unk> ) . He played 55 games for <unk> in the North American Hockey League in 1999 – 2000 , scoring seven goals and 23 points . He split the 2000 – 01 season with the national under @-@ 18 program and the junior team in the United States Hockey League , also representing the United States at the 2001 IIHF World U18 Championships . He later represented the United States at the 2002 and 2003 World Junior Ice Hockey Championships . 
 He moved onto the University of Michigan , earning a place on the Central Collegiate Hockey Association ( CCHA ) All @-@ Rookie team in 2002 after scoring 18 goals and 31 points . On the strength of that season , the Calgary Flames selected him with their first pick , 10th overall , at the 2002 NHL Entry Draft . Before turning professional , Nystrom completed his final three seasons of college eligibility , finishing with 111 points in 160 career games , and serving as the Wolverines ' captain in his senior year of 2004 – 05 . 
 = = = Calgary Flames = = = 
 Upon turning professional in 2005 , Nystrom was assigned to the Omaha Ak @-@ Sar @-@ Ben Knights of the American Hockey League ( AHL ) . He was recalled by the Flames at the start of the 2005 – 06 season and made his NHL debut against the Colorado Avalanche on October 10 , 2005 . He played two games with the Flames before being returned to the AHL to complete the season . Nystrom missed most of the 2006 – 07 after suffering a tear in his right shoulder during a pre @-@ season game . He attempted to rehab the injury and then play , before opting on surgery . The injury limited Nystrom to just 12 regular season games for Omaha , but he returned in time to play five playoff games for the Knights . 
 Nystrom split the 2007 – 08 season between the Calgary and the Quad City Flames . He appeared in 44 regular season games for Calgary , and scored his first NHL goal on October 30 , 2007 , against the Nashville Predators . He scored a career @-@ high four points , two goals and two assists , in the Flames final game of the regular season , a 7 – 1 victory over the Vancouver Canucks . Following the season , he signed a two @-@ year contract extension with the Flames . 
 Nystrom played his first full NHL season with the Flames in 2008 – 09 , playing in 76 games and scoring five goals , three of them game @-@ winning . He added a fourth game @-@ winning goal in the 2009 Stanley Cup Playoffs against the Chicago Blackhawks . He more than doubled his career high in 2009 – 10 , scoring 11 goals despite struggling through a groin injury for a large part of the season . He was invited to play with the American team at the 2010 IIHF World Championships . 
 = = = Minnesota and Dallas = = = 
 Nystrom chose to leave Calgary as a free agent , signing a three @-@ year , $ 4 @.@ 2 million contract with the Minnesota Wild on July 1 , 2010 . He scored four goals and eight assists in his first season with the Wild , a season which Nystrom admitted was not good , and " snowballed negatively " for him . The 2011 – 12 season posed early challenges for Nystrom . In a pre @-@ season game against the Edmonton Oilers , his attempt to avoid an icing call resulted in his stick getting caught up in the skates of Edmonton 's Taylor <unk> , sending the latter player crashing into the boards at high speed . <unk> suffered a broken leg and the play renewed calls for the NHL to move to no @-@ touch icing to avoid similar incidents in the future . He was waived by Minnesota prior to the season 's start , but went unclaimed by any other team and was demoted to the AHL 's Houston Aeros , with whom he appeared in one game . 
 On October 12 , 2011 , the Wild dealt him to the Dallas Stars . Minnesota had to place him through re @-@ entry waivers first , and while Dallas could have claimed him at that point and been responsible for only half of his $ 1 @.@ 4 million salary , they took on his full salary via trade so as to meet the league 's minimum payroll rules . Dallas general manager Joe Nieuwendyk praised Nystrom as being an effective penalty killer who would add depth to his team . Though he was anticipated to play in a defensive checking role , Nystrom added an offensive touch for Dallas , scoring 10 goals in his first 21 games with the team . His 12th goal of the season set a new career high , and he finished the year with 16 . 
 Due to the 2012 – 13 NHL lockout , Nystrom signed with Stavanger Oilers late November and made his debut in the Norwegian GET @-@ ligaen in a match against Vålerenga on December 20 . Nystrom had four goals and three assists in his first game . He played only six games with the team , but recorded 14 points . Returning to the NHL once the lockout was resolved , Nystrom scored 11 points in 48 games with Dallas . 
 = = = Nashville Predators = = = 
 Nystrom left the Stars as a free agent following the 2012 – 13 NHL season and signed a four @-@ year deal with the Nashville Predators worth $ 10 million . He recorded the first hat trick of his NHL career on January 24 , 2014 , against the Calgary Flames and finished with a franchise record four goals . The Predators lost the game , however , 5 – 4 in a shootout . 
 On June 29 , 2016 , Nystrom 's three @-@ year tenure with the Predators was brought to an end , as he was placed on waivers for the intent to buy @-@ out the remaining year of his contract . 
 = = Off the ice = = 
 Nystrom has frequently involved himself with charitable endeavors throughout his career . While with Quad City , he performed an on @-@ ice striptease that mimicked the one performed by the character Ned Braden in the movie Slap Shot as part of a team jersey auction . The event raised $ 30 @,@ 000 . He served as a player ambassador for the Reading ... Give it a Shot ! program as a member of the Flames and visited local schools as part of the team 's campaign to increase literacy among students . Nystrom is active with Garth Brooks ' Teammates for Kids Foundation . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = = = Regular season and playoffs = = = 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = Awards and honours = = 
 = M @-@ 61 ( Michigan highway ) = 
 M @-@ 61 is a state trunkline highway in the US state of Michigan that runs between Marion and Standish . The highway runs along the boundary area between Northern Michigan and Central Michigan in the Lower Peninsula . M @-@ 61 runs through rural forestland connecting several smaller communities together as it connects M @-@ 115 , US Highway 127 ( US 127 ) , Interstate 75 ( I @-@ 75 ) and US 23 . Less than 10 @,@ 000 vehicles a day use various segments of the roadway on average . 
 The trunkline was first designated along a portion of its current alignment by 1919 . M @-@ 61 was extended in segments through 1940 , with a truncation at the end of the 1950s . One change in routing in the 1970s resulted in the current routing of the highway . 
 = = Route description = = 
 M @-@ 61 starts in eastern Osceola County south of Marion at an intersection with M @-@ 115 . It runs eastward and meets M @-@ 66 before crossing into Clare County . The highway runs along the boundary between the regions of Northern and Central Michigan through forest land and crosses the Muskegon River en route to Harrison . There it follows Main Street into town to an intersection with 1st Street near Budd Lake . M @-@ 61 turns south at the intersection and joins the business loop of US 127 ( Bus . US 127 ) through town . Bus . US 127 / M @-@ 61 follows Clare Avenue south of the city to exit 170 on the US 127 freeway . The business loop ends , and M @-@ 61 turns east along Gladwin Road . 
 The highway passes south of Wiggins Lake as it approaches the junction with M @-@ 18 in Gladwin . The two highways run concurrently on Cedar Avenue for approximately ten blocks through downtown . M @-@ 61 leaves town on the east side near the airport . The highway continues eastward to a junction with M @-@ 30 ( Meridian Road ) in White Star on the west banks of the Smallwood Lake section of the Tittabawassee River . The highway crosses the river and runs through Wooden Shoe Village as it continues through the Au Sable State Forest , crossing extreme northern Bay County . The trunkline crosses into Arenac County before meeting I @-@ 75 and US 23 in Arenac County near Standish . 
 The Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) maintains M @-@ 61 like all other state trunkline highways in the state . As a part of these maintenance responsibilities , the department tracks the volume of traffic along its roadways using a metric called average annual daily traffic ( AADT ) . This is a measurement of the traffic along a segment of roadway for any average day of the year . The highest traffic level for M @-@ 61 in MDOT 's 2009 surveys was 9 @,@ 257 vehicles per day along the Harrison business loop . The lowest AADT was 981 vehicles daily between the Osceola – Clare county line and the Muskegon River crossing . No section of M @-@ 61 has been added to the National Highway System , a network of roads important to the country 's defense , economy and mobility . 
 = = History = = 
 On July 1 , 1919 , when the rest of the state highway system was first signed , M @-@ 61 ran between M @-@ 18 at Gladwin to M @-@ 30 at White Star . A decade later in 1929 , M @-@ 61 was extended south to Winegars along M @-@ 30 and then northeasterly zig @-@ zagging through Highwood and Bentley to Standish . This eastern extension was straightened in 1932 , bypassing the route south through Winegars and Bentley to use a direct course between White Star and Standish . At the same time , a second , discontinuous section of M @-@ 61 was created when a section of the contemporary M @-@ 63 was redesignated M @-@ 61 between US 131 at Tustin and M @-@ 115 near Marion . At the same time , additional county roads were upgraded to state highways , extending the western M @-@ 61 to US 127 in Harrison . The gap between Harrison and Gladwin was eliminated in 1940 when the roadway was built between the two towns . At the end of the 1950s , M @-@ 61 's designation was removed between M @-@ 115 and US 131 . The western end was realigned in 1974 to bypass Marion , shortening the route of M @-@ 61 . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Gospel of the Hebrews = 
 The Gospel of the Hebrews ( Greek : τὸ <unk> ' <unk> <unk> ) , or Gospel according to the Hebrews , was a syncretic Jewish – Christian gospel , the text of which is lost ; only fragments of it survive as brief quotations by the early Church Fathers and apocryphal writings such as reference table in The Lost Books of the Bible in Table 1 ( as The Gospel According to the Hebrews ) . The fragments contain traditions of Jesus ' pre @-@ existence , incarnation , baptism , and probable temptation , along with some of his sayings . Distinctive features include a Christology characterized by the belief that the Holy Spirit is Jesus ' Divine Mother and a first resurrection appearance to James , the brother of Jesus , showing a high regard for James as the leader of the Jewish Christian church in Jerusalem . It was probably composed in Greek in the first decades of the 2nd century , and is believed to have been used by Greek @-@ speaking Jewish Christians in Egypt during that century . 
 It is the only Jewish – Christian gospel which the Church Fathers referred to by name , believing there was only one Hebrew Gospel , perhaps in different versions . Passages from the gospel were quoted or summarized by three Alexandrian Fathers – Clement , Origen and Didymus the Blind ; it was also quoted by Jerome , either directly or through the commentaries of Origen . The gospel was used as a supplement to the canonical gospels to provide source material for their commentaries based on scripture . Eusebius included it in his list of disputed writings known as the <unk> , noting that it was used by " Hebrews " within the Church ; it fell out of use when the New Testament canon was codified at the end of the 4th century . 
 Modern scholars classify the Gospel of the Hebrews as one of the three Jewish – Christian gospels , along with the Gospel of the Nazarenes and the Gospel of the Ebionites . All are known today only from fragments preserved in quotations by the early Church Fathers . The relationship between the Jewish – Christian gospels and a hypothetical original Hebrew Gospel remains a speculation . 
 = = Origin and characteristics = = 
 The Gospel of the Hebrews is the only Jewish – Christian gospel which the Church Fathers refer to by name . The language of composition is thought to be Greek . The provenance has been associated with Egypt ; it probably began circulating in Alexandria , Egypt in the first decades of the 2nd century and was used by Greek @-@ speaking Jewish – Christian communities there . The communities to which they belonged were traditional , conservative Christians who followed the teaching of the primitive Christian church in Jerusalem , integrating their understanding of Jesus with strict observance of Jewish customs and law , which they regarded as essential to salvation . Despite this , the gospel displays no connection with other Jewish – Christian literature , nor does it appear to be based on the Gospel of Matthew or the other canonical gospels of what is now orthodox Christianity . Instead , it seems to be taken from alternative oral forms of the same underlying traditions . Some of the fragments suggest a syncretic gnostic influence , while others support close ties to traditional Jewish Wisdom literature . 
 = = Content = = 
 The Gospel of the Hebrews is preserved in fragments quoted or summarized by various early Church Fathers . The full extent of the original gospel is unknown ; according to a list of canonical and apocryphal works drawn up in the 9th century known as the Stichometry of Nicephorus , the gospel was 2200 lines , just 300 lines shorter than Matthew . Based on the surviving fragments , the overall structure of the gospel appears to have been similar to the canonical ones . It consisted of a narrative of the life of Jesus which included his baptism , temptation , transfiguration , last supper , crucifixion , and resurrection . The gospel also contained sayings of Jesus . The events in the life of Jesus have been interpreted in a way that reflects Jewish ideas present in a Hellenistic cultural environment . 
 There is wide agreement about seven quotations cited by Philipp Vielhauer in the critical 3rd German edition of Wilhelm <unk> 's New Testament Apocrypha , translated by George Ogg . The translations below follow Vielhauer 's order : 
 1 . When Christ wished to come upon the earth to men , the good Father summoned a mighty power in heaven , which was called Michael , and entrusted Christ to the care thereof . And the power came into the world and was called Mary , and Christ was in her womb seven months . ( Cyril of Jerusalem , Discourse on Mary Theotokos 12 ) 
 Fragment 1 identifies Jesus as the son of the Holy Spirit ; this idea is found also in the Egyptian Coptic Epistle of James , another indication of the Egyptian origin of the gospel . 
 2 . And it came to pass when the Lord was come up out of the water , the whole fount of the Holy Spirit descended upon him and rested on him and said to him : My Son , in all the prophets was I waiting for thee that thou <unk> come and I might rest in thee . For thou art my rest ; thou art my first @-@ begotten Son that <unk> for ever . ( Jerome , Commentary on Isaiah 4 ) 
 Fragment 2 uses the language of Jewish Wisdom literature , but applies it to the Holy Spirit : the Spirit has waited in vain through all the prophets for the Son . The " rest " that the Holy Spirit finds in the Son belongs to the Christian gnostic idea of the pre @-@ existent Redeemer who finally becomes incarnate in Jesus . 
 3 . Even so did my mother , the Holy Spirit , take me by one of my hairs and carry me away on to the great mountain Tabor . ( Origen , Commentary on John 2 @.@ 12 @.@ 87 ) 
 Fragments 2 and 3 , giving accounts of Jesus ' baptism and temptation or transfiguration , spring from the widespread Greco @-@ Roman myth of the descent of divine Wisdom ; this underlies the parallel passages in the gospels of Matthew ( 11 @.@ 25 – 30 ) , Luke ( 7 @.@ 18 – 35 and 11 @.@ 49 – 51 ) and John ( 1 @.@ 1 – 18 ) , as well as the Gospel of Thomas . The differences between fragment 3 and the orthodox canonical gospels are considerable : their third @-@ person narrative has become an account by Jesus himself , Satan is replaced by the Holy Spirit , and the Holy Spirit is identified as Jesus ' mother . 
 4a . He that marvels shall reign , and he that has reigned shall rest . ( Clement , <unk> 2 @.@ 9 @.@ 45 @.@ 5 ) 
 4b . He that seeks will not rest till he finds ; and he that has found shall marvel ; and he that has marveled shall reign ; and he that has reigned shall rest . ( Clement , <unk> 5 @.@ 14 @.@ 96 @.@ 3 ) 
 Fragment 4 is a " chain @-@ saying " , seek – find – marvel – reign – rest , describing the steps towards salvation , where " rest " equals the state of salvation . The saying is similar to themes found in Jewish Wisdom literature , and the similarity to a saying in the Gospel of Thomas suggests that the text may have been influenced by gnostic Wisdom teaching . 
 5 . And never be ye joyful , save when ye behold your brother with love . ( Jerome , Commentary on Ephesians 3 ) 
 6 . In the Gospel according to the Hebrews ... there is counted among the most grievous offenses : He that has grieved the spirit of his brother . ( Jerome , Commentary on Ezekiel 6 ) 
 Fragments 5 ( on Ephesians 5 @.@ 4 ) and 6 ( on Ezekiel 18 @.@ 7 ) are ethical saying of Jesus , suggesting that such teachings formed a significant part of the gospel . 
 7 . The Gospel according to the Hebrews ... records after the resurrection of the Savior : And when the Lord had given the linen cloth to the servant of the priest , he went to James and appeared to him . For James had sworn that he would not eat bread from that hour in which he had drunk the cup of the Lord until he should see him risen from among them that sleep . And shortly thereafter the Lord said : Bring a table and bread ! And immediately it is added : He took the bread , blessed it and brake it and gave it to James the Just and said to him : My brother , eat thy bread , for the Son of man is risen from among them that sleep . ( Jerome , De viris inlustribus 2 ) 
 Fragment 7 emphasizes the importance of James , the brother of Jesus and head of the Jewish – Christian movement in Jerusalem after Jesus ' death , thereby testifying to the Jewish character of the community of the gospel . 
 In addition to direct quotations , other gospel stories were summarized or cited by the Church Fathers . The translations below are from Vielhauer & Strecker ( 1991 ) , except " b2 " which is from <unk> ( 2003 ) : 
 a . ( Scripture ) seems to call Matthew " Levi " in the Gospel of Luke . Yet it is not a question of one and the same person . Rather Matthias , who was installed ( as apostle ) in place of Judas , and Levi are the same person with a double name . This is clear from the Gospel of the Hebrews . ( Didymus the Blind , Commentary on the Psalms 184 @.@ 9 – 10 ) 
 The summary of a gospel passage identifies Mattias , rather than Matthew , as the name of the tax @-@ collector who was called to follow Jesus . 
 b1 . And he ( Papias ) has adduced another story of a woman who was accused of many sins before the Lord , which is contained in the Gospel according to the Hebrews . ( Eusebius , Historia ecclesiastica 3 @.@ 39 @.@ 17 ) 
 The citation by Eusebius of a story he found in the writings of Papias is believed to refer to an alternate version of the account in John 's gospel of Jesus and the woman taken in adultery . 
 b2 . It is related in some gospels that a woman was condemned by the Jews because of a sin and was taken to the customary place of stoning , in order that she might be stoned . We are told that when the Savior caught sight of her and saw that they were ready to stone her , he said to those who wanted to throw stones at her : Let the one who has not sinned , lift a stone and throw it . If someone is certain that he has not sinned , let him take a stone and hit her . And no one dared to do so . When they examined themselves and they recognized that they too bore responsibility for certain actions , they did not dare to stone her . ( Didymus the Blind , Commentary on Ecclesiastes 4 @.@ 223 @.@ 6 – 13 ) 
 Although Didymus does not name his source , he found this independent tradition of the story of the sinful woman in a non @-@ canonical gospel in Alexandria which may have been the Gospel of the Hebrews . 
 = = Christology = = 
 The theology of the gospel is strongly influenced by Jewish – Christian wisdom teaching . The Holy Spirit is represented as a manifestation of Divine Wisdom who is called " Mother " . The feminine aspect of the Spirit is an indication of Semitic influence on the language of the gospel . The Spirit takes Jesus to Mount Tabor by a single hair , echoing Old Testament themes in the stories of Ezekiel ( <unk> . 8 @.@ 3 ) and Habbakuk ( Dan . 14 @.@ 36 LXX ) . The gospel emphasizes the fulfillment of the prophecy of Isaiah 11 @.@ 2 in Jesus ' baptism , but also adopts elements of Jewish Wisdom theology . The Spirit has been gathered in one place at the moment of Jesus ' baptism , so that he has become the only Son of the Spirit in which he has found eternal " rest " and reigns forever . The " seek – find " and " rule – rest " language also comes from Jewish Wisdom tradition as stages on the way to salvation during which the believer is encouraged to emulate divine Wisdom . 
 The " rest " that the Holy Spirit waits for and finally finds in the Son is also found in gnostic speculations . The wisdom chain @-@ saying which describes the progression of seeking , marveling , and finding salvation , is similar to the Hermetic conception of salvation found in the Alexandrian Corpus <unk> . " Rest " is not only to be understood as the ultimate goal of the seeker after truth , which leads to salvation ; it is also descriptive of a unity with the wisdom which lies at the heart of the Godhead . The " resting " of the Holy Spirit at the moment of Jesus ' Baptism may also be understood in this timeless sense , as the union and rest of the pre @-@ existent Son with his Father , in keeping with the gnostic conception of " rest " as the highest gift of salvation . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Eusebius listed the Gospel of the Hebrews in his <unk> as one of the disputed writings of the early Church . Despite this , the Church Fathers occasionally used it , with reservations , as a source to support their exegetical arguments . Eusebius reports that the 2nd century Church Father Hegesippus used the gospel as a source for writing his <unk> ( " Memoranda " ) in Rome ( c . 175 – 180 ) . The Alexandrian Fathers – Clement , Origen , and Didymus the Blind – relied directly on the gospel to provide <unk> as a supplement to the canonical gospels . Clement quoted from the gospel as part of a discourse on divine Wisdom . Origen used it to compare differing views of the relationship between the Word and the Holy Spirit . Jerome claimed to have used the gospel as a <unk> , although he may have relied in part on excerpts from the commentaries of Origen . He quoted from it as a proof from prophecy based on Isaiah 11 @.@ 2 to explain how Jesus was the fulfillment of messianic expectations . The Gospel of the Hebrews was excluded from the canon by the Catholic Church with the closing of the New Testament canon at the end of the 4th century , and was no longer cited as a source in Church literature . 
 Subsequent to the closing of the canon , the gospel is mentioned in a homily " On the Virgin Mary " attributed to Cyril of Jerusalem in a collection of apocryphal stories believed to have been written in Coptic in the first half of the 6th century . The author ( known to scholars as Pseudo @-@ Cyril ) refers to the Gospel of the Hebrews in a polemical dialogue between a monk and Cyril over the nature of Mary , whom the monk contends was a divine Power sent from heaven . Cyril condemns the monk 's teaching as a heresy , which the author attributes to <unk> , <unk> , and Ebionites . Not all later mentions of the gospel were polemical ; Bede ( c . 673 – 735 ) , after listing some apocryphal gospels rejected by the Church , includes the Gospel of the Hebrews among the " ecclesiastical histories " and refers to its usage by Jerome . 
 = = Relationship to other texts = = 
 The early Church Fathers believed there was only one Jewish – Christian gospel , perhaps in different versions ; however , scholars have long recognized the possibility there were at least two or three . Jerome 's references to a Gospel of the Hebrews , or variants of that name , are particularly problematic because it is unclear which gospel he is referring to as the source of his quotations . Hegesippus , Eusebius , and Jerome all used an Aramaic gospel , which Jerome referred to as the gospel used by a Jewish Christian sect known as the Nazarenes . Gospel of the Nazarenes is the name adopted by scholars to describe the fragments of quotations believed to originate from an Aramaic gospel that was based on traditions similar to the Gospel of Matthew . A third gospel was known only to Epiphanius of Salamis , which he attributed to a second Jewish Christian group known as the Ebionites . Scholars have conventionally referred to seven fragments of a Greek gospel harmony preserved in quotations by Epiphanius as the Gospel of the Ebionites . The existence of three independent Jewish – Christian gospels with distinct characteristics has been regarded as an established consensus . However , that conclusion has recently been challenged with respect to the composition of the gospel known to the Nazarenes and its relationship to the Gospel of the Hebrews . The relationship between the Gospel of the Hebrews and the other Jewish – Christian gospels , as well as a hypothetical original Hebrew Gospel , is uncertain and has been an ongoing subject of scholarly investigation . 
 = Indiana General Assembly = 
 The Indiana General Assembly is the state legislature , or legislative branch , of the state of Indiana . It is a bicameral legislature that consists of a lower house , the Indiana House of Representatives , and an upper house , the Indiana Senate . The General Assembly meets annually at the Indiana Statehouse in Indianapolis . 
 Members of the General Assembly are elected from districts that are realigned every ten years . Representatives serve terms of two years and senators serve terms of four years . Both houses can create bills , but bills must pass both houses before it can be submitted to the governor and enacted into law . 
 = = Structure = = 
 The Indiana General Assembly is made up of two houses , the House of Representatives and the Senate . Indiana has a part @-@ time legislature that does not meet year @-@ round . The General Assembly convenes on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in January . During odd @-@ numbered years the legislature meets for 61 days ( not necessarily consecutively ) and must be adjourned by April 30 . During even @-@ numbered years the legislature meets for 30 days ( not necessarily consecutively ) and must be adjourned by March 15 . The General Assembly may not adjourn for more than three days without a resolution approving adjournment being passed in both houses . The governor has the authority to call on the General Assembly to convene a special session if legislators are unable to complete necessary work within time allotted by the regular sessions . Special sessions of the General Assembly were rarely called in the state 's early history , but have become more commonplace in modern times . 
 The General Assembly delegates are elected from districts . Every ten years the districts are realigned by the General Assembly using information from the U.S. Census Bureau to ensure that each district is roughly equal in population . The districting is maintained to comply with the United States Supreme Court ruling in Reynolds v. Sims . 
 The Indiana Senate and House of Representatives each have several committees that are charged with overseeing certain areas of the state . Committees vary in size , from three to eleven members . The committees are chaired by senior members of the majority party . Senators and representatives can be members of multiple committees . Most legislation begins within the committees who have responsibility for the area that the bill will affect . Once approved by a committee , a bill can be entered into the agenda for debate and vote in the full chamber . Although not common , bills can be voted on by the full house without going through the committee process . 
 Indiana legislators make a base annual salary of $ 22 @,@ 616 , plus $ 155 for each day in session or at a committee hearing and $ 62 in expense pay every other day . 
 = = = Terms and qualifications = = = 
 Article 4 , Section 7 , of the Indiana Constitution states the qualifications to become a Senator or Representative . The candidate must have been a U.S. citizen for a minimum of two years prior to his candidacy and must have been resident of the district that he seeks to represent for one year . Senators must be at least twenty @-@ five years of age and representatives must be twenty @-@ one when sworn into office . The candidate cannot hold any other public office in the state or federal government during their term . The candidate must also be a registered voter within the district they seek to represent . Candidates are required to file papers stating their economic interests . 
 Article 4 , Section 3 , of the state constitution places several limitation on the size and composition of the General Assembly . The Senate can contain no more than fifty members , and the senators serve for term of four years . The House of Representatives can contain no more than one hundred members , and the representatives serve terms of two years . There is no limit to how many terms a state senator or representative may serve . 
 = = = Checks and balances = = = 
 There are several checks and balances built into the state constitution that limit the power of the General Assembly . Other clauses allow the General Assembly to balance and limit the authority of the other branches of the government . Among these checks and balances is the governor 's authority to veto any bill passed by the General Assembly . The General Assembly may in turn override his veto by simple majority vote in both houses . Bills passed by a super majority automatically become law without requiring the signature of the governor . Once the bill is made law , it can be challenged in the state courts which may rule the law to be unconstitutional , effectively repealing the law . The General Assembly could then override the court 's decision by amending the state constitution to include the law . The General Assembly has historically been the most powerful branch of the state government , dominating a weak governor 's office . Although the governor has gained more power in the past fifty years , the General Assembly still retains the power to remove much of that authority . 
 = = = Powers = = = 
 The authority and powers of the Indiana General Assembly are established in the state constitution . The General Assembly has sole legislative power within the state government . Each house can initiate legislation , with the exception that the Senate is not permitted to initiate legislation that will affect revenue . Bills are debated and passed separately in each house , but must be passed by both houses before they can submitted to the governor . Each law passed by the General Assembly must be applied uniformly to the entire state ; the General Assembly has no authority to create legislation that targets only a particular community . 
 The General Assembly is empowered to regulate the state 's judiciary system by setting the size of the courts and the bounds of their districts . The body also has the authority to monitor the activities of the executive branch of the state government , has limited power to regulate the county governments within the state , and has sole power to initiate the process to amend the state constitution . 
 Under Indiana law , legislators cannot be arrested while the General Assembly is in session unless the crime they commit is treason , a felony , or breach of the peace . 
 = = = Indiana Senate = = = 
 The Indiana Senate consists of 50 members elected to four @-@ year terms . Eric Holcomb , the Lieutenant Governor of Indiana , presides over the Senate while it is in session and casts the deciding vote in the event of a tie . The Senate President Pro Tempore is Senator David C. Long of Fort Wayne . The 2015 – 2016 Senate has a Republican super @-@ majority , with Republicans holding 40 out of 50 seats . The Senate offices are located in the west wing of the second floor of the Indiana Statehouse , and the Senate chambers are on the west wing of the third floor . 
 = = = Indiana House of Representatives = = = 
 The Indiana House of Representatives consists of 100 members elected to two @-@ year terms . The Speaker of the House for the 2015 – 2016 term is Representative Brian C. <unk> . In 2015 , the House of Representatives has a Republican majority of 71 seats , while the Democrats have 29 seats . The House offices are located in the east wing of the second floor of the Indiana Statehouse and the House chambers are on the third floor . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = 1816 Constitution = = = 
 Indiana 's first constitution was ratified on June 10 , 1816 , and the election of the first General Assembly took place on August 5 of that year . They convened in the original three @-@ room statehouse located in Corydon . The body consisted of ten senators and twenty @-@ nine representatives , sixteen of whom had been signers of the Indiana state constitution . There , the General Assembly began its development into the institution it is today . The original constitution provided that representatives served terms of one year and senators served terms of three years , and permitted an annual meeting of the assembly from December until March . 
 At first , there was only one political party of any consequence in Indiana , the Democratic @-@ Republicans . The party was , however , broken into three divisions that would later split off into their own parties . The divisions were mainly over the issue of slavery , but they would develop more differences in later years . The Jennings party , made up of abolitionists , was dominant in the beginning . The Noble party was in favor of slavery , and the Hendricks party was generally neutral , although Hendricks himself was openly anti @-@ slavery . In 1818 , the Noble party tried to impeach Governor Jennings over his role in the negotiations of the Treaty of St. Mary 's . After two months of debate in the House , and Jennings having destroyed the evidence of his role , the House of Representatives dropped the investigation and issued a resolution that confirmed Jennings in his position as governor . 
 In its first two decades , the General Assembly laid the foundation of the state . They created the framework for the state 's public school system , began construction on the State Seminary and of roads in the southern part of the state . Initially , the General Assembly was faced with low tax revenues . In response to the problem , they created the Bank of Indiana and sold nine million acres ( 36 @,@ 000 km ² ) of public lands to finance their projects . The General Assembly relocated the capitol to Indianapolis in 1824 , and in 1831 they authorized the construction of the first dedicated statehouse . 
 In the 1830s , the Whigs split from the Democratic @-@ Republicans in response to national policies . The Whigs held a strong majority in the General Assembly in that decade . In 1843 , the remnants of the old slavery party had strengthened into the Democratic Party and swept into power , the Whigs never regained their majority and the Democrats maintained power until the middle of the American Civil War . In 1836 the General Assembly passed the Mammoth Internal Improvement Act and set plans into motion to modernize the state 's infrastructure . The wilderness of northern and central Indiana was slowly developed as the General Assembly approved the construction of roads , canals , railroads , and numerous other infrastructure projects . This led the state to near bankruptcy in the late 1830s , but it was avoided when the General Assembly spun off the failing canals , and half of their debts , to private companies in 1841 . The failure of the projects was the main factor in the Whig 's loss of power . 
 The state constitution had come under considerable criticism beginning in the 1840s because it allowed most government positions to be filled by appointment . The problem with this method of filling positions did not manifest itself until the advent of the state 's political parties . Once in power , a party could stack the government with its own members , making it difficult for the minority to regain power . Another problem was that the authority for many trivial issues were not delegated to other authorities . For example , if a man was to divorce his wife , the divorce bill had to be approved by the General Assembly before he or she could legally remarry . 
 = = = 1851 Constitution = = = 
 In 1851 , a new state constitution was created and ratified . Among the constitution 's new clauses was an extension of the terms of representatives to two years and senators to four years . It also made many of the previously appointed positions open to public election . The new constitution delegated many minor tasks to newly created elected offices . With its workload considerably decreased , instead of meeting annually , the General Assembly only convened a session every two years . The new constitution also placed new limits on the General Assembly 's power to create local laws , the General Assembly having become notorious for creating state level laws that were only applied to one town or county . 
 The new constitution led to the gradual erosion of the Democratic majority . In 1854 , the Republican Party was established and drew in many of the former Whigs . That year the General Assembly was split with no party attaining a majority . The Democrats held the most seats , but the Whigs and Republicans caucused to form a majority and control the assembly . The result was deadlock on most issues because Republicans and Whigs could not agree on most major issues . By 1858 , the Whigs were almost completely disempowered and the Republicans gained enough seats to become the largest party , but not enough to form a majority on their own . That year Governor Ashbel P. Willard called the first special session of the General Assembly because they had been unable to pass an appropriations bill . Democrats regained a small majority by gaining the votes of the disaffected Whigs in the 1860 election . 
 During the 1860s and the American Civil War , the legislature was the scene of intense debate . At the beginning of the war , the General Assembly was controlled by the southern sympathetic Democrats . Governor Oliver Morton and the Republican minority were able to prevent the General Assembly from meeting in 1862 and 1863 by denying the body quorum . Morton even had some members of the body arrested or detained on suspicions of disloyalty . The lack of funding created by this crisis again led to the near bankruptcy of the state . In 1864 , the Republicans gained a majority and convened the General Assembly to remedy the state 's funding problems . 
 During the 1880s and 1890s , Indiana industry began to grow rapidly because of the Indiana Gas Boom , leading to the creation of many labor unions and a return to Democratic control of the General Assembly . One of the events to occur during the period was the Black Day of the General Assembly , a situation arising from Governor Isaac P. Gray 's desire to be elected to the United States Senate . Beginning with the state senate 's refusal to seat a new lieutenant governor , fighting broke out in the chamber and spread throughout the statehouse . Shots were fired , and Democrats and Republicans threatened to kill each other before police could bring the situation under control . A second bout of violence broke out in the 1894 regular session when Republicans locked the doors of the House chambers preventing Governor Claude Matthews from delivering a veto of a bill that repealed over a decade of Democratic legislation . The governor personally led fellow party members in beating down the door and unsuccessfully attempting to fight their way to the podium to deliver the vetoed bill ; one newspaper said Democrats and Republicans " fought like beasts of the forest . " During those decades , the General Assembly enacted a series of laws to protect the rights of workers and encourage more industrial growth . The women 's suffrage movement also began in the state and rallies were held in Indianapolis to support the female suffrage legislation that was ultimately voted down in the General Assembly . 
 During 1907 , the General Assembly made Indiana the first state to enact eugenics legislation , and the law remained in effect until 1921 . The law led to the forced sterilization of thousands of criminals until it was ruled unconstitutional by the Indiana Supreme Court in 1921 . Scandal erupted in 1925 when it was discovered that the Indiana Branch of the Ku Klux Klan controlled over half the seats in the General Assembly . During the session , Grand Dragon D. C. Stephenson boasted " I am the law in Indiana " . During the next two years , the federal government intervened , Stephenson was convicted of murder . After the governor refused to pardon him , Stephenson indicted his co @-@ conspirators , leading to many of the state government being charged with various crimes and removing much of the Klan 's power . 
 In the 1930s , the General Assembly established the state 's first general welfare programs to help the poor affected by the Great Depression . The General Assembly passed the nation 's first DUI laws in 1939 , establishing a blood alcohol level of .15 as the legal limit . The 1940s led to the first African American being elected to the Indiana Senate and legislation that desegregated the public schools in 1949 . 
 The General Assembly established the state 's first sales tax at two percent in 1962 . The revenues from the tax led to a host of new projects across the state . The General Assembly also passed the Indiana Civil Rights bill in 1963 , granting equal protection to minorities in seeking employment . In 1970 a series of constitutional amendments were passed . Among them was one that authorized the General Assembly to meet annually instead of biennially . 
 During the 1988 session , the Indiana House of Representatives was split evenly between both parties for the first time in Indiana 's history . After a period of negotiations , both parties agreed to share majority powers , alternating which party controlled the position of speaker each day . The same General Assembly legalized horse racing in the state in 1989 . 
 Governor Evan Bayh called a special session of the General Assembly in 1992 because no budget had been passed in the regular session . During the special session , the General Assembly passed the budget and also legalized the operation of riverboat casinos in the state , overriding the governor 's veto to prevent it . 
 The General Assembly passed property tax reform legislation in 2008 , capping property taxes at one percent , making Indiana one of the lowest property tax locations in the nation . 
 = More popular than Jesus = 
 " More popular than Jesus " ( or " Bigger than Jesus " ) was a controversial remark made by the Beatles ' John Lennon in 1966 . Lennon said that Christianity was in decline and that the Beatles had become more popular than Jesus Christ . The comment drew no controversy when originally published in the United Kingdom , but angry reactions flared up in Christian communities when it was republished in the United States five months later . 
 Lennon had originally made the remark in March 1966 during an interview with Maureen Cleave for the London Evening Standard , which drew no public reaction . When Datebook , a US teen magazine , quoted Lennon 's comments in August , five months later , extensive protests broke out in the Southern United States . Some radio stations stopped playing Beatles songs , their records were publicly burned , press conferences were cancelled , and threats were made . The controversy coincided with the group 's US tour in August 1966 , and Lennon and Brian Epstein attempted to quell the dispute at a series of press conferences . Some tour events experienced disruption and intimidation , including a picketing by the Ku Klux Klan . The controversy contributed to the Beatles ' lack of interest in public live performances , and the US tour was the last they undertook , after which they became a studio @-@ only band . 
 = = Background = = 
 In March 1966 , the London Evening Standard ran a weekly series of articles entitled " How Does a Beatle Live ? " which featured John Lennon , Ringo Starr , George Harrison , and Paul McCartney respectively . The articles were completed by journalist Maureen Cleave , who knew the group well and had interviewed them regularly since the start of Beatlemania in the UK . Three years previously she had written they were " the darlings of Merseyside " , and had accompanied them on the plane on the group 's first US tour in February 1964 . For her lifestyle series in March 1966 , she chose to interview the group individually , rather than all together , as was the norm . 
 Cleave interviewed Lennon on 4 March 1966 . At his home , Kenwood , in Weybridge , she found a full @-@ size crucifix , a gorilla costume , a medieval suit of armour and a well @-@ organised library , with works by Alfred , Lord Tennyson , Jonathan Swift , Oscar Wilde , George Orwell , Aldous Huxley , and The Passover Plot , by Hugh J. <unk> , which had influenced Lennon 's ideas about Christianity . Cleave 's article mentioned that Lennon was " reading extensively about religion " , and quoted a comment he made : 
 Christianity will go . It will vanish and shrink . I needn 't argue about that ; I 'm right and I 'll be proved right . We 're more popular than Jesus now ; I don 't know which will go first — rock ' n ' roll or Christianity . Jesus was all right but his disciples were thick and ordinary . It 's them twisting it that ruins it for me . 
 Cleave 's interview with Lennon was published in the Evening Standard in March 1966 and provoked no public reaction in the UK . Church attendance there was in decline and the Christian churches were making no secret of their efforts to transform their image into something more relevant to modern times . Music historian Jonathan Gould wrote , " The satire comedians had had a field day with the increasingly desperate attempts of the Church to make itself seem more relevant ( ' Don 't call me vicar , call me Dick ... ' ) . " In 1963 , the Anglican Bishop of Woolwich , John A. T. Robinson , published a controversial but popular book , Honest to God , urging the nation to reject traditional church teachings on morality and the concept of God as an " old man in the sky " , and instead embrace a universal ethic of love . Bryan R. Wilson 's 1966 text Religion in Secular Society explained that increasing secularization led to British churches being abandoned . However , in the US , churches remained popular . 
 Both McCartney and Harrison had been baptised in the Roman Catholic Church , but neither of them followed Christianity . At the start of Beatlemania , the group came into contact with the Revd Ronald Gibbons , who told reporters that a Beatles version of " O Come All Ye Faithful " might provide the Church of England with " the very shot in the arm it needs " . 
 = = Response in the US = = 
 The day after Cleave 's article appeared in the Evening Standard , Beatles press officer Tony Barrow offered Datebook , a US teen magazine , rights to all four interviews . Barrow believed the pieces were important to show fans that the Beatles were progressing beyond simple pop music and producing more intellectually challenging work . As Datebook had already run pieces on fashion designer Mary Quant and on the effects of LSD , it seemed like a suitable vehicle to carry this information . 
 In late July 1966 , nearly five months after UK publication , Datebook republished the interviews . However , art editor Art Unger decided to deliberately put Lennon 's quote about Christianity on its front cover , cutting the prose before it . In Birmingham , Alabama , WAQY DJ Tommy Charles heard about the quotation from his coworker Doug Layton , and was immediately incensed , saying " That does it for me . I am not going to play the Beatles any more " . Charles and Layton asked for listeners ' views on Lennon 's comment and the response was overwhelmingly negative . Charles later stated , " We just felt it was so absurd and sacrilegious that something ought to be done to show them that they can 't get away with this sort of thing " . Al Benn , who was the Bureau Manager for United Press International News , heard the WAQY show and immediately filed a news report in New York City , culminating in a major news story in The New York Times on 5 August . Around two dozen other stations followed WAQY 's lead with similar announcements . Some stations in the Deep South went further , organising demonstrations with bonfires , drawing hordes of teenagers to publicly burn their Beatles records and other memorabilia . 
 Epstein was so concerned by the reaction that he considered cancelling the group 's upcoming US tour , believing they would be seriously harmed in some way . He then flew to the US and held a press conference in New York City , where he publicly criticised Datebook , saying the magazine had taken Lennon 's words out of context , and expressed regret on behalf of the group that " people with certain religious beliefs should have been offended in any way " . Epstein 's efforts had little effect , as the controversy quickly spread beyond the borders of the US . In Mexico City there were demonstrations against the group , and a number of countries , including South Africa and Spain , made the decision to ban the Beatles ' music on national radio stations . The Vatican issued a public denouncement of Lennon 's comments . 
 The Beatles left for their US tour on 11 August 1966 . According to Lennon 's wife , Cynthia , he was nervous and upset that he had made people angry simply by expressing his opinion . The Beatles attended a press conference in Chicago , Illinois ; Lennon did not want to apologise but was advised by Epstein and Barrow that he should . Lennon quipped that " if I had said television was more popular than Jesus , I might have got away with it " but stressed that he was simply remarking on how other people viewed and popularised the band . He described his own belief in God by quoting the Bishop of Woolwich , saying , " ... not as an old man in the sky . I believe that what people call God is something in all of us . " Adamant that he was not comparing himself with Christ , he tried to explain the decline of Christianity in the UK . Pressed for an apology by a reporter , he said " if you want me to apologise , if that will make you happy , then OK , I 'm sorry . " Journalists gave a sympathetic response , and told Lennon that the Bible Belt were " quite notorious for their Christian attitude . " 
 When the tour began , it was marred by protests and disturbances . Telephone threats were received , and concerts were picketed by the Ku Klux Klan . Daily Express writer Robert Pitman , responding to the US outcry , wrote , " It seems a nerve for Americans to hold up shocked hands , when week in , week out , America is exporting to us a subculture that makes the Beatles seem like four stern old churchwardens . " The reaction was also criticised in the US ; a Kentucky radio station declared that it would give the Beatles ' music airplay to show its " contempt for hypocrisy personified " , and the Jesuit magazine America wrote : " Lennon was simply stating what many a Christian educator would readily admit " . 
 The Memphis city council , aware that a Beatles concert was scheduled at the Mid @-@ South Coliseum during the tour , voted to cancel it rather than have " municipal facilities be used as a forum to ridicule anyone 's religion " , and also saying , " the Beatles are not welcome in Memphis " . The Ku Klux Klan nailed a Beatles album to a wooden cross , vowing " vengeance " , with conservative groups staging further public burnings of Beatles records . The Reverend Jimmy <unk> stated that a Christian rally in Memphis " would give the youth of the mid @-@ South an opportunity to show Jesus Christ is more popular than the Beatles " . The Memphis shows did take place on 19 August ; the afternoon show went as planned , but there was a minor panic when a firecracker was set off on stage during the evening performance , which led the group to believe they were the target of gunfire . 
 The group hated the tour , partly due to the controversy and adverse reaction from Lennon 's comments , and were unhappy about Epstein continuing to organise live performances that were increasingly at odds with their studio work . Harrison seriously contemplated leaving the band , but was persuaded to stay on the condition that the Beatles would from now on be a studio @-@ only group . After a break , they reconvened to record Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band , which drew strong commercial success and critical praise when released in June 1967 . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Lennon was asked about the controversy three years later during a trip to Canada , in 1969 . He repeated his opinion that the Beatles were more influential on young people than Christ , adding that some ministers had agreed with him . He called the protestors in the US " fascist Christians " , saying he was " very big on Christ . I 've always fancied him . He was right . " In 1978 , he thanked Jesus for an end to the Beatles ' touring , saying " if I hadn 't said [ that ] and upset the very Christian Ku Klux Klan , well , Lord , I might still be up there with all the other performing fleas ! God bless America . Thank you , Jesus . " 
 In 1993 , Michael Medved wrote in The Sunday Times that " today , comments like Lennon 's could never cause controversy ; a contemptuous attitude to religion is all but expected from all mainstream pop performers . " In 1997 , Noel Gallagher claimed that his band Oasis were " bigger than God " , but reaction was minimal . 
 In a 2008 article marking the 40th anniversary of the Beatles ' double album The Beatles ( also known as the " White Album " ) , the Vatican newspaper , L 'Osservatore Romano , issued the statement : 
 " The remark by John Lennon , which triggered deep indignation , mainly in the United States , after many years sounds only like a ' boast ' by a young working @-@ class Englishman faced with unexpected success , after growing up in the legend of Elvis and rock and roll . The fact remains that 38 years after breaking up , the songs of the Lennon @-@ McCartney brand have shown an extraordinary resistance to the passage of time , becoming a source of inspiration for more than one generation of pop musicians . " 
 In response to the statement , Starr said " Didn 't the Vatican say we were Satanic or possibly Satanic , and they 've still forgiven us ? I think the Vatican 's got more to talk about than the Beatles . " In its 14 April 2010 edition , L 'Osservatore Romano responded to Starr 's comments , stating that " John Lennon had no need of forgiveness from the Vatican , L 'Osservatore Romano reprinted its 1966 article on John Lennon 's comments . The 1966 L 'Osservatore Romano article noted that Lennon had apologised for his comments and that fellow Beatle Paul McCartney had criticized them . " In 2010 , Starr said that he had now found religion , adding , " For me , God is in my life ... I think the search has been on since the 1960s . " 
 In 2012 , the Houston Press music blog compared several aspects of popular media and concluded Jesus is more popular than the Beatles . 
 In 2015 , The Philippine Star said that almost half a century , Lennon 's statement proved half @-@ wrong : Rock ‘ n roll is dead but Christianity expanded with Catholicism experiencing exceptional growth through Pope Francis ’ lead . 
 = = Other mentions = = 
 On 18 May 1968 , Lennon summoned the other Beatles to a meeting at Apple Corps to announce that he was the living reincarnation of Jesus : " I have something very important to tell you all . I am Jesus Christ . I 'm back again . " The meeting was adjourned for lunch and Lennon never mentioned the subject again . In May 1969 , Lennon and McCartney recorded " The Ballad of John and Yoko " , with Lennon singing the lines , " Christ , you know it ain 't easy , You know how hard it can be , The way things are going , They 're gonna crucify me . " In a BBC interview a few months later , Lennon called himself " One of Christ 's biggest fans " , talked about the Church of England , his vision of heaven , and unhappiness over being unable to marry Yoko Ono in church . 
 On 3 December 1969 , Andrew Lloyd Webber and Tim Rice asked Lennon to play the part of Jesus in the stage production of Jesus Christ Superstar , which he declined , although he said he would have been interested if Ono could play the part of Mary Magdalene . Lennon mentioned Jesus again in his 1970 song , " God " , singing , " I don 't believe in Jesus " , but also sang that he did not believe in the Bible , Buddha , Gita , and the Beatles . While living in Los Angeles with May Pang , Lennon once said to DJ Wolfman Jack , " To boogie or not to boogie , that is the Christian . " Critics of Lennon 's lyrics also focused the line " Imagine there 's no heaven " on Lennon 's 1971 song , " Imagine " . 
 Lennon was murdered on 8 December 1980 by Mark David Chapman , who had become a born @-@ again Christian in 1970 and was incensed by Lennon 's " more popular than Jesus " remark , calling it blasphemy . He later stated that he was further enraged by the songs " God " and " Imagine " — even singing the latter with the altered lyric : " Imagine John Lennon dead " . 
 = <unk> War = 
 The <unk> War ( 229 / 228 – 222 BC ) was fought by Sparta and its ally , Elis , against the Achaean League and Macedon . The war ended in a Macedonian and Achaean victory . 
 In 235 BC , Cleomenes III ( r . 235 – 222 BC ) ascended the throne of Sparta and began a program of reform aimed at restoring traditional Spartan discipline while weakening the influence of the ephors , elected officials who wielded extraordinary political power , although they had sworn to uphold the rule of Sparta 's kings . When , in 229 BC , the ephors sent Cleomenes to seize a town on the border with Megalopolis , the Achaeans declared war . Cleomenes responded by ravaging Achaea . At Mount Lycaeum he defeated an army under Aratus of Sicyon , the strategos of the Achaean League , that had been sent to attack Elis , and then routed a second army near Megalopolis . 
 In quick succession , Cleomenes cleared the cities of Arcadia of their Achaean garrisons , before crushing another Achaean force at Dyme . Facing Spartan domination of the League , Aratus was forced to turn to Antigonus III <unk> ( r . 229 – 221 BC ) of Macedon and request that he assist the Achaeans ' efforts to defeat the Spartans . In return for Macedonian assistance , the Achaeans were obliged to surrender the citadel overlooking Corinth to Antigonus . Cleomenes eventually invaded Achaea , seizing control of Corinth and Argos . But Cleomenes was forced to retreat to Laconia when Antigonus arrived in the Peloponnese . Cleomenes fought the Achaeans and the Macedonians at Sellasia , where the Spartans were routed . He then fled to the court of his ally , Ptolemy III of Egypt ( r . 246 – 222 BC ) , where he ultimately committed suicide in the wake of a failed revolt against the new Pharaoh , Ptolemy IV ( r . 221 – 205 BC ) . 
 = = Prelude = = 
 Cleomenes III ascended the throne of Sparta in 236 BC or 235 BC , after deposing his father , Leonidas II . His accession to power ended a decade @-@ long period of heightened conflict between the two royal families . Sparta 's ancient dual kingship was explained by the founding legend , that the original conquerors of Sparta were twin brothers and their descendants shared Sparta . During the turmoil , Leonidas II had executed his rival king , the reformist Agis IV . 
 In 229 BC , Cleomenes took the important cities Tegea , Mantineia , <unk> and Orchomenus in Arcadia , who had by then allied themselves with the Aetolian League , a powerful Greek confederation of city states in central Greece . Historians Polybius and Sir William Smith claim that Cleomenes seized the cities by treachery ; however , Richard Talbert , who translated Plutarch 's account of Sparta , and historian N. G. L. Hammond say Cleomenes occupied them at their own request . Later that year , the ephors sent Cleomenes to seize the Athenaeum , near Belbina . Belbina was one of the entrance points into Laconia and was disputed at the time between Sparta and Megalopolis . Meanwhile , the Achaean League summoned a meeting of her assembly and declared war against Sparta . Cleomenes in return fortified his position . 
 Aratus of Sicyon , the strategos of the Achaean League , tried to re @-@ take Tegea and Orchomenus in a night attack . Efforts from inside the city failed , though , and Aratus quietly retreated , hoping to remain unnoticed . Cleomenes nonetheless discovered the plan and sent a message to Aratus asking about the goal of his expedition . Aratus replied that he had come to stop Cleomenes from fortifying Belbina . Cleomenes responded to this by saying : " If it 's all the same to you , write and tell me why you brought along those torches and ladders . " 
 = = Early years and Spartan success = = 
 After fortifying Belbina , Cleomenes advanced into Arcadia with 3 @,@ 000 infantry and a few cavalry . However , he was called back by the ephors , and this retreat allowed Aratus to seize <unk> as soon as Cleomenes returned to Laconia . Once this news reached Sparta , the ephors sent Cleomenes out again ; he managed to capture the <unk> city <unk> before ravaging the territory surrounding Argos . 
 Around this time , the Achaean League sent an army under a new strategos — Aristomachos of Argos , who had been elected in May 228 BC — to meet Cleomenes in battle . The Achaean army of 20 @,@ 000 infantry and 1 @,@ 000 cavalry advanced on the 5 @,@ 000 @-@ strong Spartan army at <unk> . Aratus , who had accompanied Aristomachos , advised him to retreat because even 20 @,@ 000 Achaeans were no match for 5 @,@ 000 Spartans . Aristomachos , listening to Aratus ' advice , retreated with the Achaean army . 
 Meanwhile , Ptolemy III of Egypt , who had been an ally of the Achaean League in their wars against Macedon , shifted his financial support to Sparta . Ptolemy made this decision after calculating that a resurgent Sparta would be a more valuable ally against Macedon than a failing Achaean League . 
 In May 227 BC , Aratus was once again elected strategos and attacked Elis . The <unk> appealed to Sparta for aid ; as the Achaeans were returning from Elis , Cleomenes attacked and routed their entire army near Mount Lycaeum . Taking advantage of a rumour that he had been killed during the fighting , Aratus attacked and seized Mantinea . 
 Meanwhile , the Eurypontid King of Sparta Eudamidas III , son of Agis IV , died . Pausanias , the Greek writer , claims that Cleomenes had him poisoned . In order to strengthen his position against the ephors , who were opposed to his expansionist policy , Cleomenes recalled his uncle Archidamus V from his exile in Messene to ascend the Eurypontid throne , but as soon as Archidamus returned to the city , he was assassinated . Cleomenes ' involvement in the plot is unclear , since ancient sources contradict each other : Polybius claims that Cleomenes ordered the murder , but Plutarch disagrees . 
 = = Battle of <unk> and reforms = = 
 Later in 227 BC , Cleomenes bribed the ephors to allow him to continue his campaign against the Achaeans . Having succeeded with his bribe , Cleomenes advanced into the territory of Megalopolis and captured the village of Leuctra . In response , an Achaean army arrived , relieved the city and inflicted a minor defeat on the Spartan army based nearest the city walls . Cleomenes was therefore obliged to retreat with his troops across a series of ravines . Aratus ordered the Achaeans not to pursue the Spartans across the ravine , but Lydiadas of Megalopolis disobeyed the order and charged with the cavalry in pursuit of the Spartans . Taking advantage of the difficult terrain and the scattered cavalry , Cleomenes sent his Cretan and <unk> soldiers against Lydiadas . They routed the cavalry , and Lydiadas was amongst the dead . The Spartans , encouraged by these events , charged against the main Achaean forces and defeated the entire army . The Achaeans were so outraged and demoralized by Aratus ' failure to support Lydiadas that they made no further attacks in that year . 
 Cleomenes , who was now confident of the strength of his position , began plotting against the ephors . He first recruited his stepfather , persuading him of the need to do away with the ephors . Cleomenes contended they could then make the ephors ' property common to all citizens and work toward the achievement of Spartan supremacy in Greece . Having won over his stepfather , Cleomenes started preparing his revolution . Employing the men he considered most likely to oppose him ( probably in an attempt to get them killed ) , he captured <unk> and Asea . He also brought in food for the citizens of Orchomenus — which the Achaeans were besieging — before camping outside Mantinea . This campaign exhausted his opponents , who asked to remain in Arcadia so they could rest . Cleomenes then advanced upon Sparta with his mercenaries and sent some loyal followers to slay the ephors . Four of the five ephors were killed ; the sole survivor was <unk> , who managed to escape and sought sanctuary in a temple . 
 With the ephors vanquished , Cleomenes initiated his reforms . First , he handed over his land to the state ; he was soon followed by his stepfather and his friends , and then by the rest of the citizens . He divided up all of the Spartan land , awarding an equal lot to each citizen . He increased the citizen population by granting citizenship to some perioeci , who constituted the Spartan middle class , but did not at that time have Spartan citizenship . Expanding the citizen population meant that Cleomenes could build a larger army ; he trained 4 @,@ 000 hoplites and restored the old Spartan social and military discipline . He also strengthened his army by introducing the Macedonian <unk> ( pike ) . Cleomenes completed his reforms by placing his brother , Eucleidas , in charge , making him the first Agiad king on the Eurypontid throne . 
 = = Domination of the Peloponnese = = 
 Ptolemy III of Egypt offered continued assistance to Cleomenes on the condition that the Spartan king would offer his mother and children as hostages . Cleomenes hesitated but his mother , after learning of Ptolemy 's offer , went voluntarily to Egypt . 
 In 226 BC , the citizens of Mantinea appealed to Cleomenes to expel the Achaean garrison from the city . One night , he and his troops crept into the city and removed the Achaean garrison before marching off to nearby Tegea . From Tegea , the Spartans advanced into Achaea , where Cleomenes hoped to force the League to face him in a pitched battle . Cleomenes advanced with his army to Dyme and was met by the entire Achaean army . In the battle , the Spartans routed the Achaean phalanx , killing many of the Achaeans and capturing others . Following this victory , Cleomenes captured the city of <unk> and presented it to the <unk> . 
 The Achaean League was demoralized by this battle ; Aratus declined the generalship , and when both Athens and the Aetolian League turned down their appeals , they sued Cleomenes for peace . Initially , Cleomenes made only minor requests of the Achaean delegates , but as the talks progressed , Cleomenes ' demands became greater and he eventually insisted that leadership of the League be surrendered to him . In exchange , he would return to the Achaeans the prisoners and strongholds he had seized . The Achaeans invited Cleomenes to <unk> , where they were holding council . While marching there , Cleomenes drank too much water , which caused him to lose his voice and cough up blood — a situation that forced him to return to Sparta . 
 Aratus took advantage of this incident , and began plotting against Cleomenes with King Antigonus III <unk> of Macedon . Previously , in 227 BC , two ambassadors from Megalopolis were sent to Macedon to request help . Antigonus showed little interest at the time , and these efforts failed . Aratus wanted the Macedonian king to come to the Peloponnese and defeat Cleomenes , in return for control of Acrocorinth . This was not a sacrifice that the League was willing to make , however , and they declined to seek help from Macedon . 
 When the Achaeans arrived at Argos for an assembly , Cleomenes came down from Tegea to meet them . However , Aratus — who had reached an agreement with Antigonus — demanded that Cleomenes present 300 hostages to the Achaeans and enter the city alone , or approach the city with all his forces . When this message reached Cleomenes , he declared that he had been wronged and once again declared war on the Achaeans . 
 Achaea was now in turmoil , and some cities were close to revolt ; many residents were angered at Aratus ' decision to invite the Macedonians into the Peloponnese . Some also hoped that Cleomenes would introduce constitutional changes in their cities . Encouraged by this development , Cleomenes invaded Achaea and seized the cities of Pellene , <unk> and <unk> , effectively splitting the Achaean League in half . The Achaeans , concerned about developing treachery in Corinth and Sicyon , dispatched their mercenaries to garrison the cities and then went to Argos to celebrate the Nemean Games . 
 Cleomenes estimated that Argos would be easier to capture while filled with festival @-@ goers and spectators to cause panic . During the night , he seized the rugged area above the city 's theatre . The people of the city were too terrified to offer resistance . They accepted a garrison , delivered twenty hostages to Cleomenes and became Spartan allies . The capture of Argos gave Cleomenes ' reputation a massive boost , since no Spartan king had ever managed to seize Argos . Even Pyrrhus of Epirus , one of the most famous generals of the age , had been killed while trying to take the city . 
 Soon after the seizure of Argos , <unk> and Phlius surrendered themselves to Cleomenes . Meanwhile , Aratus was in Corinth investigating those suspected of supporting Sparta . When he heard what had happened at Argos , Aratus expected the city to fall to Sparta . He summoned an assembly and , with all the citizens present , he took his horse and fled to Sicyon . The Corinthians did surrender the city to Cleomenes , but the Spartan king criticized them for failing to arrest Aratus . Cleomenes sent his stepfather <unk> to Aratus , asking for the surrender of Acrocorinth — the citadel of Corinth , which had an Achaean garrison — in return for a large amount of money . 
 In quick succession , Hermione , Troezen and Epidaurus surrendered to Cleomenes , who went from Argos to Corinth and started besieging the citadel . He sent a messenger to Aratus proposing that Acrocorinth should be garrisoned jointly by both the Spartans and the Achaeans , and that he would deliver a twelve talent pension . Aratus faced the hard decision of whether to give the city to Antigonus or to let it fall to Cleomenes . He chose to conclude an alliance with Antigonus and sent his son as a hostage to Macedon . Cleomenes invaded the territory of Sicyon and blockaded Aratus inside the city for three months before Aratus was able to escape to attend the Achaean council at Aegium . 
 = = Macedonian intervention = = 
 Antigonus , who had brought with him a large force of 20 @,@ 000 infantry and 1 @,@ 300 cavalry , was marching through Euboea towards the Peloponnese . The hostile Aetolian League occupying parts of Thessaly had threatened to oppose him if he went further south than Thermopylae , despite their neutrality at that point in the war . Aratus met Antigonus at <unk> , where he was pressured by Antigonus into giving Megara to Boeotia . When Cleomenes heard of the Macedonian advance through Euboea , he abandoned his siege of Sicyon and constructed a trench and palisade running from Acrocorinth to the Isthmus . He chose this location to avoid facing the Macedonian phalanx head @-@ on . 
 Despite numerous attempts to break through the defensive line and reach Lechaeum , Antigonus ' force failed and suffered considerable losses . These defeats took such a toll on Antigonus that he considered abandoning his attack of the palisade and moving his army to Sicyon . However , Aratus was visited one evening by some friends from Argos who invited Antigonus to come to their city . The Argives were ready to revolt under the command of <unk> , as they were irritated that Cleomenes had not made any reforms in the city . Antigonus sent 1 @,@ 500 men under the command of Aratus to sail to Epidaurus and , from there , march to Argos . At the same time the Achaean strategos for the year , <unk> , advanced with more men from Sicyon . When the Achaean reinforcements arrived , the entire city except for the citadel was in the hands of the Argives . 
 When Cleomenes heard about the revolt at Argos , he sent his stepfather with 2 @,@ 000 men to try and save the situation . <unk> was killed while assaulting the city , however , and the relief force retreated , leaving the Spartans in the citadel to continue resistance . Cleomenes abandoned his much stronger position at the Isthmus for fear of being encircled and left Corinth to fall into the hands of Antigonus . Cleomenes advanced his troops upon Argos and forced his way into the city , rescuing the men stuck in the citadel . He retreated to Mantinea when he saw Antigonus ' army on the plain outside the city . 
 After retreating into Arcadia and receiving news of his wife 's death , Cleomenes returned to Sparta . This left Antigonus free to advance through Arcadia and on the towns that Cleomenes had fortified , including Athenaeum — which he gave to Megalopolis . He continued to Aegium , where the Achaeans were holding their council . He gave a report on his operations and was made chief @-@ in @-@ command of all the allied forces . 
 Antigonus took the opportunity to revive the Hellenic League of Philip II of Macedon , under the name League of Leagues . Most of the Greek city states took part in the league . These included Macedon , Achaea , Boeotia , Thessaly , Phocis , Locris , Acarnania , Euboea and <unk> . Peter Green claims that for Antigonus , the League was just a way to further Macedon 's power . 
 In the early spring of 223 BC , Antigonus advanced upon Tegea . He was joined there by the Achaeans and together they laid siege to it . The Tegeans held out for a few days before being forced to surrender by the Macedonians ' siege weapons . After the capture of Tegea , Antigonus advanced to Laconia , where he found Cleomenes ' army waiting for him . When his scouts brought news that the garrison of Orchomenus was marching to meet Cleomenes , however , Antigonus broke camp and ordered a forced march ; this caught the city by surprise and forced it to surrender . Antigonus proceeded to capture Mantinea , <unk> and <unk> , which confined Cleomenes to Laconia . Antigonus then returned to Aegium , where he gave another report about his operations before dismissing the Macedonian troops to winter at home . 
 Knowing that Cleomenes got the money to pay for his mercenaries from Ptolemy , Antigonus , according to Peter Green , seems to have ceded some territory in Asia Minor to Ptolemy in return for Ptolemy withdrawing his financial support of Sparta . Whether this assumption is accurate or not , Ptolemy certainly withdrew his support , which left Cleomenes without money to pay for his mercenaries . Desperate , Cleomenes freed all helots able to pay five Attic minae ; in this way he accumulated 500 talents of silver . He also armed 2 @,@ 000 of the ex @-@ helots in Macedonian style to counter the White Shields , the Macedonian crack troops , before planning a major initiative . 
 Cleomenes noted that Antigonus had dismissed his Macedonian troops and only traveled with his mercenaries . At the time Antigonus was in Aegium , a three @-@ day march from Megalopolis . Most of the Achaeans of military age had been killed at Mount Lycaeum and <unk> . Cleomenes ordered his army to take five days ' worth of rations and sent his troops toward Sellasia , to give the appearance of raiding the territory of Argos . From there he went to the territory of Megalopolis ; during the night he ordered one of his friends , <unk> , to capture the weakest section of the walls , while Cleomenes and the rest of the army followed . <unk> managed to capture that section of the wall after killing the sentries . This allowed Cleomenes and the rest of the Spartan army to enter the city . 
 When dawn came , the Megalopolitans realised that the Spartans had entered the city ; some of them fled , while others stood and fought against the invaders . Cleomenes ' superior numbers forced the defenders to retreat , but their rearguard action allowed most of the population to escape — only 1 @,@ 000 were captured . Cleomenes sent a message to Messene , where the exiles had gathered , offering to give back their city if they became his allies . The Megalopolitans refused ; in retaliation the Spartans ransacked the city and burnt it to the ground . Nicholas Hammond estimated that Cleomenes managed to accumulate around 300 talents of loot from the city . 
 = = Battle of Sellasia = = 
 The destruction of Megalopolis shook the Achaean League . Cleomenes set off with his army to raid the territory of Argos , knowing that Antigonus would not resist him due to a lack of men . Cleomenes also hoped that his raid would cause the Argives to lose confidence in Antigonus because of his failure to protect their territory . Walbank describes this raid as being " an impressive demonstration , but it had no effect other than to make it even more clear that Cleomenes had to be defeated in a pitched battle . " 
 In the summer of 222 BC , Antigonus summoned his troops from Macedon , who arrived together with other allied forces . According to Polybius , the Macedonian army consisted of 10 @,@ 000 Macedonian infantry , most of them armed as phalangites , 3 @,@ 000 peltasts , 1 @,@ 200 cavalry , 3 @,@ 000 mercenaries , 8 @,@ 600 Greek allies , and 3 @,@ 000 Achaean infantry , making a total of 29 @,@ 200 men . 
 Cleomenes had fortified all the passes into Laconia with barricades and trenches before setting off with his army of 20 @,@ 000 men to the pass at Sellasia , on the northern border of Laconia . Overlooking the pass at Sellasia were two hills , Evas and Olympus . Cleomenes positioned his brother , Eucleidas , with the allied troops and the <unk> on Evas ; he stationed himself on Olympus with 6 @,@ 000 Spartan hoplites and 5 @,@ 000 mercenaries . 
 When Antigonus reached Sellasia with his army , he found it well guarded and decided against storming the strong position . Instead he pitched camp near Sellasia and waited for several days . During this time , he sent scouts to reconnoiter the areas and feign attacks on Cleomenes ' position . 
 Unable to force a move from Cleomenes , Antigonus decided to risk a pitched battle . He positioned some of his Macedonian infantry and Illyrians facing the Evas hill in an articulated phalanx . The <unk> , the Acarnanians and 2 @,@ 000 Achaean infantry stood behind them as reinforcements . The cavalry took a position opposite Cleomenes ' cavalry , with 1 @,@ 000 Achaean and <unk> infantry in reserve . Together with the rest of his Macedonian infantry and mercenaries Antigonus took his position opposite that of Cleomenes . 
 The battle started when the Illyrian troops on the Macedonian right wing attacked the Spartan force on Evas . The Spartan light infantry and cavalry , noticing that the Achaean infantry was not protected at the rear , launched an assault on the back of the Macedonian right wing , and threatened to rout it . However , at the critical moment , <unk> of Megalopolis ( who later became one of the greatest heroes of the Achaean League , eventually conquering Sparta ) , tried to point out the danger to the senior cavalry commanders . When they did not take notice of him , <unk> gathered a few other cavalrymen and charged the Spartan cavalry . The Spartans attacking from the rear broke off their engagement with the enemy , which encouraged the Macedonians to charge at the Spartan positions . The Spartans ' left flank was eventually forced back and thrown from their position and their commander , Eucleidas , killed ; they fled the field . 
 Meanwhile , the Macedonian phalanx on the left flank engaged the Spartan phalanx and mercenaries . During the initial assault , the Macedonian phalanx gave a considerable amount of ground before its weight drove back the Spartan phalanx . The Spartans , overwhelmed by the deeper ranks of Macedonian phalanx , were routed , but Cleomenes managed to escape with a small group of men . The battle was very costly for the Spartans ; most of their army was routed with only 200 of the 6 @,@ 000 Spartans that fought surviving the battle . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Following his defeat at Sellasia , Cleomenes briefly returned to Sparta and urged the citizens to accept Antigonus ' terms . Under cover of darkness , he fled from Sparta with some friends and went to the city 's port of Gythium , where he boarded a ship heading to Egypt . 
 Antigonus entered Sparta triumphantly , its first foreign conqueror . Nevertheless , he treated the population generously and humanely . He ordered that the reforms of Cleomenes be revoked , and restored the ephors , although he did not force Sparta to join the League . However , Antigonus ' failure to restore the Spartan Kings suggests to historian Graham Shipley that this restoration of laws was a sham . Within three days , he left Sparta and returned to Macedon to deal with a <unk> invasion , leaving a garrison in Acrocorinth and Orchomenos . With Cleomenes ' defeat , Sparta 's power collapsed and it fell into the hands of successive tyrants . 
 On his arrival at Alexandria , Cleomenes was greeted by Ptolemy , who welcomed him with smiles and promises . At first Ptolemy was guarded towards Cleomenes , but soon came to respect him and promised to send him back to Greece with an army and a fleet . He also promised to provide Cleomenes with an annual income of twenty @-@ four talents . However , before he could fulfill his promise , Ptolemy died — and with him any hope for Cleomenes to return to Greece , as the weak Ptolemy IV ascended the throne . 
 Ptolemy IV began treating Cleomenes with neglect and soon his chief minister , <unk> , had Cleomenes put under house arrest after he was falsely accused of plotting against the king . In 219 BC , Cleomenes and his friends escaped from house arrest and ran through the streets of Alexandria , trying to encourage an uprising against Ptolemy . When this failed , Cleomenes and all of his friends committed suicide . 
 = Virtual Theatre = 
 The Virtual Theatre is a computer game engine designed by Revolution Software to produce adventure games for computer platforms . The engine allowed their team to script events , and move animated sprites against a drawn background with moving elements using a point @-@ and @-@ click style interface . Upon its first release , it rivaled competing engines like LucasArts ' SCUMM and Sierra 's Creative Interpreter , due to its then high level of artificial intelligence . The engine was first proposed in 1989 , while the first game to use it , Lure of the Temptress , was released in 1992 , followed by Beneath a Steel Sky ( 1994 ) , Broken Sword : The Shadow of the Templars ( 1996 ) and Broken Sword II : The Smoking Mirror ( 1997 ) . 
 It allowed in @-@ game characters to wander around the gameworld independently of each other , performing " everyday life " actions , which was not previously possible , and all characters and objects occupied space , and consequently , non @-@ player characters had to side @-@ step the player 's protogonist and any other object they came across , as well as the player had to side step them , achieving a more realistic game world than previous engines were unable to provide , though non @-@ player characters could unwittingly block a path as the player was traversing the game scene . Non @-@ player characters performed much simpler tasks with each release due to size constraints . 
 Two games ( Broken Sword : The Shadow of the Templars and Broken Sword II : The Smoking Mirror ) that use a Virtual Theatre variant engine can now be played on modern hardware using ScummVM , which as a result allows the engine to run on platforms where the titles were not officially released . In 2012 , it was confirmed that the engine will be revived as " Virtual Theatre 7 " for the upcoming fifth Broken Sword titled Broken Sword : The Serpent 's Curse ( 2013 ) . 
 = = Development = = 
 Charles Cecil and Tony Warriner had worked together at Artic Computing , an English video game development company . In 1990 , they decided that they would set up their own video game development company , together with David Sykes and Noirin Carmody . For their debut adventure game , Lure of the Temptress , released in 1992 for Amiga , Atari ST and PC , Cecil , Warriner , Sykes and Dan Marchant created the concept of the game engine titled Virtual Theatre , which Warriner wrote . 
 For Beneath a Steel Sky , released in 1994 for Amiga , and PC , Revolution used an updated version of Virtual Theatre , Virtual Theatre 2 @.@ 0 , written by Warriner and Sykes . However , because the game was six times the size of Lure of the Temptress , non @-@ player characters had to perform much simpler tasks than in its predecessor . Broken Sword : The Shadow of the Templars , released in 1996 for PC , Mac and PlayStation , and its sequel , Broken Sword II : The Smoking Mirror , released in 1997 for PC and PlayStation , also used modified versions of the Virtual Theatre engine . The engine got various updates since then . For Broken Sword : The Serpent 's Curse a brand new engine ( <unk> ) was developed in order to deal with multiple platforms and , in particular screen resolution ( The system is built on C + + and OpenGL , and a custom scripting language to implement the game itself ) . 
 = = Features = = 
 Traditionally in adventure game engines , non @-@ player characters were static awaiting the player to interact with them to trigger an event . However , Virtual Theatre allowed non @-@ player characters to traverse the world in seemingly random patterns , interacting with their environment . Upon the engine 's first release , it rivaled competing engines such as LucasArts ' SCUMM engine , and Sierra 's Creative Interpreter , due to its then high level of artificial intelligence . 
 Another advantage of the engine is that it is a cross @-@ platform engine . It was also faster on the Amiga than the C code that was used by many USA programmers at that time . Compared to the Sierra titles , the engine became in this respect more sophisticated , a reason why Revolution did the conversion of King 's Quest VI to the Amiga . 
 All of the in @-@ game objects ( including non @-@ player characters ) in Virtual Theatre occupied space , which was a unique feature for an engine at the time . Consequently , non @-@ player characters had to side @-@ step the player 's protogonist and any other object they came across , as well as the player had to side step them . When a non @-@ player character bypassed the protagonist , he or she uttered a comment ( like " Excuse me , Sir " ) . As the result , the engine achieved a more realistic game world than previous engines were able to provide , though non @-@ player characters could unwittingly block a path as the player was traversing the game scene . This was remedied with the release of Broken Sword : The Shadow of the Templars , where the protagonist , if found his way blocked by another character , could simply walk through him . 
 Two games ( Broken Sword : The Shadow of the Templars and Broken Sword II : The Smoking Mirror ) that use a Virtual Theatre variant engine can now be played on modern hardware using ScummVM . Consequently , those games using the engine may run on the platforms the titles were not officially released on . 
 = Greg Young = 
 Gregory James " Greg " Young ( born 25 April 1983 ) is an English semi @-@ professional footballer who plays as a defender for Northern Premier League Premier Division club Buxton . 
 Young started his career with the Sheffield Wednesday youth system and after being released in 2002 he joined Grimsby Town of the First Division . He made his first team debut on the last day of the 2002 – 03 season with the team having already been relegated and he suffered a second relegation the following season , during which he made 19 appearances . During the 2004 – 05 season he spent two periods on loan at Conference National team Northwich Victoria before joining Halifax Town in 2005 . 
 He made 35 appearances for Halifax during the 2005 – 06 season and started in the 2006 Conference National play @-@ off Final at the Walkers Stadium , which was lost to Hereford United . Following loans with former club Northwich and Conference North team Alfreton Town he joined Altrincham in early 2008 . He played for Altrincham as a semi @-@ professional and after making over 100 appearances in two and a half seasons he joined York City in 2010 . After a season at the club he returned to Alfreton . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Grimsby Town = = = 
 Born in Doncaster , South Yorkshire , Young started his career with the Sheffield Wednesday youth system , where he also played in the reserve team . He was released at the end of the 2001 – 02 season , and was signed by fellow First Division team Grimsby Town in July 2002 following a trial , initially playing in the reserves . He eventually made his first team debut by starting in a 2 – 1 defeat to Reading on 26 April 2003 , the last day of the 2002 – 03 season , with Grimsby having already been relegated to the Second Division . He signed a new contract with Grimsby on 3 June 2003 , with manager Paul Groves saying " Greg has improved since he arrived at the club . He did well on his debut at Reading , but it did show that there is a big step up from the reserves for him to make . " 
 His first appearance of the 2003 – 04 season came as a half @-@ time substitute in a 1 – 0 victory at Blackpool on 30 September 2003 . The season saw him initially used as a stand @-@ in left back as cover for injuries , but after the arrival of Nicky Law as manager , he became a regular starter as a central defender . Young was described as the " stand @-@ out performer " in a 4 – 4 draw at Chesterfield on 27 March 2004 , despite suffering a dislocated shoulder during the match . He made a " brave " return in the final game of the season on 8 May 2004 , a 2 – 1 defeat at Tranmere Rovers , which condemned Grimsby to relegation to League Two . He finished the season with 19 appearances for Grimsby and he signed a new two @-@ year contract with the club in June 2004 . 
 He was still suffering from the shoulder injury in June and under new manager Russell Slade Young endured a frustrating spell . A cold Young was suffering from in August required treatment from physio Dave Moore as it put him out of action . He joined Conference National team Northwich Victoria on a one @-@ month loan on 7 October 2004 , after having made five appearances for Grimsby up to that point during the 2004 – 05 season . He made his debut two days later in a 0 – 0 draw with Crawley Town and in his third game scored in a 3 – 1 victory over Forest Green Rovers . He was recalled by Grimsby later that month due to injuries after making three appearances for Northwich . He rejoined Northwich on another one @-@ month loan on 3 December 2004 , with injury restricting him to three appearances before returning to Grimsby on 6 January 2005 . 
 = = = Halifax Town = = = 
 Young moved to Conference National team Halifax Town on a free transfer on 25 February 2005 after signing a one @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ year contract . He made his debut as a 57th @-@ minute substitute in a 2 – 2 draw with former club Northwich the following day . His first goal for the club came on his sixth appearance against Tamworth after heading in a Martin Foster corner kick , with the game ending in a 3 – 3 draw . He finished the season with 13 appearances and two goals for Halifax . Young suffered an injury in August 2005 and he made his return in a 4 – 0 victory over Tamworth on 10 September 2005 . His only goal of the 2005 – 06 season came after he headed in from a Matt Doughty corner for the opening goal in a 1 – 1 draw with Stevenage Borough on 14 April 2006 . He played in both legs of Halifax 's play @-@ off semi @-@ final victory over Grays Athletic , which the team won 5 – 4 on aggregate . He started in the 2006 Conference National play @-@ off Final at the Walkers Stadium on 20 May , being substituted on 61 minutes , which was lost 3 – 2 to Hereford United after extra time . He finished the season with 35 appearances and one goal . 
 He was affected by a shoulder injury towards the end of the season and he had a successful operation on this in May 2006 . After recovering from this operation he made his return in a 2 – 1 victory at Cambridge United on 29 August 2006 . He joined Northwich for the third time after signing a one @-@ month loan in November 2006 , after having made eight appearances for Halifax up to that point during the 2006 – 07 season . He made three appearances for Northwich before being recalled by Halifax on 18 December 2006 . He made three appearances after returning and his season was ended due to a knee injury sustained on 1 January 2007 in a 1 – 1 draw with Altrincham , after having made 11 appearances for Halifax that season . 
 He joined Conference North team Alfreton Town on a one @-@ month loan in August 2007 , making his debut and return from injury in a 2 – 1 defeat to Southport on 18 August . He made six appearances before returning to Halifax on 18 September 2007 . He made an immediate return to the team after coming on as a substitute on 88 minutes in a 1 – 1 draw with Rushden & Diamonds on 22 September 2007 . 
 = = = Altrincham = = = 
 Young was released by Halifax while they were enduring financial difficulties and he signed for Altrincham as a semi @-@ professional on a contract until the end of the 2007 – 08 season shortly afterwards on 4 January 2008 . He made his debut a day later as a 60th @-@ minute substitute in a 4 – 0 defeat to Oxford United and his full debut came after starting in a 2 – 1 victory over Kidderminster Harriers . His only goal of the season came from the edge of the box in a 2 – 1 defeat at Burton Albion on 8 April 2008 . He finished the season with 22 appearances and one goal for Altrincham and he signed a new two @-@ year contract in the summer of 2008 . 
 Young featured for Altrincham in their FA Cup first round game and first round replay against League Two team Luton Town , with the latter being lost 4 – 2 in a penalty shoot @-@ out . His first goal of the 2008 – 09 season came after he scored from close range in a 1 – 0 victory over Northwich Victoria on 26 December 2008 . His second goal of the season was the winner in a 1 – 0 victory at Wrexham on 13 April 2009 , a result that ensured Altrincham would not finish the season in the relegation zone . He finished the season with 51 appearances and two goals . 
 He contracted mumps in September 2009 and made his return to action against Rushden on 3 October . Young 's first goal of the 2009 – 10 season came with the winner in a 1 – 0 victory over Wrexham in an FA Trophy first round replay . His first league goal of the season came after scoring the winning goal in a 2 – 1 victory at Ebbsfleet United after heading in a Doughty corner on 16 January 2010 . Young 's fourth goal of the season came against Wrexham came after he scored an 82nd @-@ minute equaliser on 9 March 2010 . He scored the winning goal in a 3 – 2 victory over Kidderminster after shooting from 12 yards on 3 April 2010 . He finished the season with 44 appearances and six goals . 
 = = = York City = = = 
 Young joined fellow Conference Premier team York City on a one @-@ year contract on 24 May 2010 and so returned to playing full @-@ time . He made his debut in a 2 – 1 defeat at Fleetwood Town on 30 August 2010 and he scored York 's only goal in the 87th minute with a header from an Alex Lawless cross . After initially being used as an outfield substitute Young played in goal for the second half of York 's 5 – 0 defeat at Luton Town on 18 January 2011 , conceding one goal , after Michael Ingham was sent off in the 15th minute . 
 Young returned to former club Altrincham on an emergency loan until the end of the 2010 – 11 season on 7 February 2011 . His first appearance after returning to the club came in a 2 – 1 defeat at Kidderminster on 12 February 2011 . After making 11 appearances and scoring one goal for Altrincham , Young returned to York after being recalled on 20 April 2011 due to an injury to Danny Parslow . He did not play following his return and finished the season with 12 appearances and one goal for York . 
 = = = Alfreton Town = = = 
 Young signed a two @-@ year contract with former club Alfreton Town , who had recently been promoted to the Conference Premier , on 1 June 2011 . He finished the 2011 – 12 season with 35 appearances for Alfreton . 
 = = = Gainsborough Trinity = = = 
 On 14 June 2012 , Young signed for Conference North side Gainsborough Trinity and made his debut in their 2012 – 13 opening day 1 – 0 defeat at home to Gloucester City on 18 August . 
 = = = Buxton = = = 
 Young signed with Buxton of the Northern Premier League Premier Division in July 2014 . He made 47 appearances and scored six goals as Buxton finished tenth in the table in the 2014 – 15 season . 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Young primarily plays as a left @-@ footed centre @-@ back and is also able to play at left @-@ back . While at Altrincham , he was also deployed as an auxiliary striker . While being a " classy centre @-@ half " , he is an " aggressive player who likes to win the ball " and his play has been described as " <unk> " . On his goalscoring record , Young said " It ’ s something I have worked on in my own game during the last couple of years . I made a point of improving my scoring record and I ’ ve done that slightly " in 2010 . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Young studied for a degree in sport and exercise science at university while playing part @-@ time for Altrincham . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of match played 26 April 2014 . 
 = Climate = 
 Climate is the statistics ( usually , mean or variability ) of weather , usually over a 30 @-@ year interval . It is measured by assessing the patterns of variation in temperature , humidity , atmospheric pressure , wind , precipitation , atmospheric particle count and other meteorological variables in a given region over long periods of time . Climate differs from weather , in that weather only describes the short @-@ term conditions of these variables in a given region . 
 A region 's climate is generated by the climate system , which has five components : atmosphere , hydrosphere , cryosphere , lithosphere , and biosphere . 
 The climate of a location is affected by its latitude , terrain , and altitude , as well as nearby water bodies and their currents . Climates can be classified according to the average and the typical ranges of different variables , most commonly temperature and precipitation . The most commonly used classification scheme was Köppen climate classification originally developed by Wladimir Köppen . The Thornthwaite system , in use since 1948 , incorporates evapotranspiration along with temperature and precipitation information and is used in studying biological diversity and the potential effects on it of climate changes . The Bergeron and Spatial Synoptic Classification systems focus on the origin of air masses that define the climate of a region . 
 Paleoclimatology is the study of ancient climates . Since direct observations of climate are not available before the 19th century , <unk> are inferred from proxy variables that include non @-@ biotic evidence such as sediments found in lake beds and ice cores , and biotic evidence such as tree rings and coral . Climate models are mathematical models of past , present and future climates . Climate change may occur over long and short timescales from a variety of factors ; recent warming is discussed in global warming . 
 = = Definition = = 
 Climate ( from Ancient Greek <unk> , meaning inclination ) is commonly defined as the weather averaged over a long period . The standard averaging period is 30 years , but other periods may be used depending on the purpose . Climate also includes statistics other than the average , such as the magnitudes of day @-@ to @-@ day or year @-@ to @-@ year variations . The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) 2001 glossary definition is as follows : 
 Climate in a narrow sense is usually defined as the " average weather , " or more rigorously , as the statistical description in terms of the mean and variability of relevant quantities over a period ranging from months to thousands or millions of years . The classical period is 30 years , as defined by the World Meteorological Organization ( WMO ) . These quantities are most often surface variables such as temperature , precipitation , and wind . Climate in a wider sense is the state , including a statistical description , of the climate system . 
 The World Meteorological Organization ( WMO ) describes climate " normals " as " reference points used by climatologists to compare current climatological trends to that of the past or what is considered ' normal ' . A Normal is defined as the arithmetic average of a climate element ( e.g. temperature ) over a 30 @-@ year period . A 30 year period is used , as it is long enough to filter out any <unk> variation or anomalies , but also short enough to be able to show longer climatic trends . " The WMO originated from the International Meteorological Organization which set up a technical commission for climatology in 1929 . At its 1934 Wiesbaden meeting the technical commission designated the thirty @-@ year period from 1901 to 1930 as the reference time frame for climatological standard normals . In 1982 the WMO agreed to update climate normals , and in these were subsequently completed on the basis of climate data from 1 January 1961 to 31 December 1990 . 
 The difference between climate and weather is usefully summarized by the popular phrase " Climate is what you expect , weather is what you get . " Over historical time spans there are a number of nearly constant variables that determine climate , including latitude , altitude , proportion of land to water , and proximity to oceans and mountains . These change only over periods of millions of years due to processes such as plate tectonics . Other climate determinants are more dynamic : the thermohaline circulation of the ocean leads to a 5 ° C ( 9 ° F ) warming of the northern Atlantic Ocean compared to other ocean basins . Other ocean currents redistribute heat between land and water on a more regional scale . The density and type of vegetation coverage affects solar heat absorption , water retention , and rainfall on a regional level . Alterations in the quantity of atmospheric greenhouse gases determines the amount of solar energy retained by the planet , leading to global warming or global cooling . The variables which determine climate are numerous and the interactions complex , but there is general agreement that the broad outlines are understood , at least insofar as the determinants of historical climate change are concerned . 
 = = Climate classification = = 
 There are several ways to classify climates into similar regimes . Originally , climes were defined in Ancient Greece to describe the weather depending upon a location 's latitude . Modern climate classification methods can be broadly divided into genetic methods , which focus on the causes of climate , and empiric methods , which focus on the effects of climate . Examples of genetic classification include methods based on the relative frequency of different air mass types or locations within synoptic weather disturbances . Examples of empiric classifications include climate zones defined by plant hardiness , evapotranspiration , or more generally the Köppen climate classification which was originally designed to identify the climates associated with certain biomes . A common shortcoming of these classification schemes is that they produce distinct boundaries between the zones they define , rather than the gradual transition of climate properties more common in nature . 
 = = = Bergeron and Spatial Synoptic = = = 
 The simplest classification is that involving air masses . The Bergeron classification is the most widely accepted form of air mass classification . Air mass classification involves three letters . The first letter describes its moisture properties , with c used for continental air masses ( dry ) and m for maritime air masses ( moist ) . The second letter describes the thermal characteristic of its source region : T for tropical , P for polar , A for Arctic or Antarctic , M for monsoon , E for equatorial , and S for superior air ( dry air formed by significant downward motion in the atmosphere ) . The third letter is used to designate the stability of the atmosphere . If the air mass is colder than the ground below it , it is labeled k . If the air mass is warmer than the ground below it , it is labeled w . While air mass identification was originally used in weather forecasting during the 1950s , climatologists began to establish synoptic <unk> based on this idea in 1973 . 
 Based upon the Bergeron classification scheme is the Spatial Synoptic Classification system ( SSC ) . There are six categories within the SSC scheme : Dry Polar ( similar to continental polar ) , Dry Moderate ( similar to maritime superior ) , Dry Tropical ( similar to continental tropical ) , Moist Polar ( similar to maritime polar ) , Moist Moderate ( a hybrid between maritime polar and maritime tropical ) , and Moist Tropical ( similar to maritime tropical , maritime monsoon , or maritime equatorial ) . 
 = = = Köppen = = = 
 The Köppen classification depends on average monthly values of temperature and precipitation . The most commonly used form of the Köppen classification has five primary types labeled A through E. These primary types are A , tropical ; B , dry ; C , mild mid @-@ latitude ; D , cold mid @-@ latitude ; and E , polar . The five primary classifications can be further divided into secondary classifications such as rain forest , monsoon , tropical savanna , humid subtropical , humid continental , oceanic climate , Mediterranean climate , steppe , subarctic climate , tundra , polar ice cap , and desert . 
 Rain forests are characterized by high rainfall , with definitions setting minimum normal annual rainfall between 1 @,@ 750 millimetres ( 69 in ) and 2 @,@ 000 millimetres ( 79 in ) . Mean monthly temperatures exceed 18 ° C ( 64 ° F ) during all months of the year . 
 A monsoon is a seasonal prevailing wind which lasts for several months , ushering in a region 's rainy season . Regions within North America , South America , Sub @-@ Saharan Africa , Australia and East Asia are monsoon regimes . 
 A tropical savanna is a grassland biome located in semiarid to semi @-@ humid climate regions of subtropical and tropical latitudes , with average temperatures remain at or above 18 ° C ( 64 ° F ) year round and rainfall between 750 millimetres ( 30 in ) and 1 @,@ 270 millimetres ( 50 in ) a year . They are widespread on Africa , and are found in India , the northern parts of South America , Malaysia , and Australia . 
 The humid subtropical climate zone where winter rainfall ( and sometimes snowfall ) is associated with large storms that the westerlies steer from west to east . Most summer rainfall occurs during thunderstorms and from occasional tropical cyclones . Humid subtropical climates lie on the east side continents , roughly between latitudes 20 ° and 40 ° degrees away from the equator . 
 A humid continental climate is marked by variable weather patterns and a large seasonal temperature variance . Places with more than three months of average daily temperatures above 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) and a coldest month temperature below − 3 ° C ( 27 ° F ) and which do not meet the criteria for an arid or semiarid climate , are classified as continental . 
 An oceanic climate is typically found along the west coasts at the middle latitudes of all the world 's continents , and in southeastern Australia , and is accompanied by plentiful precipitation year round . 
 The Mediterranean climate regime resembles the climate of the lands in the Mediterranean Basin , parts of western North America , parts of Western and South Australia , in southwestern South Africa and in parts of central Chile . The climate is characterized by hot , dry summers and cool , wet winters . 
 A steppe is a dry grassland with an annual temperature range in the summer of up to 40 ° C ( 104 ° F ) and during the winter down to − 40 ° C ( − 40 ° F ) . 
 A subarctic climate has little precipitation , and monthly temperatures which are above 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) for one to three months of the year , with permafrost in large parts of the area due to the cold winters . Winters within subarctic climates usually include up to six months of temperatures averaging below 0 ° C ( 32 ° F ) . 
 Tundra occurs in the far Northern Hemisphere , north of the taiga belt , including vast areas of northern Russia and Canada . 
 A polar ice cap , or polar ice sheet , is a high @-@ latitude region of a planet or moon that is covered in ice . Ice caps form because high @-@ latitude regions receive less energy as solar radiation from the sun than equatorial regions , resulting in lower surface temperatures . 
 A desert is a landscape form or region that receives very little precipitation . Deserts usually have a large diurnal and seasonal temperature range , with high or low , depending on location daytime temperatures ( in summer up to 45 ° C or 113 ° F ) , and low nighttime temperatures ( in winter down to 0 ° C or 32 ° F ) due to extremely low humidity . Many deserts are formed by rain shadows , as mountains block the path of moisture and precipitation to the desert . 
 = = = Thornthwaite = = = 
 Devised by the American climatologist and geographer C. W. Thornthwaite , this climate classification method monitors the soil water budget using evapotranspiration . It monitors the portion of total precipitation used to nourish vegetation over a certain area . It uses indices such as a humidity index and an aridity index to determine an area 's moisture regime based upon its average temperature , average rainfall , and average vegetation type . The lower the value of the index in any given area , the drier the area is . 
 The moisture classification includes climatic classes with descriptors such as <unk> , humid , subhumid , <unk> , semi @-@ arid ( values of − 20 to − 40 ) , and arid ( values below − 40 ) . Humid regions experience more precipitation than evaporation each year , while arid regions experience greater evaporation than precipitation on an annual basis . A total of 33 percent of the Earth 's landmass is considered either arid of semi @-@ arid , including southwest North America , southwest South America , most of northern and a small part of southern Africa , southwest and portions of eastern Asia , as well as much of Australia . Studies suggest that precipitation effectiveness ( PE ) within the Thornthwaite moisture index is overestimated in the summer and underestimated in the winter . This index can be effectively used to determine the number of herbivore and mammal species numbers within a given area . The index is also used in studies of climate change . 
 Thermal classifications within the Thornthwaite scheme include <unk> , <unk> , and megathermal regimes . A <unk> climate is one of low annual mean temperatures , generally between 0 ° C ( 32 ° F ) and 14 ° C ( 57 ° F ) which experiences short summers and has a potential evaporation between 14 centimetres ( 5 @.@ 5 in ) and 43 centimetres ( 17 in ) . A <unk> climate lacks persistent heat or persistent cold , with potential evaporation between 57 centimetres ( 22 in ) and 114 centimetres ( 45 in ) . A megathermal climate is one with persistent high temperatures and abundant rainfall , with potential annual evaporation in excess of 114 centimetres ( 45 in ) . 
 = = Record = = 
 = = = Modern = = = 
 Details of the modern climate record are known through the taking of measurements from such weather instruments as thermometers , barometers , and anemometers during the past few centuries . The instruments used to study weather over the modern time scale , their known error , their immediate environment , and their exposure have changed over the years , which must be considered when studying the climate of centuries past . 
 = = = Paleoclimatology = = = 
 Paleoclimatology is the study of past climate over a great period of the Earth 's history . It uses evidence from ice sheets , tree rings , sediments , coral , and rocks to determine the past state of the climate . It demonstrates periods of stability and periods of change and can indicate whether changes follow patterns such as regular cycles . 
 = = Climate change = = 
 Climate change is the variation in global or regional climates over time . It reflects changes in the variability or average state of the atmosphere over time scales ranging from decades to millions of years . These changes can be caused by processes internal to the Earth , external forces ( e.g. variations in sunlight intensity ) or , more recently , human activities . 
 In recent usage , especially in the context of environmental policy , the term " climate change " often refers only to changes in modern climate , including the rise in average surface temperature known as global warming . In some cases , the term is also used with a presumption of human causation , as in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change ( UNFCCC ) . The UNFCCC uses " climate variability " for non @-@ human caused variations . 
 Earth has undergone periodic climate shifts in the past , including four major ice ages . These consisting of glacial periods where conditions are colder than normal , separated by interglacial periods . The accumulation of snow and ice during a glacial period increases the surface albedo , reflecting more of the Sun 's energy into space and maintaining a lower atmospheric temperature . Increases in greenhouse gases , such as by volcanic activity , can increase the global temperature and produce an interglacial period . Suggested causes of ice age periods include the positions of the continents , variations in the Earth 's orbit , changes in the solar output , and volcanism . 
 = = = Climate models = = = 
 Climate models use quantitative methods to simulate the interactions of the atmosphere , oceans , land surface and ice . They are used for a variety of purposes ; from the study of the dynamics of the weather and climate system , to projections of future climate . All climate models balance , or very nearly balance , incoming energy as short wave ( including visible ) electromagnetic radiation to the earth with outgoing energy as long wave ( infrared ) electromagnetic radiation from the earth . Any imbalance results in a change in the average temperature of the earth . 
 The most talked @-@ about applications of these models in recent years have been their use to infer the consequences of increasing greenhouse gases in the atmosphere , primarily carbon dioxide ( see greenhouse gas ) . These models predict an upward trend in the global mean surface temperature , with the most rapid increase in temperature being projected for the higher latitudes of the Northern Hemisphere . 
 Models can range from relatively simple to quite complex : 
 Simple radiant heat transfer model that treats the earth as a single point and averages outgoing energy 
 this can be expanded vertically ( radiative @-@ convective models ) , or horizontally 
 finally , ( coupled ) atmosphere – ocean – sea ice global climate models <unk> and solve the full equations for mass and energy transfer and radiant exchange . 
 Climate forecasting is a way by some scientists are using to predict climate change . In 1997 the prediction division of the International Research Institute for Climate and Society at Columbia University began generating seasonal climate forecasts on a real @-@ time basis . To produce these forecasts an extensive suite of forecasting tools was developed , including a <unk> ensemble approach that required thorough validation of each model 's accuracy level in simulating <unk> climate variability . 
 = Metric system = 
 The metric system is an internationally agreed decimal system of measurement . It was originally based on the mètre des Archives and the kilogramme des Archives introduced by the First French Republic in 1799 , but over the years the definitions of the metre and the kilogram have been refined , and the metric system has been extended to incorporate many more units . Although a number of variants of the metric system emerged in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries , the term is now often used as a synonym for " SI " or the " International System of Units " — the official system of measurement in almost every country in the world . 
 The metric system has been officially sanctioned for use in the United States since 1866 , but the US remains the only industrialised country that has not adopted the metric system as its official system of measurement . Many sources also cite Liberia and Myanmar as the only other countries not to have done so . Although the United Kingdom uses the metric system for most administrative and trade purposes , Imperial units are widely used by the public and are permitted or obligatory for some purposes , such as road signs . 
 Although the originators intended to devise a system that was equally accessible to all , it proved necessary to use prototype units in the custody of national or local authorities as standards . Control of the prototype units of measure was maintained by the French government until 1875 , when it was passed to an intergovernmental organisation , the General Conference on Weights and Measures ( CGPM ) . 
 From its beginning , the main features of the metric system were the standard set of interrelated base units and a standard set of prefixes in powers of ten . These base units are used to derive larger and smaller units that could replace a huge number of other units of measure in existence . Although the system was first developed for commercial use , the development of coherent units of measure made it particularly suitable for science and engineering . 
 The uncoordinated use of the metric system by different scientific and engineering disciplines , particularly in the late 19th century , resulted in different choices of base units even though all were based on the same definitions of the metre and the kilogram . During the 20th century , efforts were made to rationalise these units , and in 1960 , the CGPM published the International System of Units , which has since then been the internationally recognised standard metric system . 
 = = Features = = 
 Although the metric system has changed and developed since its inception , its basic concepts have hardly changed . Designed for transnational use , it consisted of a basic set of units of measurement , now known as base units . Derived units were built up from the base units using logical rather than empirical relationships while multiples and submultiples of both base and derived units were decimal @-@ based and identified by a standard set of prefixes . 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 At the outbreak of the French Revolution in 1789 , most countries and even some cities had their own system of measurement . Although different countries might have used units of measure with the same name , such as the foot , or local language equivalents such as pied , Fuß and <unk> , there was no consistency in the magnitude of those units , nor in the relationships with their multiples and submultiples , much like the modern @-@ day differences between the US and the UK pints and gallons . 
 The metric system was designed to be universal — in the words of the French philosopher Marquis de Condorcet it was to be " for all people for all time " . It was designed for ordinary people , for engineers who worked in human @-@ related measurements and for astronomers and physicists who worked with numbers both small and large , hence the huge range of the prefixes that have been defined in SI . 
 When the French Government first investigated the idea of overhauling their system of measurement , the concept of universality was put into practice in 1789 : Maurice de Talleyrand , acting on Condorcet 's advice , invited John Riggs Miller , a British parliamentarian and Thomas Jefferson , the American Secretary of State to George Washington , to work with the French in producing an international standard by promoting legislation in their respective legislative bodies . However , these early overtures failed and the custody of the metric system remained in the hands of the French government until 1875 . 
 In languages where the distinction is made , unit names are common nouns ( i.e. not proper nouns ) . They use the character set and follow the grammatical rules of the language concerned , for example " kilometre " , " <unk> " , but each unit has a symbol that is independent of language , for example " km " for " kilometre " , " V " for " volts " etc . 
 = = = Decimal multiples = = = 
 In the metric system , multiples and submultiples of units follow a decimal pattern , a concept identified as a possibility in 1586 by Simon Stevin , the Flemish mathematician who had introduced decimal fractions into Europe . This is done at the cost of losing the simplicity associated with many traditional systems of units where division by 3 does not result in awkward fractions ; for example one third of a foot is four inches , a simplicity that in 1790 was debated , but rejected by the originators of the metric system . In 1854 , in the introduction to the proceedings of the [ British ] Decimal Association , the mathematician Augustus de Morgan summarised the advantages of a decimal @-@ based system over a non @-@ decimal system thus : " In the simple rules of arithmetic , we practice a pure decimal system , nowhere interrupted by the entrance of any other system : from column to column we never carry anything but tens " . 
 A common set of decimal @-@ based prefixes that have the effect of multiplication or division by an integer power of ten can be applied to units which are themselves too large or too small for practical use . The concept of using consistent classical ( Latin or Greek ) names for the prefixes was first proposed in a report by the [ French Revolutionary ] Commission on Weights and Measures in May 1793 . The prefix kilo , for example , is used to multiply the unit by 1000 , and the prefix milli is to indicate a one @-@ thousandth part of the unit . Thus the kilogram and kilometre are a thousand grams and metres respectively , and a milligram and millimetre are one thousandth of a gram and metre respectively . These relations can be written symbolically as : 
 1 mg 
 = 0 @.@ 001 g 
 1 km = 
 1000 m 
 In the early days , multipliers that were positive powers of ten were given Greek @-@ derived prefixes such as kilo- and mega- , and those that were negative powers of ten were given Latin @-@ derived prefixes such as centi- and milli- . However , 1935 extensions to the prefix system did not follow this convention : the prefixes <unk> and micro- , for example have Greek roots . During the 19th century the prefix <unk> , derived from the Greek word <unk> ( <unk> ) , was used as a multiplier for 10000 . 
 When applying prefixes to derived units of area and volume that are expressed in terms of units of length squared or cubed , the square and cube operators are applied to the unit of length including the prefix , as illustrated below . 
 Prefixes are not usually used to indicate multiples of a second greater than 1 ; the non @-@ SI units of minute , hour and day are used instead . On the other hand , prefixes are used for multiples of the non @-@ SI unit of volume , the litre ( l , L ) such as millilitres ( ml ) . 
 = = = <unk> and replicable prototypes = = = 
 The base units used in the metric system must be realisable , ideally with reference to natural phenomena rather than unique artefacts . Each of the base units in SI is accompanied by a mise en pratique [ practical realisation ] published by the BIPM that describes in detail at least one way in which the base unit can be measured . Where possible , definitions of the base units were developed so that any laboratory equipped with proper instruments would be able to realise a standard without reliance on an artefact held by another country . In practice , such realisation is done under the auspices of a mutual acceptance arrangement ( MAA ) . 
 = = = = Metre and kilogram = = = = 
 In the original version of the metric system the base units could be derived from a specified length ( the metre ) and the weight [ mass ] of a specified volume ( 1 ⁄ 1000 of a cubic metre ) of pure water . Initially the de facto French Government of the day , the Assemblée nationale constituante , considered defining the metre as the length of a pendulum that has a period of one second at 45 ° N and an altitude equal to sea level . The altitude and latitude were specified to accommodate variations in gravity ; the specified latitude was a compromise between the latitude of London ( 51 ° <unk> ) , Paris ( 48 ° <unk> ) and the median parallel of the United States ( 38 ° N ) to accommodate variations . However the mathematician Borda persuaded the assembly that a survey having its ends at sea level and based on a meridian that spanned at least 10 % of the earth 's quadrant would be more appropriate for such a basis . 
 The available technology of the 1790s made it impracticable to use these definitions as the basis of the kilogram and the metre , so prototypes that represented these quantities insofar as was practicable were manufactured . On 22 June 1799 these prototypes were adopted as the definitive reference pieces , deposited in the Archives nationales and became known as the mètre des Archives and the kilogramme des Archives . Copies were made and distributed around France . These artefacts were replaced in 1889 by the new prototypes manufactured under international supervision . Insofar as was possible , the new prototypes were exact copies of the original prototypes , but used a later technology to ensure better stability . One of each of the kilogram and metre prototypes were chosen by lot to serve as the definitive international reference piece with the remainder being distributed to signatories of the Metre Convention . In 1889 there was no generally accepted theory regarding the nature of light but by 1960 the wavelength of specific light spectra could give a more accurate and reproducible value than a prototype metre . In that year the prototype metre was replaced by a formal definition which defines the metre in terms of the wavelength of specified light spectra . By 1983 it was accepted that the speed of light in vacuum was constant and that this constant provided a more reproducible procedure for measuring length . Therefore , the metre was redefined in terms of the speed of light . These definitions give a much better reproducibility and also allow anyone , anywhere with a suitably equipped laboratory , to make a standard metre . 
 = = = = Other base units = = = = 
 None of the other base units rely on a prototype – all are based on phenomena that are directly observable and had been in use for many years before formally becoming part of the metric system . 
 The second first became a de facto base unit within the metric system when , in 1832 , Carl Friedrich Gauss used it , the centimetre and the gram to derive the units associated with values of absolute measurements of the Earth 's magnetic field . The second , if based on the Earth 's rotation , is not a constant as the Earth 's rotation is slowing down — in 2008 the solar day was 0 @.@ 002 s longer than in 1820 . This had been known for many years ; consequently in 1952 the International Astronomical Union ( IAU ) defined the second in terms of the Earth 's rotation in the year 1900 . Measurements of time were made using extrapolation from readings based on astronomy . With the launch of SI in 1960 , the 11th CGPM adopted the IAU definition . In the years that followed , atomic clocks became significantly more reliable and precise ; and in 1968 the 13th CGPM redefined the second in terms of a specific frequency from the emission spectrum of the caesium 133 atom , a component of atomic clocks . This provided the means to measure the time associated with astronomical phenomena rather than using astronomical phenomena as the basis from which time measurements were made . 
 The CGS absolute unit of electric current , the <unk> , had been defined in terms of the force between two parallel current @-@ carrying wires in 1881 . In the 1940s , the International Electrotechnical Commission adopted an MKS variant of this definition for the ampere which was adopted in 1948 by the CGPM . 
 Temperature has always been based on observable phenomena — in 1744 the degree Centigrade was based on the freezing and boiling points of water . In 1948 the CGPM adopted the Centigrade scale , renamed it the " Celsius " temperature scale name and defined it in terms of the triple point of water . 
 When the mole and the candela were accepted by the CGPM in 1971 and 1975 respectively , both had been defined by third parties by reference to phenomena rather than artefacts . 
 = = = Coherence = = = 
 Each variant of the metric system has a degree of coherence — the various derived units are directly related to the base units without the need for intermediate conversion factors . For example , in a coherent system the units of force , energy and power are chosen so that the equations 
 hold without the introduction of unit conversion factors . Once a set of coherent units have been defined , other relationships in physics that use those units will automatically be true . Therefore , Einstein 's mass @-@ energy equation , E = mc2 , does not require extraneous constants when expressed in coherent units . 
 The CGS system had two units of energy , the erg that was related to mechanics and the calorie that was related to thermal energy ; so only one of them ( the erg ) could bear a coherent relationship to the base units . Coherence was a design aim of SI resulting in only one unit of energy being defined – the joule . 
 In SI , which is a coherent system , the unit of power is the " watt " which is defined as " one joule per second " . In the US customary system of measurement , which is non @-@ coherent , the unit of power is the " horsepower " which is defined as " 550 foot @-@ pounds per second " ( the pound in this context being the pound @-@ force ) . Similarly , neither the US gallon nor the imperial gallon is one cubic foot or one cubic yard — the US gallon is 231 cubic inches and the imperial gallon is 277 @.@ 42 cubic inches . 
 The concept of coherence was only introduced into the metric system in the third quarter of the 19th century ; in its original form the metric system was non @-@ coherent — in particular the litre was 0 @.@ 001 m3 and the are ( from which the hectare derives ) was 100 m2 . However the units of mass and length were related to each other through the physical properties of water , the gram having been designed as being the mass of one cubic centimetre of water at its freezing point . 
 = = History = = 
 In 1586 the Flemish mathematician Simon Stevin published a small pamphlet called De <unk> ( " the tenth " ) . Decimal fractions had been employed for the extraction of square roots some five centuries before his time , but nobody used decimal numbers in daily life . Stevin declared that using decimals was so important that the universal introduction of decimal weights , measures and coinage was only a matter of time . 
 One of the earliest proposals for a decimal system in which length , area , volume and mass were linked to each other was made by John Wilkins , first secretary of the Royal Society of London in his 1668 essay " An Essay towards a Real Character and a Philosophical Language " . His proposal used a pendulum that had a beat of one second as the basis of the unit of length . Two years later , in 1670 , Gabriel Mouton , a French abbot and scientist , proposed a decimal system of length based on the circumference of the Earth . His suggestion was that a unit , the <unk> , be defined as a minute of arc along a meridian . He then suggested a system of sub @-@ units , dividing successively by factors of ten into the centuria , <unk> , virga , virgula , <unk> , <unk> , and <unk> . His ideas attracted interest at the time , and were supported by both Jean Picard and Christiaan Huygens in 1673 , and also studied at the Royal Society in London . In the same year , Gottfried Leibniz independently made proposals similar to those of Mouton . 
 In pre @-@ revolutionary Europe , each state had its own system of units of measure . Some countries , such as Spain and Russia , saw the advantages of harmonising their units of measure with those of their trading partners . However , vested interests who profited from variations in units of measure opposed this . This was particularly prevalent in France where the huge inconsistency in the size of units of measure was one of the causes that , in 1789 , led to the outbreak of the French Revolution . During the early years of the revolution , savants including the Marquis de Condorcet , Pierre @-@ Simon Laplace , Adrien @-@ Marie Legendre , Antoine Lavoisier and Jean @-@ Charles de Borda set up a Commission of Weights and Measures . The commission was of the opinion that the country should adopt a completely new system of measure based on the principles of logic and natural phenomena . Logic dictated that such a system should be based on the radix used for counting . Their report of March 1791 to the Assemblée nationale constituante considered but rejected the view of Laplace that a duodecimal system of counting should replace the existing decimal system ; the view such a system was bound to fail prevailed . The commission 's final recommendation was that the assembly should promote a decimal @-@ based system of measurement . The leaders of the assembly accepted the views of the commission . 
 Initially France attempted to work with other countries towards the adoption of a common set of units of measure . Among the supporters of such an international system of units was Thomas Jefferson who , in 1790 , presented a document Plan for Establishing Uniformity in the Coinage , Weights , and Measures of the United States to Congress in which he advocated a decimal system that used traditional names for units ( such as ten inches per foot ) . The report was considered but not adopted by Congress . 
 = = = Original metric system = = = 
 The French law of 18 Germinal , Year III ( 7 April 1795 ) defined five units of measure : 
 The mètre for length 
 The are ( 100 m2 ) for area [ of land ] 
 The stère ( 1 m3 ) for volume of stacked firewood 
 The litre ( 1 dm3 ) for volumes of liquid 
 The gramme for mass . 
 This system continued the tradition of having separate base units for geometrically related dimensions , e.g. , mètre for lengths , are ( 100 m2 ) for areas , stère ( 1 m3 ) for dry capacities , and litre ( 1 dm3 ) for liquid capacities . The hectare , equal to a hundred ares , the area of a square 100 metres on a side ( about 2 @.@ 47 acres ) , is still in use . The early metric system included only a few prefixes from milli ( one thousandth ) to <unk> ( ten thousand ) . 
 Originally the kilogramme , defined as being one <unk> ( later renamed the litre ) of water at the melting point of ice , was called the grave ; the gramme being an alternative name for a thousandth of a grave . However , the word grave , being a synonym for the title " count " , had aristocratic connotations and was renamed the kilogramme . The name mètre was suggested by Auguste @-@ <unk> <unk> in May 1790 . 
 France officially adopted the metric system on 10 December 1799 . Although it was decreed that its use was to be mandatory in Paris that year and across the provinces the following year , the decree was not universally observed across France . 
 = = = International adoption = = = 
 Areas annexed by France during the Napoleonic era were the first to inherit the metric system . In 1812 Napoleon introduced a system known as mesures usuelles which used the names of pre @-@ metric units of measure , but defined them in terms of metric units – for example , the livre metrique ( metric pound ) was 500 g and the toise metrique ( metric fathom ) was 2 metres . After the Congress of Vienna in 1815 , France lost the territories that she had annexed ; some , such as the Papal States reverted to their pre @-@ revolutionary units of measure , others such as Baden adopted a modified version of the mesures usuelles , but France kept her system of measurement intact . 
 In 1817 the Netherlands reintroduced the metric system , but used pre @-@ revolutionary names — for example 1 centimetre became the <unk> ( thumb ) , the ons ( ounce ) became 100 g and so on . Certain German states adopted similar systems and in 1852 the German Zollverein ( customs union ) adopted the <unk> ( customs pound ) of 500 g for intrastate commerce . In 1872 the newly formed German Empire adopted the metric system as its official system of weights and measures and the newly formed Kingdom of Italy likewise , following the lead given by Piedmont , adopted the metric system in 1861 . 
 The Exposition Universelle ( 1867 ) ( Paris Exhibition ) devoted a stand to the metric system and by 1875 two thirds of the European population and close to half the world 's population had adopted the metric system . By 1872 the only principal European countries not to have adopted the metric system were Russia and the United Kingdom . 
 By 1920 countries comprising 22 % of the world 's population , mainly English @-@ speaking , used the imperial system ; 25 % used mainly the metric system and the remaining 53 % used neither . 
 In 1927 several million people in the United States sent over 100 @,@ 000 petitions backed by the Metric Association and The General Federation of Women 's Clubs urging Congress to adopt the metric system . The petition was opposed by the manufacturing industry , citing the cost of the conversion . 
 = = = International standards = = = 
 In 1861 a committee of the British Association for Advancement of Science ( BAAS ) including William Thomson ( later Lord Kelvin ) , James Clerk Maxwell and James Prescott Joule introduced the concept of a coherent system of units based on the metre , gram and second which , in 1873 , was extended to include electrical units . 
 On 20 May 1875 an international treaty known as the Convention du Mètre ( Metre Convention ) was signed by 17 states . This treaty established the following organisations to conduct international activities relating to a uniform system for measurements : 
 General Conference on Weights and Measures ( CGPM ) , an intergovernmental conference of official delegates of member nations and the supreme authority for all actions ; 
 International Committee for Weights and Measures ( CIPM ) , consisting of selected scientists and <unk> , which prepares and executes the decisions of the CGPM and is responsible for the supervision of the International Bureau of Weights and Measures ( BIPM ) ; 
 International Bureau of Weights and Measures ( BIPM ) , a permanent laboratory and world centre of scientific metrology , the activities of which include the establishment of the basic standards and scales of the principal physical quantities and maintenance of the international prototype standards . 
 In 1881 first International Electrical Congress adopted the BAAS recommendations on electrical units , followed by a series of congresses in which further units of measure were defined and the International Electrotechnical Commission ( IEC ) was set up with the specific task of overseeing electrical units of measure . This was followed by the International Congress of Radiology ( ISR ) who , at their inaugural meeting in 1926 , initiated the definition of radiological @-@ related units of measure . In 1921 the Metre Convention was extended to cover all units of measure , not just length and mass and in 1933 the 8th CGPM resolved to work with other international bodies to agree standards for electrical units that could be related back to the international prototypes . Since 1954 the CIPM committee that oversees the definition of units of measurement , the Consultative Committee for Units , has representatives from many international organisations including the ISR , IEC and ISO under the chairmanship of the CIPM . 
 = = Variants = = 
 A number of variants of the metric system evolved , all using the Mètre des Archives and Kilogramme des Archives ( or their descendants ) as their base units , but differing in the definitions of the various derived units . 
 = = = <unk> @-@ gram @-@ second systems = = = 
 The centimetre gram second system of units ( CGS ) was the first coherent metric system , having been developed in the 1860s and promoted by Maxwell and Thomson . In 1874 , this system was formally promoted by the British Association for the Advancement of Science ( BAAS ) . The system 's characteristics are that density is expressed in g / cm3 , force expressed in <unk> and mechanical energy in ergs . Thermal energy was defined in calories , one calorie being the energy required to raise the temperature of one gram of water from 15 @.@ 5 ° C to 16 @.@ 5 ° C. The meeting also proposed two sets of units for electrical and magnetic properties – the electrostatic set of units and the electromagnetic set of units . 
 = = = Metre @-@ kilogram @-@ second systems = = = 
 The CGS units of electricity were cumbersome to work with . This was remedied at the 1893 International Electrical Congress held in Chicago by defining the " international " ampere and ohm using definitions based on the metre , kilogram and second . In 1901 , Giovanni Giorgi showed that by adding an electrical unit as a fourth base unit , the various anomalies in electromagnetic systems could be resolved . The metre @-@ kilogram @-@ second @-@ coulomb ( <unk> ) and metre @-@ kilogram @-@ second @-@ ampere ( MKSA ) systems are examples of such systems . 
 The International System of Units ( Système international d 'unités or SI ) is the current international standard metric system and is also the system most widely used around the world . It is an extension of Giorgi 's MKSA system — its base units are the metre , kilogram , second , ampere , kelvin , candela and mole . 
 = = = Metre @-@ tonne @-@ second systems = = = 
 The metre @-@ tonne @-@ second system of units ( MTS ) was based on the metre , tonne and second – the unit of force was the <unk> and the unit of pressure was the <unk> . It was invented in France for industrial use and from 1933 to 1955 was used both in France and in the Soviet Union . 
 = = = Gravitational systems = = = 
 Gravitational metric systems use the kilogram @-@ force ( <unk> ) as a base unit of force , with mass measured in a unit known as the <unk> , Technische Mass Einheit ( <unk> ) , mug or metric slug . Although the CGPM passed a resolution in 1901 defining the standard value of acceleration due to gravity to be 980 @.@ 665 cm / s2 , gravitational units are not part of the International System of Units ( SI ) . 
 = = = International System of Units = = = 
 The 9th CGPM met in 1948 , three years after the end of the Second World War and fifteen years after the 8th CGPM . In response to formal requests made by the International Union of Pure and Applied Physics and by the French Government to establish a practical system of units of measure , the CGPM requested the CIPM to prepare recommendations for such a system , suitable for adoption by all countries adhering to the Metre Convention . The recommendation also catalogued symbols for the most important MKS and CGS units of measure and for the first time the CGPM made recommendations concerning derived units . At the same time the CGPM formally adopted a recommendation for the writing and printing of unit symbols and of numbers . 
 The CIPM 's draft proposal , which was an extensive revision and simplification of the metric unit definitions , symbols and terminology based on the MKS system of units , was put to the 10th CGPM in 1954 . In accordance with Giorgi 's proposals of 1901 , the CIPM also recommended that the ampere be the base unit from which electromechanical units would be derived . The definitions for the ohm and volt that had previously been in use were discarded and these units became derived units based on the metre , ampere , second and kilogram . After negotiations with the International Commission on Illumination ( CIE ) and IUPAP , two further base units , the degree kelvin and the candela were also proposed as base units . The full system and name " Système International d 'Unités " were adopted at the 11th CGPM in October 1960 . During the years that followed the definitions of the base units and particularly the methods of applying these definitions have been refined . 
 The formal definition of International System of Units ( SI ) along with the associated resolutions passed by the CGPM and the CIPM are published by the BIPM in brochure form at regular intervals . The eighth edition of the brochure Le Système International d 'Unités — The International System of Units was published in 2006 and is available on the internet . In October 2011 , at the 24th CGPM proposals were made to change the definitions of four of the base units . These changes should not affect the average person . 
 = = Relating SI to the real world = = 
 Although SI , as published by the CGPM , should , in theory , meet all the requirements of commerce , science and technology , certain units of measure have acquired such a position within the world community that it is likely they will be used for many years to come . In order that such units are used consistently around the world , the CGPM catalogued such units in Tables 6 to 9 of the SI brochure . These categories are : 
 Non @-@ SI units accepted for use with the International System of Units ( Table 6 ) . This list includes the hour and minute , the angular measures ( degree , minute and second of arc ) and the historic [ non @-@ coherent ] metric units , the litre , tonne and hectare ( originally agreed by the CGPM in 1879 ) 
 Non @-@ SI units whose values in SI units must be obtained experimentally ( Table 7 ) . This list includes various units of measure used in atomic and nuclear physics and in astronomy such as the dalton , the electron mass , the electron volt , the astronomical unit , the solar mass , and a number of other units of measure that are well @-@ established , but dependent on experimentally @-@ determined physical quantities . 
 Other non @-@ SI units ( Table 8 ) . This list catalogues a number of units of measure that have been used internationally in certain well @-@ defined spheres including the bar for pressure , the ångström for atomic physics , the nautical mile and the knot in navigation . 
 Non @-@ SI units associated with the CGS and the CGS @-@ Gaussian system of units ( Table 9 ) . This table catalogues a number of units of measure based on the CGS system and dating from the nineteenth century . They appear frequently in the literature , but their continued use is discouraged by the CGPM . 
 = = Usage around the world = = 
 The usage of the metric system varies around the world . According to the US Central Intelligence Agency 's Factbook ( 2007 ) , the International System of Units has been adopted as the official system of weights and measures by all nations in the world except for Myanmar ( Burma ) , Liberia and the United States , while the NIST has identified the United States as the only industrialised country where the metric system is not the predominant system of units . However , reports published since 2007 hold this is no longer true of Myanmar or Liberia . An Agence France @-@ Presse report from 2010 stated that Sierra Leone had passed a law to replace the imperial system with the metric system thereby aligning its system of measurement with that used by its Mano River Union ( <unk> ) neighbours Guinea and Liberia . Reports from Myanmar suggest that the country is also planning to adopt the metric system . 
 In the United States metric units , authorised by Congress in 1866 , are widely used in science , medicine , military , and partially in industry , but customary units predominate in household use . At retail stores the litre is a commonly used unit for volume , especially on bottles of beverages , and milligrams are used to <unk> the amounts of medications , rather than grains . On the other hand , non @-@ metric units are used in certain regulated environments such as nautical miles and knots in international aviation . Resistance to metrication , particularly in the UK and the US , has been connected to the perceived cost involved , a sense of patriotism and lack of desire to conform internationally . 
 In the countries of the Commonwealth of Nations the metric system has replaced the imperial system by varying degrees : Australia , New Zealand and Commonwealth countries in Africa are almost totally metric , India is mostly metric while Canada is partly metric . In the United Kingdom , the metric system , the use of which was first permitted for trade in 1864 , is used in much government business , in most industries including building , health and engineering and for pricing by measure or weight in most trading situations , both wholesale and retail . However the imperial system is widely used by the British public , such as feet and inches as a measurement of height , weight in stone and pounds , and is legally mandated in various cases , such as road @-@ sign distances , which must be given in yards and miles . In 2007 , the European Commission announced that it was to abandon the requirement for metric @-@ only labelling on packaged goods in the UK , and to allow dual metric – imperial marking to continue indefinitely . 
 Some other jurisdictions , such as Hong Kong , have laws mandating or permitting other systems of measurement in parallel with the metric system in some or all contexts . 
 = = = Variations in spelling = = = 
 The SI symbols for the metric units are intended to be identical , regardless of the language used but unit names are ordinary nouns and use the character set and follow the grammatical rules of the language concerned . For example , the SI unit symbol for kilometre is " km " everywhere in the world , even though the local language word for the unit name may vary . Language variants for the kilometre unit name include : <unk> ( Italian ) , Kilometer ( German ) , kilometer ( Dutch ) , <unk> ( French ) , <unk> ( Greek ) , <unk> / <unk> ( Portuguese ) , <unk> ( Spanish ) and <unk> ( Russian ) . 
 Variations are also found with the spelling of unit names in countries using the same language , including differences in American English and British spelling . For example , meter and liter are used in the United States whereas metre and litre are used in other English @-@ speaking countries . In addition , the official US spelling for the rarely used SI prefix for ten is <unk> . In American English the term metric ton is the normal usage whereas in other varieties of English tonne is common . Gram is also sometimes spelled gramme in English @-@ speaking countries other than the United States , though this older usage is declining . 
 = = = Conversion and calculation incidents = = = 
 The dual usage of or confusion between metric and non @-@ metric units has resulted in a number of serious incidents . These include : 
 Flying an overloaded American International Airways aircraft from Miami , Florida to <unk> , Venezuela on 26 May 1994 . The degree of overloading was consistent with ground crew reading the kilogram markings on the cargo as pounds . 
 In 1999 the Institute for Safe Medication Practices reported that confusion between grains and grams led to a patient receiving phenobarbital 0 @.@ 5 grams instead of 0 @.@ 5 grains ( 0 @.@ 03 grams ) after the practitioner misread the prescription . 
 The Canadian " Gimli Glider " accident in 1983 , when a Boeing 767 jet ran out of fuel in mid @-@ flight because of two mistakes made when calculating the fuel supply of Air Canada 's first aircraft to use metric measurements : mechanics miscalculated the amount of fuel required by the aircraft as a result of their unfamiliarity with metric units . 
 The root cause of the loss in 1999 of NASA 's US $ 125 million Mars Climate Orbiter was a mismatch of units – the spacecraft engineers calculated the thrust forces required for velocity changes using US customary units ( lbf · s ) whereas the team who built the thrusters were expecting a value in metric units ( N · s ) as per the agreed specification . 
 = = Conversion between SI and legacy units = = 
 During its evolution , the metric system has adopted many units of measure . The introduction of SI rationalised both the way in which units of measure were defined and also the list of units in use . These are now catalogued in the official SI Brochure . The table below lists the units of measure in this catalogue and shows the conversion factors connecting them with the equivalent units that were in use on the eve of the adoption of SI . 
 The SI Brochure also catalogues certain non @-@ SI units that are widely used with the SI in matters of everyday life or units that are exactly defined values in terms of SI units and are used in particular circumstances to satisfy the needs of commercial , legal , or specialised scientific interests . These units include : 
 = = Future developments = = 
 After the metre was redefined in 1960 , the kilogram was the only SI base unit that relied on a specific artefact . After the 1996 – 1998 <unk> a clear divergence between the international and various national prototype kilograms was observed . 
 At the 23rd CGPM ( 2007 ) , the CIPM was mandated to investigate the use of natural constants as the basis for all units of measure rather than the artefacts that were then in use . At a meeting of the CCU held in Reading , United Kingdom in September 2010 , a resolution and draft changes to the SI brochure that were to be presented to the next meeting of the CIPM in October 2010 were agreed to in principle . The CCU proposed to 
 in addition to the speed of light , define four constants of nature — Planck 's constant , an elementary charge , Boltzmann constant and Avogadro constant – to have exact values 
 retire the international prototype kilogram 
 revise the current definitions of the kilogram , ampere , kelvin and mole to make use of the above four constants of nature 
 tighten the wording of the definitions of all the base units 
 The CIPM meeting of October 2010 found that " the conditions set by the General Conference at its 23rd meeting have not yet been fully met . For this reason the CIPM does not propose a revision of the SI at the present time " . The CIPM did however sponsor a resolution at the 24th CGPM in which the changes were agreed in principle and which were expected to be finalised at the 25th CGPM in 2014 . 
 = 1982 British Army Gazelle friendly fire incident = 
 On 6 June 1982 , during the Falklands War , the British Royal Navy Type 42 destroyer HMS Cardiff engaged and destroyed a British Army Gazelle helicopter , serial number XX377 , in a friendly fire incident , killing all four occupants . Cardiff , on the lookout for aircraft flying supplies to the Argentine forces occupying the Falkland Islands , had misidentified the helicopter as an enemy C @-@ 130 Hercules . Although the helicopter 's loss was initially blamed on enemy action , a subsequent inquiry found Cardiff 's missiles to be the cause . 
 On the night of 5 June , HMS Cardiff was stationed to the east of the islands to provide gunfire support to the land forces and intercept enemy aircraft . At around 02 : 00 a radar contact was detected ; a British Army Air Corps Gazelle helicopter was making a routine delivery of personnel and equipment to a radio rebroadcast station on East Falkland . From the contact 's speed and course , Cardiff 's operations room crew assumed it to be hostile . Two Sea Dart missiles were fired , destroying the target . The Gazelle 's wreckage and crew were discovered the next morning , and the loss was attributed to enemy fire . Although Cardiff was suspected , later scientific tests on the wreckage proved inconclusive . 
 No formal inquiry was held until four years later . Defending their claim that the helicopter had been lost in action , the United Kingdom 's Ministry of Defence ( MoD ) stated that they had not wanted to " cause further anguish to relatives " while they were still trying to ascertain how the Gazelle had been shot down . The board of inquiry finally confirmed that the soldiers fell due to friendly fire . It recommended that " neither negligence nor blame should be attributed to any individual " , but identified several factors . A lack of communication between the army and the navy meant that 5th Infantry Brigade had not notified anyone of the helicopter 's flight . The navy had not informed the land forces that Cardiff had changed position to set up an ambush for Argentine aircraft travelling over the area . The helicopter 's identification friend or foe ( IFF ) transmitter was turned off , because it caused interference with the army 's Rapier anti @-@ aircraft missile system . The board of inquiry 's findings prompted criticism of the MoD 's initial response to the incident . 
 = = Background = = 
 On 2 April 1982 , the British overseas territory of the Falkland Islands was invaded by neighbouring Argentina . The United Kingdom , nearly 8 @,@ 000 miles ( 13 @,@ 000 km ) away , assembled and dispatched a naval task force of 28 @,@ 000 troops to recapture the islands . The conflict ended that June with the surrender of the Argentine forces ; the battles fought on land , at sea , and in the air had cost the lives of some 900 British and Argentine servicemen . 
 In early May , British troops landed at San Carlos on the western side of East Falkland , and from there moved overland towards the islands ' capital of Stanley . To support the advance , logistical supplies were ferried to the troops by helicopter from San Carlos . The Argentine forces occupying Stanley were supplied throughout the war by C @-@ 130 Hercules aircraft from the Argentine mainland . These " milk @-@ runs " , as the British termed them , were a source of concern to the Royal Navy , and various attempts were made to intercept them . 
 = = Incident = = 
 On the night of 5 June , the British Type 42 destroyer HMS Cardiff took up station on the " Bluff Cove <unk> " to the east of the islands . Tasked with a dual mission , Cardiff was to provide fire support to the marines of 3 Commando Brigade , and to interdict any Argentine aircraft attempting to fly into Stanley . The destroyer had performed a similar role four nights previously , when she unsuccessfully attempted to shoot down a re @-@ supply aircraft as it landed , and again as it took off . 
 Meanwhile , pilots Staff Sergeant Christopher Griffin and Lance Corporal Simon Cockton , of 656 Squadron Army Air Corps , had been ordered to fly equipment and personnel to a malfunctioning radio re @-@ broadcast station on top of Pleasant Peak . The station had been established the previous day to provide a communications link between the 5th Infantry Brigade headquarters at Darwin , and the 2nd Battalion , Parachute Regiment at Fitzroy . Night flying conditions were excellent , with a clear sky , a prominent moon and a wind speed of 20 kn ( 37 km / h ) . The crew departed from Goose Green in Gazelle serial number XX377 and collected the replacement equipment from the headquarters at Darwin . They also took on board two passengers ; Major Michael Forge , the OC of 205 Signal Squadron , and one of his technicians , Staff Sergeant John Baker . Griffin was an experienced pilot ; the flight to the re @-@ broadcast station was expected to take ten minutes . 
 At 02 : 00 local time , Cardiff 's operations room detected XX377 on her surface plot radar at a range of 25 nautical miles ( 46 km ) . The helicopter 's identification friend or foe ( IFF ) system was turned off , so receiving no friendly transmissions and with the contact apparently heading towards Stanley , the operations room crew assumed it to be hostile . After calculating its speed they believed they were tracking an Argentine fixed @-@ wing aircraft — either a Hercules conducting a resupply mission , or a FMA IA 58 <unk> ground @-@ attack aircraft sent to retaliate for Cardiff 's shelling . Cardiff fired two of her Sea Dart missiles . 5th Infantry Brigade lost radio contact with the Gazelle , and simultaneously the exploding missile warheads were seen and heard by the re @-@ broadcast station 's personnel atop Pleasant Peak . Cardiff 's crew were able to see the fireball , but only with the aid of night vision goggles . 
 The helicopter 's loss caused the British to suspect that Argentine forces were still operating in the area , so patrols were mounted by Gurkha soldiers . When the Gurkhas came across the personnel manning the Pleasant Peak station there was potential for another friendly fire incident to occur . At first light a proper search was carried out , and the Gazelle 's wreckage was found along with the dead aircrew and passengers ; 5th Infantry Brigade 's first casualties of the war . Immediately there were suspicions that Cardiff had been responsible for the shootdown , and later that evening Rear Admiral " Sandy " Woodward declared a " Weapons Tight " order , forbidding the engagement of any aircraft not positively identified as hostile , for all contacts detected flying over East Falkland at less than 200 kn ( 370 km / h ) and under 610 m ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) . 
 = = Investigations = = 
 The crew 's bodies were initially examined by senior medical officer , Surgeon @-@ Captain Richard " Rick " Jolly of the Royal Navy . The helicopter 's wreckage was inspected on @-@ site , but the British were unable to determine if it had been destroyed by Cardiff 's missiles or by Argentine fire . This uncertainty prompted the decision not to hold a board of inquiry , and XX377 was declared " lost in action " . It was surmised that , if the relatives of the deceased were told that the Gazelle might have been lost to friendly fire , it would add to their grief . After the war , missile fragments found in the wreckage were taken to the British government 's aviation research facility at RAE Farnborough for analysis . The scientific tests concluded that the fragments were not from a British Sea Dart missile , despite a Sea Dart casing later being found " several hundred yards " away from the wreckage . 
 In December 1982 an inquest was held by a Southampton coroner into the death of Lance Corporal Cockton after his body was repatriated to the UK . Based on RAE Farnborough 's test results , the Army Air Corps submitted evidence stating that the analysis of the warhead fragments found in the wreckage indicated that the helicopter had been destroyed by a type of anti @-@ aircraft missile " known to have been in the possession of the enemy " . The test results were reviewed in November 1985 and determined that there could be " no definitive conclusion as to the exact source of the missile fragments recovered from the crash site " . In June 1986 , John Stanley , the Minister of State for the Armed Forces , announced in his written answers to the House of Commons : " the [ Southampton ] coroner has been informed accordingly . " 
 In October 1986 , partly due to pressure from Cockton 's mother and the anti @-@ war politician Tam Dalyell , an official board of inquiry was finally opened . The board took a month to reach the conclusion that XX377 was shot down by Cardiff . Historian Hugh <unk> remarks : " It took [ the ] MoD four years and two investigations , the first either incompetent or a deliberate cover @-@ up , even to admit the Gazelle blue @-@ on @-@ blue . " The board 's findings were made public by a Freedom of Information Act request in July 2008 , although Paragraph 13 of the report was redacted under Section 26 of the act as it " contains operational details of the Royal Navy 's activities , which , even with the passage of time since the Falklands campaign , would be of use to potential enemies . " 
 The board of inquiry found that standard operating procedure dictated that the commanders of 5th Infantry Brigade were not required to declare the helicopter 's mission to any other authority , as the flight was to occur in brigade airspace on a brigade task . Gazelle XX377 was equipped with an IFF transmitter , but this was turned off . In the opinion of the board , " had IFF been in use there is little doubt that Cardiff would not have engaged the aircraft that night . " At the time , less than half of the land force 's helicopters were fitted with IFF transmitters , and those that were had been ordered not to use them because they inhibited the tracking systems of the British ground @-@ based Rapier anti @-@ aircraft missile batteries . A misconception about the Royal Navy 's ability to engage air targets over land led to the navy not being informed that the army 's helicopters were not using IFF . The board of inquiry concluded that it was this failure to communicate , together with the navy 's assumption that all helicopters would be operating IFF , which " had a cumulative effect [ and ] was a major cause of [ the ] accident . " However , the board recommended that " neither negligence nor blame should be attributed to any individual " . 
 = = Effects = = 
 Given that the role of helicopters in land force operations was increasing , as was the integration of guided missile destroyers for coastal defence , the board of inquiry recommended an amendment to NATO procedures for amphibious warfare and naval gunfire support , to alert other armed forces to the danger of underestimating a ship 's missile engagement zone over land . During the late 1980s , the British government placed more emphasis on joint warfare training , with exercises , such as Purple Warrior , taking place in Oman and Scotland . The board noted the establishment of the Permanent Joint Headquarters , designed to put an end to the " ad hoc and reactive way " in which operations had been carried out while under single service control . IFF transmitters were fitted to all Army Air Corps and Royal Marine Gazelle and Lynx helicopters , and the problem of operating IFF in the vicinity of Rapier batteries was successfully addressed . The board supported a recommendation that the responsibilities of naval gunfire @-@ support liaison officers could be broadened to include the interpretation of air defence problems during inshore joint warfare operations . 
 A memorial cross was installed on Pleasant Peak , and the number " 205 " was painted at the crash site by the soldiers of 205 Signal Squadron . The number is approximately 40 m ( 130 ft ) wide and can be seen from the air ( 51 @.@ <unk> ° S 58 @.@ <unk> ° W ﻿ / <unk> ; <unk> ) . 
 = Thespis ( opera ) = 
 Thespis , or The Gods Grown Old , is an operatic extravaganza that was the first collaboration between dramatist W. S. Gilbert and composer Arthur Sullivan . No musical score of Thespis was ever published , and most of the music has been lost . Gilbert and Sullivan went on to become the most famous and successful artistic partnership in Victorian England , creating a string of comic opera hits , including H.M.S. Pinafore , The Pirates of Penzance and The Mikado , which continue to be popular . 
 Thespis premièred in London at the Gaiety Theatre on 26 December 1871 . Like many productions at that theatre , it was written in a broad , burlesque style , considerably different from Gilbert and Sullivan 's later works . It was a success , for a Christmas entertainment of the time , and closed on 8 March 1872 , after a run of 63 performances . It was advertised as " An entirely original Grotesque Opera in Two Acts " . 
 The story follows an acting troupe headed by Thespis , the legendary Greek father of the drama , who temporarily trade places with the gods on Mount Olympus , who have grown elderly and ignored . The actors turn out to be comically inept rulers . Having seen the ensuing mayhem down below , the angry gods return , sending the actors back to Earth as " eminent tragedians , whom no one ever goes to see " . Gilbert would return to this theme twenty @-@ five years later in his last opera with Sullivan , The Grand Duke , in which a theatre company temporarily replaces the ruler of a small country and decides to " revive the classic memories of Athens at its best " . 
 Seasonal works like Thespis were not normally expected to endure , and apart from a benefit performance shortly after the original staging , Thespis was not performed again during its creators ' lifetimes . A renewed interest in the piece began in the 1950s , and numerous productions have been performed since , either with music taken from Sullivan 's other works , or with original music . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Act I = = = 
 Scene : A Ruined Temple on the Summit of Mount Olympus 
 On Mount Olympus , the elderly deities complain of feeling old and lament their waning influence on Earth . Mercury complains that the older gods are lazy and leave all their duties to him , while he gets no credit for all his drudgery . Jupiter says that matters have reached a crisis , but he is unsure what can be done about it . Just then , the gods see a swarm of mortals ascending the mountain and withdraw to observe them from a distance . 
 Thespis 's acting company enters for a picnic celebrating the marriage of two of its members , Sparkeion and Nicemis . The actors , being cheap , have failed to contribute substantial food items to the picnic . Sparkeion flirts with his former fiancée , Daphne , which annoys Nicemis . In retaliation , Nicemis flirts with her old suitor , Thespis , but he declines to flirt back . Thespis explains to his troupe that a successful manager must be aloof from those he manages , or he will lose his authority . 
 Jupiter , Mars and Apollo enter . All of the actors flee in terror , except for Thespis . Jupiter asks Thespis whether he is impressed with the father of the gods . Thespis replies that the gods are unimpressive and suggests that they go down to earth in disguise to " mingle " and judge for themselves what people think of them . They agree to invest the actors with their powers , as they take a merry holiday below on Earth . Thespis agrees that he and his company will keep things running on Mount Olympus during the gods ' absence . Each actor takes the place of one of the gods , with Thespis himself replacing Jupiter . Mercury stays behind to offer any advice the actors may need . 
 = = = Act II = = = 
 The Same Scene , One Year Later , with the Ruins Restored 
 Under Thespis 's direction , Olympus has been restored to its former splendour , and the Thespians enjoy ambrosia and nectar . Thespis 's rule is very liberal , and he has advised his troupe not to " be hampered by routine and red tape and precedent " . The celestial assignments , however , have caused some difficulties , as the romantic entanglements of the actors in real life conflict with those of the gods that they are playing . Venus , played by <unk> , is supposed to be married to Mars , but the actor playing Mars is her father . A possible solution is discovered in Venus having actually married Vulcan , but Vulcan is her grandfather . Sparkeion , who took on the role of Apollo , accompanies his wife , Nicemis , who plays Diana , on her nightly duties , so that the sun is up during the night . 
 Mercury informs Thespis that the substitute gods have received many complaints from mortals because some are not performing their functions , and others ' ill @-@ judged experiments have wreaked havoc in the world below . For instance , <unk> , the replacement for Mars , is a pacifist and a coward ; the substitute for Hymen refuses to marry anyone ; and the ersatz Pluto is too tenderhearted to let anyone die . Daphne , who plays the muse Calliope , comes to Thespis and claims , based on a bowdlerised edition of the Greek myths , that Calliope was married to Apollo . She points out that Apollo , played by Sparkeion , is the brother of Diana ( played by Sparkeion 's wife , Nicemis ) . Thespis decides that Sparkeion is married to Daphne while they are gods , but his marriage to Nicemis will resume when they are mortals once again . 
 When the gods return , they are furious and tell Thespis that he has " deranged the whole scheme of society " . Thespis says that they should calm down , as the list of mortals ' complaints is about to be read . The gods watch incognito as Mercury presents the complaints : The actors have ruined the weather ; caused strife among the nations ; and there is no wine , since Bacchus is a teetotaller . After listening to these grievances , the gods angrily shed their disguises . The actors beg to stay on Olympus , but Jupiter punishes them for their folly by sending them back to earth cursed as " eminent tragedians , whom no one ever goes to see " . 
 = = Roles and original cast = = 
 Gods 
 Jupiter , Aged Deity – John Maclean 
 Apollo , Aged Deity – Fred Sullivan 
 Mars , Aged Deity – Frank Wood 
 Diana , Aged Deity – Mrs. Henry Leigh 
 Venus , Aged Deity [ uncredited ] – ( Miss Jolly ) 
 Mercury – Ellen " Nellie " Farren 
 Thespians 
 Thespis , Manager of a Travelling Theatrical Co . – J. L. Toole 
 <unk> , his Stage Manager – J. G. Taylor 
 <unk> – Mr. Marshall 
 <unk> – Robert Soutar ( Nellie Farren 's husband ) 
 <unk> – Harry Payne 
 <unk> – Fred Payne 
 Sparkeion – Mlle. Clary ( Real name : Mlle. <unk> @-@ <unk> ) 
 Nicemis – Constance <unk> 
 <unk> – Rose Berend 
 Daphne – Annie Tremaine 
 Cymon – Miss L. Wilson 
 Principal dancers : Mlle. Esta , Misses Lizzie Wright and Smithers 
 Chorus of aged deities and thespians ; Gaiety Corps de Ballet 
 The first performance was conducted by Arthur Sullivan . Subsequent performances were conducted by Meyer Lutz , the theatre 's musical director . In addition to playing <unk> , the theatre 's stage manager , Robert Soutar , stage managed the piece . The Ballet Master was W. H. Payne 
 = = Background = = 
 = = = Genesis = = = 
 Impresario and author John Hollingshead , the lessee of London 's Gaiety Theatre since 1868 , had produced a number of successful musical burlesques and operettas there . Indeed , Hollingshead " boasted that he kept alight ' the sacred lamp of burlesque . ' " Gilbert and Sullivan were each well acquainted with the Gaiety and its house artistes . Gilbert 's Robert the Devil ( a burlesque of the opera Robert le Diable ) had been on the programme on the theatre 's opening night on 21 December 1868 , with Nellie Farren in the title role , and played successfully for over 100 nights . Constance <unk> and Annie Tremaine ( both of whom had roles in Thespis ) were also in the cast of Robert , and Arthur Sullivan was in the audience on that opening night as one of Hollingshead 's guests . It was a great success , " received with a storm of approbation " . Less successfully , Gilbert had also written a play for the theatre in 1869 called An Old Score . Hollingshead would later say that the piece was " too true to nature " . By late September or early October 1871 , Gaiety programmes announced that " The Christmas Operatic Extravaganza will be written by W. S. Gilbert , with original music by Arthur Sullivan . " There would be prominent roles for the popular comedian J. L. Toole , as well as Farren , the theatre 's star " principal boy " in all of its burlesques . 
 How and when the pair came to collaborate on Thespis is uncertain . Gilbert was a logical choice for the assignment . With seven operas and plays premièring that year and over a dozen other burlesques , farces and extravaganzas under his belt , he was well known to London theatregoers as a comic dramatist . Sullivan , however , was at this point mainly known for his serious music . His completed music that year included the choral cantata On Shore and Sea , a suite of incidental music for Shakespeare 's The Merchant of Venice , and numerous hymns , including " Onward , Christian Soldiers " . He did have two comic operas to his credit , Cox and Box ( 1866 ) and The Contrabandista ( 1867 ) , but the latter was four years in the past and had been unsuccessful . In September 1871 , Sullivan had been engaged to conduct at The Royal National Opera , but it failed abruptly , leaving him unexpectedly without commitments . Hollingshead 's offer of a role to his brother , Fred Sullivan , may have encouraged him to write the music for Thespis . 
 The production " aroused a great deal of interest and speculation " . Ironically , it had " probably the largest audience " of any Gilbert and Sullivan première , as the Gaiety was the largest of the five London theatres at which their joint works premièred . 
 = = = Composition = = = 
 Gilbert had a busy autumn . His play On Guard had an unsuccessful run at the Court Theatre , opening on 28 October 1871 , while his most successful play to date , Pygmalion and Galatea , opened on 9 December , only a few days before rehearsals for Thespis were to begin . Sullivan , however , had more time on his hands after a Manchester production of The Merchant of Venice , for which he supplied incidental music , had its première on 9 September . 
 Both Gilbert and Sullivan recalled that Thespis was written in some haste . Sullivan recalled , simply , that " both music and libretto were very hurriedly written " . In his 1883 autobiography , Gilbert wrote : 
 Soon after the production of Pygmalion and Galatea I wrote the first of many libretti , in collaboration with Mr Arthur Sullivan . This was called Thespis ; or , the Gods Grown Old . It was put together in less than three weeks , and was produced at the Gaiety theatre after a week 's rehearsal . It ran eighty nights , but it was a crude and ineffective work , as might be expected , taking into consideration the circumstances of its rapid composition . 
 By 1902 , Gilbert 's recollection of the time frame had expanded to five weeks : 
 I may state that " Thespis " was in no sense a failure although it achieved no considerable success . I believe it ran about seven [ ty ] nights — a fair run in those days . The piece was produced under stress of tremendous hurry . It was invented , written , composed , rehearsed , and produced within five weeks . 
 Gilbert 's five @-@ week estimate is " in conflict with other apparently incontrovertible facts " . Sullivan 's nephew , Herbert Sullivan , wrote that the libretto was already in existence before his uncle became involved in the project : " Gilbert showed [ Hollingshead ] the libretto of an operatic Extravaganza Thespis , and Hollingshead forthwith sent it to Sullivan to set . " Gilbert generally sketched out his libretti some months in advance of a production but did not write a finished libretto until he had a firm commitment to produce it . At the very least , a " rough draft of the plot " must have existed by 30 October , in light of a letter on that date from Gilbert 's agent to R. M. Field of the Boston Museum Theatre , which reads : 
 At Xmas will be produced at the Gaiety Theatre , a new and original Opera <unk> in English , by W. S. Gilbert , Esq . , & Arthur Sullivan , Esq. does the new music . It is expected to be a Big Thing — and the purport of my present letter to you is — first — to send you ( this day ) rough sketch of the piece for your own reading , and secondly to ask you — if you care and will cause the piece to be rightly protected — with a view to sale in all places possible in the United States . ... Messrs. G. & S. are now hard at work on said piece . 
 Gilbert did , in fact , conclude an agreement with Field , and the first published libretto advised : " Caution to American Pirates . — The Copyright of the Dialogue and Music of this Piece , for the United States and Canada , has been assigned to Mr. Field , of the Boston Museum , by agreement , dated 7th December , 1871 . " If Field mounted the work , however , the production has not been traced . Gilbert 's concern about American copyright pirates foreshadowed the difficulties he and Sullivan would later encounter with unauthorised " pirated " productions of H.M.S. Pinafore , The Mikado and their other popular works . In any case , the libretto was " published and circulated " in London in mid @-@ December . 
 = = = Production = = = 
 With the piece set to open on 26 December , Gilbert first read the libretto to the cast on 14 December , but Toole , who was playing the central role of Thespis , did not return from a tour of the British provinces until 18 December . He then appeared in nine performances at the Gaiety in the six days immediately after his return , and other actors had similar commitments . In addition , Hollingshead had committed the company to perform a pantomime at The Crystal Palace on 21 December , which included many of the performers who would be in Thespis . Lastly , Thespis was to play as the afterpiece to an H. J. Byron comedy , <unk> than Life , which shared many of its actors , including Toole and Fred Sullivan , and had to be rehearsed at the same time . 
 Despite the short time available for rehearsals , Sullivan recalled that Gilbert insisted that the chorus play a major role , as it would do in their later Savoy operas : 
 Until Gilbert took the matter in hand choruses were dummy concerns , and were practically nothing more than a part of the stage setting . It was in ' Thespis ' that Gilbert began to carry out his expressed determination to get the chorus to play its proper part in the performance . At this moment it seems difficult to realise that the idea of the chorus being anything more than a sort of stage audience was , at that time , a tremendous novelty . In consequence of this innovation , some of the incidents at the rehearsal of ' Thespis ' were rather amusing . I remember that , on one occasion , one of the principals became quite indignant and said , ' Really , Mr. Gilbert , why should I stand here ? I am not a chorus @-@ girl ! ' to which Gilbert replied curtly , ' No , madam , your voice is not strong enough , or no doubt you would <unk> 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Opening night = = = 
 The première was under rehearsed , as several critics noted , and the work was also evidently in need of cutting : Gaiety management had advised that carriages should be called for 11 : 00 p.m. , but Thespis was still playing past midnight . The Orchestra reported that " scarcely one player ... was more than ' rough perfect ' in his part . " The Observer commented that " the acting , as well as the business , will want working up before it can be fairly criticized ... the opera ... was not ready " . The Daily Telegraph suggested that " It is more satisfactory for many reasons to look upon the performance last evening as a full dress rehearsal .... When Thespis ends at the orthodox Gaiety closing hour , and the opera has been energetically rehearsed , few happier entertainments will be found . " 
 Some critics could not see past the production 's state of disarray . The Hornet captioned its review , " Thespis ; or , the Gods Grown Old and <unk> ! " The Morning Advertiser found it " a dreary , tedious two @-@ act rigmarole of a plot ... grotesque without wit , and the music thin without liveliness ... however , not entirely devoid of melody .... The curtain falls before a yawning and weary audience . " But others found much to admire in the work , despite the poor opening performance . The Illustrated Times wrote : 
 It is terribly severe on Mr. W. S. Gilbert and Arthur Sullivan , the joint authors of Thespis , that their work was produced in such a crude and unsatisfactory state . Thespis on its own merits — merits of literary worth , merits of fun , merits of song writing deserves to succeed ; but the management has crippled a good play by insufficiency of rehearsals and a want of that requisite polish and aplomb without which these merry operas are useless . I must state , however , that Thespis is well worth seeing ; and when it has been corrected and attracts the proper Gaiety audience , it will hold its own bravely . It is a pity , indeed , that such a play , so rich in humour and so delicate in music , was produced for the edification of a Boxing @-@ Night audience . Anything would have done for such an occasion .... Unless I am very much mistaken , and despite the hisses of Boxing @-@ Night ... the ballads and wit of Mr. Gilbert [ and ] the pretty strains of Mr. Arthur Sullivan ... will carry Thespis through and make it — as it deserves to be — the most praiseworthy piece of the Christmas season . 
 Clement Scott , writing in the Daily Telegraph , had a mostly favourable reaction : 
 Possibly a holiday audience is disinclined to dive into the mysteries of heathen mythology , and does not care to exercise the requisite intellect to unravel an amusing , and by no means intricate , plot .... Certain it is , however , that the greeting which awaited Thespis , or The Gods Grown Old , was not so cordial as might have been expected . The story , written by Mr. W. S. Gilbert in his liveliest manner , is so original , and the music contributed by Mr. Arthur Sullivan so pretty and fascinating , that we are inclined to be disappointed when we find the applause fitful , the laughter scarcely spontaneous , and the curtain falling not without sounds of disapprobation . Such a fate as this was certainly not deserved , and the verdict of last evening cannot be taken as final . Thespis is too good to be put on one side and cold @-@ shouldered in this fashion : and we anticipate that judicious curtailment and constant rehearsal will enable us shortly to tell a very different tale . 
 The Observer commented , " ... we have authors and musicians quite as talented as [ the French ] .... The subject of Thespis is unquestionably funny .... Mr. Arthur Sullivan has entered with heart into the spirit of Mr. Gilbert 's fun , he has brightened it up with the most fanciful and delightful music " . 
 = = = Subsequent performances = = = 
 Many writers in the early 20th century perpetuated a myth that Thespis ran only a month and was considered a failure . In fact , it remained open until 8 March . Of the nine London pantomimes that appeared during the 1871 – 72 holiday season , five closed before Thespis did . By its nature , the genre did not lend itself to long runs , and all nine had closed by the end of March . Moreover , the Gaiety normally only ran productions for two or three weeks ; the run of Thespis was extraordinary for the theatre . 
 As they would do with all their operas , Gilbert and Sullivan made cuts and alterations after the first performance . Two days after the opening , Sullivan wrote to his mother , " I have rarely seen anything so beautiful put upon the stage . The first night I had a great reception , but the music went badly , and the singer sang half a tone sharp , so that the enthusiasm of the audience did not sustain itself towards me . Last night I cut out the song , the music went very well , and consequently I had a hearty call before the curtain at the end of Act II . " The piece eventually settled into a respectable state , and later critics were much more enthusiastic than those on opening night . 
 By the third night , the London Figaro could report : " I must say that not a single hitch in the performance is now to be perceived , and that the applause and evident delight of the audience from beginning to end , the piece occupying a space of time within two hours . " On 6 January 1872 , the Penny Illustrated Paper commented that " Mr. Gilbert 's Gaiety extravaganza grows in public favour and deservedly so " . On 9 January , the Daily Telegraph reported a visit by His Royal Highness , the Duke of Edinburgh . By 27 January , the Illustrated Times noted that " a chance playgoer will certainly not find a seat at the Gaiety .... Thespis can , after all , boast the success which was predicted " . Land and Water reported on 3 February that " Thespis is now in capital working order . " 
 Performances of Thespis were interrupted on 14 February 1872 , Ash Wednesday , since London theatres refrained from presenting costumed performances out of respect for the religious holiday . Instead , a " miscellaneous entertainment " was given at the Gaiety , consisting of <unk> , performing dogs and , coincidentally , a sketch parodying a penny reading by the young George Grossmith , who , several years later , became Gilbert and Sullivan 's principal comedian . 
 On 17 February , Henry Sutherland Edwards wrote in the Musical World : " In almost all conjunctions of music and words , there is a sacrifice of one to the other ; but in Thespis ... Sufficient opportunities have been given for music ; and the music serves only to adorn the piece . " Similar reports continued to appear through early March , when Thespis closed . The final performance during the authors ' lifetimes was given less than two months later , on 27 April , at a matinée for the benefit of Mlle. Clary , the original Sparkeion . On such an occasion , a performer would normally choose a piece likely to sell well , as the beneficiary was entitled to the income ( after expenses ) , and tickets were generally offered at " inflated prices " . The actress was a Gaiety favourite , " not only in respect of her voice but also her delicious French accent and , of course , her figure . " Others recalled " the charm of Mlle. Clary , with her pretty face and piquant broken English " . She had been particularly successful as Sparkeion , and her song in Act II , " Little Maid of Arcadee " , was the only one chosen for publication . 
 = = = Aftermath = = = 
 After the production of Thespis , Gilbert and Sullivan went their separate ways , reuniting three years later , with Richard D 'Oyly Carte as their manager , to produce Trial by Jury in 1875 . When that work was a surprise success , there were discussions of quickly reviving Thespis for the 1875 Christmas season . Gilbert wrote to Sullivan : 
 They seem very anxious to have it and wanted me to name definite terms . Of course I couldn 't answer for you , but they pressed me so much to give them an idea of what our terms would be likely to be that I suggested that possibly we might be disposed to accept two guineas a night each with a guarantee of 100 nights minimum . Does this meet your views , & if so , could you get it done in time . I am going to re @-@ write a considerable portion of the dialogue . 
 The proposed revival was mentioned in several more letters throughout the autumn of 1875 , until on 23 November Gilbert wrote , " I have heard no more about Thespis . It is astonishing how quickly these capitalists dry up under the magic influence of the words ' cash down ' . " In 1895 , with Richard D 'Oyly Carte struggling to rediscover success at the Savoy , he once again proposed a revival of Thespis , but the idea was not pursued . No mention of the whereabouts of the music of Thespis exists since 1897 , and scholars have searched for it among many of the extant collections . Except for two songs and some ballet music , it is presumed lost . 
 The reasons why Thespis went <unk> are not known . Some commentators speculate that Sullivan used the music in his other operas . If this were true , then " for this reason alone a revival would have become impossible " . However , evidence that Sullivan did so has eluded discovery . Another possible explanation is that Gilbert and Sullivan came to regard Thespis , with its " brazen girls in tights and short skirts " , and broad burlesque @-@ style humour , as " the kind of work they wished to avoid " . They later renounced travesti roles and revealing dresses on their actresses , and made publicly known their disapproval of them . In 1885 , Hollingshead wrote to the Pall Mall Gazette , " Mr. Gilbert is somewhat severe on a style of burlesque which he did much to popularise in the old days before he invented what I may call burlesque in long clothes . … Mr Gilbert never objected to the dresses in Robert the Devil nor to the dresses in Thespis . " 
 In 1879 , Sullivan , Gilbert and Carte were in the midst of a legal battle with the former directors of the Comedy Opera Company , which had produced H.M.S. Pinafore . Sullivan wrote to Hollingshead , saying : " You once settled a precedent for me which may just at present be of great importance to me . I asked you for the band parts of the Merry Wives of Windsor ... and [ you ] said , ' They are yours , as our run is over .... ' Now will you please let me have them , and the parts of Thespis also at once . I am detaining the parts of Pinafore , so that the directors shall not take them away from the Comique tomorrow , and I base my claim on the precedent you set . " 
 = = = Modern productions = = = 
 After its last performance at the Gaiety in 1872 , Thespis appears to have remained unperformed until 1953 , although an attempted reconstruction from the 1940s has been discovered . Tillett and Spencer , who discovered the ballet music , identified twenty separate reconstructions of Thespis between 1953 and 2002 . About half of these use music adapted from Sullivan 's other works ; the others use new music for all but the surviving songs , or , in a few cases , re @-@ compose those as well . No version has become predominant in recent productions . 
 Theatre historian Terence Rees developed a version of the libretto that attempts to correct the many errors noted in the surviving libretto . Rees also prepared a performance version , based on the libretto , which included a few interpolated lyrics from Gilbert 's non @-@ Sullivan operas in an attempt to replace the missing songs . A score was supplied by Garth Morton , based on music from lesser @-@ known Sullivan operas , and this version has been recorded . A version with a score by Bruce Montgomery has been performed several times , including in 2000 at the International Gilbert and Sullivan Festival . In 1996 , a version with new music by Quade Winter was produced by the Ohio Light Opera . 
 In 2008 , a Sullivan pastiche score ( with some Offenbach added ) , arranged by Timothy Henty , was first used with Gilbert 's libretto adapted by Anthony Baker , at the <unk> Theatre in Teddington , Middlesex , England , the first professional British production since 1872 . This was performed several times subsequently , including at the 2014 International Gilbert and Sullivan Festival . Also in 2008 , an original score by Thomas Z. Shepard was first performed in concert by the Blue Hill Troupe in New York City and was finally given a fully staged amateur production in 2014 . 
 = = Assessment = = 
 = = = More than the usual burlesque = = = 
 Thespis was an advance on the types of burlesques to which Gaiety audiences were accustomed . François Cellier recalled much later : 
 I retain a dim recollection of witnessing the piece and being impressed with the freshness of Gilbert 's libretto , especially as regards the lyrics , which were , indeed , a treat to read after the vapid , futile jingle of rhymes without reason which had hitherto passed muster on those degenerate days . To all play @-@ goers it was a new " sensation " in musical plays . As for Arthur Sullivan 's music , need I say how every number charmed and charmed again ? 
 Several critics suggested that the piece may have been too sophisticated for its audience — or at least , the audience that greeted its first performance on Boxing Night . The Times wrote : " The dialogue throughout is superior in ability and point to that with which ordinary burlesque and extravaganza have familiarized us ; so much so , in fact , that it was a daring experiment to produce such a piece on such a night . It met , however , with an excellent reception , and on any other occasion than Boxing Night the numerous merits of the piece cannot fail to secure for it in the public estimation a high place among the novelties of the season . " Other reviews of the first night took up a similar theme : Sporting Life suggested that " It may be that they looked for something less polished than Mr. Gilbert 's verse , and went for something broader and coarser than that delightful author 's humour . It may be , too , that Thespis was a little — I only say , just a little — ' over their heads ' . " The Orchestra carried a similar sentiment : " In fact , both music and idea were somewhat over the heads of the audience . " 
 = = = Libretto = = = 
 The plot of Thespis , with its elderly gods tired of their life in Olympus , is similar to some of Offenbach 's operas , notably Orphée aux Enfers ( Orpheus in the Underworld ) . In Orphée aux Enfers , like Thespis , classical mythology , particularly the Olympian gods , are ruthlessly parodied . In Thespis , the gods swap places with the actors and descend to Earth ; in Orphée aux Enfers , the gods head to hell for a pleasant holiday away from too much boring perfection . Offenbach 's plot – for although Crémieux and Halévy wrote the libretto , the idea was Offenbach 's – places Orpheus , the great musician , in the centre ; however , Gilbert 's plot focuses on Thespis , the Father of the Drama . While this may be a coincidence , it could also be seen as a response to Offenbach , as his plot places music at the centre of his operetta , but Gilbert 's elevates the dramatist . 
 The libretto has been praised by several biographers and historians . One said that " The dialogue contains many an authentic Gilbertian touch . " Another found it " a gay , sparkling libretto " . Sidney Dark and Rowland Gray wrote that " the book of Thespis is genuine Gilbert , the Gilbert whom nowadays all the world loves .... Thespis once more emphasizes the fact that Gilbert 's artistry was hardly affected with the passing of the years . Many of its songs might well have appeared in the later operas . " They point out Mercury 's " I 'm the celestial drudge " , which anticipates Giuseppe 's " Rising early in the morning " in The Gondoliers , and find the " real brand of Gilbertian topsy @-@ <unk> " in the song about the former head of a railway company , " I once knew a chap who discharged a function " . Isaac Goldberg thought that " Thespis looks forward far more often than it glances backward : " It forecasts the characteristic methods , and now and then a character , of the later series . Its dialogue is comical , and , if anything , somewhat above the heads of the Gaiety audiences of 1871 . " 
 Goldberg wrote in 1929 that the libretto " seems to have no specific ancestry .... neither in his burlesques nor in his ballads ... had Gilbert played with the gods and goddesses of Greek mythology . " However , Gilbert did write a series of humorous sketches parodying the Greek myths , mainly the heroes of the Iliad , for the illustrated magazine Fun in 1864 , and Pygmalion and Galatea , which he produced just before Thespis , was a more serious treatment of Greek mythology . Jane W. Stedman points out that Thespis " looks backward to French opéra bouffe " , but it is " fundamentally a Gilbertian invasion plot in which outsiders penetrate and affect a given society , often for the worse . " She compares the theatrical company in Thespis to the politicians that remodel fairyland in Gilbert 's 1873 play The Happy Land and the Englishmen who reform the island nation of Utopia in Utopia , Limited ( 1893 ) . Elements of Thespis also appear in Gilbert and Sullivan 's last opera together , The Grand Duke ( 1896 ) , where a theatre company replaces the ruler and decides to " revive the classic memories of Athens at its best " . 
 = = = The music = = = 
 Sullivan 's score generally came in for praise , though critics <unk> — as they would throughout his life — that theatrical scores were beneath his ability . In the Standard , A. E. T. Watson wrote : 
 " Mr. John Hollingshead ... has judiciously called on Mr. W. S. Gilbert to furnish him with an original opera @-@ extravaganza , and entrusted its musical setting to Mr. Arthur Sullivan . From the association of these two names the most pleasing result has for some weeks past been anticipated , which the success of last evening fully justified .... Mr. Gilbert in ' Thespis ' has happily provided the composer with everything he could desire , mastering the character of opera @-@ extravaganza , which precludes the exercise of the highest flights of genius of which a musician is capable and sets a limit to the exercise of his talents . 
 Clement Scott in The Daily Telegraph found the opera " not marred by ambitious music " . But he added , " <unk> throughout , always pretty , frequently suggestive , the songs and dances are quite in character with the author 's design .... Some of the numbers will certainly live , and the impression caused by the music as a whole is that it will have far more than a passing interest . " 
 Many critics praised the originality of the title character 's song in the first act about the head of a railway company , which may have been a joke about the Duke of Sutherland , " who was fond of running railway engines " . Scott called the song a " ludicrous ballad " , but " quite in the spirit of the well @-@ known compositions of ' Bab , ' and , as it has been fitted with a lively tune and a rattling chorus , a hearty encore was inevitable . Though the ditty was long , the audience would have been well content to hear it all over again . " The Pall Mall Gazette found the orchestration " very novel , including , as it does , the employment of a railway bell , a railway whistle , and some new instrument of music imitating the agreeable sound of a train in motion . " Similarly The Sunday Times noted , " The entire company join in the chorus , the music of which admirably expresses the whirl and thunder of a railway train at express speed . " The Era called it " a screaming , whistling and shouting chorus [ that ] fairly brings down the house " . 
 The similarity to French models was much commented upon . Vanity Fair thought that " the music in the piece itself is charming throughout , and promises for the first time a rival to Offenbach .... Thespis is quite as good as Orphée aux Enfers . " Another wrote : 
 Mr. W. S. Gilbert and Mr. Arthur Sullivan have attempted , with not a little success , to imitate French comic opera , concerning which we have heard so much for the last half @-@ dozen years .... In these days — when the French critics are savagely turning round on us , and calling us pickpockets — it is not disagreeable to find that we have authors and musicians quite as talented as our neighbours .... Mr. Sullivan has certainly persuaded us of one thing — that a musician can write to any metre . 
 The Morning Advertiser thought that " There is an evident attempt to copy the creations of a foreign composer who is so popular at the present time , and who has written some charming music for the gods and goddesses en <unk> . " Others accused Sullivan of blatant copying . The Athenaeum wrote that the music " was arranged and composed by Mr A. S. Sullivan ( the first verb was not in the bills as it ought to have been ) " . One critic thought that the duet for Sparkeion and Nicemis , " Here far away from all the world " , was one of the " single best items of the piece " . In 1873 , the arranger Joseph <unk> ( who had arranged Sullivan 's Merchant of Venice score for the piano ) wrote to Sullivan , asking about the song , with a view to publication . The composer replied , " Thespis is not published but if you like I will send you the Full Score of the Duet in question " , but nothing came of it . 
 = = Surviving music = = 
 Only three musical passages from Thespis are known to survive : the ballad " Little maid of Arcadee " , the chorus " Climbing over rocky mountain " , and the ballet music . The fate of Sullivan 's score has long been a subject for speculation . In 1978 , Isaac Asimov wrote a time travel story , " Fair Exchange ? " , which focused on a character travelling back to 1871 to rescue the score to Thespis before Sullivan could destroy it . But Sullivan is not known to have destroyed it , and the ballet , at least , was still available to be reused in 1897 . 
 = = = Little maid of Arcadee = = = 
 Sparkeion 's song in Act II , " Little maid of Arcadee " , was the only number from the opera to achieve contemporaneous publication . It was one of four numbers to be encored on the first night . The Daily Telegraph wrote : " With the public no doubt the musical gem will be a ballad called ' Cousin Robin ' — pathetic and tender words , with a dreamy and somewhat <unk> air . So sweetly was this sung by Mdlle . Clary that another encore was inevitable . " The Observer agreed that the song " ... will cause most delight on account of the quaint simplicity and tenderness of the words , the charming singing of Mdlle . Clary , and the really exquisite setting by Mr. Sullivan .... This is a musical gem " . 
 The song enjoyed long @-@ standing popularity . Wyndham writes , " Little maid of Arcadee " was " popular for a quarter of a century " . Sullivan 's first biographer suggested that " Thespis will be best remembered by the exquisite musical setting to the simple little Gilbertian ballad " . Several later commentators write favourably of the song . Walbrook finds it " one of the neatest of Gilbert 's ditties , packed with cynicism and slyness , expressed in terms of sentimental tenderness . " Goldberg says that it is " dainty , simple and quite in the vein of Gilbert 's words , to which , as in almost every later instance , Sullivan 's setting provides an original rhythmic piquancy . " Fitz @-@ Gerald considers it " quite a forerunner of Gilbert at his easiest " , while Dark and Gray call it " a typically dainty Gilbertian love @-@ song worthy to be compared to the best that he ever wrote . " Jacobs dissents : " As music it is as trivial as Sullivan ever wrote . " 
 The separately published version had several significant wording differences from the theatrical version , owing to " the contrast between the Gaiety Theatre 's suggestiveness and the prudery expected in the drawing room " . In the drawing room version , the song 's little maid sat by Cousin Robin 's knee , not on it . Rather than weary of his lover 's play , he became fickle as the month of May . And rather than Cousin Richard came to woo , it was till another came to woo . 
 = = = Climbing over rocky mountain = = = 
 " Climbing over rocky mountain " is the best known piece from Thespis , as it was transplanted in 1879 into one of Gilbert and Sullivan 's most successful operas , The Pirates of Penzance . In 1902 , Gilbert told a correspondent that this had happened accidentally . He and Sullivan had arrived in New York to produce the new opera , but the composer discovered that he had left his sketches behind in England . Fortunately , the entrance chorus from Thespis fitted the situation almost exactly , so it was substituted instead . 
 Several scholars have doubted that explanation . In Sullivan 's autograph score for the later work , the first part of " Climbing over rocky mountain " is actually taken from a Thespis copyist score , with the Thespis words cancelled and the new words written in , which raises the question of why Sullivan had a Thespis score to hand , if not for that purpose . 
 Some suggest that other music from Thespis could have been used in Pirates . Goldberg suggests that " It is reasonable to believe that Sullivan made generous use of his Thespis music in other operettas : perhaps owing to the circumstances under which The Pirates of Penzance was written , it contains more than one unacknowledged borrowing from the unlucky <unk> of the lucky pair . " Reginald Allen says that " it seems certain " from its " rhythmic structure " that part of the Act I finale of Thespis , " Here 's a pretty tale for future <unk> and Odysseys " became the original Act II finale in Pirates , " At length we are provided with unusual felicity " , which was later deleted . Tillett and Spencer propose that most of Act I of Pirates was taken from Thespis . However , there is only circumstantial evidence for these suggestions . Except for " Climbing over rocky mountain " , neither author admitted to borrowing from Thespis for later works . 
 = = = Ballet = = = 
 A five @-@ movement ballet occurred somewhere in Act II , staged by W. H. Payne . A heading in the libretto , " Chorus and Ballet " , attaches it to the last section of the finale but does not indicate how it figured in the plot . Most press accounts placed it at about this point , although some placed it slightly earlier in the act . At some performances , the ballet was performed in Act I , but it was certainly in Act II on opening night , and it seems finally to have settled there . 
 In 1990 , Roderick Spencer and Selwyn Tillett discovered the ballet from Act II of Thespis . Two of the five movements , in the same hand that had copied the score of " Climbing over rocky mountain " , were found together with the surviving performance materials for Sullivan 's 1864 ballet , L 'Île Enchantée . Another section was found in the material for his 1897 ballet , Victoria and Merrie England . The page numbering of the surviving three sections gave approximate lengths for the missing pieces , and a contemporary engraving , seen at left , along with other circumstantial evidence , allowed plausible identifications of the two remaining movements : a dragon costume , used nowhere in the libretto , is presumably from the ballet , and the harp visible in the orchestra pit was an unusual instrument for the Gaiety 's orchestra . Movements of appropriate length that made sense of these oddities were found in Sullivan 's other ballets , and the reconstructed ballet has been recorded twice on CD . 
 Sullivan tended to re @-@ use his ballet music . Of the five movements that Tillett and Spencer identified , only one ( the Waltz , No. 3 ) is not known to have been used in any other work . Three of the movements had previously been used in L 'Île Enchantée . Two of those , and one other , were eventually re @-@ used in Victoria and Merrie England . One was also used in his incidental music to Macbeth . Sullivan was asked in 1889 to supply a ballet for a French @-@ language production of The Mikado in Brussels , which he duly did . Tillett suggests that the Thespis ballet was almost certainly the music that Sullivan provided , given that it was the only ballet that he wrote for use in an opera , and that three weeks after producing The Gondoliers he is unlikely to have written something original . 
 = = Text = = 
 The surviving libretto is not the version heard by audiences at the Gaiety Theatre . There are numerous discrepancies between the original libretto and what was described as happening on stage , and reviewers repeatedly quoted dialogue that has no equivalent in the published libretto . At least one song is missing , and an entire character , Venus , is mentioned in at least five reviews as stout , elderly , and heavily made @-@ up , but does not appear in either the programme or the libretto . Stage directions in the original are slip @-@ shod : characters reappear without an entrance being noted , or enter twice in quick succession , without having exited . In addition , Sullivan told his mother that at least one song was cut after opening night , and there must certainly have been other cuts , given the undue length of the first performance . But the text of the libretto , as published , remained " virtually unchanged " between December 1871 and March 1872 . 
 In a letter to Percy Strzelecki on 23 April 1890 , Gilbert apologised for the condition of the libretto . He wrote , " I was in the United States when it was published & I had no opportunity of correcting proofs . This will explain the presence of innumerable typographical & other errors . " But several scholars conclude that Gilbert must have been remembering a trip the following year , as in the fall of 1871 it " would have been impossible for Gilbert to travel to America and back in time for rehearsals of Thespis . " Even after the first printing , there does not seem to have been any effort to correct the errors : There were four separate issues of the libretto between December and March , but no corrections were made . 
 Gilbert 's final disposition of the libretto came in 1911 , when it was included in the fourth volume of his Original Plays . However , Gilbert died before he could correct proofs for that edition , and so it reprinted the 1871 text , correcting only a few spelling mistakes . 
 = = Musical numbers = = 
 This is the order in which the musical numbers appear in the libretto . The music is known to survive for numbers shown in bold ; a ballet also survives , but its location is uncertain . Reviews of the opera hint at three additional numbers not in the libretto , but as their names and exact locations are unknown , they are not listed . 
 = = Recordings = = 
 As most of the music to Thespis is lost , there is no complete recording of the original score . The ballet , as reconstructed by Spencer and Tillett , has been issued twice on CD : 
 Penny , Andrew , conductor ( 1992 ) . " Thespis " . On Sir Arthur Sullivan – Ballet Music ( CD ) . Marco Polo 8 @.@ <unk> . 
 Pryce @-@ Jones , John , conductor ( 1991 ) . " Thespis – Ballet in Act 2 " . On Iolanthe ( CD ) . That 's Entertainment Records <unk> 1188 . 
 A recording of the Rees / Morton version of Thespis was issued on LP records , which included the original " Little maid of Arcadee " and " Climbing over rocky mountain " : Spencer , Roderick , conductor ( 1972 ) . Thespis , or The Gods Grown Old . Fulham Light Operatic Society . Rare Recorded Editions <unk> 132 / 3 . 
 " Little maid of Arcadee " has been included in two Sullivan anthologies : 
 Adams , Donald , singer ( 1971 , LP ) . Donald Adams Sings Sullivan and Gilbert , <unk> Classics SM @-@ GS @-@ 1 . 
 Benton , Jeffrey , singer ( 1992 , cassette ) . If Doughty Deeds , Symposium 1124 . 
 = Tipitina = 
 " Tipitina " is a song written and made famous by Professor Longhair . The song has been widely covered , and the Professor Longhair version was recorded in 1953 for Atlantic Records . " Tipitina " was first released in 1953 and rereleased on the album New Orleans Piano in 1972 . The song , which is considered a New Orleans music standard , was added to the US National Recording Registry in 2011 because of its cultural significance . The subject of " Tipitina " is unknown . The New Orleans music venue , Tipitina 's , was named for the song , and Tipitina 's Foundation bears the Tipitina name . 
 = = Background = = 
 Pianist Henry Roeland " Roy " Byrd , known as Professor Longhair , was a prominent New Orleans musician . He played syncopated music that combined blues , ragtime , zydeco , rhumba , mambo and calypso . His singing was characterized as hoarse . His peripatetic recording career began in 1949 with " Mardi Gras In New Orleans " and " She 's Got No Hair " with a group credited as " Longhair and his <unk> Hungarians . " A year later at Mercury Records and Roy Byrd & his Blues Jumpers rerecorded " She 's Got No Hair " as " Bald Head " , which broke through as his only national R & B hit . In 1953 , at Atlantic Records , he recorded " Tipitina " , which is now regarded as his " signature song " . 
 = = Details = = 
 The melody is derived from Champion Jack Dupree 's " Junker 's Blues " . Rolling Stone described the song as a " rhumba @-@ style track " that has become a quintessential New Orleans standard . According to the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame , which inducted Longhair in 1992 , " The hum @-@ along nonsense syllables and stutter stepping left @-@ hand rhythm of ' <unk> ' is both a symbol and staple of New Orleans music . " 
 Allen Toussaint described learning the song as a " rite of passage " . The subject of the song is unknown . Among the speculated subjects are a place and a person . Hugh Laurie recorded a cover of the song around the time of its selection to the National Recording Registry . He commented about the mystery as follows : " I thought it was better not knowing . It adds to its mystique and its power to make me laugh and cry all in one go . " 
 After the song 's original release it only became a hit in New Orleans . However , it was not that successful in the rest of the United States . The 1953 Professor Longhair version and the 1972 Dr. John version are both considered " Classic non Hot 100 songs " . 
 = = Critical response = = 
 In 2011 , the song was included in the National Recording Registry . Byrd received a Grammy Hall of Fame Award for this song . The song was listed among the 500 Songs That Shaped Rock in 1994 by the Rock ad Roll Hall of Fame . The song was also listed in the 1001 Songs : The Great Songs of All Time and the Artists , Stories and Secrets Behind Them ( 2006 ) by Toby Creswell as well as the Rock Song Index : The 7500 Most Important Songs for the Rock and Roll Era ( 2005 ) by Bruce Pollock . 
 The National Recording Registry announcement for this song said the song is " a signature distillation of the musical ideas and personality that inspired and influenced such New Orleans pianists as Fats Domino , Huey " Piano " Smith , James Booker , Dr. John and Allen Toussaint " . According to Creswell , " Tipitina " " marshalled New Orleans rhythm into a sparkling package " . 
 = = Selected recorded versions = = 
 The song has been widely covered . 
 Professor Longhair : from New Orleans Piano ( 1972 , recorded 1953 ) 
 Dr. John : from Dr. John 's Gumbo ( 1972 ) 
 Hugh Laurie : from his debut album , Let Them Talk ( 2011 ) 
 = = = Professor Longhair version = = = 
 The Professor Longhair version was recorded in New Orleans in November 1953 under the name Professor Longhair & His Blues Scholars . According to John Crosby 's Professor Longhair : a bio @-@ discography , performers included Roy Byrd ( vocals , piano ) , Lee Allen ( tenor saxophone ) , Frank Fields ( bass ) , Earl Palmer ( drums ) , and Alvin " Red " Tyler ( baritone saxophone ) . However , the Atlantic Records Discography credits Edgar Blanchard as the bassist . It was released as a single in 1953 and then re @-@ released in 1972 . It is included on several albums including the New Orleans Piano ( 1972 ) , which has two different takes . Other albums that include this version are Martin Scorsese Presents the Blues : Piano Blues ( 2003 ) and Doctors , Professors , Kings & Queens ( 2004 ) . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 A version by Bo Dollis & The Wild Magnolias is in the Bones season 1 episode " The Man in the Morgue " ( an episode set in New Orleans ) . 
 " Tipitina " , the November 25 , 2012 season 3 finale of Treme ( a TV series about New Orleans in the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina ) , used the song twice . 
 = Geoffroy 's tamarin = 
 Geoffroy 's tamarin ( Saguinus geoffroyi ) , also known as the Panamanian , red @-@ crested or rufous @-@ naped tamarin , is a tamarin , a type of small monkey , found in Panama and Colombia . It is predominantly black and white , with a reddish nape . Diurnal , Geoffroy 's tamarin spends most of its time in trees , but does come down to the ground occasionally . It lives in groups that most often number between three and five individuals , and generally include one or more adults of each gender . It eats a variety of foods , including insects , exudates , fruits and other plant parts . Insects and fruits account for the majority of its diet , but exudates are also important . But since its teeth are not adapted for gouging trees to get to the sap , it can only eat exudates when they are easily available . 
 Although a variety of reproductive methods are used , the most common is for a single adult female in the group to be reproductively active and to mate with multiple adult males in the group . After a gestation period of about 145 days , she gives birth to either a single infant or twins . Males contribute significantly to care of the infants . Sexual maturity is reached at about 2 years , and it can live up to 13 years . Geoffroy 's tamarin is classified as being of " least concern " by the IUCN . 
 = = Taxonomy = = 
 Like the other tamarins and marmosets , Geoffroy 's tamarin is a New World monkey classified within the family Callitrichidae . In 2001 , Colin Groves included the <unk> in the family Cebidae , which also includes capuchin monkeys and squirrel monkeys , but in 2009 Anthony Rylands and Russell Mittermeier reverted to older classifications which considered Callitrichidae a separate family . It is a member the genus Saguinus , the genus containing most tamarins . There are no recognized subspecies . In 1977 , Philip Hershkovitz classified Geoffroy 's tamarin as a subspecies of the cotton @-@ top tamarin ( Saguinus oedipus ) , which resides exclusively in Colombia , based on fur coloration , cranial and mandibular morphology , and ear size . However , more recent research indicates that the two taxa differ sufficiently to be considered separate species . 
 = = Physical description = = 
 In common with other <unk> ( tamarins and marmosets ) , Geoffroy 's tamarin is a small monkey . With a length of between 225 and 240 millimetres ( 8 @.@ 9 and 9 @.@ 4 in ) , excluding the tail , it is the smallest Central American monkey . The tail length is between 314 and 386 millimetres ( 12 @.@ 4 and 15 @.@ 2 in ) . Males have an average weight of 486 grams ( 17 @.@ 1 oz ) , and females are slightly larger on average , with an average weight of 507 grams ( 17 @.@ 9 oz ) . The fur on its back is variegated black and yellow , with pale legs , feet and chest . Its face is nearly bare , but the head has reddish fur with a triangle @-@ shaped patch in the front of the head . The tail is chestnut @-@ red and has a black tip . 
 = = Behavior = = 
 Like all <unk> , Geoffroy 's tamarin is diurnal and arboreal . Unlike some other New World monkeys , it does come down to the ground occasionally . This is normally done only in special circumstances , such as to acquire certain foods or to get to a tree it cannot otherwise reach . Group size is generally between three and nine monkeys , with three to five being most common . Groups often consist of more than one adult of each gender . Adults of both genders migrate between groups . Groups show some degree of territorial defense . Population densities on Barro Colorado Island in Panama range between 3 @.@ 6 and 5 @.@ 7 monkeys per square kilometer , but in other areas the population density can be as much as 20 to 30 monkeys per square kilometer . On average , Geoffroy 's tamarin ranges 2061 meters per day . Home range size varies between 9 @.@ 4 hectares and 32 hectares . 
 Communication occurs both though vocalization and by visual gestures . Vocalizations that have been recorded include whistles , twitters , trills , loud or soft sharp notes , sneezes and long rasps . Body postures and displays that reveal more of the white coloration , such as standing on hind legs and piloerection , tend to be associated with aggression . Females often signal willingness to mate by rapidly coiling their tails . 
 Unlike squirrels , which often move through the canopy by climbing and descending vertical tree trunks , Geoffroy 's tamarin generally avoids large vertical supports during travel . It prefers to move across thin branches , ascending and descending by long leaps . To the extent Geoffroy 's tamarin uses large vertical supports for travel , it uses them most often for ascending rather than descending . 
 Geoffroy 's tamarin generally avoids sympatric small and medium size monkey species such as the white @-@ headed capuchin and the Panamanian night monkey . Avoidance is spatial with respect to the capuchin , and temporal in the case of the night monkey , since Geoffroy 's tamarin is only active during daylight hours and the Panamanian night monkey is only active at night . Geoffroy 's tamarin is rarely observed in the vicinity of squirrels , although this appears to be the result of the squirrels avoiding interactions with the larger tamarins . Geoffroy 's tamarin generally attempts to escape when birds of prey approach , regardless of whether the bird presents a true danger . However , the tamarins ignore one bird of prey , the double @-@ toothed kite , which sometimes follows the tamarins in an apparent effort to feed on small animals disturbed by the tamarins . 
 The diet of Geoffroy 's tamarin is similar to some species of tyrant flycatcher birds in Panama , and they share similar vocalizations . The tamarins may use the flycatcher calls to help find favorable food sources . The flycatchers and tamarins have different patterns of activity , which minimizes competition for similar food sources . The flycatchers are most active shortly after dawn and tend to rest in the middle of the day . The tamarins do not become active until about 45 minutes after full daylight , but remain active for most of the remaining daylight hours until an hour or less before sunset . 
 = = = Diet = = = 
 Geoffroy 's tamarin has a varied diet that includes fruits , insects , exudates ( gums and saps ) , and green plant parts . The diet varies seasonally . A study by Paul Garber estimated that the diet was made up of 40 % insects , 38 % fruit , 14 % exudates ( almost entirely from <unk> <unk> cashew trees ) , and 8 % other items . Another study , on Barro Colorado Island , showed 60 % fruit , 30 % insects and 10 % green plant parts , including large amounts of elephant ear tree ( <unk> <unk> ) sap . Another study showed a diet about equally split between insects ( mostly grasshoppers ) and fruit . Unlike marmosets , tamarins do not have dentition adapted for gouging trees , so Geoffroy 's tamarin eats sap only when it is easily accessible . It generally hunts for insects by making quick movements on thin , flexible supports . In contrast , it generally feeds on sap while clinging to large vertical tree trunks . 
 In one study , Geoffroy 's tamarin drank water from the corollas of <unk> <unk> flowers . However , it is believed to also drink from tree holes , similar to other tamarin species . 
 = = Reproduction = = 
 Geoffroy 's tamarin can give birth throughout the year , but the birthing peak is from April to June . A single infant or twins can be born , although it is not uncommon for one of the twins to perish within the first few months . The gestation period is believed to be about 145 days , similar to the cottontop tamarin . The interbirth period ranges between 154 and 540 days , with an average of 311 days . The longer interbirth periods occur after twins . Infants weigh between 40 and 50 grams ( 1 @.@ 4 and 1 @.@ 8 oz ) and are born fully furred . The infant 's fur is colored differently than the parents ' ; the infant has black fur on the body and tail , with a beige blaze and white face . The infant coloration reduces the visibility of white , which is associated with aggressive displays by the species . 
 Both polyandrous and polygynous mating occurs , and males contribute heavily to parental care . But typically , only one adult female in a group is reproductively active , and reproductively active females mate with multiple males if given the opportunity . Males carry and groom infants more than females do . Older siblings may also contribute to infant care , although infants prefer to be carried by their parents than their siblings . Infants become mobile at 2 to 5 weeks , and begin eating solid food at 4 to 7 weeks . They are independent at 10 to 18 weeks and are fully weaned at 15 to 25 weeks . Geoffroy 's tamarin becomes sexually mature at about 2 years , and can live up to 13 years . 
 = = Distribution and habitat = = 
 Geoffroy 's tamarin lives in various types of forest , including primary and secondary forest , and dry and moist tropical forest . In Panama , it prefers secondary forests with moderate humidity . It occurs in central and eastern Panama , with the range extending slightly west of the Panama Canal zone . It is less common on the Atlantic coast of Panama than the Pacific coast , and is only abundant on the Atlantic coast in areas near the Canal zone that have been modified by man . It occurs in Metropolitan Natural Park , an urban park within Panama City . In Colombia , it occurs on the Pacific coast west of the Andes , south to the Rio San Juan . The eastern boundary of its range in Colombia was once thought to be the Rio Atrato , but has been reported further east , including the Las <unk> National Park . Older sources sometimes report the species occurring in southern Costa Rica , but these are most likely erroneous . 
 = = Conservation status = = 
 The International Union for Conservation of Nature classifies Geoffroy 's tamarin as being of " least concern " . However , in some localities the population may be declining due to habitat loss . It is also sometimes hunted and captured for the pet trade in Panama . A 1985 study in Panama concluded that Geoffroy tamarin population densities are higher in areas where human access is limited . Human activity in Panama can have both positive and negative effects on Geoffroy 's @-@ tamarin populations . While hunting decreases the population , cutting mature forest for agriculture provides more areas of secondary growth , which is beneficial for the tamarin . 
 = Eustathios Daphnomeles = 
 Eustathios Daphnomeles ( Greek : <unk> <unk> , fl. early 11th century ) was a Byzantine strategos and patrician who distinguished himself in the Byzantine conquest of Bulgaria . He ranks as one of the most prominent and successful generals in the thirty @-@ year war between Emperor Basil II ( r . 976 – 1025 ) and Samuel of Bulgaria ( r . 997 – 1014 ) , helping to end the long conflict by blinding and capturing the last Bulgarian leader , Ibatzes , in 1018 . 
 = = Biography = = 
 The main source describing Daphnomeles 's life , and indeed the Bulgarian campaigns ( 986 – 1018 ) of Emperor Basil II , is the late 11th century Synopsis <unk> of John Skylitzes , whose chronology is often problematic to reconstruct . Daphnomeles came from the landed aristocracy of Asia Minor , which for centuries provided the Byzantine military elite . Traditional historiography places his first appearance in circa 1005 , when the Adriatic port city of Dyrrhachium is said to have been surrendered by John <unk> , a local magnate , to the Byzantines . Daphnomeles , at the head of a fleet , took possession of the city . Given the chronologically unclear narrative of Skylitzes , however , it is possible that this episode reflects his later appointment ( after 1018 ) as strategos ( military governor ) of the city . 
 Daphnomeles participated in the subsequent conflicts against Tsar Samuel , but his greatest feat was the capture of the Bulgarian leader Ibatzes in 1018 , for which he is given a prominent position in Skylitzes 's work . Following the defeat at the Battle of Kleidion in 1015 , Bulgarian resistance began to collapse . By 1018 , most Bulgarian commanders had surrendered , and only Ibatzes , who had retreated with his followers to the royal estate of <unk> , a naturally strong and defensible highland position , continued to resist . He rejected both bribes and threats from the Byzantines , and for 55 days , the Byzantine army under Emperor Basil II remained encamped at <unk> nearby , waiting for his surrender . At that point , and as local crowds gathered to Ibatzes 's palace for the feast of the Dormition , Daphnomeles , now strategos of nearby <unk> , on his own initiative , resolved to end the impasse . With only two escorts , he climbed the way to the estate , and announced himself to Ibatzes . Ibatzes , believing that Daphnomeles would not have come alone unless he intended to forge an alliance against Basil , retreated with the strategos to a secluded wooded glade in the gardens for a private discussion . There , Daphnomeles and his two hidden associates sprang on the Bulgarian general , blinded him , and carried him to the upper story of the palace , through the assembled crowds who were too stunned to react . When the Bulgarians recovered , they gathered underneath the building crying for revenge . Daphnomeles , however , addressed them and managed to convince them of the futility of further resistance , and to lay down their arms and seek the emperor 's pardon . 
 Ibatzes ' capture brought to an end the long conflict between Byzantium and Bulgaria , and according to the Byzantinist Paul Stephenson , secured for Daphnomeles , along with Nikephoros Ouranos and Nikephoros Xiphias , the reputation of one of the most prominent and successful generals in the Bulgarian wars of Basil II . 
 Following his feat , Daphnomeles was appointed strategos of the thema of Dyrrhachium by a grateful emperor , and given all of Ibatzes 's movable wealth as a reward . In 1029 , however , he was accused of conspiring with other prominent governors of the Balkans to overthrow Emperor Romanos III Argyros ( r . 1028 – 34 ) in favour of doux Constantine Diogenes . The accused were then recalled to Constantinople , beaten , paraded through the Mese , and banished . Nothing further is known of him . 
 = Robert Sterling Yard = 
 Robert Sterling Yard ( February 1 , 1861 – May 17 , 1945 ) was an American writer , journalist , and wilderness activist . Born in Haverstraw , New York , Yard graduated from Princeton University and spent the first twenty years of his career in the editing and publishing business . In 1915 , he was recruited by his friend Stephen Mather to help publicize the need for an independent national park agency . Their numerous publications were part of a movement that resulted in legislative support for a National Park Service ( NPS ) in 1916 . Yard served as head of the National Parks Educational Committee for several years after its conception , but tension within the NPS led him to concentrate on non @-@ government initiatives . He became executive secretary of the National Parks Association in 1919 . 
 Yard worked to promote the national parks as well as educate Americans about their use . Creating high standards based on aesthetic ideals for park selection , he also opposed commercialism and industrialization of what he called " America 's masterpieces " . These standards subsequently caused discord with his peers . After helping to establish a relationship between the NPA and the United States Forest Service , Yard later became involved in the protection of wilderness areas . In 1935 , he became one of the eight founding members of The Wilderness Society and acted as its first president from 1937 until his death eight years later . Yard is now considered an important figure in the modern wilderness movement . 
 = = Early life and career = = 
 Robert Sterling Yard was born in 1861 in Haverstraw , New York to Robert Boyd and Sarah ( Purdue ) Yard . After attending the Freehold Institute in New Jersey , he graduated from Princeton University in 1883 . Known throughout his life as " Bob " , he became a prominent member of Princeton 's Alumni Association , and founded the Montclair Princeton Alumni Association . In 1895 , he married Mary Belle Moffat ; they had one daughter , Margaret . 
 During the 1880s and 1890s , Yard worked as a journalist for the New York Sun and the New York Herald . He served in the publishing business from 1900 to 1915 , variously as editor @-@ in @-@ chief of The Century Magazine and Sunday editor of the New York Herald . After serving as editor of Charles Scribner 's Sons ' the Book Buyer , Yard helped launch the publishing firm of Moffat , Yard and Company . He served as vice president and editor @-@ in @-@ chief of the firm . 
 = = = National Park Service = = = 
 In 1915 , Yard was invited to Washington , D.C. by his friend Stephen Mather , who had started working on national parks as assistant to the Secretary of Interior . Yard and Mather had met while working for the New York Sun and became friends ; Yard was the best man at Mather 's wedding in 1893 . 
 Mather , who wanted someone to help publicize the need for an independent agency to oversee the national parks movement , personally paid Yard 's salary from his independent income . The United States had authorized 14 parks and 22 monuments over the previous forty years ( 1872 – 1915 ) , but there was no single agency to provide unified management of the resources . In addition , some resources were managed by political appointees without professional qualifications . Together Mather and Yard ran a national parks publicity campaign for the Department of the Interior , writing numerous articles that praised the scenic qualities of the parks and their possibilities for educational , inspirational and recreational benefits . The unprecedented press coverage persuaded influential Americans about the importance of national parks , and encouraged Congress to create an independent parks agency . 
 Although Yard was not an outdoorsman like most advocates of a national park service , he felt a connection to the cause , and eventually became personally invested in its success . At the National Park Conference in March 1915 , he stated , " I , the <unk> of dusty city streets , boldly claim common kinship with you of the plains , the mountains , and the glaciers . " He gathered data regarding popular American tourist destinations , such as Switzerland , France , Germany , Italy , and Canada , together with reasons why people visited certain areas ; he also collected photographs and compiled lists of those who might enlist in the conservation cause . One of his most recognized and passionate articles of the time , entitled " Making a Business of Scenery " , appeared in The Nation 's Business in June 1916 : 
 We want our national parks developed . We want roads and trails like Switzerland 's . We want hotels of all prices from lowest to highest . We want comfortable public camps in sufficient abundance to meet all demands . We want lodges and chalets at convenient intervals commanding the scenic possibilities of all our parks . We want the best and cheapest accommodations for pedestrians and motorists . We want sufficient and convenient transportation at reasonable rates . We want adequate facilities and supplies for camping out at lowest prices . We want good fishing . We want our wild animal life conserved and developed . We want special facilities for nature study . 
