 Yard 's most successful publicity initiative during this time was the National Parks Portfolio ( 1916 ) , a collection of nine pamphlets that — through photographs interspersed with text lauding the scenic grandeur of the nation 's major parks — connected the parks with a sense of national identity to make visitation an imperative of American citizenship . Yard and Mather distributed this publication to a carefully selected list of prominent Americans , including every member of Congress . That same year , Yard wrote and published Glimpses of Our National Parks , which was followed in 1917 by a similar volume titled The Top of the Continent . The latter volume , which was subtitled A Cheerful Journey through Our National Parks and geared toward a younger audience , became a bestseller . 
 Yard and Mather 's publicity and lobbying resulted in the creation of the National Park Service ; on August 25 , 1916 , President Woodrow Wilson signed a bill establishing the agency " to conserve the scenery and the natural and historic objects and wild life therein , and to provide for the enjoyment of the same in such manner and by such means as will leave them unimpaired for the enjoyment of future generations . " Mather served as its first director beginning in 1917 , and while he appointed Horace Albright as assistant director , he put Yard in charge of the National Parks Educational Committee . Consisting only of Yard and a secretary , this division of the NPS produced informative publicity in order to draw visitors to parks and develop programs to enhance the educational value of their experience . 
 In January 1917 , Mather suffered a mental breakdown and had to take an extended leave . Yard believed he would be appointed interim director at the NPS . Disagreements within the organization , however , kept him from the position . Yard , who has been described as " intense , urbane and opinionated " , was disappointed when the position was given to Albright , who was then only 27 years old . After more than a year of working in the Educational Division , Yard began to look outside the NPS for support . 
 = = National Parks Association = = 
 Yard believed that while the National Park Service was effective as a government agency , it was not capable of promoting the wishes of the common American . He wrote in June 1918 that the national park movement must " be cultivated only by an organization of the people outside the government , and unhampered by politics and routine " . On May 29 , 1919 , the National Parks Association ( NPA ) was officially created to fill this role . Yard , who became a pivotal figure in the new society , was elected its executive secretary . His duties as the only full @-@ time employee of the NPA were practically the same as they had been with the NPS — to promote the national parks and to educate Americans about their use . In its early years , the NPA was Yard 's livelihood and passion : he recruited the key founding members , raised money and wrote various press releases . Yard also served as editor of the NPA 's National Parks Bulletin from 1919 to 1936 . In the first issue , Yard outlined the organization 's objectives in order to craft a broad educational program : not only would they attract students , artists and writers to the parks , but a " complete and rational system " would be created and adhered to by Congress and the Park Service . 
 Yard believed that eligible national parks had to be scenically stunning . He noted in his 1919 volume The Book of the National Parks that the major characteristic of almost all national parks was that their scenery had been forged by geological or biological processes . He wrote , " [ W ] e shall not really enjoy our possession of the grandest scenery in the world until we realize that scenery is the written page of the History of Creation , and until we learn to read that page . " Yard 's standards also insisted upon " complete conservation " , meaning avoidance of commercialism and industrialization . Often referring to parks as " American masterpieces " , he sought to protect them from economic activities such as timber cutting and mineral extracting . In such , Yard often advocated the preservation of " wilderness " conditions in America 's national parks . 
 In 1920 , Congress passed the Water Power Act , which granted licenses to develop hydroelectric projects on federal lands , including national parks . Yard and the NPA joined again with Mather and the National Park Service to oppose the intrusion on Park Service control . In 1921 , Congress passed the Jones @-@ Esch Bill , amending the Water Power Act to exclude existing national parks from hydroelectric development . 
 = = Conflict and the Forest Service = = 
 Despite agreeing on most issues regarding the protection of national parks , friction between the NPA and NPS was seemingly unavoidable . Mather and Yard disagreed on many issues ; whereas Mather was not interested in the protection of wildlife and accepted the Biological Survey 's efforts to exterminate predators within parks , Yard criticized the program as early as 1924 . Yard was also highly critical of Mather 's administration of the parks . Mather advocated plush accommodations , city comforts and various entertainments to encourage park visitation . These plans clashed with Yard 's ideals , and he considered such urbanization of the nation 's parks misguided . While visiting Yosemite National Park in 1926 , he stated that the valley was " lost " after he found crowds , automobiles , jazz music and a bear show . 
 In 1924 , the United States Forest Service started a program to set aside " primitive areas " in the national forests to protect wilderness while opening it to use . Yard , who preferred to give the land that did not meet his standards to the Forest Service rather than the NPS , began to work closely with the USFS . Beginning in 1925 , he served as secretary of the Joint Committee on the Recreational Survey of Federal Lands , a position he held until 1930 . Composed of members of both the NPA and the USFS , the committee sought a separate national recreation policy that would distinguish between recreational and preservation areas . The NPA and Yard were both criticized by activists who feared that the association would be eclipsed by the Forest Service 's own program goals . Yard at times felt isolated and under @-@ appreciated by his peers . He wrote in 1926 , " I wonder whether I 'm justified in forcing this work upon people who seem to care so little about it . " 
 By the late 1920s , Yard had come to believe preservation of wilderness was a solution to more commercially motivated park making . He continued to clash with others regarding legislation on park proposals . These included the Shenandoah National Park in Virginia , which Yard thought was too recreational and not of the caliber of a national park . He hesitated at the nomination of the Everglades National Park in Florida . When the Tropic Everglades National Park Association was founded in 1928 to promote the idea of a national park in south Florida , Yard was initially skeptical that it was necessary . Although he recognized the need for preservation , he did not accept proposals for a national park unless the area met his high scenic standards . He slowly warmed to the Everglades idea , and in 1931 supported the proposal under conditions that the area remain pristine , with limited tourist development . The Everglades National Park was authorized by Congress in 1934 . 
 = = The Wilderness Society = = 
 Yard 's preservationist goals exceeded those of the Park Service in the 1930s . Drifting away from the national parks lobby , he pushed to preserve what he called " primitive " land ; he and John C. Merriam had discussed forming a group called " Save the Primitive League " . Although that group was not formed , Yard was soon invited to become a founding member of The Wilderness Society . Seventy @-@ four @-@ years old at the time , he was known for his tireless work ethic and youthfulness ; for decades he had jokingly insisted to colleagues that he was a mere 47 . 
 The society was officially formed in January 1935 to lead wilderness preservation in the United States . Additional founding members included notable conservationists Bob Marshall , Benton MacKaye , Bernard Frank , Aldo Leopold , and Harvey Broome . In September , Yard published the first issue of the society 's magazine , The Living Wilderness . He wrote of the society 's genesis , " The Wilderness Society is born of an emergency in conservation which admits of no delay . The craze is to build all the highways possible everywhere while billions may yet be borrowed from the unlucky future . The fashion is to barber and manicure wild America as smartly as the modern girl . Our mission is clear . " 
 Although Marshall proposed that Leopold act as the society 's first president , in 1937 Yard accepted the role , as well as that of permanent secretary . He ran the society from his home in Washington , D.C. and single @-@ handedly produced The Living Wilderness during its early years , with one issue annually until 1945 . Yard did the greater share of work during the Society 's early years ; he solicited membership , corresponded with other conservation groups , and kept track of congressional activities related to wilderness areas . Although much older than some of his colleagues , Yard was described as a cautious and non @-@ confrontational leader . 
 = = Death and legacy = = 
 While ill from pneumonia at the end of his life , he ran the society 's affairs from his bed . He died on May 17 , 1945 , at the age of 84 . 
 The National Park Service and what is now called the National Parks Conservation Association remain successful organizations . The National Park System of the United States protects more than 400 sites covering an area exceeding 84 million acres ( 340 @,@ 000 km2 ) in all 50 states , Washington , D.C. , American Samoa , Guam , Puerto Rico , Saipan , and the Virgin Islands . His work to preserve wilderness in the United States has also endured . After his death , three members of The Wilderness Society took on his various duties ; Benton MacKaye officially replaced him as president , but executive secretary Howard Zahniser and director Olaus Murie ran the society for the next two decades . Zahniser also took over the society 's magazine , making The Living Wilderness into a successful quarterly publication . 
 The December 1945 issue of The Living Wilderness was dedicated to Yard 's life and work ; in one article , fellow co @-@ founder Ernest Oberholtzer wrote that " the form he [ Yard ] gave The Wilderness Society was the crowning of a lifelong vision . He undertook it with a freshness that belied his years and revealed , as nothing else could , the vitality of his inspiration . Few men in America have ever had such understanding of the spiritual quality of the American scene , and fewer still the voice to go with it . " 
 Yard 's effect on the Wilderness Society proved long @-@ lasting ; he was responsible for initiating cooperation with other major preservationist groups , including the National Park Association . He also established a durable alliance with the Sierra Club , founded in 1892 by noted preservationist John Muir . This alliance proved crucial during the proposal and eventual passage of the Wilderness Act . The act , which was signed into law by President Lyndon B. Johnson on September 3 , 1964 , was the first major victory for The Wilderness Society . Written by Zahniser , it enabled Congress to set aside selected areas in the national forests , national parks , national wildlife refuges and other federal lands , as units to be kept permanently unchanged by humans . Since its conception , The Wilderness Society has contributed a total of 104 million acres ( 421 @,@ 000 km ² ) to the National Wilderness Preservation System . 
 = = Selected list of works = = 
 The Publisher ( 1913 ) 
 Glimpses of Our National Parks ( 1916 ) 
 The Top of the Continent ( 1917 ) 
 The Book of the National Parks ( 1919 ) 
 The National Parks Portfolio ( 1921 ) 
 Our Federal Lands : A Romance of American Development ( 1928 ) 
 = Carli Lloyd = 
 Carli Anne Lloyd ( born July 16 , 1982 ) is an American soccer player , two @-@ time Olympic gold medalist , FIFA Women 's World Cup champion , and 2015 FIFA Player of the Year . She currently plays for the Houston Dash in the National Women 's Soccer League ( NWSL ) and the United States women 's national soccer team . Lloyd scored the gold medal @-@ winning goals in the finals of the 2008 Summer Olympics and the 2012 Summer Olympics . She has represented the United States at three FIFA Women 's World Cup tournaments : the 2007 FIFA Women 's World Cup , in which she helped the U.S. win bronze ; the 2011 FIFA Women 's World Cup , in which the U.S. won silver ; and the 2015 FIFA Women 's World Cup , where Lloyd scored a hat trick in the final in captaining the U.S. to its third title . 
 During the United States ' 5 – 2 win over Japan in the 2015 FIFA Women 's World Cup Final , Lloyd became the first person ever to score three goals in a FIFA Women 's World Cup final , and the second soccer player in history to score a hat trick in any senior FIFA World Cup Final , after Sir Geoff Hurst . Lloyd scored three goals in the first 16 minutes of the final , with the first two occurring in the first five minutes of the game and within three minutes of each other . She received the Golden Ball Trophy as the best player of the tournament and earned the Silver Boot for her six goals and one assist during the tournament . 
 Lloyd has played in over 220 matches for the U.S. national team and scored over 80 goals . She previously played for the Chicago Red Stars , Sky Blue FC , and Atlanta Beat in Women 's Professional Soccer ( WPS ) . In 2013 , she was allocated to the Western New York Flash for the inaugural season of the NWSL and helped her team win the regular season championship . After two seasons with the Flash , she was traded to the Houston Dash prior to the 2015 season . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Born to Stephen and Pamela Lloyd , Carli was raised in Delran Township , a small community located in South New Jersey about twenty minutes northeast of Philadelphia . Lloyd began playing soccer at age five . Of her exposure to soccer at a young age , Lloyd 's mother , Pamela said , " At that age , it was coed , and Carli was hanging with the boys . She always loved it and showed a lot of ability from an early age , but she also has always worked hard . " Lloyd has one brother , Stephen , and a sister , Ashley . 
 Lloyd attended Delran High School from 1997 to 2000 where she played soccer under the tutelage of the late Rudy " The Red Baron " <unk> . As a high school athlete , she was known for her exceptional ball control and skill at distributing the ball from the midfield . During her senior year , she scored 26 goals and served eight assists while captaining her team to an 18 – 3 record . The Philadelphia Inquirer twice @-@ named her Girls ’ High School Player of the Year in 1999 and 2000 . She was named to the Star @-@ Ledger All @-@ State First Team twice and received 1999 and 2000 Parade All @-@ American honors . In 2000 , she was named the Courier Post Player of the Year and the South Jersey Soccer Coaches Association ( <unk> ) Midfielder of the Year . 
 = = = Rutgers Scarlet Knights , 2001 – 2004 = = = 
 Lloyd attended Rutgers University from 2001 to 2004 and played for the Scarlet Knights women 's soccer team under head coach Glenn Crooks . She was named First @-@ Team All @-@ Big East for four straight years – the first athlete at Rutgers to do so . She ended her collegiate career as the school 's all @-@ time leader in points ( 117 ) , goals ( 50 ) , and shots . 
 During her freshman season , Lloyd started every match and was the team 's leading scorer with 15 goals for a total of 37 points . She was named to Soccer America 's All @-@ Freshman Team and was the first Rutgers player to earn Big East Rookie of the Year honors . As a sophomore , she was the team 's leading scorer for the second consecutive season with 12 goals and seven assists for 31 points . The same year Lloyd was a finalist for the Hermann Trophy , widely considered the highest accolade for collegiate soccer players . During her third season with the Scarlet Knights , she scored 13 goals and served 2 assists for a total of 28 points and was named a Big East Academic All @-@ Star . As a senior , she was a starter for 18 of the 20 games she played , scored 10 goals and served one assist . Lloyd was named the 2004 Big East Midfielder of the Year . 
 In 2013 , Lloyd was inducted into the Rutgers Hall of Distinguished Alumni . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Club = = = 
 = = = = W @-@ League Experience , 1999 – 2004 = = = = 
 While still in high school , Lloyd played for W @-@ League teams Central Jersey Splash in 1999 , New Brunswick Power in 2000 , and South Jersey Banshees in 2001 . In the summer prior to her senior year at Rutgers , Lloyd played for the New Jersey Wildcats in 2004 with teammates Kelly Smith , Manya <unk> , Tobin Heath , and Heather O 'Reilly . She made only one appearance for the club . 
 = = = = The WPS Years , 2009 – 2011 = = = = 
 With the return of a top @-@ flight women 's professional soccer league to the United States via Women 's Professional Soccer , Lloyd 's playing rights were allocated to the Chicago Red Stars in 2008 . During the league 's inaugural season , she started in 14 of her 16 appearances for Chicago playing a total of 1 @,@ 313 minutes on the pitch . She scored two goals : one in the 23rd minute of her team 's 4 – 0 win over the Boston Breakers on April 25 ; and the other during the 24th minute of a 3 – 1 defeat of the Los Angeles Sol on August 2 . The Red Stars finished sixth on the season with a 5 – 5 – 10 record . 
 Following the conclusion of the season , Lloyd was declared a free agent and subsequently signed with her home state club and 2009 WPS champions , Sky Blue FC , for the 2010 season . In April 2010 , during a match against her former team , Chicago Red Stars , Lloyd slipped and broke her ankle . The injury kept her off the pitch for most of the season although she did return for two games in September . 
 In December 2010 , Lloyd signed with expansion team Atlanta Beat for the 2011 season . Of her signing , Beat head coach James <unk> said , " She is a fantastic midfielder and someone who is fully focused on the game . I have known her from her college days , and I have had the opportunity to train her and improve her game individually . She has made a lot of sacrifices off the field to reach her dreams , and she is going to bring a lot of professionalism to the team . " Lloyd scored two goals in her ten appearances for the Beat . She scored the team 's lone goal in a 4 – 1 defeat by the Boston Breakers on April 9 . Her second goal on the season was an equalizer during the 70th minute of a 2 – 2 draw against the Western New York Flash . The Beat finished their first season in last place with a 1 – 4 – 13 record . 
 = = = = Western New York Flash , 2013 – 2014 = = = = 
 On January 11 , 2013 , Lloyd joined the Western New York Flash in the new National Women 's Soccer League as part of the NWSL Player Allocation . After recovering from a shoulder injury suffered earlier in the year , Lloyd made her debut for the Flash on May 12 , 2013 during the team 's 2 – 1 defeat of FC Kansas City . She scored her first goal in a match against her former club , Sky Blue FC , helping the Flash win 3 – 0 . During a match against the Washington Spirit on June 28 , Lloyd scored a hat trick leading the Flash to a 4 – 0 win . She was subsequently named NWSL Player of the Week for her performance . 
 Lloyd finished the 2013 season with 10 goals , the third most goals scored on the season . The Flash finished first during the regular season with a 10 – 8 – 4 record and advanced to the playoffs . During the Flash 's semifinal match against Sky Blue FC , Lloyd scored both of the Flash 's game @-@ winning goals : one in the 33rd minute and the second coming during stoppage time . Her two goals resulted in a 2 – 0 win that advanced the Flash to the championship final against the Portland Thorns FC . The Flash were defeated 2 – 0 during the final . 
 = = = = Houston Dash , 2015 – present = = = = 
 On October 16 , 2014 , Lloyd was traded to the Houston Dash in exchange for Becky Edwards , Whitney Engen and a third @-@ round pick in the 2016 NWSL draft . 
 = = = International = = = 
 = = = = Youth national team = = = = 
 Lloyd represented the United States at the under @-@ 21 level before making the jump to the senior team at the age of 23 . As a member of the under @-@ 21 team , she played at the Nordic Cup four times winning consecutive titles from 2002 to 2005 in Finland , Denmark , Iceland , and Sweden respectively . During the first round of the 2003 Nordic Cup , she served the assist in the U.S. ' 1 – 0 win against Denmark . At the 2004 Nordic Cup , she scored two goals and served one assist while starting in every match . The following year at the 2005 Nordic Cup , she scored three times including one goal during the championship match against Norway . 
 = = = = Senior national team = = = = 
 Lloyd made her first appearance for the United States women 's national soccer team on July 10 , 2005 , against Ukraine . She scored her first international goal on October 1 , 2006 against Taiwan . At the 2006 Four Nations Tournament , Lloyd won a third cap . She earned the first two starts of her career at the 2006 Algarve Cup , gaining a place in the starting 11 against Denmark and in the championship game against Germany . She played in 19 games , starting 13 , and scored one goal . 
 = = = = = Algarve Cup and FIFA Women 's World Cup , 2007 = = = = = 
 After scoring once in her first 24 matches with the national team , Lloyd scored four goals at the 2007 Algarve Cup . As the tournament 's top scorer , she was awarded Most Valuable Player tournament honors . Lloyd logged her first brace for the national team during a 6 – 1 win against New Zealand . 
 The same year , Lloyd played in her first FIFA Women 's World Cup tournament . Heading into the tournament , the national team had not conceded a game in regulation time in nearly three years and was considered a favorite to win the tournament in China . During their first match of the tournament , the U.S. tied North Korea 2 – 2 . The team faced Sweden in their next match on September 14 and won 2 – 0 with two goals from Abby Wambach . The U.S. finished group play with a 1 – 0 win over Nigeria women 's national football team on September 18 . 
 During the quarterfinal match against England on September 22 , the U.S. won 3 – 0 . All three goals were scored within 12 minutes . The U.S. faced Brazil in the semifinal in what would become a controversial and game @-@ changing match for the team . Coach Greg Ryan decided to bench starting goalkeeper , Hope Solo , and instead started Brianna Scurry , a veteran goalkeeper who had started in three World Cups and two Olympics , but who had started very few matches since the 2004 Olympics . The U.S. was defeated 4 – 0 by Brazil . The loss relegated them to a final match against Norway , which they won 4 – 1 , to secure third place standing at the tournament . Lloyd started three of the five games in which she played at the tournament . 
 Throughout 2007 , Lloyd started 13 of the 23 matches in which she played . She ranked third on the team in scoring with nine goals and three assists . 
 = = = = = 2008 Beijing Olympics = = = = = 
 During the championship match of the CONCACAF Women 's Olympic Qualifying Tournament , Lloyd scored the U.S. ' only goal during stoppage time on a free @-@ kick . The U.S. eventually defeated Canada 6 – 5 in penalty kicks . She scored two goals during the 2008 Olympics : the game @-@ winning goal in the team 's 1 – 0 defeat of Japan during the tournament 's group stage and another game @-@ winning goal in overtime against Brazil during the final helping the U.S. win gold . 
 Lloyd was named the 2008 U.S. Soccer Athlete of the Year along with Tim Howard . She was on the starting lineup in all 35 games in which she played in 2008 , tying for the team lead in matches started during the year . Her 2 @,@ 781 minutes on the pitch for the U.S. ranked third on the team in minutes played . Her nine goals and nine assists resulted in her best scoring year yet on the national team . 
 = = = = = From Injury Recovery to 100th Career Cap and CONCACAF Women 's World Cup Qualifying , 2009 – 10 = = = = = 
 In 2009 , the U.S. national team competed in eight games , of which Lloyd was on the starting lineup in five . At the 2010 Algarve Cup , Lloyd scored the game @-@ opening goal in the final helping the U.S. clinch the championship title after defeating Germany 3 – 2 . 
 Although she suffered a broken ankle in the fourth game of the 2010 WPS Season while playing for Sky Blue FC , she played in 15 matches for the United States in 2010 , starting 14 . Lloyd started all five games at the 2010 CONCACAF Women 's World Cup Qualifying Tournament , scoring two goals , including the United States ' lone goal during the championship match . She ended the tournament with five assists and was named the Player of the Match three times during the tournament . After the U.S. finished third at the tournament , they traveled to Italy to vie for a place at the 2011 FIFA Women 's World Cup in the UEFA @-@ CONCACAF play @-@ off against Italy . Playing every minute of the series , Lloyd scored three goals with five assists during the series . She earned her 100th career cap during the second leg of the series . 
 = = = = = Algarve Cup , Four Nations Tournament , and FIFA Women 's World Cup , 2011 = = = = = 
 2011 saw the U.S. team making preparations for the 2011 FIFA Women 's World Cup and training starting with the Four Nations Tournament . Lloyd scored the lone goal for the U.S. in the opening match loss to Sweden . In the championship match , the U.S. defeated Canada 2 – 0 with Lloyd scoring the first goal and being named Player of the Match . 
 At the 2011 Algarve Cup , Lloyd scored three goals including the first goal in the championship match ; subsequently named best goal for the tournament . She was named player of the match for the 2nd time in the tournament . The team won the cup , making it their eighth title win . 
 At the 2011 FIFA Women 's World Cup , Lloyd scored the final goal in a 3 – 0 win against Colombia for her first World Cup goal . Throughout the tournament , she tallied an assist , a goal , and one successful penalty kick in the shootout against Brazil to send the U.S. to the semifinals vs. France . In the World Cup final , after finishing the game tied 2 – 2 the U.S. went on to penalty kicks with Japan . Along with two teammates who failed to convert their penalty kicks , Lloyd mishit the ball over the crossbar . The U.S. won the silver medal at the tournament . 
 = = = = = CONCACAF Olympic Qualifying Tournament and London Olympics , 2012 = = = = = 
 The national team opened 2012 with the Olympic Qualifiers in Vancouver , Canada . The U.S. was placed in Group B with the Dominican Republic , Guatemala , and Mexico . In the first match , the United States routed the Dominican Republic by a score of 14 – 0 with Lloyd tallying one goal and one assist . In the second match , the U.S. again defeated Guatemala 13 – 0 with Lloyd again finding the back of the net and providing an assist . 
 The game to win the group and thus play the second place team from Group A occurred between the U.S. and Mexico . The U.S. was previously defeated 2 – 1 by Mexico during the 2010 CONCACAF Women 's Gold Cup . This time , the U.S. beat Mexico 4 – 0 with Lloyd netting her first career hat trick . She was subsequently named player of the match . 
 In the semi @-@ final , the U.S. faced Costa Rica . During the second half , the U.S. scored two goals , the second coming from Lloyd . The U.S. beat Costa Rica 3 – 0 with Lloyd named player of the match for the second game in a row . During the final match against Canada , the U.S. defeated Canada at home 4 – 0 to move on to the Olympics as the CONCACAF champions . Lloyd finished the tournament with six goals and three assists and tied for the team lead in goals scored . 
 At the 2012 Summer Olympics in London , Lloyd scored the go @-@ ahead goal in the 56th minute of the team 's opening match against France , to boost the U.S. to a 3 – 2 lead ; the match ended with a final score of 4 – 2 . She scored her second goal of the tournament against Colombia during the group stage . 
 During the Olympic gold medal match against Japan , played at London 's Wembley Stadium , Lloyd scored both American goals in the team 's 2 – 1 victory . Her four goals in the tournament tied for the second highest on the U.S. squad . She is the only player ( of either gender ) in history to score the game @-@ winning goal in two separate Olympic gold medal matches ; her first occurred during the Beijing 2008 final against Brazil . 
 After scoring her 46th international goal in the 13th minute of a friendly against New Zealand in October 2013 , Lloyd became the highest @-@ scoring midfielder in the team 's history , passing Julie Foudy , who finished her career with 45 goals . 
 = = = = = 2015 FIFA World Cup = = = = = 
 In April 2015 , Lloyd was named by head coach Jill Ellis to the 23 @-@ player roster for the 2015 FIFA Women 's World Cup in Canada . Lloyd captained the team during four of the team 's matches , including the quarterfinal against China , semifinal against Germany and final against Japan and scored six goals during the tournament , finishing the tournament on a four @-@ game goalscoring streak that spanned the knockout stage and that culminated in a hat trick in the game 's opening 16 minutes during the final against Japan . The last goal was hailed by Reuters as " one of the most remarkable goals ever witnessed in a Women ’ s World Cup " , and featured Lloyd catching Japanese goalkeeper Ayumi <unk> off her line and chipping her virtually from the halfway line . 
 For her efforts in leading the United States to a record third World Cup title , and first since 1999 , she won the Golden Ball as the best player of the tournament . While Lloyd 's six goals were enough to match Celia Sasic as the tournament 's top scorer , Sasic won the Golden Boot for playing fewer minutes and Lloyd was awarded the Silver Boot . Lloyd also became the first woman to score a hat trick in a World Cup final and the first player , male or female , to do so since Geoff Hurst did so for England against West Germany in the 1966 final at Wembley . Furthermore , her third goal earned her a nomination for the Puskás Award , FIFA 's annual award for Goal of the Year . 
 = = = = International goals = = = = 
 = = Honors and awards = = 
 = = = Individual = = = 
 Algarve Cup Most Valuable Player : 2007 
 U.S. Soccer Athlete of the Year : 2008 
 FIFA World Player of the Year Shortlist : 2012 , 2015 
 FIFA <unk> Award Nominee : 2015 
 NWSL Player of the Week : July 2013 , July 2014 
 NWSL Player of the Month : July 2015 
 CONCACAF Women 's Player of the Year : 2015 
 CONCACAF Goal of the Year : 2015 
 FIFA Women 's World Cup Golden Ball : 2015 
 FIFA Women 's World Cup Silver Boot : 2015 
 FIFA Women 's World Cup All @-@ Star Team : 2015 
 FIFA Women 's World Cup Dream Team : 2015 
 FIFA Women 's World Cup Goal of the Tournament : 2015 
 Women 's Sports Foundation Sportswoman of the Year Team Sport Award : 2015 
 Sports Illustrated Sportsman of the Year Nominee : 2015 
 IFFHS World 's Women Best Playmaker : 2015 
 FIFA World Player of the Year : 2015 
 Nominee for 2016 ESPY Award for Best Championship Performance 
 = = = Team = = = 
 United States 
 Olympic Gold Medal : 2008 , 2012 
 FIFA Women 's World Cup Champion : 2015 
 Runner @-@ up : 2011 
 = = Style of play = = 
 Although she was initially criticised for being inconsistent at the beginning of career , and for losing possession too easily , Lloyd later developed into one of the best players in the world , and is highly regarded in particular for her outstanding determination , mental strength , and work @-@ ethic . A tenacious , energetic , and hard @-@ working player , she also is known for her control , technique , and passing accuracy , and is capable of aiding her team both defensively and offensively , due to her stamina , strength , and tackling , as well as her ability to get into good attacking positions , and either score goals or create chances for team @-@ mates . These abilities , coupled with her tactical versatility , enable her to be deployed in several midfield positions ; although she began her career in the centre , as a defensive midfielder , she is most comfortable when moved to a more advanced role , as an attacking midfielder behind the forwards . Lloyd has also earned a reputation as a " clutch player " , due to her tendency to score decisive goals ; a powerful striker of the ball , she is capable of scoring from any position on the pitch , and can finish well both with her head and with her feet inside the area . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 Lloyd lives with her fiancé , Brian Hollins , in Mount Laurel , New Jersey . She has done philanthropic work for Habitat for Humanity . She plans to get married to him after the 2016 Olympic Games . 
 = = In popular culture = = 
 = = = Endorsements = = = 
 Lloyd currently has an endorsement deal with Nike . In 2011 , she was the focus of a promotional feature for the sports company entitled , Pressure Makes Us : Carli Lloyd . Following the 2015 FIFA Women 's World Cup , Lloyd starred in a commercial for Xfinity and signed an endorsement deal with Visa . In August 2015 , she co @-@ starred in a Nike commercial called Snow Day also featuring Rob Gronkowski and Sydney Leroux . 
 = = = Magazines and television = = = 
 Lloyd has been featured in Glamour , Shape , and Sports Illustrated magazines . She has made appearances on Good Morning America , The Daily Show with Jon Stewart , and Live with Kelly and Michael . In 2012 , she appeared in an ESPN feature called Title IX is Mine : USWNT . 
 = = = Video Games = = = 
 Lloyd was featured along with her national teammates in the EA Sports ' FIFA video game series in FIFA 16 , the first time women players were included in the game . In September 2015 , she was ranked by EA Sports as the # 1 women 's player in the game . 
 = = = Ticker Tape Parade and White House Honor = = = 
 Following the United States ' win at the 2015 FIFA Women 's World Cup , Lloyd and her teammates became the first women 's sports team to be honored with a Ticker Tape Parade in New York City . Each player received a key to the city from Mayor Bill de Blasio . In October of the same year , the team was honored by President Barack Obama at the White House . 
 = Dream Within a Dream Tour = 
 The Dream Within a Dream Tour was the fourth concert tour by American recording artist Britney Spears . It was launched in support of her third studio album , Britney ( 2001 ) . The tour was promoted by Concerts West , marking the first time Spears did not tour with Clear Channel Entertainment . On September 21 , 2001 , a North American tour was announced that kicked off exactly two months later after various dates were postponed . In February 2002 , Spears announced a second leg of the tour . It was directed and choreographed by Wade Robson , who explained the main theme of the show was Spears 's coming of age and newfound independence . The stage was designed by Steve Cohen and Rob Brenner and was composed of a main stage and a B @-@ stage , united by a runway . Inspired by Cleopatra 's barge , a flying device was developed so Spears could travel over the audience to the B @-@ stage . The setlist was mostly composed by songs from the supporting album , as Spears felt they were more reflective of her personality . Songs from her previous two studio albums were also included in remixed form by Robson . 
 The show was divided into seven segments with the last one being the encore . Spears opened the show hanging from a gyrating wheel ; it continued with Spears performing a medley of older hits , jumping in bungee cords from the flying device onto the stage and dancing in a jungle setting . Most of the performances were accompanied by extravagant special effects , including confetti , pyrotechnics , laser lights , and artificial fog and snow . In the encore , there was a water screen that pumped two tons of water into the stage ; this was considered one of the signature performances of the tour . During the 2002 leg , some changes were made ; several songs were remixed , and Spears premiered various unreleased songs which included " Mystic Man " . The show received mixed reviews by critics , who praised the show for being innovative but dismissed it for taking the attention away from the music . 
 The Dream Within a Dream Tour was largely sold out and grossed $ 43 @.@ 7 million . During the second show in Mexico , Spears left the stage after the sixth song due to a lightning storm ; the show was canceled and angered the audience . The tour was broadcast live on an HBO special on November 18 , 2001 , and went on to win an Emmy for Outstanding Technical Direction on the 2002 ceremony . A DVD titled Live from Las Vegas was released in January 2002 . 
 = = Background = = 
 On July 19 , 2001 , Spears 's band announced there would be a tour to support her third studio album , Britney ( 2001 ) . The following day , Spears 's label Jive Records confirmed that there was a tour planned for the fall . The Dream Within a Dream Tour was promoted by Concerts West , chosen after a much publicized battle with concert promoter Clear Channel Entertainment ( CCE ) , who had handled her previous concert tours . It marked the first time Concerts West outbid CCE , with reports claiming Spears would earn between $ 13 and $ 15 million during the tour . Spears 's manager Larry Rudolph commented on the situation , saying , 
 " Clear Channel is an incredible company , and I 'm sure we 'll be doing more business with them . We went with Concerts West because they 're a strong touring company and because they have ancillary properties , in that [ parent AEG owns ] arenas and some 7 @,@ 000 movie theaters throughout the country . This decision was not made to exclude Clear Channel . It was made to include Concerts West . [ AEG ] has the ability to help us market our core products — the album and tour — and our secondary properties — the movie — in ways that tipped the scale for us . " 
 On September 20 , 2001 , dates were released along with the track listing of the album . The tour was slated to begin on October 26 , 2001 , but the opening of the show was pushed back until October 31 after Spears became ill and was prescribed five days of rest . The tour was postponed one more day due to production delays and finally kicked off at Nationwide Arena in Columbus , Ohio . Before the tour began , Spears announced she planned to give $ 1 of each ticket to the children of firefighters and police officers killed during the September 11 attacks . She also planned to sell merchandise and auction front row seats , hoping to raise $ 2 million . On February 26 , 2002 , more North American dates were released through her official website to kick off in Las Vegas at Mandalay Bay . The second leg of the tour was sponsored by Samsung . In conjunction with entertainment company <unk> , they offered a cell @-@ phone service that featured collectible merchandise and a membership card with access to backstage reports directly from Spears . She stated that " [ the offering ] is an exciting new way for me to stay connected with my fans " . 
 = = Development = = 
 The name of the tour was based on Edgar Allan Poe 's poem of the same name . The tour was directed and choreographed by Australian choreographer Wade Robson . He explained the concept of the tour , saying , 
 " The show is gonna be really , really theatrical — it 's really complicated . It 's a massive show with a lot of new music . It 's just gonna be really different . [ ... ] You 're gonna learn a lot more about her as a person . The show is gonna be really about how she 's becoming a woman , how she 's finding herself and her independence . She knows what she wants to do , she knows who she wants to be , and that 's what the show 's about . " 
 The stage was designed by production designer Steven Cohen and production manager Rob Brenner for the HBO special . This was the first time Spears used an entire new stage design after having used a typical end @-@ stage with a ramp and stairs at the center as on her first 3 tours ( the ... Baby One More Time Tour , the ( You Drive Me ) Crazy Tour , and the Oops ! ... I Did It Again Tour ) . Cohen designed the main stage with an oval shape so that Spears could perform around the stage and so that it would look good from multiple camera angles . He said that the rest of the stage was created with three main components in mind : a runway , a B @-@ stage , and a flying device over the crowd . The last was developed , as explained by Cohen , " around this Cleopatra 's barge concept I got into my head while designing when the movie Cleopatra was playing in the background . It needed to be elegant and stylized but also high tech , because it was going to have to be traveling on conventional motors and transport mechanisms . Plus , it had to have a big enough performance area for her and the dancers . " Brenner continued , " I wanted to try to give the kid in the back of the house the same experience as the one in the first 10 rows . " The runway uniting the main stage and the B @-@ stage was suggested by one of Spears 's managers , Johnny Wright . The entire stage was built by Michael Tait from Tait Towers . Cohen said , " We took a more expanded role in preparing the drawings for Michael . We wanted to retain the essence of the look of the show , both in its overall footprint and in the execution of these various pieces . [ ... ] [ He ] did a great job on executing the fine details like the hand railings and the floor lights and the MR @-@ 16 covers . When you 're doing something for TV , all of those pieces are foreground pieces . The mirrors on the platforms and the floor painting made the show look better on TV . " 
 The video screens showed both live shoots and special footage directed by Robson . Cohen worked by Danny O 'Brien at BCC Video to create double @-@ sided custom video LED cubes that hanged above stage right . There were three larger @-@ sized video screens above the stage area . The gyrating wheel in which Spears opened the show was made by <unk> Enterprises and was attached to a platform also created by Tait Towers . 171 white light <unk> lasers were provided by Spectra . The giant music box from which Spears emerged in " Born to Make You Happy " ( 1999 ) was designed by Michael Cotton . Confetti was shot from machines provided by <unk> . Pyrotechnics were done by <unk> Fountains , whereas artificial snow was provided by Little Blizzard . During the encore performance of " ... Baby One More Time " ( 1998 ) , there was a water screen in which it was poured nearly two tons of water pumped at 360 gallons a minute . Cohen said , " The water screen is the keystone of the entire design because it impacts every system — electrics , staging , dancing . Rob discovered the company ( Chameleon Productions of Orlando , Florida ) that makes the screen , and I immediately looked at what they had in stock , which was a straight line . And I knew we didn 't want a straight line . We wanted a circular water screen so we could physically build a shower for her to stand in the middle of and not get wet and then walk through when she wanted to . Of course , everyone thought I was crazy , so I suggested a six @-@ sided shape . Everyone was concerned that the gaps between the sections might cause gaps in the actual sheets of water . But I kept saying that if you put them 40 ' to 50 ' up in the air , gravity will cause the water to attach to itself , so you end up getting a solid sheet . " 
 The lighting was designed by Cohen and his partner in Steve Cohen Productions , Joel Young , who served as the tour 's lighting director . Cohen continued saying , " All of our shows [ are ] heavily color @-@ based — everything is rich in color . There is a lot of layering that is not confusing so the purity comes through " . Young programmed the show on a Flying Pig Systems <unk> II console , which he ran while simultaneously calling the 13 followspots for each show . There were eight truss spots and five house spots : four Lycian 2 @.@ 5 kW instruments on the back , four Robert <unk> on the front truss , four FOH spots and one in the back . " Steve Cohen Productions also served as the tour 's lighting vendor and sublet the gear they required from <unk> and Fourth Phase / LSD . <unk> provided its own 3k lights . Apart from the <unk> , the rest of the lighting was a combination of <unk> and High End Systems automated fixtures and conventional luminaries . There were a total of 215 active lights . 
 A week before the tour began , Spears said of the show : " I come from Broadway , so I want it to be very theatrical . The whole process for me is magical . Hopefully it will be something people have never even imagined or envisioned in their head . I was going through a run @-@ through yesterday and was thinking , ' By the time I 'm 30 , there 's not going to be anything left for me to do ' " . Initial rehearsals for the band started on September 9 , 2001 . She joined them later after rehearsing the choreography in Los Angeles . The setlist was composed mostly by songs from Britney . She explained her decision in a press conference , saying , " I just want my fans to see me in a different light than they have ever seen me [ in ] before . This music I am singing right now is such a reflection of me and who I am . Hopefully [ the fans ] will come to the show and be inspired and have a lot of fun . " Several songs from her previous albums ... Baby One More Time and Oops ! ... I Did It Again were remixed by Robson to " take [ them ] in a new direction – flip [ them ] up a bit " . 
 = = Concert synopsis = = 
 The show began with a woman dressed in an 18th @-@ century white nightgown who talked to the audience briefly before disappearing . There was a video introduction in which different people told their dreams . At the end of the video , Spears appeared sleeping in a bubble . A platform with a wheel attached rose several feet above the ground , and she appeared strapped to it while wearing a black ensemble . She started rotating in a similar way to a target girl while starting to perform " Oops ! ... I Did It Again " with her dancers . " ( You Drive Me ) Crazy " was performed next with Spears captured by her dancers . She left the stage for a costume change while her dancers performed . " Overprotected " was performed next with Spears ( dressed in a futuristic version of one of Elvis Presley 's jumpsuit ) surrounded by laser lights . The video backdrop showed images of a bald Spears , with her hair growing as the song went along . In the next section , a giant musical box was raised , and Spears emerged from the middle as a ballerina to perform " Born To Make You Happy " . She tore off her tutu and put on a long white satin cote to perform " Lucky " while confetti was shot . The medley ended with a performance of " Sometimes " for which she donned a bathrobe . 
 She returned to the stage wearing a tank top with glittery tomboy looking suspenders and pants for a dance @-@ oriented performance of " Boys " . The show continued with " Stronger " , in which she wore a paint @-@ covered robe and in some shows a bowler hat . At the end of the performance , she sat down next to a piano player and talked to the audience before moving into a performance of " I 'm Not A Girl , Not Yet A Woman " . A video interlude spoofing Making the Band @-@ type shows followed , showing Spears and her dancers as a struggling band . She took the stage again in a barge ( wearing a black , silver , and gray rock star style jacket and green pants ) along with four female dancers to perform " I Love Rock ' n ' Roll " . The barge was lifted by wires , but pyrotechnics below it made it seem as if it was lifted by fire . When it was above the B @-@ stage , Spears jumped to it with bungee cords . There was a skit in which her dancers chased her , before Spears loses the rock star jacket revealing a glittery red and purple halter top for a performance of " What It 's Like To Be Me " in the small stage . She returned to the main stage for a performance of " Lonely " , in which she danced to a video projection of herself . The dancers and the band performed the " Breakdown " interlude . In " Don 't Let Me Be the Last to Know " , she sang on an elevated platform wearing a white evening gown , while two of her dancers performed a routine . Artificial snow fell from the ceiling during the performance . 
 After a brief interlude , she returned for a performance of " Anticipating " where she wore a patched denim skirt . The set was made of giant coloring book drawings of houses and cars . She took out the costume to reveal a green top and small brown skirt for " I 'm a Slave 4 U " in a jungle setting while surrounded by artificial fog and laser lights . After the song ended , she bowed and thanked the audience before exiting the stage . The encore began with a giant projection of a hologram of Spears onto a water screen . The projection gradually shrunk until Spears rose from the stage while wearing a plastic cowboy hat , blue hip @-@ huggers , and a matching bra top . She began performing " ... Baby One More Time " in a ballad version until reaching the end of the runway . Pyrotechnics surrounded the stage while the song changed to a more uptempo version with elements of techno . Her dancers took the main stage while she returned to it running through the runway . They jumped on the barge while it was lifted into the air and continued to dance . At the end , Spears jumped off the barge with the bungee cords and landed in the main stage and descended from it . 
 After the announcement of the 2002 extension of the tour , some changes were made to the setlist . The original mix of " Overprotected " was replaced by the Darkchild remix of the song . " Boys " was replaced by the remix featuring Pharrell while Spears replaced the outfit with tomboy suspenders for a black leather top . A new song called " Mystic Man " was added after " Stronger " . It was described by Corey Moss of MTV as " similar to [ " I 'm Not a Girl , Not Yet a Woman " ] , but with a bit more traditional R & B flair , a la Alicia Keys " . The song was often replaced with other new songs throughout the tour . Some other changes were also made ; the video screens did not have such a prominent role , and the backdrops of " Overprotected " were taken out . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Larry Nager of The National Enquirer commented that " [ the concert ] packed more technical wizardry than Harry Potter , but almost no actual singing " . He summarized his review saying " If it wasn 't quite a real concert , it was a great show . " Ann Powers of The New York Times said the show was " dazzling " and commented that the performance did not suffer from music being its least important element , adding " This dream extravaganza perhaps unwittingly suggested that the Britney we know is herself a dream , an artist whose genius is not for singing [ ... ] but for teasing out the cravings and fears that haunt the modern world . Ms. Spears now wants to awaken to an adult persona , but she may find that the netherworld of desire is her natural home . " Jim Farber of the New York Daily News compared it to tours of other teenage artists , saying " her latest 90 @-@ minute extravaganza had to be the costliest , most elaborate and , to be honest , least tacky to date " . He was also impressed with the stage , calling it " the largest proscenium I 've ever seen at a pop show . " Camille Lamb of The Daily Collegian named the show " an elaborate , highly homogenized display of capitalism at its finest " . She also said the show fulfilled its expectations , saying " [ it brought ] a teenage fantasy to a tangible reality . " 
 Neva Chonin of the San Francisco Chronicle believed the show " was pure Britney excess , [ ... ] hugely entertaining " and added that " while it 's all too easy to deride Spears ' contrivances from a distance , in person there 's no denying her charisma or her archetypal appeal . She 's like a refugee from David Lynch 's Mulholland Drive , a gleaming dream cipher waiting to be filled with an audience 's fantasies . And she works that role with flawless professionalism , punctuating her choreographed moves with an amiable accessibility that drew fans into her airtight world even as it kept them at a safe distance . In short , she connected — through smiles , giggles and what seemed to be genuine pleasure in performing . " While reviewing the Femme Fatale Tour in 2011 , Jim Harrington of the Oakland Tribune deemed the show as " one of the best pop music productions I ’ ve ever witnessed . " The tour was a commercial success . According to Spears 's booking agent David Zedeck , the 2001 leg was largely sold out , with the concerts attended by over 400 @,@ 000 people . It grossed $ 43 @.@ 7 million , the second highest grossing tour of the year by a female artist behind Cher 's Farewell Tour . 
 = = Lubbock Power <unk> cancellation = = 
 The show on June 14 , 2002 at the United Spirit Arena in Lubbock , Texas was cancelled due to a transformer blowing out during the 2nd song which put the whole show on auxiliary power making it unsafe for Spears and the entire production to continue . The show initially was going to be rescheduled according to Band member Skip but it apparently never did . 
 = = Mexico cancellation = = 
 On July 28 , 2002 , during the second concert at Foro Sol in Mexico City , Spears left the stage after the performance of " Stronger " while saying , " I 'm sorry , Mexico . I love you , bye . " Shortly after , an announcement was made through the speakers confirming the show was cancelled . According to local newspapers Milenio and El Universal , fans screamed " Fraud ! " , booed and hurled chairs and other items . Two days later , a statement was released by Spears that said : " I 'm sorry I couldn 't finish the show for my fans . The Mexican fans are one of the best audiences to play for . We decided that we had no choice but to cancel the show after the storm and lightning showed no signs of clearing up . " Concert promoter <unk> Presenta director Guillermo Parra explained to El Universal that " there was no trick nor deceit , but climatic conditions cannot be controlled " . It was announced that fans could receive a full refund starting on August 1 , 2002 . Jive Records released a statement saying , 
 " A hazardous lightning storm made it essential for Spears to depart the stage . Spears began the show during a break between two rainstorms , but the degree of risk to the audience and stage crew associated with the second storm , an electrical storm , made it impossible for the show to continue . " 
 = = Broadcasts and recordings = = 
 On March 1 , 2001 , HBO announced that a Las Vegas show at MGM Grand Arena would be broadcast on November 18 , 2001 . The special was directed and produced by Marty Callner . Spears requested that HBO aired the concert to the American Forces Network ( AFN ) on its AFN @-@ Atlantic and AFN @-@ Pacific channels at no cost . She also interacted with soldiers based at Marine Corps Base Camp Pendleton , Naval Base San Diego , Fort Polk , and Lackland Air Force Base . The special won an Emmy for Outstanding Technical Direction on the 2002 ceremony . In January 2002 , Jive Records released the DVD Live from Las Vegas ; it was certified two @-@ times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) for shipment of 200 @,@ 000 copies in units . On September 18 , 2002 , Jive Records announced the release of a photographic book and DVD titled Stages and Stages : Three Days in Mexico . The DVD was directed by Albert <unk> and chronicled her stay in Mexico and Japan . Spears explained the release , saying , " I wanted to share with my fans all the things that they never get to see that make it all so special for me . It 's my way of saying thank you . " 
 = = Setlist = = 
 Source : 
 = = Shows = = 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Source : 
 = Binky ( polar bear ) = 
 Binky ( 1975 – July 20 , 1995 ) was a polar bear who lived at the Alaska Zoo in Anchorage . Found as an orphan on Alaska 's North Slope , he was taken to the zoo and quickly became one of its most popular attractions . He became a local hero and received international news coverage after mauling two zoo visitors in separate incidents in 1994 . Binky died in 1995 from <unk> , a parasitic disease . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Binky was found orphaned on Cape Beaufort , North Slope , Alaska in May 1975 and was rescued by the Alaska Department of Fish and Game . He was then given to the Alaska Children 's Zoo ( later the Alaska Zoo ) in Anchorage , where he quickly became one of the zoo 's most popular attractions . His keeper commented in 1976 that Binky was a performer and cried in the evenings when his applauding , laughing visitors left for the day . 
 Binky was initially placed in a 13 foot by 20 foot oval cage , which he quickly outgrew . The prospect of raising the estimated $ 150 @,@ 000 needed for a new , larger enclosure was uncertain , and zoo officials feared Binky would have to be sent to the Milwaukee Zoo . A fundraiser and open house were held to raise money for the effort , and a number of schools and businesses participated . Ultimately , the greatest contribution to the zoo 's effort was the city 's purchase of the zoo land for $ 100 @,@ 000 , which the zoo agreed to buy back in 55 annual installments of $ 2 @,@ 500 . Binky 's new enclosure opened in May 1977 . That year , Binky made an appearance as " my dog Spot " in one of Cal Worthington 's car dealership commercials . 
 As Binky approached sexual maturity , zoo officials negotiated for the purchase of a female polar bear named Mimi from the Tulsa Zoo in Oklahoma . As the transfer was being finalized , however , Mimi died from a viral disease in Tulsa . In February 1979 , young polar bear twins ( Nuka , a female , and Siku , a male ) joined Binky in his enclosure . Binky got along poorly with Siku , however , so Siku was given to a zoo in Morelia , Mexico in 1981 . 
 As a full @-@ grown bear , Binky weighed 1 @,@ 200 pounds . He was an aggressive bear ; in 1980 , he bit off a zoo employee 's finger . His keeper commented in 1983 , " Binky is stubborn [ and ] independent , and he likes to play games . When he 's really feeling obstinate , he walks halfway into his den and sits down . He knows I can 't close it . He 's a very smart bear . " 
 = = <unk> , celebrity , and death = = 
 In July 1994 , 29 @-@ year @-@ old Australian tourist Kathryn Warburton jumped over two safety rails to get a close @-@ up photograph of Binky in his cage . When Binky stuck his head through the bars and grabbed her , she suffered a broken leg and bite wounds . Another tourist caught the event on tape . Binky kept the woman 's shoe for three days before it could be retrieved by zoo officials , and the day after the attack Alaska Star photographer Rob Layman took a photo of Binky , holding the shoe in his mouth , that was printed in almost every press account of the incident . Warburton gave the other shoe to the Bird House , a bar in nearby Bird Creek that has since burned down . 
 Six weeks later , Binky was involved in another mauling . Drunken local teenagers approached the bear 's enclosure , apparently hoping to swim in its pool , and one 19 @-@ year @-@ old was hospitalized with leg lacerations after he was mauled . The zoo did not confirm that Binky was the attacker , but the bear had blood on his face following the incident . 
 After these attacks , Binky received international news coverage . Binky merchandise was created , including T @-@ shirts , mugs , and bumper stickers , often adorned with the shoe photo or with the slogan " Send another tourist , this one got away " . Local letters to the editor supported Binky during both incidents , most often arguing that polar bears ' dangerousness should be respected . The Zoo 's director , <unk> Seawell , criticized Warburton 's actions in the Anchorage Daily News , saying " [ s ] he violated the rules and jeopardized the bear 's life . " Though Seawell initially insisted that the attack would not change how the zoo was run , security around Binky 's cage was upgraded to keep zoo visitors out . 
 In 1995 , Binky 's <unk> Nuka suddenly became sick with the parasitic disease <unk> , dying from associated liver failure on July 14 , a week after her symptoms began . Shortly thereafter , Binky showed signs of the disease . On the morning of July 20 , he went into convulsions and died . Zoo visitors left bouquets of flowers outside the bears ' empty enclosure , and the zoo 's memorial service saw a high turnout despite pouring rain . The bears were buried on zoo grounds . 
 = Mormon handcart pioneers = 
 The Mormon handcart pioneers were participants in the migration of members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints ( also known as the LDS Church ) to Salt Lake City , Utah , who used handcarts to transport their belongings . The Mormon handcart movement began in 1856 and continued until 1860 . 
 Motivated to join their fellow Church members in Utah but lacking funds for full ox or horse teams , nearly 3 @,@ 000 Mormon pioneers from England , Wales , Scotland and Scandinavia made the journey from Iowa or Nebraska to Utah in ten handcart companies . The trek was disastrous for two of the companies , which started their journey dangerously late and were caught by heavy snow and severe temperatures in central Wyoming . Despite a dramatic rescue effort , more than 210 of the 980 pioneers in these two companies died along the way . John Chislett , a survivor , wrote , " Many a father pulled his cart , with his little children on it , until the day preceding his death . " 
 Although fewer than 10 percent of the 1846 – 68 Latter @-@ day Saint emigrants made the journey west using handcarts , the handcart pioneers have become an important symbol in LDS culture , representing the faithfulness and sacrifice of the pioneer generation . They continue to be recognized and honored in events such as Pioneer Day , Church pageants , and similar commemorations . 
 = = Background to the migration = = 
 The Latter Day Saints were first organized in 1830 . Early members of the Church often encountered hostility , primarily due to their practice of withdrawing from secular society and gathering in locales to practice their distinct religious beliefs . Their neighbors felt threatened by the Church 's rapid growth in numbers , its tendency to vote as a bloc and acquire political power , its claims of divine favor , and , later , the practice of polygamy . Violence directed against the Church and its members caused the body of the Church to move from Ohio to Missouri , then to Illinois . Despite the frequent moves , Church members were unable to escape opposition , which culminated in the extermination order against all Mormons living in the state by Missouri Governor Lilburn Boggs in 1838 and the death of their leader Joseph Smith in 1844 . Brigham Young said that he had received divine direction to organize the church members and head beyond the western frontier of the United States . 
 = = Need for handcart companies = = 
 Soon after the first Mormon pioneers reached Utah in 1847 , the Church began encouraging its converts in the British Isles and elsewhere in Europe to emigrate to Utah . From 1849 to 1855 , about 16 @,@ 000 European Latter @-@ day Saints traveled to the United States by ship , through the eastern states by rail , and to Utah by ox and wagon . Although most of these emigrants paid their own expenses , the Church established the Perpetual Emigration Fund to provide financial assistance for poor emigrants to trek west , which they would repay as they were able . Contributions to expand the fund were encouraged . 
 When contributions and loan repayments dropped off in 1855 after a poor harvest in Utah , President Young decided to begin using handcarts because the Latter @-@ day Saints who remained in Europe were mostly poor . Young also believed it would speed the journey . 
 Young proposed the plan in a letter to Franklin D. Richards , President of the European Mission , in September 1855 . His letter was published in the Millennial Star , the Church 's England @-@ based periodical , on December 22 , 1855 , along with an editorial by Richards endorsing the project . The cost of the migration was expected to be reduced by one @-@ third . The response was overwhelming — in 1856 the Perpetual Emigration Fund supported the travel of 2 @,@ 012 European emigrants , compared with 1 @,@ 161 the year before . 
 = = Outfitting = = 
 Emigrants departed from an English port ( generally Liverpool ) and travelled by ship to New York or Boston , then by railroad to Iowa City , Iowa , the western terminus of the rail line , where they would be outfitted with handcarts and other supplies . 
 Built to Brigham Young 's design , the handcarts resembled a large wheelbarrow , with two wheels five feet ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) in diameter and a single axle four and a half feet ( 1 @.@ 4 m ) wide , and weighing 60 pounds ( 27 kg ) . Running along each side of the bed were seven @-@ foot ( 2 @.@ 1 m ) pull shafts ending with a three @-@ foot ( 0 @.@ 9 m ) crossbar at the front . The crossbar allowed the carts to be pushed or pulled . Cargo was carried in a box about three feet by four feet ( 0 @.@ 9 m by 1 @.@ 2 m ) , with 8 inch ( 0 @.@ 2 m ) walls . The handcarts generally carried up to 250 pounds ( 110 kg ) of supplies and luggage , though they were capable of handling loads as heavy as 500 pounds ( 230 kg ) . Carts used in the first year 's migration were made entirely of wood ( " Iowa hickory or oak " ) ; in later years a stronger design was substituted , which included metal elements . 
 The handcart companies were organized using the handcarts and sleeping tents as the primary units . Five persons were assigned per handcart , with each individual limited to 17 pounds ( 7 @.@ 7 kg ) of clothing and bedding . Each round tent , supported by a center pole , housed 20 occupants and was supervised by a tent captain . Five tents were supervised by the captain of a hundred ( or " sub @-@ captain " ) . Provisions for each group of one hundred emigrants were carried in an ox wagon , and were distributed by the tent captains . 
 = = 1856 : First three companies = = 
 The first two ships departed England in late March and mid @-@ April and sailed to Boston . The emigrants spent several weeks in Iowa City , where they constructed their handcarts and were outfitted with supplies before beginning their trek of about 1 @,@ 300 miles ( 2 @,@ 093 km ) . 
 About 815 emigrants from the first two ships were organized into the first three handcart companies , headed by captains Edmund Ellsworth , Daniel D. McArthur , and Edward Bunker . The captains were missionaries returning to their homes in Utah and were familiar with the route . Most of the sub @-@ captains were also returning missionaries . 
 Across Iowa they followed an existing road about 275 miles ( 443 km ) to Council Bluffs , following a route that is close to current U.S. Route 6 . After crossing the Missouri River , they paused for a few days at a Mormon outpost in Florence , Nebraska ( now part of Omaha ) , for repairs , before beginning the remaining 1 @,@ 030 @-@ mile ( 1 @,@ 658 km ) journey along the Mormon Trail to Salt Lake City . 
 Initial problems with the carts occurred because the wood used to construct them was said to have been " green timber " , with many more breakdowns than anticipated . When the First Handcart Company reached Winter Quarters , Edmund Ellsworth had a member of the company " tin " the wooden axles and also installed " thick hoop iron <unk> " which enabled the handcart axles to turn more easily and resist breakage much better . This feature became a standard part of handcarts in following years , including frequent greasing to keep the wheels lubricated . 
 The companies made good time , and their trips were largely uneventful . The emigrant companies included many children and elderly individuals , and pushing and pulling handcarts was difficult work . Journals and recollections describe periods of illness and hunger . Like other companies traveling on the Emigrant Trail , deaths occurred along the way . Hafen and Hafen 's Handcarts to Zion lists 13 deaths from the first company , seven from the second , and fewer than seven from the third . Journal entries reflect the optimism of the handcart pioneers , even amid their hardships : 
 The first two companies arrived in Salt Lake City on September 26 and the third followed less than a week later . The first three companies were regarded as having demonstrated the feasibility of emigrating using handcarts . 
 = = 1856 : Willie and Martin handcart companies = = 
 The last two handcart companies of 1856 departed late from England . The ship Thornton , carrying the emigrants who became the Willie Company , did not leave England until May 4 . The leader of the Latter @-@ day Saints on the Thornton was James G. Willie . Another three weeks passed before the Horizon , carrying the emigrants who formed the Martin Company , departed . The late departures may have been the result of difficulties in procuring ships in response to the unexpected demand , but the results would be tragic . 
 With slow communications in the era before the transatlantic telegraph , the Church agents in Iowa City were not expecting the additional emigrants and had to make frantic preparations for their arrival . Critical weeks were spent hastily assembling the carts and outfitting the companies . When the companies reached Florence , additional time was lost making repairs to the poorly built carts . Emigrant John Chislett describes the problems with the carts : 
 Prior to the Willie Company departing Florence , the company met to debate the wisdom of such a late departure . Because the emigrants were unfamiliar with the trail and the climate , they deferred to the returning missionaries and Church agents . One of the returning missionaries , Levi Savage , urged them to spend the winter in Nebraska . He argued that such a late departure with a company consisting of the elderly , women and young children would lead to suffering , sickness and even death . All of the other Church elders argued that the trip should go forward , expressing optimism that the company would be protected by divine intervention . Some members of the company , perhaps as many as 100 , decided to spend the winter in Florence or in Iowa , but the majority , about 404 in number ( including Savage ) continued the journey west . The Willie Company left Florence on August 17 and the Martin Company on August 27 . Two ox @-@ wagon trains , led by captains W.B. Hodgett and John A. Hunt , followed the Martin Company . 
 Near Wood River , Nebraska , a herd of bison caused the Willie Company 's cattle to stampede , and nearly 30 cattle were lost . Left without enough cattle to pull all of the wagons , each handcart was required to take on an additional 100 pounds ( 45 kg ) of flour . 
 In early September , Franklin D. Richards , returning from Europe where he had served as the Church 's mission president , passed the emigrant companies . Richards and the 12 returning missionaries who accompanied him , traveling in carriages and light wagons pulled by horses and mules , pressed on to Utah to obtain assistance for the emigrants . 
 = = = Disaster and rescue = = = 
 In early October the two companies reached Fort Laramie , Wyoming , where they expected to be restocked with provisions , but no provisions were there for them . The companies had to cut back food rations , hoping that their supplies would last until help could be sent from Utah . To lighten their loads , the Martin Company cut the luggage allowance to 10 pounds ( 4 @.@ 5 kg ) per person , discarding clothing and blankets that soon would be desperately needed . 
 On October 4 the Richards party reached Salt Lake City and conferred with president Brigham Young and other Church leaders . The next morning the Church was meeting in a general conference , where Young and the other speakers called on the Church members to provide wagons , mules , supplies , and teamsters for a rescue mission . On the morning of October 7 the first rescue party left Salt Lake City with 16 wagon @-@ loads of food and supplies , pulled by four @-@ mule teams with 27 young men serving as teamsters and rescuers . The party elected George D. Grant as their captain . Throughout October more wagon trains were assembled , and by the end of the month 250 relief wagons were on the road . 
 Meanwhile , the Willie and Martin companies were running out of food and encountering bitterly cold temperatures . On October 19 a blizzard struck the region , halting the two companies and the relief party . The Willie Company was along the Sweetwater River approaching the Continental Divide . A scouting party sent ahead by the main rescue party found and greeted the emigrants , gave them a small amount of flour , encouraged them that rescue was near , and then rushed onward to try to locate the Martin Company . The members of the Willie Company had just reached the end of their flour supplies . They began slaughtering the handful of broken @-@ down cattle that still remained while their death toll mounted . On October 20 Captain Willie and Joseph Elder went ahead by mule through the snow to locate the supply train and inform them of the company 's desperate situation . They arrived at the rescue party 's campsite near South Pass that evening , and by the next evening the rescue party reached the Willie Company and provided them with food and assistance . Half of the rescue party remained to assist the Willie Company while the other half pressed forward to assist the Martin Company . The difficulties of the Willie Company were not yet over . On October 23 , the second day after the main rescue party had arrived , the Willie Company faced the most difficult section of the trail — the ascent up Rocky Ridge . The climb took place during a howling snowstorm through knee @-@ deep snow . That night 13 emigrants died . 
 On October 19 , the Martin Company was about 110 miles ( 177 km ) further east , making its last crossing of the North Platte River near present @-@ day Casper , Wyoming . Shortly after completing the crossing , the blizzard struck . Many members of the company suffered from hypothermia or frostbite after wading through the frigid river . They set up camp at Red Bluffs , unable to continue forward through the snow . Meanwhile , the original scouting party continued eastward until it reached a small vacant fort at Devil 's Gate , where they had been instructed to wait for the rest of the rescue party if they had not found the Martin Company . When the main rescue party rejoined them , another scouting party consisting of Joseph Young , Abel Garr , and Daniel Webster Jones was sent forward . The Martin company remained in their camp at Red Bluffs for nine days until the three scouts finally arrived on October 28 . By the time the scouts arrived , 56 members of the company had died . The scouts urged the emigrants to begin moving again . Three days later the main rescue party met the Martin Company and the Hodgett and Hunt wagon companies and helped them on to Devil 's Gate . 
 George D. Grant , who headed the rescue party , reported to President Young : 
 At Devil 's Gate the rescue party unloaded the baggage carried in the wagons of the Hodgett and Hunt wagon companies that had been following the Martin Company so the wagons could be used to transport the weakest emigrants . A small group led by Daniel Webster Jones remained at Devil 's Gate over the winter to protect the property . On November 4 the company had to cross the Sweetwater River , which was about 2 feet ( 0 @.@ 6 m ) deep and 90 to 120 feet ( 27 to 37 m ) wide . The stream was clogged with floating ice . Some of the men of the rescue party spent hours pulling the carts and carrying many of the emigrants across the river . However , many members of the company crossed the river themselves , some even pulling their own handcarts across . The severe weather forced the Martin Company to halt for another five days at Martin 's Cove , a few miles west of Devil 's Gate . 
 The rescue parties escorted the emigrants from both companies to Utah through more snow and severe weather while their members continued to suffer death from disease and exposure . The Willie Company arrived in Salt Lake City on November 9 ; 68 members of the company had lost their lives . 
 Meanwhile , a backup relief party of 77 teams and wagons was making its way east to provide additional assistance to the Martin Company . After passing Fort Bridger the leaders of the backup party concluded that the Martin Company must have wintered east of the Rockies , so they turned back . When word of the returning backup relief party was communicated to Young , he ordered the courier to return and tell them to turn back east and continue until they found the handcart company , but several days had been lost . On November 18 the backup party met the Martin Company with the greatly needed supplies . At last all the members of the handcart party were now able to ride in wagons . The 104 wagons carrying the Martin Company arrived in Salt Lake City on November 30 ; at least 145 members of the company had lost their lives . Many of the survivors had to have fingers , toes , or limbs amputated due to severe frostbite . 
 After the companies arrived in Utah , the residents generously opened their homes to the arriving emigrants , feeding and caring for them over the winter . The emigrants would eventually go on to Latter @-@ day Saint settlements throughout Utah and the West . 
 = = = Responsibility for the tragedy = = = 
 American West historian , Wallace Stegner , described the inadequate planning and improvident decisions leading to the tragedy when he wrote , 
 In urging the method upon Europe 's poor , Brigham and the priesthood would over @-@ reach themselves ; in shepherding them from Liverpool to the valley , the ordinarily reliable missionary and emigration organization would break down at several critical points ; in accepting the assurances of their leaders and the wishful importunities of their own hope , the emigrants would commit themselves to greater sacrifices than even the Nauvoo refugees ; and in rallying from compound fatal error to bring the survivors in , the priesthood and the people of <unk> would show themselves at their compassionate and efficient best . 
 As early as November 2 , 1856 , while the Willie and Martin companies were still making their way to safety , Brigham Young responded to criticism of his own leadership by rebuking Franklin Richards and Daniel Spencer for allowing the companies to leave so late . However , many authors argued that Young , as author of the plan , was responsible . Ann Eliza Young , daughter of one of the men in charge of building the carts and a former plural wife of Brigham Young , described her ex @-@ husband 's plan as a " cold @-@ blooded , scheming , blasphemous policy . " Stegner described Richards as a scapegoat for Young 's fundamental errors in planning , though Howard Christy , professor emeritus and former senior editor of scholarly publications at Brigham Young University , noted that Richards , as the highest @-@ ranking official in Florence , Nebraska area , was , in fact , the official who would have had the authority and capability to have averted the tragedy by halting their late departure . Christy also pointed out that Brigham Young and the other members of the First Presidency had consistently pointed out that departure from what is now Omaha , Nebraska needed to happen by the end of May to safely make the journey . 
 Many survivors of the tragedy refused to blame anyone . Survivor John Jacques wrote , " I blame nobody . I am not anxious to blame anybody ... I have no doubt that those who had to do with its management meant well and tried to do the best they could under the circumstances . " Another survivor , Francis Webster , was quoted as having said , " Was I sorry that I chose to come by hand cart ? No . Neither then nor any minute of my life since . The price we paid to become acquainted with God was a privilege to pay and I am thankful that I was privileged to come in the Martin Hand Cart Company . " On the other hand , survivor John Chislett , who later left the Church , wrote bitterly of Richards promising them that " we should get to Zion in safety . " 
 In May 2006 , a panel of researchers at the annual conference of the Mormon History Association blamed the tragedy on a failure of leadership . <unk> Carter , a trails historian , said Franklin D. Richards " was responsible , in my mind , for the late departure " because " he started the snowball down the slope " that eventually " added up to disaster . " Christy agreed that " leadership from the top , from the outset , was seriously short of the mark . " Robert Briggs , an attorney , said " It 's almost a foregone conclusion ... there is evidence of negligence . With leaders all the way up to Brigham Young , there was mismanagement . " On the other hand , Rebecca Bartholomew and Leonard J. Arrington wrote , " Memories of what was perhaps the worst disaster in the history of western migration have been <unk> by what could also be regarded as the most heroic rescue of the Mormon frontier . " 
 = = 1857 – 60 : Last five companies = = 
 A number of lessons had been learned from the 1856 disaster that allowed the Church to continue the handcart system while avoiding another disaster . Never again would a handcart company depart Florence later than July 7 . The construction of the handcarts was modified to strengthen them and reduce repairs . The handcarts would now be regularly greased . Arrangements were made to replenish supplies along the route . 
 By 1857 the Perpetual Emigration Fund was exhausted ; almost all of the handcart emigrants that year and in subsequent years had to pay their own way . With the increased cost , the number of handcart emigrants dropped from nearly 2 @,@ 000 in 1856 to about 480 in 1857 . Nevertheless , in 1857 two companies made the trek , both arriving in Salt Lake City by September 13 . Perhaps the most notable incident was when a captain of the U.S. Army 's Utah Expedition , on its way to Utah to confront Young and the Mormons , donated an ox to the hungry emigrants . 
 With the uncertainty caused by the Utah War , the Church called off all European emigration for 1858 . In 1859 one handcart company crossed the plains . The emigrants were now able to travel by rail to Saint Joseph , Missouri , after which they went by riverboat to Florence where they were outfitted with handcarts and supplies . When the 1859 company reached Fort Laramie , they discovered their food was running dangerously short , so they cut back on rations . When they reached Devil 's Gate the last flour was distributed . Emigrant Ebeneezer B. Beesley recalled an incident in which a group of rough mountain men fed the hungry emigrants . One of the mountain men then asked a young woman from the company to stay with him , which the tired woman agreed to do . ( William Atkin recalled another version of the story in which two young women married two mountain men . ) The hunger worsened when expected supplies were not available when they reached the Green River . Three days later wagons from Utah carrying provisions finally rescued the famished emigrants . 
 The last two handcart companies made the journey in 1860 , again following the route through St. Joseph . Although the journey proved to be difficult for the emigrants , these companies had relatively uneventful trips and experienced little loss of life . 
 After 1860 handcarts were no longer used . The Church implemented a new system of emigration , in which wagon trains travelled east from Salt Lake City in the spring and returned with emigrants in the summer . The transcontinental railroad was being constructed , and the railroad terminus gradually moved westward , shortening the trip . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 Handcart pioneers and the handcart movement are important parts of LDS culture , music and fiction . Arthur King Peters described the importance of this part of Mormon history in Seven Trails West : 
 Wallace Stegner praised the examples of those of the handcart companies , particularly in comparison to other pioneer parties : 
 = = = <unk> = = = 
 <unk> , in which a group dressed in 19th century garb travels for one or more days pushing and pulling handcarts , have become a popular activity among LDS wards , youth groups , and families . The reenactments have been lauded by LDS leaders ; for example , M. Russell Ballard of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles said , " Through music , drama , and stirring reenactments , we will be reminded of incredible pioneer journeys , both temporal and spiritual . " The reenactments have become so popular that the Bureau of Land Management is studying the impact on the trail and its environment , especially in the area around Rocky Ridge , Wyoming . According to the Casper Star @-@ Tribune , the BLM has had to impose a fee to offset the costs of monitoring the impacts of reenactors and other campers on the trail . 
 A re @-@ creation of the 1856 handcart disaster was featured on the History Channel show , Wild West Tech . 
 = = = 150th anniversary = = = 
 A number of events were held during 2006 to commemorate the 150th anniversary of the 1856 handcart companies : 
 The 2006 conference of the Mormon History Association was held in Casper , Wyoming from May 25 – May 28 and featured a specially commissioned concert opera by Harriet <unk> Bushman , " 1856 : Long Walk Home , " as well as several research papers on the handcart trek . 
 From June 9 – June 11 , a symposium and festival were held in Iowa City on the anniversary of the departure of the first company . Gordon B. Hinckley , the then @-@ current president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter @-@ day Saints , spoke at the closing ceremony fireside . 
 A musical called 1856 , produced by Cory Ellsworth , a descendant of Edmund Ellsworth , was performed in Mesa , Arizona and Salt Lake City in July 2006 . 
 Filmmaker Lee <unk> and writer / historian Heidi Swinton created a documentary for PBS , Sweetwater Rescue : The Willie & Martin Handcart Story , which features reenactments of the rescue . The one @-@ hour film was shown nationally in the United States on December 18 , 2006 . A companion book was also published . 
 Brigham Young University created a daily journal of the Willie Handcart Company on its Web site . 
 = = = Artistic depictions = = = 
 Film 
 Handcart . Directed by <unk> Goodman . 2002 . Made as part of the wave of Mormon films in the early 2000s . 
 17 Miracles . Directed by T. C. Christensen , distributed by Excel Entertainment Group . June 2011 . About the Willie and Martin Handcart Companies , especially Levi Savage . 
 Ephraim 's Rescue Directed by T. C. Christensen , distributed by Excel Entertainment Group . May 2013 . The story of the rescue of the Willie and Martin Handcart Companies , primarily told from the point of view of Ephraim Hanks . 
 Theater 
 Handcarts West . Play , by Nathan & Ruth Hale . 
 The Trail of Dreams . Musical , written by James Arrington , Steven Kapp Perry , and Marvin <unk> premiered at Utah Valley State College in 1997 . Also played at the <unk> Center for the Arts in Orem , Utah . The cast recording won the 1999 Pearl Award for " Best Soundtrack of the Year , " and Steven Kapp Perry was nominated as " Songwriter of the Year " for his work on this project . 
 Music 
 The handcart treks were a familiar theme in 19th @-@ century Mormon folk music . 
 Fiction 
 George the Handcart Boy . By Howard R. Driggs . Aladdin , 1952 . Young adult novel . 
 Fire of the Covenant . By Gerald N. Lund . Deseret Book , 1999 . ISBN <unk> OCLC <unk> 
 Charlotte 's Rose . By Ann Edwards Cannon . Random House , 2002 . Young adult novel . 
 Miracles of the Martin Handcart Company . By JoAnn Mellor Felix , 2006 . Teen , Young Adult and Adult novel . 
 Independence Rock . By Debra Terry Hulet . Cedar Fort , 2011 . Young adult novel . 
 True Sisters . By Sandra Dallas . St. Martin 's Press , 2012 . Adult novel . 
 In the Company of Angels . By David <unk> . 
 " West " . By Orson Scott Card . Science @-@ fiction short story . 
 = = = Notable handcart pioneers = = = 
 Edward Bunker – Captain of the third company . 
 C. C. A. Christensen – Sub @-@ captain of the seventh company and an artist known for his illustrations of LDS history . 
 John Jaques – Member of the Martin Company , missionary , and company historian . 
 Levi Savage Jr . – Sub @-@ captain of the Willie Company who argued against the late departure . 
 Jens Nielson , Danish entrepreneur that later settled several communities in the Cedar City Historic District . 
 Nellie <unk> – Member of the Martin Company . 
 Emily H. <unk> – Member of the Willie Handcart Company and one of the most influential Mormon poets in the 19th century . 
 = = = Notable members of the rescue parties = = = 
 Ephraim Hanks – Scout , member of the second rescue party . 
 Daniel Webster Jones – Member of advance party who found the Martin Company . Jones spent the winter at Devil 's Gate guarding the equipment that was left there . 
 Hosea Stout – Member of the second rescue party who carried messages to and from Salt Lake City . 
 Joseph Angell Young – Son of Brigham Young and member of the advance rescue party that found the Martin Company . 
 = HMS Raven II = 
 HMS Raven II was a seaplane carrier of the Royal Navy used during World War I. Converted from the captured German freighter Rabenfels , the ship 's aircraft conducted aerial reconnaissance , observation and bombing missions in the Eastern Mediterranean and Red Sea during 1915 – 17 even though the ship was not commissioned into the Royal Navy until mid @-@ 1915 . She fruitlessly searched the Indian Ocean for the German commerce raider Wolf in mid @-@ 1917 . Raven II was decommissioned in late 1917 and became a Merchant Navy collier for the last year of the war . She was sold off in 1923 and had a succession of owners and names until she was sunk during World War II while under Japanese ownership . 
 = = Description = = 
 Raven II was 394 feet 5 inches ( 120 @.@ 22 m ) long , had a beam of 51 feet 6 inches ( 15 @.@ 7 m ) , and a draught of 27 feet 6 inches ( 8 @.@ 38 m ) . She was rated at 4 @,@ 706 GRT . The ship had one propeller shaft powered by one quadruple @-@ expansion steam engine that used steam generated by an unknown number of coal @-@ fired boilers . Raven II had a maximum speed of 10 knots ( 19 km / h ; 12 mph ) . 
 = = Career = = 
 The German freighter SS Rabenfels was built by Swan Hunter & Wigham Richardson and completed in December 1903 . On the outbreak of war in August 1914 , she was seized by the British authorities whilst in Port Said , Egypt and was requisitioned for service under the Red Ensign in January 1915 to operate seaplanes . No special modifications were made to the ship ; the aircraft were stowed on the aft hatch covers and handled with her cargo booms . Aenne Rickmers operated two French Nieuport floatplanes that had been off @-@ loaded by the French seaplane carrier <unk> ; they were flown by French pilots with British observers . Later , the ship operated included British Short Type 184 , Sopwith Schneider , Sopwith Baby and Short Admiralty Type 827 floatplanes . 
 For the first two months of 1915 , the ship and her aircraft supported Allied operations in Syria , Palestine and the Sinai Peninsula . Aside from reconnaissance duties , they delivered and recovered Allied spies as well as observed for ships performing coastal bombardments . Around 20 March , Rabenfels arrived in Mudros to load the aircraft and crew of the damaged Aenne Rickmers ( later HMS Anne ) . The ship was commissioned into the Royal Navy on 12 June 1915 and renamed HMS Raven II . On 17 August , both Anne and Raven II spotted for the French armoured cruiser Jeanne d 'Arc as she bombarded Tarsus . In January 1916 , she was assigned to the East Indies and Egypt Seaplane Squadron together with the carriers Empress , Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree and Anne . The squadron was under the command of the General Officer Commanding , Egypt and its primary duty was to watch Turkish positions and movements in southern Palestine and the Sinai in early 1916 . 
 At the end of March , Raven II was sent to the Red Sea to attack Turkish troops threatening Aden ; she carried one two @-@ seat Short floatplane and five Sopwith <unk> for this operation . After a preliminary reconnaissance mission , on 2 – 3 April her aircraft dropped ninety @-@ one 20 @-@ pound ( 9 @.@ 1 kg ) bombs as well as leaflets urging the Arab auxiliaries to desert . The ship returned to the Syrian coast for patrols and was transferred to Kastellorizo in early July to conduct aerial reconnaissance and bombing missions in that area . Raven II was transferred to the Gulf of Aqaba later that month to take aerial photographs of the head of gulf as well as the east coast of the Red Sea . Her aircraft observed for the monitor M21 as she bombarded a Turkish encampment in the Sinai . One aircraft was forced to land , but it was taken in tow by the monitor and delivered back to Raven II . 
 The East Indies and Egypt Squadron reassembled in late August with Raven II , Anne and Ben @-@ my @-@ Chree and the aircraft from the three carriers attacked the Turkish supply dump at El Afule for thirty minutes . The squadron then steamed south along the Palestinian coast where they encountered two Turkish supply dhows . One was sunk by the escorting French destroyer <unk> while the other was captured . The squadron flew off seven aircraft that attacked an encampment at Bureir and a nearby railroad viaduct . Raven II was then sent to the Adalia area on the Turkish coast where her aircraft bombed a factory at <unk> and searched for U @-@ boat bases On 1 September , the ship was in Port Said preparing for another sortie into the Red Sea when she was hit by a bomb dropped by a German aircraft ( probably the first successful air attack on an aviation vessel ) . Although Raven II was only lightly damaged , Anne was sent in her place . Raven II relieved Anne on 26 October in the Red Sea and her aircraft bombed Turkish forces advancing on Rabigh and <unk> on 10 December . Shortly afterwards , the ship was transferred back to the Eastern Mediterranean where her aircraft attacked a bridge over the Ceyhan River with one 65 @-@ pound ( 29 kg ) bomb and eight 16 @-@ pound ( 7 @.@ 3 kg ) bombs on 27 December . 
 On 10 March 1917 , Raven II and the French armoured cruiser Pothuau sailed for the Indian Ocean to hunt for the German Q @-@ ship Wolf . For this mission she carried a Short Baby and two Short 184s . The two ships searched the Laccadive Islands en route to Colombo , Ceylon , which they reached on 2 April . They then searched the Chagos Archipelago and the Maldive Islands and returned to Colombo . Engine problems forced a Short 184 to make an emergency landing on 21 April in the Maldives ; the crew rejoined the ship on 6 May after a series of adventures that inspired Rudyard Kipling 's story " A Flight of Fact " . Raven II recovered the floatplane and its aircraft continued to fly search missions from Colombo until 21 May . She then joined a convoy bound for Egypt and arrived back in Port Said on 10 June . In early November , the ship 's aircraft observed fire for a variety of ships during the Third Battle of Gaza . 
 = = = Commercial service = = = 
 HMS Raven II was paid off shortly afterwards and , renamed <unk> , served as a collier under the Red Ensign from January 1918 until the end of the war under the management of Grahams & Co . She was sold to British Dominion Steamship Co. in 1923 and resold later that year to Karafuto <unk> Kabushiki Kaisha ( KKK ) , which renamed her <unk> Maru No. 7 . In 1935 , the ship was sold to <unk> KKK and she was renamed <unk> Maru No. 7 in 1938 . The ship was sunk during World War II , although the circumstances are unknown . 
 = Hurricane Bertha ( 1990 ) = 
 Hurricane Bertha caused minor damage in the United States , Bermuda , and Atlantic Canada in July and August 1990 . The third tropical cyclone , second named storm , and first hurricane of the 1990 Atlantic hurricane season , Bertha developed from a frontal low pressure area offshore of North Carolina on July 24 . Initially subtropical , it slowly acquired tropical characteristics while tracked southeast and then southwestward . By early on July 27 , the cyclone was re @-@ classified as a tropical depression . Following its transition , the depression intensified and was upgraded to Tropical Storm Bertha on July 28 . The storm then curved northeastward and rapidly strengthened . Bertha became a hurricane early on July 29 , though it weakened back to a tropical storm later that day . On the following day , Bertha re @-@ intensified into a hurricane and peaked as an 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) Category 1 hurricane on July 31 . 
 Early on August 2 , Bertha made landfall near Sydney , Nova Scotia while weakening and transitioning back into an extratropical cyclone . Large waves impacted the East Coast of the United States ; 25 to 50 feet ( 7 @.@ 6 to 15 @.@ 2 m ) waves were reported along the coast of North Carolina . In Florida , rough seas caused two fatalities by drowning , as well as at least 200 lifeguard rescues . Seven other drowning deaths occurred offshore when the S.S. Corazon sank near Cape Cod . Minimal impact occurred on Bermuda , limited to mainly tropical storm force wind gusts . In Canada , strong winds caused moderate crop damage on Prince Edward Island and collapsed a suspension bridge in Nova Scotia . Rainfall caused minor flooding in the region . Overall , Bertha caused nine fatalities and approximately $ 3 @.@ 91 million ( 1990 USD ) in damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 A cold front moved eastward through the United States in the middle part of July , and reached the East Coast of the United States on July 23 . By the following day , a low pressure area developed just southeast of Cape Hatteras , North Carolina ahead of the frontal zone , and quickly formed into a subtropical depression . In association with a nearby upper @-@ level low , the depression tracked quickly southeastward before turning to the southwest . The subtropical depression gradually organized , and satellite classifications began subsequent to merging with a tropical wave on July 25 . Convection developed closer to the center of circulation as it gradually decelerated while continuing southwestward and on July 27 , the system organized into Tropical Depression Three while located about 335 miles ( 539 @.@ 1 km ) east of Daytona Beach , Florida . 
 Upon transitioning into a tropical cyclone , the depression executed an elongated counter @-@ clockwise loop to the northeast . Conditions favored further intensification , and based on ship reports , it is estimated the depression strengthened into Tropical Storm Bertha early on July 28 . Bertha quickly strengthened to attain hurricane status early on July 29 about halfway between Cape Canaveral , Florida and Bermuda . The strengthening trend was brief , however , as increased vertical wind shear weakened it back to a tropical storm late on July 29 , with the center exposed from the deep convection . Bertha continued slowly northeastward to ridging from the Bermuda high extending westward to the United States . 
 Operationally , forecasters at the National Hurricane Center speculated whether Bertha was transitioning into a subtropical cyclone , due to its deep convection being located , at times , over 200 miles ( 321 @.@ 8 km ) from the center . However , the convection progressively returned to the center and by late on July 30 , Bertha re @-@ intensified into a hurricane as the convection covered the center , about 415 miles ( 667 @.@ 8 km ) east of where it first formed . Early on July 31 , the hurricane briefly attained peak winds of 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) before weakening and accelerated northeastward as the ridge of high pressure was slowly eroded . Bertha maintained hurricane status as it approached Atlantic Canada , and briefly reached winds of 80 mph ( 129 km / h ) before weakening and making landfall near Sydney , Nova Scotia on August 1 as a 70 mph ( 113 km / h ) tropical storm . The storm was transitioning into an extratropical cyclone while approaching Atlantic Canada , and lost all tropical characteristics shortly after moving ashore . The weakening extratropical remnants of Bertha turned northward into the Gulf of Saint Lawrence and lost its identity shortly thereafter . 
 = = Preparations and Impact = = 
 The formation of Bertha in close proximity of the East Coast of the United States prompted residents to stock up on emergency supplies and monitor the storm . The Maritimes Weather Center and National Hurricane Center began to issue warnings for Nova Scotia and most of Atlantic Canada on July 31 and August 1 . By the following day , all warnings and advisories for Atlantic Canada were dropped as Bertha dissipated . 
 Bertha 's broad circulation produced high waves which were reported along the southeastern coast of the United States , in North Carolina , the storm produced waves of 25 – 50 ft ( 7 @.@ 6 @-@ 15 @.@ 2 m ) . The waves caused minor beach erosion along the North Carolina coastline including the Outer Banks . In Florida , rip currents from Bertha caused two drowning fatalities . 200 other swimmers were rescued from the rough seas . The vortex of Bertha forced warm air and blocked sea breezes from South Florida . As a result , record high temperatures were reported in West Palm Beach , Miami , Hollywood , and Miami Beach ; temperatures also tied records in Fort Lauderdale . The extreme heat also shattered numerous sliding glass doors and exhausted several air conditioners . 
 Offshore , several ships came in contact with Bertha , many reported sustained winds of 35 @-@ 58 mph ( 56 – 93 km / h ) and a Canadian ship reported a barometric pressure of 985 mbar ( 29 @.@ 1 inHg ) . The only reported shipwreck caused by Bertha was when the Corazon , a Greek freighter capsized and sank during the storm . The ship , which was off the coast of Cape Cod at the time of its sinking , was experiencing strong winds up to 78 mph ( 126 km / h ) and 30 feet ( 9 @.@ 1 m ) waves . The rough seas caused the ship 's keel to break , causing the crewmen to send a distress signal and evacuate the sinking vessel . During the evacuation , one crewman drowned when trying to board a lifeboat , his body was later found by a Soviet merchant ship . Another merchant ship , the <unk> , spotted twelve of the 27 sailors in their liferaft and the crew of the <unk> tried to rescue the sailors but to no avail as the rough seas caused the liferaft to drift near the ships propeller and rudder area . The turbulence caused by the ships propeller knocked seven sailors into the water , five of them drowned and a search for their bodies continued until the following day . The remaining 21 sailors were later rescued by crews of other freighters and merchant ships . An investigation by the United States Coast Guard revealed that the Corazon 's lifeboats were in too poor of a condition to use in case of an emergency . 
 Initially , the National Hurricane Center noted the possibility of Bertha impacting Bermuda . However , the storm bypassed Bermuda , which caused only minor effects on the island ; limited to rough seas and wind gusts reaching 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) . 
 In Atlantic Canada , Bertha brought strong tropical storm force winds and heavy rainfall . Two weather stations in <unk> , Nova Scotia and Hunter 's Mountain recorded 7 inches ( 177 @.@ 8 mm ) of rainfall . In Prince Edward Island , the storm produced a wind gust of 71 mph ( 115 km / h ) and 4 @.@ 72 inches ( 101 @.@ 6 mm ) of rain . A weather station in Port @-@ aux @-@ Basques , Newfoundland and Labrador reported a wind gust of 63 mph ( 102 km / h ) and 2 @.@ 51 inches ( 50 mm ) of rain . The high winds brought by Bertha caused moderate damage to tobacco and corn crops in Prince Edward Island and damaged a suspension bridge in Nova Scotia . Heavy rainfall from Bertha caused minimal flooding at a golf course . In Peggys Cove , Nova Scotia , six people were injured when waves from Bertha washed them into the sea . Damage was estimated at $ 4 @.@ 427 million ( 1990 CAD , $ 3 @.@ 912 million 1990 USD ) . 
 = Keynsham = 
 Keynsham / <unk> / is a town and civil parish between Bristol and Bath in Somerset , south @-@ west England . It has a population of 16 @,@ 000 . It was listed in the Domesday Book as <unk> , which is believed to mean the home of Saint Keyne . 
 The site of the town has been occupied since prehistoric times , and may have been the site of the Roman settlement of Trajectus . The remains of at least two Roman villas have been excavated , and an additional 15 Roman buildings have been detected beneath the Keynsham Hams . Keynsham developed into a medieval market town after Keynsham Abbey was founded around 1170 . It is situated at the confluence of the River Chew and River Avon and was subject to serious flooding before the creation of Chew Valley Lake and river level controls at Keynsham Lock in 1727 . The Great Flood of 1968 inundated large parts of the town . It was home to the Cadbury 's chocolate factory , Somerdale , which opened in 1935 as a major employer in the town . 
 It is home to Memorial Park , which is used for the annual town festival and several nature reserves . The town is served by Keynsham railway station on the London @-@ Bristol and Bristol @-@ Southampton trunk routes and is close to the A4 road which bypassed the town in 1964 . There are schools , religious , sporting , and cultural clubs and venues . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Roman Trajectus = = = 
 Evidence of occupation dates back to prehistoric times , and during the Roman period , Keynsham may have been the site of the Roman settlement of Trajectus , which is the Latin word for " bridgehead . " It is believed that a settlement around a Roman ford over the River Avon existed somewhere in the vicinity , and the numerous Roman ruins discovered in Keynsham make it a likely candidate for this lost settlement . 
 In 1877 during construction of the Durley Hill Cemetery , the remains of a grand Roman villa with over 30 rooms was discovered . Unfortunately , construction of the cemetery went ahead , and the majority of the villa is now located beneath the Victorian cemetery and an adjacent road . The cemetery was expanded in 1922 , and an archeological dig was carried out ahead of the interments , leading to the excavation of 17 rooms and the rescue of 10 elaborate mosaics . 
 At the same time as the grand Roman villa was being excavated at Durley Hill Cemetery , a second , much smaller Roman villas was discovered during the construction of Fry 's Somerdale Chocolate Factory . Two fine stone coffins were also excavated , interred with the remains of a male and a female . The villa and coffins were removed from the site , and reconstructed near the gates of the factory grounds , and construction on the factory went ahead . Fry 's constructed a museum on the grounds of the factory , which house the Durley Hill mosaics , the coffins , and numerous other artifacts for many years . The factory was shuttered in 2011 , and the property sold to Taylor Wimpey for redevelopment into a housing community . In 2012 , Taylor Wimpey carried out a detailed geophysical assessment of the area , and discovered an additional 15 Roman buildings centered around a Roman road beneath Keynsham Hams , with evidence of additional Roman buildings that have been disturbed by quarrying . Currently , there are no plans to excavate the Roman ruins at Keynsham Hams . 
 = = = Medieval Keynsham = = = 
 According to legend , Saint Keyne , daughter of King Brychan of Brycheiniog ( Brecon ) , lived here on the banks of the River Avon during the 5th century . Before settling here , she had been warned by the local King that the marshy area was swarming with snakes , which prevented habitation . St Keyne prayed to the heavens and turned the snakes to stone . The fossil ammonites found in the area were believed to be the result . However , there is no evidence that her cult was ever celebrated in Keynsham . 
 Some scattered archeological evidence suggests that an Anglo @-@ Saxon settlement existed in Keynsham in the High Street area , and that in the 9th century a Minster church existed in Keynsham as well . The earliest documentary reference to Keynsham is in the Anglo @-@ Saxon Chronicle , ( c . 980 ) which refers to it as <unk> , Old English for ' <unk> 's Hamm . ' The town is also listed in the Domesday Book of 1086 as " <unk> . " It has therefore been suggested that the origin of Keynsham 's name is not , in fact Saint Keyne , but from " <unk> ( <unk> ) . " 
 Around 1170 , Keynsham Abbey was founded by the Victorine congregation of canon regulars . Archeological evidence suggests that the abbey was built over the site of the previous Saxon Minster church . The settlement developed into a medieval market town , and the abbey of Keynsham was given ownership of the Keynsham Hundred . The Abbey survived until the dissolution of the monasteries in 1539 , and a house was subsequently built on the site . The remains have been designated as a Grade I listed building by English Heritage . 
 = = = Modern history = = = 
 Keynsham played a part in the Civil War as the Roundheads saved the town and also camped there for the night , using the pub now known as the Lock Keeper Inn as a guard post . During the Monmouth Rebellion of 1685 the town was the site of a battle between royalist forces and the rebel Duke of Monmouth . Bridges Almshouses were built around 1685 and may have been for the widows of those killed in the rebellion . 
 = = = Post World War II = = = 
 Before the creation of Chew Valley Lake and river level controls at Keynsham Lock and weir , Keynsham was prone to flooding . The Great Flood of 1968 inundated large parts of the town , destroying the town 's bridges including the county bridge over the Avon which had stood since medieval times , and private premises on <unk> Hill ; the devastation was viewed by the Duke of Edinburgh . After the flood the Memorial Park , which had been laid out after World War II was extended . 
 Keynsham rose to fame during the late 1950s and early 1960s when it featured in a long @-@ running series of advertisements on Radio Luxembourg for Horace Batchelor 's Infra @-@ draw betting system . To obtain the system , listeners had to write to Batchelor 's Keynsham post office box , and Keynsham was always painstakingly spelled out on @-@ air , with Batchelor famously intoning " Keynsham – spelt K @-@ E @-@ Y @-@ N @-@ S @-@ H @-@ A @-@ M – Keynsham , Bristol " . This was done because the proper pronunciation of Keynsham – " Cane @-@ sham " – does not make the spelling of Keynsham immediately obvious to the radio listener . 
 Since the 1950s Keynsham has become a dormitory town for Bristol and Bath . The High Street shopping area has been remodelled , and a Town Hall , Library , and Clock Tower were built in the mid @-@ 1960s . 
 = = = 2010s regeneration = = = 
 Design work for regeneration of the town hall area was awarded by Bath and North East Somerset Council to <unk> in 2010 , with the works cost stated in 2011 to be £ 33 million ( £ 34 million in 2012 ) . Realisation of the plans is hoped to " attract new business and jobs " , in the aftermath of the announcement of the Cadbury Somerdale Factory closure . 
 In January 2012 , it was announced that the Willmott Dixon Group had been appointed as contractor on the scheme . The Council 's planning committee in August 2012 deferred the approval decision , pending alterations to the external appearance of the building . These were approved in October 2012 , with demolition commencing in the same month . The regenerated Civic Centre area came back into use in late 2014 and early 2015 . 
 = = Governance = = 
 The town council has responsibility for local issues , including setting an annual precept ( local rate ) to cover the council ’ s operating costs and producing annual accounts for public scrutiny . The town council evaluates local planning applications and works with the local police , district council officers , and neighbourhood watch groups on matters of crime , security , and traffic . The town council 's role includes projects for the maintenance and repair of parish facilities , such as the village hall or community centre , as well as consulting with the district council on the maintenance , repair , and improvement of highways , drainage , footpaths , public transport , and street cleaning . 
 Playing fields and playgrounds are provided in Memorial Park , <unk> , Kelston Road , Teviot Road , <unk> Road and Manor Road with basketball facilities at Teviot Road and <unk> Road and a BMX track at Keynsham Road . The Keynsham town council is also responsible for the football pitches and pavilion at Manor Road and the floodlit Multi Sport Site in Memorial Park . It also provides support for community groups organising music and cultural events . Conservation matters ( including trees and listed buildings ) and environmental issues are also of interest to the council . The town council was formed in 1991 and consists of 15 members elected every four years . There are 2 Labour and 13 Conservative . Keynsham has one official twin town : Libourne in France . 
 From 1974 to 1996 , Keynsham was administered as part of the short @-@ lived county of Avon ; it has since formed part of the unitary authority of Bath and North East Somerset , in the ceremonial county of Somerset . Bath and North East Somerset which was created in 1996 , was established by the Local Government Act 1992 . The town is divided into <unk> North , which has five Conservative councillors , Keynsham South which is represented by three Conservative and two Labour councillors , and Keynsham East , which has the remaining 5 councillors , all of whom are Conservatives . 
 Bath and North East Somerset provides a single tier of local government with responsibility for almost all local government functions within its area including local planning and building control , local roads , council housing , environmental health , markets and fairs , refuse collection , recycling , cemeteries , crematoria , leisure services , parks , and tourism . It is also responsible for education , social services , libraries , main roads , public transport , trading standards , waste disposal and strategic planning , although fire , police and ambulance services are provided jointly with other authorities through the Avon Fire and Rescue Service , Avon and Somerset Constabulary and the Great Western Ambulance Service . 
 Bath and North East Somerset 's area covers part of the ceremonial county of Somerset but it is administered independently of the non @-@ metropolitan county . Its administrative headquarters is in Bath , but many departments are headquartered in Keynsham . Between 1 April 1974 and 1 April 1996 , it was the Wansdyke district and the City of Bath of the county of Avon . Before 1974 that the parish was part of the Keynsham Urban District . 
 The parish is represented in the House of Commons of the Parliament of the United Kingdom as part of the North East Somerset constituency , which is a county constituency created by the Boundary Commission for England as the successor seat to the Wansdyke Parliamentary Seat . It came into being at the 2010 general election , and is represented by the Conservative Jacob Rees @-@ Mogg . It elects one Member of Parliament ( MP ) by the first past the post system of election . It is also part of the South West England constituency of the European Parliament which elects six MEPs using the d 'Hondt method of party @-@ list proportional representation . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Keynsham is located where the River Chew meets the River Avon . Fishing rights for the <unk> and Chewton sections of the Chew are owned by Keynsham Angling Club . The Mill Ground stretch of the River Chew consists of the six fields on the western bank from Chewton Place at Chewton Keynsham to the Albert Mill . The water is home to Chub , Roach , European perch and Rudd , along with good numbers of <unk> , Dace and Trout . Keynsham Lock on the Avon opened in 1727 . Just above the lock are some visitor moorings and a pub , on an island between the lock and the weir . The weir side of the island is also the mouth of the River Chew . 
 Memorial Park , the northern part of which has existed as parkland since the 19th century , as shown by the ordnance Survey maps of 1864 and 1867 , was formally laid out after World War II was extended after the floods of 1968 . It covers 10 @.@ 7 hectares ( 26 acres ) of woodland and grass alongside the River Chew . It commemorates the war dead of Keynsham and includes facilities including two children 's play areas , a skateboard park , multi @-@ sport area , bowling green , public toilets , a bandstand and refreshment kiosk . The formal gardens within the park are adjacent to the River Chew with the <unk> Hill Woods at its western end . Part of the park is known locally as Chew Park because of its proximity to the River and another area , close to Keynsham Abbey as Abbey Park . The park received the Green Flag Award in 2008 / 09 , and again for 2009 / 10 . 
 On the outskirts of Keynsham lies Keynsham <unk> <unk> , one of the most <unk> rich acidic grassland sites within the Avon area . The site is on a south @-@ facing slope running alongside the Bristol to Bath railway line . It consists of open patches of grassland and bare rock , interspersed with blocks of scrub . It is the only site in Avon at which Upright <unk> <unk> erecta , occurs . Other locally notable plant species found here include Annual <unk> <unk> <unk> , Sand <unk> <unk> rubra , Subterranean Clover Trifolium subterraneus and Prickly Sedge Carex muricata ssp. <unk> . The site does not have any statutory conservation status , and is not managed for its biodiversity interest . Threats to its ecological value include the encroachment of scrub onto the grassland areas , and damage from motorcycle scrambling . Between Keynsham and Saltford , a 15 hectares ( 37 acres ) area of green belt has been planted , with over 19 @,@ 000 trees , as the Manor Road Community Woodland , which has been designated as a Nature Reserve . Nearby is the Avon Valley Country Park tourist attraction . 
 Along with the rest of South West England , Keynsham has a temperate climate which is generally wetter and milder than the rest of England . The annual mean temperature is about 10 ° C ( 50 ° F ) with seasonal and diurnal variations , but due to the modifying effect of the sea , the range is less than in most other parts of the United Kingdom . January is the coldest month with mean minimum temperatures between 1 ° C ( 34 ° F ) and 2 ° C ( 36 ° F ) . July and August are the warmest months in the region with mean daily maxima around 21 ° C ( 70 ° F ) . In general , December is the dullest month and June the sunniest . The south west of England enjoys a favoured location , particularly in summer , when the Azores High extends its influence north @-@ eastwards towards the UK . 
 Cloud often forms inland , especially near hills , and reduces exposure to sunshine . The average annual sunshine totals around 1600 hours . Rainfall tends to be associated with Atlantic depressions or with convection . In summer , convection caused by solar surface heating sometimes forms shower clouds and a large proportion of the annual precipitation falls from showers and thunderstorms at this time of year . Average rainfall is around 800 – 900 mm ( 31 – 35 in ) . About 8 – 15 days of snowfall is typical . November to March have the highest mean wind speeds , with June to August having the lightest . The predominant wind direction is from the south west . 
 = = Demography = = 
 In the 2001 census Keynsham had a population of 15 @,@ 533 , in 6 @,@ 545 households , of which 6 @,@ 480 described themselves as White . Keynsham East Ward had a population of 5 @,@ 479 , Keynsham North 5 @,@ 035 and Keynsham South 5 @,@ 019 . In each of the wards between 75 and 80 % of the population described themselves as Christians , and around 15 % said that they had no religion . 
 In 1881 the population of the civil parish was 2 @,@ 482 . This grew gradually until 1931 when there were 4 @,@ 521 , before there was a steeper rise to 1951 when there were 8 @,@ 277 . Over the next ten years this nearly doubled to 15 @,@ 152 in 1961 . 
 = = Economy = = 
 An important industry in the town was Cadbury 's chocolate factory , the Somerdale Factory . The J. S. Fry & Sons business merged with Cadbury in 1919 , and moved their factory in the centre of Bristol to Keynsham in 1935 . As Quakers , the factory was built in a 228 @-@ acre ( 0 @.@ 92 km2 ) greenfield site with social facilities , including playing fields and recreational sports grounds . Called Somerdale after a national competition in 1923 , Keynsham Cadbury was the home of Fry 's Chocolate Cream , the Double Decker , Dairy Milk and Mini Eggs , Cadbury 's Fudge , Chomp and <unk> . 
 On 3 October 2007 , Cadbury announced plans to close the Somerdale plant by 2010 with the loss of some 500 jobs . Production will be moved to factories in Birmingham and Poland . In the longer term it is likely the greenfield site will be re @-@ classified and provide Keynsham with additional housing . Labour MP for Wansdyke , Dan Norris , said " news of the factory 's closure is a hard and heavy blow , not just to the workforce , but to the Keynsham community as a whole " . In late 2007 campaigns to save the Cadbury 's factory in Somerdale were in full swing . One local resident started a campaign to urge English Heritage to protect the site , and preserve the history of the factory . The campaign did not succeed and as of February 2009 the site is still scheduled for closure , and likely demolition . Cadbury have suggested that the land be redeveloped as a mixture of housing and commercial interests , giving a figure of approximately 900 jobs being created as a result . 
 Before their takeover of Cadbury in February 2010 , Kraft Foods had pledged to keep the Cadbury factory at Somerdale open if they were successful in their bid for the company . However , within a week of completing their purchase of Cadbury , Kraft CEO Irene Rosenfeld released a statement announcing that Kraft were to close the factory by 2011 , as originally planned by Cadbury . The stated reason for this was that it was only after the purchase had been made that Kraft realised how advanced Cadbury 's plans were . Industry experts have however questioned this explanation , arguing that Kraft invested so much in researching their bid for Cadbury that they should have been aware of the extent to which plans had been advanced . 
 = = Culture = = 
 In 1969 the town was featured as the title of the fourth album Keynsham by the Bonzo Dog Band . The title was chosen in honour of Horace Batchelor , who had been referenced in previous Bonzo Dog Band recordings . In the early 1960s , Batchelor became known through his regular advertisements on Radio Luxembourg for his football pools prediction service . When giving his contact address , he would slowly spell out ' Keynsham ' letter by letter , and this became an amusing feature for many young listeners . 
 Keynsham Festival , which started in the late 1990s , takes place in the Memorial Park each July , and attracts around 16 @,@ 000 people . There is also a Victorian evening held in the town each November . Keynsham and Saltford local history society was formed in 1965 and is concerned with researching and recording the history of the area . 
 Keynsham was chosen as the outdoor location for a dramatic story @-@ line in the BBC One TV serial EastEnders in September 2012 with filming taking place in a cordoned @-@ off section of the High Street . 
 In Northanger Abbey by Jane Austen , Catherine and her friends ride to ″ within view of the town of Keynsham ″ . 
 = = Transport = = 
 The town is served by Keynsham railway station on the London @-@ Bristol and Bristol @-@ Southampton trunk routes . It opened in 1840 and was renamed Keynsham and Somerdale in 1925 . The factory had its own rail system which was connected to the mainline . The connection to Fry 's chocolate factory was taken out of use on the 26 – 27 July 1980 . The station 's name reverted to Keynsham on 6 May 1974 . The station was rebuilt in 1985 as a joint project between British Rail and Avon County Council . 
 The A4 road used to run through the town , however much of this traffic is now carried on the bypass , which was constructed in 1964 . The bypass runs from Saltford , a village which adjoins Keynsham , to Brislington , Bristol . Keynsham is on the Monarch 's Way long distance footpath which approximates the escape route taken by King Charles II in 1651 after being defeated in the Battle of Worcester . 
 The town is served by no less than 9 bus routes , 5 of which connect Bath with Bristol , 1 which runs from Ashton Way at the back of the shops to Bristol City Centre via Kingswood , another bus service runs from Ashton Way at the back of the shops to Southmead Hospital and one bus service runs to Cribbs Causeway . One bus runs to Mangotsfield . In numerical order : 
 A4 Bath to Bristol Airport 
 17 / 17A Keynsham to Southmead Hospital 
 38 Bath to Bristol 
 39 Bath to Bristol 
 178 Bath to Bristol via Radstock 
 349 Keynsham to Bristol 
 = = Education = = 
 State @-@ funded schools are organised within the unitary authority of Bath and North East Somerset . A review of Secondary Education in Bath was started in 2007 , primarily to reduce surplus provision and reduce the number of single @-@ sex secondary schools in Bath , and to access capital funds available through the government 's Building Schools for the Future programme . There are several primary schools in Keynsham , including St Johns primary school , Castle Primary school , <unk> infants and junior school and new school St <unk> primary school ( a merge of Keynsham primary school and 150 yr old Temple Primary school ) . There are also two secondary schools , Wellsway School and Broadlands School . 
 Wellsway School is an 11 – 18 , mixed comprehensive school which was established in 1971 , by amalgamating Keynsham Grammar School and Wellsway County Secondary School both of which opened on a shared site in the mid @-@ 1950s . Most students that attend the school live in Keynsham and Saltford or the nearby villages . As of 2007 , approximately 1350 students attend the school , ranging in age of 11 – 18 , with 64 % achieving 5 or more A @-@ C grades at GCSE . Wellsway 's bid for specialist school status was accepted in September 2007 . Meaning that Wellsway School now specialises as a Sports and Science College . This means the School has joined the national network of specialist schools , resulting in every school in Bath and North East Somerset now having a specialism . A joint bid is unusual as there are only six schools in the country with a combined Sports and Science specialism . 
 Broadlands School , with has specialist Science College and Engineering College status , has 1058 students , between the ages of 11 and 16 years . The school opened in 1935 . 
 Nearby Bath has two universities . The University of Bath was established in 1966 . It is known , academically , for the physical sciences , mathematics , architecture , management and technology . Bath Spa University was first granted degree @-@ awarding powers in 1992 as a university college ( Bath Spa University College ) , before being granted university status in August 2005 . It has schools in Art and Design , Education , English and Creative Studies , Historical and Cultural Studies , Music and the Performing Arts , and Social Sciences . The city contains one further education college , City of Bath College , and several sixth forms as part of both state , private , and public schools . In England , on average in 2006 , 45 @.@ 8 % of pupils gained 5 grades A @-@ C including English and Maths ; for Bath and North East Somerset pupils taking GCSE at 16 it is 52 @.@ 0 % . Special needs education is provided by Three Ways School . 
 = = Religious sites = = 
 Begun in 1292 , the Anglican parish church of St John the Baptist gradually evolved until taking its present general form during the reign of Charles II , after the tower collapsed into the building during a storm in 1632 . The tower , built over the north @-@ east corner of the nave , now rises in three stages over the Western entrance and is surmounted by a pierced parapet and short <unk> pinnacles and is said to have been built from the ruins of the abbey church . The south aisle and south porch date from 1390 . The chancel , then the responsibility of the abbey , was rebuilt in 1470 and further restoration was carried out in 1634 – 1655 , following the collapse of the tower . There is a pulpit dating from 1634 and is also a screen of the same age which shuts off the choir vestry . It has been designated as a Grade II * listed building . 
 A former organ is said to have stood in the church , but " had tones so mellow " that Handel bargained for it , offering a peal of bells in exchange . The offer was accepted . The musician went off with the organ and the bells were delivered . There are eight bells in total , some made by the Bilbie family of Chew Stoke , the smallest bears these lines : 
 " I value not who doth me see 
 For Thomas Bilbie casted me ; 
 <unk> my sound it is but small 
 I can be heard amongst you all . " 
 St. John the Baptist church is one of five churches in the Church of England Parish of Keynsham , the others being the village churches of St. Michael 's in Burnett and St. Margaret 's in Queen Charlton , the " Mission Church " in Chewton Keynsham ( formerly the school building ) , and St. Francis ' Church on the Park Estate which in 2013 - 2015 underwent extensive modernisation and offers two halls for use by community groups . 
 There are also the Victoria and Queens Road Methodist churches , St. Dunstan 's Roman Catholic Church and an Elim Church . The churches work together , also with churches in Saltford , under the banner of " Churches Together in Keynsham and Saltford " and often with the strapline " More to Life " . 
 = = Sport = = 
 Keynsham Cricket Club play at the Frank Taylor Memorial Ground , their 1st XI compete in the West of England Premier League Division 2 . Marcus Trescothick is the most noticeable player to have played for the club . His family remain members of the club , which incorporates over 100 senior members and 100 junior members . 
 Keynsham rugby football club play at Crown Field . The club 's most notable and tragic event occurred on 24 December 1992 , when there was a fatal road accident outside the club 's ground . A Ford Fiesta car ploughed into 11 people leaving the annual festive disco . One woman , 21 @-@ year @-@ old Sarah <unk> , died at the scene . A second person , 24 @-@ year @-@ old rugby player Richard Barnett , died in hospital two days later from his injuries . Clive Sutton was later found guilty on a double charge of causing death by dangerous driving and sentenced to four years in prison at Bristol Crown Court . 
 Keynsham Town F.C. were founded in 1895 . They have played continuously apart from a break during World War II and moved to their current ground , the Crown Field , in 1945 . They first played in the Bristol & District League and progressed through the Bristol Combination , Bristol Premier and Somerset Senior League and won the Somerset Senior Cup in 1951 – 52 and 1957 – 58 . They were elected to the Western League in 1973 but were relegated three years later in 1976 . Since then they have been promoted to the Premier Division three times and relegated three times . They won the Somerset Senior Cup for the third time in 2002 – 03 and reached the 5th round of the FA Vase in 2003 – 04 . They currently play in the Western Football League Division 1 . 
 There is a bowls club situated at the Memorial Park . Keynsham leisure centre was built in 1965 by British Gas as a gift to the town . It includes a swimming pool , gymnasium and sauna . 
 = = Notable residents = = 
 Several notable people have been born or lived in Keynsham . The comedian Bill Bailey was raised in the town . Another entertainer Neil Forrester , who was a research assistant and became known as a cast member on The Real World : London was also a local . Sports players from Keynsham include Mark Regan a professional rugby player and a former player at Keynsham Rugby Football Club , Luke Sutton of Lancashire County Cricket Club who played as both a wicket @-@ keeper and batsman , Marcus Trescothick , the Somerset and England <unk> and Judd Trump , a professional snooker player . Horace Batchelor , the football pools forecaster lived in Keynsham , making the town famous by spelling its name on Radio Luxembourg adverts . Author Christina Hollis was born and raised in Queen 's Road . 
 = SMS Bremen = 
 SMS Bremen ( " His Majesty 's Ship Bremen " ) was the lead ship of the seven @-@ vessel Bremen class , built by the Imperial German Navy . She was built by the AG Weser shipyard in Bremen , her namesake city . She was laid down in 1902 , launched in July 1903 , and commissioned into the High Seas Fleet in May 1904 . Armed with a main battery of ten 10 @.@ 5 cm ( 4 @.@ 1 in ) guns and two 45 cm ( 18 in ) torpedo tubes , Bremen was capable of a top speed of 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) . 
 Bremen served on the East American Station for the majority of her career , including the ten years before the outbreak of World War I. She returned to Germany in 1914 before the start of the war . At the onset of hostilities , she was attached to the fleet in the Baltic tasked with containing the Russians . In August 1915 , she participated in the Battle of the Gulf of Riga , but did not see significant action during the battle . Four months later , on 17 December , she struck two Russian naval mines and sank , with the loss of 250 of her crew . 
 = = Construction = = 
 Bremen was ordered under the contract name " L " and was laid down at the AG Weser shipyard in the ship 's namesake city in 1902 and launched on 9 July 1903 , after which fitting @-@ out work commenced . She was commissioned into the High Seas Fleet on 19 May 1904 . The ship was 111 @.@ 1 meters ( 365 ft ) long overall and had a beam of 13 @.@ 3 m ( 44 ft ) and a draft of 5 @.@ 53 m ( 18 @.@ 1 ft ) forward . She displaced 3 @,@ 797 t ( 3 @,@ 737 long tons ; 4 @,@ 185 short tons ) at full combat load . Her propulsion system consisted of two triple @-@ expansion engines , designed to give 10 @,@ 000 indicated horsepower ( 7 @,@ 500 kW ) for a top speed of 22 knots ( 41 km / h ; 25 mph ) . The engines were powered by ten coal @-@ fired Marine @-@ type water @-@ tube boilers . Bremen carried up to 860 tonnes ( 850 long tons ) of coal , which gave her a range of 4 @,@ 270 nautical miles ( 7 @,@ 910 km ; 4 @,@ 910 mi ) at 12 knots ( 22 km / h ; 14 mph ) . She had a crew of 14 officers and 274 – 287 enlisted men . 
 The ship was armed with ten 10 @.@ 5 cm SK L / 40 guns in single mounts . Two were placed side by side forward on the forecastle , six were located amidships , three on either side , and two were placed side by side aft . The guns could engage targets out to 12 @,@ 200 m ( 40 @,@ 000 ft ) . They were supplied with 1 @,@ 500 rounds of ammunition , for 150 shells per gun . She was also equipped with two 45 cm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes with five torpedoes . They were submerged in the hull on the broadside . The ship was protected by an armored deck that was up to 80 mm ( 3 @.@ 1 in ) thick . The conning tower had 100 mm ( 3 @.@ 9 in ) thick sides , and the guns were protected by 50 mm ( 2 @.@ 0 in ) thick shields . 
 = = Service history = = 
 After her commissioning , Bremen served on the East American station , and she frequently visited the United States . In April 1907 , she and the armored cruiser Roon sailed to the United States to participate in the Jamestown Exposition commemorating the anniversary of the arrival of colonists in Chesapeake Bay on 26 April . In addition to the German delegation , the international fleet consisted of warships from Great Britain , Japan , Austria @-@ Hungary , France , Italy , and several other nations . 
 Wilhelm Canaris , the future admiral and head of the Abwehr during World War II , served aboard the ship starting on 2 November 1907 , his first assignment after graduating from the naval academy . Bremen conducted a tour of South America in late 1908 , beginning in September with a call on Buenos Aires , followed by a stop in Rio de Janeiro in Brazil . The tour lasted through February 1909 , and included stops in Costa Rica , Panama , Guatemala , and the Dutch Antilles . In March , Bremen returned to the northern Atlantic and visited American ports for the next three months . 
 In September – October 1909 , Bremen , joined the protected cruisers Victoria Louise and Hertha , and the light cruiser Dresden , which had traveled to the United States to represent Germany during the Hudson @-@ Fulton Celebration . In early 1912 , Bremen was assigned to a goodwill cruise to the United States , along with the battlecruiser Moltke and the light cruiser Stettin . On 11 May 1912 the ships left Kiel and arrived off Hampton Roads , Virginia , on 30 May . There , they met the US Atlantic Fleet and were greeted by then @-@ President William Howard Taft aboard the presidential yacht USS Mayflower . After touring the East Coast for two weeks , they returned to Kiel on 24 June . 
 Bremen remained abroad until 1914 , when she returned to Germany . After the outbreak of World War I in July 1914 , she was assigned to the fleet in the Baltic Sea . While there , she participated in the Battle of the Gulf of Riga in August 1915 . She was assigned to the second attack on the Gulf , which took place on 16 August . She and the cruisers Graudenz , Augsburg , and Pillau escorted the dreadnoughts Nassau and Posen while they attempted to force their way into the Gulf . The German flotilla penetrated the Russian defenses by 19 August and steamed into the Gulf , but withdrew shortly thereafter due to the threat of Allied submarines and mines . On 17 December 1915 , Bremen and the torpedo boat <unk> ran into a Russian minefield ; Bremen struck a pair of mines off Windau and sank , as did <unk> . The majority of Bremen 's crew died in the sinking , with 250 men killed . 
 = Illinois v. McArthur = 
 Illinois v. McArthur , 531 U.S. 326 ( 2001 ) , was a United States Supreme Court case decided in 2001 . The case concerned the extent of the government ’ s power to limit an individual ’ s complete control of his or her home pending the arrival of a search warrant . A divided Court held that the search was not unconstitutional because there was a reasonable law @-@ enforcement need to acquire a warrant , namely , to prevent the potential destruction of evidence within the home . 
 = = Background = = 
 Tera McArthur asked two police officers to accompany her to a trailer home where she lived with her husband Charles , so that she could take her belongings out of the home . Just after she came out of the trailer , she told the police that Charles McArthur had drugs inside . The police knocked and asked Charles if they could search , which he refused . He then came out of the trailer ; an officer prevented him from going back inside while the other policeman rushed to get a warrant . The Illinois Appellate Court held that this action violated the Fourth Amendment , which prohibits unreasonable searches and seizures without a warrant . The Supreme Court granted certiorari to hear the case in 2000 . 
 = = Opinion of the Court = = 
 The Court voted 8 @-@ 1 to reverse the Illinois Appellate Court to hold the actions of the police officers at question constitutional . Justice Breyer wrote the majority opinion which upheld the search . Due to the specific circumstances of the case , the police needed to prevent the investigation scene from being contaminated . Breyer wrote that the Court found " no case in which [ we have ] held unlawful a temporary seizure that was supported by probable cause and was designed to prevent the loss of evidence while the police diligently obtained a warrant in a reasonable period of time . " Moreover , McArthur 's argument that his decision to remain on his porch and not allow the police entry did not amount to " a constructive eviction " . Instead , Breyer noted that the Court found in a prior case that the doorway of a house is in a ' public place ' and thus not subject to warrant rules . He noted in conclusion that the hard @-@ to @-@ contest fact of probable cause made it difficult to accept McArthur 's claims . 
 = = = Souter 's concurrence = = = 
 Justice Souter joined Breyer 's opinion in all respects but wrote separately to condition his support on the belief that the search was appropriate only because of the immediate danger that the evidence could have been destroyed . Only in this unique instance could the warrant requirement be waived . 
 = = = Stevens ' dissent = = = 
 Justice Stevens wrote a brief dissenting opinion arguing that the case should have been dismissed because the Illinois legislature has largely reduced penalties for marijuana possession , which made it ridiculous for the officers to rush to get a warrant . He said that even if he reached the merits of the question , he would affirm and hold the search unconstitutional because the majority misapplied a balancing of “ privacy @-@ related and law enforcement @-@ related concerns " . He wanted to give broader protection to the idea of the home as a place for protection , even if the home in this case was a trailer . 
 = Albany Highway = 
 Albany Highway links Western Australia 's capital city Perth with its oldest settlement , Albany , on the state 's south coast . The 405 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 252 mi ) highway travels through the southern Wheatbelt and Great Southern regions , and is designated State Route 30 for most of its length . Outside of Perth the highway is predominately a sealed , single carriageway with regular overtaking lanes in some undulating areas . Albany Highway commences at The Causeway , a river crossing that connects to Perth 's central business district . The highway heads south @-@ east through Perth 's metropolitan region , bypassed in part by Shepparton Road and Kenwick Link , and continues south @-@ eastwards through to Albany . It intersects several major roads in Perth , including the Leach , Tonkin , Brookton , and South Western highways . The rural section of Albany Highway connects to important regional roads at the few towns and roadhouses along the route , including <unk> Road at Arthur River , Great Southern Highway at Cranbrook , and <unk> Highway at Mount Barker . 
 Prior to European settlement , the indigenous Noongar people had a considerable network of tracks , including a trade route between the areas now known as Perth and Albany . Construction of a road between Perth and Albany began soon after the naming of Albany in 1832 , but progress was slow , with only 16 miles ( 26 km ) completed by 1833 . A monthly mail route which operated in the 1840s had such trouble with the journey that a new contractor was required each year , and from 1847 the mail route detoured via Bunbury . The introduction of convicts in 1850 , and thus convict labour , allowed a road along the direct route to be fully constructed by 1863 . 
 The rise of the motor vehicle era in the early 20th century saw the road gain prominence once more , and by 1939 the whole road had been sealed . Congestion at the Perth end of the road in the 1930s led to parallel roads Berwick Street and Shepparton Road being upgraded to provide bypasses . The entire Perth − Albany road was renamed Albany Highway on 2 October 1940 , in recognition of its importance as an arterial traffic route . From the late 1970s , $ 49 million over ten years was spent on repairing Albany Highway , and the experience saw Main Roads develop a program of interventions to prevent costly road reconstruction . Since the 1990s Main Roads has been upgrading various portions along the length of Albany Highway , including widening sections to dual carriageways in Perth , and the construction of the Kenwick Link bypass . 
 = = Route description = = 
 Albany Highway commences at The Causeway , a river crossing that connects to Perth 's central business district . The highway heads south @-@ east through Perth 's metropolitan region , and continues through the southern Wheatbelt and Great Southern regions to Albany on the south coast of Western Australia . Albany Highway is generally a two @-@ lane single carriageway road , but with additional lanes and dual @-@ carriageway sections in Perth and Albany . The highway is allocated State Route 30 , except for bypassed sections in Perth , and the southernmost portion in Albany . The part bypassed by Kenwick Link is allocated Alternate State Route 30 , and a short length in Arthur River is concurrently allocated State Route 107 . Albany Highway also carries sections of Heritage Country Tourist Drive ( Tourist Drive 205 ) and Great Southern Tourist Way ( Tourist Drive 356 ) . 
 Main Roads Western Australia monitors traffic volume across the state 's road network , including various locations along Albany Highway . In the 2013 / 14 financial year , the recorded traffic volumes ranged between 3880 and 70 @,@ 690 vehicles per weekday in Perth , 1980 to 3880 in the Wheatbelt , and 1720 to <unk> in the Great Southern . The highest percentage of heavy traffic was 29 @.@ 2 % , south of Jarrahdale Road in the Wheatbelt . Reports commissioned by the Royal Automobile Club of Western Australia ( RAC ) in 2006 and 2008 gave the majority of the highway a three @-@ star safety rating out of five , with an approximately 20 @-@ kilometre @-@ long ( 12 mi ) section south @-@ east of Armadale rated at a two star level . The overall highway network was generally rated as three @-@ star or four @-@ star , but around 10 % in 2006 and 5 % in 2008 received a two @-@ star rating . 
 = = = Perth to Armadale = = = 
 In Perth , Albany Highway 's north @-@ western terminus is at a parclo interchange with The Causeway , Shepparton Road , and Great Eastern and Canning Highways in Victoria Park . The first 200 metres ( 660 ft ) of the road is one @-@ way into the interchange , but only connecting to The Causeway and Canning Highway – there is no direct access to the other roads . For the next four kilometres ( 2 @.@ 5 mi ) , the highway is a two @-@ lane , two @-@ way high street serving Victoria Park 's town centre , and continuing south @-@ east through East Victoria Park . The nearby four @-@ lane Shepperton Road serves as a bypass , carrying through @-@ traffic as well as State Route 30 . 
 The two roads converge at an intersection with Welshpool Road , and for 15 kilometres ( 9 @.@ 3 mi ) Albany Highway serves as an arterial route in Perth 's south @-@ eastern suburbs , varying between a single carriageway and dual carriageway , and between a four- and six @-@ lane capacity . This part of the highway is dominated by commercial shopping precincts in Bentley , Cannington , Maddington , Gosnells and Kelmscott , with numerous sets of traffic lights . The section of Albany Highway through Beckenham and Kenwick is allocated Alternate State Route 30 , while State Route 30 follows a bypass , Kenwick Link . 
 Albany Highway has a folded diamond interchange with Tonkin Highway in Gosnells , and continues south for seven kilometres ( 4 @.@ 3 mi ) past commercial and residential properties in Kelmscott and Mount <unk> . The highway has a T junction that is the western terminus of Brookton Highway , at the boundary between Kelmscott , and Mount <unk> . Further south in Armadale , the highway intersects the eastern end of Armadale Road and northern end of South Western Highway . 
 = = = Regional highway = = = 
 Albany Highway proceeds east and then south from Armadale , around the suburb of Mount Richon . The road continues south @-@ east , with signs of human activity becoming more sparse as the highway crosses the Darling Scarp , and the scenery transitions to native forest . Further south , after 60 kilometres ( 37 mi ) , it transitions again to pastures , with farming activities such as livestock rearing and orchards . Over the next 300 kilometres ( 190 mi ) , the highway encounters few towns : Williams , Kojonup and Mount Barker are on the highway , but are 100 kilometres ( 62 mi ) apart . <unk> exist at North Bannister , Crossman and Arthur River , while many of the service towns in the region are approximately 30 kilometres ( 20 mi ) to the east on Great Southern Highway , including Narrogin , Wagin and Katanning . 
 Closer to Albany , there are large tracts of blue gum eucalypt plantations . Twelve kilometres ( 7 @.@ 5 mi ) from the road 's south @-@ eastern terminus , it passes Albany Airport . The highway passes by suburban areas before intersecting South Coast Highway at a Y intersection , and only 100 metres ( 330 ft ) beyond it , a large five @-@ way roundabout . This roundabout is the southern terminus of State Route 30 , and connects the highway with Chester Pass Road ( which continues east to South Coast Highway ) , North Road , and Hanrahan Road . The final two @-@ and @-@ a @-@ half @-@ kilometre ( 1 @.@ 6 mi ) stretch takes the highway south @-@ east into the centre of Albany . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Background = = = 
 Prior to European settlement , the indigenous Noongar people had a considerable network of tracks around their territory in the south @-@ west of Western Australia . One such track , used as a trade route , linked the Swan River ( in modern @-@ day Perth ) with the area now known as Albany . The track followed a similar alignment to modern @-@ day Albany Highway . 
 On 25 December 1826 , the New South Wales colonial government brig Amity , under the command of Major Edmund Lockyer , arrived at King George Sound to establish a military garrison . On 21 January 1827 , as instructed by the Colonial Secretary , the Union Jack was raised and a feu de joie fired by the troops , formally annexing the territory , in assertion of the first official claim by the Imperial Government to British possession over the whole continent of Australia . On 7 March 1831 the King George Sound and colony was made part of the Swan River Colony and a free settlement . Albany was officially named by Governor Stirling at the beginning of 1832 , at the time that political authority passed to the Swan River colony . The construction of a road from Albany to Perth began soon thereafter , but only 16 miles ( 26 km ) had been completed by 1833 . Due to this slow progress , the settlers of Albany petitioned England to supply convicts to work on the road . At the time the government in Perth derided the proposal , and Western Australia would not become a penal colony until 1849 . 
 = = = Surveying and initial routes = = = 
 In October and November 1835 , Governor Stirling and Surveyor @-@ General John Septimus Roe travelled overland from Perth to Albany , with the focus of the journey being the route south of the Hotham River . A more comprehensive survey was undertaken in July – September 1836 by Assistant Surveyors Alfred Hillman and D. Smith . Hillman started from the Albany end , while Smith concurrently commenced from Perth . A few months later , in February 1837 , Hillman accompanied a group that made the trip to Perth in 12 days travelling time , journeying via <unk> , <unk> , Mount Barker , Lake Matilda , Kojonup , Williams and Arthur River . This group was led by Mr J. Harris , and included Lieutenant Armstrong with eight soldiers of the 21st Fusiliers , Albany settlers Patrick Taylor and Dr. Thomas Harrison , as well as " the native ' Handsome ' " . In April 1838 four bridges were built near Albany by John Young , and in 1839 Governor John Hutt ventured out to Albany on an official visit , travelling through Williams and Kojonup . Assistant Surveyor Hillman led a large group of Albany settlers to Perth in 1940 , via <unk> , <unk> , Joseph 's Wells , <unk> and <unk> ; whilst in the same year Edward John Eyre shepherded 550 sheep and 70 cattle from Albany to York , and then over to Perth . 
 A monthly mail route was set up in June 1841 , travelling from Albany to Perth via Kojonup and Williams . The following year , a service through Guildford commenced . The tough conditions of the mail route saw a different contractor providing the service each year . The 1845 contractor James Martin had particular trouble with debts , which led to his mail horse being seized ; while he managed to acquire a replacement animal , he also had trouble servicing the resultant debt of £ 2 . In 1847 , the Perth – Albany route was adjusted , so that the mail would travel from Albany to Kojonup , then head to Bunbury on the coast , and subsequently up to Perth via Rockingham and Fremantle . The new route still had difficulties , such as flooding in the winter of 1847 that resulted in a " terrible trip " which took a month to complete . The people of Albany , who could travel as passengers on the mail cart , found the trip to Perth long and deplorable . 
 With the arrival of the convict ship Scindian on 1 June 1850 and the advent of convict labour , early completion of the Perth – Albany road seemed assured . Investigations of a direct route via Kelmscott , Hotham , Williams and Kojonup began in late 1851 . Assistant Surveyor A. C. Gregory reported in 1852 that the direct route would be 57 miles ( 92 km ) shorter than the route via Bunbury , and 40 miles ( 64 km ) shorter than the York route . Construction was recommended in late 1852 , after the mail contractor George Maxwell completed a journey along the proposed route in September , and soon commenced . Fifty miles ( 80 km ) had been completed by October 1853 , and the whole road was finished in 1863 . The road served as the main link between Perth and Albany until the 1880s , when the Great Southern Railway opened . 
 = = = Early 20th century = = = 
 The rise of the motor vehicle era in the early 20th century saw the road gain prominence once more . The newly formed Main Roads Board took over control and maintenance of the Perth – Albany road and twenty @-@ one other important roads between 1926 and 1928 , which were declared " main roads " . At this stage the Perth – Albany road was not much more developed than a bush track . To increase the usability of the overall main road network , the Board 's work schedule prioritised upgrading the worst individual segments , rather than any one road . In 1928 / 29 , twenty @-@ two separate sections of the Perth – Albany road were improved , but many were short , and drivers would experience quite varied conditions , from new sealed road to gravel road , and then a boggy dirt in just a few miles . By 1932 , the improved conditions allowed an average speed of 35 to 40 miles per hour ( 55 to 65 km / h ) to be reached , for a total trip of eight to nine hours instead of two days . In 1938 , a total of eight miles ( 13 km ) had been sealed , and the following year the whole route had been completed . 
 In 1935 , a town planning report for the City of Perth noted traffic congestion on Albany Road in Victoria Park . As widening the existing road would have left the council liable for compensation from affected businesses and properties , the provision of bypass routes was recommended instead . To provide the bypasses , parallel roads would be upgraded and extended : Berwick Street to the south @-@ west , and Shepparton Road to the north @-@ east . In 1937 , work had progressed on extending Berwick Street eastwards , and it had been extended to <unk> Street by November 1938 . A new causeway to extend Berwick Street north over the Swan River , and make it a truck route , was considered by the state government in 1940 . The existing Causeway , from which Albany Road commenced , had experienced almost a doubling of traffic volume between 1930 and 1939 . However , the new Causeway was eventually constructed adjacent to old Causeway , which was then demolished . 
 The cooperation of the Canning Road District would be required to continue the Berwick Street bypass south @-@ east beyond the city 's boundary at Boundary Road , and ultimately through to Albany Road . The South Perth Road Board was also in favour of such a bypass , which would improve access for South Perth residents . A deputation from the Canning and South Perth Road Boards to the Acting Minister For Works , Mr E. H. Gray , in June 1940 complained about the congestion in Albany Road . The traffic delays were worsened by cars parked on both sides of the road and slow @-@ moving trams . The deputation suggested extending Berwick Street to Albany Highway as the solution , as well as removing the trams . Gray contended that parking should be prohibited , and refused to scrap the trams , but said he would consider the resumption of land east of Berwick Street to enable a one @-@ quarter @-@ mile ( 0 @.@ 40 km ) extension to Albany Road . However , Berwick Street was diverted to the south @-@ west to connect with Chapman Road , providing a longer continuous route west of Albany Highway . 
 Shepperton Road ran parallel to Albany Road between Harvey Street , 45 chains ( 3 @,@ 000 ft ; 910 m ) from The Causeway , and Somerset Street , one and a half miles ( 2 @.@ 4 km ) further along . In 1937 , a road from Asquith Street to Albany Road was constructed , to eventually link in with Shepperton Road . In the same year , the intersection of Albany Road , Milford Street , and Welshpool Road was reconfigured to improve visibility , and in anticipation of an eastern extension to Shepperton Road . In April 1940 , that extension was nearing completion , which was expected to be by the end of May , while the demolition of houses on land resumed for the western extension was being arranged . On 29 September 1941 , the Perth City Council decided to construct the link between Asquith Street and Harvey Street early the following year , completing the Shepperton Road bypass . Buses were rerouted onto Shepperton Road in 1946 , by which time it had become the preferred route for motorists . 
 In November 1939 , the State Advisory Committee on Nomenclature recommended that the Perth – Albany road be named Great Southern Highway , in recognition of its importance as an arterial traffic route . This suggestion followed on from the naming of Great Eastern Highway , in April of the previous year . The committee sent letters to all the local governments in the area to advise them of the proposal . Feedback was mixed ; whilst the name was " thoroughly approved " by the <unk> Road Board , and the Perth City Council 's general purposes committee recommended that no objection be raised , the Kojonup Road Board believed that " sufficient grounds [ did ] not exist for the proposed change " , and the Albany Municipal Council objected strongly to not retaining " Perth – Albany " in the name . 
 The State Advisory Committee made a new recommendation in April 1940 for Albany Highway instead of Great Southern Highway . This new proposal received support from the Albany Municipal Council and <unk> Road Board . However , the Perth City Council still preferred Great Southern Highway , and recommended that within its boundaries – from The Causeway to Welshpool – the road be named Albany Road , and that one of the proposed bypasses in the area would be better suited to the highway name . The entire road was renamed Albany Highway on 2 October 1940 , superseding the previously used names Albany Road , Perth – Albany Road , and High Street in Kojonup . 
 = = = Post @-@ World War II = = = 
 During World War II , the Main Roads Department focused its activities on the war effort . Roads in rural areas deteriorated , especially after the Pearl Harbour attack brought the war to the Pacific , and only the most urgent maintenance works were authorised on roads for civilian purposes . Following the war , Main Roads returned to its usual operations , repairing and maintaining the road network . The rural road network expanded in the 1950s , with Main Roads both repairing the worst segments of its roads , through numerous small jobs , and assisting local governments to seal their roads . Such activity was spurred on by the closure of railway lines in addition to the establishment of new land settlements . 
 In Perth , a roundabout was constructed at the north @-@ western end of Albany Highway , to improve the flow of traffic onto and off The Causeway . It opened in 1952 , with guides on the usage of the roundabout published in newspapers . In 1973 construction began to upgrade the intersection to a partial cloverleaf interchange at the eastern end of The Causeway . The $ 1 @.@ 3 million interchange opened on 8 March 1974 . 
 By the late 1970s , the road sections sealed in the 1950s and 1960s were in need of repair or maintenance to prolong the pavement life . Old bitumen surfaces would deteriorate and crack . <unk> such cracks was a high priority , as expensive reconstruction would be required if water was allowed to enter the road base . Over a ten @-@ year period , $ 49 million was spent on repairing Albany Highway . The techniques used in this process were then formalised into the 4R Program , which aimed to alleviate a growing maintenance problem – based on a thirty @-@ five @-@ year pavement lifespan , the amount of reconstruction required would be more than double the actual rate of reconstruction . " 4R " abbreviated the options that could be used keep roads serviceable : 
 Restoration – maintaining the condition of a road 
 <unk> – resealing a bitumen surface which was no longer waterproof , to prevent pavement failure 
 Rehabilitation – improving a deteriorated road to its original condition 
 Reconstruction – done when deterioration was beyond the point of repairs 
 Interventions to prevent a road requiring reconstruction , the most costly option , would save money . 
 From the 1980s Main Roads began planning for the future needs of Albany Highway within the City of Canning in Perth , in conjunction with the City and the Metropolitan Region Planning Authority . A three @-@ kilometre ( 2 mi ) section between Leach Highway and Nicholson Road was subsequently upgraded between November 1992 and June 1994 . The four @-@ lane undivided road had been one of the most congested in Perth but was improved by adding a third lane in each direction as well as a median strip . The project was recognised with an Excellence Award from the Institution of Engineers Australia in 1994 . In the 1990s several other improvement projects were planned across the length of the highway , including between <unk> and North Bannister , through Mount Barker , and between <unk> and Albany . Closer to Perth , the section along <unk> Hill ( south @-@ east of Armadale ) was upgraded to a four @-@ lane dual carriageway , with work completed in June 1999 . 
 This period also saw the planning and construction of additional junctions with new major roads in Perth . At Armadale , Armadale Road would connect to what had been a three @-@ way junction with South Western Highway , while a highway deviation was proposed to connect to the extension of Roe Highway through Beckenham . The proposed deviation became Kenwick Link , constructed as part of the Roe Highway extension towards Fremantle . It was initially built as a single carriageway , and upgraded to a dual carriageway later . It opened on 17 April 1998 , ahead of the Roe Highway extensions from Welshpool Road to Kenwick Link ( opened 30 November 2002 ) and from Kenwick Link to Nicholson Road ( opened 21 January 2003 ) . 
 Further work was undertaken in Perth in 2011 and 2012 , between John Street in Bentley and Leach Highway . The road was widened and a median installed to increase both safety and efficiency . The works also upgraded intersection , including installation of new traffic lights . Downer EDI Works Pty Ltd completed the work under a $ 3 @.@ 65 million contract . In January 2014 , work began on widening and reconstructing 2 @.@ 4 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 5 mi ) of Albany Highway north of Kojonup . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 = Lost ! = 
 " Lost ! " is a song by the British alternative rock band Coldplay . The band co @-@ produced it with Brian Eno and Markus Dravs for their fourth album , Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends . The song was released on 10 November 2008 as the fourth overall single from the album to generally positive critical reviews . A live version was released via digital download following a performance of the band and Jay @-@ Z at the 2009 Grammy Awards , spurring high digital sales and giving " Lost ! " a new peak at number 40 in the United States . 
 Several official versions of the song exist , including vocalist Chris Martin 's separate recording with a piano accompaniment ( known as " Lost ? " ) which appears as a B @-@ side for " Violet Hill " , and a version that features Jay @-@ Z ( known as " Lost + " ) which appears on their 2008 EP Prospekt 's March . The accompanying music video to the single features a live performance of the band in the United States . Coldplay launched a contest through their website , in which fans submitted self @-@ made music videos . The winning entries were posted on the band 's website . The song was used in the 2010 film , The Way . 
 = = Writing and composition = = 
 According to Coldplay drummer Will Champion in a fan <unk> , " Lost ! " had been developed long before the band began recording tracks for their fourth studio album , Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends , and was not getting into completion . Champion recalls , " I was starting to get into using a particular drum programming programme . I was messing around with that and I built this beat up from scratch . ... Then Chris overheard it and played ' Lost ! ' over the top of it . " Martin revealed that the song 's drumbeat took inspiration from Justin Timberlake 's " Cry Me a River " , which was one of Champion 's favourite songs at that time . 
 " Lost ! " was one of the earliest songs the band worked on for the album . Coldplay revealed that " Sing " ( a track off Blur 's 1991 debut album Leisure ) was a source of inspiration in having provided a starting point for writing " Lost ! " . While in Detroit , Michigan , for a concert tour , the band was listening to " Sing " in their dressing room . Once they went on stage for a soundcheck , they thought of writing a song based from it . According to guitarist Jonny Buckland , " We recorded some of it in a church up the road that 's now a studio . In a huge room with a piano and organ going at the same time . " In an interview with The Sun , Martin said , " The line in this song ' Just because I 'm losing doesn 't mean I 'm lost ' is what the whole record came out of because we were feeling down at the end of the last tour . That line arrived and it was , ' OK , that 's how we kinda feel . We know we can improve . " The ensuing track evolved in different versions . 
 The song 's musicscape features a church organ riff , tribal drum @-@ circle groove , and minimal handclaps . Towards the end of the track , it builds into a " rhythmically soaring , Edge @-@ like " guitar solo . Coldplay 's use of " exotic " instruments for majority of tracks in the album , including " Lost ! " , was a result of a goal in wanting to present their songs differently , something " which have never been heard " in previous releases . In a review Alex Denney of The Guardian , he described the music of " Lost ! " as " tabla @-@ assisted gospel @-@ hop " . Kitty Empire of The Guardian wrote in a review that " Lost ! " , " a great organ @-@ driven tune , alive with handclaps and foot @-@ stomps " , is the most obvious homage to Canadian indie rock band Arcade Fire among other tracks off the album . 
 According to Chris Willman of Entertainment Weekly magazine , the lyrics to " Lost ! " are " a lament about spiritual <unk> " . Rolling Stone magazine 's Will Hermes interpreted the lyrics as about " holding on against the odds that has the breathtaking loft " of " I Still Haven 't Found What I 'm Looking For " , a song off Irish band U2 's 1987 album The Joshua Tree . The chorus to the lyrics is noted by Ian Youngs of BBC " a typical Chris Martin chorus that mixes insecurity with determination " . 
 = = Song versions = = 
 The following songs are different variations of " Lost ! " : 
 " Lost ? " is a separate recording of the song featuring only singer Chris Martin and a piano . It was initially released as the B @-@ side on the CD version of " Violet Hill " , later as a bonus track to the Japanese , iTunes Store and Amazon MP3 editions of Viva la Vida or Death and All His Friends and finally on the " Lost ! " digital EP . 
 " Lost + " features a rap section by Jay @-@ Z , with whom the band recorded the reworked track in New York . This version was premiered on BBC Radio 1 on 16 October 2008 . " Lost + " was released as the lead track from " Lost ! " ' s digital EP release , and was included on the Prospekt 's March EP . Jay @-@ Z 's rap was based on a freestyle he performed on Funkmaster Flex 's show on the Hot 97 radio station . This took place on 31 October 2008 , while Jay @-@ Z was promoting his Kingdom Come <unk> performed the song at the 2009 Grammy Awards . They opened it with a rendition of " Lost ? " but Jay @-@ Z joined singer Chris Martin on stage and rapped over the piano solo . This version is also referred to as " Lost + " by the website and was released digitally . 
 " <unk> " is an instrumental track , identical to " Lost ! " but without vocals . 
 " Lost @ " is a recording of the song performed live at the United Center , Chicago on 22 July 2008 . This version also forms the basis for the single 's music video . 
 " Lost + / Viva la Vida ( Live At the 51st Annual Grammy Awards ) " is a recording of " Viva la Vida " and this song , performed live at the 51st Annual Grammy Awards . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Lost ! " was released as a promotional CD single in September 2008 . On 10 November 2008 , Coldplay officially released a four @-@ track digital EP of " Lost ! " , confirming the song 's status as a single . 
 The song has been well received by critics . Will Hermes of Rolling Stone magazine noted " Lost ! " as " probably " the " album 's most sublime pop moment " . NME 's critic Mark Beaumont had the same view of Hermes , complimenting , " It 's not until [ ' Lost ! ' ] – all church organ funkiness , <unk> handclap rhythms and Chris pouting like a preacher in a jacuzzi full of strippers – that [ Viva la Vida ] really hits its stride . " Chris Jones of BBC writes , " ... ' Lost ! ' seems to sport bongos in its mix , yet it 's the plaintive voice with its vague sense of regret , the lifts from minor key piano forays into vast , pumping rock and also a strident optimism that people are going to come here for . " Ryan Dombal of Pitchfork Media had the same sentiment : " Thanks to a bubbling bit of exotic percussion that wouldn 't sound out of place on Peter Gabriel 's latter @-@ day LPs , ' Lost ! ' is transformed from Just Another Coldplay Song into a uniquely alluring smash and live staple for years to come . " An article in The Guardian lambasted " Lost ! " : " This song is a deflated balloon , or , put another way , a used empty condom . He has , I think , merged visual , audio and textual into a kind of <unk> jam ; no part of it works without the other two . " 
 Since it did not match the commercial success of the album 's previous singles , " Lost ! " charted in some countries during the week of the album being released and due to high digital sales , despite not officially being a single at the time . It has charted most notably the United Kingdom where it peaked at number 54 in the UK Singles Chart and in the United States where it debuted at number 94 on the Billboard Hot 100 . The single has peaked at number 10 on the Billboard Hot Modern Rock Tracks . Its UK peak made the single Coldplay 's first to fail to chart in the UK Top 40 although considering the fact that it was not physically released ( though it was still available as a digital download at the time ) . 
 Buoyed by the band 's success at the 2009 Grammy Awards , a live Grammy performance of the single featuring Jay @-@ Z was released exclusively to iTunes , spurring digital download sales . As a result , " Lost ! " achieved a new peak position on the Billboard Hot 100 , re @-@ entering at number 40 . Billboard called the collaboration a " gloomy instrumentation with a series of drums and claps that perfectly fits the lyrical content of the song and makes the transition from Martin 's singing to Jay 's rapping seem effortless . " Christian Hoard of Rolling Stone , in his review of Prospekt 's March , praised " Lost + " as containing a " great Jay @-@ Z cameo . " 
 = = Music video = = 
 The music video to " Lost ! " was officially released on Coldplay 's website on 26 September 2008 . It features a live performance of the song at United Center in Chicago , Illinois . It shows views of different members of the band playing the song and Chris Martin actively moving around stage while singing . The video was filmed and directed by Mat Whitecross . According to Luke Lewis of NME , the video is a tribute to U2 's tour documentary Rattle and Hum . An alternative version was released for " Lost + " . This video is the same as the original but with the camera angles slightly altered , primarily to show a screen on stage which features Jay @-@ Z whose performance was added digitally . 
 Coldplay launched a contest in October 2008 in which fans submitted homemade music videos for the " Lost ? " acoustic version . Open to all fans worldwide , the competition closed on 1 December 2008 . All members of the band picked the finalists and judged the winning entries on 5 December . The winner was awarded a pair of " ultra @-@ VIP " tickets to the band 's show in O2 arena in London in December 2008 , and it included backstage passes . The winning video was announced on 8 December 2008 , with the winner being Paul O 'Brien for a " Wonderful blend of Claymation and Computer Graphics " . O 'Brien 's video and the runner up , made by Martin <unk> , are featured on Coldplay 's official website . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = = Lost ! = = = 
 = = = Lost + = = = 
 = Tropical Storm Ana ( 2009 ) = 
 Tropical Storm Ana was the first named storm of the 2009 Atlantic hurricane season and the first tropical cyclone to impact the Caribbean islands during 2009 . Forming out of an area of low pressure associated with a tropical wave on August 11 , Ana briefly attained tropical storm intensity on August 12 before weakening back to a depression . The following day , the system degenerated into a non @-@ convective remnant low as it tracked westward . On August 14 , the depression regenerated roughly 1 @,@ 075 mi ( 1 @,@ 735 km ) east of the Leeward Islands . Early on August 15 , the storm re @-@ attained tropical storm status , at which time it was named Ana . After reaching a peak intensity with winds of 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) and a barometric pressure of 1003 mbar ( hPa ; 29 @.@ 65 inHg ) , the storm began to weaken again due to increasing levels of wind shear and the unusually fast movement of Ana . In post @-@ storm analysis , it was discovered that Ana had degenerated into a tropical wave once more on August 16 , before reaching any landmasses . 
 Numerous tropical storm watches were issued for the Lesser Antilles , Puerto Rico , Dominican Republic between August 15 and 17 . Several islands took minor precautions for the storm , including St. Croix which evacuated 40 residents from flood @-@ prone areas ahead of the storm . In the Dominican Republic , officials took preparations by setting up relief agencies and setting up shelters . Impact from Ana was minimal , mainly consisting of light to moderate rainfall . In Puerto Rico , up to 2 @.@ 76 in ( 70 mm ) of rain was reported , causing street flooding and forcing the evacuation of three schools . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 9 , the National Hurricane Center ( NHC ) began monitoring a tropical wave associated with a small area of convective activity between the Cape Verde Islands and the western coast of Africa . The system eventually spawned an area of low pressure as it tracked towards the west . After slowly organising for a few days , the NHC reported early on August 11 , that the system had developed into a tropical depression . The system at this time was located about 280 mi ( 455 km ) , west of the Cape Verde Islands . The depression developed deep convection around the center of circulation and continued to track generally towards the west in response to a mid @-@ level subtropical ridge to the north . The depression was expected to gradually intensify as it moved over marginally warm sea surface temperatures and into an area of low wind shear ; however it was anticipated that dry air would hamper the depressions chances of intensifying further . 
 By August 12 , the NHC reported that Tropical Depression Two was near tropical storm intensity after a burst of deep convection over the center . At this point , the system was not upgraded to a tropical storm ; however , in a post @-@ storm analysis , it was determined that the system had attained tropical storm @-@ force winds , peaking at 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) for 12 hours on August 12 . Several hours later , the system became disorganized due to increased wind shear . By the afternoon of August 13 , the system had weakened to a tropical depression and shortly thereafter , degenerated into a non @-@ convective remnant low @-@ pressure area as it failed to maintain convection around the center for 24 hours . At this time , the NHC issued their final advisory on the system but noted that there was the possibility of regeneration . 
 On August 14 , roughly 24 hours after degenerating into a remnant low , convection began to redevelop over the system . Later that day , a Hurricane Hunter reconnaissance plane deployed dropsondes into the system . They found that the system was regenerating and shortly after , the NHC began re @-@ issuing advisories on the depression when it was located roughly 1 @,@ 075 mi ( 1 @,@ 735 km ) east of the Leeward Islands . The depression continued to track westward in response to an upper @-@ level high over the north Atlantic . Early on August 15 , the NHC upgraded the depression to a tropical storm , giving it the name Ana as deep convection developed around the center of circulation . Later that day , wind shear caused convection to become displaced from the circulation , exposing the center of Ana again . 
 By August 16 , the forward motion of Ana began to increase , and the storm quickly entered a region of dry , stable air . By the afternoon , a Hurricane Hunter reconnaissance mission did not find any evidence of tropical storm @-@ force winds , resulting in Ana being downgraded to a tropical depression . It was determined in post @-@ storm analysis , that Ana had degenerated into a tropical wave shortly afterwards , and was no longer a tropical cyclone . Several hours later , the system redeveloped convection as it raced towards the west @-@ northwest at 26 mph ( 42 km / h ) . Early on August 17 , radar imagery from Guadeloupe and San Juan , Puerto Rico depicted a system without a closed , low @-@ level circulation . Despite this , the NHC continued operational advisories until confirmation could be made with visible satellite imagery . Later that day , a final reconnaissance plane flew into the storm and did not find a low @-@ level circulation . Following this , the NHC stated that Ana had dissipated off the coast of Puerto Rico , despite having already degenerated into a tropical wave the previous day . The remnants of Ana were once more monitored for signs of regeneration , but land interaction with Hispaniola and Cuba spoiled the system 's chances of redevelopment . 
 = = Preparations and impact = = 
 On August 15 , a tropical storm watch was issued for much of the Leeward Islands . Two days later , the watch was expanded to include Puerto Rico and areas in the eastern Dominican Republic between Cabo Engaño and Cabo Beata . As Ana weakened and dissipated , the watches were discontinued . 
 In San Maarten , cruise agencies redirected ships to avoid the storm and secured vessels docked at port . Several ships were moved to Simpson Bay Lagoon where waves are generally small . In St. Kitts , officials evacuated 40 families in flood @-@ prone areas to shelters ahead of the storm . On August 17 , the National Weather Service in San Juan , Puerto Rico issued an Urban and Small Stream Flood Advisory for all of the eastern municipalities on the island . Flights in the area were delayed by several hours to avoid the depression . In the Dominican Republic , officials posted flood alerts for 12 provinces as the remnants of Ana were forecast to produce up to 6 in ( 150 mm ) of rain in the country . General Luna Paulino of the civil army activated relief agencies ahead of the storm and notified residents of possible mandatory evacuations . Officials inspected the dams threatened by the storm to protect several towns and villages . Emergency officials stated that roughly 35 @,@ 000 personnel were on standby in case of a disaster . Shelters were also prepped throughout the country ; however , these were not opened and the residents who had voluntarily evacuated had returned home by the afternoon of August 17 . In nearby Haiti , officials placed the country under yellow alert as the remnants of Ana could produce heavy rainfall over mountainous areas . 
 In St. Thomas , sustained winds reached 28 mph ( 45 km / h ) and gusts peaked at 40 mph ( 65 km / h ) . In Puerto Rico , rainfall was limited due to the storms ' fast motion , triggering minor flooding but little damage . A maximum of 2 @.@ 76 in ( 70 mm ) of rain fell in Río Grande . The rains caused the Río Fajardo to rise , resulting in the issuance of an alert as officials warned it could overflow its banks . Several streets were temporarily shut down due to flooding , including one tunnel , and three schools had to be evacuated . Throughout the island , roughly 6 @,@ 000 people were left without power as numerous branches were snapped off trees and knocked down power lines . There were also reports of waterspouts and tornadoes associated with Ana in Puerto Rico . Winds on the island gusted up to 42 mph ( 67 km / h ) . The remnants of Ana produced widespread rainfall across Hispaniola ; however , there were no reports of damage from the system . 
 = 1933 Atlantic hurricane season = 
 The 1933 Atlantic hurricane season was the second most active Atlantic hurricane season on record , with 20 storms forming in the northwest Atlantic Ocean . The season ran through the summer and the first half of fall in 1933 , with activity as early as May and as late as November . A tropical cyclone was active for all but 13 days from June 28 to October 7 . The year was surpassed in total number of tropical cyclones by the 2005 season , which broke the record with 28 storms . Tropical cyclones that did not approach populated areas or shipping lanes , especially if they were relatively weak and of short duration , may have remained undetected . Because technologies such as satellite monitoring were not available until the 1960s , historical data on tropical cyclones from this period are often not reliable . Compensating for the lack of comprehensive observation , one hurricane researcher estimates the season could have produced 24 tropical cyclones . 
 Of the 20 storms during the season , 11 attained hurricane status . Six of those were major hurricanes , with sustained winds of over 111 mph ( 179 km / h ) . Two of the hurricanes reached winds of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) , which is a Category 5 – the highest of 5 – on the modern Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . The season produced several deadly storms , with eight storms killing more than 20 people . All but 3 of the 20 known storms affected land at some point during their durations . 
 = = Season summary = = 
 The 1933 season was the most active of its time , surpassing the previous record @-@ holder of 19 storms in 1887 . Fifteen of the season 's storms made landfall as tropical cyclones , and another struck land as an extratropical storm . Eight tropical storms , including six hurricanes , hit the United States during the season , including the Chesapeake – Potomac hurricane , which the U.S. Weather Bureau described as one of the most severe in history along the Mid @-@ Atlantic States . Seven tropical storms , including four hurricanes , hit Mexico , two of which caused severe damage in the Tampico area . 
 The season was continuously active , with six storms forming during the month of August alone . At the time , many storms received the distinction of being the earliest nth storm to form , such as the earliest fifth tropical storm to form in a season . Most of the records were broken in later years . During the season , the U.S. Weather Bureau issued storm and hurricane warnings for eight storms , including coastal portions of Texas , as well as from Florida to Massachusetts , forcing the evacuations of thousands of people . The deadliest storm of the season was a hurricane that struck Tampico , Mexico , killing over 184 residents . The costliest hurricane was the Chesapeake – Potomac hurricane , which caused $ 27 million in damage from North Carolina to New Jersey . The hurricane produced rainfall that resulted in severe crop damage in Maryland . 
 In addition to the 20 tropical storms , there were several tropical depressions of lesser intensity . The first developed on June 1 in the northwest Caribbean and dissipated a few days later . Another depression developed on July 11 over Panama and also quickly dissipated . A tropical depression developed on July 17 in the northeastern Atlantic west of the Azores , and one ship reported hurricane @-@ force winds ; however , there was little evidence that the tropical system was organized , so it was not classified as a tropical storm . Originally , there was a tropical storm in the database in the Caribbean in the middle of August , but it was downgraded to a tropical depression due to lack of any reports of gale @-@ force winds . Similarly , there was a tropical storm in the database in late September , but it was also downgraded to a tropical depression due to lack of gale @-@ force winds . 
 The season produced the highest Accumulated Cyclone Energy ( ACE ) on record with a total of 259 . The measurement is a method to compare tropical cyclone activity between seasons . Originally , 1933 had an ACE of 213 , which was surpassed by 1950 and 2005 . However , the Atlantic hurricane reanalysis project found that the storms in 1933 were stronger than initially reported . 
 = = Storms = = 
 = = = Tropical Storm One = = = 
 The first storm of the season formed on May 14 in the southwestern Caribbean Sea off the east coast of Nicaragua . It moved quickly to the north @-@ northwest , passing just northeast of the eastern tip of Honduras . On May 15 , the storm turned to the west and entered the Gulf of Mexico while moving around the Yucatán Peninsula . The next day , it attained peak winds of 50 mph ( 85 km / h ) , based on a ship report . Turning southward , the storm made landfall on Ciudad del Carmen in Mexico early on May 19 with winds of 40 mph ( 64 km / h ) . It dissipated over land later that day . 
 = = = Hurricane Two = = = 
 A westward @-@ moving tropical wave spawned a tropical depression on June 24 about halfway between the southern Lesser Antilles and the coast of Africa . The depression quickly intensified into a tropical storm , and by June 27 it became a hurricane off the northern coast of Guyana . At 2100 UTC that day , the hurricane struck extreme southern Trinidad with winds of 85 mph ( 137 km / h ) . After crossing the island , the hurricane moved across the Paria Peninsula in northeastern Venezuela with the same intensity . The hurricane was earliest to affect the region on record , and was the first storm in over 50 years to affected Trinidad and Venezuela . In Trinidad , 13 people were killed , about 1 @,@ 000 people were left homeless , and damage was estimated at $ 3 million . In Venezuela , the hurricane caused power outages , destroyed several houses , and killed several people . 
 After crossing Venezuela into the eastern Caribbean , the hurricane moved northwestward and gradually intensified . On July 3 it struck western Cuba with winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) . In the country , the storm killed 22 people , while damage amounted to $ 4 million . A building high pressure area turned the hurricane westward in the Gulf of Mexico , and after further strengthening the storm attained peak winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) on July 5 . It turned to the west @-@ southwest and made landfall in northeastern Mexico on July 7 with winds of 100 mph ( 160 km / h ) , about halfway between Tampico and the Mexico / United States border . It dissipated about 11 hours later over Mexico . There were several deaths and heavy damage in the area where the storm moved ashore . Across its path , the hurricane killed 35 people . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Three = = = 
 The third tropical storm of the season ( initially classified as two separate storms but later identified as a single track ) was first observed on July 14 near St. Kitts . It moved quickly westward and passed just south of Puerto Rico and Hispaniola as a weak storm . The system curved slightly to the west @-@ northwest and brushed the northern coast of Jamaica before turning slightly westward and hitting the Mexican state of Quintana Roo . As it crossed the Yucatán Peninsula the cyclone weakened and eventually crossed into the Bay of Campeche . It moved quickly to the northwest , and made landfall near Matagorda Bay , in Texas on July 23 as a 45 mph ( 70 km / h ) tropical storm . The system turned to the northeast , and became extratropical to the east of Dallas , Texas . The extratropical system moved slowly through northern Louisiana , turned to the northeast , and dissipated over northeastern Arkansas near Memphis , Tennessee . 
 While passing near Jamaica , the storm dropped heavy rainfall , including 9 inches ( 230 mm ) in Kingston which led to flooding and washouts . The rainfall also damaged several bridges and roads and resulting in delays in train schedules . Mudslides and overflowing rivers flooded several towns with knee @-@ deep waters . Moderate winds downed several banana trees across the island . Prior to the arrival of the storm in Texas , numerous coastal residents boarded up their houses and businesses and voluntarily evacuated further inland . Upon making landfall , the storm produced high tides . In eastern Texas and western Louisiana , the system dropped very heavy precipitation , which in places reached accumulations exceeding 20 inches ( 500 mm ) . The highest storm total occurred in Logansport , Louisiana , which reported 21 @.@ 30 inches ( 541 mm ) in a 4 @-@ day period . In Louisiana , the flooding severely damaged crops and forced about 250 families near Shreveport to evacuate their flooded homes . The torrential rainfall also resulted in overflowing rivers ; numerous highways , roads , and railroads were either impassable or closed , with some locations experiencing water depths of up to 20 feet ( 6 @.@ 1 m ) . Total damage reached nearly $ 2 million . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Four = = = 
 A dissipating cold front spawned a tropical depression east of Bermuda on July 24 . It moved east @-@ northeastward initially , and intensified into a tropical storm early on July 25 . Based on ship observations , it is estimated the storm attained peak winds of 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . The storm turned to the northeast and was absorbed by a cold front southeast of Newfoundland early on July 27 . 
 = = = Hurricane Five = = = 
 On July 24 , a tropical storm was detected . Located to the southeast of Antigua , it tracked west @-@ northwestward , passing near St. Thomas with winds of up to 60 mph ( 95 km / h ) . The storm strengthened and attained hurricane status the next day north of Puerto Rico , and it continued its west @-@ northwest movement . After moving through the northern Bahamas , the hurricane struck near Fort Pierce , Florida , with winds of 85 mph ( 135 km / h ) . The hurricane crossed the state and weakened to minimal tropical storm intensity . It turned to the west @-@ southwest and re @-@ strengthened to a hurricane on August 4 off the coast of Texas . It weakened again to tropical storm status and made its final landfall near Brownsville , Texas , on August 5 as a strong tropical storm . The system rapidly dissipated over northern Mexico . 
 While moving over Saint Christopher , the storm killed six people . Heavy rain was reported throughout the Virgin Islands . The hurricane caused the drowning of one person in the Bahamas , and moderate winds produced severe structural damage to the buildings in the archipelago . In Florida , the National Weather Bureau issued storm warnings between Miami to Titusville , while Governor David <unk> issued a mandatory evacuation for 4 @,@ 200 residents in vulnerable areas around Lake Okeechobee . Damage in Florida was minimal , limited to minor crops , roofs , and signs . In southern Texas , the hurricane produced moderate damage of $ 500 @,@ 000 , including disrupted telephone and telegraph lines . The hurricane produced high tides along the coast of Texas , covering parts of South Padre Island , and heavy rains in northern Mexico caused heavy damage . 
 = = = Hurricane Six = = = 
 A ship first reported a tropical depression near the Cape Verde islands on August 13 . This system would become one of the most destructive hurricanes of the season . The storm moved towards the northwest and attained hurricane status on August 16 . The hurricane continued to strengthen , and on August 21 , it passed about 150 miles ( 240 km ) southwest of Bermuda as a Category 3 hurricane . St. George 's avoided a direct hit but reported wind speeds of up to 64 mph ( 103 km / h ) . On August 22 , the hurricane turned west @-@ northwest and reached its peak intensity , with maximum sustained winds of 140 mph ( 220 km / h ) , equivalent to a Category 4 hurricane in the modern @-@ day Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . However , it weakened quickly afterwards . On August 23 , the storm made landfall on the Outer Banks of North Carolina as a Category 1 hurricane and continued to quickly weaken as it moved inland , away from its energy source . The storm turned to the north , then to the northeast , passing through Virginia , Maryland , and Pennsylvania before weakening to a tropical depression over New York . The storm became extratropical on August 25 and turned to the east , moving through Atlantic Canada and dissipating on August 28 . 
 The hurricane caused damage ranging from moderate to severe in the corridor between North Carolina and New Jersey , due to high tides and strong winds . In the state of Maryland , the storm 's effects resulted in severe crop damage , and many boats and piers were damaged or destroyed due to high tides and storm surge . The hurricane produced heavy rainfall along its path , with a peak of 13 @.@ 28 inches ( 337 @.@ 3 mm ) in York , Pennsylvania . Overall , the hurricane caused $ 27 million in <unk> and 31 deaths . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Seven = = = 
 The seventh tropical storm of the season was first observed in the eastern Caribbean on August 14 . It strengthened to reach winds of 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) . After passing just south of Jamaica , the storm turned to the northwest and crossed over both the Isle of Youth and western Cuba on August 18 . It curved northward and dissipated west of Florida on August 21 . 
 On Trinidad , rainfall from this storm and a subsequent tropical depression were the heaviest in nine years , which caused rivers to overflow and flooded parts of the island . Several boats were damaged or driven ashore from rough seas . The two storms caused damage to fields , highways , and houses , and caused the loss of crops such as cocoa and bananas . In all , damage totaled $ 3 million and there were 13 deaths on Trinidad . The storm produced heavy rainfall in eastern Jamaica , including a record 24 @-@ hour total of 12 @.@ 2 inches ( 310 mm ) in the Corporate Area , and Dallas Castle received 20 @.@ 2 inches ( 510 mm ) in 24 hours . This flooded and damaged properties and water systems in Kingston and Saint Andrew , leading to a water famine until the water mains were fixed . Damage totaled to over $ 2 @.@ 5 million , and 70 people were reported killed due to the flooding . Damage was minimal in both Cuba and Florida . 
 = = = Hurricane Eight = = = 
 The eighth storm of the season was one of two storms in the 1933 Atlantic hurricane season to reach the intensity of a Category 5 strength on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale . It formed on August 22 off the west coast of Africa , and for much of its duration it maintained a west @-@ northwest track . The system intensified into a tropical storm on August 26 and into a hurricane on August 28 . Passing north of the Lesser Antilles , the hurricane rapidly intensified as it approached the Turks and Caicos islands . It reached Category 5 status and its peak winds of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) on August 31 . Subsequently , it weakened before striking northern Cuba on September 1 with winds of 120 mph ( 190 km / h ) . In the country , the hurricane left about 100 @,@ 000 people homeless and killed over 70 people . Damage was heaviest near the storm 's path , and the strong winds destroyed houses and left areas without power . Damage was estimated at $ 11 million . 
 After exiting from Cuba , the hurricane entered the Gulf of Mexico and restrengthened . On September 2 , it re @-@ attained winds of 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) . Initially the hurricane posed a threat to the area around Corpus Christi , Texas , and the local United States Weather Bureau forecaster advised people to stay away from the Texas coastline during the busy Labor Day Weekend . Officials declared martial law in the city and mandated evacuations . However , the hurricane turned more to the west and struck near Brownsville early on September 5 with winds estimated at 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) . It quickly dissipated after causing heavy damage in the Rio Grande Valley . High winds caused heavy damage to the citrus crop . The hurricane left $ 16 @.@ 9 million in damage and 40 deaths in southern Texas . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Nine = = = 
 On August 23 , another tropical storm was observed north of Puerto Rico . It moved northwestward for three days , slowly strengthening as it moved over the open ocean . The storm turned to the northeast and reached peak sustained winds of 50 mph ( 80 km / h ) a short distance to the west of Bermuda . It began weakening shortly thereafter , and on August 30 the storm became extratropical to the southeast of Newfoundland . It continued to the northeast and was last observed on August 31 over the north @-@ central Atlantic Ocean . It did not cause significant effects on land . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Ten = = = 
 A tropical storm formed in the Bay of Campeche . It initially moved to the northwest . The cyclone remained a minimal tropical storm for most of its lifetime . On August 29 , the storm turned to the west @-@ southwest and made landfall near Tampico , Mexico , dissipating shortly thereafter . The tropical storm caused heavy rains near the coast , although winds were minor . Due to uncertainty as to its course , tropical storm warnings were issued for portions of the southern Texas coastline . 
 = = = Hurricane Eleven = = = 
 A tropical storm was first observed on August 31 , 225 miles ( 360 km ) north @-@ northeast of the island of Antigua . The storm rapidly intensified as it moved quickly to the west @-@ northwest , attaining hurricane status later that day , and major hurricane strength on September 1 , while located to the north of Puerto Rico . It continued west @-@ northwestward and attained its peak intensity , with maximum sustained winds of 140 mph ( 225 km / h ) , on September 2 . The hurricane , then at Category 4 on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale , moved through the northern Bahamas at peak intensity and weakened slightly before making landfall on Jupiter , Florida , with winds of 125 mph ( 200 km / h ) on September 4 . The system weakened rapidly over Florida to tropical storm status , and after turning to the north , decelerated . The weakening storm slowly moved through Georgia before dissipating near the Georgia / South Carolina border on September 7 . 
 On Eleuthera Island , the Category 4 hurricane blew away the roofs of buildings , wrecked wharves , and lost boats . Hurricane warnings were issued for the eastern Florida coastline , and 3 @,@ 000 people were evacuated around Lake Okeechobee to safer areas . In southeastern Florida , the strong winds broke many glass windows and downed trees and power lines ; severe house damage was reported near the landfall location . The hurricane 's powerful winds also severely damaged crops , including 4 million boxes of citrus fruit across the state . In total , Florida suffered $ 2 million in damage and two deaths . 
 = = = Hurricane Twelve = = = 
 On September 8 , an area of disturbed weather to the east of the Lesser Antilles organized into a tropical storm . It moved north @-@ northeastward , and after a turn to the northwest , the system intensified to hurricane strength on September 10 . It steadily intensified and reached a peak strength of 140 mph ( 225 km / h ) on September 15 . It slowed as it turned to the north , striking southeastern North Carolina just west of Cape Hatteras as a Category 2 hurricane . After moving through the Outer Banks , the system accelerated to the northeast and became extratropical on September 18 about halfway between Cape Cod and the southern tip of Nova Scotia . The extratropical storm passed over Nova Scotia , Newfoundland , and Labrador before dissipating east of Greenland on September 22 . 
 Strong winds from the hurricane downed trees and power lines in southeastern North Carolina , causing damage to many houses . The hurricane produced a storm surge that flooded coastal streets with 3 to 4 feet ( 0 @.@ 9 – 1 @.@ 2 m ) of water . In all , the hurricane caused at least 21 deaths , primarily due to drowning in high waters . Damage totaled around $ 4 @.@ 5 million . 
 = = = Hurricane Thirteen = = = 
 On September 10 , as Hurricane Twelve was intensifying over the waters of the Atlantic Ocean , another area of disturbed weather developed into a tropical storm over the western Caribbean Sea off the coast of Guatemala . It moved slowly northward and strengthened , becoming a hurricane on September 12 just east of Belize . On the next day , the hurricane made landfall on the Mexican state of Quintana Roo , and the system weakened to a tropical storm as it moved northwestward across the Yucatán Peninsula . On September 14 it again regained hurricane status over the Bay of Campeche . The hurricane struck Tampico on September 15 and then dissipated . 
 The storm caused severe damage in Tampico and further inland , leaving several thousand homeless . According to The New York Times , at least 67 people were killed . Tuxpan , south of Tampico , also suffered heavy damage with many houses and office buildings destroyed . Total property losses were estimated at several million dollars . 
 = = = Hurricane Fourteen = = = 
 On the other side of the Caribbean Sea , what would become the second Category 5 hurricane of the season , and the 14th tropical storm of the year , was first observed on September 16 to the east of the southern Leeward Islands . The cyclone , then a tropical depression , tracked to the west @-@ northwest through the islands , slowly strengthening into a tropical storm on September 18 . It attained hurricane strength on September 19 near Jamaica , then began a period of rapid intensification south of that island . On September 21 , a ship measured a central pressure of 929 millibars ( 27 inHg ) , indicating that the hurricane had intensified to a peak of 160 mph ( 260 km / h ) . Continuing west @-@ northwestward , the hurricane weakened somewhat and made landfall 40 miles ( 65 km ) south of Cozumel Island on September 22 . Winds at landfall were estimated to have been 140 mph ( 230 km / h ) , equivalent to a Category 4 hurricane by modern classification . The hurricane weakened slightly over the Yucatán Peninsula , but then re @-@ strengthened over the Gulf of Mexico to reach a second peak intensity of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) on September 24 . Shortly thereafter , the storm made landfall near Tampico . It dissipated on September 25 over Mexico . 
 Near Jamaica , the hurricane caused rough seas , although damage , if any , is unknown . While moving across the Yucatán Peninsula , the storm produced heavy rainfall and strong winds . In Cozumel , the winds destroyed a 300 @-@ foot ( 91 m ) pier and several buildings . Rough seas sunk several ships , and one person drowned . The rainfall caused several rivers to overflow , causing flooding and damage to roads and railroads in the state of Veracruz . Many people in low @-@ lying areas around Tampico evacuated for the storm . 
 Reports indicate much of the city of Tampico was destroyed , and the total number of deaths and injuries amounted to over 5 @,@ 000 . Most of the deaths occurred from flood waters , which were 10 to 15 feet ( 3 @.@ 0 – 4 @.@ 6 m ) deep and covered the entire city ; many bodies were washed out to sea , and were never recovered . The flooding washed out roads and railroads , delaying relief efforts into the devastated area . Water and food supplies in and around Tampico were damaged or contaminated , resulting in a threat of famine or disease that further aggravated the situation . Torrential rains caused more flooding , and the powerful winds damaged or destroyed nearly every building in the city and left many homeless . The strong winds downed numerous power lines , leaving the entire city in blackout , and destroyed two large water towers . There were at least 10 cases of looting ; all of the perpetrators were executed . Damage in and around Tampico totaled over $ 10 million , and the storm killed over 184 people . 
 The thousands of victims took refuge in churches , theatres , and public buildings . Immediately after the storm , the Mexican military placed the city under martial law . Military and federal authorities dispatched trains with food , water , and medicine , and planes bearing engineers and doctors . Mexican president Abelardo L. Rodríguez rallied citizens to aid the affected people in the storm area . The local chamber of deputies allowed $ 140 @,@ 000 in funds for the storm victims . 
 = = = Hurricane Fifteen = = = 
 A storm of extratropical origin developed into a small tropical storm on September 24 southwest of the Azores . Initially the storm moved north @-@ northwestward , and based on ship reports , it is estimated the system intensified into a hurricane on September 26 . It passed west of the Azores as it turned to the north @-@ northeast , weakening to a tropical storm later that day . On September 27 the storm became extratropical , and the next day it dissipated . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Sixteen = = = 
 A tropical disturbance moved through the Lesser Antilles in late September . After crossing Hispaniola , a tropical depression developed on October 1 north of the Dominican Republic . It moved northwestward initially and quickly intensified into a tropical storm . It had a broad wind field , indicating characteristics of a subtropical cyclone . After reaching peak winds of 45 mph ( 72 km / h ) , the storm turned to the northeast and weakened . It dissipated on October 4 to the southeast of Bermuda . 
 = = = Hurricane Seventeen = = = 
 On October 1 , a tropical storm developed off the northeast coast of Nicaragua . It moved slowly northward and steadily intensified , becoming a hurricane on October 3 just west of Jamaica . The hurricane turned to the north @-@ northwest and hit the Cuban province of La Habana with winds of 110 mph ( 175 km / h ) on October 4 . The hurricane passed over Havana and turned to the northeast and strengthened , becoming a major hurricane as it moved south of Miami , Florida . The hurricane reached a peak intensity of 125 mph ( 205 km / h ) while passing through the Bahamas on October 6 . The hurricane weakened as it accelerated to the northeast , and it became extratropical on October 8 to the south of Nova Scotia . It paralleled the Nova Scotia coast , turned to the east @-@ southeast , and lost its tropical characteristics on October 9 over the open north Atlantic Ocean . 
 One person was killed in Jamaica due to flooding . In Cuba , people boarded up numerous buildings , and emergency workers assisted authorities in spreading the word about the impending storm ; residents in vulnerable areas evacuated to shelters on higher ground . The hurricane 's powerful winds destroyed several houses in Camagüey , and heavy rainfall overflowed numerous rivers in low @-@ lying districts . The winds damaged and disrupted telephone and telegraph lines and injured a few people in Havana . Despite government orders for police to kill any looters , large @-@ scale looting occurred in Havana after the storm . Two looters were shot to death , and a third was injured . Two civilians were also wounded by snipers who fired to disperse thieves . Residents in southeast Florida boarded up for the storm while the National Weather Bureau issued storm warnings for portions of the coastline . The hurricane produced strong winds and rain in the Florida Keys and extreme southern Florida , but damage was minimal . In northwest Miami , the hurricane spawned a tornado that damaged three houses and injured two . In Nova Scotia , the former hurricane left heavy damage to crops due to strong winds and heavy rain . Sunken boats killed nine people , and damage was estimated at around $ 1 million ( 1933 CAD ) , including $ 250 @,@ 000 in lost apple crop . 
 = = = Hurricane Eighteen = = = 
 After a two @-@ week period of inactivity , a tropical depression was detected in the western Caribbean Sea on October 25 . It moved to the east @-@ northeast then curved to the northwest while slowly intensifying . On October 29 , it strengthened into a hurricane near Jamaica and reached peak winds of 90 mph ( 150 km / h ) before striking the western portion of the island . The hurricane turned to the northeast and weakened . It made landfall on southeastern Cuba as a strong tropical storm on October 31 . The weakening storm changed its course to the north @-@ northwest , as it drifted through Cuba and the Bahamas . On November 4 , the storm turned once more to the northeast , accelerated , and was absorbed by an approaching cold front on November 7 near Bermuda . 
 While moving near western Jamaica , the hurricane produced strong winds of about 80 mph ( 130 km / h ) , which wrecked about 90 % of the banana crop . One plantation lost 500 banana trees , and there was also damage to corn , coffee , and yams . Many houses were wrecked or washed away , leaving hundreds homeless . The storm cut power and telegraph lines and blocked roads , limiting communication . Rail lines were cut , and small bridges were washed away . Damage was estimated at $ 3 million , and there were 23 deaths . The storm also produced strong winds and rainfall in Cuba . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Nineteen = = = 
 Almost simultaneous to Hurricane 19 , a tropical storm developed a short distance east of the central Bahamas on October 26 . It moved north @-@ northeastward , then northeastward , steadily strengthening along its path . On October 27 , a barometric pressure of 993 mbar ( 29 @.@ 32 inHg ) was recorded within the storm , and on October 28 the storm reached a peak intensity of 70 mph ( 110 km / h ) . On October 29 , the storm became extratropical and turned north to hit Nova Scotia . <unk> between two high pressure systems , it continued northward until dissipating over extreme eastern portions of Quebec on October 30 . 
 In Atlantic Canada , the former tropical storm produced winds of 52 mph ( 83 km / h ) in Nova Scotia , along with heavy rainfall of 2 @.@ 3 in ( 58 mm ) in Amherst . The storm sank one boat and washed another ashore . Winds were strong enough to knock down telephone and telegraph lines , mainly due to fallen trees which also covered roads and damaged houses . Flooding washed out several bridges and roads , covering one highway with 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 8 m ) of water , and entered the basements of houses . In New Brunswick , the storm damaged or destroyed 72 bridges . One man was struck by a car due to poor visibility from the storm . 
 = = = Tropical Storm Twenty = = = 
 After another calm period , the final tropical storm of the season was first observed on November 15 in the southwestern Caribbean Sea . It moved slowly westward , never strengthening beyond a minimal tropical storm in its short lifetime . On November 16 , it struck the southeastern coast of Nicaragua , and it dissipated soon after on November 17 . 
 = = Seasonal effects = = 
 This is a table of the storms in 1933 and their landfall ( s ) in bold , if any . The minimum pressures , in most cases , are based on limited observations and may not have occurred at their peak intensity . 
 = Fresh Bones = 
 " Fresh Bones " is the fifteenth episode of the second season of the science fiction television series The X @-@ Files . It premiered on the Fox network on February 3 , 1995 . It was written by Howard Gordon , directed by Rob Bowman , and featured guest appearances by Kevin Conway , Daniel Benzali , and Matt Hill . The episode is a " Monster @-@ of @-@ the @-@ Week " story , unconnected to the series ' wider mythology . " Fresh Bones " earned a Nielsen household rating of 11 @.@ 3 , being watched by 10 @.@ 8 million households in its initial broadcast . The episode received mixed to positive reviews from critics . 
 The show centers on FBI special agents Fox Mulder ( David Duchovny ) and Dana Scully ( Gillian Anderson ) who work on cases linked to the paranormal , called X @-@ Files . In the episode , Mulder and Scully discover a voodoo symbol drawn on a tree after a soldier , Private Jack McAlpin , crashes his car into it following two separate hallucinatory incidents . This leads the two to a processing center for Haitian refugees where suspicion falls on one of the Haitians identified by the colonel in charge . 
 Howard Gordon was inspired to write the episode after reading two articles involving suicides of servicemen in Haiti . The Haitian refugee camp was shot in a derelict building in a North Vancouver shipyard ; originally , the producers wanted to set the episode in Haiti and actually film in the country . This endeavor , however , proved unsuccessful . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In <unk> , North Carolina , Jack McAlpin , an agitated Marine Corps private , drives his car into a tree after several hallucinatory episodes and is apparently killed . On the tree is a veve , a drawn voodoo religious symbol . 
 McAlpin is the second purported suicide among troops stationed at an INS compound processing refugees from Haiti . Fox Mulder and Dana Scully visit the compound to investigate McAlpin 's death . There , a young boy named Chester Bonaparte sells a good luck charm to Mulder . After meeting with Colonel Wharton , head of the compound , Mulder meets with an imprisoned refugee , Pierre Bauvais , and an associate of McAlpin 's , Harry Dunham . When Scully attempts to perform an autopsy on McAlpin 's body , she finds a dog carcass in its place at the morgue . 
 While driving down the road , Mulder and Scully discover a still @-@ living McAlpin , who doesn 't remember what has happened to him . <unk> , a chemical Mulder believes is part of Haitian <unk> rituals , is found in McAlpin 's blood . The agents go to the local graveyard to investigate the corpse of the other dead soldier , but find the grave robbed . They also find Chester , who collects frogs at the cemetery and sells them to Bauvais . Dunham approaches Mulder , telling him that Wharton has begun abusing the refugees as a means of retaliation against Bauvais ; Wharton denies the accusations , but later has Bauvais beaten to death . 
 Scully cuts her hand on the thorn of a twig left in her car . When she drives off , a veve is seen on the ground under her car . Mulder has a meeting with X , who tells him that he and Scully will soon be called back to Washington and that the camp will be restricted to military personnel only . Mulder believes Wharton is persecuting the refugees after the suicide of some of his men during a previous trip to Haiti . Scully finds Dunham dead in a bathtub , and Mulder catches McAlpin with a knife nearby . Although he has no recollection of the event , McAlpin confesses to the murder under the influence of Wharton , who tells the agents that Bauvais committed suicide and that their investigation is over . 
 McAlpin 's wife provides the agents with a photo of Wharton with Bauvais in Haiti , causing the agents to go through his office . They find that both Dunham and McAlpin had filed complaints against Wharton over his treatment of the detainees . The agents head to the cemetery , where Wharton is performing a voodoo rite over Bauvais ' coffin . When Mulder confronts him , Wharton harms him through sympathetic magic . Meanwhile , in a hallucinatory episode , a man emerges from the small cut in Scully 's hand and strangles her , but the illusion disappears when she grabs the charm Chester sold them . Bauvais appears and stops Wharton by blowing zombie powder in his face . Scully arrives to assist Mulder and pronounces Wharton dead . 
 The next day the agents say goodbye to McAlpin , who reveals that Chester was a boy who had died in a riot six weeks earlier . The episode ends with Wharton being unwittingly buried alive by the graveyard watchman . 
 = = Production = = 
 Writer Howard Gordon was inspired to write the episode after reading two articles involving suicides of servicemen in Haiti . The refugee plot was used due to the producers being unable to film in Haiti . Colonel Wharton was portrayed by Daniel Benzali , who later went on to star in the ABC series Murder One . While the producers agreed that he did not look like a military man , they felt he had the quality they were looking for in the role . For the sequence where a man emerges from Scully 's hand and strangles her , a male actor pushed his gelatine covered fingers through a mechanical hand . The episode started production in late December 1994 , and after a Christmas break was completed in January 1995 . The Haitian refugee camp was shot in a derelict building in a North Vancouver shipyard . <unk> pumps had to be used on the graveyard of the episode 's ending as it was shot during a particularly rainy January . 
 = = Broadcast and reception = = 
 " Fresh Bones " premiered on the Fox network on February 3 , 1995 . The episode earned a Nielsen rating of 11 @.@ 3 , with a 19 share , meaning that roughly 11 @.@ 3 percent of all television @-@ equipped households , and 19 percent of households watching television , were tuned in to the episode . It was viewed by 10 @.@ 8 million households . " Fresh Bones " was the highest rated episode of the first two seasons . 
 The episode received mixed to positive reviews from critics . Writer Gordon stated that director Bowman did a great job in mining his script for chills . In their book , X @-@ Treme Possibilities , authors Keith Topping and Paul Cornell praised the episode , including Benzali 's performance and the sequence in the graveyard at the end of the episode . Series creator Chris Carter called the episode one of the ones he was most proud of from the second season , stating that Gordon did a good job with the script and Bowman did a great job with the directing . 
 Not all of the reviews were glowing . Entertainment Weekly gave the episode a B- and a more mixed review , writing that the episode was " Not one for the ages , despite some jarring moments ( car meets tree , Scully 's hoodoo hallucinations , and that final shot — whoa ) . " Reviewer Todd VanDerWerff of The A.V. Club gave the episode a C , and wrote that " the biggest problems here are the lack of focus and the chaotic pacing . The episode rumbles along in first gear for about three @-@ quarters of its running time and then abruptly shifts into high gear at the end , moving toward an apocalyptic finish that doesn 't feel wholly earned . There 's good stuff in ' Fresh Bones , ' but the bulk of the episode disappoints . " 
 = Attack of the Alligators ! = 
 " Attack of the Alligators ! " is the 23rd episode of Thunderbirds , a British 1960s Supermarionation television series co @-@ created by Gerry and Sylvia Anderson . One of the final episodes of Series One , it was written by Alan Pattillo and directed by David Lane , and was first broadcast on ATV Midlands on 10 March 1966 . In this episode , set in South America , alligators grow to an enormous size after a swamp is contaminated by a newly invented growth chemical . When the animals proceed to attack a house , International Rescue must save the occupants trapped inside . 
 Combining science @-@ fiction and haunted house horror themes , with a plot written to be " nightmarish " , the episode was filmed in late 1965 . It is remembered for containing footage of actual crocodiles , doubling as re @-@ sized alligators on scale model sets – the first appearance of live animals in an Anderson production . However , the animals ' slowness and unpredictability complicated and delayed the filming , which involved the use of electric shocks to induce movement from the crocodiles . Although the AP Films Studios were briefly investigated by the RSPCA , animal abuse allegations were not upheld . 
 A critic and fan favourite , despite the controversy of its production , " Attack of the Alligators " is commonly ranked as one of the best episodes of Thunderbirds . Since the filming of this episode and a later instalment , " The Cham @-@ Cham " , went over @-@ time and over @-@ budget , the series finale was re @-@ written as a clip show to lower costs and simplify the shooting schedule . Ten years after first airing , " Attack of the Alligators ! " provided the inspiration for an episode of The New Avengers , by ex @-@ Thunderbirds scriptwriter Dennis Spooner . 
 = = Plot = = 
 A businessman , Blackmer , visits the reclusive Dr Orchard , a scientist who lives in a remote house on the Ambro River in South America . From the local plant <unk> americanus , Orchard has developed a food additive called Theramine ; if administered to animals , the chemical causes them to grow beyond their original size . Enlargement of animal stock would offer a simple solution to world famine and present other economic advantages . Blackmer 's boatman , Culp , eavesdrops on the meeting . After a storm forces Blackmer to stay at the house for the night , Culp resolves to steal the Theramine and sell it to the highest bidder . Waiting until the other occupants fall asleep , he steals the keys to Orchard 's laboratory from the housekeeper , Mrs Files . While filling a vial with a quantity of the chemical , Culp accidentally knocks the rest of the supply into a sink , and the Theramine drains into the Ambro River . 
 Shortly after Blackmer and Culp depart the next morning , their boat is attacked by an alligator , now enlarged because of the contamination . Orchard 's assistant , Hector McGill , manages to rescue Blackmer , but Culp is believed killed . The house is quickly surrounded by three giant alligators , which throw themselves at the building with Orchard , McGill , Blackmer and Mrs Files trapped inside . On the advice of Mrs Files , McGill contacts International Rescue and John ( voiced by Ray Barrett ) alerts Tracy Island . Jeff ( Peter Dyneley ) dispatches Thunderbirds 1 and 2 . Arriving at the scene , Scott ( Shane Rimmer ) briefly dispels the reptiles with his hoverjet cannon and accesses the house through the laboratory window . Eventually the laboratory caves in , forcing Scott and the others to move to the lounge . There , the group is confronted by none other than Culp , who survived the alligator attack and holds them at gunpoint . 
 Virgil ( David Holliday ) arrives in Thunderbird 2 and scatters the alligators with aircraft 's vertical landing jets . Alan ( Matt Zimmerman ) and Gordon ( David Graham ) subdue two of the animals with heavy @-@ duty tranquiliser guns . When the third returns to the house , Alan exits Thunderbird 2 on a hoverjet to lure the alligator away . He collides with a tree and falls from the hoverjet , but is saved by Gordon , who shoots the oncoming alligator before it can attack Alan . Culp threatens to empty the whole Theramine vial into the Ambro River unless he is granted safe passage upstream . Launching Thunderbird 4 , Gordon encounters a fourth , far larger reptile that ravages Blackmer 's boat and stops Culp . Virgil disposes of the creature with a missile fired from Thunderbird 2 . Although it is feared at first that the vial has been smashed , Gordon retrieves it from the riverbed intact . Later , on Tracy Island , Jeff announces that Theramine will be subject to international security restrictions , and Culp will be going to jail . Tin @-@ Tin ( Christine Finn ) has been away on a shopping trip and has bought Alan a present for his upcoming birthday – a pygmy alligator . 
 = = Production = = 
 Inspiration for " Attack of the Alligators ! " was derived partly from H. G. Wells ' 1904 novel The Food of the Gods and How It Came to Earth , in which animal re @-@ sizing is a major theme . Another source was the 1927 film The Cat and the Canary and its 1939 re @-@ make , both of which feature haunted house premises and stalkers . Scriptwriter Alan Pattillo , who according to special effects director Derek Meddings " had tried to come up with the most nightmarish rescue situation he could " , wanted to direct the episode as well ; the position was ultimately given to David Lane . " Attack of the Alligators ! " was filmed in October and November 1965 , overrunning its one @-@ month shooting window and forcing the production staff to work overtime , and sometimes long into the night , to complete the recording . Ian Wingrove , a special effects technician for AP Films , remembers that the episode 's complex technical aspects resulted in the crew " [ working ] day and night ... through a weekend " . 
 Although it was series co @-@ creator and producer Gerry Anderson 's original plan to film with actual alligators , AP Films instead acquired a group of juvenile crocodiles from a private zoo in northern England ; these would double as re @-@ sized alligators on scale model sets and water tanks . With the exception of a five @-@ foot ( 1 @.@ 5 m ) specimen , which was too aggressive to be removed from its box , the animals were three feet ( 0 @.@ 91 m ) long . The crew kept the on @-@ set water tanks heated to a suitably warm temperature and used electric shocks to induce movement from the reptiles . They were unpredictable and very difficult to control and film , either bathing in the heat of the studio lights or disappearing into the tanks and remaining submerged for hours . To make the crocodiles more visible to the cameras , the crew fixed them to guiding rods and co @-@ ordinated their movements . The heavy presence of the animals in both puppet and scale model shots resulted in a closer @-@ than @-@ normal degree of collaboration between the puppet and effects crews . 
 Objecting on animal welfare grounds , effects director Brian Johnson was one of several crewmembers who refused to participate in the production . Camera operator Alan Perry has no memory of ill treatment ; series supervising director Desmond Saunders , however , recalls that more than one crocodile died of pneumonia after being left overnight in an un @-@ heated tank . Director David Elliott , though filming a different episode at the time , remembers that another dislocated a limb after receiving an unexpected jolt from a shocker . Puppet operator Christine Glanville admitted that the filming could not have been a pleasant experience for the " guest stars " , since the tanks were " filled with all sorts of dirty paint water , oil and soapy water to make it look swampy . " Saunders comments : " It was scandalous . It was one of the great episodes . Nevertheless there was a price to be paid for it . " 
 Concerns over the animals ' safety prompted an anonymous telephone call to the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals ( RSPCA ) , which dispatched a representative . Initial tests with shocking had yielded disappointing results , necessitating an increase in voltage . According to Anderson , " Meddings explained that his team were laying the crocodiles down and they weren 't doing anything . They were just lying there . The RSPCA man said , well , they would , because of the warmth of the lamps . So Derek said , ' We 've been giving them a touch with an electrode just to make them move . ' The guy asked what voltage they were using and Derek said it was about 20 volts , and the guy said , ' Oh , they 've got terribly thick skins , you know . If you want them to move , you 'll have to pump it up to 60 . ' " Following an initial investigation of AP Films Studios , the allegations of mistreatment were not pursued further ; the RSPCA officer later joined the crocodiles ' handler in assisting with the filming . 
 Filming involving the reptiles frequently proved to be hazardous . During a promotional shoot with Supermarionation puppets , one of the crocodiles suddenly grabbed the Lady Penelope marionette ( which does not appear in the episode ) and , to the upset of Glanville , ripped apart one the legs . During the filming of a scene in which an alligator swims after a boat , Meddings was using a rope to guide the crocodile forwards when it was discovered that the animal had slipped out of its harness ; in his book , 21st – Century Visions , Meddings wrote of the incident : " My crew never saw me move as fast as I did to get out of the tank when I pulled the rope and realised the creature was free . " Of the largest crocodile , which was wetted with damp strips at the back of the stage while un @-@ used , Wingrove recalls : " You would forget that it was there , then one day someone shouted ' Look out ! ' and we turned round to see this big crocodile walking across the stage – which cleared of people very quickly ! " 
 = = Broadcast = = 
 " Attack of the Alligators ! " achieved ratings of 4 @.@ 78 million viewers for its BBC2 network broadcast on 20 March 1992 . The BBC repeated Thunderbirds in 2001 , a year known for a number of major rail accidents in the UK ( notably the Great Heck rail crash ; others occurred in <unk> , Wiltshire and Hither Green , Lewisham , London ) . Consequently , it was decided to delay the transmission of the episodes " The Perils of Penelope " and " Brink of Disaster " ( both of which feature disasters involving trains ) until the end of the broadcast schedule . " Attack of the Alligators ! " substituted for " Brink of Disaster " , and was the 11th episode to be repeated on BBC Two . 
 = = Reception = = 
 " Attack of the Alligators ! " , a popular instalment , is widely considered to be one of the best episodes of Thunderbirds . It is series co @-@ creator Sylvia Anderson 's favourite episode , while commentator Stephen La Rivière judges the plot to be one of the most unusual of the series . Lew Grade , head of distributor ITC , expressed high satisfaction with the filming during a visit to AP Films Studios in 1965 . 
 In 2004 , " Attack of the Alligators ! " was re @-@ issued on Region 1 DVD as part of A & E Video 's The Best of Thunderbirds : The Favorite Episodes , whose content was selected based on the results of a fan poll hosted on the A & E website . In a review for the website DVD Verdict , David Gutierrez awarded " Attack of the Alligators ! " a perfect score of 100 , judging it the best of the collection and praising its production values : " It 's like a beautifully directed short film " . He elaborated : " ' Attack of the Alligators ! ' serves as a terrific example of how strong Thunderbirds can look . It 's not Howdy Doody sporting a jetpack – it 's an hour @-@ long programme that feels like a motion picture . " 
 Susanna Lazarus of Radio Times argues that the episode is memorable specifically for the alligator footage . The techniques used to produce the animal sequences have resulted in the episode being considered " controversial " by some sources . Mark Pickavance of the website Den of Geek is critical from a visual standpoint , suggesting that the use of scale sets and young crocodiles , " shot in super close @-@ up to make them seem huge " , does not produce a convincing illusion of giant , re @-@ sized alligators . Author Dave Thompson relates the giant reptile plot to Swamp Thing , a hybrid superorganism featured in the DC Comics Universe . 
 Since " Attack of the Alligators ! " and " The Cham @-@ Cham " exceeded their allotted budgets , the scriptwriters re @-@ wrote the Series One finale to be a clip show , " Security Hazard " . A shot of a stormy sky , present at the start of the episode , later introduced the opening titles of the TV series The Prisoner . In 1976 , Thunderbirds writer Dennis Spooner adapted the premise of " Attack of the Alligators ! " for an episode of The New Avengers ; the episode " <unk> " features a wild rat , which grows to an enormous size after drinking from a water source contaminated by a dangerous chemical . 
 = Tintinhull Garden = 
 Tintinhull Garden , located in Tintinhull , near Yeovil in the English county of Somerset , is a small 20th century Arts and Crafts garden surrounding a 17th @-@ century Grade I listed house . The property is in the ownership of the National Trust . It is visited by around 25 @,@ 000 people per year . 
 The house started as a small farmhouse in 1630 but was enlarged into its current form in the 18th century . The house was the property of the Napper family for centuries . It was given to the National Trust in 1954 . The Arts and Crafts style garden is modeled on that at Hidcote Manor Garden in Gloucestershire . It was originally laid out by Phyllis Reiss and developed by Penelope Hobhouse . 
 = = House = = 
 The original farmhouse which forms the basis of the current Tintinhull House was built of Hamstone 1630 . It was reshaped and enlarged around 1722 when the west façade was added . 
 The house was the property of the Napper family , who acquired the manor after the Dissolution of the Monasteries and also owned Tintinhull Court , and was passed down in the family until they sold it sometime after 1814 . 
 The <unk> let it to the Pitt family until the death of John Napper in 1791 . It passed through several hands until 1835 , when it was bought by Jeremiah Penny . In 1898 the then owner , Arthur Cobbett , added a single @-@ storey extension to the east front before selling it to his tenant the botanist , Dr. <unk> Price . In 1933 it was bought by Phyllis Reiss and her husband , Capt. F.E. Reiss . 
 The house includes several paintings from the National Trust 's collection , including a painting of the front of the house by John S. Goodall . 
 The house is a Grade I listed building and can be booked for holiday lets from the National trust . 
 = = Garden = = 
 The garden is laid out into areas separated by walls and hedges . 
 The garden layout was developed in the early 20th century , by Dr. Price , including laying down <unk> and diamond shaped flagstone paths . The ornamental domes of box were planted in the 1920s . The early landscaping was expanded and planted starting in 1933 by Phyllis Reiss in a Arts and Crafts " Hidcote " style . The 1 @.@ 5 acres ( 0 @.@ 61 ha ) garden is separated into " rooms " by Yew hedges and walls . The different areas include Eagle Court ( the former courtyard ) , Middle Garden , Fountain Garden and Pool Garden . The pool garden is the site of a former tennis court . 
 In 1954 Reiss gave the house and garden to the National Trust , but continued to live in the house and care for the garden until her death in 1961 . From then on , the Trust let the house to a variety of tenants , including the garden designer and writer Penelope Hobhouse and her husband Prof John Malins from 1980 to 1993 . 
 The gardens are included in the National Register of Historic Parks and Gardens and include small pools and an <unk> garden . 
 = Amchitka = 
 Amchitka ( / <unk> / ; Aleut : <unk> ̂ ) is a volcanic , tectonically unstable island in the Rat Islands group of the Aleutian Islands in southwest Alaska . It is part of the Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge . The island is about 68 kilometers ( 42 mi ) long , and from 3 to 6 km ( 1 @.@ 9 to 3 @.@ 7 mi ) wide . The area has a maritime climate , with many storms , and mostly overcast skies . 
 Amchitka was populated for more than 2 @,@ 500 years by the Aleut people , but has had no permanent population since 1832 . The island has been part of the United States since the Alaska Purchase of 1867 . During World War II , it was used as an airfield by US forces in the Aleutian Islands Campaign . 
 Amchitka was selected by the United States Atomic Energy Commission to be the site for underground detonations of nuclear weapons . Three such tests were carried out : Long Shot , an 80 @-@ kiloton ( 330 TJ ) blast in 1965 ; Milrow , a 1 @-@ megaton ( 4 @.@ 2 PJ ) blast in 1969 ; and Cannikin in 1971 – at 5 Mt ( 21 PJ ) , the largest underground test ever conducted by the United States . The tests were highly controversial , with environmental groups fearing that the Cannikin explosion , in particular , would cause severe earthquakes and tsunamis . Amchitka is no longer used for nuclear testing . It is still monitored for the leakage of radioactive materials . 
 = = Geography = = 
 Amchitka is the southernmost of the Rat Islands group in the Aleutian Chain , located between 51 ° 21 ′ N 178 ° 37 ′ E and 51 ° 39 ′ N 179 ° 29 ′ E. It is bounded by the Bering Sea to the north and east , and the Pacific Ocean to the south and west . 
 The eastern part of the island is a lowland plateau , with isolated ponds and gently rolling hills . There is low but abundant vegetation , consisting of mosses , lichens , liverworts , ferns , grasses , sedges , and crowberry . The center of the island is mountainous , and the western end is barren and vegetation is sparse . 
 Amchitka has a maritime climate , often foggy and windswept , with cloud cover 98 percent of the time . While temperatures are moderated by the ocean , storms are frequent . Geologically , the island is volcanic , being a part of a small crustal block on the Aleutian Arc that is being torn apart by oblique subduction . It is " one of the least stable tectonic environments in the United States . " 
 = = Early history = = 
 The human history of Amchitka dates back at least 2 @,@ 500 years , with the Aleut people . Human remains , thought to be of an Aleut dating from about 1000 AD , were discovered in 1980 . 
 Amchitka is said to have been seen and named St. <unk> by Bering in 1741 , was sighted by Billings in 1790 , and visited by <unk> in 1820 . 
 In 1783 , <unk> <unk> and 15 Japanese castaways landed on Amchitka after drifting for seven months . The castaways were taken care of by Russian employees of <unk> and hunted with indigenous people . Six of the castaways died in three years . 
 = = World War II and after = = 
 In June 1942 , the Japanese occupied some of the western Aleutian islands , and hoped to occupy Amchitka . Eager to remove the Japanese , the Joint Chiefs of Staff agreed to move quickly to regain the territory . American planners decided to build a series of airfields to the west of Umnak , from which bombers could attack the invading forces . 
 The U.S. Army established bases at Adak and 13 other locations . At the War Department 's suggestion , an initial reconnaissance of Amchitka was carried out in September 1942 , which found that it would be difficult to build an airstrip on the island . Nevertheless , planners decided on December 13 that the airfield " had to be built " to prevent the Japanese from doing the same . A further reconnaissance mission visited Amchitka from 17 to 19 December , and reported that a fighter strip could be built in two to three weeks , and a main airfield in three to four months . The plan was approved and began in 1942 . 
 American forces made an unopposed landing on Amchitka on January 12 , 1943 . Despite facing difficult weather conditions and bombing from the Japanese , the airfield was usable by February 16 . The Alaska Command was now 80 km ( 50 mi ) away from their target , Kiska . The military eventually built numerous buildings , roads , and a total of three airstrips on the island , one of which would later be rebuilt and used by the Atomic Energy Commission in the late 1960s . At its peak , the occupancy of Amchitka reached 15 @,@ 000 troops . 
 The Aleutian Islands campaign was successfully completed on August 24 , 1943 . In that month , a strategic intercept station was established on the island , which remained until February 1945 . On 31 December 1949 the Air Force Base was closed due to insufficient personnel and staff . The Army closed its communications facility at Amchitka in August 1950 . On 31 December 1950 the Air Force <unk> Air Weather Group pulled the last of its personnel out of Amchitka and the facility was abandoned . 
 The site later hosted an Air Force White Alice telecommunication system in 1959 to 1961 , and a temporary relay station in the 1960s and 1970s . A prototype <unk> Over @-@ the @-@ Horizon Radar system existed on Amchitka between 1991 and 1993 to conduct surveillance on Russia . 
 = = Nuclear testing = = 
 = = = Plans for nuclear testing = = = 
 With the pullout of military forces from Amchitka in 1950 , the Department of Defense initially considered the island for nuclear testing planned for 1951 . Requiring information about the cratering potential of nuclear weapons , plans were made to detonate two 20 @-@ kiloton ( 84 TJ ) devices . After approximately 34 test holes had been drilled , the site was deemed unsuitable , and the project was moved to the Nevada test site . 
 In the late 1950s , scientists realized that improved seismological knowledge was necessary for the detection of Soviet underground nuclear explosions . The 1 @.@ 7 @-@ kiloton ( 7 @.@ 1 TJ ) " Rainier " test ( part of Operation <unk> , performed in Nevada ) produced strong seismic signals , but looked much like an ordinary earthquake . In 1959 , Dr. James R. Killian , the Special Assistant to the President for Science and Technology , formed the Panel on Seismic Improvement ( which subsequently recommended the program that came to be known as Vela Uniform ) , with the twin goals of improving seismic instruments and deploying them globally , and researching in more depth the seismic effects of nuclear explosions . The project was subsequently initiated by the Eisenhower administration . 
 Together with the Atomic Energy Commission , the DoD began assessing Amchitka for use as part of the Vela Uniform tests . 
 = = = Long Shot test = = = 
 To conduct the Vela Uniform test Long Shot , 51 ° 25 ′ 35 @.@ 84 ″ N 179 ° 11 ′ 14 @.@ 13 ″ E the Department of Defense occupied Amchitka from 1964 to 1966 , with the AEC providing the device , measuring instruments , and scientific support . The goal was " to determine the behavior and characteristics of seismic signals generated by nuclear detonations and to differentiate them from seismic signals generated by naturally occurring earthquakes . " 
 Although it would not be publicly announced until March 18 , 1965 , senior Alaskan officials were notified the previous February . After the devastating Great Alaska earthquake of March 27 , 1964 , the governor expressed concern about the psychological effects of the test on the populace . He was quickly reassured . 
 Long Shot was detonated on October 29 , 1965 , and the yield was 80 kilotons ( 330 TJ ) . It was the first underground test in a remote area , and the first test managed by the DoD . While there was no surface collapse , tritium and krypton were found at the surface following the test ; this was not made public until 1969 . 
 = = = Milrow and Cannikin tests = = = 
 Though performed as part of the Nuclear Weapons Testing Program , " [ the ] purpose of the Milrow test was to test an island , not a weapon . " It was a " calibration shot " , intended to produce data from which the impact of larger explosions could be predicted , and specifically , to determine whether the planned Cannikin detonation could be performed safely . Milrow was detonated on October 2 , 1969 51 ° 24 ′ 52 @.@ 06 ″ N 179 ° 10 ′ 44 @.@ 84 ″ E , with an approximate yield of 1 to 1 @.@ 2 megatons ( 4 @.@ 2 – 5 @.@ 0 PJ ) . 
 The shockwave reached the surface with an acceleration of over 35 g ( 340 m / s2 ) , causing a dome of the Earth 's surface , approximately 3 km ( 2 mi ) in radius , to rise about 5 meters ( 16 ft ) . The blast " turned the surrounding sea to froth " and " forced geysers of mud and water from local streams and lakes 50 feet ( 15 m ) into the air " . A " surface collapse feature " , also known as a subsidence crater , was formed by material collapsing into the cavity formed by the explosion . 
 Cannikin was intended to test the design of the Spartan anti @-@ ballistic missile ( ABM ) interceptor – a high @-@ yield warhead that " produced copious amounts of x @-@ rays and minimized fission output and debris to prevent blackout of ABM radar systems . " The test would " measure the yield of the device , measure the x @-@ ray flux and spectrum , and assure deployment of a reliable design . " 
 = = = = Controversy = = = = 
 A few days after the Milrow test , the Don 't Make A Wave Committee was organized at a meeting in Vancouver , Canada . The Committee 's name referred to predictions made by a Vancouver journalist named Bob Hunter , later to become Greenpeace member 000 . He wrote that the test would cause earthquakes and a tsunami . On the agenda was whether to fight another blast at the island , or whether to expand their efforts to fight all perceived threats against the environment . As he was leaving , one man gave the traditional farewell of the peace @-@ activist movement , " Peace . " " Make it a green peace , " replied another member . The Committee would later become Greenpeace . 
 The AEC considered the likelihood of the test triggering a severe earthquake " very unlikely " , unless one was already imminent on a nearby fault , and considered a tsunami " even more unlikely " . Others disagreed . Russell Train , then Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality , argued that " experience with Milrow ... does not provide a sure basis for extrapolation . In the highly nonlinear phenomena involved in earthquake generation , there may be a threshold value of the strain that must be exceeded prior to initiation of a large earthquake . ... The underground explosion could serve as the first domino of the row of dominoes leading to a major earthquake . ... as in the case of earthquakes it is not possible at this time to assess quantitatively the probability of a tsunami following the explosion . " 
 In July 1971 , a group called the Committee for Nuclear Responsibility filed suit against the AEC , asking the court to stop the test . The suit was unsuccessful , with the Supreme Court denying the injunction by 4 votes to 3 , and Richard Nixon personally authorized the $ 200 million test , in spite of objections from Japan , Peru , and Sweden . " What the Court didn ’ t know , however , was that six federal agencies , including the departments of State and Interior , and the fledgling EPA , had lodged serious objections to the Cannikin test , ranging from environmental and health concerns to legal and diplomatic problems . Nixon issued an executive order to keep the comments from being released . " The Don 't Make A Wave Committee chartered a boat , in which they had intended to sail to the island in protest , but due to weather conditions they were unable to reach their destination . 
 = = = = Cannikin tested = = = = 
 Cannikin was detonated on November 6 , 1971 51 ° 28 ′ 13 @.@ 20 ″ N 179 ° 6 ′ 40 @.@ 75 ″ E , as the thirteenth test of the Operation <unk> ( 1971 – 1972 ) underground nuclear test series . The announced yield was 5 megatons ( 21 PJ ) – the largest underground nuclear test in US history . ( Estimates for the precise yield range from 4 @.@ 4 to 5 @.@ 2 megatons or 18 to 22 PJ ) . The ground lifted 20 feet ( 6 m ) , caused by an explosive force almost 400 times the power of the Hiroshima bomb . Subsidence and faulting at the site created a new lake , over a mile wide . The explosion caused a seismic shock of 7 @.@ 0 on the Richter scale , causing rockfalls and turf slides of a total of 35 @,@ 000 square feet ( 3 @,@ 300 m2 ) . Though earthquakes and tsunamis predicted by environmentalists did not occur , a number of small tectonic events did occur in the following weeks , ( some registering as high as 4 @.@ 0 on the <unk> scale ) thought to be due to the interaction of the explosion with local tectonic stresses . 
 According to wildlife surveys following the Cannikin event by the University of Alaska Fairbanks , 700 – 2 @,@ 000 sea otters were killed by <unk> in the Bering Sea as a direct result of the explosion . This survey showed that number of sea otters endangered by the blast was far greater than the Atomic Energy Commission had predicted . 
 = = = 1973 and beyond = = = 
 The AEC withdrew from the island in 1973 , though scientists continue to visit the island for monitoring purposes . In 2001 , the DoE returned to the site to remove environmental contamination . Drilling mud pits were stabilized by mixing with clean soil , covering with a polyester membrane , topped with soil and re @-@ seeded . 
 Concerns have been expressed that new fissures may be opening underground , allowing radioactive materials to leak into the ocean . A 1996 Greenpeace study found that Cannikin was leaking both plutonium and americium into the environment , . In 2004 , scientific divers from the University of Alaska Fairbanks collected shallow subtidal organisms and reported that " There were no indications of any radioactive leakage , and all that was really wonderful news . " Similar findings are reported by a 2006 study , which found that levels of plutonium " were very small and not significant biologically " . 
 The Department of Energy continues to monitor the site as part of their remediation program . This is expected to continue until 2025 , after which the site is intended to become a restricted access wildlife preserve . 
 = Tropical Depression Ten ( 2005 ) = 
 Tropical Depression Ten was the tenth tropical cyclone of the record @-@ breaking 2005 Atlantic hurricane season . It formed on August 13 from a tropical wave that emerged from the west coast of Africa on August 8 . As a result of strong wind shear , the depression remained weak and did not strengthen beyond tropical depression status . The cyclone degenerated on August 14 , although its remnants partially contributed to the formation of Tropical Depression Twelve , which eventually intensified into Hurricane Katrina . The cyclone had no effect on land , and did not directly result in any fatalities or damage . 
 = = Meteorological history = = 
 On August 8 , a tropical wave emerged from the west coast of Africa and entered the Atlantic Ocean . Tracking towards the west , the depression began to exhibit signs of convective organization on August 11 . The system continued to develop , and it is estimated that Tropical Depression Ten formed at 1200 UTC on August 13 . At the time , it was located about 1 @,@ 600 miles ( 2 @,@ 600 km ) east of Barbados . Upon its designation , the depression consisted of a large area of thunderstorm activity , with curved banding features and expanding outflow . However , the environmental conditions were predicted to quickly become unfavorable . The depression moved erratically and slowly towards the west , and wind shear inhibited any significant intensification . Late on August 13 , it was " beginning to look like Irene @-@ junior as it undergoes southwesterly mid @-@ level shear beneath the otherwise favorable upper @-@ level outflow pattern " . The wind shear was expected to relent within 48 hours , prompting some forecast models to suggest the depression would eventually attain hurricane status . 
 By early August 14 , the shear had substantially disrupted the storm , leaving the low @-@ level center of circulation exposed from the area of convection , which was also deteriorating . After meandering , the storm began to move westward . Forecasters expected it to resume a northwestward track as high pressure to the south of Bermuda was forecast to weaken and another high was predicted to form southwest of the Azores . By 1800 UTC on August 14 , the strong shear had further weakened the storm , and it no longer met the criteria for a tropical cyclone . It degenerated into a remnant low , and the National Hurricane Center issued their final advisory on the cyclone . Moving westward , it occasionally produced bursts of convective activity , before dissipating on August 18 . 
 Tropical Depression Twelve formed over the southeastern Bahamas at 2100 UTC on August 23 , partially from the remains of Tropical Depression Ten . While the normal standards for numbering tropical depressions in the Atlantic stipulate that the initial designation be retained when a depression regenerates , satellite imagery indicated that a second tropical wave had combined with Tropical Depression Ten north of Puerto Rico to form a new , more complex weather system , which was then designated as Tropical Depression Twelve . In post @-@ season reanalysis , it was found that the low @-@ level circulation of Tropical Depression Ten had completely detached and dissipated ; only the remnant mid @-@ level circulation moved on and merged with the second tropical wave . As a result , the criteria for keeping the same name and identity were not met . Tropical Depression Twelve later became Hurricane Katrina . 
 = = Impact = = 
 Because Tropical Depression Ten never approached land as a tropical cyclone , no tropical cyclone watches and warnings were issued for any land masses . No effects , damages , or fatalities were reported , and no ships reported tropical storm @-@ force winds in association with the depression . The system did not attain tropical storm status ; as such , it was not given a name by the National Hurricane Center . The storm partially contributed to the formation of Hurricane Katrina , which became a Category 5 hurricane on the Saffir @-@ Simpson Hurricane Scale and made landfall in Louisiana , causing catastrophic damage . Katrina was the costliest hurricane , and one of the five deadliest , in the history of the United States . 
 = Haunted ( Beyoncé song ) = 
 " Haunted " is a song by American recording artist Beyoncé from her fifth studio album , Beyoncé ( 2013 ) . It was written and produced by Beyoncé herself and Boots . Conceived by the latter following an infuriating meeting with a record label , the song was presented to Beyoncé who decided to record it following similar experiences in the music industry . The song was inspired by the works of English musician Aphex Twin and contains a stream of consciousness rap . 
 Musically , it consists of two parts titled " Ghost " and " Haunted " . A predominantly R & B , dance @-@ pop , dubstep and hip hop song , it contains a minimalistic sound with keyboards , bass and percussion . Beyoncé raps the spoken word segment of " Ghost " with robotic and reverbed vocals . Lyrically , " Haunted " contains sexually explicit and frank lyrics talking about desire . Many music critics compared its sound with various artists and noted different influences and elements explored in its composition . Upon its release , the song was met with positive reviews , with critics praising its <unk> sound and the minimalistic approach . 
 Two accompanying music videos were filmed for both parts of the song and placed separately on the visual album . The clip for " Ghost " was directed by Pierre Debusschere while Jonas Åkerlund served as the director for the second part , " Haunted " . The former visual shows various close @-@ up shots of Beyoncé lip @-@ syncing the lyrics , while the latter features her walking in the corridor of a big mansion meeting various actors seen inside the rooms . Critics compared the video of " Haunted " and the singer 's look with works by Madonna , most notably with her song " Justify My Love " ( 1990 ) . The song was performed live during the last European leg of The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour and at the On the Run Tour in 2014 . Beyoncé also performed it at the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards as part of a medley consisting of songs from her fifth studio album . 
 = = Background = = 
 " Haunted " was written and produced by Beyoncé and New York @-@ based musician Boots , who was relatively unknown before the release of Beyoncé ( 2013 ) . He was signed to Roc Nation , about six months prior to the album 's release and produced 85 % of Beyoncé also having writing credits on four of its tracks . During an interview with Pitchfork Media , Boots revealed that " Haunted " was the first song written by him which Beyoncé heard ; it was originally titled " I 'm Onto You " at that time . Beyoncé liked the song upon hearing it , leaving Boots confused as he felt the song was only showcasing his sad vocals , with a piano recorded on his iPhone as a voice memo . 
 He also played her the rap of stream of consciousness of " Ghost " during one of their early meetings inspired by an infuriating meeting with a record label . Beyoncé could immediately connect to the topic as she had also experienced the same things in the record industry when people advised her about the sound of her music . For the music of " Ghost " , Boots created a beat from a " dreamlike , hypnotic place " working with guitars and building layers inspired by the work of musician Aphex Twin . Boots said , " [ Aphex Twin 's ] works like that are more floaty , more without than within , but I made mine grounded in that thumping beat , so you can 't get out of that feeling . " He also elaborated about its concept , " It 's like that song is leading you by the hand , but you 're blindfolded and you don 't know where you 're going . You 're scared and you 're not sure what to expect from it , but as the album unfolds , we take the blindfold off and you realize it 's a surprise party for you . " 
 Beyoncé also explained the meaning of " Haunted " on her iTunes Radio channel where she also revealed her admiration for Boots , " The song is really about temptation in this music industry and being exposed to this crazy madness . " The vocal production of the song was handled by Beyoncé and contains background vocals provided by Boots and <unk> Wyatt . " Haunted " was recorded at Jungle City Studios and Oven Studios , both located in New York City under the guidance of Boots and Stuart White . It was later mixed by Tony Maserati and White at <unk> Studios in North Hollywood . The track was eventually mastered by Tom Coyne and Aya Merril in Sterling Sound in New York City . All instruments were provided by Boots , with additional drum programming by Hit @-@ Boy . 
