 = = Composition = = 
 " Haunted " is a two @-@ part song , consisting of " Ghost " and " Haunted " collectively running for a length of approximately six minutes . Its composition was described as ranging from contemporary R & B to " straight up experimentalism " . Mojo 's Priya Elan compared the song 's composition with works by English band The xx . The song features sexually explicit and frank lyrics in line with a prominent theme of the album about sexuality also present in other songs . Its instrumentation consists of " murky " keyboards and a " creeping " , pulsating bassline . Beyoncé sings over mournful piano stabs which are repeated along with drums and airy vocals along with a pounding club rhythm . 
 " Ghost " is an alt hip hop and dubstep song featuring Beyoncé rapping with recessed and reverbed vocals . The song contains ambient beats , bass and percussion and a poetic spoken word vocal with high loop . It was created by using a minimal approach and a falsetto vocal was applied along with various " warped , ghost @-@ ly " effects . " Ghost " opens with an audio recording of the singer winning a Sammy Davis Jr . Award in 1989 in Houston for a <unk> talent show . It continues with a person incorrectly pronouncing her name as " ' Bee <unk> ' [ sic ] Knowles " . According to Spin columnist Brandon Soderberg , the song begins with a " random , frustrating indignity from her youth into a full @-@ blown , racially loaded origin story " and also features expressions of her celebrity . Lyrically , Beyoncé makes a prediction about her album 's sales and offers commentary on record labels through a spoken word intro : " I don 't trust these record labels , I 'm <unk> ' " and later adds , " Soul not for sale / Probably won 't make no money off this / Oh well . " Speaking about the record industry , she sings about being bored with labels during the lines , " All the shit I do is boring / All these record labels ... boring " . The lyrics of the song also discuss the failure of taking risks in the music industry . She also expresses sadness for people having to work banal and monotonous jobs in the lines , " All these people on the planet / Workin ' nine to five just to stay alive / How come ? " . 
 Soderberg felt that the fast conversational vocal style adopted by the singer was reminiscent of rapper Kendrick Lamar . Anupa Mistry of the same publication felt that she borrowed Lamar 's " alien @-@ robot cadence and sings in a pinched choral croon " which she further compared with Bat for Lashes . Una Mullally of The Irish Times wrote that the singer 's " monotone " rapping is accompanied by " the flatness of the tone reflecting the repetition of labour " . Janice <unk> from HipHopDX compared the part where Beyoncé sings the line " oh well " with Kanye West 's " shrug [ s ] " . Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune found the same line to be sarcastic . Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine described her vocals during the line as half @-@ rapped and " half @-@ shrug [ ed ] as if directly countering Scheinman 's silver linings playbook " . Rob Sheffield from Rolling Stone felt that the singer confessed she got " bored " with the " popstar routine " in " Ghost " . 
 During the end , " Ghost " quickly transitions into " Haunted " which contains elements of hip hop and R & B music . Kitty Empire of The Observer described it as a dance @-@ pop track talking about " being haunted in love " . Instrumentally , it consists of percussion and an off @-@ kilter club beat which was compared with Jacques Greene and Burial . Its sound is operatic and the lyrics <unk> , with piano chords and various rhythmic effects , such as foot @-@ tapping . Lyrically , it talks about desire , with Ryan Dennehy from AbsolutePunk noting it was about " frank sexual desires " . The Village Voice 's Brittany Spanos felt the song was discussing lingering memories of the past . Trent Wolbe of The Verge compared the sound of " Haunted " with music by bands The Knife , Sade and Boards of Canada . Andrew Barker from Variety found a trance genre similar to Madonna 's Bedtime Stories . The song includes sexual lyrics that are reflected throughout the album , including , " The bedroom 's my runway / Slap me ! / I 'm pinned to the doorway / Kiss , bite , foreplay " and " My wicked tongue / Where will it be ? " set to " sonorous ... and chilly charged beats " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Haunted " was well received by music critics . Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph felt that the " modernist sonic approach is pushed to the fore " on " Ghost " . Spin 's Brandon <unk> felt that the line " nine @-@ to @-@ five " just to stay alive " was repeated " way too many times " . Anupa Mistry of the same publication described the song as " multi @-@ directional , mood @-@ shifting " . Cosmopolitan 's Alex Rees said the song is a " sharp critique of postmodern culture , except then all of a sudden there 's a bunch of nasty sex talk . " Mesfin Fekadu from the Associated Press described " Haunted " as a " gloomy " song . Writing for the website The 405 , editor White Caitlin felt the singer offered part of her insecurities and flaws through the song and " sheds slut @-@ shaming , the shackled role of uptight matriarch or calculated star " . Fact 's Chris Kelly described its composition as " foreboding " and found a " seductive " and " haunting " hook ; he further described the first part as " smoky ethereality " . Mojo 's Priya Elan felt that some of the lines were a " nihilistic streak " . In a review for The Quietus , Mof Gimmers described " Haunted " as a " perfect slice of vanguard @-@ pop " . Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune described it as a " two @-@ part dream " . Robert Leedham of the website Drowned in Sound felt that the album 's " confessional moments are when you connect with it the most " , exemplifying the statement with lyrics from " Haunted " . Andrew Hampp and Erika Ramirez of Billboard magazine felt that " Haunted " was one of the best songs on the album along with being " [ the ] most insightful [ one ] " . They concluded that while the song was " one of the album 's most staunchly non @-@ commercial moments , but endlessly listenable just the same " . Nick Catucci from Entertainment Weekly chose " Haunted " as one of the best songs from the album , describing it as a " moody , genre @-@ melding epic " and noting , " [ it ] treat [ s ] relationships with the same raw instinct that suffuses her sex songs " . AllMusic reviewer Andy Kellman also chose " Haunted " as one of the highlights on Beyoncé . Una Mullally of The Irish Times deemed " Haunted " the best song on the album and an indicator of the prominent minimalism throughout the whole record . 
 AbsolutePunk writer Ryan Dennehy remarked in his review that " ethereal echoes " of the singer 's voice " elevate it above just a post @-@ Weeknd , dark update to staid topics " . Philip Matusavage of musicOMH described the sound of " Ghost " as " sleek ambient " dubstep , adding that it sounded typical for the singer and served as a " Beyoncé manifesto " . He concluded his review by stating that if the references to disagreements Beyoncé talked about in the song were real , " the result proves to be the most sonically adventurous album of Beyoncé 's career . " Julia Leconte writing for Now praised Beyoncé 's vocals as " perfect " . Exclaim ! ' s Ryan B. Patrick felt that the song 's minimalistic sound allowed the singer to " ironically champion artistic integrity and proclaim her thoughts on the industry " . Chris Bosman from the website Consequence of Sound who felt that the song was the record 's " mood setter " and contained " ghostly vibes " , wrote that it " dabbles in R & Burial , Evian Christ 's drag @-@ influenced codeine hip @-@ hop , and Nothing Was the Same 's Xanax club rap " . He felt that during the lines " Slap me , I 'm pinned to the doorway / Kiss , bite , foreplay " , Beyoncé " slides " the last word , making the song sound " even less radio friendly " . Bosman further stated that " Haunted " along with " Partition " and " Mine " , " are confident enough to take one , two , three left turns while maintaining thematic cohesion . " The Guardian journalist Michael Cragg compared the song with works by Janelle Monae and described its sound as " doom @-@ laden " . Ryan E.C. Hamm from Under the Radar magazine felt that " It 's remarkable to hear a pop star at the height of her arena @-@ tour powers taking chances like ' Haunted , ' a dirge of a song that behaves more as spoken word until it 's ' Vogue ' -y breakdown " . 
 Having described the track as " eerie " , Jason Newman from Fuse added it was suitable for softcore pornography with the singer being " in her best coo " . He further described it as an erotic ballad and a " slow , creeping burn " , noting that it sounded like Trent Reznor remixing Madonna 's " Justify My Love " . Claire Lobenfeld from Complex magazine described it as Beyoncé 's version of " Justify My Love " . Joey Guerra from the Houston Chronicle described the song as " ominous " . Mike Wass from Idolator felt that the singer explored a new soundscape with " Haunted " with " minimal beats hover [ ing ] like fog " . Wass also praised Boots ' production and noted that the singer declared her artistic integrity with the lyrics . In a review of the song , Randall Roberts of the Los Angeles Times compared its break with Madonna 's work during Ray of Light with a chopped and screwed sound characteristic for Houston . Melissa Locker from Time magazine stated that the lyrics of the song were one of the " best <unk> ever " while also noting that they hinted at the singer " dabbling in fiction " . USA Today writer Elysa Gardner wrote that in " Haunted " along with another song on the album , " Jealous " , the singer " embodies success and privilege on the surface , but there is a sense that her contentment is fragile " . <unk> Lopez of the same publication stated that she seemed " surprisingly in touch with the 9 @-@ to @-@ 5 grind , echoing her own career frustration " . MTV News writer James Montgomery felt that Beyoncé showcased a " newfound sense of self " on the " cold , coital " song . Tim Finney of Complex magazine considered " Ghost " " a collision of opposites ... less a song than a transfixing eye @-@ hole glimpse into another , entirely separate world the singer could inhabit if she chose " . Deeming the song a " [ c ] <unk> mood piece " , Jody Rosen of Vulture noted a lack of a music hook . In the annual Pazz and Jop mass critics poll of the year 's best in music in 2013 , " Haunted " was ranked at number 228 . 
 = = Music videos = = 
 Music videos for both " Ghost " and " Haunted " were released on December 13 , 2013 through the iTunes Store on Beyoncé itself along with a clip for every other track on the album . Todd Tourso served as the creative director for both of the visuals as well as the rest of the album 's videos . On November 24 , 2014 the videos for " Ghost " and " Haunted " were uploaded to the singer 's Vevo account . 
 = = = " Ghost " = = = 
 The music video for " Ghost " was directed by Belgian director Pierre Debusschere . Beyoncé is seen wearing a swimsuit by <unk> with a nude mesh midsection and her look is also complete with red lips . While creating the video for " Pretty Hurts " , she sent a note to director Melina Matsoukas requesting from her to include footage from her childhood as the clip was meant to connect to the next one on the album , " Ghost " . The video <unk> with a close @-@ up shot of Beyoncé 's face lip @-@ syncing the song 's lyrics . Various shots of the singer with different outfits and placed at different sets are featured . Other scenes show a dancer with his whole body covered in a white clothing . 
 Writing for MTV , John Walker wrote that Beyoncé " serves multiple levels of Martha Graham realness " in the video for " Ghost " . Lindsey Weber from the website Vulture compared the dancer seen in the video with a " <unk> " one from Yeezus . Neil McCormick of The Daily Telegraph felt that the singer looked " perfect " in a bikini in the song 's music video . Insanul Ahmed of Complex praised her look as " sexy " . A writer from The New York Times described the singer 's look in the video as " minimalist " . Brent DiCrescenzo of the magazine Time Out called the video a " Cover Girl ad with full @-@ body condoms " . Whitney Phaneuf of the website HitFix compared it with Comme des Garçons and found a " deadpan expression of a model " . Michelle Collins from Vanity Fair wrote in her review that the video was " jarring as it is soul @-@ crushing " . Jody Rosen from Vulture felt that the clip " has its moments , mostly involving billowing fabric " . Michael Zelenko from The Fader praised the director 's work on the video and remarked it included " stark portraits of a blase Beyonce , slithering , perching and dancing against black and white backgrounds " . While reviewing the album , Emily Mackay of NME talked about the video for " Ghost " , 
 " Some joyous shagging songs , though , are paltry excitement beside that of seeing an artist of such fame , long held as iconic without enough genuinely exciting music to back it up , reach her full throttle of awesomeness . The video for ' Ghost ' sums it up best , Beyonce glaring and writhing defiantly as she speak @-@ sings ' I 'm climbing up the wall ’ cause all the shit I hear is boring / All the shit I do is boring / All these record labels boring ' . Let 's hope Beyonce keeps finding new ways to amuse herself – there could be some very interesting times ahead . " 
 = = = " Haunted " = = = 
 = = = = Background = = = = 
 The music video for " Haunted " was directed by Swedish film and music video director Jonas Åkerlund and styled by <unk> Yen and B. Åkerlend . It was shot using four cameras and in a period of two days . On November 15 , 2013 , Popjustice reported that one of the actors who was featured in the video , J @-@ Hustle , shared a picture on his Twitter account while being on a five @-@ day set for the filming . He added that a song with " a slow vibe " was played in the background during the shooting and that its potential name was " Ghost Haunted " . Beyoncé first discussed about the video with Åkerlend during a concert she had in Stockholm in 2013 . Having invited him for the performance , the singer played several songs for the director afterwards and the pair went on to exchange several ideas about its concept . During an interview with Vulture , Åkerlend talked about the process , " It was not like a solid plan of ' This is what I think we should do . ' It was a pretty long process . And she was traveling and touring , so we had time to bounce ideas back and forth , figure out what the best vision was . And meanwhile , she was shooting all these other videos and I wasn 't really involved in what those other ideas were . " He noted that several ideas of the video which were initially conceived were similar with " other videos that people were working on " . Beyoncé conceived some of the initial ideas behind the looks and the scenarios for many of the rooms which were eventually shot . He also explained that the video contained many sexually explicit scenes and ideas when initially shot . However , he felt that the team managed to balance between the singer 's look , her performance and a strong idea along with several other things . Åkerlund further noted that its concept remained largely unchanged as none of the big ideas were excluded . Beyoncé 's look remained largely the same as the director pictured it before the filming of the video had started . 
 On December 2 , 2014 , a behind @-@ the @-@ scenes video consisting of footage from the making of the video for " Haunted " and " Superpower " with commentary by Jonas Åkerlund was released online . In the clip , he explained how both videos were slightly different compared to the singer 's previous work as they contained less choreography . He went on saying the video for " Haunted " had a " cinematic " and " surreal " tone inspired by its music , further comparing it with a score for a movie . He concluded that the team had " all the elements to create something special " 
 = = = = Synopsis = = = = 
 The video opens with a three @-@ second film countdown and proceeds with shots of several empty rooms and televisions in a big mansion . Most of the scenes were shot at the Villa de Leon . Beyoncé is seen driving a car and eventually arriving at the mansion while a song is played in the background . She enters inside the building with two <unk> embellished with the letter " B " and throws her coat on the ground while a servant is seen lighting a cigarette she had previously taken from her hair . He hands her a key and the singer is seen climbing up the stairs . As she arrives in the hallway on the second floor , the song starts playing in the background and Beyoncé starts a journey , looking from room to room as she goes forward in the corridor . 
 In the various rooms , she meets men wearing vest tops with their faces painted white with black eyes staring at her as she passes down the corridor . Later she meets other people in leather and masks , before being surrounded by a troop of lace @-@ clad dancers . One shot shows a man in colourful clothes and leopard print <unk> surrounded by bubbles in a bathtub . Another room contains a family of four mannequins in a 1960s @-@ styled kitchen , preparing for a plastic @-@ looking meal . A bare African @-@ American is seen dancing and painting herself with a large brush while being almost naked . She is also seen with her legs spread around a TV screen and Beyoncé is seen on it , singing the song . During one scene , Beyoncé performs a dance choreography on a couch along with several other female dancers . Throughout the video , she is seen wearing a tuxedo with a tie , a white fur jacket and platform heels designed by Saint Laurent . The black @-@ and @-@ white jumpsuit she wears is designed by Russian designer <unk> <unk> . Her look is further complete with dark make @-@ up around the eyes and red lipstick while her hair is marcelled and blonde . 
 = = = = Reception = = = = 
 Anupa Mistry from Spin wrote that the location where the video was filmed was filled with " freaks and weirdos " in order to channel Madonna during the 1990s in a better way . Lauren Cochrane of The Guardian wrote in her review of the video that it was a " homage " to Madonna with the suit and <unk> wave Beyoncé had . She added that anyone who watched the video for " Justify My Love " , " knows that a hotel corridor is an excellent place to film a video " and went on to praise Beyoncé 's looks and outfits . Kitty Empire of The Observer stated , " Less originally , the high @-@ concept Haunted video finds Beyoncé in a posh hotel populated by sexually motivated freaks , with many shades of Madonna invoked . " Bronwyn Barnes of Entertainment Weekly found similarities with the singer 's look and Madonna 's . 
 Whitney Phaneuf writing for the website HitFix felt that the video was a fit for the song 's industrial sound and described the singer 's look as " goth @-@ glam " . She concluded the scenes are quickly cut throughout the video , " never culminating in a linear narrative and forcing the viewer to fill in the blanks " . Sharing what he perceived to be " key " moments in each of the seventeen music videos , Walker of MTV identified one for " Haunted " where Beyoncé " begins to crack under the pressures of her iconic status " . Jon Dolan of Rolling Stone described the video for the song as the " [ c ] <unk> " on the album . A writer from The New York Times focused on the singer 's look in the video , saying that she portrayed a fashionista . Randal Roberts of Los Angeles Times also provided a positive review for her " stunning " look while smoking a cigarette . Brent DiCrescenzo of Time Out described the video as " Stanley Kubrick meets Robert Palmer " . Michelle Collins of Vanity Fair noted the scary atmosphere of the video and described the singer 's look as " straight @-@ up 1920s glamour " with a hair styled similar to Josephine Baker . Collins went on to compare it with the opening credits of American Horror Story and found " [ n ] <unk> images strung together in one very long , very creepy sequence of Beyoncé looking for her hotel room " . 
 Andrew Hampp and Erika Ramirez from Billboard magazine compared the video with Madonna 's work and American Horror Story , concluding " [ t ] he spine @-@ <unk> glam ... video for this track is worth Beyoncé 's case for making this a simultaneous visual @-@ and @-@ audio experience alone " . Describing the video as " scary " , Lindsay Weber from Vulture further called it the singer 's best impression of American Horror Story . Jason Newman from the website Fuse described the video as " equally frightening [ as the song ] ; part Korean horror film , part Lynchian psychosexual fantasy . " The Fader editor Michael Zelenko noted the clip presented a classic story where an " innocent guest [ is ] caught in ghost @-@ infested hotel " . Insanul Ahmed of Complex described the visual as " creepy " . ABC News journalist Michael Rothman compared the video 's opening with horror movies and The Ring in particular and went on to praise it overally as Beyoncé 's " best yet " . Trent Wolbe of The Verge criticized Åkerlund 's work on the album , feeling that his contributions " feel like boring opulence porn " , something he found on " Haunted " . 
 = = Live performances and usage in media = = 
 " Haunted " was performed as the opening song for Beyoncé 's first concert of the last European leg of The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour in Glasgow on February 20 , 2014 . The performance of the song featured backing dancers and strobing lights with the singer 's look being completed by a glittery gown . Digital Spy 's Robert Copsey felt that " Haunted " worked as a " brilliantly spooky opener " . David Pollock from The Independent found a " thundering bass containing a heavy dubstep influence " during the performance of the song . Mark Savage from BBC News felt that the concert included various " unparalleled " vocal styles and ranges , including the " hushed and sultry " " Haunted " . A professionally recorded live performance of the song from the tour aired on June 30 , 2014 , as the first episode of Beyonce : X10 , an HBO series documenting renditions of the song performed during The Mrs. Carter Show World Tour . Anna Silman from Vulture discussed the performance saying that it was full of " kaleidoscopic visuals and headache @-@ inducing strobe lights and fog to make you grateful you weren 't there for the live performance ( almost ) " . 
 The song was later also added to the set list of Beyoncé 's co @-@ headlining tour with Jay @-@ Z , the On the Run Tour . During the performance , her look was complete with a drop @-@ sleeve piece with black lace . While reviewing a concert of the show , Erica K. Landau of USA Today compared Beyoncé 's look to Stevie Nicks . She went on to deem the song a highlight of the performance praising her " creamy " vocals in contrast with the other songs on the set list . Similarly , Dan DeLuca writing for Philadelphia Media Network considered the song to be a showcase of her vocals . Leila Cobo of the magazine Billboard considered the song to be a highlight of the show , showcasing the singer 's " vocal prowess " and " her ability to connect as a singer and not just as a striking personality " . While reviewing another concert , Mike Wass of Idolator considered the performance a religious experience . In another concert review , Mikael Wood of the Los Angeles Times noted that the attention among the people in the crowd " drift [ ed ] noticeably during ' Haunted ' " resulting in a mild reception of the song 's performance . 
 At the 2014 MTV Video Music Awards , Beyoncé performed " Haunted " along with a medley of songs from her fifth studio album . It served as the second song of the set and it featured the singer dressed in a jeweled bodysuit . After concluding with " Mine " she announced " MTV , welcome to my world " and performed " Haunted " surrounded by smoke on stage . As she sang the song , Beyoncé was surrounded by dancers wearing bustiers , sleeves and face cages by fashion label <unk> . Nadeska Alexis of MTV News stated that the performance of the song was among the " most soul @-@ baring of the night " . 
 In March 2014 , " Haunted " was used during the screening of the film Fifty Shades of Grey at CinemaCon . On November 13 , 2014 , the song was used in the film 's second trailer . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Credits adopted from the album 's liner notes and the singer 's official website . 
 Song credits 
 " Ghost " video credits 
 " Haunted " video credits 
 = = Charts = = 
 The song debuted at number 99 on the French Singles Chart on November 22 , 2014 . The following week , which also marked its last week on the chart , it fell to the position of 171 . 
 = Battle of Fort Lahtzanit = 
 The Battle of Fort Lahtzanit took place on October 6 , 1973 , between the Egyptian Army and the Israel Defense Forces ( IDF ) . Part of the Egyptian @-@ initiated Operation Badr , the battle was one of the first of the Yom Kippur War , fought in and around Fort Lahtzanit , a fortification of the Bar Lev Line , located 19 kilometres ( 12 mi ) south of Port Fouad in the Sinai Peninsula . 
 Commencing the battle with an artillery barrage against the fort , the Egyptians surrounded and isolated the fort prior to assaulting it . Firing ramps intended for Israeli tanks were occupied by Egyptian infantry , who defeated several Israeli attempts to reinforce the fort with armor . The Egyptians managed to breach the defenses and swiftly capture the fort , and proceeded to clear the bunkers , utilizing flamethrower teams . By nighttime , the fort was completely under Egyptian control . 
 = = Background = = 
 Operation Badr , an Egyptian military operation , had the objective of crossing the Suez Canal and seizing the Bar Lev line of fortifications . Three of these fortifications , codenamed Budapest , Orkal and Lahtzanit , fell within the area of operations of the Port Said Military Sector . Commanded by Major General Omar Khaled , the sector was a military command independent of the Egyptian Second Field Army to the south . The military sector incorporated the towns of Port Said and Port Fouad on the Mediterranean Sea and surrounding areas . Two independent infantry brigades , the 30th and 135th , were under the military sector 's command along with some coast guard units . 
 The commander of Fort Lahtzanit was Lieutenant <unk> Malhov , who had served on the canal before . During the week leading up to the Yom Kippur War , Israeli patrols between Lahtzanit and Orkal discovered footprints coming from the canal and moving inwards , almost on a daily basis , indicating that the Egyptians were possibly sending men on long @-@ range intelligence missions , or to act as artillery observers . Two days before the outbreak of the war , Malhov expressed concern to his superior officer of the observations being made on the canal line , and that the forts would not stand a chance if they were attacked . 
 = = = Plan of attack = = = 
 The 30th Independent Infantry Brigade was tasked with capturing Fort Lahtzanit , located at the Kilometer 19 mark south of Port <unk> . Fort Lahtzanit was surrounded by minefields and barbed wire to a depth of 600 metres ( 2 @,@ 000 ft ) , and incorporated seven bunkers . The commander of the 30th Brigade , Colonel Mustafa el- ' Abassi , committed an infantry battalion to capture the Israeli fort . The battalion would cross at three different points , between an area 2 kilometres ( 1 @.@ 2 mi ) south and 1 @.@ 5 kilometres ( 0 @.@ 93 mi ) north of the fort . Initially the battalion would encircle the fort and cut it off from north , east and south , before the battalion 's assault units would move to attack the fort from several directions . ' Abassi was also tasked with overseeing the defense of the Port Said Sector , and thus deployed two battalions on the west bank to defend against an Israeli naval landing or canal @-@ crossing . Additionally , ' Abassi was reinforced with a Sa 'iqa company ( lit. lightning ; Egyptian commandos ) . Per planning the company would cross the canal south of the fort , then advance eastward to seize a crossroads located eight kilometers east of the canal , while simultaneously working to intercept enemy reserves headed towards the fort . 
 = = Battle = = 
 = = = Isolation = = = 
 At 1 : 55 p.m. , just before the start of the war , a reconnaissance force swam to the east bank of the Suez Canal , two kilometers south of Fort Lahtzanit , and laid two ropes across the canal to facilitate the crossing of friendly forces . At 2 : 05 p.m. , as Operation Badr began , an artillery barrage was initiated against the fort using just the 85 mm guns and B @-@ 10 recoilless rifles of the brigade 's anti @-@ tank company ; the use of high trajectory artillery guns was forbidden since a number of Egyptian aircraft were flying over this area . 
 The troops tasked with isolating Fort Lahtzanit began crossing the canal in dinghies at 2 : 15 p.m .. Ten minutes later they reached the east bank and proceeded to climb the sand wall . They succeeded in attracting Israeli fire , thereby facilitating the main assault force in its mission to attack the fort later on . The troops tasked with isolating the fort from the east reached and occupied a firing ramp prepared for tanks , and raised the Egyptian flag over it . This severely demoralized the Israeli soldiers inside Fort Lahtzanit . Soon after the Sa 'iqa company ( less one platoon ) arrived at the firing ramp as well . 
 A reserve of eight M48 Patton tanks were pushed forward to reinforce the fort . They came up against the eastern isolation force , which destroyed one of the tanks at a range of 300 metres ( 980 ft ) . Another tank broke through the Egyptian position and proceeded immediately north towards Fort Orkal , but was destroyed at Kilometer 14 by the northern isolation force . The remaining tanks retreated eastwards to Baluza . 
 = = = Attack = = = 
 At around 2 : 50 p.m. , the B @-@ 10 rifles on the west bank managed to open a breach in the barbed wire surrounding the fort , and also destroyed other significant targets , such as the observation equipment . Meanwhile , combat engineers were breaching further openings using Bangalore torpedoes , under heavy small arms fire and hand grenades . The battalion 's main assault force was crossing at the same time . The main assault force then funneled through the breaches and entered the Israeli trenches . The Israeli command in Northern Sinai kept receiving frantic calls for help from the fort 's radio operator , and gunfire could also be heard . The Egyptians captured the southern sector of the fort by 3 : 05 p.m .. Five minutes later , the assault force moved against the northern sector of the fort . Within fifteen minutes , the Egyptians were in control of the fort . The power generator inside the fort was destroyed , and all electricity and communication lines leading to the fort were severed . At 3 : 30 p.m. , Maj. Gen. Khaled was informed that Lahtzanit had been seized and that Israeli soldiers had been captured . The Israelis reported losing radio contact with the fort at around 4 : 00 p.m. 
 The Egyptians proceeded to clear the bunkers . They utilized flamethrower teams , which had a visible psychological impact on the fort 's garrison . At one point , the Egyptians , with the help of a wounded Israeli prisoner , managed to secure a bunker by convincing the panicked Israelis inside to come out and surrender . Soon after losing contact with the fort , the Israelis attempted to reach it once more . By this time , Malhov was dead . A group of tanks from Baluza advanced to Lahtzanit , but the Sa 'iqa company occupying the firing ramp managed to destroy two tanks , forcing the remainder to retreat . Another group of tanks and half @-@ tracks tried to break through the southern isolation force , but were ambushed and withdrew after losing a tank . 
 At 4 : 00 p.m. , two anti @-@ tank teams joined the Sa 'iqa company on the firing ramp . Both teams , along with the company , were ordered to advance eastward and seize the crossroads . At around 5 : 00 p.m. , the Israeli Air Force began attacking Egyptian forces in the fort and on the west bank of the canal . One group of four aircraft attempted to bomb the fort ; the first aircraft dropped its payload of seven bombs , then descended to a low altitude to escape anti @-@ aircraft fire . An anti @-@ air platoon at the Kilometer 17 mark soon shot down an Israeli aircraft ( either a Mirage III or an A @-@ 4 Skyhawk ) with a Strela 2 missile , destroying it . Between 6 : 00 and 7 : 00 p.m. all bunkers and troop shelters inside the fort were cleared , and the Egyptians transferred 26 Israeli prisoners to the west bank of the canal , and thereafter transferred them to Port Said for intelligence gathering . The Israelis concentrated heavy artillery fire against the fort , once they were sure it had been captured by the Egyptians . 
 At 9 : 30 p.m. , the Sa 'iqa company reported an Israeli armored column advancing towards the fort . Two Egyptian tanks on the west bank opened fire , forcing the Israeli tanks and armored vehicles to withdraw . The company continued eastwards , eventually reaching the crossroads , facing no resistance along the way . With the reinforcing anti @-@ tank teams , the company established defensive positions , and el- ' Abassi dispatched patrols to secure the roads leading to the fort . 
 = = Aftermath = = 
 Fort Lahtzanit was the first defensive fortification of the Bar Lev Line to be captured , over one hour after the start of the assault . Israeli casualties were 60 killed and 26 captured ; Egyptian losses were 23 killed , including one officer , and 7 wounded , including two officers . The most important factor leading to the capture of the fort was its isolation on all sides , and the speed with which the infantry reached and seized the firing ramp east of the fort before Israeli tanks occupied it . In contrast to the capture of Fort Lahtzanit , the attempt to capture Fort Orkal by the 135th Brigade went awry , and el- ' Abassi was forced to commit a reserve infantry company on the west bank to help seize the fort . The company crossed at 4 : 00 p.m. on October 6 , and the following day Fort Orkal was captured . 
 = Are You Experienced = 
 Are You Experienced is the debut studio album by English @-@ American rock band the Jimi Hendrix Experience . Released in 1967 , the LP was an immediate critical and commercial success , and it is widely regarded as one of the greatest debuts in the history of rock music . The album features Jimi Hendrix 's innovative approach to songwriting and electric guitar playing which soon established a new direction in psychedelic and hard rock music . 
 By mid @-@ 1966 , Hendrix was struggling to earn a living playing the R & B circuit as a backing guitarist . After being referred to Chas Chandler , who was leaving the Animals and interested in managing and producing artists , Hendrix was signed to a management and production contract with Chandler and ex @-@ Animals manager Michael Jeffery . Chandler brought Hendrix to London and began recruiting members for a band designed to showcase the guitarist 's talents , the Jimi Hendrix Experience . In late October , after having been rejected by Decca Records , the Experience signed with Track , a new label formed by the Who 's managers Kit Lambert and Chris Stamp . 
 Are You Experienced and its preceding singles were recorded over a five @-@ month period from late October 1966 through early April 1967 . The album was completed in sixteen recording sessions at three London locations , including De Lane Lea Studios , CBS , and Olympic . Released in the UK on May 12 , 1967 , Are You Experienced spent 33 weeks on the charts , peaking at number two . The album was issued in the US on August 23 by Reprise Records , where it reached number five on the Billboard 200 , remaining on the chart for 106 weeks , 27 of those in the Top 40 . The album also spent 70 weeks on the US Billboard R & B chart , where it peaked at # 10 . The US version contained some of Hendrix 's best known songs , including the Experience 's first three singles , which , though omitted from the British edition of the LP , were top ten hits in the UK : " Purple Haze " , " Hey Joe " , and " The Wind Cries Mary " . 
 In 2005 , Rolling Stone ranked Are You Experienced fifteenth on its list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time . They placed four songs from the album on their list of the 500 Greatest Songs of All Time : " Purple Haze " ( 17 ) , " Foxy Lady " ( 153 ) , " Hey Joe " ( 201 ) , and " The Wind Cries Mary " ( 379 ) . That same year , the record was one of 50 recordings chosen by the Library of Congress in recognition of its cultural significance to be added to the National Recording Registry . Writer and archivist Rueben Jackson of the Smithsonian Institution wrote : " it 's still a landmark recording because it is of the rock , R & B , blues ... musical tradition . It altered the syntax of the music ... in a way I compare to James Joyce 's Ulysses . " 
 = = Background = = 
 By May 1966 , Jimi Hendrix was struggling to earn a living playing the R & B circuit as a back @-@ up guitarist . During a performance at one of New York City 's most popular nightspots , the Cheetah Club , he was noticed by Linda Keith , the girlfriend of Rolling Stones guitarist Keith Richards . Soon afterward , Hendrix relocated to the city 's Greenwich Village and began a residency at the Cafe Wha ? fronting his own band , Jimmy James and the Blue Flames . Keith recommended Hendrix to Stones manager Andrew Loog Oldham and producer Seymour Stein . They failed to see Hendrix 's musical potential , and rejected him . She then referred him to Chas Chandler , who was leaving the Animals and interested in managing and producing artists . Chandler liked the Billy Roberts song " Hey Joe " , and was convinced he could create a hit single with the right artist . Impressed with Hendrix 's live version of the song with his band , he brought him to London on September 24 , 1966 , and signed him to a management and production contract with himself and ex @-@ Animals manager Michael Jeffery . 
 Immediately following Hendrix 's arrival in London , Chandler began recruiting members for a band designed to showcase the guitarist 's talents , the Jimi Hendrix Experience . Hendrix met the guitarist Noel Redding at an audition for the New Animals , where Redding 's knowledge of blues progressions impressed Hendrix . Chandler asked Redding if he wanted to play bass guitar in Hendrix 's band ; Redding agreed . Chandler then began looking for a drummer and soon after , he contacted Mitch Mitchell through a mutual friend . Mitchell , who had recently been fired from Georgie Fame and the Blue Flames , participated in a rehearsal with Redding and Hendrix where they bonded over their shared interest in rhythm and blues . When Chandler phoned Mitchell later that day to offer him the position , he readily accepted . In late October , after having been rejected by Decca Records , the Experience signed with Track , a new label formed by the Who 's managers Kit Lambert and Chris Stamp . 
 = = Recording = = 
 Are You Experienced and its preceding singles were recorded over a five @-@ month period from late October 1966 through early April 1967 . The album was completed in sixteen recording sessions at three London locations , including De Lane Lea Studios , CBS , and Olympic . Chandler booked many of the sessions at Olympic because the facility was acoustically superior and equipped with most of the latest technology , though it was still using four @-@ track recorders , whereas American studios were using eight @-@ track . 
 Chandler 's budget was limited , so in an effort to reduce expenditures he and Hendrix completed much of the album 's pre @-@ production work at their shared apartment . From the start , Chandler intentionally minimized the creative input of Mitchell and Redding . He later explained : " I wasn 't concerned that Mitch or Noel might feel that they weren 't having enough — or any — say ... I had been touring and recording in a band for years , and I 'd seen everything end as a compromise . Nobody ended up doing what they really wanted to do . I was not going to let that happen with Jimi . " When the Experience began studio rehearsals , Hendrix already had the chord sequences and tempos worked @-@ out for Mitchell , and Chandler would direct Redding 's bass parts . 
 = = = October to December 1966 = = = 
 Chandler and the Experience found time to record between performances in Europe . They began on October 23 , recording " Hey Joe " at De Lane Lea Studios , with Chandler as producer and Dave Siddle as engineer . The song featured backing vocals by the Breakaways . Soon after the session began , Chandler asked Hendrix to turn his guitar amplifier down , and an argument ensued . Chandler commented : " Jimi threw a tantrum because I wouldn 't let him play guitar loud enough ... He was playing a Marshall twin stack , and it was so loud in the studio that we were picking up various rattles and noises . " According to Chandler , Hendrix then threatened to leave England , stating : " If I can 't play as loud as I want , I might as well go back to New York . " Chandler , who had Hendrix 's immigration papers and passport in his back pocket , laid the documents on the mixing console and told Hendrix to " piss off " . Hendrix laughed and said : " All right , you called my bluff " , and they got back to work . Redding wrote in his diary that they completed two songs during the October 23 session , but the second one has never been positively identified . Author Sean Egan speculated that it might have been Howlin ' Wolf 's " Killing Floor " or Wilson Pickett 's " Land of a Thousand Dances " . Chandler decided that they should use an Experience original for the B @-@ side of the single , so he encouraged Hendrix to start writing ; he composed his first Experience song , " Stone Free " , the following day . Chandler , in an effort to minimize studio expenses , purchased rehearsal time at the Aberbach House in London . He abandoned this practice after realizing how quickly the group could learn songs while warming @-@ up in the studio . On November 2 , 1966 , the Experience returned to De Lane Lea to continue work on their first single . During the session , they recorded " Stone Free " and a demo version of " Can You See Me " . This marked the first time that the Experience recorded a song that was eventually included on the original UK release of the album . 
 Chandler had been dissatisfied with the sound quality at De Lane Lea , so he took the advice of Kit Lambert and booked time at CBS Studios . On December 13 , 1966 , after taking a five @-@ week break from recording while they performed in Europe , the Experience reconvened at CBS . Assisted by engineer Mike Ross , the band were especially productive during the session , recording instrumentation and vocals for " Foxy Lady " and basic instrumental tracks for " Love or Confusion " , " Can You See Me " , and " Third Stone from the Sun " . Ross recalled the impact of Hendrix 's Marshall stacks : " It was so loud you couldn 't stand in the studio ... I 'd never heard anything like it in my life . " When Ross asked Hendrix where he would like the microphone placed Hendrix replied : " Oh , man , just put a mic about twelve feet away on the other side of the studio . It 'll sound great . " Ross agreed , and with a Neumann U87 tube mic he recorded Hendrix 's guitar playing in a large room that , according to Ross , " was absolutely vital to the uniquely powerful Experience sound . " Ross noted that input from Mitchell and Redding was minimized , and he asserted that Chandler was clearly " the one in charge " of the sessions . The band played together live at CBS ; the lead and backup vocals were overdubbed . Despite his dwindling finances , Chandler encouraged the Experience to record numerous takes of a song , affording them the luxury of repeated attempts at a satisfactory recording . With a live instrument track as the foundation of the recordings , they eschewed the common practice of piecing together parts of several takes to make one continuous piece . After the December 13 recording session , the band made their television debut , on Britain 's Ready Steady Go ! 
 On December 15 , 1966 , finishing touches were made on the four rhythm tracks that were recorded the previous session . Although Chandler enjoyed working at CBS and he appreciated the high @-@ quality of the recordings they made there , he ended his professional connection with the studio after a disagreement between him and owner Jake Levy over his failure to make payment . Chandler had planned to pay Levy for the sessions after the album was completed , but Levy demanded payment upfront . Chandler viewed this as an unreasonable expectation , and he vowed that he would never again do business with CBS . The fifth and final song recorded there was " Red House " . As stereophonic sound was not yet popular among music fans , these recordings were all monaural mixes ; Ross explained : " back then ... mono was king . All the effort went into the mono . " He estimated that they spent no more than 30 minutes mixing any one track . 
 The first Experience single , with " Hey Joe " as the A @-@ side and " Stone Free " as the B @-@ side , was released in the UK on December 16 , 1966 . Track Records was not yet operational , so their distributor , Polydor Records , issued the single with their logo . It reached number six on the UK chart in early 1967 . On December 21 , 1966 , Chandler and the Experience returned to De Lane Lea with Dave Siddle as engineer . They recorded two alternate versions of " Red House " and began work on " Remember " ; both tracks were significantly re @-@ worked in April 1967 at Olympic Studios . 
 = = = January to April 1967 = = = 
 = = = = January = = = = 
 After a three @-@ week break from recording while they played gigs in England , including a December 29 appearance on Top of the Pops , the Experience reconvened at De Lane Lea on January 11 , 1967 . As " Hey Joe " was gaining chart momentum in the UK , they began working on their second single , which featured Hendrix 's second songwriting effort , " Purple Haze " , as its A @-@ side . The track presented a more complex arrangement than the band 's previous recordings , and required four hours of studio time to complete , which Chandler considered extravagant . The session was the first time that he and the group had experimented with guitar effects . Acoustic engineer Roger Mayer introduced Hendrix to the Octavia , an octave @-@ doubling effect pedal , in December 1966 , and he first recorded with the effect during the guitar solo of " Purple Haze " . When Track Records sent the master tapes for " Purple Haze " to Reprise for remastering , they wrote on the tape box : " Deliberate distortion . Do not correct . " 
 On January 11 , 1967 , the Experience worked on their second A @-@ side , " The Wind Cries Mary " , a song that marked their first use of overdubbing in lieu of retakes as a method of achieving a satisfactory track . Chandler explained : " There were five guitar overdubs all linking in together to sound like one guitar . " The song , which Redding and Mitchell had not yet heard before that day , was completed during the session . Chandler had decided that they should discard the rough version of " Third Stone from the Sun " from December 13 and re @-@ record the song ; they completed a basic track for the piece , but were unable to achieve a finished master . The group managed to produce an acceptable live recording of the basic track for " Fire " after seven takes . Next , they attempted Hendrix 's newly written ballad , " The Wind Cries Mary " . Without the benefit of rehearsals , the band recorded the song in one take , to which Hendrix added several guitar overdubs ; Chandler estimated that they spent approximately 20 minutes on the completed rhythm track . According to Chandler , by this time Redding and Mitchell had begun to complain about their limited input . Chandler explained that financial considerations influenced the creative dynamic : " [ They ] were sort of fighting the fact that they had no say during recording sessions ... they were starting to come up with suggestions , but ... We didn 't need to be arguing with Noel for ten minutes and Mitch for five ... We just couldn 't afford the time . " 
 Between January 12 and February 2 , 1967 , the Experience took a break from recording while they played 20 dates in England , including a second appearance on Top of the Pops , on January 18 . Chandler was dissatisfied with the sound quality of the January 11 recordings and frustrated by the large number of noise complaints that they had received from people living and working near De Lane Lea . He explained : " There was a bank above the studio ... and it was at the time when computers were just coming in ... we would play so loud that it would foul up the computers upstairs . " Brian Jones and Bill Wyman of the Rolling Stones encouraged Chandler to try Olympic Studios , which was considered the top independent London studio . Despite the growing chart success of their first single , Chandler 's money problems persisted . Olympic required advance payment for studio time , but Polydor had not yet released any funds to Track for disbursement . When Chandler went to Polydor asking for relief they responded by guaranteeing him a line of credit at Olympic . 
 = = = = February = = = = 
 With his budget concerns alleviated , Chandler booked time at Olympic , where on February 3 , 1967 , he and the Experience met sound engineer Eddie Kramer . During Kramer 's first session with the group , he deviated from the standard recording method that they had been using at CBS and De Lane Lea , which was to record bass and drums in mono on two tracks . He instead recorded Mitchell 's drums on two tracks in stereo , leaving the remaining two tracks available for Redding 's bass and rhythm guitar parts played by Hendrix . Kramer 's unorthodox approach , which was inspired by Hendrix 's complaints regarding the limitations of four @-@ track recordings , captured the live sound of the band using all four available tracks . Kramer and Chandler then pre @-@ mixed and reduced the first four tracks down to two , making two more tracks available for lead guitar overdubs and vocals . This method satisfied both Hendrix 's perfectionism and Chandler 's desire to reduce the number of takes required for a satisfactory rhythm track , thus minimizing their expenses . Another change instigated by Kramer was the use of a mixture of close and distant microphone placements when recording Hendrix 's guitar parts whereas , during previous sessions , the microphones had been placed about twelve feet away from Hendrix 's amplifiers . In addition to the usual choices , Kramer used Beyer M1 60 ribbon microphones , which were typically not used to record loud music . 
 During the February 3 , 1967 , session at Olympic , the Experience improved the January 11 master tape of " Purple Haze " by re @-@ recording the vocal and lead guitar parts , and adding another Octavia guitar overdub , which was sped @-@ up and panned at the end of the song . The group reconvened at Olympic on February 7 , continuing their work on " Purple Haze " by recording Hendrix 's rhythm guitar and vocal parts , as well as Redding 's background vocals . They spent time overdubbing ambient background sounds by playing tapes through a set of headphones that were held near a microphone , creating an echo effect as the headphones were moved closer ; they completed a final mix of " Purple Haze " the following day . During the session , they worked on the De Lane Lea master tape of " Fire " , replacing everything except Redding 's bass line , which he double @-@ tracked in an effort to accentuate the recording 's lower frequencies . Kramer placed the second bass line on a dedicated track and blended Redding 's original bass line with Mitchell 's newly recorded drum part . They also recorded Mitchell and Redding 's backing vocals . " Foxy Lady " was also reworked on February 8 ; Redding recorded a new bass line and Hendrix and Mitchell added overdubs to their existing parts . After recording backing vocals by Redding and lead vocals from Hendrix , Kramer prepared the song 's final mix . 
 Hendrix was not as confident a singer as he was a guitarist , and because he strongly disliked anyone watching him sing he asked the engineers at Olympic to construct a privacy barrier between him and the control room . This created problems when the studio lights were low , and the engineers were unable to see him , making his visual cues and prompts difficult to communicate . As was the case at De Lane Lea , Hendrix 's penchant for using multiple amplifiers at extreme volume drew criticism and complaints from the people living and working near to the studio . Olympic tape operator George Chkiantz recalled : " Sometimes , it got so loud we 'd turn the [ control booth ] monitors off and there was really very little difference . " Chkiantz noted that reactions to Hendrix 's music were not always positive : " I seem to recall a lot of musicians , a lot of people , saying , ' I can 't see what all the fuss is about myself ' , or ' I don 't know how you listen to all that noise ; I 'd be scared to work with him ' ... Chas was convinced that he was on to something . Not everyone was convinced that Chas was right . " Another issue that complicated the sessions were the large number of female fans who would show up at the studio wanting to watch the Experience record . As a habit , Hendrix would indiscriminately tell people where we would be on any given day , which led to large groups of fans following him everywhere . Olympic employees were tasked with keeping them under control and at a safe distance so as to not unduly burden the recording process . Chkiantz commented : " It was extraordinary . I worked with the Stones . I worked with the Beatles . I worked with Led Zeppelin . I was not as jumpy ; it was not as difficult as with Hendrix . It was something of an open house . Hendrix was not difficult at all , but I personally would have preferred not to have loads of girls lurking in the woodwork . " 
 On February 20 , 1967 , the Experience continued working on Are You Experienced , but scheduling conflicts at Olympic led Chandler to book time at De Lane Lea . During the session they recorded " I Don 't Live Today " , which featured a manual wah effect that predated the pedal unit . They managed to complete a working master by the end of the day , though Hendrix eventually recorded a new lead vocal at Olympic . 
 = = = = March and April = = = = 
 The Experience took a week break from recording while playing gigs in England , and returned to De Lane Lea on March 1 , 1967 , to attempt a studio recording of Bob Dylan 's " Like a Rolling Stone " . Although the song had long been a staple of the group 's live show , they failed to achieve an acceptable basic track , owing mostly to Mitchell 's inability to keep consistent time during the session . 
 The second Experience single , " Purple Haze " / " 51st Anniversary " , was released on March 1 . It entered the UK singles chart on the 23rd , peaking at number three . During that month , the band took another long break from recording while they played gigs in Belgium , Germany , and England , including appearances on the UK television show Dee Time and the BBC radio show Saturday Club . Scheduling conflicts at Olympic led Chandler to book a March 29 session at De Lane Lea . On this date the band worked on another newly written Hendrix composition , " Manic Depression " ; they finished a rough mix by the end of the session that was later rejected in favor of a re @-@ mix completed at Olympic . On April 3 , the Experience returned to Olympic , adding overdubs and completing final mixes on several unfinished masters . During the eight @-@ hour session , the band recorded three new songs , including " Highway Chile " , " May This Be Love " , and " Are You Experienced ? " . As the album 's title track featured backwards rhythm guitar , bass , and drums , replication of the beat caused Mitchell some consternation when attempting the song live . Chandler completed final mixes for " I Don 't Live Today " , " Are You Experienced ? " , and " May This Be Love " before the end of a session that Kramer described as " very organized . " 
 In an effort to free @-@ up space for Hendrix 's lead vocals , further reduction mixing was completed for " Are You Experienced ? " during a session at Olympic on April 4 , 1967 . With the title track complete , the Experience shifted their focus to the January 11 rough demo of " Third Stone from the Sun " . Chandler decided that they should discard the original De Lane Lea tape and record a new version of the song . During the session , Kramer prepared a reduction mix of " Highway Chile " , which made two tracks available for Hendrix 's lead guitar and vocal overdubs . Though stereo and mono mixes were completed for the song , Chandler preferred the mono version , which he paired with " The Wind Cries Mary " for release as the group 's third UK single . A reduction mix was prepared for " Love or Confusion " , and Hendrix took advantage of the newly vacant tracks by adding lead guitar and vocals . A final mix was completed before the end of the session . On April 5 , Chandler participated in a mastering session at Rye Muse Studios for " Highway Chile " and " The Wind Cries Mary " , during which preparations were made so that Track could begin manufacturing vinyls . On the 10th , he and the Experience returned to Olympic , spending the bulk of the session on editing dialogue segments for " Third Stone from the Sun " , which were then slowed down and mixed into the song . Kramer concentrated his efforts on the song 's complicated mix : " The song was like a watercolor painting ... each track was composed of four , fairly dense composite images . " 
 After the April 10 , 1967 , recording session , the Experience spent the next two weeks playing shows and attending promotional appearances in England , including a spot on the BBC television program Monday Monday and BBC2 's Late Night Line @-@ Up . Chandler , Hendrix , and Kramer completed the final mixing of Are You Experienced at Olympic by 3 a.m. on April 25 . Chandler had agreed to audition the finished LP for Polydor 's head of A & R , Horst <unk> , at 11 a.m. , so after a couple hours of sleep he prepared a suitable vinyl demo and traveled to Polydor . Chandler recalled : " As Horst started to put the needle on the record , I broke out in a cold sweat , thinking ... when he hears this , he 's going to order the men in white coats to take me away ... Horst played the first side through and didn 't say a word . Then he turned the disk over and played the other side . I started thinking about how I was going to talk my way out of this . At the end of the second side , he just sat there . Finally , he said , ' This is brilliant . This is the greatest thing I 've ever heard . ' " Horst immediately became an ardent supporter of the album and the band , championing the marketing and distribution of their debut LP . 
 = = Music and lyrics = = 
 According to Hendrix biographer Harry Shapiro , the music on Are You Experienced incorporates a variety of music genres from rhythm and blues to free jazz ; author Peter Doggett noted its " wide variety of styles " , while journalist Chris Welch said " each track has a different personality " . Musicologist Gilbert Chase asserted that the album " marked a high peak in hard rock " , and music critic Jim DeRogatis characterized the LP and its preceding singles as " raw , focused psychedelic rock " . A contemporary review published in Newsweek in October 1967 identified the influence of soul music on the Experience and the album . In 1989 , Hit Parader magazine ranked it number 35 in a list of the top 100 heavy metal albums . In 2006 , writer and archivist Rueben Jackson of the Smithsonian Institution wrote : " it 's still a landmark recording because it is of the rock , R & B , blues ... musical tradition . It altered the syntax of the music ... in a way I compare to , say , James Joyce 's Ulysses . " 
 Included on the UK edition of Are You Experienced were two tracks that represented the music Hendrix had played in the US before the formation of the Experience : the blues track " Red House " and the rhythm and blues song " Remember " . The album 's psychedelic title track , which author Sean Egan described as impressionistic , featured the post @-@ modern soundscapes of backwards guitar and drums that pre @-@ date scratching by 10 years . Musicologist Ritchie Unterberger considers the lyrics to " I Don 't Live Today " to be more at home in a gothic rock setting than in psychedelia , however ; he describes the music as being " played and sung with an ebullience that belies the darkness of the lyrics . " The song 's tribal rhythms served as a platform for Hendrix 's innovative guitar feedback improvisations . Whereas " Fire " is a funk and soul hybrid driven by Mitchell 's drumming , " May This Be Love " and " The Wind Cries Mary " are soft ballads that demonstrate Hendrix 's ability to write thoughtful lyrics and subtle melodies . The influence of raga rock can be heard in his sitar @-@ like guitar solo on " Love or Confusion " . " Can You See Me " is an uptempo rocker that features Hendrix 's double tracked vocals and his use of a one @-@ note bend in the style of Hank Marvin . Although " Hey Joe " is a folk song , and the only cover on the album , it would become one of Hendrix 's most requested tracks . 
 The UK edition of Are You Experienced opened with " Foxy Lady " , a track that , with the exception of a few overdubs , was recorded in one session at CBS . Hendrix wrote the song about Heather Taylor , a highly desirable London socialite who later married the Who 's Roger Daltrey . It begins with the fade @-@ in of an F note that Hendrix is bending @-@ up to F ♯ while applying generous finger vibrato . Using his guitar 's control knob , he slowly increases volume until an audio feedback loop develops and he slides into the song 's dominant F ♯ m7 chord . Hendrix used a combination of natural amplifier overdrive and fuzz box effects units to create the song 's razor @-@ sharp guitar tone . Its blues – inspired solo — his fourth since arriving in England — used pentatonic scales while showcasing his innovative approach to melody ; by exploiting the increased sustain created by overdriving his amplifiers , he moved seamlessly between the middle and high registers with a fluid , singing tone . While author Peter Doggett compared its slow beat to Memphis soul , David Stubbs described the track as a prototype for heavy metal bands such as Black Sabbath . 
 Although the lyrics to " Purple Haze " , which opened the US edition of Are You Experienced , are often misinterpreted as describing an acid trip , Hendrix explained : " [ It ] was all about a dream I had that I was walking under the sea . " He speculated that the dream may have been inspired by a science fiction story about a purple death ray . Redding stated that Hendrix had not yet taken LSD at the time of the song 's writing , which was after a gig in London on December 26 , 1966 . The first draft of the lyrics was exceedingly long , so Chandler and Hendrix reduced its length to something appropriate for mainstream pop music . It opens with a guitar / bass harmony in the interval of a tritone that was known as the diabolus in musica during the time of the Spanish Inquisition . The Catholic Church prohibited medieval composers of religious music from using the tritone , or flattened fifth , because as musicologist Dave Whitehill wrote : " to play it was like ringing Satan 's doorbell . " In the opinion of the author Ritchie Unterberger , the opening riff has " become a permanent part of rock 's vocabulary . " Whereas Rolling Stone described the song as the beginning of late @-@ 60s psychedelia , the authors Harry Shapiro and Caesar Glebbeek identified Hendrix 's use of R & B , funk , and soul elements in the track . 
 In 1967 , Hendrix told the journalist Keith Altham that " Third Stone from the Sun " is about a visiting space alien who , upon evaluation of the human species , decides that people are not fit to rule Earth , destroys their civilization , and places the planet in the care of chickens . The song is composed of two contrasting sections , one that features a jazzy guitar melody played in the style of Wes Montgomery over a straightforward rock tempo , and another that showcases Hendrix 's free @-@ form mixolydian mode guitar lines with a jazz beat . The track contains no proper vocals , instead using spoken words played at half @-@ speed to invoke images of interstellar space travel . In addition to jazz elements , Unterberger identified Hendrix 's use of surf music motifs in the track that are reminiscent of earlier works by the Ventures , a group from the Pacific Northwest that Hendrix would have heard during his childhood . 
 Hendrix described " Manic Depression " as " ugly times music " ; during a live performance he explained the meaning of the lyrics : " It 's a story about a cat wishing he could make love to music instead of the same old everyday woman . " The song is unusual in that its written in triple meter , or 3 / 4 time , which is the time signature commonly associated with a waltz , whereas most rock music is written in 4 / 4 . Although his delivery is rock oriented , Mitchell 's drumming on the track is reminiscent of Elvin Jones 's fluid jazz patterns . Musicologist Andy Aledort noted Hendrix 's " dramatic use of chromaticism " during the song 's opening bars and the " heavily <unk> unison bends " that presage what he described as one of Hendrix 's best guitar solos . 
 " The Wind Cries Mary " is the first ballad recorded by the Experience ; Hendrix wrote the lyrics after an argument with his girlfriend , Kathy Etchingham , whose middle name is Mary . She explained : " I smashed plates on the floor , [ and ] he swept them up . He locked me in the bathroom for absolutely ages and ... eventually Chas 's girlfriend Lotta let me out ... I ran out to get a taxi and was standing under the traffic lights , and I had red hair and a red dress . I went back after I 'd cooled down and he 'd already written it . " The song featured a chord progression inspired by Curtis Mayfield and lyrics that reflected Hendrix 's admiration of Bob Dylan . " Stone Free " expressed Hendrix 's desire to preserve his personal freedom , <unk> the concepts of conformity and long @-@ term relationships . He revisited this theme in " 51st Anniversary " and " Highway Chile " . Omitted from the American version of the album , " Red House " would not see an official release in US until the 1969 compilation , Smash Hits . An unusual feature of the recording is that it does not include a bass guitar track ; Redding instead played rhythm guitar with his equalization set strongly in favor of bass tones . It is Hendrix 's only original twelve @-@ bar blues . 
 = = Album cover = = 
 Chris Stamp designed the cover of the UK version of Are You Experienced , which featured a picture of Hendrix , Mitchell , and Redding by Bruce Fleming . The image shows Hendrix wearing a long dark cape while standing over Mitchell and Redding , striking what Egan described as a " Dracula @-@ esque pose " . Chandler contacted Fleming based on the photographer 's previous work with the Hollies , the Dave Clark Five , and the Animals . The photo shoot took place in February after Fleming had attended several recording sessions and Experience gigs . Chandler made a point of requesting that the band member 's faces be clearly visible in the photograph ; Fleming explained : " [ Album covers ] got much more esoteric as time went on , but to establish the artist we had to get their faces across so the kids would recognize them . " He took monochrome and color shots of the band ; Track selected an image from the latter group . Fleming had indicated which picture he preferred they use , marking the shot with a cross , but after the album 's release he realized that they had selected another , less desirable image . According to Fleming , the shot that he chose was " more sinister ; more interesting " . Stamp hired graphic artist Alan Aldridge to design the sleeve 's psychedelic lettering . Track inexplicably put only the album 's title on the cover , omitting the band 's name ; Polydor issued the release throughout Europe with Hendrix 's name printed at the top in matching font . The cover art 's combination of dull green and brown tones , juxtaposed with the jocular nature of the subject 's pose , created a weak overall visual impression ; Stamp commented : " It 's not a great cover at all . Hopefully , we made up for that in all the other covers . " 
 Hendrix disliked the UK cover of Are You Experienced , so arrangements were made for a photo shoot with graphic designer Karl Ferris . Hendrix wanted " something psychedelic " , so he requested Ferris because he appreciated the photographer 's sleeve @-@ work on the Hollies June 1967 release , Evolution . During a meeting with the band , Ferris told Hendrix that he wanted to hear more of their music from which to draw inspiration . They accommodated his request by allowing him to attend several sessions for their second album , Axis : Bold as Love . Ferris brought home tapes from the sessions , which along with Are You Experienced he listened to intently . His first impression of the music was that it was " so far out that it seemed to come from outer space " , which inspired him to develop a backstory about a " group travelling through space in a Biosphere on their way to bring their unworldly space music to earth . " With this concept in mind , he took color photographs of the band at Kew Gardens in London , using a fisheye lens which was then popular in Mod sub @-@ culture . Ferris used what Egan described as " an infrared technique of his own invention which combined color reversal with heat signature " , further enhancing the exotic nature of the image . Ferris was an experienced fashion photographer , and his interest in the finer details of his covers led him to choose the band 's wardrobe . After seeing Hendrix with his hair combed away from the scalp , Ferris requested that he wear it that way during the photo shoot . Hendrix 's girlfriend , Kathy Etchingham , trimmed his hair to improve its symmetry , forming an afro that became the basis of a homogenized Experience image . Redding and Mitchell liked Hendrix 's new hairstyle , so Ferris hired a hairdresser to style their hair in a similar fashion . After purchasing clothing for Redding and Mitchell at the boutiques on King 's Road — Hendrix wore clothes from his wardrobe , including a psychedelic jacket with a pair of eyes printed on the front which had been given to him by a fan — the Experience travelled to Kew Gardens . In an effort to focus on Hendrix 's hands , Ferris shot the band at a low angle . The daylight faded soon after their arrival at the garden , so they returned the following day for a second shoot , which was not needed ; the image selected for the US cover of Are You Experienced was the first shot taken the previous day . Ferris chose the cover 's yellow background and its surreal lettering , and he intended for a textured gatefold jacket that Reprise , as a cost @-@ saving measure , did not approve . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Europe = = = 
 The third Experience single , " The Wind Cries Mary " backed by " Highway Chile " , was released in the UK on May 5 , 1967 , while " Purple Haze " occupied the number three spot in the charts . The management 's decision to release the single while the previous one was still present in the UK charts was unorthodox , as was the choice of " The Wind Cries Mary " , which differed greatly from " Purple Haze " . Stamp recalled : " We did that on purpose ... We wanted musically to show who this person was . " Egan wrote : " It alerted the public to the fact that the so @-@ called Wild Man of Borneo was capable of songs of delicacy and sensitivity . " " The Wind Cries Mary " reached number six in the UK in May . 
 Track Records released Are You Experienced in the UK on May 12 , 1967 . It entered the charts on May 27 , where it spent 33 weeks , peaking at number two . It remained in the charts long enough that it was still present when the Experience released their second album , Axis : Bold as Love . The album , which was released in the UK without the first three singles , was prevented from reaching the top spot by the Beatles ' Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band . 
 = = = North America = = = 
 Although popular in Europe at the time , the Experience 's first US single , " Hey Joe " , failed to reach the Billboard Hot 100 chart upon its release on May 1 , 1967 . The group 's fortunes improved when Paul McCartney recommended them to the organizers of the Monterey Pop Festival . He insisted that the event would be incomplete without Hendrix , whom he called " an absolute ace on the guitar " , and he agreed to join the board of organizers on the condition that the Experience perform at the festival in mid @-@ June . During the climax of the festival , which was filmed by D. A. Pennebaker for the documentary Monterey Pop , Hendrix burned and smashed his guitar on stage for dramatic effect . 
 After the show @-@ stealing performance , Reprise Records agreed to distribute Are You Experienced . However , despite the increased awareness that the Experience 's performance at Monterey provided , the second Experience single , " Purple Haze " / " The Wind Cries Mary " , released in the US on August 16 , 1967 , stalled at number 65 on the Billboard Hot 100 . Although the single performed poorly in the US charts , its presence on underground FM radio stations , which were transitioning from easy listening and classical music formats to album cuts , significantly aided sales of the LP . Reprise allocated a $ 20 @,@ 000 promotional budget for the LP , which was an unprecedented amount for an unproven artist . Released in the US on August 23 by Reprise , Are You Experienced reached number five on the Billboard 200 . The album remained on Billboard 's album chart for 106 weeks , 27 of those in the Top 40 . The North American edition of Are You Experienced featured a new cover by Karl Ferris and a new track list , with Reprise omitting " Red House " , " Remember " , and " Can You See Me " , and including the first three A @-@ sides omitted from the UK release : " Hey Joe " , " Purple Haze " , and " The Wind Cries Mary " . 
 = = Reception and legacy = = 
 Music critics widely regard Are You Experienced as one of the greatest debut albums in the history of rock and roll . An immediate commercial success , within seven months of its release it had sold more than one million copies . Melody Maker praised the work 's artistic integrity and the Experience 's varied use of tempo . NME 's Keith Altham said it is " a brave effort by Hendrix to produce a musical form which is original and exciting " . However , not all contemporary writers gave the LP a favorable review ; in November 1967 , Rolling Stone 's Jon Landau wrote that although he considered Hendrix a " great guitarist and a brilliant arranger " , he disapproved of his singing and songwriting . He criticized the quality of the material and described the lyrics as inane : " Above all this record is unrelentingly violent , and lyrically , <unk> violent at that . " 
 Journalist Ritchie Unterberger described Are You Experienced as " one of the definitive albums of the psychedelic era . " In the opinion of author Chris Smith , the release was " a landmark in a summer of landmark albums " . Noe Goldwasser , the founding editor of Guitar World magazine , called it " a veritable textbook of what a musician can do with his instrument " and " the measure by which everything ... in rock and roll has been compared since . " According to music journalist Charles Shaar Murray , the album " completely changed notions of what a guitar could sound like , or indeed , what music could sound like " , while The Miami Herald credited Are You Experienced with introducing acid rock , classic rock , and the guitar aesthetic of heavy metal . Critic Robert Christgau called it a " bombshell debut " in his review for Blender and said its songs were innovative for how they utilized three @-@ minute pop structures as a medium for Hendrix 's unprecedentedly heavy and turbulent guitar and loud , powerful hooks , which greatly appealed to young listeners . 
 Mojo magazine listed Are You Experienced as the greatest guitar album of all time . Rolling Stone called the double @-@ platinum LP Hendrix 's " epochal debut " , and they ranked it number fifteen on their list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time , noting his " exploitation of amp howl " , and characterizing his guitar playing as " incendiary ... historic in itself " . They ranked it as the number three debut album of all time , crediting it as the LP " that established the transcendent promise of psychedelia " , stating : " Every idea we have of the guitarist as groundbreaking individual artist comes from this record . " They placed four songs from the album on their list of the 500 Greatest Songs of All Time : " Purple Haze " ( 17 ) , " Foxy Lady " ( 153 ) , " Hey Joe " ( 201 ) , and " The Wind Cries Mary " ( 379 ) . In 2005 , Are You Experienced was one of 50 recordings chosen by the Library of Congress to be added to the National Recording Registry , which selects recordings annually that are " culturally , historically , or aesthetically significant " . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Since the first release of Are You Experienced in 1967 , there have been six distinct versions of the track listing . As of 1997 , compact disc editions in the US and UK feature 17 tracks , including all songs that appeared on either the original UK / international edition of the album , or the original North American edition , or the Experience 's first three singles ( Stone Free , 51st Anniversary , and Highway Chile ) . 
 = = = Original UK and international edition = = = 
 All songs written and composed by Jimi Hendrix . 
 = = = Original North American edition = = = 
 All songs written and composed by Jimi Hendrix except where noted . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 Jimi Hendrix — vocals , guitars 
 Noel Redding — bass ; backing vocals on " Foxy Lady , " " Fire , " and " Purple Haze " 
 Mitch Mitchell — drums ; backing vocals on " I Don 't Live Today " and " Stone Free " 
 = = = Additional personnel = = = 
 The Breakaways — backing vocals on " Hey Joe " 
 Chas Chandler — producer 
 Dave Siddle — engineering on " Manic Depression , " " Can You See Me , " " Love or Confusion , " " I Don 't Live Today , " " Fire , " " Remember , " " Hey Joe , " " Stone Free , " " Purple Haze , " " 51st Anniversary , " and " The Wind Cries Mary " 
 Eddie Kramer — engineering on " The Wind Cries Mary , " " Are You Experienced ? , " and " Red House " ; additional engineering on " Love or Confusion , " " Fire , " " Third Stone from the Sun , " and " Highway Chile " 
 Mike Ross — engineering on " Foxy Lady , " " Red House , " and " Third Stone from the Sun " 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = The Simpsons 138th Episode Spectacular = 
 " The Simpsons 138th Episode Spectacular " is the tenth episode of The Simpsons ' seventh season . It originally aired on the Fox network in the United States on December 3 , 1995 . As the title suggests , it is the 138th episode and the third clip show episode of The Simpsons after " So It 's Come to This : A Simpsons Clip Show " and " Another Simpsons Clip Show " . While the " 138th Episode Spectacular " compiles sequences from episodes throughout the entire Simpsons series like the previous two , it also shows clips from the original Simpsons shorts from The Tracey Ullman Show and other previously unaired material . Like the Halloween specials , the episode is considered non @-@ canon and falls outside of the show 's regular continuity . 
 The " 138th Episode Spectacular " was written by Jon Vitti and directed by David Silverman , and is a parody of the common practice among live @-@ action series to produce clip shows . It has received positive reviews , and was one of the most watched episodes of the season with a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 5 . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 Troy McClure hosts this episode , which highlights individual scenes and sequences from throughout the show and offers never @-@ before @-@ seen outtakes . McClure starts the episode by showing a brief presentation of how The Simpsons series was conceived by Matt Groening , James L. Brooks , and Sam Simon . He goes on to present some clips of the original shorts that aired on The Tracey Ullman Show , including the first one , " Good Night " , in its entirety . Next , a presumed commercial break is introduced with a trivia question about the message that appears when Maggie Simpson is scanned by the cash register during the show 's opening sequence ; the answer is revealed ( falsely ) to be " <unk> . " The show then returns to McClure , who responds to questions from fan mail by showing clips that contain the answers . The letters include questions on Homer 's growing stupidity , how the cast and crew can create an episode per week , and hints of Waylon Smithers ' homosexuality . 
 Another commercial break is then introduced with a trivia question , this time concerning which two popular characters have died within the past year ; the answer is revealed to be Bleeding Gums Murphy and Dr. Marvin Monroe , although neither of them were ever popular ( and the latter was not actually dead , as revealed in " <unk> of a Mad Housewife " ) . McClure then presents deleted scenes from Simpsons episodes , " Krusty Gets Kancelled " , " $ pringfield ( Or , How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love Legalized Gambling ) " , " Mother Simpson " , " Treehouse of Horror IV " , " Homer and Apu " , and " Burns ' Heir " . 
 McClure also reveals that alternate endings to part two of " Who Shot Mr. Burns ? " were created to prevent the staff on The Simpsons from spoiling the mystery that " all of America was trying to solve [ ... ] this past summer " . These alternate endings , most of which consist of random characters shooting Mr. Burns , conclude with a more elaborate ending in which Smithers is revealed to be the assailant . Troy McClure ends the episode by showing a montage of " hardcore nudity " ( scenes of The Simpsons characters naked ) , set to the KC and the Sunshine Band song " ( Shake , Shake , Shake ) Shake Your Booty " . 
 = = Production = = 
 As the title suggests , " The Simpsons 138th Episode Spectacular " is the 138th episode of The Simpsons , although it is the 155th episode when placed in production order . It is the third Simpsons clip show , after " So It 's Come to This : A Simpsons Clip Show " and " Another Simpsons Clip Show " . It was written by Jon Vitti , who used the pseudonym " Penny Wise " in the closing credits because he did not want to be credited for writing a clip show . The episode was directed by David Silverman , who also did not want to be credited , and used the pseudonym " Pound Foolish " in the closing credits . 
 During the early years of the show , Fox network officials forced the Simpsons staff to produce clip shows in order to save money . Originally , the producers were ordered to produce one clip show per season in order to meet episode limits imposed by the network . Fox network officials reasoned that clip shows could be produced at half the cost of a normal episode , but syndication rights could be sold at full price . The staff , however , felt such a large number of clip shows would alienate fans of the series . 
 Former show runner Bill Oakley thought the episode was one of the better clip shows of The Simpsons , because it had more original and interesting material than the others . Oakley enjoyed showing deleted scenes from previous episodes and the Simpsons shorts , and particularly enjoyed the montage of couch gags at the beginning of the episode . The staff tried to entertain themselves while producing the clip show , and Oakley said by having the only actor be Phil Hartman as Troy McClure , it was " guaranteed to be fun " . 
 One of the clips shown in the episode comes from the season four episode " Marge Gets a Job " , in which Smithers has a dream that he is sleeping and Mr. Burns flies through a window into his room . The sequence shows Burns flying towards a happy @-@ looking Smithers . The original clip went on for a few seconds longer , but had to be trimmed down in order to remove portions that showed " Mr. Burns land [ ing ] in a particular position on Smithers anatomy " . There were also issues with " the lump in his bed " , which the animators said they had drawn as his knee , but the censors had mistakenly believed was an erection . 
 A deleted scene from the season five episode " Burns ' Heir " is also shown , in which a robotic Richard Simmons dances outside Burns 's mansion to the 1976 song " ( Shake , Shake , Shake ) Shake Your Booty " . It was cut from " Burns ' Heir " because the writers did not think it was funny , nor did it do well with a test audience , although Oakley thought the animation was terrific . To the production staff 's surprise , the scene would make the audience " erupt with laughter " when screened at animation conventions and college presentations , so they decided to insert it in this episode . 
 The montage of nude scenes over the ending credits includes the original animation of Homer and Marge <unk> from Grampa vs. Sexual Inadequacy , which was dropped from that episode and reanimated after Fox censors thought it was too explicit . 
 Due to the amount of interest in the ending of the " Who Shot Mr. Burns ? " episode , David Mirkin wrote several " terrible endings " and recorded several alternate endings with Harry Shearer serving as the only voice actor . Mirkin 's original intention was to fool the production staff and also leak the endings to various media outlets ; much to his surprise , Mirkin failed to successfully fool the staff . Several endings were animated that showed various characters , such as Barney , Moe , and Apu , shooting Mr. Burns , and were presented as part of this episode . 
 = = = Referenced clips = = = 
 During the opening credits the episode is advertised as having " twenty @-@ three percent new footage " , while the rest are clips taken from previous episodes . The five shorts used in this episode are " Good Night " , which was featured in its entirety , and portions of " The Perfect Crime " , " Space Patrol " , " World War III " , and " <unk> " . Some parts of the episode contain montages of only a few seconds @-@ long clips , such as those referring to Homer 's increased stupidity ( " Blood Feud " , " Flaming Moe 's " , " Marge vs. the Monorail " , " Deep Space Homer " , and " Treehouse of Horror V " ) , or those suggesting Smithers ' homosexuality ( " Rosebud " , " Dog of Death " , " Lisa vs. Malibu Stacy " , and " Marge Gets a Job " ) . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The entire setup of Troy McClure presenting the episode is a parody of the practice by live @-@ action series to produce clip shows in general , by celebrating a completely arbitrary milestone and by making exaggerated use of the conventions of traditional highlights shows , such as a grand introduction and relentlessly <unk> host . 
 The episode makes references to several films and television shows . The Tracey Ullman Show is referred to as " the nation 's showcase for psychiatrist jokes and musical comedy numbers " , while the outtakes right before the commercial breaks parodies television series such as Roseanne and Home Improvement ( which regularly aired similar outtakes ) . The deleted scene from " $ pringfield " in which Homer plays blackjack with James Bond parodies the 1967 film Casino Royale . The deleted scene from " Burns ' Heir " in which the robotic Richard Simmons is shot through the head and repairs itself parodies the liquid metal T @-@ 1000 in Terminator 2 : Judgment Day ( 1991 ) . The episode satirizes the Fox network in particular , as the two specials mentioned in the beginning , Alien Nose Job and Five Fabulous Weeks Of ' The Chevy Chase Show ' , are references to two actual programs that have aired on the network : The Chevy Chase Show ( 1993 ) and Alien Autopsy : Fact or Fiction ( 1995 ) . Several famous musical themes are used or parodied in the clips , such as when Homer sings the theme song from The Flintstones , and Johann Strauss II 's Blue Danube is heard in the background of one scene . The show 's producers are depicted as animated characters in the introduction : Groening is a bald Southern patriot who wields a gun wearing an eye patch , a reference to the promotional poster of the 1970 film Patton , and his own comic strip Life in Hell ; Brooks is seen as Rich Uncle Pennybags , the tycoon from Monopoly ; and Simon 's appearance resembles Howard Hughes . One of Smithers ' fantasies is a parody of Marilyn Monroe 's famous happy birthday song to President John F. Kennedy , while another one is an allusion to Peter Pan flying through the window . The book that Krusty tries to sell is a reference to Madonna 's book entitled Sex . " <unk> , " the message that appears on a cash register during the opening sequence reference in a trivia question , is a reference to the National Rifle Association . 
 = = Reception = = 
 The episode ranked among the ten most heavily viewed episodes of the seventh season . After its initial American airing , the episode received a Nielsen rating of 9 @.@ 5 , and a Nielsen rank of 48 . The episode has become study material for sociology courses at University of California , Berkeley , where it is used to " examine issues of the production and reception of cultural objects , in this case , a satirical cartoon show " , and to figure out what it is " trying to tell audiences about aspects primarily of American society , and , to a lesser extent , about other societies . " Some questions asked in the courses include : " What aspects of American society are being addressed in the episode ? What aspects of them are used to make the points ? How is the satire conveyed : through language ? Drawing ? Music ? Is the behavior of each character consistent with his / her character as developed over the years ? Can we identify elements of the historical / political context that the writers are satirizing ? What is the difference between satire and parody ? " Considered a spoof of television clip shows , the episode is seen drawing attention to prevailing televisual conventions and reminds viewers that The Simpsons itself participates actively in that same cultural legacy . 
 The authors of the book I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood , thought " the out @-@ takes are up to standard " and contains " a number of great self @-@ referential moments " . Simone Knox praised its visual style in her article Reading the <unk> Double @-@ <unk> of " The Simpsons " . The episode itself has been described by some critics as a kind of self @-@ imposed benchmark of the show itself , with writer Bill Keveney commenting , " the show picks its own benchmarks , as it did in 1995 " . Knox referred to it as not simply a clip show , " but a ‘ clip show ’ that looks at the series with a sense of hyper @-@ self @-@ consciousness about its own <unk> . " DVD Movie Guide 's Colin Jacobson said even though the episode is a clip show , it " <unk> up the concept with some interesting elements , and keeps repetitive material to a minimum . Instead , it offers lots of then @-@ unseen footage as well as old snippets from The Tracey Ullman Show . It still feels like a cheap way to crank out a new episode , but it ’ s one of the better clip shows you ’ ll see . " Jennifer Malkowski of DVD Verdict gave the episode a B + grade and commented , " apart from the creative material , what really makes this [ episode ] shine is the hilarious hosting by Troy McClure . " Dave Foster of DVD Times criticized the episode : " Despite some interesting concepts such as a bored Troy McClure presenting to much amusement and the presence of deleted scenes and Tracey Ullman shorts amongst the clips , this is an episode that tries hard to find a hook but never quite manages , assuring it 'll never make it into regular rotation on this viewer 's watch . " 
 = Busher Jackson = 
 Ralph Harvey " Busher " Jackson ( January 17 , 1911 – June 25 , 1966 ) was a Canadian professional ice hockey player . Jackson played 15 National Hockey League ( NHL ) seasons between 1929 and 1944 for the Toronto Maple Leafs , New York Americans and Boston Bruins . He was a member of the famed Kid Line with Joe Primeau and Charlie Conacher , one of the early NHL 's dominant scoring trios . Jackson led the league in scoring in 1931 – 32 and was member of Toronto 's 1932 Stanley Cup championship team . He was named to five NHL All @-@ Star Teams and played in three benefit all @-@ star games , including the Ace Bailey Benefit Game , the first all @-@ star game in NHL history . 
 Off the ice , Jackson was well known for his high @-@ spending lifestyle and drinking habit that prompted his trade from Toronto to New York in 1939 . He was remembered as one of hockey 's tragic figures following his retirement , as he struggled with alcoholism and financial difficulty . He was a figure of controversy within the Hockey Hall of Fame selection committee as Jackson 's lifestyle and personal problems were used to block his induction . He finally earned a place in the Hall of Fame in 1971 , five years after his death . Jackson is also an honoured member of Canada 's Sports Hall of Fame , inducted in 1975 . 
 = = Playing career = = 
 = = = Junior = = = 
 Jackson grew up in Toronto , playing his youth hockey at " Poverty Pond " in the city 's east side before playing at the <unk> Rink where he was discovered by Frank Selke , the assistant general manager of the Toronto Maple Leafs . Selke signed Jackson to a contract and assigned him to the Toronto Marlboros in the Ontario Hockey Association ( OHA ) ' s junior league for the 1927 – 28 season . Jackson scored four goals in four regular season games that season , and though the Marlboros were considered a favourite to win the Memorial Cup , the team was defeated in the Eastern final by the Ottawa Gunners . He returned to the team for the 1928 – 29 season , scoring 10 goals and 14 points in 9 regular season games . He then led the OHA playoffs with seven goals and nine points as the Marlboros won the OHA championship . Jackson was a leading offensive player for Toronto in the 1929 Memorial Cup playdowns , scoring 15 goals and 25 points in 13 games . The Marlboros reached the final , defeating the Elmwood Millionaires in a best @-@ of @-@ three series to win the franchise 's first Memorial Cup championship . 
 = = = Toronto Maple Leafs = = = 
 Joining the Maple Leafs for the 1929 – 30 season , 18 @-@ year @-@ old Jackson was the youngest player in the National Hockey League ( NHL ) . In his league debut , against the Montreal Canadiens , Jackson knocked over his idol Howie Morenz with a bodycheck . Assessing the youngster 's potential following the hit , Morenz offered , " you 'll do " . Jackson appeared in 31 games for the Maple Leafs , scoring 12 goals and adding 6 assists . He missed some time due to injury , during which he earned his nickname from the team 's trainer , Tim Daly . According to Jackson : " Daly asked me to carry sticks for him . I told him I wasn 't a stick boy , I was a hockey player . So he said I was nothing but a fresh <unk> [ a term for someone who had just been called up from the minors ] and the name stuck . " 
 During his first season , Jackson was placed on a line with two other young players . Charlie Conacher , a teammate of his with the Marlboros , played right wing and Joe Primeau was their centre . The trio formed what became known as the " Kid Line " , one of the early NHL 's most famous scoring trios . Primeau was the playmaker whose passes set up both Conacher and Jackson 's goal @-@ scoring ability . 
 Following a 31 @-@ point season in 1930 – 31 , Jackson led the NHL in scoring with 53 points in 1931 – 32 . At 21 years , 3 months old , Jackson became the youngest scoring champion in NHL history , a record he would hold until broken by Wayne Gretzky in 1980 – 81 . Jackson 's 28 goals that season was the most he would score in his career , and he was named to the NHL 's First All @-@ Star Team for the first time of his career . He added five goals in the 1932 playoffs , including one of Toronto 's six in the deciding game of the 1932 Stanley Cup Final , a 6 – 4 victory over the New York Rangers that clinched Toronto 's first Stanley Cup championship since 1922 . 
 The Kid Line remained Toronto 's top offensive threat for several years ; Jackson , Conacher and Primeau were the team 's top three scorers for four consecutive seasons between 1932 and 1935 . Following his league @-@ leading season , Jackson led Toronto offensively in 1932 – 33 with 44 points . On November 20 , 1934 , Jackson set an NHL record when he became the first player in NHL history to score four goals in a period , notching four markers in the third period of a 5 – 2 victory over the St. Louis Eagles . The record has not been surpassed through 2012 , though eleven players have matched it . He was named to three additional All @-@ Star Teams during this time , placed on the second team in 1932 – 33 and on the first team in both 1933 – 34 and 1934 – 35 . Additionally , Jackson played in the Ace Bailey Benefit Game on February 14 , 1934 . Held in support of injured teammate Ace Bailey , it was the first all @-@ star game in NHL history . Jackson scored two goals for the Maple Leafs in a 7 – 3 victory over the NHL All @-@ Stars . 
 Following four consecutive 20 @-@ goal seasons , Jackson slipped to 11 goals in 1935 – 36 . The Kid Line was finally broken up . While they remain consistent offensive performers , they lacked defensive ability and opposing teams began to find success playing their own top scoring lines against the trio . Primeau subsequently retired in 1936 in favour of his business interests . Despite the break @-@ up , Jackson scored 21 goals and 40 points in 1936 – 37 to earn his fourth and final appearance on the First All @-@ Star Team . 
 Prior to the start of the 1937 – 38 season , Jackson played with the NHL All @-@ Stars in the Howie Morenz Memorial Game , the NHL 's second benefit all @-@ star contest . In regular league play , his offence entered a decline as he scored 34 points that season , then 27 in 1938 – 39 . Following the season , the Maple Leafs traded him to the New York Americans along with Jimmy Fowler , Murray Armstrong , Doc <unk> and Buzz Boll in exchange for Sweeney Schriner on May 18 , 1939 . The five @-@ for @-@ one deal was unprecedented in NHL history at that time . 
 = = = New York and Boston = = = 
 Prior to his first season in New York , Jackson played in his third benefit all @-@ star game , the Babe Siebert Memorial Game , on October 29 , 1939 . He represented the NHL All @-@ Stars in a 5 – 2 victory over the Montreal Canadiens . In NHL play , he posted 12 goals and 20 points for the Americans , then improved to 26 points in 1940 – 41 . He was unable to come to terms with team manager Red Dutton on a new contract for the 1941 – 42 season however , and did not join the team at the start of the season . The impasse lasted for half the season , until Dutton sold Jackson 's rights to the Boston Bruins for $ 7 @,@ 500 on January 4 , 1942 . 
 Joining the Bruins gave Jackson the opportunity to play alongside his younger brother Art . He played only 26 games that season due to his holdout , just over half of an NHL season of 48 games , scoring 12 points . Though he played the left wing throughout his career , the Bruins switched him part @-@ time to defence when they lost players to injury or the Second World War . He scored 34 points in 1942 – 43 , and his 19 goals was Jackson 's highest total in six seasons . The Bruins reached the 1943 Stanley Cup Final by defeating Montreal , but lost the series to the Detroit Red Wings in four straight games . Jackson played a final season in 1943 – 44 , after which he announced his retirement as a player following a 15 @-@ year career . 
 = = Personal life = = 
 A handsome man with even features , Jackson lived a lifestyle of a Hollywood actor during his playing career , spending money freely , driving fast cars and attending posh parties . Maple Leafs ' owner Conn Smythe unsuccessfully tried to convince Jackson to save his money for the future , even offering to match his player 's savings dollar for dollar . Jackson 's habits , particularly his drinking , ultimately played a role in his trade away from Toronto . Jackson 's lifestyle came crashing down following his retirement as a player as he no longer had the money to fund his pursuits . He unsuccessfully tried to overcome his alcoholism , lost two marriages to divorce , struggled to hold a job , and it was said that he could be found outside Maple Leaf Gardens trying to sell broken sticks of Maple Leaf players to try to make some money . He emerged as one of hockey 's tragic figures . 
 Jackson suffered a series of injuries and ailments in his later years . In 1958 , he broke his neck after falling down a flight of stairs . His recovery took 18 @-@ months and cost him mobility in his right hand . Two months after his release , Jackson returned to hospital with a bout of jaundice . He was hospitalized again in 1962 following an epileptic seizure . 
 As Jackson 's health failed , he became the focus of a controversy within the Hockey Hall of Fame selection committee . Though he was considered one of hockey 's greatest left wingers , and he was famed for his offensive , attacking style and backhand shot , Jackson 's personal problems led Conn Smythe to blacklist him from entry into the Hall . Though Primeau and Conacher had gained induction , Jackson died on June 25 , 1966 , without being given the same honour . It would be another five years until the remainder of the selection committee finally overruled Smythe and posthumously inducted Jackson into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1971 . Smythe quit the committee in protest , while Jackson 's son Kim accepted the honour on his father 's behalf . In 1975 , he was inducted into Canada 's Sports Hall of Fame , and The Hockey News ranked him 55th in its 1997 book , The Top 100 NHL players of All @-@ Time . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 = Saw 3D = 
 Saw 3D ( also known as Saw : The Final Chapter , or simply Saw VII ) is a 2010 American 3D horror film directed by Kevin Greutert , written by Patrick Melton and Marcus Dunstan , and starring Tobin Bell , Costas Mandylor , Betsy Russell , Sean Patrick <unk> and Cary Elwes . It is the seventh ( and originally intended final ) installment of the Saw franchise , and the only film in the series to be in 3D . 
 The film focuses on a man who falsely claims to be a Jigsaw survivor , becoming a local celebrity . However , he soon finds himself part of a real Jigsaw game where he must ultimately save his wife . Meanwhile , Jill Tuck reveals to an internal affairs officer that rogue Detective Mark Hoffman is the man responsible for the recent Jigsaw games , and Hoffman hunts her down . 
 An eighth installment was planned , but the decrease in the box office performance for Saw VI compared to previous installments led to Saw 3D being the final planned film in the series , and the plot concept for Saw VIII being incorporated into Saw 3D . Saw V director David Hackl was to direct the film , but two weeks before filming Lionsgate announced that Greutert , who directed the sixth film , would direct . Principal photography took place in Toronto , Ontario from February to April 2010 and was shot with the SI @-@ 3D digital camera system , as opposed to shooting with traditional cameras and later transferring to 3D in post @-@ production . 
 Saw 3D was originally scheduled to be released on October 22 , 2010 , but was pushed back a week to October 29 , 2010 in the United States and Canada ; it was released a day earlier in the United Kingdom and Australia . Saw 3D opened at number one making over $ 22 @.@ 5 million . 
 = = Plot = = 
 Two men , Brad and Ryan , awaken in a metropolitan storefront window , bound at the wrists to opposite sides of a <unk> with a circular saw in front of each of them . Their mutual lover , Dina , is suspended above a third saw . As the scene draws attention and police arrive , a puppet informs the men that they can kill each other or let Dina die . They initially fight each other , during which Brad is cut , but ultimately choose to allow Dina to die instead . 
 Matt Gibson , an internal affairs detective at Mark Hoffman 's precinct , is met by Jill Tuck , who incriminates Hoffman in exchange for protection and immunity from prosecution . Gibson , who has mistrusted Hoffman ever since Hoffman saved his life by gunning down a homeless man , agrees to her terms . Meanwhile , Hoffman abducts a skinhead gang - Dan , Evan , Jake and Kara - and places them in a trap that kills them all , leaving the reverse bear trap at the scene to incriminate Jill , who is put into protective custody . After a meeting of Jigsaw survivors , including Lawrence Gordon , who cauterized his leg on a steam pipe after escaping the bathroom and now uses a leg brace and cane , Hoffman abducts Bobby Dagen , a self @-@ help guru who achieved fame and fortune by falsifying his own survival story . He sends Gibson videos with cryptic clues to the game 's location , offering to end the games if Jill is given to him . 
 Dagen awakens in a cage in an asylum and is told that his wife Joyce will die if he doesn 't save her within one hour . Joyce is chained at the neck to a steel platform that gradually pulls her down as she watches Dagen 's progress . After he escapes the cage , which dangles over a floor of spikes , he begins searching for Joyce . Along the way , he finds Nina , his publicist ; Suzanne , his lawyer ; and Cale McNamara , his best friend and co @-@ conspirator . All three are in separate traps representing the three wise monkeys and are killed despite his efforts to save them . After he removes his upper wisdom teeth to obtain the combination for a security door , Dagen finds Joyce and is forced to reenact the trap he claimed to survive : he must drive hooks through his pectoral muscles and hoist himself up to the ceiling to deactivate her trap . He fails , and is forced to watch as a brazen bull capsule closes around Joyce and incinerates her . 
 Gibson eventually discovers the game 's location and sends a SWAT team , who are sealed in another room and killed by toxic gas . Simultaneously , he and two officers infiltrate Hoffman 's command center in the junkyard , where they find Dan 's corpse sat in front of several monitors connected to the police headquarters security cameras . He sees Hoffman brought into the morgue in a body bag and tries to warn Palmer , but is killed by an automatic turret gun along with his men . Hoffman kills Dr. Heffner , Palmer , and everyone else in his path to Jill , who briefly escapes before she is caught and knocked unconscious . He straps her to a chair and locks a reverse bear trap to her head ; she awakens as the timer starts and is killed when the trap activates , tearing apart her face . 
 After destroying his workshop , Hoffman is attacked and subdued by three pig @-@ masked figures , led by Gordon . Flashbacks show that John Kramer found him unconscious by the steam pipe and nursed him back to health , and Gordon has assisted him ever since . This was known only by Jill , who delivered a package to him at the hospital , a videotape in which Kramer asked him to watch over Jill and take action if anything happened to her . To this end , Gordon has Hoffman brought to the disused bathroom and shackled by the ankle to a pipe . He enters and tosses out of the bathroom the hacksaw he 'd used to sever his own foot , and then turns off the lights and seals the door , leaving Hoffman to die . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Development = = = 
 Variety reported in July 2009 that Lionsgate greenlit Saw VII and announced David Hackl would return to direct , his last film being Saw V. Producers Mark Burg and Oren Koules , and writers Patrick Melton and Marcus Dunstan also returned . Brian <unk> replaced series ' cinematographer David Armstrong . Pre @-@ production began on September 14 , 2009 . According to Melton , there were plans to title the film Saw : Endgame . Originally two sequels were planned after the sixth , but in December 2009 Melton stated in a podcast interview with the UK radio station Demon FM that Saw VII was the final installment and would address unanswered questions from previous Saw films , such as the fate of the first film 's protagonist Dr. Lawrence Gordon and other Jigsaw survivors from previous films , while bringing a final resolution to the series . The storyline for a Saw VIII was combined into Saw VII ; this decision was primarily due to Saw VI 's below average box office performance . On July 22 , 2010 in an interview with USA Today the producers confirmed that Saw VII will officially end the film series . Burg told Reuters that , " In every Saw movie , we left questions open and in Saw VII we answer every question the audience has ever had " . He added that , " even new viewers will be able to follow and get caught up to speed " . 
 In January 2010 , Kevin Greutert , who made his directorial debut with the sixth film , was about to begin work on Paramount 's Paranormal Activity 2 when Twisted Pictures suddenly dismissed Hackl and forced Greutert on the project by exercising a " contractual clause " in his contract , much to Greutert 's dismay . When Greutert arrived on set two weeks before filming began , he performed a " compressive re @-@ write " of the script . Melton explained that , " He has a lot of ideas , but it 's a bit hard and extreme to implement all of these ideas because sets have been built , people have been cast , props have been bought or created , and with the Saw films they are so specific in set design because of the traps . It becomes very problematic and difficult to change things a whole bunch right in the middle of it " . 
 = = = Casting = = = 
 Casting began in mid @-@ December 2009 . On February 22 , 2010 , Cary Elwes was listed on the Toronto Film & Television 's official list of personnel website for Saw 3D but on March 8 his name along with other cast members were removed from the list . The following month , Lionsgate confirmed his reprisal of the role of Lawrence Gordon , last seen in the first film . Dunstan and Melton said that Elwes filmed new scenes . The filmmakers wanted to bring Elwes back earlier , but Elwes wanted to wait until the last film . He described his character as having Stockholm syndrome . Chad Donella appeared in the film as Internal Affairs Detective Gibson , who was also Hoffman 's former partner . 
 Gabby West , who won the second season of Scream Queens , plays Kara in the film . Chester Bennington , the lead vocalist of the alternative rock band Linkin Park , has a role in the film playing Evan , a white power skinhead . Bennington met with an acting coach to prepare for his role . He said , " It was actually a little more difficult than I expected because it took a lot for me to figure out how to portray this guy and what exactly his motives were going to be throughout . I thought maybe I was overthinking it , and I met with this really great acting coach who helped me walk through and make sense of the , ' Motivation ' " . Devon Bostick was offered to reprise his role as Brent from Saw VI , but turned it down due to scheduling conflicts . 
 = = = Filming in 3D = = = 
 Saw 3D was shot entirely in RealD 3D using the SI @-@ 3D digital camera system ; rather than filming on set traditionally and later transferring the footage to 3D . Before choosing 3D , Burg and others viewed a minute of the original Saw film rendered in 3D and were pleased , which led to them choosing 3D for the seventh film . The sets and traps were designed to take advantage of 3D . To continue the fast pace of the previous films , the SI @-@ 3D cameras ' light weight allowed three @-@ quarters of film to be shot handheld . Saw 3D was Greutert 's first time directing a 3D film . He said in an interview with Popular Mechanics that composing a shot in 3D was tricky compared to 2D ; he explained , " If you 've got both cameras looking at a subject and there 's a very bright sheen on the side of the person 's arm that only one camera can see , there 's a good chance that when you look at a composite of the two images that sheen will not register in 3D space . It looks like a mistake . These things aren 't an issue at all in 2D but in 3D are obsessively problematic " . Given the cost of filming in 3D , Greutert said the budget was $ 17 million , the most expensive of the series . Principal photography began on February 8 , 2010 in Toronto , Ontario and wrapped on April 12 , 2010 . Filming took place mostly at Toronto 's Cinespace Film Studios . 
 When determining the style of 3D shooting they wanted to use , Burg felt that the audience would want several moments where objects move into the audience , comparing this to My Bloody Valentine 3D . He acknowledged that this method would be used , but expressed an interest in shooting from the victim 's perspective , similar to that of first @-@ person shooter video games being rendered in 3D . Dunstan added that " It adds a whole new layer of discipline and criteria to creating these moments . We 've had a very flat surface to try to get a reaction out of you . Now , we get to push out a bit and envelop the viewer , still maintaining the patterns that have worked and been successful , but also to raise it up a notch . " Commenting on the change to filming in 3D , Bell stated it would not affect his performance or methods of acting , noting that it would be an " interesting experience " . Mandylor called the 3D shoot " more tedious and longer " . Flannery described the 3D aspect as being " [ not ] shot in 3D so that you can , per se , see blood coming directly at you . It 's in 3D for the texture and the depth , for the architecture , to get a sense that you 're in the scene but there 's no ' we want to see blood coming at the lens ' it 's nothing like that . But I think we made a good movie . " Post @-@ production services were provided by Deluxe . 
 = = = Traps = = = 
 Filming of the trap scenes , which was done last , began in March . The film 's opening trap scene was filmed at Metro Hall in Toronto , Ontario , just outside Roy Thomson Hall , and included 400 extras . In the trap , the circular saw blades were actually real and functional , but safety precautions were taken for the actors . One actor that was in the trap , Jon Cor , told Demon FM that he had scars on his hands from the shackles , and said the other actors , Sebastian Pigott chipped his tooth and Anne Lee Greene lost the feeling in her feet and had to receive medical attention . 
 Producer Oren Koules told horror news website <unk> that there are eleven traps in the film , the most ever in the franchise . There is one " trap " scene in the film that producers would not allow in previous Saw films that they described as " too violent " , " too disgusting " , and " just wrong " . Melton later confirmed that was the " Garage Trap " , which involved a car and sets off a " chain reaction " with other characters . Gabby West was part of the trap . She told VH1 , " They molded my entire face , and basically my entire upper body after my belly button . They put layers and layers of different materials on you and you have two straws in your nose so you can breathe . It was so scary ! They put so much of it on , you can 't see and they put it in your ears so you can barely hear anything . That was part of the prep for the film , which was really cool , to have a dummy made of yourself . But scary . " Over 25 gallons of fake blood was used in the film , which was two and half times more than Saw II . 
 = = Music = = 
 The film 's score was composed by Charlie Clouser and released on iTunes through Evolution Music Partners on November 2 , 2010 . The Saw 3D soundtrack is " inspired by the film " and features music from rock bands including Dir En Grey , Boom Boom Satellites , Saliva , Krokus , Hinder , <unk> , My Darkest Days and Chester Bennington 's Dead By Sunrise . It was released through <unk> Independent Network ( SIN ) and Artists ' Addiction Records on October 26 , 2010 . The song " Life Won 't Wait " by Ozzy Osbourne was announced in the Production Notes , but was not actually played during the film 's end credits . 
 Track listing 
 = = Marketing = = 
 On July 8 , 2010 , in some press materials for San Diego Comic @-@ Con , the film was referred to as Saw 3D : The Final Chapter , which led to the media assuming it was the final name . The following day , Burg and Koules said that " The Final Chapter " was simply a tagline that had been misinterpreted as part of the title . Koules said that if they included the seventh Roman numeral followed by " 3D " ( Saw VII 3D ) , it would have been " cumbersome " and not made the impact they wanted . He explained , " It was such a process in 3D , so much hard work was put in . Saw VII 3D is too much . This is like a new movie . [ ... ] " 
 In the same interview , the producers addressed Saw 's presence at Comic @-@ Con 2010 in San Diego . They said that the footage that was going to be used for the convention could not get approved for the audience ; Koules explained , " It 's going to be different than what we 've done before , we 're going to be at Comic @-@ Con but we 're not in Comic @-@ Con " . " The Comic @-@ Con teaser trailer was released via IGN on July 22 , 2010 . The next day of the convention , the first eight minutes of the film were screened for the press and a few fans . 
 The trailer shown in the United Kingdom during a break from The Gadget Show was banned after a ten @-@ year @-@ old child complained that it was " distressing " and " inappropriately scheduled " . <unk> had cleared the trailer for 19 : 00 GMT , but did not actually air until 20 : 29 . In one scene of the trailer , people in a cinema become trapped to the seats by metal restraints with a hand coming through the screen pulling a person in . The Advertising Standards Authority said it was " likely to cause distress to young children " . In Massachusetts , a branch of Showcase Cinemas showed Saw 3D instead of the cartoon Megamind , which was being watched by a seven @-@ year @-@ old celebrating a birthday . It took several minutes before the cinema employees fixed the mistake . 
 = = Release = = 
 Saw 3D was distributed theatrically by Lionsgate in the United States and through Maple Pictures in Canada . The film was originally scheduled to be released on October 22 , 2010 , but in July 2010 , three months prior to release , the date was pushed back to October 29 . It also had preview screenings on October 28 , 2010 in 2 @,@ 000 locations . Since the release of Saw IV , each film has been released a day earlier in Australia and New Zealand ; Saw 3D continued the tradition in Australia , though the New Zealand release was not released until March 3 , 2011 . The film was initially rated NC @-@ 17 ( no children 17 and under admitted ) by the Motion Picture Association of America ( MPAA ) and had to be edited and re @-@ submitted six times to secure an R rating . In Australia , the Australian Classification Board gave a heavy R18 + ( restricted to 18 and over ) for " high impact violence , blood and gore " , whereas all previous Saw films were rated MA15 + ( with the exception of the director 's cut version of Saw V ) . 
 = = = Censorship in Germany = = = 
 Germany banned its showing as a whole because the Amtsgericht Tiergarten has noted that several scenes in the film violate the violence act § 131 StGB . Thereby , the film is banned in Germany . Private copies are still legal to own and personal use is not punishable ; however any public screening is a highly prohibited and punishable act . There is a censored " Keine <unk> / No youth admitted " version , but it has all the violent scenes cut out . Retailing this copy is still legal , since " KJ " rated films cannot be indexed / banned . 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Burg said in an interview with Bloomberg Television on October 25 , 2010 that the DVD will only be released in the 2D version . Lionsgate Home Entertainment released Saw 3D : The Final Chapter on January 25 , 2011 in three versions . The first is a standard DVD release consisting of the theatrical version of the film , a selection of bonus features and a second disc with a digital copy ; a second edition is a 2D combo pack that includes an unrated Blu @-@ ray , DVD and digital copy of the film . The last edition of the release is a 3D combo pack consisting of an unrated Blu @-@ ray 3D , Blu @-@ ray , DVD , and digital copy version of the film . According to the Nielsen VideoScan chart , the DVD and Blu @-@ ray formats placed number three in its first week . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Saw 3D had preview screenings on October 28 , 2010 in 2 @,@ 000 locations and made $ 1 @.@ 7 million . It opened in wide release the following day in 2 @,@ 808 locations playing on 3 @,@ 500 screens , the second smallest release behind the first Saw . The film earned $ 8 @,@ 976 @,@ 000 on its opening day , taking the number one spot from Paranormal Activity 2 . It grossed $ 22 @,@ 530 @,@ 123 its opening Halloween weekend , with 92 % of tickets coming from more than 2 @,@ 100 3D @-@ equipped locations and 57 % of the audience being under the age of 25 . It had the fifth best opening weekend in the Saw series . After only four days of wide release , Saw 3D had out @-@ grossed Saw VI 's $ 27 @.@ 7 million final domestic gross . On its second weekend , the film dropped 66 % in ticket sales and made $ 7 @.@ 7 million , moving to the number five spot with Megamind taking its number one spot . Saw 3D closed on December 2 , 2010 , after 35 days of release in the United States and Canada . 
 Saw 3D opened in 25 territories with $ 14 @.@ 4 million ( including preview screenings ) placing first place in the United Kingdom ( UK ) with $ 5 @.@ 8 million , beating Saw III 's $ 4 @.@ 7 million UK opening . It opened in second place in Russia with $ 2 @.@ 2 million ; Australia and Japan grossed $ 909 @,@ 000 and $ 864 @,@ 800 , respectively . Saw 3D grossed $ 12 @.@ 8 million in the United Kingdom , Ireland and Malta ; $ 10 @.@ 9 million in Germany ; $ 7 million in Italy ; $ 5 @.@ 3 million in Russia ; and $ 2 @.@ 4 million in Australia . The film has grossed $ 45 @.@ 7 million in the United States and Cinema of Canada , with $ 90 @.@ 4 million in other markets , for a worldwide total of $ 136 @.@ 1 million . This makes Saw 3D the highest grossing film in the series in the foreign market . Also , it made more than double the amount of the previous installment Saw VI and is the most successful film in the franchise since Saw IV . 
 = = = Critical response = = = 
 As with the previous four Saw films , Saw 3D was not screened in advance for critics . Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a rating of 9 % , based on 74 reviews , with an average rating of 3 @.@ 1 / 10 , making it the poorest rated film in the series . The site 's consensus reads , " <unk> filmed , poorly acted , and <unk> plotted , Saw 3D leaves viewers trapped in the most lackluster installment of the series . " Metacritic gave the film a score of 24 out of 100 , based on 17 critics , indicating " generally unfavorable reviews " . 
 Luke Thompson of E ! Online gave the film a " B " . He called the film 's gore " over @-@ the @-@ top " and " in your face " while admitting the film had an " unusual amount of self @-@ parody " . He said the central storyline of the films was beginning to feel " played out " . Rob Nelson of Variety gave the film a negative review . He called the film " relentlessly repugnant " that would please fans , but offer no surprise . He went on to say , " Apart from these limb @-@ pulling setpieces , tech credits appear fairly shoddy , as do any 3D effects that don 't include flying viscera . The editing relies on lazy flashbacks , while the dialogue remains as horrific as the killings . " Kim Newman of Empire gave the film two out of five stars , calling it " a step down from last year 's much more pointed Saw VI " . He criticized the repetition of the plot but thought bringing back Jigsaw survivors was a " nice idea " . He closed his review with , " There are a scattering of infallibly cringe @-@ making horrors , but on the whole Saw 3D could do with more depth " . 
 Eric Goldman of IGN Movies gave the film two out of five stars . He was unhappy with the little screen time Bell and Elwes had been given , saying that the time the film did spend with them , didn 't have much impact . He said the traps were a step down from Saw VI , but did point out his favorite and highlight of the film as the " garage trap " . About the film 's 3D effects , Goldman said " The 3D is used as you might expect it to be – which is to say , this is no James Cameron immersive experience . Instead , blades jut out of the screen , and there is some fun had with blood and guts literally shooting forward at several points " . Frank Scheck of The Hollywood Reporter gave the film a mixed review . He said Saw 3D is " consistent both stylistically and thematically with previous editions " , but said most of the film 's traps lack the " Rube Goldberg @-@ style cleverness that marked the series " . Scheck went on to say that it was " unfortunate " the creators killed Bell 's character so early in the series and called Mandylor 's character ( Hoffman ) an " exceedingly bland stand @-@ in " . He called the visual impact of the 3D " negligible " . 
 Roger Moore of the Orlando Sentinel gave the film one out of five stars saying , " It 's all bunk and has been for years . These are all no @-@ win scenarios . Whatever moral lessons were presented in the earliest Saw films seem to have been dispensed with as the movies grow more and more gruesome , with filmmakers caught up in ' What would it look like if somebody 's jaw was ripped out , or their skin was glued to a car seat ? ' <unk> to the ' Cool , let 's see that again ' crowd has made Lionsgate rich but done nothing for this unendurable endurance contest of this long @-@ enduring film franchise " . Mike Hale of The New York Times called the film the most " straightforward " of the series and the " most consistently ( though not inventively ) violent " . He ended his review saying , " If you see the film in a theater equipped with RealD 3D and Dolby sound , you 'll come away with a pretty good idea of what it would feel like to have flying body parts hit you in the face " . 
 Elizabeth Weitzman of the New York Daily News gave the film one out of five stars . She criticized the lack of Bell 's screentime saying , " What the filmmakers of the last four Saw movies have somehow overlooked is that Tobin Bell 's Jigsaw is the linchpin of these films . It 's right there in the title , so you 'd think they 'd realize what they lost when they killed him off in Saw III . But it 's been downhill ever since , and we hit bottom today " . She admitted that the performances have become " painfully stilted " and called the script " a jumble of nothing punctuated by barely @-@ trying death traps " . She went on to say , " It 's also disappointing to watch a once @-@ original franchise morph into a generic slasher series , in which random people are killed in banal ways just to up the body count " and closed her review with , " No matter how much money The Final Chapter makes over Halloween weekend , it 's time to acknowledge that this game is over " . 
 Wesley Morris of The Boston Globe called the film the " most gruesome and least coherent of the seven movies " . He felt that some of the film 's " games " were just randomly forced into the film , saying that kind of " episodic approach " and 3D works for a " far more innovative series like Jackass 3D " . Morris closed his review by saying " This alleged final edition trashes the perverse morality of [ Jigsaw 's ] legacy to make him the Jerry Springer of gore " . Jason Anderson of the Toronto Star gave the film two out of four stars . He praised Saw 3D 's plot for not being as confusing as previous films , for which he described as having to " generally require an encyclopedic knowledge of the series ' many plot strands " in order to understand them . He thought Greutert gave the film a " pulpy energy " and described the film 's traps and gore as having an " unpretentious sensibility " to films by <unk> Gordon Lewis . Alan Jones of the Radio Times gave the film four out of five stars saying , " though the film initially borders on parody , once the ever @-@ ingenious trapping begins – using fishhooks , <unk> , ovens and dental equipment – the chills run on turbo drive right through to the greatest hits flashback finale " . He implied that the " shock scenarios " were borrowed from sources such as , A Man Called Horse and the work of Lucio Fulci . Jones said the 3D did not add to the experience saying " the CGI blood splatter something of a distraction to the almost Shakespearean crescendo of anguish and carnage " . The film was nominated for a Golden Raspberry Award for " Worst Eye @-@ <unk> Misuse of 3D " , but it lost to The Last Airbender . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 The film was intended to be the finale for the film series . However , it was reported in February 2016 that an eighth film titled Saw : Legacy was being developed . The report stated that Legacy would be written by Josh Stolberg and Pete Goldfinger . 
 = Solomon Asch = 
 Solomon Eliot Asch ( September 14 , 1907 – February 20 , 1996 ) was a Polish gestalt psychologist and pioneer in social psychology in the United States . He created seminal pieces of work in impression formation , prestige suggestion , conformity , and many other topics in social psychology . His work follows a common theme of Gestalt psychology that the whole is not only greater than the sum of its parts , but the nature of the whole fundamentally alters the parts . Asch stated : " Most social acts have to be understood in their setting , and lose meaning if isolated . No error in thinking about social facts is more serious than the failure to see their place and function " ( Asch , 1952 , p . 61 ) . He is most well known for his conformity experiments , in which he demonstrated the influence of group pressure on opinions . A Review of General Psychology survey , published in 2002 , ranked Asch as the 41st most cited psychologist of the 20th century . 
 = = Early life = = 
 Asch was born in Warsaw , Poland on September 14 , 1907 to a Jewish family . He grew up in a small town , Łowicz , Poland . 
 In 1920 Asch emigrated at the age of 13 with his family to the United States . They lived on the Lower East Side of New York , a dense area of many Jewish , Italian and Irish immigrants . His friends called him <unk> . 
 = = Education = = 
 Asch was shy when he moved to the United States and did not speak English fluently . He went to the neighborhood public school , P.S. 147 , to attend 6th grade . As a result of the language barrier , Asch had a very difficult time understanding in class . He learned English by reading Charles Dickens . Asch later attended Townsend Harris High School , a very selective high school attached to the City College of New York . After high school , he attended the City College of New York , majoring in both literature and science . He became interested in psychology towards the end of his undergraduate career after reading the work of William James and a few philosophers . In 1928 , when he was 21 years old , he received his Bachelor of Science . 
 Asch went on to pursue his graduate degree at Columbia University . He initially was not very interested in social psychology , but he was interested in anthropology . With the help of Gardner Murphy , Lois Murphy , Franz Boas , and Ruth Benedict to gain a summer fellowship , he investigated how children became members of their culture . His master 's thesis was a statistical analysis of the test scores of 200 children under the supervision of Woodworth . Asch received his master 's degree in 1930 . His doctoral dissertation examined whether all learning curves have the same form ; H.E. Garrett assigned the topic to him . He received his PhD in 1932 . 
 Asch was exposed to Gestalt psychology through Gardner Murphy , then a young faculty member at Columbia . He became much more interested in Gestalt psychology after meeting and working closely with his adviser at Columbia Max Wertheimer , one of the founders of Gestalt psychology . He later became close friends with Wertheimer . 
 = = Family life = = 
 Asch met Florence Miller in a library on East Broadway on the lower East Side in New York City . He married her in 1930 . Their relationship was reported as being " easy , good @-@ humored " ( Rock , pg . 5 ) . Asch remained married to Florence his entire life . They had their first and only son , Peter , in 1937 . Peter Asch became a Professor of Economics at Rutgers University , married Ruth Zindler and had two sons , Eric and David . Peter died of heart failure at age 52 ( predeceasing both parents and his wife . ) 
 = = Career = = 
 Asch began his teaching career at Brooklyn College . In 1947 , he moved to Swarthmore College , where he stayed for 19 years ( 1947 @-@ 1966 ) . Swarthmore was the major center for scholars of Gestalt psychology at that time in the United States . Wolfgang Kohler , a German immigrant ; W. C. H. Prentice , and Hans Wallach were faculty members at that time as well . 
 In 1966 , Asch left to found the Institute for Cognitive Studies at Rutgers University ( 1966 @-@ 1972 ) . In 1972 , Asch moved to the University of Pennsylvania . He taught there as a professor of psychology until he retired in 1979 , and was Emeritus until 1996 . Asch also had visiting posts at Harvard and MIT . 
 = = = Impression formation = = = 
 Asch was interested in how humans form impressions of other human beings . He was intrigued how we are able to easily form impressions of humans even though we have such complex structures . He specifically was interested in how impressions of other people were established and if there were any principles that regulated these impressions . Asch concluded " to know a person is to have a grasp of a particular structure " . He demonstrated through his experiments that forming an impression has the following elements : 
 1 ) it is an organized process , 
 2 ) the characteristics are perceived differently in relation to other characteristics , 
 3 ) central qualities are discovered , causing a distinction between them and peripheral qualities , 
 4 ) relations of harmony and contradiction are observed . 
 Asch conducted many experiments in which he asked participants to form an impression of a hypothetical person based on several characteristics said to belong to them . 
 Central characteristics on impression formation In one experiment , two groups , A and B , were exposed to a list of exactly the same characteristics except one , cold vs. warm . The list of characteristics given to each group are listed below : 
 Group A : intelligent @-@ skillful @-@ industrious @-@ warm @-@ determined @-@ practical @-@ cautious 
 Group B : intelligent @-@ skillful @-@ industrious @-@ cold @-@ determined @-@ practical @-@ cautious 
 One group of people were told that the person was warm and another group of people were told the person is " cold " . Participants were asked to write a brief description of the impression they formed after hearing these characteristics . The experimenters also produced a check list consisting of pairs of opposite traits , such as generous / ungenerous , shrewd / wise , etc . These words were related to the first list of characteristics they heard . Participants were asked to indicate which of these traits matched with the hypothetical person who had just been described to them . 
 Asch found that very different impressions were found based on this one characteristic in the list . In general , the " A " impressions were far more positive than the " B " impressions . Based on the results of the written descriptions of the hypothetical person , the meaning of the other characteristics in the list seemed to change , related to whether the hypothetical person was described as a " warm " or " cold " person . 
 Not all qualities were changed by this word . Words such as " honest " , " strong " , " serious " , and " reliable " were not affected . The words " warm " and " cold " were shown to be of more importance in forming participant 's impressions than other characteristics . They were considered to be basic to understanding the person , whereas other characteristics would be considered secondary . Thus , if another characteristic in this list was changed between two subjects , such as manipulating the words " polite " and " blunt " , instead of the words " warm " and " cold " , it would not affect the impression of the person as much as did " warm " and " cold " . Asch called " warm " and " cold " " central " characteristics , and " polite " and " blunt " peripheral characteristics . 
 Order effects on impression formation 
 In another experiment , Asch found that the order in which he presented the traits of a hypothetical person drastically influenced the impression formed by participants formed . For example , participants were read one of the following lists below : 
 A. intelligent @-@ industrious @-@ impulsive @-@ critical @-@ stubborn @-@ envious 
 B. envious @-@ stubborn @-@ critical @-@ impulsive @-@ industrious @-@ intelligent 
 Series A starts with desirable qualities and ends with undesirable qualities , while the reverse is true for Series B. As a result of this slight difference , people perceive person A as someone who is an " able person who possesses certain shortcomings which , do not , however , overshadow his merits " . But , people perceive person B as a " problem , whose abilities are hampered by his serious difficulties " . The meaning of the other words in this list also change in the majority of subjects between list A and list B. Words such as " impulsive " and " critical " take on a positive meaning with A , but a negative meaning with B. 
 Similarity and difference of impression 
 In another central experiment , Asch presented participants with four groups of characteristics . Each participant was exposed to the group of words listed below . 
 Set 1 : Quick , Skillful , Helpful 
 Set 2 : Quick , Clumsy , Helpful 
 Set 3 : Slow , Skillful , Helpful 
 Set 4 : Slow , Clumsy , Helpful 
 Notice that only one characteristic , " helpful " , is the same throughout all of the four sets . Participants were asked 1 ) which of the other three sets most resemble Set I , and 2 ) which of the other sets most resembles Set 2 . In 87 percent of the cases , Set 1 was seen most similar with Set 3 . In only 13 percent of the cases , people reported Set 1 to be similar to Set 2 . Also , Set 2 was said to resemble Set 4 in 85 percent of the cases and only 9 percent of the cases was it said to resemble Set I was the closest . 
 However , there are more " identical elements " in Set 1 and 2 and in Set 3 and 4 . Notice that two of the three words are the same in Set 1 and 2 and in Set 3 and 4 . The similarity in sets can not be based on the number of shared elements in the set . Participants also reported that the word " quick " of set 1 was most similar in meaning to " slow " of set 3 . Similarly , " quick " of set 2 was perceived to be most similar in meaning to " slow " of set 4 . 
 Asch reached the following conclusions based on this experiment : 
 1 ) The meaning of a characteristic changes based on a change in the " environment " it 's in . Thus , the meanings of the words " quick " and " slow " change based on what other words it is presented with or associated with in real life . The meaning of the word " quick " in set 1 is associated more with " one of assurance , of smoothness of movement " while in set 2 the word is associated with " forced quickness , in an effort to be helpful " . In everyday life , we perceive a quick , skillful person to be very different from a quick , clumsy person . However , we perceive someone who is " quick and skillful " and " slow and skillful " as being similar and sharing the same quality of being more of an expert . 
 2 ) The change in the meaning of the characteristic is determined by its relationship with other characteristics . " [ Set ] I is quick because he is skillful ; [ Set ] 2 is clumsy because he is fast " " In [ Set ] 3 slowness indicates care , prides in work well @-@ done . <unk> in [ Set ] 4 indicates sluggishness , poor motor coordinate , some physical retardation " We perceive our overall impression by integrating the relationships of the different qualities of a person . Therefore , we form very different impressions when one of these qualities differ . 
 3 ) " Dynamic consequences are grasped in the interaction of qualities " , ( Asch , pg . 280 ) . Participants considered " quick " and " skillful " and " slow " and " skillful " as characteristics that cooperate together , but they think of " quick " and " clumsy " as characteristics that cancel one another . 
 = = = Prestige suggestion = = = 
 As a result of World War II in the 1940s , Asch and other social psychologists were interested in propaganda . They wondered : How do you get people to believe what you want them to believe ? How do you get people to believe they should sacrifice for the war effort ? 
 In everyday life , psychologists noticed that people are persuaded by messages differently based on the identity of the author . It seemed that the more prestige the author / speaker has , the more likely the person will believe them . Many social psychologists prior to Asch had studied this phenomenon . However , Asch disagreed with many of them and critiqued their interpretations . His main conclusion was that a change in evaluation requires a change in the content and meaning of the response as a result of the change in context . Therefore , the meaning of the message is interpreted differently depending on who is the author of the message . He suggests that participants are not blindly accepting a message based on the author , but rather they are making meaning of the quote based on the author . 
 Asch called into question the present theory for the underlying psychological process concerning the effect of group forces on the formation and change of opinions and attitudes . Asch critiques the experimental approach of many different psychologists , including <unk> , Moore , Marple , Sherif , Thorndike , and Lorge , in their investigations of evaluation change . Lorge 's and Sherif 's investigation of the effects of " prestige " on the evaluation of statements were investigated in detail in one of Asch 's articles . 
 The same basic procedure was used by all of the above @-@ mentioned psychologists . A participant makes a judgment about some particular issue . At a later time , they judge the same problem again but with information of how certain groups or prestigious people have evaluated the same problem . If the subject changes his judgment in the same direction as the evaluations of these groups of people or prestigious people , then this is considered a degree of influence that they have exerted on the participant 's judgment . 
 Lorge critique 
 Lorge 's main finding was that " prestige " can alter evaluations of statements of serious political and economic questions . 
 In his experiment , subjects rated a set of 50 quotations on a 5 @-@ point scale of " agreement " or " disagreement " with the statement . The quotes were followed by the names of two public people . Subjects were informed that one of the names was the author of the true source and were asked to select the true author . After about a month , the subjects again rated the same quotation but with the true author only listed below the quotation . Subjects also rated earlier their " respect for the political opinions of each of these individuals " . This was used as a measure of prestige . Lorge found that the participants rated the same statement differently when it was referred to a different author . More specifically , the rating of a statement tended to rise when it was referred to a more " prestigious " author . 
 One of Lorge 's main conclusions is that " an unchanged object of judgment undergoes a change of evaluation " . Therefore , the prestige of the author is viewed as acting arbitrarily on the statement regardless of the content or merit of the statement . Participants simply view the statement as having higher value when the author has higher prestige . 
 Asch , however , reinterprets Lorge 's findings and suggests that there was " a change in the object of judgment , rather than in the judgment of the object " ( Asch , 1940 ) . He suggests that a person will redefine the object of judgment based on the content of the evaluations . Therefore , the person will base the meaning of the quote in the context of what he / she believes to be true about the person who said the quote , resulting in different meanings of the statements based on the author . 
 In evidence of his claims , Asch conducted an experiment in which college students read statements with the name of one author below each statement . They were instructed to describe what the statement meant to them . Two groups of students read the same statements but with different authors associated with them . The main finding was that there was a " cognitive reorganization " of the statement based on what was understood about the author of the statement . Participant 's felt the meaning of the quote differed depending on who wrote the statement . 
 For example , the following quote was presented to both groups of subjects : " Only the willfully blind can fail to see that the old style capitalism of a primitive freebooting period is gone forever . The capitalism of complete laissez @-@ faire , which thrived on low wages and maximum profits for minimum turnover , which rejected collective bargaining and fought against justified public regulation of the competitive process , is a thing of the past . " When participants thought that Bridges ( a well @-@ known union leader ) was the author , they interpreted the passage to be an " expression of the accomplishments of labor in the face of opposition from capital and contained a resolve to defend these gains from attack " . However , when Johnston ( president of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce at the time ) was the author , they interpreted the passage to be " a perspective of policy in the interest of business , especially of ' enlightened ' business " . Asch conducted a very similar and classic study with participants reading statements either attributed to Jefferson or Lenin . 
 One of the major points that Asch makes is that participants are not completely blind in the experiment and making arbitrary choices based on this bias . Asch claims that participants were acting reasonable in their change of evaluation of the judgment because the context of the judgment and thus the meaning of the judgment had changed . Lorge , however , suggested that if the participants were behaving logical , their evaluations should have remained the same despite the change in author . 
 Sherif critique 
 <unk> Sherif conducted an experiment , very similar to Lorge , in which he investigated how prestige affects the evaluation of literary materials . College students were asked to rank a set of prose passages according to their literary quality . Each passage also included the name of a well @-@ known author . However , all of the passages were actually written by the same author . Participants rated the authors earlier in terms of their literary standing . Sherif found that passages that were identified with highly acclaimed authors received higher rankings . 
 Asch suggested that Sherif 's results could be largely influenced from the environment of a laboratory experiment . Because the experiment was designed to have each of the passages have very few differences between them , participants were faced with a dilemma when asked to distinguish between them . The experimenter and other neighboring participants may appear to find the task obvious , so the participant attends to any clues that might help him make the decision . In fear of looking ridiculous , the participant might now approach the task as , " Which of these am I expected to like and dislike ? " With the only information that varies being the author , the participant might make conclusions about the quotes based on this one piece of information that varies . 
 = = = Conformity experiments = = = 
 Asch is most well known for his conformity experiments . His main finding was that group pressure can change opinion , of even obvious facts . 
 Asch wanted to examine throughout his experiments to 1 ) What extent do social forces alter people 's opinions ? and also 2 ) Which aspect of the group influence is most important @-@ the size of the majority or the unanimity ? 
 Asch 's conformity experiment was conducted using 123 male participants who were told that they would be part of an experiment in visual judgment . Each participant was put into a group with 5 to 7 confederates ( people who knew the true aims of the experiment , but were introduced as participants to the naive " real " participant ) . The participants were shown a card with a line on it , followed by another card with 3 lines on it labeled a , b , and c . The participants were then asked to say which line matched the line on the first card in length . Each line question was called a " trial " . The " real " participant answered last or <unk> . For the first two trials , the subject would feel at ease in the experiment , as he and the other " participants " gave the obvious , correct answer . However , after the fourth trial , all of the confederates respond with the clearly wrong answer at certain points such that in 12 of the 18 trials they all said the wrong answer . The 12 trials in which the confederates answered incorrectly were considered the " critical trials " . The participant could thus either ignore the majority and go with his own senses or he could go along with the majority and ignore the clearly obvious fact . The aim was to see whether the real participant would change his answer and respond the same way as the confederates or stick with the clearly obvious answer . 
 Asch found that a considerable percentage followed the majority . Asch suggested that this procedure created a doubt in the participants ' mind about the seemingly obvious answer . Participants reported that the correct but rejected line was almost but not quite equal to the standard line . Asch also found that the effectiveness of the group pressure increased significantly from 1 person to 3 people unanimously responding incorrectly . However , there was not much increase after that . He also found that when the participant had a confederate pose as a supporting partner who also responded correctly , the power of the majority to influence the participant decreased substantially . 
 Asch told his colleagues that his idea to study conformity was brought about by his childhood experiences in Poland . He recalls being seven years old and staying up for his first Passover night . He recalls seeing his grandmother pour an extra glass of wine . When he asked who the glass of wine was for , she said that it was for the prophet Elijah . He then asked her whether he would really take a sip from the glass and his uncle assured him that he would . His uncle told him to watch very closely when the time came . " Filled with a sense of suggestion and expectation " Asch " thought he saw the level of wine in the cup drop just a bit " . Thus , early in life , Asch succumbed to conformity , which fostered his idea to investigate conformity later in life . 
 = = = Other work = = = 
 <unk> 
 Asch looked at metaphors in a variety of different languages , such as Old Testament Hebrew , Homeric Greek , Chinese , Thai , <unk> , and Hausa . He found that there was a similar meaning for the sensory term , such as " cold " in English , and the corresponding personality trait . He concluded that metaphors , and thus language , reflects a person 's attempt to understand the true properties of a person or object . 
 Unitary and <unk> associations 
 Asch showed that simple properties would enter into associations much easier when they are part of the same unit than when they are from different units . 
 = = Notable influences = = 
 Asch was Stanley Milgram 's advisor at Princeton University , and Milgram completed his dissertation on national differences under conformity under Asch . Asch also largely influenced the theory of many other social psychologists , such as Harold Kelley . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 According to Levine ( 1999 ) , Asch 's research has led to four critical ideas that persist in social influence research . First , Asch believed that social interaction reflects the ability of individual people to synthesize information about group norms , the viewpoints of others and their own perceptions of themselves as group members . This point of view has been manifested in at least two important theories ( social identity theory and self @-@ categorization theory ) , and has been a source of inspiration for the work of many social psychologists ( See Hardin & Higgins , 1996 ; Weick & Roberts , 1993 ) . 
 Second , Asch emphasized that independent thought and disagreement among group members is a cornerstone of group functioning . He believed that only by settling our differences with other group members can we actually understand the shortcomings of our own beliefs ( Levine , 1999 ) . This notion has been embraced by social scientists like <unk> , who has pursued this rationale as the basis for his theory of minority influence in group situations , and has also been incorporated into <unk> conflict theory . 
 Asch also believed the relationship between conformity and non @-@ conformity was not as simple as one being the opposite of the other . This was Asch 's third influential idea , and he suggested that conformity and resistance might be explained by their own unique social psychological processes . Conformity , for instance , could be a function of how aware a person is that they are being influenced by the group ( distortion of perception ) , the degree to which the person believes that the group consensus is correct ( distortion of judgement ) , and how badly the person wants to be accepted by the group ( distortion of action ) . Although these exact terms have not been directly ported over to the literature , researchers such as <unk> and Nemeth have adopted the perspective that majority and minority influence are moderated by multiple processes ( Levine , 1999 ) . 
 Lastly , Asch suggested that group influence can change how people perceive stimuli ( See Asch , 1940 for an example ) . This is the most obscure of Asch 's major ideas , in large part because it has not been cited frequently ( Levine , 1999 ) , but is none @-@ the @-@ less important because it speaks to the power of group influence . 
 = = End of life = = 
 Asch was disappointed and concerned by the direction social psychology was going in the 1980s . He wrote , " Why do I sense , together with the current expansion , a shrinking of vision , an expansion of surface rather than depth , a failure of imagination ? .... Why is not social psychology more exciting , more human in the most usual sense of that term ? To sum up , is this discipline perhaps on the wrong track ? " ( Asch , p. x ) Asch was worried that social psychologists were not asking the deeper questions that would help change and improve the world . Asch died at the age of 88 on February 21 , 1996 in his home in Haverford , Pennsylvania . 
 = = Selected work = = 
 Asch E. ( 1989 ) . Letter to Irvin Rock . 
 Asch S. E. ( 1929 ) . A study of scatter on the Stanford revision of the Binet scale . Unpublished MA thesis . 
 Asch S. E. ( <unk> ) . Personality development of Hopi children . Unpublished paper . 
 Asch S. E. ( <unk> ) . " An experimental study of variability in learning " . Archives of Psychology , 143 , 1 @-@ 55 
 Asch , S. E. ( 1940 ) . Studies in the principles of judgements and attitudes : II . Determination of judgements by group and ego standards . Journal of Social Psychology , 12 , 433 @-@ 465 . 
 Asch S. E. ( 1946 ) . " Forming impressions of personality " . Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology , 41 , 258 @-@ 290 . 
 Asch S. E. ( 1948 ) . " The doctrine of suggestion , prestige , and imitation in social psychology " . Psychological Review , 55 , 250 @-@ 276 . 
 Asch S. E. ( 1952 ) . " Social psychology " . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice @-@ Hall . 
 Asch S. E. ( 1955 ) . " On the use of metaphor in the description of persons " . In H. Werner ( Ed . ) , On expressive language ( 29 @-@ 38 ) . Worcester , MA : Clark University Press . 
 Asch . S. E. ( 1955 ) . Opinions and Social Pressure 
 Asch S. E. ( 1956 ) . " Studies of independence and conformity : I. A minority of one against a unanimous majority " . Psychological Monographs , 70 , 1 @-@ 70 . 
 Asch S. E. ( 1958 ) . " The metaphor : a psychological inquiry " . In R. <unk> & L. <unk> ( Eds . ) , Person perception and interpersonal behavior ( pp. 86 – 94 ) , California : Stanford University Press . 
 Asch S. E. ( 1962 ) . " A problem in the theory of associations " . <unk> Beitrage , 6 , 553 @-@ 563 . 
 Asch S. E. ( 1964 ) . " The process of free recall " . In C. Scheerer ( Ed . ) , Cognition : Theory , research , promise ( pp. 79 – 88 ) . New York : Harper and Row . 
 Asch S. E. ( <unk> ) . " The doctrinal tyranny of associationism " . In T. R. Dixon & D. L. Horton ( Eds . ) , Verbal behavior and general behavior theory ( pp. 214 – 228 ) . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice @-@ Hall . 
 Asch S. E. ( <unk> ) . " Wolfgang Köhler " . American Journal of Psychology , 81 , 110 @-@ 119 . 
 Asch S. E. ( 1969 ) . " A reformulation of the problem of associations " . American Psychologist , 24 , 92 @-@ 102 . 
 Asch S. E. , <unk> J. , & <unk> W. ( 1960 ) . " Perceptual conditions of association " . Psychological Monographs , 74 ( 3 ) , 1 @-@ 48 . 
 Asch S. E. , & <unk> S. M. ( <unk> ) . " The principle of associative symmetry " . Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society , 106 , 135 @-@ 163 . 
 Asch S. E. , & <unk> S. M. ( <unk> ) . " The process of free recall : evidence for non @-@ associative factors in acquisition and retention " . Journal of Psychology , 54 , 3 @-@ 31 . 
 Asch S. E. , Hay J. , & Mendoza R. ( 1960 ) . " Perceptual organization in serial rote @-@ learning " . American Journal of Psychology , 73 , 177 @-@ 198 . 
 Asch S. E. , & Lindner M. ( 1963 ) . " A note on strength of association " . Journal of Psychology , 55 , 199 @-@ 209 . 
 Asch S. E. , & Prentice W. C. H. ( 1958 ) . " Paired association with related and unrelated pairs of nonsense figures " . American Journal of Psychology , 71 , 247 @-@ 254 . 
 Asch S. E. , & Witkin H. A. ( <unk> ) . " Studies in space orientation : I. Perception of the upright with displaced visual fields " . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 38 , 325 @-@ 337 . 
 Asch S. E. , & Witkin H. A. ( <unk> ) . " Studies in space orientation : II . Perception of the upright with displaced visual fields and with body tilted " . Journal of Experimental Psychology , 38 , <unk> 477 . 
 Hardin , C. D. & Higgins , E. T. ( 1996 ) . Shared reality : How social verification makes the subjective objective . In R. M. Sorrentino & E. T. Higgins ( Eds . ) , Handbook of motivation and cognition ( Vol . 3 , pp. 28 – 84 ) . New York : Guilford . 
 Levine , J. M. ( 1999 ) . Solomon Asch 's Legacy for group research . Personality and Social Psychology , 3 ( 4 ) , 358 @-@ 364 . 
 Weick , K. E. & Roberts , K. H. ( 1993 ) . Collective mind in organizations : <unk> <unk> on flight decks . Administrative Science Quarterly , 38 , 357 @-@ 381 . 
 = Blue Jay Way = 
 " Blue Jay Way " is a song recorded by the English rock group the Beatles . Written by George Harrison , it was released in 1967 on the band 's Magical Mystery Tour EP and album . The song was named after a street in the Hollywood Hills of Los Angeles where Harrison stayed in August 1967 , shortly before visiting the Haight @-@ Ashbury district of San Francisco . The lyrics document Harrison 's wait for music publicist Derek Taylor to find his way to Blue Jay Way through the fog @-@ ridden hills , while Harrison struggled to stay awake after the flight from London to Los Angeles . 
 As with several of Harrison 's compositions from this period , " Blue Jay Way " incorporates aspects of Indian classical music , although the Beatles used only Western instrumentation on the track , including a drone @-@ like Hammond organ part played by Harrison . Created during the group 's psychedelic period , the track makes extensive use of studio techniques such as flanging , Leslie rotary effect , and reversed tape sounds . The song appeared in the Beatles ' 1967 television film Magical Mystery Tour , in a sequence that visually re @-@ creates the sense of haziness and dislocation evident on the recording . 
 While some reviewers have dismissed the song as monotonous , many others have admired its yearning quality and dark musical mood . The website Consequence of Sound describes " Blue Jay Way " as " a haunted house of a hit , adding an ethereal , creepy mythos to the City of Angels " . Among its continued links with Los Angeles , the song was one of the first Beatles tracks that cult leader Charles Manson adopted as the foundation for his Helter Skelter theory of an American race @-@ related countercultural revolution . Artists who have covered the song include Bud Shank , Colin Newman , Tracy Bonham , Siouxsie and the Banshees and Greg Hawkes . 
 = = Background and inspiration = = 
 George Harrison wrote " Blue Jay Way " after arriving in Los Angeles on 1 August 1967 with his wife Pattie Boyd and Beatles aides Neil Aspinall and Alex Mardas . The purpose of the trip was to spend a week with Derek Taylor , the Beatles ' former press officer and latterly the publicist for California @-@ based acts such as the Byrds and the Beach Boys . The visit also allowed Harrison to reunite with his sitar tutor , Ravi Shankar , whose Kinnara School of Music and upcoming concert at the Hollywood Bowl he helped publicise . 
 The title of the song came from a street named Blue Jay Way , one of the " bird streets " high in the Hollywood Hills West area overlooking the Sunset Strip , where Harrison had rented a house for his stay . Jet @-@ lagged after the flight from London , he began writing the composition on a Hammond organ as he and Boyd waited for Taylor and the latter 's wife , Joan , to join them . The home 's location , on a hillside of narrow , winding roads , together with the foggy conditions that night , created the backdrop for the song 's opening lines : " There 's a fog upon L.A. / And my friends have lost their way . " Harrison had almost completed the song by the time the Taylors arrived , around two hours later than planned . 
 The week with Taylor proved to be important for the direction of the Beatles . At the height of the Summer of Love and the popularity of the band 's Sgt. Pepper 's Lonely Hearts Club Band album , Harrison , Taylor and their small entourage visited the international " hippie capital " of Haight @-@ Ashbury , in San Francisco , on 7 August . Harrison had expected to encounter an enlightened community engaged in artistic pursuits and working to create a viable alternative lifestyle ; instead , he was disappointed that Haight @-@ Ashbury appeared to be populated by drug addicts , dropouts and " hypocrites " . Following his return to England two days later , Harrison completed work on " Blue Jay Way " at his home in Esher . He also shared his disillusionment about Haight @-@ Ashbury with John Lennon , soon after which the Beatles publicly denounced the popular hallucinogen LSD ( or " acid " ) and other drugs in favour of Transcendental Meditation under Maharishi Mahesh Yogi . While noting Harrison 's role in " <unk> [ ing ] the West 's mainstream acquaintance with Hindu religion " through his leadership in this aspect of the Beatles ' career , author Ian MacDonald describes " Blue Jay Way " as a " farewell to psychedelia " , just as " It 's All Too Much " , which the Beatles recorded in May 1967 , became Harrison 's " farewell to acid " . 
 = = Composition = = 
 = = = Music = = = 
 " Blue Jay Way " was one of several songs that Harrison composed on a keyboard over 1966 – 68 – a period when , aside from in his work with the Beatles , he had abandoned his first instrument , the guitar , to master the sitar , partly under Shankar 's tutelage . The song is in 4 / 4 time throughout ; its structure consists of an intro , three combinations of verse and chorus , followed by repeated choruses . While MacDonald gives the musical key as " C major ( minor , diminished ) " , musicologist Alan Pollack views it as a mix of C major and C modal , and acknowledges the " highly unusual " incorporation of the notes D ♯ and F ♯ . The inclusion of the latter note suggests the Lydian mode , which , according to musicologist Walter Everett , had only been heard previously in popular music in the Left Banke 's 1966 single " Pretty Ballerina " . 
 The song 's melody oscillates over the chords of C major and C diminished , a chord favoured by Harrison in his Indian music @-@ inspired compositions for the Beatles . Acknowledging Harrison 's statement that the tune is " slightly Indian " , Everett considers " Blue Jay Way " to be related to the ragas <unk> and <unk> . According to author Simon Leng , however , Harrison based the song partly on Raga Marwa . Following the inclusion of a raga @-@ style introduction ( or alap ) in his previous Indian compositions , " Love You To " and " Within You Without You " , " Blue Jay Way " begins with a preview of the song 's melody played softly , in free time , over the opening drone . Author Ian Inglis credits the song 's incorporation of ambient drone , specifically its role in providing " an anchorage point for vocal and instrumental improvisation " , as one of the first examples of a musical device that soon became prevalent in the work of Fairport Convention , the Incredible String Band and other folk artists . 
 The length of the verses falls short of an even eight bars through the omission of a final beat . Pollack recognises this detail as reflecting a sense of impatience , in keeping with the circumstances surrounding the song 's creation . Following the third verse – chorus combination , the outro comprises four rounds of the chorus , with the lyrics to the final round consisting of the repeated " Don 't be long " refrain . As a feature that Pollack terms " compositionally impressive " , each of the four sections in this outro varies in structure by being either shorter in length or less musically detailed . 
 = = = Lyrics = = = 
 The lyrics to " Blue Jay Way " relate entirely to Harrison 's situation on that first night in Los Angeles . He refers to fighting off sleep and recalls his advice to Taylor to ask a policeman for directions to Blue Jay Way . Author Jonathan Gould views the song as " darkly funny " , with the singer 's concern over his friends ' tardiness almost resembling " a metaphysical crisis " . In the choruses , Harrison repeatedly urges " Please don 't be long / Please don 't you be very long " , a refrain that Inglis identifies as central to the composition 's " extraordinary sense of yearning and melancholy " . 
 Taylor later expressed amusement at how some commentators interpreted " don 't be long " as meaning " don 't belong " – a message to Western youth to opt out of society – and at how the line " And my friends have lost their way " supposedly conveyed the idea that " a whole generation had lost direction " . With regard to whether Harrison was telling contemporary listeners not to " belong " , Inglis writes , this " alternative reading " of the song aligned with Timothy Leary 's catchphrase for the 1960s American psychedelic experience , " Turn on , tune in , drop out " . In Gould 's opinion , the continual repetition of the line at the end of " Blue Jay Way " transforms the words into " a plea for <unk> – ' don 't belong ' " . Rather than attaching any countercultural significance to this , however , Gould views it as the Beatles repeating the wordplay first used in the chorus of Lennon 's 1963 song " It Won 't Be Long " . 
 = = Production = = 
 = = = Recording = = = 
 The Beatles began recording " Blue Jay Way " on 6 September 1967 at EMI 's Abbey Road Studios in London . The song was Harrison 's contribution to the television film Magical Mystery Tour , the first project undertaken by the band following the death of their manager , Brian Epstein . Author Nicholas Schaffner describes " Blue Jay Way " as the first Harrison @-@ written Beatles recording on which he " adapt [ ed ] some of his Indian @-@ derived ideas to a more Western setting " , with Hammond organ , cello and drums serving the function of , respectively , tambura drone , sitar and tabla . 
 The group achieved a satisfactory rhythm track in a single take . On 7 September , this recording – comprising two organ parts , bass guitar and drums – was reduced to two tracks on the 4 @-@ track master tape , after which Harrison overdubbed his double @-@ tracked lead vocal , and he , Lennon and Paul McCartney added backing vocals . Among Beatles biographers , MacDonald credits Harrison as the sole organ player on the song , while Kenneth Womack and John Winn write that Lennon played the second keyboard part . Recording was completed at Abbey Road on 6 October , with the addition of tambourine , played by Ringo Starr , and cello . The latter was performed by an unnamed session musician . As with all the songs recorded for Magical Mystery Tour , final mixing was carried out on 7 November . 
 = = = Studio effects = = = 
 " Blue Jay Way " features extensive use of three studio techniques employed by the Beatles over 1966 – 67 : flanging , an audio delay effect ; sound @-@ signal rotation via a Leslie speaker ; and ( in the stereo mix only ) reversed tapes . Beatles historian Mark Lewisohn compares " Blue Jay Way " with two Lennon tracks from this period , " Strawberry Fields Forever " and " I Am the Walrus " , in that the recording " seized upon all the studio trickery and technical advancements of 1966 and 1967 and captured them in one song " . Together with the pedal drone supplied by the keyboard parts , the various sound treatments reinforce the sense of dislocation evident in the song . 
 In the case of the reversed @-@ tape technique , a recording of the completed track was played backwards and faded in at key points during the performance . This effect created a response to Harrison 's lead vocal over the verses , as the backing vocals appear to answer each line he sings . Due to the limits of multitracking , the process of feeding in reversed sounds was carried out live during the final mixing session . Described by Lewisohn as " quite problematical " , the process was not repeated when the Beatles and their production team worked on the mono mix . 
 = = Appearance in Magical Mystery Tour film = = 
 The song 's segment in Magical Mystery Tour was shot mainly at RAF West Malling , an air force base near Maidstone in Kent , during the week beginning on 19 September . Described by Womack as " the movie 's hazy , psychedelic sequence " , it features Harrison sitting on a pavement and playing a chalk @-@ drawn keyboard . Dressed in a red suit , he is shown busking on a roadside ; next to his keyboard are a white plastic cup and a message written in chalk , reading : " 2 wives and kid to support " . The depiction of Harrison , seated in the lotus position and seemingly zoned out , matched his public image as the most committed of the Beatles to Transcendental Meditation and Eastern philosophy . 
 The filming took place in an aircraft hangar , with the scene designed to re @-@ create a typically smog @-@ ridden Los Angeles . Music journalist Kit O 'Toole writes that the smoke surrounding Harrison " almost engulf [ s ] him , mimicking the ' fog ' described in the lyrics " . Through the use of prismatic photography , the " Blue Jay Way " segment also shows Harrison 's " image refracted as if seen through a fly 's eye " , according to author Alan Clayson , who describes the scene as mirroring " the requisite misty atmosphere " suggested by the recording . In its preview of Magical Mystery Tour in 1967 , the NME highlighted the segment as one of the film 's " extremely clever " musical sequences , saying : " For ' Blue Jay Way ' George is seen sitting cross @-@ legged in a sweating mist which materialises into a variety of shapes and patterns . It 's a pity that most TV viewers will be able to see it only in black and white . " 
 At other times during the sequence , the four Beatles alternate in the role of a solo cellist . These scenes were filmed on 3 November , on the rockery at Sunny Heights , Starr 's house in Weybridge , Surrey . Tony Barrow , the production manager for Magical Mystery Tour , recalls that , as " a colourful conclusion " to the segment , they set off fireworks that had been bought for the upcoming Guy Fawkes Night celebrations . The version of " Blue Jay Way " appearing in the 2012 DVD release of Magical Mystery Tour is an alternative edit and includes some previously unused footage . O 'Toole admires the " Blue Jay Way " sequence as " one of the film 's too @-@ few bright spots " and " a perfect representation of the track 's hallucinatory qualities " . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 " Blue Jay Way " was issued in Britain as the final song on the Magical Mystery Tour double EP on 8 December 1967 . In America , where Capitol Records had combined the six EP tracks with five songs issued on the band 's singles throughout the year , creating a full album , the release took place on 27 November . 
 Reviewing the EP for the NME , Nick Logan considered it to be " Sergeant Pepper and beyond , heading for marvellous places " , during which " we cruise down ' Blue Jay Way ' with [ Harrison ] almost chanting the chorus line . A church organ starts this one off and leads us into a whirlpool of sound ... " Among reviews of the US release , Saturday Review admired the album as a " description of the Beatles ' acquired Hindu philosophy and its subsequent application to everyday life " , while Robert Christgau wrote in Esquire that , despite three of the new songs being " disappointing " , Magical Mystery Tour was " worth buying ... especially for Harrison 's hypnotic ' Blue Jay Way ' " . Christgau described the track as " an adaptation of Oriental modes in which everything works , lyrics included " . 
 In a combined review of concurrent releases such as Magical Mystery Tour , the Rolling Stones ' Their Satanic Majesties Request and Cream 's Disraeli Gears , Hit Parader praised the Beatles for further " widening the gap between them and 80 <unk> other groups " . The reviewer added : " The master magicians practice their alchemy on Harrison 's ' Blue Jay Way ' , recorded perhaps in an Egyptian tomb , and ' I Am The Walrus ' , a piece of terror lurking in foggy midnight moors . These two songs accomplish what the Stones attempted . " 
 = = Retrospective assessment = = 
 A critic of the Beatles ' output immediately post @-@ Sgt. Pepper , Ian MacDonald found " Blue Jay Way " " as unfocused and monotonous as most of the group 's output of this period " , adding that the song " numbingly fails to transcend the weary boredom that inspired it " . Writing for Rolling Stone in 2002 , Greg Kot considered it to be " one of [ Harrison 's ] least @-@ memorable Beatles tracks … a song essentially about boredom – and it sounds like it " . Similarly unimpressed with Magical Mystery Tour , Tim Riley describes " Blue Jay Way " as a song that " goes nowhere tiresomely " , with a vocal that " sounds as tired and droning " as the musical accompaniment . 
 Ian Inglis writes that the emotion Harrison conveys on the track " belies its apparently trivial lyrics " and that , together with the instrumentation and backing vocals , his pleas " create an unusually atmospheric and strangely moving song " . Writing for Rough Guides , Chris Ingham deems the song to be " essential <unk> " ; he views it as Harrison 's " most haunting and convincing musical contribution of the period " , after " Within You Without You " , as well as " possibly the most unnerving of all Beatles tracks " . In a 2002 review for Mojo , Charles Shaar Murray described the song as " eerie , serpentine " and " a fine and worthy companion for Pepper 's Within You Without You " . Writing in Uncut that same year , Carol Clerk called it " a weirdly atmospheric triumph " . 
 In his book Indian Music and the West ( 1997 ) , Gerry Farrell refers to the song when discussing its author 's contribution to popularising Indian classical music , writing : " It is a mark of Harrison 's sincere involvement with Indian music that , nearly thirty years on , the Beatles ' ' Indian ' songs remain among the most imaginative and successful examples of this type of fusion – for example , ' Blue Jay Way ' and ' The Inner Light . ' " Simon Leng writes of the song : " Harrison was working at a sophisticated level of extrapolating Indian scales to the Western setting , something no one else had done … ' Blue Jay Way ' explores the structures of Indian music just as ' Within You Without You ' debates its philosophical roots . " In her song review for the music website Something Else ! , Kit O 'Toole describes " Blue Jay Way " as one of its composer 's " most eccentric and abstract compositions " and " the perfect snapshot of the Beatles ' most unusually creative artistic phase " . Former Record Collector editor Peter Doggett , writing in Barry Miles ' The Beatles Diary , similarly admires the recording , saying that the Beatles rendered the song " an exotic , almost mystical journey " that evokes a mysterious Eastern mood " without a single Indian instrument being employed " . 
 In his 2009 review for Consequence of Sound , Dan Caffrey highlights the track among the " stellar moments in the album 's first half " and considers it to be " George Harrison 's most underrated song " . Caffrey adds : " For a piece inspired by the simple act of waiting for a friend to arrive at his Los Angeles home on a foggy night , ' Blue Jay Way ' is a haunted house of a hit , adding an ethereal , creepy mythos to the City of Angels . " Writing for The A.V. Club , Chuck Klosterman describes the song as being among " the <unk> ... material [ the Beatles ] ever made " , while Mark Kemp of Paste views it as " wonderfully wobbly " . Scott Plagenhoef of Pitchfork Media includes " Blue Jay Way " among the EP 's four " low @-@ key marvels " , about which he opines : " Few of them are anyone 's all @-@ time favorite Beatles songs ... yet this run seems to achieve a majesty in part because of that : It 's a rare stretch of amazing Beatles music that can seem like a private obsession rather than a permanent part of our shared culture . " 
 = = Cover versions and cultural references = = 
 Lord Sitar included " Blue Jay Way " on his 1968 album of Indian music @-@ style recordings , titled Lord Sitar . The artist credit was a pseudonym for London session guitarist Big Jim Sullivan , although rumours circulated that Lord Sitar was in fact Harrison himself , partly as a result of EMI / Capitol 's refusal to deny the claim . Also in 1968 , jazz saxophonist and flautist Bud Shank , another associate of Ravi Shankar , recorded the song for his album Magical Mystery . 
 " Blue Jay Way " was a rare Beatles song released before their 1968 self @-@ titled double album that Charles Manson adopted as part of his theory of an impending social revolution in the United States , a scenario that led to his followers carrying out a series of murders in Los Angeles during the summer of 1969 . Finding parallels between the Beatles ' lyrics and the Book of Revelation , and believing himself to be the messiah , Manson interpreted Harrison 's opening verse and chorus as the Beatles calling out to Jesus Christ . 
 Colin Newman , singer and guitarist with the post @-@ punk band Wire , included a cover of " Blue Jay Way " on his 1982 solo album Not To . In March 2015 , the song was also his selection for the NME 's " 100 Greatest Beatles Songs " poll . Newman cited the track as an example of how the Beatles were " properly serious about their art " and why they now " need to be rescued from the clammy clutches of the heritage industry " . 
 <unk> released a live recording of the song on their 1992 album <unk> Hair That Long , a version that Trouser Press later said " could easily reunite the Beatles for good if it were played in the presence of the surviving trio " . On their 2003 live album Seven Year Itch , Siouxsie and the Banshees included a reading that , according to The Guardian 's reviewer , " transformed [ the song ] into an apocalyptic howl " . Other artists who have covered " Blue Jay Way " include Tracy Bonham , on her 2007 album In the City + In the Woods , and the Secret Machines , whose version appears in the Julie Taymor @-@ directed film Across the Universe ( 2007 ) . Former Cars keyboardist Greg Hawkes recorded a ukulele rendition for his 2008 solo album The Beatles Uke . 
 Harrison 's experience when writing " Blue Jay Way " is referenced in the Jonathan Kellerman novel Obsession ( 2007 ) , as the lead character , Alex Delaware , waits among the " bird streets " overlooking Sunset Strip . The US hip hop group Death Grips quote from the song 's lyrics in their 2012 track " Double Helix " , released on The Money Store , an album that Clash magazine described as sounding like " the burning skies of LA 's decaying empire " . 
 In a 2011 interview , music producer and radio host Kim Fowley identified " Blue Jay Way " as the first song in which a member of the Beatles wrote about America and cited it as evidence of Harrison 's standing as " the most American of all the Beatles " during the 1960s . Fowley highlighted this connection – including Harrison 's friendships with David Crosby of the Byrds and other California @-@ based musicians , such as Leon Russell – as the foundation for rock music 's first all @-@ star charity concert , the Concert for Bangladesh , which Harrison staged in New York in August 1971 . 
 Due to the attention created by the Beatles ' song , the street signs for Blue Jay Way have long been collector 's items for fans visiting the Hollywood Hills . In May 2015 , a lane in the <unk> area of Exeter , in the English county of Devon , was named Blue Jay Way after the song . In addition to much of the filming for Magical Mystery Tour having taken place at various locations in the West Country , the title commemorates the Beatles ' three concert appearances at Exeter 's ABC Cinema over 1963 – 64 . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 According to Ian MacDonald : 
 George Harrison – lead vocals , Hammond organ , backing vocal 
 John Lennon – backing vocal 
 Paul McCartney – backing vocal , bass 
 Ringo Starr – drums , tambourine 
 Session musician – cello 
 = Terry Pratchett 's The Colour of Magic = 
 Terry Pratchett 's The Colour of Magic is a two @-@ part television adaptation of the bestselling novels The Colour of Magic and The Light Fantastic by Terry Pratchett . The fantasy film was produced for Sky1 by The Mob , a small British studio , starring David Jason , Sean Astin , Tim Curry and Christopher Lee as the voice of Death . Vadim Jean both adapted the screenplay from Pratchett 's original novels , and served as director . 
 Terry Pratchett 's The Colour of Magic was broadcast on Sky One , and in high definition on Sky 1 HD , on Easter Sunday ( 23 March ) and 24 March 2008 . The first part drew audiences of 1 @.@ 5 million , with the second part attracting up to 1 @.@ 1 million viewers . The film was well received by fans , but drew mixed reviews from critics , who generally praised the acting talent of the all @-@ star cast , but criticised the film 's script and direction . 
 The production is the second adaptation of Pratchett 's novels as a live @-@ action film , following the successful release of Hogfather on Sky 1 over Christmas 2006 . A third adaptation , Going Postal , followed in 2010 with more planned for the future . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The plot of the adaptation largely follows the first two Discworld novels , The Colour of Magic and The Light Fantastic . The story follows the exploits of Rincewind , a wizard who is expelled from Unseen University after spending 40 years failing to learn even the most basic magic . In fact , Rincewind 's head holds one of the eight spells from the Octavo , the most powerful spellbook in the Discworld , and he has been unable to learn others because " they were afraid to be in the same head " as the Octavo spell . Rincewind is forced by the Patrician of Ankh @-@ Morpork to act as a local guide for Twoflower , a property insurance salesman and the Discworld 's first tourist , who is visiting Ankh @-@ Morpork , and Twoflower 's luggage , which is made from Sapient <unk> and can run on its own legs . 
 After a misunderstanding over an insurance policy causes the owner of the inn where Twoflower and Rincewind are staying to commit arson , the pair flee the city . They proceed across the disc , encountering a variety of mythical creatures , most of which lead to near @-@ death experiences for Rincewind . Fortunately for Rincewind , the Octavo spell in his head precludes him from actually dying , resulting in several comic encounters with Death . Meanwhile , a significant power struggle is occurring within the Unseen University . Narrator Brian Cox explains that " in the competitive world of wizardry , the way to the top is via dead men 's pointy shoes ... even if you have to empty them yourself " . The power @-@ hungry wizard <unk> Trymon ( Tim Curry ) plans to become Archchancellor . Trymon assassinates several faculty members but is thwarted by the incumbent Archchancellor , Galder Weatherwax , and his superior magical knowledge of the Octavo . Trymon knows there is no point in deposing the Archchancellor until he learns how to control the Octavo , which is growing increasingly restless as Rincewind ( and the spell in his head ) moves further away from Ankh @-@ Morpork and into greater danger . 
 Rincewind and Twoflower are eventually washed <unk> to the kingdom of Krull , which lies on the very rim of the disc , where they are taken prisoner . The astronomers and " <unk> " of Krull have for many years attempted to determine the sex of Great A 'Tuin , and are on the verge of launching a space vehicle to carry a pair of " <unk> " on a new mission over the rim of the disc . Unaware of this , Rincewind and Twoflower take the place of the two cosmonauts and ' escape ' to the spacecraft , which they accidentally launch , catapulting them off the rim . The prospect of losing the eighth spell in this fashion prompts the Octavo to act , causing A 'Tuin to perform a barrel roll to recapture Rincewind , landing the pair near the centre of the disc . Watching the Octavo 's restlessness , the Archchancellor reveals his intention to use the Rite of <unk> to ask Death about the Octavo and also about a large red star that has recently appeared in the sky . Now knowing all he needs , Trymon throws Weatherwax from the Tower of Art and becomes Archchancellor in his place . 
 The red star grows steadily larger , and the worried people of Ankh @-@ Morpork mob the Unseen University because the wizards appear unable to save the disc from it . Trymon learns from Death that all eight spells of the Octavo must be said together at the solstice to save the disc from destruction and that Great A 'Tuin is flying towards the red star for a purpose that Death says is " nothing to do with me . " Trymon dispatches a group of mercenaries , led by Herrena , to capture Rincewind and retrieve the eighth spell , along with a force of wizards . Meanwhile , Rincewind and Twoflower encounter Cohen the Barbarian ( 87 years old and retired ) , and Twoflower rescues Bethan , a human sacrifice in a druid ritual . A battle between the wizards and Rincewind leaves Twoflower in a coma ; Rincewind rescues him from Death 's door , and Cohen in turn rescues Rincewind and Twoflower from Herrena and the mercenaries . 
 The four take a ferry to Ankh @-@ Morpork , where the populace is rioting because the star is now larger than the disc 's own sun . Trymon assembles the senior wizards of the University , and orders them to <unk> the Octavo . When they release the spellbook , Trymon steals it and locks the wizards in its chamber . Rincewind releases them and they follow Trymon to the top of the Tower of Art , afraid that he will attempt to say the spells and that they will destroy his mind ( and the rest of the world ) . Trymon , however , says the first seven spells successfully and gains near @-@ ultimate power , and turns the wizards to stone . Rincewind fights Trymon , who is eventually killed , returning the spells to the Octavo . Rincewind <unk> the eighth spell from his head , completing the set , and reads the entire spellbook . 
 The red star is finally revealed as a world @-@ turtle breeding ground : the Octavo spells prompt several eggs orbiting the star to hatch into juvenile <unk> , which follow Great A 'Tuin as it returns to deep space . The narrator <unk> up a few loose ends : the Octavo is eaten by the luggage , which Twoflower donates to Rincewind . Rincewind , now able to learn new spells with the departure of the 8th spell from his head , re @-@ enrolls at Unseen University . Cohen and Bethan decide to get married ( despite the 60 year age difference ) , with Cohen celebrating by commissioning some Din <unk> , made from troll 's teeth ( pure diamond ) . Twoflower presents them with a dozen gold coins as a wedding gift . Although Twoflower , who comes from the <unk> Continent where gold is extremely common , considers this a small sum Rincewind comments that in Ankh @-@ Morpork a dozen gold coins is enough to buy a small kingdom . Twoflower returns home on a ship and Rincewind returns to the Unseen <unk> with the Luggage happily following . 
 = = = Differences from original texts = = = 
 Although the film generally remains true to the original novels , several scenes and characters were removed or merged with others to bring the script to a reasonable length . Noting that " there wasn 't time for everything " , the producers cut completely the scene in the Temple of Bel @-@ <unk> and the associated plotline about the significance of the number eight ; Director Vadim Jean defended the decision , saying " we could have gone there , but we went to the Wyrmberg instead . There [ were ] time constraints and we could have gone one way or the other , so we went the whole hog on just one . " The scenes in the Wyrmberg were themselves shortened and simplified , reducing the character of Li ! <unk> to a cameo and losing the characters of K ! <unk> , <unk> and <unk> completely . The inter @-@ wizard rivalry at Unseen University , by contrast , was expanded and spread out throughout the film , while in the novels the sequences are short and mainly found in The Light Fantastic . This established Trymon as a more easily recognisable antagonist . To avoid the necessity of explaining the deus ex machina in detail , the Octavo in the film simply causes A 'Tuin to roll to recapture Rincewind , whereas in the novel , a complicated ' change spell ' returns him to the disc . The creatures from the Dungeon Dimensions which invade reality at the end of The Light Fantastic , and Rincewind 's fight in the Dungeon Dimensions themselves , are completely omitted , and Trymon is simply driven mad by reading the Octavo spells at the end of the film version . Galder Weatherwax is also killed by Trymon in the film version , whereas , in the books , he is killed by accidentally summoning the Luggage instead of Rincewind . Furthermore , when Rincewind spotted the Luggage in the film , it was after he had attempted to jump into the River Ankh , whereas in the book he spotted the Luggage when he was sitting the Broken Drum . 
 = = Production = = 
 The adaptation was produced by The Mob , with Rod Brown , Ian Sharples , Elaine Pyke and Sarah Conroy credited as producers . Vadim Jean continued his involvement with the film as director . 
 = = = Adaptation = = = 
 The Colour of Magic is the second live @-@ action adaptation of Terry Pratchett 's Discworld series , following the highly successful Hogfather , which was broadcast over Christmas 2006 to an audience of 2 @.@ 6 million . After the success of Hogfather , Pratchett was easily persuaded to release the rights for The Colour of Magic and The Light Fantastic . Vadim Jean was employed to adapt the two literary works into a three @-@ hour , two @-@ part screenplay . While Pratchett was given " carte blanche " to " turn up whenever [ he ] wanted " , he was happy to see a more liberal interpretation of his first two works than he had been for Hogfather . Speaking to Sky Magazine , Pratchett said that , " There [ was ] not so much emotional baggage ... riding on The Colour of Magic and The Light Fantastic . It was just this book of mine that suddenly started selling incredibly well " . Jean 's main challenge was to streamline the plot and remove the many irrelevant , but highly amusing , tangents that are an iconic feature of Pratchett 's work , without destroying the appeal of the books . Jean said that " there [ was ] a real danger , with this story , that one could strip out the ' Pratchett @-@ ness ' ... I had to fight to keep [ it ] in " . Pratchett was pleased with the final script , saying " it wasn 't the slaughter job I thought it would have to be " , and " [ we 've managed ] to keep the soul ... it 's still recognisably [ the same ] book " . 
 = = = Filming = = = 
 Filming took place at Pinewood Studios for the interior scenes of the Wyrmberg , the Octavo room in the Unseen University , and for exterior shots of Ankh @-@ Morpork and the Broken Drum . Pinewood 's exterior water tank , the largest in Europe , was also employed for the scenes where Rincewind and Twoflower are washed towards the edge of the world . These sequences , as well as being the most challenging to film , were also one of the most physically exhausting for the cast . Background shots of Niagara Falls were also taken , and digitally merged with the bluescreen film shot at Pinewood , location shots taken on a river in Wales , and CGI sequences of A 'Tuin and the Discworld . Digitally combining all this material together in a believable fashion was , according to Jean , " the toughest week of the shoot " . All the digital effects and CGI for the film were provided by Fluid Pictures , a small digital effects group based in Soho . 
 Jean , who had adapted and directed Hogfather in 2006 , was keen to return to some of the locations used in that film to provide continuity . The scenes in the Great hall of the Unseen University were filmed in the crypt of the Guildhall in the City of London , and the same Victorian country home was used for Death 's house as had been seen in Hogfather . This time around , Jean was able to film more extensive panoramic shots in the latter location , thanks to The Colour of Magic 's larger budget . Other filming locations included Anglesey and Snowdonia for exterior shots , Gloucester docks as the docks of Ankh @-@ Morpork , and the Royal Courts of Justice as the Patrician 's Palace . 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 When choreographing the various fight sequences in the film , Jean sought to maintain the atmosphere and humour of the Discworld while still creating an exciting action sequence . Jean explained that " the tone of all these fights is the tone of Discworld ... it has a kind of chaos to it ... there are very few set pieces , it 's more about the chaos and the humour " . Although all the fight sequences were carefully controlled for safety , some were choreographed to be more haphazard than others ; each fighter was also given their own style for variety and humour . Liz May Brice ( Herrena ) noted the contrast in the ferry fight sequence , saying " the way we 've done the fight , he [ Cohen the Barbarian ] is almost [ winning ] by mistake ... it 's sort of fun , whereas [ Herrena ] is very deliberate " . 
 The inverted fight between Rincewind and Liessa in the Wyrmberg , by contrast , was the most meticulously choreographed sequence in the film . In addition to the need to add CGI backdrops to every shot , hanging upside down from wires whilst fighting proved to be what David Jason described as " a nauseous experience " . The sequence had to be filmed in very short bursts as " all of the actors and stunt people could only manage around four to five minutes before they wanted to [ vomit ] " . Karen David , who played Liessa , pulled several stomach muscles during the filming , and Jason described the experience as like " being hung upside @-@ down like the last chicken at Sainsbury 's ... I wouldn 't do that again in a hurry " . 
 = = Casting = = 
 David Jason was the first actor to be cast for the production , as it had always been his desire to play Rincewind in a film adaptation of The Colour of Magic . Jason had mentioned in an interview some fifteen years previously that , of all the parts available , the character of Rincewind was the one he coveted the most . Jason describes the wizard as " just such an amusing , endearing character ... I always kept this idea in my head that one day I [ would ] play Rincewind " . Jason 's appointment to the role , announced in April 2007 , drew mixed reactions , with comments ranging from " terrible choice " to " brilliant " . A common criticism was that Jason , at 68 , was too old to play a character who is , according to the books , middle @-@ aged . 
 From the day Jason was cast , rumours began to fly that a major American actor would be cast alongside him to bolster the film 's international appeal . On 31 July 2007 it was revealed that Sean Astin , world @-@ famous for his part in the Lord of the Rings film trilogy , had been signed for the role . - before filming started , Sean had to ask his agent just who " Dave Jason " was and left the video store with two large bags of David Jason 's back catalogue to watch . The casting of Tim Curry as Trymon and Christopher Lee as the voice of Death was revealed at the same time . The choice of Astin as Twoflower was criticised by some fans , who had anticipated that the tourist would be Oriental . Pratchett responded to this criticism in an open letter , where he noted that he had only described Twoflower as " exotically foreign " until Interesting Times . The choice of Lee to replace Ian Richardson , who had voiced Death in Hogfather , was more widely accepted ; Lee had previously voiced the part in the animated adaptations of Soul Music and Wyrd Sisters . 
 The part of the Patrician of Ankh @-@ Morpork , Havelock <unk> , was not revealed until the premiere of The Colour of Magic , where Jeremy Irons , billed as a " guest star " , was revealed to have played the role . A small number of Pratchett fans were invited to participate as extras in the mob scenes towards the end of the film , and the bar fight in the <unk> Drum . 
 Several members of the cast previously had roles in Sky One 's previous adaptation of Pratchett 's novel Hogfather , including David Jason as Albert , Nigel Planer as Mr. <unk> , and Stephen Marcus as Banjo . Pratchett himself had also made a cameo in Hogfather as The <unk> . Nigel Planer had also previously contributed his voice to Discworld audiobooks , as well as the computer games Discworld II : Missing Presumed ... ! ? and Discworld Noir . 
 = = = Principal cast = = = 
 David Jason as Rincewind , a failed wizard and the main protagonist . 
 Sean Astin as Twoflower , the <unk> 's first tourist . 
 Tim Curry as Trymon , the power @-@ hungry senior wizard at the Unseen University . 
 Christopher Lee as the voice of Death . 
 Jeremy Irons as Lord <unk> , the Patrician of Ankh @-@ Morpork . 
 David Bradley as Cohen the Barbarian , the most famous barbarian in the <unk> , now ' retired ' . 
 Laura Haddock as Bethan , a druid sacrifice , who falls in love with Cohen . 
 James Cosmo as Galder Weatherwax , the incumbent Archchancellor of the Unseen University . 
 Nicolas Tennant as Head Librarian of the Unseen University , who is turned into an orangutan during the events of the film . 
 Karen David as Liessa , a <unk> from the Wyrmberg . 
 Liz May Brice as Herrena , a mercenary who is employed to capture Rincewind . 
 Nigel Planer as the Arch @-@ Astronomer of Krull . 
 Richard Da Costa as The Luggage . 
 Roger Ashton @-@ Griffiths as <unk> Panter . 
 Miles Richardson as <unk> , the leader of the Ankh @-@ Morpork Assassins ' Guild . 
 James Perry as Kring , the enchanted sword . 
 Stephen Marcus as <unk> , the bartender at the Broken Drum . 
 Toby Jones as one of the heads of the eight orders of Wizardry . 
 Terry Pratchett appears in a cameo role , playing <unk> # 2 in the opening and closing scenes of the film . Richard <unk> , the director of programming at Sky One , also appears as the Alchemist . 
 = = Release and reception = = 
 A teaser trailer , released in late February 2008 , featured principal cast members , including Rincewind , Twoflower , Trymon and the Arch @-@ Astronomer of Krull , attempting to describe <unk> , the ' colour of magic ' . The teaser concludes with the film 's tagline : " a pigment of your imagination " . Two more trailers were released in March 2008 , containing a more complete synopsis , with narration by Brian Cox . The trailers formed part of a multimillion @-@ dollar advertising campaign in partnership with Amazon.com and Borders Books . In addition to conventional adverts in national newspapers and banner ads on sites including MSN.com and Yahoo ! .com , Sky launched a viral marketing campaign , and established a bluetooth hotspot at Victoria station , London , where fans could download video clips and ringtones to mobile phones . 
 The film was premiered at the Curzon Cinema , London , on 3 March 2008 ; the event was covered in several major newspapers after David Jason , somewhat inebriated , got into the wrong limousine by mistake when departing from the premiere . 
 The film was released in two parts , breaking at roughly the same place as the literary versions of The Colour of Magic and The Light Fantastic , although some scenes ( such as Trymon 's murder of the Archchancellor ) were moved across the break for dramatic effect . The first part , concluding with Rincewind and Twoflower falling off the edge of the disk in the <unk> spaceship , was broadcast on Easter Sunday ( 23 March 2008 ) , at 6pm GMT on Sky1 and Sky 1 HD . The second part was broadcast on the same channels at 6pm the following day ( Easter Monday ) . Viewing audience for the first part reached 1 @.@ 5 million , 8 % of the viewing total . The second part of the film attracted an average audience of 967 @,@ 000 , peaking at 1 @.@ 1 million during the 15 minute block from 7 : 15 pm . 
 The film was generally well received by critics , with The Times believing it to be " better than Sky 's previous Discworld adaptation Hogfather " . The Scotsman admitted that it was a " good @-@ looking production that proper fans probably appreciated " , but criticised the film for being " far too long ... with leaden direction and script " . The Times agreed , saying that " It looked good , in an over @-@ glossy , Hallmark Productions kind of way , although every now and again the budget ... looked stretched " . 
 Pratchett himself said he was " very pleased " with the casting and production of the film , although he admitted that seeing his literary work adapted for the screen was " very bad for me : it 's like I 'm wandering around on the inside of my own head " . 
 The film was released on DVD and Blu @-@ ray Disc on 3 November 2008 . 
 In the United States and Canada , it is premiering as The Color of Magic on the Ion channel . 
 The North American DVD was released on 14 July 2009 . It is considerably shorter ( 132 min ) than the British version ( 184 min ) . The version available on Netflix is the original British presentation . 
 = Weldy Walker = 
 Weldy Wilberforce Walker ( July 27 , 1860 – November 23 , 1937 ) , sometimes known as <unk> Walker and W. W. Walker , was an American baseball player . In 1884 , he became the second African American to play Major League Baseball . 
 Walker played college baseball at Oberlin College and the University of Michigan . In July 1884 , he joined the Toledo Blue Stockings of the American Association which was then part of Major League Baseball . His brother Moses Fleetwood Walker , commonly known as Fleetwood ( or " Fleet " ) Walker , was the first African American to play Major League Baseball , making his debut two months before Weldy . In 1887 , as racial segregation took hold in professional baseball , Weldy joined the Pittsburgh Keystones of the short @-@ lived National Colored Base Ball League . 
 His March 1888 open letter to The Sporting Life protesting the racial segregation of baseball has been described as " perhaps the most passionate cry for justice ever voiced by a Negro athlete . " 
 After retiring from baseball , Walker operated restaurants and a hotel in eastern Ohio . In 1897 , he served on the Executive Committee of the Negro Protective Party , a newly formed political party established in Ohio in protest of the failure of the Republican governor to investigate the lynching of an African American in June 1897 at Urbana , Ohio . In the 1900s , Weldy and his brother Fleetwood became active in the Back @-@ to @-@ Africa movement and promoted emigration to Liberia . The brothers also established and edited The Equator , a black issues newspaper . 
 = = Early years = = 
 Walker was born in 1860 in Steubenville , Ohio , an industrial city in the eastern part of the state with a reputation for racial tolerance . Weldy 's name was a combination of the biblical word for wealthy ( " <unk> " ) and the surname of English abolitionist William Wilberforce . 
 His parents , Moses W. Walker and Caroline ( O 'Hara ) Walker , moved to Steubenville from Mount Pleasant , Ohio . His father was a minister in the Methodist Episcopal Church , a physician , and a leader in Steubenville 's African @-@ American community . In June 1870 , at the time of the 1870 United States Census , the Walker family was living in Steubenville 's First Ward . Walker 's father was identified as a minister who had been born in Virginia . The couple had four children listed in the Census : William ( age 25 ) , Mary ( age 21 ) , Sarah ( age 19 ) , Moses F. ( age 11 ) and Weldy W. ( age 9 ) . In June 1880 , at the time of the 1880 United States Census , the family was still living in Steubenville and consisted of Moses ( age 59 , clergyman ) , Caroline ( age 57 ) , William ( age 35 , teamster ) , Sarah ( age 22 ) , Moses ( age 21 , at school ) , <unk> ( age 19 , at school ) , and Mary Alexander ( age 13 , adopted ) . 
 Weldy attended Steubenville 's integrated public high school in the 1870s . 
 = = College baseball = = 
 While Weldy was still in high school , his older brother , Fleetwood Walker , enrolled at Oberlin College , which was among the first colleges in the United States to become racially integrated . In 1881 , Weldy joined his brother at Oberlin College , enrolling as a student in the Oberlin 's preparatory school . In the spring of 1881 , the Walker brothers played on Oberlin College 's first varsity inter @-@ collegiate baseball team . Weldy , a freshman , played right field while Fleetwood , a junior , was the catcher . According to one account , Weldy played second base and finished the 1881 season as Oberlin 's second leading batter . 
 After the 1881 baseball season , Weldy 's brother Fleetwood transferred to the University of Michigan and played as a catcher for the Michigan Wolverines baseball team in 1882 . Fleetwood became the first African American to play on a varsity sports team at Michigan and helped lead the Wolverines to a 10 – 3 record , a conference championship , and the best record for a Michigan baseball team up to that time . Weldy initially remained at Oberlin , but he transferred to Michigan in the fall of 1882 as a student in the homeopathic medical school . In the fall of 1882 , the Oberlin Review reported : " Weldy Walker , ' 85 leaves to assist his brother in making the ' Ann Harbor ' [ sic ] nine a little more able to compete with Oberlin . " Two weeks later , a writer for an Ann Arbor newspaper noted that " we have added to the list Weldy Walker , a magnificent fielder , safe batter , and phenomenal base runner . " Before the 1883 baseball season began , Fleetwood left Michigan to play professional baseball for a team from New Castle , Pennsylvania . 
 During the 1883 season , Weldy became the second African American to play for the Michigan baseball team . He played third base for Michigan and also served on the Board of Directors of the University Base @-@ Ball Association . Weldy also played for Michigan as a catcher during part of the 1884 baseball season . Weldy scored four runs and had four hits in five at @-@ bats to help Michigan defeat Michigan Agricultural College ( later known as Michigan State University ) on June 14 , 1884 . According to Rich Adler 's book Baseball at the University of Michigan , each of the Walker brothers was " accepted as a member of the student body , " although neither received a degree from the university . 
 = = Professional baseball = = 
 = = = Toledo Blue Stockings = = = 
 At the start of the 1884 baseball season , Weldy continued to study homeopathic medicine and play baseball at Michigan . Meanwhile , Fleetwood was playing for the Toledo Blue Stockings of the American Association , which was considered to be part of Major League Baseball . On May 1 , 1884 , Fleetwood became the first African American to play in Major League Baseball . 
 As the 1884 baseball season progressed , the roster of the Toledo Blue Stockings was depleted by injuries . In need of additional players , the team recruited Weldy to join his brother in Toledo . Weldy appeared in his first game for the Blue Stockings on July 15 , 1884 , becoming the second African American to play Major League Baseball . Weldy appeared in five games as an outfielder for the Blue Stockings between July 15 and August 6 , 1884 . He had four hits , two runs batted in , and one run scored in 18 at @-@ bats for a .222 batting average . After a series in Indianapolis , an article in The Sporting Life noted that " the <unk> were short @-@ handed and played Weldy Walker , a brother of the catcher ; he played well . " The Walker brothers in 1884 were the last African Americans to play Major League Baseball for more than 60 years until Jackie Robinson joined the Brooklyn Dodgers in 1947 . 
 = = = Segregation of baseball and minor leagues = = = 
 Weldy blamed Chicago White Stockings player @-@ manager Cap Anson for the fact that neither he , his brother , nor any other African Americans were allowed to play in the major leagues after 1884 . During the 1884 season , Anson refused to play against Toledo until the Walker brothers were benched . In 1887 , Anson again refused to play against the Newark team on which Fleetwood played . Anson biographer David L. Fleitz shared Weldy 's belief that Anson was responsible for the game 's segregation : " Cap Anson , more than anyone else , was the man who wielded the infamous pen . " 
 Following his time with the Blue Stockings , Weldy played for the Cleveland team in the Western League . During the 1885 season , Weldy compiled a .375 batting average for the Cleveland Forest Cities . In 1886 , Weldy played third base for the Excelsior Club in Cleveland . 
 = = = Open letter on racial segregation = = = 
 By early 1887 , 13 African Americans were playing in the " white " minor leagues , including four in the Ohio State League . Weldy began the season with the Akron Acorns of the Ohio State League . However , he appeared in only four games for the Acorns . During the 1887 season , racial segregation began to become the official policy in certain minor leagues . Weldy was outraged by a report that the Tri @-@ State League ( successor to the Ohio State League ) had abandoned racial integration . In March 1888 , he wrote a letter to the league 's president protesting the decision . In his 1970 history of racial segregation in baseball , Robert Peterson described Weldy 's letter as " perhaps the most passionate cry for justice ever voiced by a Negro athlete . " In the letter , Walker wrote : 
 The law is a disgrace to the present age , and reflects very much upon the intelligence of your last meeting , and casts derision at the laws of Ohio – the voice of the people – that say all men are equal . I would suggest that your honorable body , in case that black law is not repealed , pass one making it criminal for a colored man or woman to be found on a ball ground ... There should be some broader cause – such as lack of ability , behavior and intelligence – for barring a player , rather than his color . It is for these reasons and because I think ability and intelligence should be recognized first and last – at all times and by everyone – I ask the question again , ' Why was the law permitting colored men to sign repealed , etc . ? ' 
 On March 14 , 1888 , and at Weldy 's request , his letter was published in The Sporting Life under the headline " Why Discriminate ? " In his book on baseball 's segregation , Robert Peterson wrote that Weldy 's question " went unanswered , because it was unanswerable . . . but the truth was plain for all who wished to see it : Jim Crow was warming up . " 
 = = = Pittsburgh Keystones = = = 
 In 1887 , Weldy joined the Pittsburgh Keystones in the newly formed National Colored Base Ball League and compiled a .360 batting average in five games as a player . Although the National Colored Base Ball League disbanded after a short time , the Keystones continued to play as an independent team . Weldy took over as the team 's manager in 1888 and led the Keystones to a 9 – 1 record in the first ten games of the season . The Keystones ' lineup in 1888 also included Sol White . In early June 1888 , The Cleveland Gazette wrote that Weldy was " making quite a success of the Keystone Base Ball Club . " 
 = = Civil rights efforts and business career = = 
 = = = 1884 civil rights lawsuit = = = 
 Walker became involved in a civil rights lawsuit in 1884 after a roller @-@ skating rink in Steubenville denied entry to Walker and his friend , Hannibal Lyons . The Cleveland Gazette , an African @-@ American weekly newspaper , described the circumstances as follows : 
 Steubenville , like many other places , is suffering now from the roller skate craze . There are now three in full blast and prospects for more . Discrimination on account of color never was carried on in Steubenville until these strangers starting rinks here issued the edict " No Negroes need apply except for positions of <unk> . " On the 16th there was an opening night at the South Side Rink , and two of our young men of gentlemanly deportment and honest reputation applied for admission . The proprietor of the rink flatly told them , " You are colored and you can 't skate . " 
 Walker and Lyons filed a civil rights lawsuit accusing the operator , Massey & Son , of racial discrimination . Some local newspaper accounts of the suit suggested that " Walker and Lyons were troublemakers stirring a ' political and social racket . ' " Following a trial in January 1885 , the presiding judge , Justice May , ruled that the skating rink operator had violated the rights of Walker and Lyons " under the civil rights law , and a special law of the Ohio Legislature giving the colored man certain privileges . " The court awarded them each fifteen dollars each in damages , with costs . However , the court declined to enter an order requiring the rink operator to admit African Americans . In his biography of Fleetwood Walker , David Zang called the court 's ruling " a judgment that nominally supported integration while doing nothing to promote it in everyday reality . " 
 = = = Negro Protective Party = = = 
 During the 1890s , Walker became active in politics . Walker 's activism was heightened by an incident in June 1897 in which residents of Urbana , Ohio , formed a lynch mob , removed a black man named " Click " Mitchell from the town jail , and publicly killed him by hanging . Believing that Ohio 's Republican Governor Asa Bushnell had failed to conduct an appropriate investigation into the lynching , Walker and other African Americans in Ohio left the Republican Party and formed the Negro Protective Party . As a member of the party 's Executive Committee , Walker helped organize the party 's convention at Columbus , Ohio in September 1897 . The party adopted a platform demanding " an immediate recognition of our rights as citizens such as have been repeatedly pledged and as often violated , " and declaring an intention " to take immediate political action that we may show to the world that we are no longer the plaything of politicians or chattels for sale to the highest bidder . " The party also began publishing " The Negro Protector " as its official organ . When former slave and Republican Party official , Nelson T. Gant , attacked Walker and the Negro Protective Party , Walker responded with an open letter that was published in Ohio newspapers . In the letter , Walker wrote : 
 Notwithstanding N. T. Gant there are many " intelligent Negroes " who will support the Negro protective ticket and will hurl back at him with contempt his insults to their manhood that they are not free to leave the republican party without being branded as " <unk> of their party " and " ungrateful to their Creator and their race . " Such <unk> are manifestly the strongest evidence of an enslaved mind ... Republicans ... believe , or make pretense of believing , that the Negro owes eternal allegiance to the G. O. P. no matter what the issue ... We shall not trespass further upon your valuable space , except to say that the Negro Protective party will live and its supporters hope never to regret the stand taken for free and independent manhood as a protest against every disregard , from whatever source , of the rights and privileges of the Negro as an American citizen . 
 When Ohio 's Republican Secretary of State Charles Kinney refused to print the Negro Protective Party 's emblem ( an image of Abraham Lincoln ) on the state ballot , the party filed a mandamus action to compel him to do so . When the party 's gubernatorial candidate , S. J. Lewis , received 4 @,@ 276 votes in the official vote count , The Cleveland Gazette opined that Governor Bushnell 's narrow plurality victory was " a direct result of the governor 's failure to do his duty during the life of the mob that lynched innocent Afro @-@ American , ' Click " Mitchell , at Urbana . " 
 = = = Business interests = = = 
 Even before retiring from baseball , Weldy became active in business . In October 1884 , Weldy and a partner went into business operating Delmonico Dining Rooms in Mingo Junction , Ohio , near Steubenville . In 1897 , Weldy and Joe <unk> opened an oyster and fish store on North Sixth Street in Steubenville . 
 The 1890s were a turbulent decade for Weldy 's older brother Fleetwood . In 1891 , Fleetwood stabbed a man to death outside a saloon , but was acquitted on grounds of self @-@ defense . In 1898 , while employed as a railroad postal clerk , Fleetwood was charged with embezzling the contents of registered letters addressed to a dozen different persons and served a year in jail . In 1899 , while Fleetwood was still in jail , Weldy began operating the Union Hotel at 105 Market Street in downtown Steubenville . Following Fleetwood 's release from jail , the hotel / boarding house was jointly operated by Fleetwood and Weldy . In June 1900 , at the time of the 1900 United States Census , Walker was living at the Union Hotel with Fleetwood , Fleetwood 's second wife <unk> , and their three children . The family also had a live @-@ in servant , Sarah Richmond ( age 45 ) . Fleetwood was identified in the 1900 Census as the operator of a boarding house , and Weldy as a " porter . " A 1902 city directory listed Fleetwood as the hotel 's proprietor and Weldy as the clerk , but a 1904 – 05 directory listed Weldy as the proprietor and Fleetwood and <unk> as residents . By 1906 , Weldy had temporarily relocated several miles downriver to Wheeling , West Virginia , and rumors circulated that the Union Hotel would be sold and turned into " a first class house for the accommodation of Afro @-@ American visitors . " 
 = = = Back @-@ to @-@ Africa movement = = = 
 In the 1900s , the Walker brothers became active in the Back @-@ to @-@ Africa movement . In 1902 , Fleetwood and Weldy established and edited a black @-@ issues newspaper called The Equator . Six years later , Fleetwood and Weldy published a 47 @-@ page book titled Our Home Colony : A Treatise on the Past , Present , and Future of the Negro Race in America . Fleetwood 's biographer , David Zang , has written that Fleetwood " was effected by the political vigilance which his younger brother , Weldy , had brought to the black cause . " In the credits to Our Home Colony , Fleetwood was identified as the author , and Weldy was identified as " General Agent , " though much of the book is written in the first @-@ person plural . In the book , the Walkers wrote : " The only practical and permanent solution of the present and future race troubles in the United States is entire separation by Emigration of the Negro from America . " They added : " The Negro race will be a menace and the source of discontent as long as it remains in large numbers in the United States . The time is growing very near when the whites of the United States must either settle this problem by deportation , or else be willing to accept a reign of terror such as the world has never seen in a civilized country . " 
 The Walker brothers also opened an office to begin the work of resettlement to Africa at the time Our Home Colony was published . In his 1908 response to an Oberlin College alumni questionnaire , Weldy listed his occupation as " General Agent " for Our Home Colony and Liberian emigration . 
 = = Later years = = 
 By 1910 , Fleetwood had moved to Cadiz , Ohio , where he operated an 800 @-@ seat vaudeville theater . In April 1910 , at the time of the 1910 United States Census , Weldy was still living at 105 Market Street in Steubenville , and the property was being operated as a boarding house . The proprietor and head of the household was identified as Thomas F. Walker , Weldy 's nephew and Fleetwood 's son . Weldy was listed as a " waiter . " 
 In January 1920 , at the time of the 1920 United States Census , Walker was living at 100 Market Street in Steubenville with nephew Thomas and Thomas 's wife , Jeanette . Thomas was listed as the " keeper " of the hotel , and Weldy ( identified as " <unk> " ) was listed as having no employment . Weldy remained politically active in his later years and was a friend of Harry C. Smith , the owner and editor of The Cleveland Gazette , the longest @-@ publishing African @-@ American weekly in the United States . After Smith helped the Republican Party elect President Warren Harding in 1920 , Weldy sent Smith a congratulatory letter noting that the Negro vote played a role in Harding 's victory . Still focused on the practice of lynching in the Southern states , Weldy added : " The North would not have known there had been an election in Florida unless that old game of killing six or more Negroes for wanting to vote had been pulled off . When will ' Uncle Sam ' allow the poor southern Negro ' life , liberty and the pursuit of happiness . ' " 
 When Fleetwood died in Cleveland in May 1924 , Weldy and Thomas traveled to Cleveland and returned Fleetwood 's remains to Steubenville in a casket costing $ 525 . According to Fleetwood biographer , David Zang , Weldy became a bootlegger during Prohibition , and nephew Thomas was a numbers bookie . 
 In April 1930 , at the time of the 1930 United States Census , Walker was a " <unk> " in an all @-@ black boarding house at 117 South 6th Street in Steubenville operated by Eugene Williams . His occupation was listed as a clerk . 
 Walker never married . In November 1937 , he died from pneumonia at his home at 100 Market Street in Steubenville . His occupation was listed as a retired hotel manager at the time of his death . 
 = Like a Virgin ( album ) = 
 Like a Virgin is the second studio album by American singer @-@ songwriter Madonna , released on November 12 , 1984 , by Sire Records . It was reissued worldwide in 1985 , with the inclusion of " Into the Groove " . In 2001 , Warner Bros. Records released a remastered version with two bonus remix tracks . After the release of her self @-@ titled debut album , Madonna wanted to solidify her future in the music business , by building on the success of the first album . She decided to become one of the record producers , but Warner Bros. was not ready to give her the artistic freedom that she wanted . Nile Rodgers was chosen as the primary producer of the album , due to his work with David Bowie . 
 The album was recorded at Power Station Studio in New York at a quick pace . Rodgers enlisted the help of his former Chic band mates Bernard Edwards , who was the bassist , and Tony Thompson , who played drums ; they appeared on several tracks of the album . Rodgers decided to be the guitarist , when Edwards requested him to do so , in exchange of their help . Jason Corsaro , the record 's audio engineer , persuaded Rodgers to use digital recording , a new technique introduced at that time . The cover sleeve and images were shot by Steven Meisel . Madonna wanted the album title and the cover image to make provocative link between her own religious name Madonna , as the Roman Catholic title for Jesus ' mother Mary , and the Christian concept of the virgin birth . 
 While not a substantial musical departure from Madonna 's first album , she felt that the material from Like a Virgin was stronger . Along with Rodgers , Madonna also collaborated with her former boyfriend Steve Bray , who co @-@ wrote many songs on the album . Consisting of dance @-@ pop oriented music , the songs also incorporated new wave . After its release , Like a Virgin received mixed reviews from the critics , but was a commercial success . It became Madonna 's first number one album on the Billboard 200 , while reaching the top of the charts in Germany , Italy , Netherlands , New Zealand , Spain and the United Kingdom . The Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) certified it diamond for shipment of ten million copies across the United States . Worldwide it has sold 21 million copies , becoming one of the best @-@ selling albums of all time . 
 Five singles were released from the album , including Madonna 's first US number @-@ one " Like a Virgin " and her first UK number @-@ one " Into the Groove " . To promote the album , she embarked on The Virgin Tour , which had shows in cities of North America only . Like a Virgin has attained significance as a cultural artifact of the 1980s . Madonna proved that she was not a one @-@ hit wonder and was able to provide herself with a permanent footing in the music world . Her songs became a lightning rod for both criticism by conservatives and imitation by the younger female population , especially " Material Girl " and " Like a Virgin " . According to author J. Randy Taraborrelli , " Every important artist has at least one album in his or her career whose critical and commercial success becomes the artist 's magic moment ; for Madonna , Like a Virgin was just such a defining moment " . 
 = = Background = = 
 A former dancer and fixture on the New York club scene , Madonna Louise Ciccone became known to the world simply as Madonna , with the release of her 1983 self @-@ titled debut album Madonna . Fueled by hit songs like " Holiday " , " Borderline " and " Lucky Star " , the album was one of the best selling of the year and helped Madonna become one of the most exciting new artists of the 1980s . When she started work on her second album , Madonna felt that her first album had succeeded in introducing her " street @-@ smart dance queen " persona , and she wanted to solidify and build upon that concept . According to her , " My work , my dedication — the stubbornness for getting Madonna released — had paid off . Now it was time to solidify my future . " 
 For Like a Virgin , Madonna attempted to become one of the primary record producers , feeling the need to control the various aspects of her music . She believed that depending on a particular producer for her album was not something that suited her . Madonna said " I learnt my lesson while creating my debut album , and the way Lucas left me in the water with the project , you can 't trust men " — referring to the incident , when due to certain difference of opinion between producer Reggie Lucas and Madonna , Lucas had left the project half @-@ way . However , Warner Bros. Records was not ready to give her the artistic freedom that she wanted . In J. Randy Taraborrelli 's biography of Madonna , she commented , 
 " Warner Bros. Records is a hierarchy of old men and it 's a chauvinist environment to be working in because I 'm treated like this sexy little girl . I had to prove them wrong , which meant not only proving myself to my fans but to my record company as well . That is something that happens when you 're a girl . It wouldn 't happen to Prince or Michael Jackson . I had to do everything on my own and it was hard trying to convince people that I was worth a record deal . After that , I had the same problem trying to convince the record company that I had more to offer than a one @-@ shot singer . I had to win this fight . " 
 Ultimately , Nile Rodgers was chosen by Madonna as the producer of the album , with the approval of the Warner Brothers executives . Madonna chose Rodgers mostly because of his work as a member of the seventies band Chic , and his most recent production work with David Bowie on his 1983 album Let 's Dance . She commented , " When I was making the record , I was just so thrilled and happy to be working with Nile Rodgers . I idolized Nile because of the whole Chic thing . I couldn 't believe that the record company gave me the money so that I could work with him . " 
 For his part , Rodgers recalled that he had first seen Madonna perform at a small club in New York in 1983 . In an interview with Time magazine , Rodgers explained : " I went to the club to see another woman sing , but when I got there Madonna was onstage . I loved her stage presence and then we met right after that . I kept thinking to myself , ' Damn , is she a star ' , but she wasn 't at that time . I always wanted to work with her and Like a Virgin seemed like a perfect opportunity . " 
 = = Recording = = 
 The album was recorded at Power Station Studio in New York at a quick pace . Rodgers enlisted the help of his former Chic band mates Edwards , who was the bassist , and Tony Thompson , who played the drums ; they appeared on several tracks of the album . Rodgers decided to be the guitarist , when Edwards requested him to do so , in exchange for their help . 
 The recording sessions did not start until the afternoon as Rodgers , who attended late @-@ night parties , was not accustomed to work in early mornings . The schedule was also difficult for Madonna , who recalled that she used to " go to the swim club on the Upper West Side and go swimming and walk from there to the recording studio . It was impossible for me to reach there at morning . " Rodgers recalled that Madonna was a real hard worker and incredibly tenacious . He commented : " I am always amazed by Madonna 's incredible judgement when it comes to making pop records . I 've never seen anyone do it better , and that 's the truth . When we did that album , it was the perfect union , and I knew it from the first day in the studio . The thing between us , man , it was sexual , it was passionate , it was creativity ... it was pop . " 
 Jason Corsaro , the record 's audio engineer , persuaded Rodgers to use digital recording , a new technique at the time which Corsaro believed was going to be the future of recording . To ensure this , Corsaro used a Sony 3324 24 @-@ track digital tape recorder and a Sony F1 two @-@ track during the mixing of the tracks . Madonna recorded the lead parts of the songs in a small , wooden , high @-@ ceilinged piano room at the back of Studio C , also known as Power Station 's " R & B room " . Corsaro then placed <unk> around her while using the top capsule of a stereo AKG <unk> tube microphone , with a Schoeps microphone preamplifier and a Pultec equalizer . Once the tracks met with everybody 's approval , Robert Sabino added the keyboard parts , playing mostly a Sequential Circuits Prophet @-@ 5 , as well as some Rhodes piano and acoustic piano , while Rodgers also played a Synclavier . Madonna , although not required , was present every minute of the recording sessions and the mixing process , Corsaro commented : " Nile was there most of the time , but she was there all of the time . She never left " . 
 = = Packaging and title = = 
 The cover sleeve and images were shot by Steven Meisel , who would become a regular collaborator with Madonna , in a suite at the St. Regis Hotel . Madonna wanted the album title to make provocative link between her own religious name — Madonna as the Roman Catholic title for Jesus ' mother Mary — and the Christian concept of the virgin birth . With the title song alluding to this concept , Madonna wanted the album cover to have mixed messages as well . Author Graham Thompson described that " reclining on a satin sheet , with a bouquet on her lap and wearing a wedding dress , a closer inspection reveals Madonna 's image as highly fetishized and sexualized . " He added that the heavy make @-@ up , pouting lips , and despoiled hair , along with the tight @-@ fitting bustier and full @-@ length gloves , turned Madonna 's image into a figure not of virtue , but of desire . This point , according to Thompson , is further emphasized by the belt she is wearing , the wording on which is just visible as " Boy Toy " . He added : " The image was ambiguous and was based upon the fact that Madonna 's appeal at that point of her career was not presenting herself just as an object of desire , but also as a desiring female subject " . 
 Erlewine commented that the " Steven Meisel @-@ shot cover ... was as key to her reinvention as the music of the album itself . " William McKeen , author of Rock and roll is here to stay : an anthology , felt that the image was another trigger and testament to the fact that Madonna was the last word on fashion for women and young girls of that era , the epitome of cool . Costume designer Arianne Phillips commented of the Like a Virgin look : " This was one of the most shocking , liberating and influential moments in pop culture / fashion history ... Fashion has never been the same . " Madonna herself declared : " I have always loved to play cat and mouse with the conventional stereotypes . My Like a Virgin album cover is a classic example . People were thinking who was I pretending to be — the Virgin Mary or the whore ? These were the two extreme images of women I had known vividly , and remembered from childhood , and I wanted to play with them . I wanted to see if I can merge them together , Virgin Mary and the whore as one and all . The photo was a statement of independence , if you wanna be a virgin , you are welcome . But if you wanna be a whore , it 's your fucking right to be so . " 
 = = Composition = = 
 According to Taraborrelli , " Madonna and Rodgers ' collective energy — she wanting to score with a smash second album and he wanting to be the producer to give it to her — drove the production of Like a Virgin with great precision . " Madonna also collaborated with her former boyfriend Steve Bray , who co @-@ wrote many of the album 's songs . Reflecting on the music composition for the album , Bray noted : " I 've always kind of made the rib cage and the skeleton of the songs already — she 's there for the last things like the eyebrows and the haircut . " The opening track " Material Girl " was written by Peter Brown and Roberta Rans . Madonna explained that the concept of the song was similar to her life 's situation at that time . According to her , the song was provocative , hence she was attracted to it . " Material Girl " incorporated new wave music and consists of synth arrangements with a robotic voice repeating the hook . The lyrics identify with materialism , with Madonna asking for a rich and affluent life , rather than romance and relationships . Written by Madonna and Steve Bray , " Angel " is the second track on the album . It was one of the first songs developed for the project and , according to Madonna , was inspired by a girl who is saved by , and subsequently falls in love with an angel . " Angel " consists of a three @-@ chord ascending hook , which serves as the verse and chorus . It has vocal harmonies beneath the main chorus and the lyrics repeat the angel @-@ like image of Madonna 's savior . The title track " Like a Virgin " was written by Billy Steinberg and Tom Kelly . Steinberg said that the song was inspired by his personal experiences of romance . It was chosen for Madonna by Michael Ostin of Warner Bros. Records , after listening to a demo sung by Kelly . However , Rodgers initially felt that the song did not have a good enough hook and was not suitable for Madonna , but subsequently changed his opinion after the hook was stuck in his mind . He credits Madonna with recognizing the song 's potential : " I handed my apology to Madonna and said , ' you know ... if it 's so catchy that it stayed in my head for four days , it must be something . So let 's do it . ' " " Like a Virgin " is a dance @-@ oriented song , composed of two hooks . Madonna 's voice is heard in a high register while a continuous arrangement of drums are heard along the bassline . According to author Rikky Rooksby , the lyrics of the song are ambiguous and consist of hidden innuendo . In sexual terms , the lyrics can be interpreted in different ways for different people . 
 In " Over and Over " , Madonna sings about determination and picking yourself up from disappointments . The song consists of instrumentation from drums , synths and has a three @-@ chord progression . An emotional moment occurred in the recording studio when Madonna covered the 1978 Rose Royce song " Love Don 't Live Here Anymore " . Rodgers recalled : " Madonna had never performed with a live orchestra before . I was very much into doing everything live , so I just said , ' Madonna , you go out there and sing and we will follow you . ' At first Madonna was hesitant , but the live setting ended up producing memorable results . She sang and she was overcome with emotions and she started crying , but I left it on the record . " The song features Madonna 's vocals supported by acoustic guitars and synth strings , with Thompson playing the drum in the second verse . Towards the end , Madonna emotes in the voice of a soul singer . 
 " Into the Groove " is the sixth track on the 1985 worldwide reissue of Like a <unk> ; it has never been part of Like a Virgin on any North American release . Madonna 's inspiration behind the song was the dance floor , and she wrote it while watching a handsome Puerto Rican man across her balcony . Initially written for her friend Mark Kamins , Madonna later decided to use it in the soundtrack of her 1985 film Desperately Seeking Susan . Unlike the other songs on Like A Virgin , " Into the Groove " was recorded at Sigma Sound Studios , and produced by Madonna and Steve Bray . Madonna 's friend Erika Belle was present during the recording and watched the whole process . In Andrew Morton 's Madonna biography , she noted that at one point of the recording , Bray was facing difficulties with the bridge of the song , as the melody thought by him was not syncing with the rest of the composition . Undeterred by his obvious difficulties , Madonna stepped up to the microphone and sang the words " Live out your fantasy here with me " . Bray 's problem was solved ; Belle remembered the experience as : " [ The song ] seemed to come out of her , I was awestruck . " The song consists of instrumentation from drums , percussion , congas and whistles . Madonna 's voice is double @-@ tracked in the chorus . The lyrics are simple , and written as an invitation to dance with the singer , with sexual innuendos and undertones in the meaning . 
 " Dress You Up " was the last track to be added to the album as it was submitted late by songwriters Andrea LaRusso and Peggy Stanziale . Although Rodgers rejected it as there was no time to compose a melody and record it for the album , Madonna pushed for the song 's inclusion on Like a Virgin , as she particularly liked its lyrics . The song is a drum beat @-@ driven dance track featuring instrumentation of guitars and vocals from a choir . The lyrics are an extended metaphor for fashion and sex , comparing dressing up with passion . " Shoo @-@ Bee @-@ Doo " contains homage to Motown music . Beginning with a slow introduction , the song is in the doo @-@ wop genre and resembles the songs of early Sixties girl groups like The Shirelles or The Crystals . The saxophone breakdown is played by Lenny Pickett . The lyrics discuss relationship problems , and are phrased as clichés in the coda . " Pretender " starts with the chorus and then moves to the verse . It talks about seduction and the insecurity felt by a woman who feels that things are moving too quickly for her with her man . " Stay " is the final track on the album . Using triple @-@ rhythms and double @-@ tracked vocals , the song includes a noise resembling someone slapping a microphone and a spoken sequence which fades away in the end . 
 = = Promotion = = 
 = = = Live performances = = = 
 Madonna debuted the first single " Like a Virgin " at the first MTV Video Music Awards on September 14 , 1984 , where she appeared on stage atop a giant wedding cake dressed in a wedding dress , adorned with the infamous " Boy Toy " belt buckle , and veil . The climax of her risqué performance found her masturbating and rolling around on the stage . The performance is noted as one of the iconic performance in MTV 's history . On December 13 , 1984 , Madonna performed " Like a Virgin " on BBC One 's program Top of the Pops , wearing punky torn tights , a vivid pink wig , religious accessories and layered mesh tops . It was later voted as the second best Top of the Pops performance of all time . She also appeared at the 1985 Live Aid charity concert , where she performed " Into the Groove " . 
 The album was further promoted on her first headlining tour , The Virgin Tour , which only visited cities in the United States and Canada . Early on there were plans to schedule dates in England and Japan due to Madonna 's large fan base in both countries . However , the final schedule did not reflect the idea . In the end several more US dates were added and moved to larger concert venues due to overwhelmingly strong ticket sales . 
 Madonna 's performance on the tour was described by Taraborrelli as " full of excitement " , singing songs from her debut album as well as Like a Virgin , and asking the audience " Will you marry me ? " The costumes included colorful new wave jackets for " Holiday " and white wedding gowns similar to the one worn in her " Like a Virgin " music video . Referring to her Detroit roots and contemporary artist Michael Jackson , Madonna sang a verse of " Billie Jean " during " Like a Virgin " . 
 The Virgin Tour was a success and collected a total of more than US $ 5 million . During a 2009 interview with Rolling Stone , interviewer Austin Scaggs asked Madonna regarding her feelings and emotions during the tour , since it was the first time she was playing in arenas . Madonna replied saying , 
 " That whole tour was crazy , because I went from playing CBGB and the Mudd Club to playing sporting arenas . I played a small theater in Seattle , and the girls had flap skirts on and the tights cut off below their knees and lace gloves and rosaries and bows in their hair and big hoop earrings . I was like , ' This is insane ! ' After Seattle , all of the shows were moved to arenas . I 've never done a bus tour . Everyone says they are really fun . " 
 = = = Singles = = = 
 " Like a Virgin " was released as the lead single from the album in late 1984 . It received positive reviews from contemporary as well as old critics , who frequently called it as one of the defining songs for Madonna . It became her first number @-@ one single on the Billboard Hot 100 , while reaching the top of the charts in Australia , Canada and Japan and the top @-@ ten of the other countries . The song was certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) on January 10 , 1985 , for shipping a million copies across United States – the requirement for a gold single prior to 1989 . The music video portrayed Madonna sailing down the riverways of Venice in a gondola , as well as roaming around a palace wearing a white wedding dress . With the video , scholars noted Madonna 's portrayal of a sexually independent woman , the symbolism of the appearance of a man with lion 's mask to that of Saint Mark , and compared the eroticism of the video to the vitality of the city of Venice . 
 " Material Girl " was the second single from the album , released in November 1984 . Critics have frequently noted " Material Girl " and " Like a Virgin " as the songs that made Madonna an icon . " Material Girl " was a commercial success , reaching the top @-@ five in Australia , Belgium , Canada , Ireland , Japan and United Kingdom . It reached position two on the Billboard Hot 100 in the United States . The music video was a mimicry of Marilyn Monroe 's performance of the song " Diamonds Are a Girl 's Best Friend " from the 1953 film Gentlemen Prefer Blondes . The mimicked scenes are interspersed with scenes of a Hollywood director trying to win the heart of an actress , played by Madonna herself . Discovering that , contrary to her song , the young woman was not impressed by money and expensive gifts , he pretended to be penniless and succeeded in taking her out on a date . " Angel " was the third released single from the album , in April 1985 . Critics gave mixed review of the song , with one group denoting it as a classic while the others felt it was sub @-@ par compared to the other Madonna singles . " Angel " became Madonna 's fifth consecutive top @-@ five single on the Billboard Hot 100 and reached the top of its dance chart . 
 " Into the Groove " was released as the album 's fourth single outside North America in July 1985 . The song was appreciated by contemporary critics as well as authors , who have frequently called it " Madonna 's first great single " . " Into the Groove " reached the top of the charts in Australia , Belgium , Ireland , Italy , Japan , Netherlands , New Zealand , and the United Kingdom , where it was Madonna 's first number @-@ one single . In the United States , the song was only available as the B @-@ side of the 12 @-@ inch single of " Angel " , therefore it was ineligible to chart on the Billboard Hot 100 at the time . It reached number one on the US Hot Dance Club Play chart where it was listed as a double @-@ sided single with " Angel " . " Dress You Up " was the last single from the album . Critics reacted positively to the dance @-@ pop nature of the track . " Dress You Up " became Madonna 's sixth consecutive top @-@ five single in the United States . It also reached the top @-@ ten in Australia , Belgium , Canada , Ireland , New Zealand and the United Kingdom . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 According to Q magazine , Like a Virgin was the album that " propelled [ Madonna ] into the stratosphere - and rightly so . The songs are smart , funny , sexy and irresistible . " Taraborrelli said , " It was Like a Virgin which reflected Madonna as a more versatile and artistic performer and vocals on this album being <unk> sharper in contrast to her early works in the music industry . " Michael Paoletta from Billboard commented that the songs on the album sustain a " fevered dance @-@ rock momentum " . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from AllMusic commented , " Overall , the album adds up to less than the sum of its parts — partially because the singles are so good , but also because on the first album , she stunned with style and a certain joy . Here , the calculation is apparent , and while that 's part of Madonna 's essence — even something that makes her fun — it throws the record 's balance off a little too much for it to be consistent , even if it justifiably made her a star . " Debby Miller from Rolling Stone preferred Madonna 's debut album over Like a Virgin . In The Village Voice , Robert Christgau was also lukewarm towards the record , writing " [ Madonna 's ] so sure of herself she 's asking men and women both to get the hots for the calculating bitch who sells the fantasy even while she bids for the sincerity market where long @-@ term superstars ply their trade . And to make the music less mechanical , she 's hired Nile Rodgers , who I won 't blame for making it less catchy . " 
 Jim Farber from Entertainment Weekly said that " In addition to raising the Madonna / whore ante with songs like the title cut , Virgin cradled the kind of ' 80s hits ( " Dress You Up " ) built to transcend the Dynasty era . " Alfred Soto from Stylus Magazine remembered the first time that he heard the songs from the album and commented , " Lots of critics think something similar occurred when Madonna followed her eponymous debut with Like a Virgin , helmed by Nile Rodgers with all the fixin 's — too calculated next to the ' raw passion ' of the debut . This is nonsense ; it misses how Madonna conflated notions of spontaneity and calculation . Rodgers is the ideal collaborator . " Stephen Holden from The New York Times said : " With a tough @-@ cookie voice that 's both coy and streetwise , Madonna 's singing harks back to the rock @-@ and @-@ roll girl @-@ group tradition that preceded the Beatles . But where girl groups , from the Shirelles to the Ronettes , <unk> extolled their boyfriends ' cars , haircuts and rebel poses , Madonna 's point of view is decidedly more self @-@ interested . In matters of love , she is a comparison shopper with a shrewd sense of her own market value . The words ' shiny and new ' describe not only the way the love @-@ smitten singer feels in the title song but the sound of the album . " 
 Matt <unk> from Los Angeles Times commented : " Madonna 's beating vibrato sometimes makes her sound so robotic in the album . " Lou Papineau , while writing for The Providence Journal , said that " In Like a Virgin , Madonna proves she 's shallow , but spunky . " Sal Cinquemani from Slant Magazine gave a positive review , saying " Though not as innovative as her debut , Like a Virgin stands as one of the most definitive pop artifacts from the indulgent Reagan Era . The mid @-@ tempo ballad ' Shoo @-@ Bee @-@ Doo ' and a soulful cover of Rose Royce 's ' Love Don 't Live Here Anymore ' proved Madonna could churn out more than just novelty hits , while the sugary ' Angel ' and the irresistible ' Dress You Up ' contributed to the singer 's record @-@ breaking list of consecutive Top 5 hits ( 16 in all ) . The retro @-@ infused ' Stay ' and the percussive ' Over and Over ' are the album 's hidden gems . " Ed Stevenson from People felt that " Madonna does have a sense of humor , though she is buried under so many layers of self @-@ parody it 's hard to tell sometimes .... She is backed on this by the reliable rhythmic touch of veteran Nile Rodgers , whose contributions have helped her create a tolerable bit of fluff . Hugo Mistry from Chicago Tribune felt that " Like a Virgin was Madonna 's breakthrough , playing off her self @-@ conscious campiness with a series of hot dance tracks , attention @-@ grabbing lyrics and steamy videos . " 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 Like a Virgin was recorded and finished by September 1984 , but the release of the album was held up , much to Madonna 's frustration , by the continuing sales of her debut album , which was approaching two million sales in United States . Like a Virgin debuted at number 70 on the Billboard 200 issued for December 1 , 1984 . The album reached the top ten of the Billboard 200 on December 8 , 1984 , and after one month reached the top of the chart on February 9 , 1985 , where it stayed for three weeks . It also reached a peak of ten on the Top R & B / Hip @-@ Hop Albums chart . By July 1985 , Like a Virgin became the first album by a female artist to be certified for sales of five million units in the United States . It was eventually certified ten times platinum ( diamond ) by the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) , for shipment of ten million copies of the album . It placed at three on the year @-@ end chart for 1985 , with Madonna becoming the top pop artist for the year . After the advent of the Nielsen SoundScan era in 1991 , the album sold a further 574 @,@ 000 copies . In Canada , the album debuted at number 78 on the RPM Albums Chart , on November 10 , 1984 . It reached a peak of number three , on February 16 , 1985 . The album was present for a total of 74 weeks on the chart , and was certified diamond by the Canadian Recording Industry Association ( CRIA ) , for shipment of one million copies of the album . Like a Virgin ranked sixth on the RPM Top 100 Albums for 1985 . 
 In the United Kingdom , Like a Virgin debuted at number 74 on the UK Albums Chart , on January 12 , 1985 . However , the album fluctuated on the chart for the next eight months and it was only in September that it finally reached the top of the chart . It remained at the top for two weeks , and a total of 152 weeks on the chart . The album was certified three times platinum by the British Phonographic Industry ( BPI ) for shipment of 900 @,@ 000 copies of the album . In France , the album debuted at number five on the French Albums Chart on October 6 , 1985 , staying there for eight weeks , then descending down the chart . It was certified two times platinum by the Syndicat National de l 'Édition Phonographique ( SNEP ) for shipment of 600 @,@ 000 copies . In Australia , the album debuted and peaked at two on the Kent Music Report albums chart , and was certified seven times platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association ( ARIA ) for shipment of 490 @,@ 000 copies of the album . It reached the top of the New Zealand Albums Chart and was certified five times platinum by the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand ( RIANZ ) for shipment of 75 @,@ 000 copies . Elsewhere , Like a Virgin reached number one in Germany , Italy , Netherlands and Spain , while peaking within the top five in many other countries , including Austria , Japan , Sweden and Switzerland . It also became Madonna 's first number @-@ one album on the European Top 100 Albums , reaching the summit on November 23 , 1985 , for two weeks . Like a Virgin has sold more than 21 million copies worldwide as of August 2008 and became one of the best @-@ selling albums of all time . 
 = = Legacy = = 
 After the release of Like a Virgin , Stephen Holden from The New York Times commented : " No phenomenon illustrates more pointedly how pop music history seems to run in cycles than the overnight success of the 24 @-@ year @-@ old pop siren known as Madonna . The month before Christmas , Madonna 's second album , Like a Virgin sold more than two million copies . Teen @-@ agers were lining up in stores to purchase the album the way their parents had lined up to buy Beatles records in the late 60 's . " Madonna proved she was not a one @-@ hit wonder with the release of the album which sold 12 million copies worldwide at the time of its release . 
 Taraborrelli felt that " Like a Virgin is really a portrait of Madonna 's uncanny pop instincts empowered by her impatient zeal for creative growth and her innate knack for crafting a good record . " He added that the success of the album made it clear what was Madonna 's real persona . " She was a street @-@ smart dance queen with the sexy allure of Marilyn Monroe , the coy <unk> of Marlene Dietrich and the cutting and protective <unk> of a modern Mae West " . Although the album received mixed reviews , Taraborrelli believed that the " mere fact that at the time of its release so many couldn 't resist commenting on the record was a testament to the continuous , growing fascination with Madonna ... Every important artist has at least one album in his or her career whose critical and commercial success becomes the artist 's magic moment ; for Madonna , Like a Virgin was just such a defining moment " Chris Smith , author of 101 Albums That Changed Popular Music believed that it was with Like a Virgin that Madonna was able to steal the spotlight towards herself . She asserted her sexuality as only male rock stars had done before , moving well beyond the limited confines of being a pop artist , to becoming a focal point for nationwide discussions of power relationships in the areas of sex , race , gender , religion , and other divisive social topics . Her songs became a lightning rod for both criticism by conservatives and imitation by the younger female population . 
 " Like a Virgin " was her first song to attract the attention of organizations who complained that the video and the song promoted sex without marriage and undermined family values , offering an unsavory image of Madonna as a whore . Outraged moralists condemned her as a sex kitten and sought to ban it . Conservatives were angered that Madonna dared to portray the virginal wedding attire in a sexual context . While one section of the population were outraged at the scandal , other were taking joy at the very notion of a virginal Madonna , who retorted by saying , 
 I was surprised by how people reacted to " Like a Virgin " because when I did that song , to me , I was singing about how something made me feel a certain way — brand @-@ new and fresh — and everyone interpreted it as I don 't want to be a virgin anymore . Fuck my brains out ! That 's not what I sang at all . " Like a Virgin " was always absolutely ambiguous . 
 The song 's influence was most profound on the younger generation . Madonna 's public persona of an indomitable , sexually unashamed , supremely confident woman struck a chord with them . Biographer Andrew Morton noted that most of Madonna 's admirers were females , who were born @-@ and @-@ brought @-@ up with an image of old @-@ fashioned stereotypes of women as virginal brides , or as whores , or with feminist values that rejected the use of a woman 's looks for her self @-@ advancement . Author William McKeen of Rock and roll is here to stay : an anthology commented that with the song , Madonna intermixed such middle @-@ class ideas of femininity with examples of what femininity meant to her , which was having equal opportunity . In addition , at a time when eighties fashions were promoting flat @-@ chested , stick @-@ thin women as ideals of beauty , the more curvaceous Madonna made average girls feel that it was fine to be in the shape they were . The term " Madonna wannabe " was introduced to describe the thousands of girls who tried to emulate Madonna 's style . At one point , Macy 's allotted an entire floor area for the sale of clothes styled according to Madonna 's fashion . University professors , gender @-@ studies experts and feminists earnestly started discussing her role as a post @-@ modernist style and cultural icon . According to author Debbi Voller , " Like a Virgin " gave rise to the icon Madonna . 
 Madonna has stated that the song she most regrets recording is " Material Girl " and if she had known that the label would be attached to her for decades , she would probably never have done so . After making the video , Madonna said she never wanted to be compared to Monroe , despite posing like her and recreating many of Monroe 's signature poses for various photos shoots , most notably in a 1991 issue of Vanity Fair . Guilbert commented that " material girl " designated a certain type of liberated women , thus deviating from its original coinage which meant a girl who is tangible and accessible . Author Nicholas Cook said that the meaning and impact of " material girl " was no more circumscribed by the video , rather by its song . Its influence was seen later among such diverse groups such as female versus male , gay versus straight , and academic versus teenage . In 1993 , a conference was held at the University of California at Santa Barbara , with the subject as Madonna : Feminist Icon or Material Girl ? The conference pondered on the duality of Madonna as both of them and deduced that the question of Madonna 's feminism is not easy to decide . Some of the feminists left the conference , citing that they had not been able to make up their minds . 
 " Dress You Up " was also the subject of much media attention , when it was included on the Parents Music Resource Center 's ( PMRC ) " Filthy Fifteen " list , for the perceived sexual content of its lyrics . The Center 's founder Tipper Gore had heard her daughter listening to the song , and considered the line " Gonna dress you up in my love " as exemplifying " vulgar music " . The PMRC called upon the Recording Industry Association of America ( RIAA ) to give parents a consumer @-@ friendly means of identifying rock records unsuitable for minors — a rating system based on lyrical content . " Dress You Up " received a rating of " S " , for " sex and obscenity " , from the RIAA . 
 = = Track listing = = 
 Notes 
 All songs produced by Nile Rodgers , except " Into the Groove " , produced by Madonna and Stephen Bray . 
 " Into the Groove " is only available on the 1985 re @-@ issue outside North America . It is not included on the 2001 remastered version . 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the album 's liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Certifications = = 
 = TNA World Tag Team Championship = 
 The TNA World Tag Team Championship is a professional wrestling world tag team championship owned by the Total Nonstop Action Wrestling ( TNA ) professional wrestling promotion . It is primarily contested within TNA 's tag team division . It was created and debuted on May 14 , 2007 at the taping of TNA 's primary television program , TNA Impact ! . It was officially introduced worldwide on the May 17 , 2007 edition of TNA 's online podcast TNA Today . Like most professional wrestling championships , the title is won as a result of a pre @-@ determined match . 
 = = History = = 
 The Total Nonstop Action Wrestling promotion formed in May 2002 . Later that same year , TNA were granted control over the NWA World Heavyweight and World Tag Team Championships by the National Wrestling Alliance ( NWA ) governing body , subsequently becoming an official NWA territory as NWA – TNA . On June 19 , 2002 , NWA – TNA held its first show : a weekly pay @-@ per @-@ view ( PPV ) event . The main event of the telecast was a twenty – man Gauntlet for the Gold match — involving all twenty men trying to throw each other over the top rope and down to the floor in order to eliminate them , until there are two men left who wrestle a standard match — to become the first ever TNA – era NWA World Heavyweight Champion . Ken Shamrock defeated Malice to win the vacant championship with Ricky Steamboat as Special Guest Referee at the event . TNA crowned the first TNA – era NWA World Tag Team Champions at their third weekly PPV event on July 3 , 2002 , when the team of A.J. Styles and Jerry Lynn defeated The Rainbow Express ( Bruce and Lenny Lane ) in a tournament final to win the championship . 
 = = = Creation = = = 
 The NWA World Heavyweight and World Tag Team Championships were contested for in TNA until the morning of May 13 , 2007 . On that day , NWA 's Executive Director Robert Trobich announced that the NWA were ending their five – year agreement with TNA , which had allowed them full control over both titles . Trobich went on to state that effective that morning , then @-@ NWA World Heavyweight Champion Christian Cage and the Team 3D pairing of Brother Devon and Brother Ray , then @-@ NWA World Tag Team Champions , were stripped of their respective championships . The motivation behind these actions was that Cage refused to defend the NWA World Heavyweight Championship against wrestlers from NWA territories . That same day , TNA were scheduled to produce their Sacrifice 2007 PPV event , in which both Cage and Team 3D were to defend their respective championships . On the card , Cage was scheduled to defend the NWA World Heavyweight Championship against Kurt Angle and Sting in a match involving three competitors , also known as a Three @-@ Way match . Team 3D were set to defend the NWA World Tag Team Championship against the team of Scott Steiner and Tomko and the team made up of Hernandez and Homicide , who were known as The Latin American Xchange ( LAX ) , in another Three Way match . 
 That night before each contest , the on @-@ screen graphic used to refer to the champions and their respective championships , credited both Cage and Team 3D as still being NWA Champions . However , the ring announcers for the encounters proclaimed the matches as being strictly for the " World Heavyweight Championship " or the " World Tag Team Championship " . Team 3D defeated Steiner and Tomko and LAX in the first Three Way championship bout to retain the " World Tag Team Championship " . In the second Three Way championship encounter , Angle defeated Cage and Sting to win the " World Heavyweight Championship " . 
 On May 17 , 2007 , Jeremy Borash and TNA 's primary authority figure at the time , Jim Cornette , unveiled the TNA World Tag Team Championship belt on that day 's edition of TNA 's online podcast TNA Today and awarded it to Team 3D ; in the process making them the first official champions . 
 = = = Belt designs = = = 
 During the championship 's entire history , it has had one design . It begins with a leather strap that is covered with four small gold plates that has an imprint of the earth centered in the middle with TNA 's official logo at the top of each . The center golden plate of the belt also has an imprint of a globe , with TNA 's official logo engraved over it . The words " World Tag Team " are placed above the globe , while the words " Wrestling Champion " are placed below it . [ 1 ] 
 = = Reigns = = 
 The inaugural champions were Team 3D ( Brother Devon and Brother Ray ) , who were awarded the championship on the May 17 , 2007 edition of TNA Today . At 212 days , Beer Money , Inc . ' s ( Bobby Roode and James Storm ) fourth reign is the longest in the title 's history . Eric Young / Super Eric and Kaz 's only reign holds the record for shortest reign in the title 's history at a half day . 
 The current champions are Decay ( Abyss and Crazzy Steve ) who are in their first reign as a team . They defeated Beer Money ( Bobby Roode and James Storm ) in a " Valley of Shadows " match on March 19 , 2016 in Orlando , Florida during the Impact Wrestling tapings ( aired April 26 ) . This is Abyss ' second individual reign , as he was previously champion with Storm in 2014 , while Crazzy Steve is in his first individual reign . 
 Individually , James Storm holds the record with seven reigns , while Beer Money and The Wolves ( Davey Richards and Eddie Edwards ) share the record of five reigns as a team . 
 Although the title is a World Tag Team Championship , three different wrestlers have held the championship by themselves — Samoa Joe , Kurt Angle , and Matt Morgan . Joe held the championship during his entire reign alone ; however , Angle held the championship alone for 15 days until Sting won a match involving three other competitors to become Angle 's partner , and Morgan held the title after turning on and ( kayfabe ) injuring his tag team championship partner Hernandez . Overall , there have been 40 reigns shared between 41 wrestlers and 28 teams . 
 = Now That You Got It = 
 " Now That You Got It " is a song by American singer and songwriter Gwen Stefani from her second solo studio album , The Sweet Escape ( 2006 ) . Stefani co @-@ wrote the song with its producers Sean Garrett and Swizz Beatz . " Now That You Got It " is a reggae song featuring hip hop beats , <unk> piano sample and military snare drums . Lyrically , the song places Gwen asking her lover to give all that she wants . A remix featuring Damian Marley was produced for the song 's release as the album 's fourth single on August 27 , 2007 by Interscope Records . 
 The original solo version received mixed reviews from music critics , with some praising its catchiness , while others calling it repetitive . However , the remix version was more praised , being called " a laid back , summery tune " . Commercially , the single experienced very little success , reaching the top @-@ forty in six countries , while failing to gain impact in the United States and the United Kingdom . The song 's music video was directed by The Saline Project and was shot in Puerto Rico and Jamaica , featuring Stefani and the Harajuku Girls . The song was performed during The Sweet Escape Tour ( 2007 ) . 
 = = Background and release = = 
 Before going on tour with her Harajuku Lovers Tour ( 2005 ) , Stefani revealed that she was going to release a second album in 2006 , stating : " I have a bunch of leftover tracks from making ' Love . Angel . Music . Baby . ' . And two months ago , Pharrell called me up , he was like , ' Come down to Miami and write some more songs ! ' And I 'm like , ' OK ! ' I went down there and wrote four songs and played three of them tonight . They 're really fresh " . In September 2006 , during the Fashion Week , MTV News interviewed Swizz Beatz and he said to be working with Stefani as well , claiming : " She 's always taking it to the next level . I love her background for music . She likes a lot of Caribbean sounds with hard beats " . They worked on " Now That You Got It " , which was selected to be the fourth single from The Sweet Escape ( 2006 ) . For the single version , Stefani enlisted Damien Marley , son of Jamaican reggae musician Bob Marley , giving the single a " reggae " feel to it . It was released to mainstream radio in the United States , on August 26 , 2007 , while in the United Kingdom , it was released on October 15 , 2007 . Two remixes were included on the CD single , both featuring Marley . The " remix " version uses the same instrumentation as the original single , but has a more reggae @-@ infused rendition and an added verse sung by Marley ; the " hybrid " version features the song 's original beat mixed with the remix version . 
 = = Composition and lyrics = = 
 " Now That You Got It " was written by Gwen Stefani , Sean Garrett and Swizz Beatz , with production being done by the latter two ; Garrett also provided background vocals . The single version of the song features a " loping hip @-@ hop beat and a staccato piano sample " while Stefani " splits wailing time with a chorus of alarms , " according to Mark Pytlik of Pitchfork Media . It also presents elements of reggae music and " military snare drums " mixed with crunk militarism . Lyrically , on " Now That You Got It " , the singer tells her lover that even though he is with her , he still has to work hard to keep her and give her everything she wants . " Now that you got it , what you gon ' do about it ? " , she repeatedly asks in the chorus . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 " Now That You Got It " received mixed reviews from music critics . A positive review came from Charles Merwin of Stylus Magazine , who referred to the original version as Stefani 's best " Beastie Boy imitation over a ' 1 Thing ' rip " , and Sal Cinquemani , while reviewing the album , of Slant Magazine called it " instantly contagious " . Norman Mayers of Prefix Magazine praised Swizz Beatz for " coming up with the most likely heir to the Hollaback crown , with the bumping chants and boasting raps " . However , Alex Miller of the NME characterized it as " a track so desperate to be a club banger , its fraying tapestry of hand @-@ claps , sirens and triumphalism has all the grace of a Pepsi Max advert " . Quentin B. Huff of PopMatters criticized the song 's songwriting , calling it " woefully thin , relying on tedious repetition . " John Murphy of musicOMH gave the single a mixed review , writing " when the self @-@ consciously wacky and kitsch side to her personality surfaces , as on the inane ' Now That You Got It ' , the temptation is to dive for the ' off ' switch " . 
 The single version with Damian Marley received generally favorable reviews . Fraser McAlpine of the BBC Chart Blog conveyed it as a " perfect case " of Stefani making songs which are sleek and tough on the outside , but have a middle which is pure and vulnerable , ultimately rating it four out of five stars . Similarly , CBBC 's Newsround portrayed the sound as " a very laid back , summery tune " which , it claims , will still have its readers " humming it next week " . 
 = = Commercial performance = = 
 " Now That You Got It " had moderate success on the charts . Nevertheless , in the United States , it was commercially unsuccessful , not entering any of the US Billboard charts , making it Stefani 's first song as a solo artist to not do so . Internationally , it reached the top @-@ twenty in a few European countries , having its higher chart position in Norway , where it debuted and peaked at number seventeen . However , it became her lowest @-@ charting single there . In Austria , it became her second lowest @-@ charting single , peaking at number sixty , with " Luxurious " being her lowest at number sixty @-@ six . In the United Kingdom , it reached number fifty @-@ nine , becoming Stefani 's third UK release not to reach the top @-@ twenty of the UK Singles Chart . In Australasia , the single performed very moderately . It debuted at number 39 on the ARIA Charts and reaching its peak position , number 37 , the following week . It remained for five weeks on the charts , but was her lowest @-@ peaking solo single . On the other hand , in New Zealand , " Now That You Got It " spent eight weeks on the charts , debuting at number 36 , on October 1 , 2007 , and peaking at number 21 , on October 8 , 2007 . However , it became her only solo single to miss the top @-@ twenty there . 
 = = Music video = = 
 The song 's accompanying music video was directed by The Saline Project and was shot in Puerto Rico and Jamaica . The Puerto Rico scenes were shot a day after Stefani 's concert in the city , as part of The Sweet Escape Tour , on July 19 , 2007 . Many parts of the video were shot in a studio , including scenes of Stefani riding a motorcycle in front of a green screen . The video premiered on MTV 's Total Request Live on September 4 , 2007 . 
 = = = Storyline = = = 
 The video opens up on a mountain with titles " Gwen Stefani Presents " , " Now That You Got It " and " featuring Damian Jr . Gong Marley " . Stefani is singing against a wall with Marley and later Stefani and the Harajuku Girls are riding along the road with scooters singing the first verse . As the chorus begins and Stefani , the Harajuku Girls and Marley are playing board games under a shelter near the lake side . Marley then begins to sing his part near two sheds while Stefani and Harajuku Girls are still on their scooters . During the second verse , Stefani sings against another girl and shows the Harajuku Girls singing on roof tops with the male dancers from The Sweet Escape Tour ( Flea , Legacy , Remedy , and <unk> ) . During the second chorus , the video opens at the beach where Stefani is <unk> . This leads the video to a party at night time where Stefani is on stage with people dancing . The video concludes with Harajuku Girls and the boys atop the roof , with Stefani and the girls singing on the scooters . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Stefani 's first performance of the track was on the UK 's television show Ant & Dec on September 29 , 2007 . She performed the original version of the song , but ended with a reggae mix . The song was also added on the setlist of The Sweet Escape Tour . The concert segment received positive feedback for the overall energy of the performance . 
 = = Track listings = = 
 Australian CD single 
 " Now That You Got It " ( Album Version ) – 3 : 00 
 " Now That You Got It " ( Remix featuring Damian " Jr Gong " Marley ) – 3 : 26 
 " Now That You Got It " ( Single Version featuring Damian " Jr Gong " Marley ) – 3 : 09 
 US iTunes remix single 
 " Now That You Got It " ( Hybrid Mix featuring Damian " Jr Gong " Marley ) – 3 : 08 ( single version ) 
 " Now That You Got It " ( Main Mix featuring Damian " Jr Gong " Marley ) – 3 : 26 ( remix ) 
 US 12 " single 
 A1 . " Now That You Got It " ( Single Version featuring Damian " Jr Gong " Marley ) – 3 : 09 
 A2 . " Now That You Got It " ( Album Version ) – 3 : 00 
 A3 . " Now That You Got It " ( Instrumental Version ) – 2 : 55 
 B1 . " Now That You Got It " ( Remix featuring Damian " Jr Gong " Marley ) – 3 : 26 
 B2 . " Now That You Got It " ( Dub ) – 3 : 30 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Credits adapted from the liner notes of The Sweet Escape . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = = Release history = = 
 = Joe Colbeck = 
 Philip Joseph " Joe " Colbeck ( born 29 November 1986 ) is an English footballer who plays as a right winger for Harrogate Town . 
 Born in Bradford , England , he joined his hometown club , Bradford City , as a youth team player in 2002 , making his debut two years later . He played more than 100 league games for Bradford during five years in the first team . Colbeck nearly left Bradford in 2007 when he was made available for transfer and played six games on loan for Darlington . However , he returned following his loan spell and went on to win Bradford City 's player of the season award during the 2007 – 08 campaign . He turned down a new deal a year later and joined Oldham Athletic on transfer deadline day in September 2009 to rejoin manager Dave Penney , for whom he played at Darlington . When Penney was sacked after less than a year in charge , Colbeck also soon left and joined Hereford United before spending several years with Grimsby Town . 
 = = Career = = 
 = = = Bradford City = = = 
 Colbeck was born in Bradford and attended Pudsey <unk> School . Bradford City youth team coach Jon Pepper brought him to the club in 2002 , and having rising through the junior ranks at City , Colbeck had barely featured for the reserves when he made his senior debut in a League Cup defeat to Notts County on 25 August 2004 at Valley Parade . It was his only first @-@ team game during the season . It was another 17 months before his next appearance for City when he was a late substitute on 7 January 2006 in a 1 – 0 defeat to Chesterfield . Colbeck broke into the team on a more regular basis and made 11 appearances , including five starts , during the latter half of the 2005 – 06 season , and was one of six junior players to earn a one @-@ year contract at the League One club . 
 His first full season in the first team was during 2006 – 07 , although he was kept out of the team during the early part of the season by winger Jermaine Johnson . After eight straight games as substitute , Colbeck made his first start of the season in a West Yorkshire derby against Huddersfield Town on 7 October 2006 . He continued to play more games in the side but as City struggled , Colbeck was sent off during a vital game against Oldham Athletic in April 2007 . He was suspended following the red card but returned to the side after his suspension , and was involved in the 3 – 0 defeat to Chesterfield which confirmed Bradford 's relegation from League One . 
 Colbeck started the new season in League Two as a substitute , but won a place in the side , and scored his first senior goal against Lincoln City more than three years after his debut . However , after a mistake cost defeat to Milton Keynes Dons , he was told he could join another club on loan . On 24 October 2007 , Colbeck went on a month @-@ long loan to Darlington to take the place of injured Julian Joachim . Colbeck scored in both his second and third games before the loan was extended for a second month . The loan deal was cut short when he returned to Bradford City in December 2007 after he had made six appearances for Darlington , but Darlington manager Dave Penney was disappointed to see Colbeck leave saying , " Joe was fantastic for us . He scored a couple of goals and had a real effect on us so we 're sorry to see him go . " 
 He immediately went back into the Bradford side , and added his second goal for the club in a 2 – 0 win over Accrington Stanley on New Year 's Day . Darlington made a bid to sign Colbeck on a permanent basis during January 2008 , but City chairman Julian Rhodes turned down the bid , and Colbeck was a regular player for the rest of the 2007 – 08 season . The run of games included the third goal in a 3 – 1 win against former side Darlington at the Darlington Arena . On 19 April 2008 , he scored his sixth goal for the club , but first in a home game , when his last minute goal gave Bradford a 2 – 1 win over Grimsby Town . Three days later , Colbeck was announced as the club 's player of the season , even though he had started just 26 league games , 23 of which came in City 's 26 games since Colbeck returned on loan from Darlington . Colbeck was surprised to win the award , saying : " If you 'd said at the beginning of the season that I would win this award , I 'd have thought you were mad . I wasn 't even a regular in the team . " However , in the following league game , Colbeck was sent off for the second time in his career , for a foul on Dean Lewington , as City lost 2 – 1 to Milton Keynes Dons , which meant he missed the final game of the season through suspension . 
 Colbeck had been playing since January with a groin injury , which hampered his preparations for the 2008 – 09 season and prevented him from playing in Bradford 's first three pre @-@ season friendly matches . His suspension also kept him out of Bradford 's first two games of the season , but he returned for a 2 – 0 victory against Macclesfield Town . He provided a cross for Peter Thorne to open the scoring after ten minutes . Colbeck helped City to go top of the league six matches into the season , and although he scored his first goal of the season in the seventh game , City lost 3 – 1 to Bournemouth . He added a second in a 2 – 2 home draw with Gillingham , before he broke a bone in his foot the following week against Grimsby Town . Colbeck was unable to play for nearly three months . He returned from injury in January by playing in two reserve games , leading up to his first @-@ team return on 24 January as a late second @-@ half substitute for Omar Daley in a 3 – 3 draw with Luton Town . Colbeck broke back into the starting eleven the following month , once again for Daley , who was ruled out for the season with his own knee injury . He was a regular in the team for the rest of the season , playing a further 16 games but he struggled for form and was unable to add to his two goals . 
 City missed out on promotion and as a result had to cut their wage budget . However , Colbeck , whose contract had expired , was offered a new three @-@ year deal on improved terms . He turned down the offer and stayed at the club on a week @-@ to @-@ week basis on his previous terms . He was watched in a pre @-@ season friendly playing for City against Bradford Park Avenue by his former Darlington boss Dave Penney , who had since been appointed Oldham Athletic manager . Colbeck started the season with Bradford and played another five games , bringing his total to the club to 109 , of which 41 were as substitute . 
 = = = Oldham Athletic = = = 
 Colbeck left Bradford in September 2009 , on the final day of the summer transfer window to join Penney at League One side Oldham Athletic . The transfer fee was undisclosed , with Bradford entitled to a sum because of Colbeck 's age – the Yorkshire Post newspaper reported the fee to be around £ 60 @,@ 000 . Penney described Colbeck as being in " the Stanley Matthews mould " and hoped his new signing would give his team some width . Colbeck 's Oldham debut at the end of the same week finished in a 3 – 0 defeat for his new team to Hartlepool United . Although described as a " tireless worker " , some of his performances angered Oldham 's fans , with Colbeck unable to " stamp his authority on games " and his " lack of quality " to deliver a final cross . In what was his first game for more than a month , Colbeck scored his first Oldham goal in a 4 – 2 defeat to Swindon Town on 9 February 2010 . Colbeck also missed part of Oldham 's run @-@ in to the end of the season because of an ankle injury and ended up playing 28 games during his first season with Oldham , but was one of three summer signings which the Oldham Advertiser said had not impressed the Latics fans . When Penney was sacked at the end of the campaign and replaced by Paul Dickov , Colbeck was almost immediately made available for transfer ahead of the 2010 – 11 season . 
 = = = Hereford United = = = 
 Colbeck almost immediately left Oldham and dropped back into League Two to sign for Hereford United on a two @-@ year contract . His new manager Simon Davey described Colbeck as " just the ideal attacking winger we 've been looking for throughout pre @-@ season and I think he is the final piece in the jigsaw " . Two days later , Colbeck scored two goals in a pre @-@ season friendly victory against Neath before being named as one of six Hereford debutants on the opening day of the 2010 – 11 League Two season as his new side won 1 – 0 at Crewe Alexandra . Colbeck scored his first goal with Hereford on 2 November 2010 in a 2 – 2 draw with Aldershot Town . Hereford , however , recorded just one win from their first ten league games , and were bottom of the league by October when Davey was sacked . Davey was replaced by Jamie Pitman , who helped to improve Hereford 's form . Colbeck received the first red card of his Hereford career for a professional foul during a 4 – 0 defeat to Southend United on 18 March 2011 . His ensuing suspension was one of only two games he missed all season helping him to 50 games in a single season for the first time in his career . 
 However , early in the following season , he missed three months because of a knee injury . He returned from injury on 17 December 2011 . 
 = = = Grimsby Town = = = 
 On 20 June 2012 , Colbeck signed a two @-@ year deal with Grimsby Town . Colbeck scored his first goal for Grimsby on 27 August 2012 against Mansfield Town , scoring the third goal of the game on 61 minutes , after good link up play between Greg Pearson who crossed into the box , the ball bouncing off strike partner Andy Cook for Colbeck to side @-@ foot it into the top corner , the game finishing a 4 – 1 to the Grimsby . On Boxing Day 2012 , Colbeck provided 3 assists and scored directly from a corner in the 4 – 1 Lincolnshire derby win over Lincoln City at Sincil Bank . On 8 January 2013 Colbeck was fined by The Football Association over comments he made on his Twitter account . 
 Colbeck was released by Grimsby on 9 May 2014 . 
 = = = Bradford Park Avenue = = = 
 On 8 July 2014 , Colbeck signed a one @-@ year contract with Bradford Park Avenue . 
 = = Playing style = = 
 Colbeck is a pacy midfielder who normally plays on the right wing . Talking about his game , Colbeck says : " I love taking players on , I think that 's my best attribute . " At Bradford , his manager Stuart McCall praised his hard work and commitment , but said he became frustrated about his lack of end product . McCall also said Colbeck 's crossing needed to be improved . Another of his managers Dave Penney described Colbeck as being in " the Stanley Matthews mould " , in reference to the former Blackpool winger . However , Colbeck 's performances at Oldham also earned mixed reviews akin to McCall 's comments , with fans and journalists describing him as a " tireless worker " but his crossing had a " lack of quality " . Going into the 2007 – 08 season , Colbeck had yet to score a goal . Before the season , he admitted he needed to score more goals and went on to score six goals during the campaign , although it remains a career high . 
 = = Career statistics = = 
 As of match played on 25 April 2015 . 
 = = Honours = = 
 Grimsby Town 
 Lincolnshire Senior Cup ( 1 ) : 2012 – 13 
 FA Trophy : Runners @-@ up , 2012 – 13 
 Individual 
 Bradford City player of the season : 2007 – 08 
 = SS Empire Endurance = 
 Empire Endurance was a 8 @,@ 514 GRT cargo liner that was built in 1928 as Alster by Deschimag Werk Vulkan , Hamburg , Germany for the shipping company Norddeutscher Lloyd . In the years leading up to the Second World War Alster carried cargo and passengers between Germany and Australia . After the outbreak of war she was requisitioned by the Kriegsmarine for use as a supply ship . 
 Alster was captured off Norway on 10 April 1940 by the British destroyer HMS Icarus . Initially serving under the original name as a repair , supply and cargo ship in Norway , she was later passed to the Ministry of War Transport ( MoWT ) and renamed Empire Endurance . She served until 20 April 1941 when she was torpedoed and sunk by the German submarine U @-@ 73 south @-@ east of the islet of Rockall in the North Atlantic Ocean . 
 = = Description = = 
 The ship was a 8 @,@ 514 GRT cargo liner . She was built in 1928 by Deschimag Werk Vulkan , Hamburg as Alster , with yard number 211 . 
 Alster was 509 @.@ 9 feet ( 155 @.@ 42 m ) long , with a beam of 63 @.@ 6 feet ( 19 @.@ 39 m ) . She had a depth of 30 @.@ 9 feet ( 9 @.@ 42 m ) . She was assessed at 8 @,@ 514 GRT , 5 @,@ 328 NRT , 12 @,@ 000 DWT . She had four masts , a single funnel , a round stern and a slanted stem . 
 The ship was propelled by a 1 @,@ 000 <unk> triple expansion steam engine , which had cylinders of 31 1 ⁄ 4 inches ( 79 cm ) , 52 3 ⁄ 4 inches ( 134 cm ) and 86 5 ⁄ 6 inches ( 221 cm ) diameter by 57 1 ⁄ 16 inches ( 145 cm ) stroke . The engine was also made by the shipbuilder . A low pressure steam turbine drove the ship 's single screw propeller through double reduction gearing and a hydraulic coupling . She had a total of 6 @,@ 500 indicated horsepower , which gave her a top speed of 14 knots ( 26 km / h ) . 
 = = History = = 
 Alster was launched on 5 January 1928 , and completed on 25 February 1928 . She was built for Norddeutscher Lloyd . The Code Letters <unk> were allocated and her port of registry was Bremen . She served on routes between Germany and Australia and East Asia . Lloyds Register entries show that she held a passenger certificate from 1934 – 40 . With the change in Code Letters in 1934 , Alster was allocated <unk> as her callsign . She had a crew of 69 and could initially take 14 passengers . In 1930 the passenger capacity was increased to 16 . 
 = = = Norwegian Campaign and capture = = = 
 On 18 March 1940 , Alster was requisitioned by the Kriegsmarine . She was used as a supply ship in Operation Weserübung - the German invasion of Norway , forming part of the invasion 's <unk> @-@ Staffel , transporting heavy equipment . Alster departed Brunsbüttel at 02 : 00 on 3 April , destined for the North Norwegian port of Narvik . She was one of four supply ships sailing from the Schleswig @-@ Holstein port in support of German forces landing at Narvik on 9 April , under cover of sailing to Murmansk in the Soviet Union . None of these ships made it to their destination . The lack of supplies and artillery would leave the German forces fighting at Narvik vulnerable . Upon reaching Norwegian waters , Alster and the tanker Kattegat , also bound for Narvik , was escorted by the Norwegian torpedo boat HNoMS Trygg as far as Kopervik , where they arrived on 5 April . At Kopervik the German plans suffered a delay because of a lack of pilots to guide the ship northwards , Alster continuing later that day , while Kattegat departed Kopervik only on 6 April . Many of the other supply ships sent out in advance of the invasion also suffered delays , putting the supply part of the invasion plans out of schedule . While at Kopervik , Alster and Kattegat were inspected by the torpedo boat HNoMS <unk> , the Norwegians finding nothing irregular . By 8 April , Alster had reached Vestfjorden , where she was hailed by the Norwegian patrol boat HNoMS Syrian , which warned her of the British naval minefield laid in the area earlier that day . Alster steamed to Bodø , to await developments . Two days later , on 10 April , following the outbreak of war between Norway and Germany the previous day , Syrian was despatched to seize Alster off Bodø . When Syrian found Alster , the commander of the small Norwegian patrol boat chose not to board the German vessel as he suspected she was armed and possibly carrying troops . As Alster attempted to escape , Syrian sent out messages to the British warships in the area . 
 On 10 April , Alster was captured by the British destroyer HMS Icarus in Vestfjorden , north of Bodø . When intercepted the German crew made an unsuccessful attempt at scuttling the vessel , setting off one explosive charge . The light cruiser HMS Penelope had also been sent after Alster , but had run aground near Bodø and suffered serious damage . With the British capture of Alster , no more German supply ships were heading for Narvik and the forces there , leaving General Eduard Dietl 's troops with the supplies on board the tanker Jan <unk> and the large stockpiles of weapons , ammunition , uniforms and food captured at the Norwegian Army base Elvegårdsmoen . At the time of her capture , Alster was under the command of Kapitän Oskar Scharf , who had previously commanded the Blue Riband @-@ holding ocean liner Europa . Initially Alster was brought to the improvised British naval base at Skjelfjord in Lofoten . On arrival at Skjelfjord on 11 April , a prize crew from Penelope took over responsibility for the ship . At Skjelfjord , the captured German crew made an unsuccessful attempt at scuttling Alster by opening the ship 's sea valves . While at Skjelfjord Alster , being equipped with derricks , was used to help repair damaged Allied warships . One of the vessels on which emergency repairs were carried out from Alster , was the destroyer HMS Eskimo , which had lost her bow during the naval battles off Narvik . Alster was also used as an accommodation ship for the crews of the damaged vessels at Skjelfjord . On 24 April Alster departed Skjelfjord for the Northern Norwegian port of Tromsø , manned by a British prize crew . The eight German officers captured on Alster were transferred to the United Kingdom on the British destroyers HMS Cossack and HMS Punjabi . In all , 80 Germans were captured on board Alster , and all were eventually sent to the United Kingdom . 
 Her cargo of 88 lorries , anti @-@ aircraft guns , spare parts for aircraft , ammunition , communications equipment , coke and 400 – 500 tons of hay , was unloaded in Tromsø on 27 April , as part of the Allied support of the Norwegian forces fighting the German invasion of their country . The cargo was put to use in the supply and defence of the Tromsø area , except for the hay , which was quarantined by the Norwegian authorities at <unk> for fear of foot @-@ and @-@ mouth disease . The coke on board Alster had been placed by the Germans in a 6 ft ( 1 @.@ 83 m ) layer covering the deck . The supplies on Alster were transferred to the Norwegians by the Allied naval commander Lord Cork after the Norwegian authorities had made repeated request for weapons and other war matériel , and was intended to be a first effort before the arrival of larger quantities of arms and ammunition promised to the Norwegians . The lorries and weapons from Alster were received , assessed and distributed by Norwegian military personnel under the command of Major Karl Arnulf , who had arrived in Tromsø on 7 May 1940 , having made his way from German @-@ occupied South Norway . The communications equipment included both a mobile radio transmitter , which was used as a spare for Tromsø radio broadcasting station , as well as large quantities of field telephone equipment which was sent to the units of the Norwegian 6th Division on the Narvik front . The field equipment from Alster replaced the old and worn field telephone systems in use up to that point . Training on the German equipment was provided by Swedish volunteers . While docked in Tromsø in May 1940 , Alster had 70 captive Germans on board . At Tromsø , Alster was manned by Norwegian sailors , replacing the British prize crew . 
 On 16 May a request was made to the Admiralty for a call sign for Alster , the ship departing Tromsø the next day for Kirkenes in Finnmark , escorted by the anti @-@ submarine whaler HMS Ullswater . She was despatched to the northern port to retrieve a cargo of iron ore . Arriving on 19 May 1940 , Alster loaded some 10 @,@ 000 tons of iron ore over four days , sailing south to the port of Harstad on 22 May , still escorted by HMS Ullswater , as well as the Norwegian patrol boat HNoMS Nordhav II . On 23 May , the British submarine HMS Truant made an unsuccessful attack with two torpedoes on Alster off <unk> , despite efforts having been made to both keep the cargo ship away from the submarine 's patrol area , and to warn Truant of the ship 's identity . The torpedoes missed , exploding when they hit land . Alster and HMS Ullswater arrived at Harstad on 26 May , with the escort vessel sailing northwards to Hammerfest with mail and provisions for the heavy cruiser HMS Devonshire . While Alster was at Harstad shipping in the town 's harbour was repeatedly subjected to attacks by Luftwaffe Heinkel He 111 bombers , the ships being defended by Gloster Gladiator fighters of the No. 263 Squadron RAF operating from Bardufoss Air Station and anti @-@ aircraft artillery . During one of the attacks on 26 May the ship 's Norwegian fireman was mortally wounded by bomb fragments , dying in Harstad Hospital later the same day . 
 On 27 May Alster sailed for the United Kingdom in a five @-@ ship convoy which included the crippled HMS Eskimo . In addition to her cargo of iron ore , the ship carried 209 British military personnel , 46 Norwegian military personnel and 72 German prisoners of war . She also transported the " B " gun turret from Eskimo , which had been removed from the destroyer during makeshift repairs . Alster arrived at Scapa Flow on 31 May , unloading her passengers there . Sailing on 3 June , in the company of the passenger steamer St. Magnus and escorted by the destroyers HMS Ashanti and HMS Bedouin , she arrived at Rosyth in Scotland on 4 June 1940 . 
 = = = As Empire Endurance = = = 
 Alster was passed to the MoWT and renamed Empire Endurance . The United Kingdom Official Number <unk> and Code Letters <unk> were allocated . Her port of registry was Middlesbrough . She was placed under the management of the Booth Steamship Co Ltd . Empire Endurance was a member of Convoy FN 255 , which departed from Southend , Essex on 17 August and arrived at Methil , Fife two days later . She then joined Convoy OA 202 , which departed on 21 August and dispersed at sea on 25 August . Her destination was Montreal , Quebec , Canada , where she arrived on 3 September . Empire Endurance sailed on 12 September for Sydney , Cape Breton , Nova Scotia , arriving three days later . She then joined Convoy HX 74 , which departed from Halifax , Nova Scotia on 17 September and arrived at Liverpool , Lancashire , United Kingdom on 2 October . She was carrying general cargo stated to be bound for Newcastle @-@ upon @-@ Tyne , Northumberland . She left the convoy at the Clyde on 2 October . 
 Empire Endurance departed on 25 October to join Convoy OB 234 , which had departed from Liverpool the previous day and dispersed at sea on 30 October . Her destination was Montreal , where she arrived on 6 November . She departed on 18 November for the Clyde , arriving on 27 November . The ship was declared a prize of war on 10 December 1940 , valued at £ 144 @,@ 000 . She departed on 5 January 1941 to join Convoy OB 270 , which had departed from Liverpool that day and dispersed at sea on 8 January . She sailed to Saint John , New Brunswick , Canada , arriving on 17 January . Empire Endurance sailed on 3 February for Halifax , arriving two days later and departing on 9 February for the Clyde , where she arrived on 21 February . 
 Empire Endurance departed on 23 February for Swansea , Glamorgan , arriving on 1 March . She sailed on 9 March for Avonmouth , Somerset , arriving the next day . She departed on 29 March for Cardiff , Glamorgan , arriving the next day and sailing on 2 April for Newport , Monmouthshire , where she arrived later that day . She sailed on 13 April for Milford Haven , Pembrokeshire , where she arrived on 15 April . 
 On 19 April , Empire Endurance departed from Milford Haven , bound for Cape Town , South Africa and Alexandria , Egypt . She was manned by 90 crew and had five passengers on board . Amongst her cargo were the <unk> B motor launches ML @-@ 1003 and ML @-@ 1037 . At 03 : 32 ( German time ) on 20 April , Empire Endurance was hit amidships by a torpedo fired by U @-@ 73 , under the command of Helmut Rosenbaum . At the time she was south west of Rockall at 53 ° 05 ′ N 23 ° 14 ′ W. A coup de grâce was fired at 03 : 57 which hit just under the bridge , breaking her in two . Empire Endurance sank with the loss of 65 crew and one passenger . Among the crew members lost was the captain , Fred J.S. Tucker of the Royal Naval Reserve . On 21 April , the Canadian Flower class corvette HMCS Trillium picked up twenty crew and four passengers at 52 ° 50 ′ N 22 ° 50 ′ W. They were landed at Greenock , Renfrewshire on 25 May . On 9 May , five crew were rescued by the British cargo liner Highland Brigade . They were landed at Liverpool . Those lost on board Empire Endurance are commemorated on the Tower Hill Memorial , London . 
 = Satoshi Kon = 
 Satoshi Kon ( <unk> <unk> , Kon Satoshi , October 12 , 1963 – August 24 , 2010 ) was a Japanese film director , animator , screenwriter and manga artist from Sapporo , Hokkaidō and a member of the Japanese Animation Creators Association ( <unk> ) . He was a graduate of the Graphic Design department of the Musashino Art University . He is sometimes credited as " Yoshihiro Wanibuchi " ( <unk> , Wanibuchi Yoshihiro ) in the credits of Paranoia Agent . He was the younger brother of guitarist and studio musician Tsuyoshi Kon . 
 = = Biography = = 
 = = = Early life = = = 
