 Satoshi Kon was born on October 12 , 1963 . Due to his father 's job transfer , Kon 's education from the fourth elementary grade up to the second middle school grade was based in Sapporo . Kon was a classmate and close friend of manga artist Seihō Takizawa . While attending Hokkaido Kushiro Koryo High School , Kon aspired to become an animator . His favorite works were Space Battleship Yamato ( 1974 ) , Heidi , Girl of the Alps ( 1974 ) , Future Boy Conan ( 1978 ) and Mobile Suit Gundam ( 1979 ) , as well as Katsuhiro Otomo 's <unk> : A Child 's Dream . Yasutaka Tsutsui served as an influence on Kon 's drawings . Kon graduated from the Graphic Design course of the Musashino Art University in 1982 . During that time , Kon viewed numerous foreign films and enthusiastically read Yasutaka Tsutsui 's books . 
 = = = Early career = = = 
 While in college , Kon made his debut as a manga artist with the short manga Toriko ( 1984 ) and earned a runner @-@ up spot in the 10th Annual Tetsuya Chiba Awards held by Young Magazine ( Kodansha ) . Afterward , he found work as Katsuhiro Otomo 's assistant . After graduating from college in 1987 , Kon authored the one @-@ volume manga <unk> ( 1990 ) and wrote the script for Katsuhiro Otomo 's live @-@ action film World Apartment Horror . In 1991 , Kon worked as an animator and layout artist for the animated film <unk> Z. Kon worked as a supervisor for Mamoru Oshii 's Patlabor 2 : The Movie along with other animated films . He then worked on the manga Seraphim : 266 @,@ 613 @,@ 336 Wings with Oshii , it was published in 1994 in Animage . In 1995 , Kon served as the scriptwriter , layout artist and art director of the short film Magnetic Rose , the first of three short films in Katsuhiro Otomo 's omnibus Memories . Kon 's work afterward would be distinguished by the recurring theme of the blending of fantasy and reality . 
 = = = Directing = = = 
 In 1993 , Kon scripted and co @-@ produced the fifth episode of the original video animation JoJo 's Bizarre Adventure . In 1997 , Kon began work on his directorial debut Perfect Blue ( based on Yoshikazu Takeuchi 's novel of the same name ) . A suspense story centered on a pop idol , it was the first film by Kon to be produced by Madhouse . Kon was initially unsatisfied with the original screenplay written by the author and requested to make changes to it . Aside from maintaining three elements of the novel ( " idol " , " horror " and " stalker " ) , Kon was allowed to make any changes he desired . The screenplay was written by <unk> Murai , who worked in the idea of a blurred border between the real world and imagination . 
 Following Perfect Blue , Kon considered adapting the Yasutaka Tsutsui novel Paprika ( 1993 ) into his next film . However , these plans were stalled when the distribution company for Perfect Blue ( Rex Entertainment ) went bankrupt . Coincidentally , Kon 's next work would also feature the theme of the blending of imagination and reality . In 2002 , Kon 's second film ( Millennium Actress ) was released to the public . The film centers on a retired actress who mysteriously withdraws from the public eye at the peak of her career . Having the same estimated budget as Perfect Blue ( approximately 120 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 yen ) , Millennium Actress garnered higher critical and financial success than its predecessor and earned numerous awards . The screenplay was written by <unk> Murai , who utilized a seamless connection between illusion and reality to create a " Trompe @-@ l 'œil kind of film " . Millennium Actress was the first Satoshi Kon film to feature Susumu Hirasawa , of whom Kon was a long @-@ time fan , as composer . 
 In 2003 , Kon 's third work ( Tokyo Godfathers ) was announced . The film centers on a trio of homeless persons in Tokyo who discover a baby on Christmas Eve and set out to search for her parents . Tokyo Godfathers cost more to make than Kon 's previous two films ( with a budget of approximately 300 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 yen ) , and centered on the themes of homelessness and abandonment , with a comedic touch worked in . The screenplay was written by Keiko Nobumoto . 
 In 2004 , Kon released the 13 @-@ episode television series Paranoia Agent , in which Kon revisits the theme of the blending of imagination and reality , as well as working in additional social themes . The series was created from an abundance of unused ideas for stories and arrangements that Kon felt were good but did not fit into any of his projects . 
 In 2006 , Paprika was announced , after having been planned out and materializing for several years . The story centers on a new form of psychotherapy that utilizes dream analysis to treat mental patients . The film was highly successful and earned a number of film awards . Kon summed up the film with " <unk> na story <unk> wa <unk> <unk> " ( <unk> ) — roughly , " Everything but the fundamental story was changed . " Much like Kon 's previous works , the film focuses on the synergy of dreams and reality . 
 After Paprika , Kon teamed up with Mamoru Oshii and Makoto Shinkai to create the 2007 NHK television production Ani * <unk> , for which Kon created the short <unk> . That same year , Kon helped establish and served as a member of the Japan Animation Creators Association ( <unk> ) . 
 = = = Health deterioration and death = = = 
 Following <unk> , Kon began work on his next film , Dreaming Machine . In May 2010 , Kon was diagnosed with terminal pancreatic cancer . Given half a year to live , Kon chose to spend the remainder of his life in his home . Shortly before his death Kon composed a final message , which was uploaded to his blog by his family upon his death . As Kon explained in the message , he chose not to make news of his rapidly advancing illness public , in part out of embarrassment at how drastically emaciated and ravaged his body had become . The result was that the announcement of his death was met with widespread shock and surprise , particularly given that Kon had shown no signs of illness at relatively recent public events , as the cancer progressed to a terminal state in a matter of months after being diagnosed . Kon died on August 24 , 2010 at the age of 46 . After his death , Kon was mentioned among the Fond Farewells in TIME 's people of the year 2010 . Darren Aronofsky wrote a eulogy to him , which was printed in Satoshi Kon 's Animation Works ( <unk> ) , a Japanese retrospective book of his animation career . 
 As of 2013 , the completion of Dreaming Machine remains uncertain due to funding difficulties , with only 600 of the 1500 shots being animated . At Otakon 2012 , Madhouse founder Masao Maruyama stated : " Unfortunately , we still don 't have enough money . My personal goal is to get it within five years after his passing . I 'm still working hard towards that goal . " In July 2015 , Madhouse reported that Dreaming Machine remains in production but they are looking for a director to match Kon 's abilities and similar vision . 
 = = Themes = = 
 When asked about his interest in female characters , Kon stated that female characters were easier to write because he is not able to know the character in the same way as a male character , and " can project my obsession onto the characters and expand the aspects I want to describe . " With a frame of reference up to Tokyo Godfathers , Susan J. Napier notes that while the theme of performance is the one obvious commonality in his works , she finds that the concept of the male gaze is the more important topic for discussion . Napier shows the evolution of Kon 's use of the gaze from its restrictive and negative aspects in Magnetic Rose and Perfect Blue , to a collaborative gaze in Millennium Actress before arriving at a new type of gaze in Tokyo Godfathers which revels in uncertainty and illusion . 
 Dean DeBlois said , " Satoshi Kon used the hand @-@ drawn medium to explore social stigmas and the human psyche , casting a light on our complexities in ways that might have failed in live action . Much of it was gritty , intense , and at times , even nightmarish . Kon didn 't shy away from mature subject matter or live @-@ action sensibilities in his work , and his films will always occupy a fascinating middle ground between ' cartoons ' and the world as we know it . " 
 = = Influences = = 
 Satoshi Kon 's most prominent influences were the works of Philip K. Dick and Yasutaka Tsutsui . Kon viewed various manga and anime up until high school . He was particularly fond of Space Battleship Yamato , Future Boy Conan , Galaxy Express 999 ( 1978 ) , Mobile Suit Gundam and <unk> : A Child 's Dream . Western films also served as an influence , most notably George Roy Hill 's Slaughterhouse @-@ Five ( 1972 ) , The City of Lost Children ( 1995 ) and the works of Terry Gilliam ( particularly Time Bandits ( 1981 ) , Brazil ( 1985 ) and The Adventures of Baron Munchausen ( 1989 ) ) . In addition to Gilliam , he also blogged about watching Monty Python . He was fond of the works of Akira Kurosawa , and worked in a reference to him in Paprika . However he claimed to be largely unfamiliar with Japanese film in general . 
 = = Filmography = = 
 = = = Manga = = = 
 = = = Other literary works = = = 
 = Drama dari Krakatau = 
 Drama dari Krakatau ( [ <unk> <unk> <unk> ] ; Drama of Krakatoa ) is a 1929 vernacular Malay novel written by Kwee Tek Hoay . Inspired by Edward Bulwer @-@ Lytton 's 1834 novel The Last Days of Pompeii and the 1883 eruption of Krakatoa , the sixteen @-@ chapter book centres on two families in 1920s Batam that are unknowingly tied together by siblings who were separated in 1883 . The brother becomes a political figure , while the sister marries a Baduy priest @-@ king . Ultimately these families are reunited by the wedding of their children , after which the priest sacrifices himself to calm a stirring Krakatoa . 
 First published as a serial in Kwee 's magazine Panorama between 7 April and 22 December 1928 , Drama dari Krakatau was written over a period of two months after the author was asked to prepare a " sensational " story for a film . Before the final instalment had been published , the novel had already been adapted for the stage . Although Kwee was known as a realist and researched the volcano before writing , Drama dari Krakatau is replete with mysticism . Thematic analyses have focused on the depiction of indigenous cultures by Kwee ( himself ethnic Chinese ) , as well as geography and nationalism . As with other works of Chinese Malay literature , the book is not considered part of the Indonesian literary canon . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1883 , Krakatoa begins stirring for the first time in 200 years . In the nearby village of <unk> , <unk> confides to her husband , village head Tjakra Amidjaja , that she has had a bad dream about the volcano ; she fears that it will be the death of them . Tjakra Amidjaja consoles her , and tells her that they will leave the village in two days . In the meantime , the volcano grows increasingly violent and Tjakra Amidjaja and <unk> stay behind to manage the evacuation . They send their children , Hasan and Soerijati , to stay with family in Rangkas Gombong . Krakatoa erupts several hours later . The village is wiped out in the resulting tsunami , and Soerijati is lost after she falls out of the carriage she is in ; Hasan , however , arrives safely in Rangkas Gombong . 
 Forty @-@ four years pass . Moelia , the son of the Regent of Rangkas Gombong and Assistant <unk> of <unk> , hears of a Baduy priest , Noesa Brama , who is curing the sick and injured . Moelia travels to Mount Ciwalirang to interview him , and finds Noesa Brama an intelligent and well @-@ spoken man . Over lunch Moelia falls in love with the priest 's daughter , Retna Sari . He learns that she must marry a man of equal standing to her father , one who is " no less than the Sultan of Yogyakarta or the Sunan of Solo " . Upon returning home , Moelia realises that Noesa Brama must be the last male descendent of the Hindu kings of Pajajaran , and that both Retna Sari and her mother bear a striking resemblance to his own grandmother . Several days later , he returns to the mountain and overhears a group of men from Palembang planning to kidnap Retna Sari . He chases them away , then briefly visits Noesa Brama before returning home . Though he attempts to forget Retna Sari , he is unable to do so . 
 The following week , the men from Palembang lie to the police , leading to Noesa Brama 's arrest for planning a rebellion ; the men then persuade Retna Sari and her mother to follow them to Sumatra . Learning of this , Moelia arranges for Noesa Brama 's release . The priest returns home to find that his wife and daughter have gone – seemingly willingly – with the men from Palembang , while Moelia takes a steamboat and chases the kidnappers . Before he can stop them , Krakatoa erupts again , overturning the fleeing ship . Moelia barely has enough time to rescue the women before the mountain erupts a second time , killing the fugitives . 
 Moelia informs his father , revealed to be Hasan , of the eruptions , and the older man comes to his son 's home . There he meets Retna Sari and her mother . They discover that Retna Sari 's mother is Soerijati , explaining the familial resemblance . She reveals that she had been found and raised by Noesa Brama 's father ; she also tells of a statue of Vishnu in a cave atop Mount Ciwalirang with the inscription " At the time when I am damaged , the land and all your descendants will be destroyed , cursed by <unk> 's anger " , damage to which the priests believe caused the Krakatoa eruption . Unknown to them , Noesa Brama – enraged at the thought of his daughter marrying a commoner – has deliberately destroyed this statue by throwing it down a well , causing the eruption which stopped the fugitives . 
 Moelia and his family depart for Ciwalirang the following morning , hoping that Noesa Brama will consent to the marriage of Moelia and Retna Sari . The priest accepts the proposal , but expresses regret over the destruction of the statue after he discovers that Retna Sari and Soerijati had not gone willingly with the men from Palembang . He weds Moelia and Retna Sari and has them promise that their first son will be raised a Hindu and become king of the Baduy ; he then surrenders all his power to his daughter . Later , hoping that his spirit and those of his ancestors can control the volcano , Noesa Brama secretly commits suicide by jumping into the well . Several weeks later , activity at the volcano drops , although it remains active . 
 = = Writing = = 
 Drama dari Krakatau was written by the journalist Kwee Tek Hoay . Born to an ethnic Chinese textile merchant and his native wife , Kwee had been raised in the Chinese culture and educated at schools that focused on preparing students for life in a modern world , as opposed to promoting tradition for its own sake . By the time he wrote the novel , Kwee was an active proponent of Buddhist teachings . He also wrote extensively on themes relating to the archipelago 's indigenous population , and was a keen social observer . He read extensively in Dutch , English , and Malay and drew on these influences after becoming a writer . His first novel , <unk> Korbannja " Perempoean Hina " ( The Victim of a " <unk> Woman " ) , was published in 1924 . 
 In 1928 Kwee was asked by a friend , who was hoping to establish a film company , to write a " sensational " story which could be used as the basis for a movie . Ongoing activity at Krakatoa was foremost in the author 's mind and , after reading Edward Bulwer @-@ Lytton 's 1834 novel The Last Days of Pompeii , Kwee asked himself " is it impossible for one to write a drama about Krakatoa ? " Owing to the length of time between the 1883 and 1928 eruptions , Kwee decided to begin his story with the separation of two young siblings . Further elements of the story were inspired by the mountain @-@ dwelling Baduy , a group which tended to avoid outsiders and claimed to be descended from the Hindu kings of Pajajaran . 
 Kwee thought himself a realist , considering it " better to say things as they are , than to create events out of nothing , which although perhaps more entertaining and satisfying to viewers or readers , are falsehoods and lies , going against the truth . " He was highly critical of contemporary writers who relied more on their fantasies than logic and truth . Hoping to keep his story grounded in reality , Kwee researched the history of the Baduy , the geological formation of Krakatoa , and the events of 1883 and 1928 ; in total he consulted 15 books , all in English or Dutch . Writing began on 19 March 1928 and was completed on 28 May of that year . Drama dari Krakatau consists of sixteen chapters , which were spread over 125 pages in the first printing . 
 = = Themes = = 
 Although Kwee was a staunch supporter of realism in literature , Drama dari Krakatau includes a degree of mysticism , as evidenced by the apparent connection between the statue in the cave and the eruption of Krakatoa . Indeed , in many of his writings ( both fiction and non @-@ fiction ) , Kwee exhibited an interest in the occult ; this includes writing detailed depictions of Therese Neumann , a fasting girl from Germany ; and Omar Khayyám , a Persian Sufi mystic , philosopher and poet . The Indonesian literary critic Jakob Sumardjo finds the mystical elements ( and the fact that no Hindu @-@ era statues with inscriptions have been found ) detract from the overall value of the novel . 
 Kwee 's work is the earliest of three Chinese Malay novels which were inspired by volcanic eruptions . The second , Liem <unk> Hoo 's <unk> Goenoeng <unk> ( The Eruption of Mount Kelud ) , was inspired by Kelud in East Java and was published in the monthly magazine Tjerita Roman in 1929 . The third , Kwee 's Drama dari <unk> ( Drama of Merapi ) , was inspired by Central Java 's Mount Merapi and was published as a serial in Moestika Romans from March to September 1931 . Volcanic eruptions also featured in contemporary Chinese Malay poetry . Claudine Salmon records one syair , Ong Tjong Sian 's Sair <unk> Goenoeng Krakatau ( Syair on the Eruption of Mount Krakatoa ; 1929 ) , as dealing with the community 's fears after Krakatoa resumed activity . 
 Unlike many contemporary works by ethnic Chinese authors , Drama dari Krakatau features no Chinese characters in major roles ; the only such characters are mentioned in passing , shopowners who provide emergency food supplies to the regent . Historically , Malay @-@ language works by ethnic Chinese authors centred on Chinese characters , to the point that terms such as tanah @-@ air ( homeland ) were often understood to mean mainland China , rather than the Malay Archipelago or Dutch East Indies . Chinese Malay works which featured exclusively indigenous characters had only developed in the 1920s . Uncommonly for ethnic Chinese writers of this period , Kwee attempts to centre the novel around indigenous people and present it from their perspective , " impersonating " these indigenous cultures through his narrative . 
 As with many stories with predominantly indigenous casts , Drama dari Krakatau is set in a rural area , far from the cities where the ethnic Chinese populace were concentrated . Geography plays a major role . The novel starts on a macro scale , depicting the origins of the archipelago from rising sea levels caused by the sinking of <unk> , then progresses increasingly towards the micro scale , passing through views of Java , Sumatra , and Krakatoa , before focusing on the home of Tjakra Amidjaja and the beginning of the plot . A later passage details the view from Mount Ciwalirang , showing Java , Krakatoa and Sumatra . 
 The Indonesian literary scholar <unk> Budianta argues that this " geographic panorama " , combined with the sympathetic depiction of other cultures and religions , shows elements of nationalism in the novel ; such a theme has also been found in Kwee 's Drama dari <unk> Digoel ( Drama of <unk> Digoel ; 1938 ) . She writes that the panoramic views of the archipelago " help the readers to imagine the geography of a nation yet to be united " , whereas the " impersonation " presents a " region of theosophy where religious difference is unified in the belief of goodness . " 
 = = Publication history and reception = = 
 Drama dari Krakatau was first published in serial form in Kwee 's magazine Panorama , between 7 April and 22 December 1928 . This serial was then published as a novel by Hoa Siang In Kiok in 1929 . A new printing , adopting the 1972 spelling reform , was included in the second volume of Kesastraan Melayu Tionghoa dan Kebangsaan Indonesia , an anthology of Chinese Malay literature . This volume also included Kwee 's novella <unk> <unk> jang Saja <unk> ( The Schoolhouse of My Dreams ; 1925 ) and the novel Boenga Roos dari Tjikembang ( The Rose of Cikembang ; 1927 ) . 
 As with Kwee 's earlier work Boenga Roos dari Tjikembang , an adaptation of Drama dari Krakatau was performed on stage before its completion . On 28 March 1928 , the Moon Opera performed Drama dari Krakatau at Pasar Senen in <unk> , Batavia ( now Senen , Jakarta ) . The troupe performed the story again on 31 March and 5 April , the latter at Mangga Besar , Batavia . Kwee prepared the story for the performances , abbreviating and simplifying it for the stage . One of the main difficulties , he wrote , was presenting Krakatoa on stage : it was a technical challenge , yet could not be abandoned as " performing this play without showing the eruption of Krakatoa would be like performing Hamlet without the Prince of Denmark . " 
 As with all works written in vernacular Malay , the novel has not been considered part of the Indonesian literary canon . In his doctoral thesis , J. Francisco B. Benitez posits a socio @-@ political cause for this . The Dutch colonial government used Court Malay as a " language of administration " , a language for everyday dealings , while the Indonesian nationalists appropriated the language to help build a national culture . Chinese Malay literature , written in " low " Malay , was steadily marginalised . Sumardjo , however , sees a question of classification : though vernacular Malay was the lingua franca of the time , it was not Indonesian , and as such , he asks whether works in vernacular Malay should be classified as local literature , Indonesian literature , or simply Chinese Malay literature . 
 = = Explanatory notes = = 
 = 1992 Queensland storms = 
 The 1992 Queensland storms were a series of thunderstorms which struck southeastern Queensland , Australia on 29 November 1992 . The storms produced strong winds , flash flooding and large hailstones in the region , including the capital city of Brisbane . The storms also spawned two of the most powerful tornadoes recorded in Australia , including the only Australian tornado to be given an official ' F4 ' classification on the Fujita scale . 
 The meteorological instability in the region resulted in the formation of at least five supercell thunderstorms in the space of around three hours . The storms , which spawned progressively further up the coast from Brisbane to Gladstone as the afternoon progressed , left a trail of damage resulting from hail , rain and wind . The event has been described as " one of the most widespread outbreaks of severe thunderstorms recorded " by veteran meteorologist Richard Whitaker . 
 = = Climatology and conditions = = 
 November is traditionally the start of the thunderstorm season along the eastern seaboard of Australia , with a rise in average humidity and warmer ground temperatures combining with more frequent occurrences of cool air in the upper atmosphere . These conditions are conducive for producing severe thunderstorms , particularly those which feature hail . 
 The conditions on Sunday , 29 November were extremely unsettled . There were a series of thunderstorm cells that formed early in the morning — despite it being more common for thunderstorms to form in the late afternoon in the south @-@ east Queensland region . These storms , which had periodic bursts of severe lightning , cleared quickly . 
 Thunderstorms began to form again just before midday , as the hot and humid conditions became more acute in the middle part of the day . The Bureau of Meteorology radar picked up a series of cells to the north @-@ west of Brisbane , the capital of Queensland , and the data suggested that there was a possibility of large hail . The Bureau immediately issued a Severe Thunderstorm Warning for the coastal region between Brisbane and the Sunshine Coast , 100 km to the north . 
 The main cell in the thunderstorm system appeared from Bureau of Meteorology radar analysis to split into two separate and distinct cells . This development resulted in one part of the major storm to head north , to Maroochydore , while the other part headed south towards Brisbane . The southern cell struck Brisbane just after 1 : 00pm , with intense lightning activity and hailstones the size of marbles falling . The storm caused a lengthy delay during the First Test of the series between Australia and the West Indies , when hail forced play to be stopped at the Brisbane Cricket Ground around 1 : 15pm . 
 The northern cell continued to intensify throughout the afternoon . The Bureau of Meteorology then recognised it as a supercell , which often bring erratic developments and often last for long periods of time . The storm dropped hailstones which were between eight and ten centimeters around Maroochydore , on the Sunshine Coast , damaging the roofs of around 80 houses in the area . The hail also damaged aircraft at a local airport and dented cars , as well as inflicting injuries to a handful of swimmers at beaches near Maroochydore . 
 = = Tornadoes = = 
 The extreme instability in this area caused at least three more severe supercells in the region . Two separate cells both produced a tornado that were recorded as two of the most powerful in Australian history . The third supercell , which formed just after 3 : 00pm ( immediately after the two tornadoes ) near Gladstone , produced golf ball @-@ sized hail that caused crop damage around Gladstone . The total damage to crops from the event was placed in the millions ( A $ ) . 
 = = = Oakhurst tornado = = = 
 Early in the afternoon , another supercell developed around the town of Maryborough , around 300 km north of Brisbane . It developed rapidly also , and at 2 : 30pm a number of reports sent to the Bureau of Meteorology reported a tornado had touched down in Oakhurst , a rural area 10 km west of Maryborough . However , due to the low population density in the area the reported damage was sparse , with one house destroyed , several others unroofed and hundreds of trees were snapped . 
 Upon investigation and analysis of measurements and the damage caused by the tornado , it was given a rating of ' F3 ' on the Fujita scale . This was one of the most powerful tornadoes ever recorded in Australia , and the scale indicated the tornado may have produced winds of between 252 and 300 kilometres per hour . 
 = = = Bucca tornado = = = 
 Only minutes after the Oakhurst tornado , another supercell developed to the south @-@ west of Bundaberg , around 400 km north of Brisbane and 150 km north of the Oakhurst tornado . It strengthened and moved in a north @-@ east direction , causing severe damage to <unk> and Bucca areas with giant hailstones , described as the size of a " cricket ball " . 
 The supercell then spawned a tornado in the Bucca and Kolan area . According to reports by meteorologists , the tornado was so strong and the effects caused on the area it hit were so extreme that household appliances were displaced , small objects were embedded in trees and house walls , and " a 3 @-@ tonne truck body was carried 300 metres across the ground " . However , as with Oakhurst , the rural nature of the area affected limited the damage caused by the tornado . 
 Examination by a severe weather team from the Bureau of Meteorology examined the damage in the Bucca and Kolan region and recorded it as an ' F4 ' on the Fujita scale . This corresponds to the tornado being able to produce winds between 331 and 417 kilometres per hour and of ' devastating ' intensity . This is the first tornado ever to be recorded as an F4 in Australian history . 
 = Turkey Tolson Tjupurrula = 
 Turkey Tolson Tjupurrula ( sometimes just Turkey Tolson ; c . 1938 – 10 August 2001 ) was a Pintupi @-@ speaking Indigenous artist from Australia 's Western Desert region . Born near Haasts Bluff , Northern Territory , Turkey Tolson was a major figure in the Papunya Tula art movement , and the longest @-@ serving chairman of the company formed to represent its artists . 
 A painter whose creative output spanned nearly three decades , controversy erupted briefly in 1999 , when disputed declarations were made by the artist regarding whether some works under his signature had been painted by some female relatives . Creator of the work Straightening spears at <unk> ( 1990 ) , Tolson 's paintings are held by several major Australian public galleries , including the Art Gallery of South Australia , National Gallery of Victoria and the National Museum of Australia . 
 = = Life = = 
 Son of Toba Tjakamarra , one of the first Pintupi people to come into European settlements out of the Western Desert , Turkey Tolson was born near Haasts Bluff , west of Alice Springs , Northern Territory . Sources differ on his birth year : researcher and art historian Vivien Johnson gives an estimate of 1938 , while the National Museum of Australia suggests 1943 . His mother was one of Toba 's three wives : the other two ( his <unk> ) were the artists Wintjiya Napaltjarri and Tjunkiya Napaltjarri . He had five half @-@ siblings , the children of Toba and Wintjiya : Bundy ( born 1953 ) , Lindsey ( born 1961 and now deceased ) , <unk> ( born 1955 ) , Claire ( born 1958 ) and Eileen ( born 1960 ) . 
 <unk> ' ( in Pintupi ) ( also commonly seen as ' <unk> ' , this being the Warlpiri spelling ) is a skin name , one of sixteen used to denote the subsections or subgroups in the kinship system of central Australian Indigenous people . These names define kinship relationships that influence preferred marriage partners and may be associated with particular totems . Although they may be used as terms of address , they are not surnames in the sense used by Europeans . Thus ' Turkey Tolson ' is the element of the artist 's name that is specifically his . 
 As a young man , Turkey Tolson worked in construction and as a stockman around Haasts Bluff , and was a skilled spear @-@ thrower . He only came to know his birth country in 1959 , after his initiation . He married and with his family moved to Papunya , Northern Territory at the time of its construction . His first wife died , and after remarrying to Mary <unk> in 1984 he moved to Kintore , which lies within his family 's traditional country . Later in life he suffered heart trouble , and was in Alice Springs receiving dialysis treatment at the time of his death on 10 August 2001 . 
 = = Art = = 
 Contemporary Indigenous Australian art arose in western desert communities when Indigenous men at Papunya began painting in 1971 , assisted by teacher Geoffrey Bardon . Soon afterwards they established Papunya Tula , a company owned and controlled by the artists , which went on to be Australia 's pre @-@ eminent Indigenous art centre . Turkey Tolson was one of the first to paint – his name appears in the company 's records in 1973 ; he was also one of the youngest . He was influential within the Papunya Tula movement and spent a period as the longest @-@ serving chairman of the company . In addition to painting , Turkey Tolson also made prints , with an example held in the collection of the National Gallery of Australia . 
 Turkey Tolson 's painting style developed in two broad phases . His early work was classical , tightly controlled and with a strong sense of symmetry characterising the geometrical arrangement of symbols and the patterns of dots surrounding them . Works from the mid @-@ 1970s , painted at Papunya , show this iconography . They include Dreaming at <unk> ( <unk> ) ( 1976 ) , <unk> ( <unk> ) ( 1976 ) Two Women Mythology at <unk> <unk> ( 1977 ) , and <unk> ( 1977 ) , all held by the National Museum of Australia , and all painted in synthetic polymer paint . Turkey Tolson collaborated with Johnny Scobie <unk> , a fellow Papunya artist , in creating the last of the works . 
 After his father 's death , the artist took over ceremonial responsibility for his country . This shift to a senior place in the community was associated with a looser style and a more individualised iconography . It was during this period that he created the work Straightening spears at <unk> ( 1990 ) , held by the Art Gallery of South Australia . This painting was described by both art expert Vivian Johnson and critic Susan McCulloch @-@ <unk> as his masterpiece , and by obituarist Rebecca Hossack as his most famous work : " a series of shimmering horizontal lines representing spears being heated and straightened over a fire by Tolson 's ancestors " . This and other similar works were described by art critic Susan McCulloch @-@ <unk> as representing not only the preparation of the spears , but also elements of Dreamings concerning fights between ancestral figures at a rock bluff west of Alice Springs . 
 In 1999 , controversy erupted when Tolson signed a statutory declaration in which he stated that , in return for payments , he had put his signature on paintings that had been created by some of his female relatives , but then , shortly afterwards , signed a contradictory declaration . The case raised important questions about the nature of Aboriginal art , and about the " corrupting " effects of the art market . Anthropologist Fred Myers analysed the case , and concluded that the issue was not that Turkey Tolson was painting for money , or even being paid money . Rather , " Turkey ’ s work is threatened by corruption because the conditions of his presence in Alice Springs – his need for more regular income and his dealer ’ s need for ' product ' – draw him away from the experiences that inform his painting . " 
 Major exhibitions in which Turkey Tolson 's work has featured have included Papunya Tula : Out of the Australian desert at the National Museum of Australia in 2010 , and Almanac : The gift of Ann Lewis AO at the Museum of Contemporary Art , Sydney , also in 2010 . The following year , his painting Spear straightening ceremony ( 1993 ) was included in a Newcastle Region Art Gallery exhibition , Speaking in Colour . 
 = = Major collections = = 
 Art Gallery of New South Wales 
 Art Gallery of South Australia 
 National Gallery of Australia 
 National Gallery of Victoria 
 National Museum of Australia 
 = New York State Route 117 = 
 New York State Route 117 ( NY 117 ) is a 15 @.@ 57 @-@ mile ( 25 @.@ 06 km ) state highway in Westchester County , New York , in the United States . The southern terminus of the route is at an intersection with U.S. Route 9 ( US 9 ) north of the village of Sleepy Hollow . The northern terminus is at an interchange with the Saw Mill River Parkway south of Katonah , a hamlet in the town of Bedford . NY 117 meets the Taconic State Parkway in Pleasantville and parallels the Saw Mill Parkway from Pleasantville to Bedford . 
 NY 117 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York and originally extended from Tarrytown to Katonah . The Tarrytown – Pleasantville portion of NY 117 passed through Kykuit , the estate of the Rockefeller family . Construction on a new limited @-@ access highway bypassing the estate to the north began in the late 1960s and was completed in 1971 , at which time NY 117 was realigned to follow the highway . Another highway bypassing Katonah was built in the early 1990s and opened c . 1992 as a realignment of NY 117 . 
 = = Route description = = 
 = = = Mount Pleasant and Pleasantville = = = 
 NY 117 begins just north of the village of Sleepy Hollow at an interchange with US 9 ( Broadway ) in the town of Mount Pleasant . The route proceeds generally northeastward along Phelps Way , a four @-@ lane , divided highway bypass of Sleepy Hollow and Kykuit , the Rockefeller family 's estate . For its first 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) , the highway runs through a wooded area along the northern edge of the Rockefeller State Park Preserve , crossing under several of the park 's hiking and walking trails . Phelps Way ends at the northeastern tip of the park , where NY 117 intersects with the northern terminus of NY 448 at Bedford Road . While NY 448 ends here , Bedford Road continues on as part of NY 117 . 
 After NY 448 , NY 117 becomes a four @-@ lane , undivided at @-@ grade street as it heads northeast through a residential area of Mount Pleasant . Just past the NY 448 junction , NY 117 enters adjacent interchanges with Saw Mill River Road ( NY 9A and NY 100 ) and the northbound direction of the Taconic State Parkway near Graham Hills County Park . From here , the highway passes south of Pace University 's Pleasantville campus on its way into the village of Pleasantville , where it narrows to two lanes and initially serves mostly commercial neighborhoods . NY 117 remains on Bedford Road for its first few blocks in Pleasantville ; however , it veers northeast onto Manville Road just southwest of the community 's central business district . 
 As Manville Road , the highway heads past five residential blocks , connecting to the southbound direction of the Saw Mill River Parkway before entering Pleasantville 's commercial center at Memorial Plaza . Within Memorial Plaza is Metro @-@ North Railroad 's Pleasantville station , located on the south side of NY 117 . After crossing the Metro @-@ North tracks , the route continues east along several commercial blocks before turning to the northeast and entering another residential section of Pleasantville . The highway eventually reaches the northern edge of the village , where it rejoins Bedford Road at a junction with the northern terminus of NY 141 . NY 117 turns north here , following Bedford Road out of Pleasantville and into the nearby town of New Castle . 
 = = = New Castle , Chappaqua and Mount Kisco = = = 
 Upon crossing into New Castle , NY 117 changes names to South Bedford Road . The road takes a generally northeasterly track away from the town line to the hamlet of Chappaqua , a community just 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from the center of Pleasantville . NY 117 serves as Chappaqua 's main north – south street , passing by commercial and residential neighborhoods ahead of an intersection with NY 120 ( King Street ) in Chappaqua 's center . NY 120 turns north here , overlapping with NY 117 for one block before splitting off to the west on Quaker Road . NY 117 continues north from this point as North Bedford Road , passing a strip mall before leaving Chappaqua . 
 Outside of Chappaqua , NY 117 loosely parallels the Saw Mill River Parkway as it winds its way northeastward across residential parts of New Castle . The two parallel roads connect again by way of Roaring Brook Road , a four @-@ lane arterial located midway between Chappaqua and the next community along NY 117 , the village of Mount Kisco . Roaring Brook Road also connects NY 117 and the Saw Mill River Parkway to the global headquarters of Reader 's Digest , which comprises a large complex bounded by NY 117 to the east and the Metro @-@ North tracks to the west . From here , NY 117 takes on a more pronounced northeasterly alignment that takes the route past Mount Kisco Country Club and into the village of Mount Kisco . 
 Just inside the village limits , NY 117 meets the north end of NY 128 at Park Avenue . Past Park Avenue , NY 117 continues north through Mount Kisco , changing names to Main Street ahead of the village 's central business district . Here , the route enters a junction with the western terminus of NY 172 ( South Bedford Road ) at the main entrance to Northern Westchester Hospital . The commercial surroundings continue north for another eight blocks to Jeff <unk> Square , where NY 117 connects to the east end of NY 133 . Main Street turns northwest onto NY 133 while NY 117 splits to the northeast along Bedford Road . 
 = = = Mount Kisco , Bedford , and Bedford Hills = = = 
 As the route heads away from Main Street , it proceeds through a brief wooded , residential area before entering a commercial district surrounding Mount Kisco Commons . Several businesses and an industrial complex follow after as NY 117 continues northeast through the northernmost part of Mount Kisco and into the town of Bedford . Across the town line , the development along the route remains commercial as the road parallels the nearby railroad tracks and the Saw Mill River Parkway to the northwest . About 2 miles ( 3 @.@ 2 km ) from Mount Kisco , NY 117 enters the hamlet of Bedford Hills , where the route initially serves residential neighborhoods . 
 In the commercial center of the community , NY 117 serves the Bedford Hills Metro @-@ North station before widening to four lanes as it crosses the railroad tracks and connects to exit 39 of the Saw Mill River Parkway . For the next mile ( 1 @.@ 6 km ) , NY 117 runs alongside the northern edge of the Saw Mill River Parkway as it heads through another residential part of Bedford Hills as a two @-@ lane road . At Harris Road , the route turns southeastward , crossing the parkway and the adjacent railroad tracks again as it intersects with the parkway 's exit 42 . NY 117 's southeastward run on Harris Road ends just past the railroad crossing , where the highway turns northeast onto an unnamed road leading to a commercial and industrial area south of the hamlet of Katonah . After turning onto the highway , NY 117 serves various businesses before the route ends at the southbound @-@ only exit 43 of the Saw Mill River Parkway . NY 117 northbound feeds into the northbound direction of the parkway , while exit 43 serves as the start of NY 117 southbound . 
 = = History = = 
 = = = Origins and local realignments = = = 
 NY 117 was assigned as part of the 1930 renumbering of state highways in New York . It initially began at the junction of Bedford and County House Roads in Tarrytown ( both part of NY 9A at the time ) and followed Bedford Road northeast to NY 132 ( now NY 35 ) at Jay Street in Katonah . NY 9A was realigned c . 1939 to follow Sleepy Hollow Road instead , bypassing Tarrytown completely . The former routing of NY 9A on Bedford Road to US 9 became a short extension of NY 117 . The route was also extended on its northern end in the mid @-@ 1970s after NY 35 was moved onto a new highway that bypassed Katonah to the north . 
 On September 1 , 1980 , ownership and maintenance of NY 117 between Manville Road southwest of the Pleasantville village limits and Broadway within Pleasantville was transferred from the state of New York to Westchester County as part of a highway maintenance swap between the two levels of government . In return , ownership and maintenance of the entirety of Manville Road through Pleasantville was given to the state of New York from Westchester County . NY 117 was rerouted to follow Manville Road while NY 141 was extended one block north along NY 117 's former routing to intersect Manville Road . The remainder of NY 117 's former routing is now County Route 27A ( CR 27A ) from Manville Road to the Pleasantville village line , part of CR 106 from View Street to Pleasantville Road , and CR 27 from the Mount Pleasant village line to View Street and from Pleasantville Road to NY 141 . 
 = = = Phelps Way = = = 
 The portion of NY 117 's original routing between Tarrytown and Pleasantville passed through the center of Kykuit , the estate of the Rockefeller family , and was designed to handle 1 @,@ 900 cars per day . The actual volume of traffic on the roadway was much higher as the actual average annual daily traffic reached upwards of 5 @,@ 000 vehicles per day . As a result , the Rockefeller family looked into having the route realigned as early as 1932 . The family suggested that a new highway be built along the northern end of the estate . 
 In 1965 , Rockefeller unveiled plans for the Potantico Expressway , a connector from the to @-@ be @-@ constructed Hudson River Expressway ( NY 9A ) to the Taconic State Parkway . Some opposition to the idea arose on the grounds that the new highway would only benefit the Rockefeller estate and not the residents . Nonetheless , construction began on the Potantico Expressway ( now known as Phelps Way ) in 1969 . When the highway was completed in 1971 , it became part of a rerouted NY 117 . NY 117 's former alignment along Bedford Road became NY 448 . The Hudson River Expressway project was cancelled in 1971 , and the western stub of the expressway now serves Phelps Hospital . 
 = = = Katonah Bypass = = = 
 The easternmost portion of NY 117 in Katonah passed through a historic district containing several homes dating back to the late 19th century . Following the construction of nearby I @-@ 684 in 1968 , this segment of NY 117 became a truck route between the Interstate Highway and industrial areas along NY 117 south of Katonah . While the Saw Mill River Parkway would have provided an alternate route to I @-@ 684 from NY 117 , commercial traffic was prohibited from using the highway . The trucks that used NY 117 would shake the historic homes as it passed through the hamlet , causing small amounts of damage to the structures . A study analyzing the issue of truck traffic along NY 117 in Katonah began in 1976 at the request of the town of Bedford . 
 The study was completed in 1978 , at which time the New York State Department of Transportation ( NYSDOT ) concluded that traffic would never become heavy enough along NY 117 to bring about a need for a bypass . However , the state continued to keep abreast of the situation and eventually performed a second study in 1983 . Unlike the first study , this one found traffic along the highway to be on the rise . As a result , the state began making plans to construct a bypass that would divert truck traffic away from Katonah . Over the next three years , NYSDOT proposed a total of nine different routings for the bypass . The route selected by the town of Bedford would begin at Harris Road and head north and east to the Saw Mill Parkway , which it would merge into . An exception would then be made to allow commercial traffic on the parkway between the Katonah Bypass and I @-@ 684 . The routing of the highway , projected to cost $ 8 @.@ 7 million ( equivalent to $ 18 @.@ 1 million in 2016 ) , was approved in November 1987 . 
 In October 1990 , NYSDOT accepted a low bid of $ 8 @.@ 5 million ( equivalent to $ 15 @.@ 4 million in 2016 ) for the project , clearing the way for construction to begin on the bypass by the following month . The Katonah Bypass opened c . 1992 and became part of a realigned NY 117 . The portion of Bedford Road from Harris Road to NY 35 is now maintained by the town of Bedford . 
 = = Major intersections = = 
 The entire route is in Westchester County . 
 = Mortal Kombat ( 2011 video game ) = 
 Mortal Kombat is the ninth main installment in the Mortal Kombat series of fighting video games . It is a reboot of the franchise and was developed by NetherRealm Studios and published exclusively by Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment . The game was released for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 systems in April 2011 , and a PlayStation Vita port was released in May 2012 . An expanded version of the game , titled Mortal Kombat : Komplete Edition , was released for Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 in February 2012 and for Microsoft Windows in July 2013 . 
 Although beginning during the events of Mortal Kombat : Armageddon , the plot is a retcon to the earliest period in the Mortal Kombat series , the trilogy of Mortal Kombat , Mortal Kombat II and Mortal Kombat 3 . The storyline involves the divine protector of Earth , Raiden , attempting to change the aftermath of the events of Armageddon by contacting his past self as he faces defeat at the hands of the evil emperor of Outworld , Shao Kahn . While having characters and levels rendered in three @-@ dimensions , the gameplay distances itself from the fully 3D graphics one seen in the last four games , bearing closer resemblance to that of the 2D era of the series , using a camera that is perpendicular to the two @-@ dimensional playing field . 
 Upon release , Mortal Kombat received very positive reviews and won several awards for fighting game of the year . It was also a commercial success , selling more than two million copies in the first month alone . Due to its extremely violent content , the game was banned in Australia due to the lack of appropriate ratings category , and South Korea , and it has been reportedly indexed in Germany ; the Australian ban was later lifted due to the introduction of an R18 classification and the game was released with many other R rated games in May 2014 . Mortal Kombat was followed by the sequel Mortal Kombat X in 2015 . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 Principal gameplay involves one @-@ on @-@ one 2.5D style fighting . Mortal Kombat uses a single two @-@ dimensional fighting plane ( at 60 frames per second ) , although characters are rendered in three @-@ dimensional fashion , intended to give depth and range to portrayals of various projectiles . Unlike previous Mortal Kombat games , four buttons on the game controller represent attacks and are each linked to a corresponding limb . 
 A new feature is the " super meter " , which can be charged by various actions during battle such as performing special moves , getting blocked by the opponent , or getting hit by them . The super meter can be charged to three levels , each of them enabling a different action to be performed . At the first level , it can be used to deliver an enhanced version of one of the character 's special attacks ; two levels can be used to interrupt a combo attack , and the full three levels allow for the delivery of a special attack called an " X @-@ ray move " . The X @-@ ray move unleashes a series of attacks during which the game provides an internal view of the character being attacked , which shows their bones and organs being broken or ruptured . 
 Extra features include a story mode during which the player plays as multiple characters , a Fatality training mode ( allowing players to practice executing finishing moves ) , the Challenge Tower , tag team fighting , and an online mode . The Challenge Tower mode is a single @-@ player option that includes 300 specific challenges of various difficulties providing currency rewards upon completion ; players have the option of using in @-@ game currency to bypass other difficult challenges , completing them later . Among the various challenges are " Test Your Might " ( rapidly pressing buttons and using specific timing to destroy blocks of varying difficulty ) , " Test Your Sight " ( following an object hidden under a cup or skull and revealing the object after a shuffle ) , " Test Your Strike " ( destroying a specific block in a stack ) and " Test Your Luck " ( fighting under certain conditions , such as no jumping ) . The four @-@ player tag @-@ team feature is an original feature , allowing two players to play together . During tag gameplay , two new types of attacks become available . The first of them is the " tag assist " attack , in which the off @-@ screen character temporarily jumps in and performs certain attacks during the active character 's combo . The other is the " tag kombo " , in which the active character performs a combo that is finished by the off @-@ screen character as they enter the fight . 
 The online mode includes a " King of the Hill " option , where up to eight players can act as spectators and play the winner of a fight . Spectators may also rate the fights and use the " forum " to determine how to perform various combos or moves observed during a fight . A single @-@ use online pass is also included with the game which is mandatory to access the online components . Online passes are also available from the PlayStation Store and Xbox Live Marketplace . 
 There is also a PlayStation 3 @-@ exclusive 3D display mode , for which 3D glasses are not necessary . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The game 's director , Ed Boon , described it as an altered re @-@ telling of the events of the first three Mortal Kombat games ( Mortal Kombat , Mortal Kombat II and Mortal Kombat 3 ) : 
 " Raiden is about to be killed by Shao Kahn , and just before he delivers the last blow , Raiden sends a mental message to his earlier self by saying that he must win , and the camera rewinds back to Mortal Kombat 1 . The Raiden from Mortal Kombat 1 then gets the message and experiences a premonition . The game then spans Mortal Kombat 1 , 2 , and 3 , retelling the story with an enlightened Raiden , who has changed the course of events . Eventually , everything the player has seen happen before — Liu Kang winning , Lin Kuei turning into cybernetic ninjas , has been altered . You might see a cybernetic character who wasn 't before , and a different version of events . " 
 = = = Story = = = 
 Following the events of Mortal Kombat : Armageddon , both the forces of light and darkness have been wiped out , with only the thunder god Raiden and the Outworld emperor Shao Kahn remaining to represent their parties . A severely weakened Raiden is about to be killed by Shao Kahn , but casts a last @-@ minute spell on the shattered pieces of his magical amulet , directing it to contact his past self with the vague message " He must win " . 
 During the events of the first tournament hosted by Shang Tsung , the past version of Raiden sees visions of the future courtesy of his cracked amulet . Raiden initially comes to the conclusion that fighter Liu Kang is to win the tournament and save Earthrealm from Outworld . Pivotal characters such as Johnny Cage , Sonya Blade , Jax Briggs , Sektor , Cyrax , Nightwolf , Kitana , Jade , and Sub @-@ Zero are introduced , the latter being killed by the <unk> Scorpion . In time , Liu Kang becomes the only remaining Earthrealm contestant , and succeeds in defeating the Shokan Prince Goro , as well as Shang Tsung . However , Raiden 's amulet continues to deteriorate , a sign that future events remain unchanged . Disappointed with Shang Tsung 's failure , Shao Kahn orders his execution , but relents when the sorcerer suggests holding the second tournament in Outworld . Raiden initially refuses , but is forced to relent when Shang Tsung threatens to unleash Outworld 's armies upon Earthrealm . 
 As each of the Earthrealm warriors are defeated , the younger Sub @-@ Zero ( originally named Tundra , who adopts the moniker Sub @-@ Zero to honor his fallen brother ) and Smoke arrive in Outworld on Lin Kuei terms , who are also fighting in the tournament . They are pursued by cybernetic Lin Kuei assassins , including Sektor and Cyrax , who attempt to take them back to Earthrealm for automation . Raiden attempts to change the timeline by rescuing Smoke from his transformation , but as a result , the younger Sub @-@ Zero is automated in his place . Also during this time , Kitana uncovers the existence of Mileena , a mutant clone of herself crafted by Shang Tsung on Shao Kahn 's orders . Infuriated by the betrayal , Kitana defects from Kahn and joins the Earthrealm warriors , with Jade following her later on . In the final round of the tournament , Raiden once again tampers with the timeline by substituting Kung Lao for Liu Kang , the original winner of the Outworld tournament , as the champion of the second tournament . Shao Kahn , however , kills Kung Lao near the end of the tournament , with Liu Kang retaliating and mortally wounding the Outworld emperor . Raiden notes the timeline is still unaffected as his amulet continues to deteriorate . 
 Healed by the sorcerer Quan Chi , Shao Kahn enters into an alliance with the Netherrealm and has Quan Chi resurrect his wife , Sindel . In doing so , they nullify the ward that prevents Kahn 's access to Earthrealm , initiating a full @-@ scale invasion . Shortly afterwards , Raiden prevents the death of Johnny Cage by slaying Motaro . Joined by fighters Kurtis Stryker and Kabal , the <unk> attempt to stop Kahn 's invasion , but many of them are killed by Sindel , who had been vastly empowered by the souls extracted from Shang Tsung 's body , thus killing the sorcerer . Kitana is then overpowered by Sindel 's new strength and is brutally beaten . Kitana , critically injured , pleads to her mother that Shao Kahn has corrupted her , but Sindel ignores and attempts to finish her off . Nightwolf , however , comes in time to stop Sindel and sacrifices himself to kill her . Raiden confronts Quan Chi and , learning of the alliance with Kahn , he realizes that the message " He must win " refers to Kahn himself — if he is allowed to merge Outworld and Earthrealm , he will be punished by the Elder Gods for a violation of the Mortal Kombat code for taking a realm without winning the tournament . Liu Kang , however , blames Raiden for the death of their allies and attacks an approaching Shao Kahn . In an attempt to change history , Raiden accidentally kills Liu Kang . Grief @-@ stricken , Raiden " surrenders " to Shao Kahn . The Elder Gods intervene , restoring Raiden 's strength which he in turn uses to defeat and punish Kahn for breaking the Mortal Kombat code . 
 After defeating Kahn , Raiden vows to rebuild Earthrealm with survivors Johnny Cage and Sonya Blade . Quan Chi is then revealed to be an agent of Shinnok , who intends to take advantage of the chaos and the elimination of Kahn to conquer both Outworld and Earthrealm in the name of the Netherrealm . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 ^ a PlayStation exclusive ^ b Available as downloadable content or as part of the Komplete Edition ^ c Boss character ( <unk> ) ^ d Secret character 
 = = Development = = 
 In a November 2008 interview , Ed Boon stated that game sales for Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe would dictate what features would appear in " the next game " . In 2009 , Midway Games Chicago filed for bankruptcy and was purchased by Warner Bros. Interactive . This led the game to be developed by NetherRealm Studios , becoming the first installment in the series to be published exclusively under the Warner Bros. label . On June 18 , 2009 , Boon confirmed on his Twitter page that developers were performing motion capture for the game and that it would not feature superheroes . Dan Forden was also expected to return as the music composer for the game . In late 2009 , Boon stated that the franchise was returning to its bloody origins and that the production team were aiming for a " Mature " rating , as opposed to the " Teen " on the previous game . Boon also showed concern about content being classified under the " Adults Only " rating . 
 Mortal Kombat was officially revealed on June 10 , 2010 with a release for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 in 2011 . It was revealed at the Sony E3 press conference that Mortal Kombat would be 3D compatible , and Boon said that in dealing with the 3D capability , more attention to detail was required so as to not obstruct the gameplay . Boon said that the extras mode from previous games ( " The Krypt " ) would return with an " elaborate and sophisticated unlocking system " and put " the other games in the series to shame . " He also said they intended for Mortal Kombat to be accessible to the casual player and more " engaging " , with experts on the fighting genre consulted . New features were made to create a deeper fighting experience . Some mild humorous elements were also included , such as the Babality finishing moves . At the time , Boon said that the production team were considering a PC port of Mortal Kombat as " there seems to be a market for [ PC games ] in Europe . " 
 Mortal Kombat runs on a heavily modified version of the Unreal Engine 3 , similar to the engine used by its predecessor , Mortal Kombat vs. DC Universe . Developers recreated the entire fighting engine so that it was restricted to a two @-@ dimensional plane of fighting , with senior producer Hans Lo stating at gamescom 2010 that the change from 3D gameplay to 2D was advantageous for Mortal Kombat , as it increased graphical detail for characters and arenas and improved gameplay speed . Another new mechanic is the inclusion of " blood physics " ( blood loss is portrayed as being more natural and being clearly visible on characters or surroundings ) . Developers stated that online gameplay for Mortal Kombat would be a main priority , declaring interest in capabilities to link the player 's progression feed to their accounts on social networking websites such as Facebook and Twitter , and recreate the feel of socializing with players in an arcade . 
 According to Dave <unk> , one of lead artists for Mortal Kombat , environments were developed to create active objects and effects such as " scripted cinema events " , " dynamic lighting effects " and " characters and objects that animated and reacted to the fights . " Arena development began with 18 arenas , but development of environments with different times of day and original arenas related to the plot scaled up arena development to roughly 30 arenas . One unique feature is included with each stage such as " The Desert " which has a " sand tech " , allowing for realistic sand motion during characters ' interaction . Dan Forden , lead sound designer , said the intent was to create a " cinematic game audio experience " . Sound effect design included use and enhancement of the " bone @-@ crunching audio design " of previous titles and , while the " dynamic experience " was vital , small details such as the " rustling of fighter 's clothes " and background sounds were also included . Music for each stage was similar to previous games but with " a completely new arrangement " . 
 Boon said that there was a focus on including characters from the first three Mortal Kombat games and that " if you have a favorite character from those games , you 're probably going to see him or her in the game . " The game 's developers stated that the characters had been designed with the intent to make each character unique – each having his or her own individual stance , victory pose and Fatality with no shared animations . Lead designer John Edwards said that characters are differentiated by features such as power and speed . Producer Shaun Himmerick said that the internal and external character design required " two months or ten weeks " . Boon said that an exclusive character was planned for the Xbox 360 version , but " unfortunately , the circumstances didn 't allow us to make a 360 exclusive . " Ed Boon mentioned that Marcus Fenix of the Gears of War franchise was considered for the Xbox 360 version as the console guest fighter . He also said they were in talks to include Sweet Tooth from Sony 's Twisted Metal franchise . 
 On April 5 , 2011 , Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment and NetherRealm Studios announced Mortal Kombat was finished and ready for mass production , with pre @-@ orders having gone " gold " . Asked what would be the correct way to call it , for example " <unk> " or " MK2011 " , Boon answered he would say " The Mortal Kombat game they rebooted in 2011 . " 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Promotion = = = 
 On August 31 , 2010 , a teaser trailer " Shadows " debuted on IGN , featuring a track " Another Way to Die " from the band Disturbed 's album Asylum . On September 28 , 2010 , the slogan " Kombat Begins In ... " appeared with a clock counting down on the Mortal Kombat official website , the countdown ending on Monday October 11 , 2010 . At the conclusion of the countdown , a link to the Facebook page was added to the website and an accompanying Facebook application was also released that showcased a teaser trailer for the game . 
 On October 4 , 2010 , the " Environment Bio " trailer of the Mortal Kombat arena , The Pit , was released to explain the in @-@ game backstory on its origins and evolution . Similar videos featuring The Living Forest , the Dead Pool , and Kahn 's Coliseum were released afterward , also explaining background information on the stages . In a similar fashion , character profile videos were released for Scorpion , Sub @-@ Zero , Mileena , Liu Kang and Raiden . In April 2011 , Playboy models Jo Garcia and Brittney Palmer ( dressed as Mileena and Kitana , respectively ) promoted the game in a sponsored vlog advertisement . In April 2011 , Bespoke Arcades created a series of arcade machines to promote the game at the Gadget Show Live 2011 . In April 2012 , two live @-@ action cosplay trailers featuring Rachelle Glover ( Kitana ) and Danni Levy ( Mileena ) were released ; they were later combined into one commercial video titled " Fight Anywhere " . 
 On March 8 , 2011 , a demo version of the game was released for download globally , initially exclusively for PlayStation Plus members . The demo ( an arcade ladder with single- or two @-@ player capability ) showcases four characters ( Johnny Cage , Mileena , Scorpion and Sub @-@ Zero ) and the stages The Living Forest and The Pit . Performance Design Products sponsored the inaugural National Mortal Kombat Championship , which took place in Las Vegas in May 2011 . Mortal Kombat was also internationally presented in the 2011 Evolution Championship Series ( Evo ) , being recognized as a " main tournament fighting game " . Professional gamers Justin Wong ( winner of the PDP championship ) and Carl ' Perfect Legend ' White ( the Evo 2011 champion ) spoke positively of Mortal Kombat 's place in future tournament events . 
 = = = Retail versions = = = 
 Mortal Kombat was available for pre @-@ order in three different editions : Standard , Kollector 's Edition ( includes a copy of the game , art book , Sub @-@ Zero and Scorpion figurine bookends and a downloadable content ( DLC ) skin , dubbed a Mortal Kombat Klassic costume ) , and the Tournament Edition ( includes a fight stick controller instead of the bookends and art book ) . A European version of the Kollector 's Edition was also released , which includes the game , art book , a Scorpion & Sub @-@ Zero figurine , a Steelbook case and downloadable skins . 
 In the United States , pre @-@ orders at retailers Toys " R " Us and Wal @-@ Mart were provided with classic Mortal Kombat skins for Kitana and Mileena , modeled after their Ultimate Mortal Kombat 3 appearances . A classic Jade skin ( also using her UMK3 model ) was also included with preorders of Mortal Kombat or Mortal Kombat : Annihilation on Blu @-@ ray ( both released April 19 , 2011 ) . GameStop , Best Buy and Amazon.com also participated in preorder bonuses and included classic costumes and Fatalities for Scorpion , Sub @-@ Zero and Reptile respectively . Mortal Kombat @-@ themed costumes were also provided for the owners of Xbox 360 avatars who preordered any version of the game . 
 = = = Downloadable content = = = 
 Netherrealm Studios released the Klassic DLC pack ( containing the classic outfits and Fatalities that were exclusive to pre @-@ order deals ) on June 7 , 2011 . Downloadable characters include Skarlet ( a red female character based on a rumor about Mortal Kombat II ) , Kenshi ( first introduced in Mortal Kombat : Deadly Alliance ) , Rain ( first seen in Ultimate Mortal Kombat 3 ) , Kratos from the God of War series , and Freddy Krueger from the A Nightmare on Elm Street franchise . A free compatibility pack is available alongside each character that contains " <unk> " skins for two characters and is available to all players . A " Season Pass " available to Xbox 360 users offered the first four DLC characters together at an overall discounted price . Warner Bros. is one of the first game companies that introduced the concept of season pass : a long term , pre @-@ paid , post @-@ launch downloadable content plan . 
 = = = PlayStation Vita port = = = 
 The PlayStation Vita version of Mortal Kombat was announced on January 18 , 2012 . It was released on May 1 , 2012 in North America and on May 4 in Europe . The Vita version of the game includes all the features from the PlayStation 3 version of Komplete Edition , and adds new costumes and a new Challenge Tower that are not available in the console versions , as well as touchscreen controls for finishing moves and other exclusive features . 
 = = = Komplete Edition = = = 
 On January 9 , 2012 , Warner Bros Interactive Entertainment announced Mortal Kombat : Komplete Edition . This version was released for the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 on February 28 , 2012 in North America and on March 2 in the United Kingdom , and consists of the game with all of the downloadable content released for it . The North American release also includes download codes for the album Mortal Kombat : Songs Inspired by the Warriors , as well as the 1995 film Mortal Kombat ( available via the PlayStation Store or Xbox Live ) . 
 In May 2011 , Ed Boon hinted on his Twitter account that a Mac version of the game was more likely than a PC one . By February 2012 , developers stated there were no immediate plans for a PC version , but were " gauging interest " . On May 22 , 2013 , it was announced that the Komplete Edition would be released for Windows on July 3 , 2013 . Initially , the game became only available through Steam but a retail version followed during the first days of August . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Prior to the game 's release , <unk> listed Mortal Kombat as " one of the reasons for people to own a gaming console in 2011 " , with PC Magazine and 2D @-@ X editor Jeffrey L. Wilson claiming this was one of the most anticipated titles of E3 2010 . The E3 2010 showcase version of Mortal Kombat received the Best Fighting Game of E3 and Best Stage Demo of E3 awards by GameSpot , and the Best Fighting Game of E3 award by GameTrailers . Later , Mortal Kombat won several Game of the Year type awards for the best fighting game of 2011 ; some of them are listed in the table on the right . 
 " Mortal Kombat " has received critical acclaim . GameZone 's David Sanchez considered describing Mortal Kombat as " a fitting reboot for the series " to be an understatement , as " while offering plenty of nostalgia " the game is also " a major step up for the series " . Andrew Reiner of Game Informer called it " the best Mortal Kombat yet . " According to Mark <unk> of GameSpot , " over @-@ the @-@ top , bloody , and bursting with content , Mortal Kombat is a return to form for the franchise . " IGN 's Ryan Clements called it an " amazing " game that " combines the novelty of extreme violence with a great fighting engine . " Neidel Crisan of 1UP.com stated it " has simply set the standard for future fighting games to follow . " Eurogamer 's Matt Edwards was more critical of the game , but added that " to judge Mortal Kombat harshly simply because it isn ’ t the equal of BlazBlue or Street Fighter IV on a technical level would be unfair to what the game does right . " Brett Elston of GamesRadar was also more cautious in his review , stating it is " a successful sequel that both reboots and redeems the wayward series , though it ’ s not a flawless victory . " 
 Mortal Kombat 's gameplay was generally well received due to its balance , violence and use of what GameTrailers called a " classic 2D template " . Reiner wrote that " the only area where Mortal Kombat feels antiquated is in its AI . " <unk> praised the game for having " one of the most in @-@ depth story modes to grace a fighting game . " Crisan compared it to " watching a full length CG movie " , and said that while " incredibly corny , it 's also oddly addicting " due to its over @-@ the @-@ top plot . One complaint concerned the shifting levels of difficulty in the game 's story mode , described by Clements as forcing the player " to fight cheap tactics with cheap tactics . " According to Elston , " character balance , inconsistent detection and a stingy coin reward system drag down an otherwise bloody good time . " 
 According to Ed Boon , during its release month , Mortal Kombat sold two million copies between both PlayStation 3 and Xbox versions . Warner Bros. Interactive Entertainment , publisher of NetherRealm Studios ’ Mortal Kombat , reported that Mortal Kombat had sold close to three million units as of August 2011 . According to Warner Bros. , this covered the cost of the entire Midway asset acquisition . One year after the game 's release , GameZone 's Sanchez stated that Mortal Kombat has still remained " the best fighter currently on the market , " calling it " today 's greatest modern fighter " and " one of the most compelling fighters to come along in years . " 
 The PlayStation Vita version of the game was also well received . Dan Ryckert of Game Informer called it " the most complete version of Mortal Kombat available , " while Brett Zeidler of Destructoid hailed it as " a perfect example of keeping the best graphical fidelity possible and including an already astronomical amount of content . " According to Walton , " despite a few control issues " regarding tag team combos , " Mortal Kombat on the Vita is every bit the great and gruesome fighter as its console counterparts . " Steven Hopper of IGN recommended this " great port " for those who did not play the original release enough . 
 The PC version of Mortal Kombat : Komplete Edition was well @-@ received despite being released two years later than the console versions ; the PC version received an 82 / 100 Metascore on Metacritic , with users of the same site rating it an average score of 8 @.@ 9 / 10 . In August 2013 , questioned about the sales performance of the Windows version of the game , Boon tweeted that it was " WAY , WAY above expectations " . 
 = = = Controversy = = = 
 In February 2011 , the game was refused classification by the Australian Classification Board due to " violence that exceeds strong in impact " . Warner Bros. unsuccessfully appealed the decision to the Classification Review Board , who ruled " the impact of the violence in Mortal Kombat is higher than strong and thus could not be accommodated within the MA15 + classification . " The Australian Customs and Border Protection Service listed the game as a prohibited item and the Australian Minister for Home Affairs Brendan O 'Connor asked to be briefed on the Mortal Kombat decision , citing " public disquiet on the issue " . In 2012 , the Vita version of Mortal Kombat was banned in Australia as well . A spokesperson for Warner Bros. commented : " We felt that because of the Vita 's size , the smaller screen would minimise the impact of the violence in the game and we felt it might fit within the MA15 + category . Obviously , the Classification Board of Australia did not agree . " In 2013 , however , following the introduction of an R18 + classification , Mortal Kombat was released uncensored on May 1 , 2013 , with the R18 + rating . 
 Mortal Kombat was also indexed in Germany by the Federal Department for Media Harmful to Young Persons due to " drastic representations of violence , " and was banned in South Korea due to its excessive depiction of blood and gore . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 A sequel for the game , Mortal Kombat X , was developed by NetherRealm Studios for the PC , PlayStation 4 , and Xbox One and was released in April 2015 . 
 = Black Widower = 
 " Black Widower " is the 21st episode of The Simpsons ' third season , originally airing on the Fox network in the United States on April 9 , 1992 . It was written by Jon Vitti , directed by David Silverman , and saw Kelsey Grammer guest star as Sideshow Bob for the second time . In the episode , Sideshow Bob — Bart 's archenemy — marries Bart 's Aunt Selma . Bart believes that Bob is planning something sinister rather than marrying for love . He realizes that Bob is planning to kill Selma ; he prevents the attempted murder , and Bob is sent back to prison . " Black Widower " finished 39th in Nielsen ratings for the week that it originally aired . Reviewers generally enjoyed the episode , and gave Grammer 's portrayal of Sideshow Bob particular praise . 
 = = Plot = = 
 The Simpsons have dinner with Aunt Selma and her new boyfriend , Sideshow Bob , Bart 's arch @-@ enemy . According to Bob , while he was in prison he spent every moment planning his revenge on Bart for exposing his plan to frame Krusty the Clown ; after receiving Selma 's response to his " Prison Pen Pal " ad , he was inspired to become a model prisoner and earned an early release . 
 Bob proposes to Selma and she accepts . He makes an appearance at a Krusty the Clown telethon and makes amends ; Lisa encourages Bart to forgive Bob , but he refuses to believe he has changed . When Selma discovers that Sideshow Bob detests her beloved MacGyver , the marriage is nearly called off until he agrees to Homer 's suggestion to take a walk when Selma watches it . 
 Selma reveals that she is unconcerned about money , as she made a good profit in the stock market ; Bob tells her he hopes he is not marrying her for her money . She also reveals that she has no sense of smell or taste and has cut back on cigarettes , now smoking only after meals and after episodes of MacGyver . Selma sends the Simpsons a tape of their honeymoon , including Bob 's tirade over the absence of a gas fireplace in their hotel room . Bart realizes that Selma has one hour to live and the Simpsons rush to the hotel room . 
 In the hotel , when Selma retires to watch MacGyver , Bob enjoys a drink downstairs . The hotel room explodes behind him . He goes back to the wrecked room , assuming Selma is dead , but she is unscathed and the Simpsons are waiting for him along with the police . Bart explains how he deduced Bob 's plot : Bob opened the gas valve in the room knowing Selma would not smell the leak , then left while she watched MacGyver , knowing that Selma would light a cigarette afterwards and cause an explosion . Bob asks why the room still exploded if Bart foiled his plot . Chief Wiggum explains that he absent @-@ mindedly threw a match into the room after smoking a celebratory cigar . Bob is taken away by the police , vowing revenge . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Black Widower " was written by Jon Vitti , and directed by David Silverman . The staff wanted an episode involving a " mystery " , so executive producer Sam Simon approached Thomas Chastain , head of the organization Mystery Writers of America , to help construct the mystery . A number of clues leading up to the revelation at the end were inserted into the script so that the viewers would be able to solve the mystery on their own . As the episode was being written , the writers had their eyes towards winning an Edgar Award , which is awarded to the best mystery fiction in television and film published or produced in the past year . Despite their efforts , " Black Widower " did not win an Edgar Award . 
 In the episode , the writers echoed the premise of Wile E. Coyote chasing the Road Runner from Looney Tunes cartoons by having Bob unexpectedly insert himself into Bart 's life and attempt to kill him . Executive producer Al Jean has compared Bob 's character to that of Wile E. Coyote , noting that both are intelligent , yet always foiled by what they perceive as an inferior intellect . For " Black Widower " , director David Silverman updated the character model of Bob to reflect the animation of director Brad Bird . One of Bob 's friends from jail seen in the episode is Snake Jailbird . The character first appeared in the season two episode " The War of the Simpsons " only as " Jailbird " , but his full name was first mentioned in " Black Widower " . The writers gave him the name Snake because of the snake tattoo on his arm , and the character has gone by that name ever since . 
 " Black Widower " was the second episode Kelsey Grammer guest starred in as the voice of Sideshow Bob . He had previously appeared in the season one episode " Krusty Gets Busted " , in which Bart gets Bob sentenced to jail for framing Krusty for armed robbery . Grammer initially expected Bob to be a one @-@ time role , but it eventually became one of the most popular roles he ever played , as Bob became a recurring character on the show . Grammer bases his Bob voice on theatre actor and director Ellis Rabb . He had once worked for Rabb , whose " lamenting tones became [ the ] foundation for Sideshow Bob . " 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 The episode begins with the family , except for Marge , watching a parody of the show Dinosaurs on television . The staff thought Dinosaurs was a knock @-@ off of The Simpsons , so at one point Bart exclaims " It 's like they saw our lives and put it right on screen , " and points at the television screen . Before she reveals to the Simpson family that Selma 's new boyfriend is Bob , Patty says there is something " disturbing " about him , which results in Lisa imagining him as being The Elephant Man . As Bob remembers his time in prison , a scene with him picking up road side trash is seen , referencing the film Cool Hand Luke . The music in the scene is a reference to the soundtrack of the film as well . Bob also remembers winning a Daytime Emmy Award in the " Best Supporting Performer in a Children 's Program " category . In Selma 's letters to Sideshow Bob , she refers to him by his prison number , 24601 , which is Jean Valjean 's prisoner number in the novel Les Misérables . The reunion between Krusty and Bob at the telethon is a reference to a surprise reunion between former comedy partners Jerry Lewis and Dean Martin on a 1970s telethon . The telethon logo features an Al Hirschfeld @-@ style caricature of Krusty . 
 " Black Widower " was the second episode to show Patty and Selma 's obsession with the character Angus MacGyver from the television show MacGyver , which has become a recurring joke on The Simpsons . When Sideshow Bob goes into the room to see Selma 's corpse , he turns around the chair , only to see Bart sitting in it . Sideshow Bob turns around and sees Selma in the doorway . These shots , from Bob turning the chair to Selma in the doorway , are a reference to the ending of the film Psycho . The music in the scene , written by composer Alf Clausen , is also a reference to Psycho . In Bart 's retelling of the story at the end of the episode , Homer 's shouts " To the <unk> ! " as the family rushes to the hotel to save Selma 's life . This is a reference to Batman 's Batmobile and his recurring catchphrase , " To the Batmobile ! " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 In its original American broadcast , " Black Widower " finished 39th in Nielsen ratings for the week of April 6 – 12 , 1992 , making The Simpsons the third @-@ highest rated television series on the Fox network that week , after Married ... with Children and In Living Color . In I Can 't Believe It 's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide , Warren Martyn wrote that he considered the episode a " terrific show " , appreciating Grammer 's work in particular , and he also enjoyed the Dinosaurs gag and Bob 's reaction to <unk> , which he remarked " make the whole thing great fun " . Bill Gibron of DVD Verdict rated the episode 97 % , and considered it a " timeless treat " because of Sideshow Bob 's appearance , calling it " excellent from beginning to end " . Nate Meyers of the website <unk> rated the episode 3 out of 5 . He felt that the episode was " not a strong entry to the series " , noting that " the love story between Bob and Selma never seems to play as well as it should " . Colin Jacobson of DVD Movie Guide remarked that later episodes of The Simpsons seasons were typically of lesser quality than episodes that appeared earlier in a season because of " general tiredness and the pressure of creating so many programs " . However , he found that " Black Widower " was an exception , noting that most episodes featuring Sideshow Bob rarely disappoint . Hock Guan Teh of DVD Town applauded Grammer 's performance as Sideshow Bob in the episode , saying he could not " get over Sideshow Bob ´ s evil and conniving tone of voice , all delivered in a pseudo @-@ Anglophile accent " . 
 = 2008 Pittsburgh Steelers season = 
 The 2008 Pittsburgh Steelers season was the franchise 's 76th season in the National Football League ( NFL ) . The season concluded with the team winning Super Bowl XLIII to become the first franchise in the NFL with six Super Bowl titles . 
 The Steelers entered the season as defending champions of the AFC North Division , coming off a 10 – 6 record in 2007 . Based on the previous season 's results , the team faced the most difficult schedule in over 30 years ; however , they were called Super Bowl contenders by ESPN . The Steelers opened their regular season on September 7 , with a win over the Houston Texans en route to a 12 – 4 record , and a second straight AFC North Division title . In his second season as head coach Mike Tomlin was selected in fan balloting as the Motorola Coach of the Year . Linebacker James Harrison was named the NFL 's Defensive Player of the Year after leading a defense which set the standard for the league in nearly every defensive category , including total yardage allowed , points allowed , passing yardage allowed , first downs allowed , yards per play , and yards per pass , among others . The playoffs began on January 11 , 2009 , with a win over the San Diego Chargers . The following week saw the third victory of the season over the Baltimore Ravens in the AFC Championship game and the advancement to Super Bowl XLIII where the Steelers defeated the Arizona Cardinals on February 1 , 2009 . 
 = = Personnel = = 
 = = = Staff = = = 
 = = = Roster = = = 
 = = Off @-@ season = = 
 Entering the 2008 season , the Pittsburgh Steelers lost ten @-@ year lineman Alan <unk> , after his contract expired , and he signed with the New York Jets . Allen Rossum , Jerame Tuman , and Clint <unk> were released on February 22 . The team also lost Dan <unk> , <unk> Haynes , Brian St. Pierre , and eight @-@ year veteran Clark <unk> to free agency . 
 The Steelers renewed quarterback Ben Roethlisberger 's contract with an eight @-@ year , $ 102 million agreement , the largest in franchise history . The team re @-@ signed Max Starks to the largest single @-@ year deal in franchise history , despite him not being a starter during the 2007 season . Nate Washington , Chris Kemoeatu , and Trai Essex also agreed to one @-@ year deals . Seven @-@ year center Justin Hartwig and running back Mewelde Moore were signed to multi @-@ year deals , and linebacker <unk> Fox agreed to a one @-@ year deal . Entering the season , 14 players were in the final year of their contracts . 
 = = = Draft = = = 
 The 2008 NFL Draft was held on April 26 and April 27 , 2008 , at Radio City Music Hall . In the first round , the Steelers selected running back Rashard Mendenhall , from the University of Illinois , with the 23rd overall pick . He was the first running back selected in the first round by the franchise since 1989 . The Steelers selected Limas Sweed , from the University of Texas , in the second round . Sweed was ranked by the Steelers as one of the top three receivers in the draft . The drafting of Sweed came after quarterback Ben Roethlisberger 's suggestion of acquiring a tall wide receiver ; Sweed is 6 @-@ feet 4 @-@ inches in height . In round three , the Steelers selected Bruce Davis , of UCLA . Davis primarily played defensive end at his alma mater , however , he is expected to switch to linebacker at the pro level . The Steelers traded their fourth @-@ round pick ( 123rd overall ) to the New York Giants for the Giants ' fourth and sixth @-@ round selections , 130th and 194th overall , respectively . The Steelers selected offensive tackle Tony Hills with the 130th overall selection , in the fourth round . Like second @-@ round pick Sweed , Hills came out of the University of Texas where he had been elected a captain of the football team during his senior season . With their fifth @-@ round selection , the Steelers chose quarterback Dennis Dixon . Prior to an injury in 2007 , Dixon was a Heisman Trophy candidate . The sixth round selection was the Steelers ' second linebacker of the draft , Mike <unk> out of the University of Iowa . Also in the sixth round , the final selection of the team was safety Ryan Mundy , a Pittsburgh native . The Steelers did not pick in the seventh round , due to a 2007 trade with the Atlanta Falcons . Kevin Colbert , Director of Football Operations , said of the draft , " we ’ re happy with the way things turned out . " Also stating that the first and second @-@ round selections were players who the team expected to have already been chosen . Coach Mike Tomlin said that the Steelers tried to select skilled offensive " weapons " over a strong offensive line , which struggled the previous season . The following day , the Steelers signed twelve free @-@ agent rookies . All draft picks agreed to terms by July 25 , two days prior to the start of training camp . 
 = = = Mini @-@ camp and OTAs = = = 
 A mandatory three @-@ day mini @-@ camp was held in early May . Hines Ward , Aaron Smith and Troy Polamalu attended the camp , but did not fully participate because of injuries . First round draft pick , Rashard Mendenhall was welcomed by Steelers current running back Willie Parker . Parker was " surprised " when he heard a running back was selected in the first round , but hoped to work with Mendenhall like Jerome Bettis worked with Parker during his rookie season . During the mini @-@ camp , the offense experimented with formations using Parker and Mendenhall in the backfield simultaneously . Receiver Hines Ward took a similar approach to Parker 's in welcoming second round draft pick Limas Sweed . As with other receivers in the past , Ward was " very hands @-@ on with Sweed throughout the weekend " . Coach Mike Tomlin called the new draft picks " humble " , adding that he liked their " spirit and attitude " ; however , it was too early to tell how well they will ultimately perform . 
 The team held two Organized Team Activities ( OTAs ) prior to the draft , in addition to 12 throughout May and June . The OTAs were voluntary , however , most players did attend . Many players routinely worked on their conditioning and strength together , in addition to " informal " on field training . A week prior to the end of OTAs Mike Tomlin said he was happy with the team 's progress during the sessions . Also stating , “ We are having a productive off @-@ season and that is what we are here for . We are here to get better individually and collectively and I think we are doing that . ” Limas Sweed experimented on special teams play for the first time ever , with a concentration in punt blocking . On the day of the final OTA , June 12 , Tomlin stated that while he was pleased with the progress of the team , no positions would be gained or lost based on the voluntary camp . Tomlin added , " it 's been teach @-@ oriented , it 's been skill @-@ develop @-@ oriented . It 's different than playing the game of football . " The team was given 44 days off until the beginning of training camp . 
 = = = Off @-@ field activity = = = 
 In May , ESPN The Magazine released the findings of its annual survey of over 80 @,@ 000 fans entitled the " Ultimate Standings : Fan Satisfaction Ranking . " The Steelers ranked as the 25th best major league sports franchise out of 122 teams from MLB , NFL , NBA , and the NHL . The franchise finished one position behind the cross @-@ town hockey team Pittsburgh Penguins . The Steelers were sixth among all NFL teams . In August , ESPN.com ranked Steelers ' fans as the best in the National Football League , citing their " unbelievable " sellout streak of 299 consecutive games . 
 During the Pittsburgh Penguins run for the Stanley Cup multiple members of the Steelers showed support for the cross @-@ town team . Ben Roethlisberger attended Stanley Cup Finals games in Detroit , where he and the Steelers won Super Bowl XL three years prior . Mike Tomlin watched Game Six of the finals outside Mellon Arena , along with 3 @,@ 000 other fans , on a JumboTron which had been erected for fans unable to acquire tickets to the sold @-@ out game . Kevin Colbert , Charlie Batch , and Tomlin attended many games throughout the regular season . In September , Penguins ' coach Michel Therrien attended the Steelers ' first game of the season . 
 On February 17 , Ernie Holmes , who played for the Steelers from 1972 to 1977 , was killed in a car crash . Ten days later , on February 27 , award @-@ winning journalist , Steelers radio announcer of 35 years , and inventor of the Terrible Towel , Myron Cope , died at age 79 . On June 6 , Dwight White , a defensive end on the Steel Curtain died from a blood clot . Upon his death , Dan Rooney called White , " one of the greatest players to ever wear a Steelers uniform . " A pre @-@ game ceremony was held in their honor prior to the first game of the season . 
 = = = Training camp = = = 
 Training camp was held at Saint Vincent College , in Latrobe , Pennsylvania , for the 42nd consecutive year . Players reported on July 27 , practices commenced the following day and ran through August 17 . Throughout the twenty three day span , seventeen included practices ; making the camp one of the shortest in Steelers history . The camp was less demanding under Tomlin , who was in his second year as coach . " We are a veteran team in some areas . You have to approach it differently because of that , " said Tomlin . 
 Pittsburgh looked to build on their defense , which was ranked first in the league throughout the 2007 season . At over thirty years in age each , all three starting linemen returned . First round draft pick , Rashard Mendenhall entered camp with expectations to make an impact on the team throughout his rookie season . Pittsburgh 's Willie Parker , who returned after suffering a broken leg in the 2007 season , was expected to share the load with Mendenhall . On July 29 , punter Daniel Sepulveda tore the ACL in his right leg and was placed on season @-@ ending injured reserve . The Steelers acquired Paul <unk> later in the day as a possible replacement . After concluding practices at St. Vincent 's , the Steelers began to practice at their facility on Pittsburgh 's South Side . Tomlin called the camp " very productive " . 
 = = Preseason = = 
 Pittsburgh opened their pre @-@ season schedule with a 16 – 10 victory over the Philadelphia Eagles . The Steelers scored on their first possession , after driving 80 yards on eight plays . Ben Roethlisberger 's 19 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Santonio Holmes completed the drive . In the first quarter , Charlie Batch was removed from the game after breaking his clavicle . Jeff Reed converted three field goals from 20 , 24 , and 50 yards . Toronto 's Rogers Centre hosted the second pre @-@ season game ; it was the first pre @-@ season game Pittsburgh played in Toronto since 1960 . Pittsburgh 's starting offense played longer in the second game . Willie Parker increased his output over the first game by playing on third downs . However , the team failed run the ball consistently and struggled on defense , losing the game 24 – 21 . " We fell short essentially in all three phases , " stated coach Tomlin after the game . 
 Pittsburgh traveled to Minnesota to play the Vikings for their third pre @-@ season game . The Steelers 's defense held the Vikings early , led by Aaron Smith who had three tackles , including one sack , in the first quarter . The offense failed to score a touchdown , with Rashard Mendenhall fumbling twice . Quarterback Byron Leftwich , who was signed to replace the injured Batch , lead the team with 129 yards passing . Jeff Reed accounted for all of the Steelers ' points , kicking four field goals — the final with 4 seconds remaining — to give Pittsburgh a 12 – 10 victory . Entering their final pre @-@ season game the Steelers had selected every starting player except the punter . Carolina tied the game with 1 : 54 remaining in regulation , but rookie Dennis Dixon lead the Steelers on a 47 @-@ yard drive , which was capped with Reed kicking the game winning 43 @-@ yard field goal as time expired . After the three point victory , Tomlin stated , " It has been a pleasure working with this group guys , but it is that time of year where we need to make tough decisions . " The Steelers cut 22 players on August 30 , to bring their roster to the required 53 player total . The following day the Steelers signed nine players from their pre @-@ season team to the practice squad . 
 = = Regular season = = 
 Based on 2007 records , the Steelers boasted the NFL 's most difficult schedule in 2008 , with an opponent winning percentage of <unk> ; ten games were played against teams that finished 2007 with winning records . The Steelers played each of the teams in the AFC North twice , once home and once on the road . The Steelers also faced the teams from the AFC South and NFC East divisions throughout the season . Pittsburgh 's matchups included the San Diego and New England , who each won their division in the 2007 season . The Steelers played five nationally televised primetime games , the maximum allowed number by the NFL . 
 Entering the first week of the season , players voted Ben Roethlisberger , Hines Ward , James Farrior , and Jeff Reed team captains . Farrior , James Harrison , and Troy Polamalu were voted to represent the Steelers at the 2009 Pro Bowl . James Harrison set the Steelers ' franchise single @-@ season record for sacks , surpassing Mike Merriweather 's previous record of 15 sacks in 1984 . Harrison also became the first undrafted player to win the NFL 's Defensive Player of the Year Award . He was the fifth Steeler to win the award — the first since Rod Woodson in 1993 . Harrison and Polamalu were also voted to the NFL 's All @-@ Pro team . 
 The Steelers ' defense tied the 1973 Los Angeles Rams record by holding 14 consecutive opponents under 300 yards of total offense . The defense finished ranked first in the league in total and passing yards given up and second in rushing yards . For the fifth time in his career Hines Ward received for over 1 @,@ 000 yards throughout the season . The team 's offense ranked 22nd in overall offense , 17th in passing , and 23rd in rushing . Rashard Mendenhall was the team 's only rookie to start a game ; the fewest rookie starts of any team in the league . 
 = = = Schedule = = = 
 Green background indicates win . 
 Red background indicates loss . 
 = = = Standings = = = 
 The 2008 season was the Steelers ' seventh as members of the AFC North Division . Pittsburgh defended their division title from the 2007 season , which they obtained by tying the Cleveland Browns ' 10 – 6 record , but holding the tie @-@ breaker with two wins over the Browns . Through 2008 , Pittsburgh is the only team to have won the AFC North four times , since its inception prior to the 2002 NFL season . Entering the 2008 season , the Steelers were chosen to win the division by sportswriter Ron Borges , as well as nine of 13 analysts interviewed by ESPN.com. Four NFL.com analysts predicted that the Steelers would finish with a 10 – 6 record . The Steelers finished the regular season with a record of 12 – 4 , going undefeated against opponents in the AFC North and winning 12 games for the fourth season since 1979 . The team clinched the second seed in the AFC for the playoffs and received a bye the first week of the post @-@ season . The Baltimore Ravens finished at second place in the AFC North with an 11 – 5 record , clinching a playoff seed as an AFC wild card . The Cincinnati Bengals finished 4 – 11 – 1 , winning their final three games of the season . The Cleveland Browns finished in the AFC North 's fourth position at 4 – 12 ; the team fired head coach Romeo Crennel after the season . 
 = = = Week 1 : vs. Houston Texans = = = 
 The Steelers started their regular season , against the Houston Texans , in front of 64 @,@ 001 spectators at Heinz Field in Pittsburgh . The Steelers drove the ball 52 yards on their opening drive , with their biggest gain coming on a 17 @-@ yard run from quarterback Ben Roethlisberger . Willie Parker scored a touchdown at 5 : 44 of the opening quarter and added a second touchdown in the following quarter . After a LaMarr Woodley interception the Steelers extended their lead to 21 points when Roethlisberger completed a 13 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Ward . With 4 : 34 remaining in the half , former @-@ Steelers ' kicker Kris Brown converted a 34 @-@ yard field goal . Pittsburgh led the game 21 – 3 as time expired on the first half . 
 In the second half , Parker scored his third touchdown of the game — surpassing his touchdown total for the entire 2007 season — and was named the AFC offensive player of the week for his performance . Pittsburgh 's defense held Houston to six yards on their ensuing drive and the Steelers drove 80 yards to take a 35 – 3 lead . The Texans scored two touchdowns in the final quarter , but Pittsburgh 's James Harrison led the team with three sacks — forcing a fumble on the third — and the Steelers won their first game of the season starting out 1 – 0 . 
 = = = Week 2 : at Cleveland Browns = = = 
 The Steelers entered their first matchup with the Cleveland Browns having won 15 of the last 16 games between the two teams . Ben Roethlisberger started the game despite missing practice time during the week due to a shoulder injury suffered in Week One . The Steelers ' defense held the Browns to 16 yards on their first four drives , as the teams played to a scoreless tie after the first quarter . After a Bryant McFadden interception the Steelers drove 70 yards and Roethlisberger connected with Hines Ward for their third touchdown combination of the season . Cleveland responded with a 14 play , 71 yard drive , but Troy Polamalu intercepted a Cleveland pass as time expired in the first half solidifying Pittsburgh 's seven point halftime lead . 
 A 48 @-@ yard pass from Roethlisberger to Santonio Holmes and a 48 @-@ yard field goal from Jeff Reed on the team 's second drive of the second half brought the score to 10 – 0 . The Browns ' Phil Dawson converted two consecutive field goals , to pull Cleveland within four points with 3 : 21 remaining . After a fourth down stop , Cleveland 's offense took over with 26 seconds remaining , but failed to gain yardage as time expired . With the win , the Steelers increased their win streak over the Browns to 10 consecutive games — the longest current winning streak over a single opponent in the NFL . With the win the Steelers improved to 2 – 0 and led the AFC North by 1 / 2 a game ahead of the Ravens . 
 = = = Week 3 : at Philadelphia Eagles = = = 
 Pittsburgh 's first inter @-@ conference opponent of the season was the Philadelphia Eagles . The Steelers scored on their first drive , with a Jeff Reed field goal . The Eagles offense drove 85 yards to take the lead on a touchdown pass from Donovan McNabb to Correll <unk> . The Eagles defense sacked Ben Roethlisberger eight times throughout the game , two of which resulted in fumbles . Bryant McFadden intercepted his second pass of the season which allowed Reed to add his second field goal of the day — this one from 53 @-@ yards . The field goal brought the half time score to 10 – 6 . 
 A third quarter diving Troy Polamalu interception , on Kevin Kolb 's first NFL pass , was named a " Can 't Miss Play " by NFL Network . The Steelers did not capitalize , punting two more times in the third quarter . The Eagles entered the final quarter leading 10 – 6 , and added two more points when Roethlisberger was called for Intentional grounding while in the end zone . Roethlisberger was forced to leave the game after his hand was stepped on in the final quarter . Offensive coordinator Bruce Arians took responsibility for the offense 's performance . " Anybody who wants anybody to blame for Philadelphia , you just blame me , " Arians stated , " and then we can get ready for Baltimore . " 
 = = = Week 4 : vs. Baltimore Ravens = = = 
 Donning their throwback uniforms , the Steelers played the Baltimore Ravens in their first Monday Night game of the season . Multiple Steelers starters did not play in the game , due to various injuries . After a 3 – 3 first quarter , Baltimore took a ten @-@ point lead into half time with a field goal and touchdown pass in the second quarter . Rashard Mendenhall — in his first NFL start — left the game in the third quarter with a season @-@ ending shoulder injury . On Pittsburgh 's third drive of the half , Roethlisberger connected with Santonio Holmes for a 38 @-@ yard touchdown pass . On the first play of Baltimore 's ensuing drive , James Harrison 's forced fumble was picked up by LaMarr Woodley and returned 7 yards for a touchdown . The two touchdowns within 15 seconds took the Steelers from ten points behind to four points ahead . In the final quarter , the Steelers ' offense was stopped on the one yard line and Reed kicked his second field goal of the night . Baltimore drove 76 yards and tied the game with a touchdown . Neither team was able to score on their final drive as the regulation clock expired . 
 Baltimore won the overtime coin toss and elected to receive . The Ravens started the drive at their own 15 yard line . The Steelers held them for no gain on the first two plays and Lawrence Timmons sacked Flacco on third down . The Steelers took over after a punt and Mewelde Moore caught a 24 yard reception to bring the Steelers to Baltimore 's 31 @-@ yard line . Jeff Reed converted a 46 @-@ yard field goal to win the game for the Steelers . Reed was named the NFL 's special teams player of the week . With the win the Steelers passed the Ravens for first place in the AFC North at 3 – 1 , as well as extending their all @-@ time record of 14 consecutive home wins on Monday Night Football . 
 = = = Week 5 : at Jacksonville Jaguars = = = 
 The Steelers ' matchup with the Jacksonville Jaguars — their first since the Jaguars knocked the Steelers out of the 2007 playoffs — was featured as the Pro Football Hall of Fame 's Throwback Game of the Week . On the Steelers opening drive , Roethlisberger — who missed practice time during the week due to injections for his shoulder — was intercepted by Rashean Mathis who returned the ball 72 yards for a touchdown . Pittsburgh responded by driving 71 yards , with Heath Miller receiving a 1 @-@ yard touchdown pass to tie the game . Jacksonville re @-@ gained the lead on the next drive when Maurice Jones @-@ Drew ran for a touchdown . Pittsburgh took the lead in the second quarter with two field goals and a 48 yard touchdown pass from Roethlisberger to Nate Washington . 
 Jacksonville scored first in the final quarter with a touchdown pass from David Garrard to <unk> Lewis . The Steelers drove from their 20 yard line in the fourth quarter , Ward received an 8 @-@ yard touchdown pass to put the Steelers up by 5 points with 1 : 53 remaining in regulation , however , the 2 @-@ pt conversion failed . Roethlisberger received the AFC offensive player of the week award for his 309 yard , 3 touchdown pass performance , despite having an injured throwing shoulder . The NFL selected the game as the league 's Week Five Game of the Week . 
 = = = Week 6 : Bye Week = = = 
 The Steelers used their bye week to rest injured players including Brett Keisel , Willie Parker , Jeff Reed , and Ben Roethlisberger . The team hosted an event to honor wounded veterans of Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom at Heinz Field . Players signed autographs and held on @-@ field drills with the veterans , while soldiers and Marines spoke of their experiences . Chris Hoke , who attended the event said , " These are the people who fight for us to have our freedom and be who we are as Americans . To come out here and spend a couple hours with them and hear their stories is unbelievable . There 's nothing better than this . " 
 = = = Week 7 : at Cincinnati Bengals = = = 
 Willie Parker was expected to return after missing two games , but aggravated his knee injury during a weekday practice and missed the game . Pittsburgh received the opening kickoff and drove 75 yards to open the scoring with a 2 @-@ yard touchdown pass from Ben Roethlisberger to Mewelde Moore to put the Steelers up 7 – 0 . The Steelers ' defense forced the Bengals offense into five consecutive three @-@ and @-@ outs , before the Bengals scored on their final possession of the opening half . The 5 @-@ yard pass from Ryan Fitzpatrick to Chad Johnson brought the Bengals within three points of the Steelers , who added a field goal from Jeff Reed . 
 Pittsburgh added their second touchdown of the game on their opening drive of the second half when Moore rushed to the left side for 13 yards . Cincinnati retaliated on their ensuing drive adding a field goal from Dave Rayner . The Steelers scored three consecutive touchdowns in the final quarter , while holding the Bengals scoreless . At 8 : 26 of the fourth quarter Roethlisberger connected with Nate Washington for a 50 @-@ yard touchdown pass . Pittsburgh 's Moore scored his third touchdown of the day — his second rushing — and Hines Ward 's 16 @-@ yard touchdown reception gave the Steelers 31 points to the Bengals ' ten . Moore finished the game with 120 yards rushing , while Santonio Holmes lead the Steelers with 89 receiving yards . 
 = = = Week 8 : vs. New York Giants = = = 
 Willie Parker missed his fourth game due to a knee injury . Santonio Holmes also missed the game after a " small quantity of marijuana " was found in his car and the team placed him on the inactive list . Mewelde Moore opened up the game 's scoring with a 32 @-@ yard touchdown run on the Steelers opening drive . The 5 – 1 New York Giants responded with a field goal on the ensuing drive . Pittsburgh stopped the Giants on four consecutive plays from inside the Steelers 2 @-@ yard line to force a turnover on downs . But were unable to score when two Ben Roethlisberger interceptions and a punt lead to two more field goals in the second quarter for the Giants . 
 At 10 : 10 of the third quarter Roethlisberger completed a 65 @-@ yard touchdown pass to Nate Washington to give the Steelers a 14 – 9 lead . Later in the quarter , a Steelers 53 @-@ yard touchdown pass was negated due to a holding penalty and Pittsburgh was forced to punt . In the final quarter Pittsburgh kept New York out of the end zone on three plays inside the 10 @-@ yard line , however , the Giants connected on a field goal to bring the Giants to within two points . On the next drive , James Harrison — who was called in to replace injured long snapper Greg Warren — snapped the ball out of the end zone to give the Giants a safety and tie the game . The Giants drove after receiving the safety 's kickoff to score a touchdown — taking a 21 – 14 lead with 3 : 07 remaining . Pittsburgh was unable to convert on their final two drives , as Roethlisberger threw his fourth interception of the day . 
 = = = Week 9 : at Washington Redskins = = = 
 The night before the United States presidential election , the Steelers played in the nation 's capitol , Washington , D.C. ; both major party candidates were interviewed at half @-@ time . The Washington Redskins took a 6 – 0 lead in the first quarter with two field goals . The Steelers defense shut out the Redskins in the second quarter while the Steelers scored on a field goal to cut the lead in half . A blocked punt with 2 : 21 remaining in the half led to a Steelers 1 @-@ yard touchdown run from Ben Roethlisberger . 
 Due to an injury to Roethlisberger , Byron Leftwich took over as quarterback in the second half . Leftwich completed a 50 yard pass to Nate Washington on the opening drive of the third quarter ; the Steelers capped the drive with a Willie Parker touchdown run . Pittsburgh extended their lead in the final quarter with a touchdown pass from Leftwich to Santonio Holmes . The Redskins gained 124 yards in the final quarter , but were unable to score . The Steelers ' 17 point win took their record to 6 – 2 on the season . 
 = = = Week 10 : vs. Indianapolis Colts = = = 
 Both the Steelers and Indianapolis Colts drove more than 60 yards on their opening offensive drives , each scored a touchdown to bring the score to 7 – 7 after the first quarter . A Steelers 42 @-@ yard flea flicker advanced the ball to the 2 yard line . On the following play Mewelde Moore scored his second touchdown of the game . The Steelers extended their lead to ten , but an interception with 1 : 30 remaining in the half led to a Colts touchdown — bringing the halftime score to 17 – 14 . 
 The Colts kicked a 36 @-@ yard field goal in the third quarter to tie the game at 17 . A Steelers field goal in the final quarter gave them a three @-@ point lead . The Colts scored on Peyton Manning 's third touchdown pass of the game to take the lead with 3 : 10 remaining in regulation . The Steelers drove from their own 27 yard line , but were unable to score . 
 = = = Week 11 : vs. San Diego Chargers = = = 
 Pittsburgh entered week eleven with starters having missed 31 games due to injuries . The San Diego Chargers scored first , and led 7 – 0 after the first quarter of play . On the second play of the second quarter , the Steelers ' James Harrison forced a fumble in the endzone , then forced a safety by tackling Marcus McNeill after he had recovered the fumble . Jeff Reed converted on a field goal as time expired on the first half , pulling the Steelers within two points . 
 Reed kicked his second field goal of the game from 41 @-@ yards to give the Steelers the lead going into the final quarter . The Chargers drove 74 yards on 17 plays , converting on a field goal to give them the lead again , with 6 : 45 remaining . On the Steelers ' ensuing drive , the offense drove 73 yards and Reed converted on his third field goal of the day , giving the Steelers an 11 – 10 lead with 15 seconds remaining in regulation . The Chargers attempted to score on their final play , but Troy Polamalu forced and recovered a fumble , returning it for a touchdown . The call was reversed when the officials ruled that San Diego had made an illegal forward pass . After the game , head referee Scott Green admitted that the touchdown should have been counted . With the touchdown not counted the final score kept Pittsburgh under the 5 point spread by which they were favored , and resulted in over $ 32 million being lost in bets . The game was the first regular season game in NFL history to end with a final score of 11 – 10 . 
 = = = Week 12 : vs. Cincinnati Bengals = = = 
 The Steelers concluded their primetime schedule with their only Thursday night game of the season . The Cincinnati Bengals took a 7 – 0 lead in the first quarter after a 62 yard drive . In the second quarter the Steelers tied the game on a touchdown pass from Ben Roethlisberger to Heath Miller . Jeff Reed converted a field goal with 1 : 56 remaining in the first half to give the Steelers a 10 – 7 halftime lead . 
 Pittsburgh added another ten points in the third quarter when Gary Russell ran for his first rushing touchdown of the season , after Reed 's second field goal . In the final quarter , Roethlisberger rushed for a touchdown to put the Steelers up by a score of 27 – 10 . Roethlisberger passed for 243 yards and one touchdown , while Santonio Holmes led the game with 84 receiving yards . James Farrior led the Steelers with 8 tackles . 
 = = = Week 13 : at New England Patriots = = = 
 The Steelers fell behind the New England Patriots less than three minutes into the first quarter , after an interception of Ben Roethlisberger was driven to the endzone . The Steelers came back with 2 : 55 remaining in the initial quarter to convert on a 20 yard Jeff Reed field goal . The Patriots extended their lead to seven points with a 29 yard field goal in the second quarter . Pittsburgh drove 63 yards on nine plays , capping their drive with a touchdown pass to Santonio Holmes to tie the game at ten points at the halfway point . 
 Pittsburgh took their first lead of the game on their first drive of the second half , after Reed 's second field goal put them up by three points . On the ensuing kickoff the Steelers recovered a Patriots ' fumble and Roethlisberger connected with Hines Ward for an 11 @-@ yard touchdown pass . James Harrison forced his first of two fumbles on the Patriots ' next drive and the Steelers recovered as Reed added his third field goal of the game — putting the Steelers up 23 – 10 . Gary Russell scored a touchdown after Lawrence Timmons returned an interception 89 yards to the Patriots ' one @-@ yard line . 
 = = = Week 14 : vs. Dallas Cowboys = = = 
 The Dallas Cowboys and the Steelers held each other scoreless in the first quarter . Troy Polamalu intercepted a pass in his fourth consecutive game , overall he led the league with seven interceptions . The Steelers scored first on a 24 @-@ yard field goal from Jeff Reed with 2 : 44 remaining in the second quarter . The Cowboys converted a 44 @-@ yard field goal as time expired on the first half to tie the game at 3 – 3 . 
 A Tony Romo touchdown pass in the third quarter gave the Cowboys their first lead of the game . The lead was extended when Nick Folk converted his second field goal of the day , putting the Cowboys up 13 – 3 as the game entered the final quarter . Reed converted his second field goal of the game , bringing the Steelers within seven points with 7 : 20 remaining in regulation . On the Steelers next drive , Ben <unk> threw a touchdown pass to Heath Miller — tying the game with 2 : 04 remaining . <unk> Townsend intercepted Romo 's next pass and returned the ball 25 yards , scoring a touchdown to give the Steelers a seven @-@ point lead , which they held to the end of the game . 
 = = = Week 15 : at Baltimore Ravens = = = 
 Entering their second game of the season against Baltimore , the Steelers ' defense ranked first in the league , while the Ravens ' defense ranked second . " We 're going to win by any means necessary . If the defense has to score , if the special teams have to kick in a score , or if the offense has to score 50 points – whatever it takes to win , " stated James Harrison prior to the game . 
 Both teams were held scoreless before a record crowd at M & T Bank Stadium until a Baltimore field goal gave the Ravens a 3 – 0 lead at 12 : 34 of the second quarter . Pittsburgh tied the game on a Jeff Reed field goal ; Matt Stover converted a second time to give the Ravens a three @-@ point lead at halftime . Stover kicked his third field goal of the game in the third quarter , extending their lead to six points . In the final quarter , Reed kicked his second field goal of the game to put the Steelers within three points . On the Steelers final drive of the game , the offense drove 92 yards over 2 : 53 , with Ben Roethlisberger completing a touchdown pass to Santonio Holmes with 50 seconds remaining . The Ravens embarked on one more drive , but the Steelers second interception of the game prevented them from scoring . With the victory the Steelers won their second consecutive AFC North title and clinched a first round bye and became the first AFC franchise to amass 550 wins . 
 = = = Week 16 : at Tennessee Titans = = = 
 Pittsburgh entered their final road game of the regular season with a chance to surpass the Tennessee Titans for the top seed in the AFC . The Steelers and the Titans were scoreless after the first quarter , when Tennessee took a 3 – 0 lead on the second play of the second quarter . Justin Gage 's 34 @-@ yard reception later in the quarter extended the lead to 10 – 0 . Pittsburgh 's Santonio Holmes also received a touchdown pass in the second quarter , bringing the halftime score to 10 – 7 . 
 In the second half , Ben Roethlisberger threw his second touchdown pass of the game — to Hines Ward — to give the Steelers their only lead of the game . After a 21 @-@ yard touchdown run on Tennessee 's ensuing drive , the Titans entered the final quarter with a three @-@ point lead . The Titans scored two touchdowns in the final quarter , and the Steelers were unable overcome two Roethlisberger fumbles and two interceptions throughout the game . 
 = = = Week 17 : vs. Cleveland Browns = = = 
 Although guaranteed the second seed in the AFC Tomlin stated , " It is a big week for us . " Willie Parker 's 34 @-@ yard touchdown run in the second quarter was the Steelers longest run of the season . With less than two minutes left in the first half , Ben Roethlisberger was hit by D <unk> Jackson and Willie <unk> and had to be immobilized and carried off the field after suffering from a concussion . Byron Leftwich replaced Roethlisberger and scored the Steelers second touchdown of the game to give the Steelers a 14 – 0 lead at halftime . 
 Pittsburgh scored the only points of the third quarter when Jeff Reed converted his sole field goal attempt of the game . The Steelers added two touchdowns in the final quarter — on a Gary Russell rush and Tyrone Carter 's return of his second interception of the game . " We were so upset we had to practice on Christmas , we had to take it out on the Browns , " said Larry Foote after the victory . 
 = = Postseason = = 
 Their 12 – 4 regular season record gave the Steelers a second @-@ place finish in the AFC . Along with the Tennessee Titans , who finished with the best record in the AFC , the Steelers received a bye during the opening week of the post @-@ season . The 2008 season was the seventh of the past 16 that the Steelers were the first or second seed in the AFC entering the playoffs — never winning the Super Bowl during those seasons . Pittsburgh defeated the San Diego Chargers in the Divisional round , giving up a franchise post @-@ season low of 15 rushing yards . The victory was head coach Mike Tomlin 's first in the post @-@ season . The Steelers defeated the Baltimore Ravens in the AFC Championship Game . The Steelers won Super Bowl XLIII over the NFC Champion Arizona Cardinals on February 1 . 
 = = = Schedule = = = 
 = = = Wild Card round : Bye week = = = 
 The team rested on December 29 — the day following their final regular @-@ season game . They began preparations for their first post @-@ season game on Tuesday , December 30 through Thursday , January 1 , before three days of weekend rest . Roethlisberger did not practice until Monday , January 5 — Tomlin stated of the injury , " We will proceed slowly with him because we have that luxury . But we feel comfortable with where he is relative to Sunday and where he ’ s capable of being next week . " Although the January 1 practice was expected to be normal , Tomlin allowed players to leave after team meetings and a walk @-@ through . Multiple Steelers stated that they would watch the games of the Wild Card round . Some including James Farrior and Ryan Clark watched as fans ; however , Chris Hoke said , " I will be watching the guys I am going against ... That is how I watch it . " 
 = = = AFC Divisional round : vs. San Diego Chargers = = = 
 Pittsburgh hosted the San Diego Chargers at Heinz Field due to the Chargers ' overtime victory over the Indianapolis Colts during the Wild Card round . The Chargers scored on the game 's first drive with a 41 @-@ yard pass from Philip Rivers to Vincent Jackson for a touchdown . After the Steelers defense stopped the Chargers on their next drive , Pittsburgh 's Santonio Holmes returned a punt 67 yards to tie the game at seven . With two minutes remaining in the first half Nate <unk> converted a 42 @-@ yard field goal to reclaim the lead for the Chargers . Pittsburgh 's offense responded with a 7 play , 66 yard drive in 1 : 33 to take their first lead of the game after a 3 @-@ yard touchdown run from Willie Parker . 
 The Steelers opened the second half with a 7 : 56 , 13 play drive which concluded with Ben Roethlisberger 's sole touchdown pass to Heath Miller . San Diego had one offensive play in the third quarter , which resulted in an interception . The Steelers entered the final quarter with a 21 – 10 lead . Gary Russell scored on a 1 @-@ yard touchdown rush to extend the Steelers lead . The Chargers scored on their next possession , when <unk> <unk> received Rivers ' second touchdown pass of the game to conclude a 73 yard drive . With 4 : 17 remaining Willie Parker scored his second touchdown of the game — with a 16 @-@ yard run . The Chargers ' Darren Sproles concluded the game 's scoring with a 62 @-@ yard touchdown reception , bringing the final score to 35 – 24 . 
 = = = AFC Championship : vs. Baltimore Ravens = = = 
 Pittsburgh hosted the Baltimore Ravens — who defeated the Miami Dolphins and Tennessee Titans in the Wild Card and Divisional rounds respectively — for the AFC Championship Game . During the week before the game , Pittsburgh mayor Luke Ravenstahl temporarily changed his name to Luke <unk> in order to remove the " Raven " . Though the change was not official the mayor did comment that " As soon as [ he ] heard [ the idea ] , [ he ] thought it was a great idea . " 
 Pittsburgh scored the game 's first points , with Jeff Reed converting on field goals from 34 and 42 yards in the first quarter . Santonio Holmes received a pass from Ben Roethlisberger in the second quarter and ran for a touchdown to give the Steelers a 13 – 0 lead . Baltimore 's Willis <unk> ran into the endzone for a touchdown with 2 : 44 remaining in the second quarter — bringing the halftime score to 13 – 7 . Reed converted his third field goal of the game from 46 yards in the third quarter . <unk> scored his second touchdown of the game with 9 : 32 remaining in the final quarter bringing the Ravens within two points . Troy Polamalu intercepted a pass from Joe Flacco and returned it 40 yards to score the final touchdown of the game , giving Pittsburgh a 23 – 14 victory . 
 = = = Super Bowl : at Arizona Cardinals = = = 
 Jeff Reed concluded the first drive of Super Bowl XLIII with a field goal — giving the Steelers a 3 – 0 lead over the Arizona Cardinals . Gary Russell scored on a 1 yard touchdown rush on the Steelers ' second drive and the Cardinals responded by scoring a touchdown on the ensuing drive . On the final play of the first half James Harrison intercepted a pass from Kurt Warner and returned it 100 yards for a touchdown . As he did in the first quarter , Reed scored the sole points of the third quarter giving the Steelers a 20 – 7 lead entering the final quarter . 
 The Cardinals scored three consecutive times in the fourth quarter — with two Larry Fitzgerald touchdown receptions and a Steelers ' holding call in the endzone that resulted in a safety — to give them a 23 – 20 lead with 2 : 37 remaining in regulation . Pittsburgh drove 78 yards in 2 : 02 and scored on a touchdown pass from Ben Roethlisberger to Santonio Holmes . The Steelers four point lead held as time expired and the Pittsburgh Steelers became the first team to win six Super Bowl titles . 
 Santonio Holmes was voted the game 's Most Valuable Player . Mike Tomlin became the youngest coach to win a Super Bowl . Harrison 's interception return was the longest play in Super Bowl history . On February 3 a parade was held in Pittsburgh to celebrate the victory , according to the Pittsburgh Post @-@ Gazette an estimated 400 @,@ 000 people attended . The city 's name was ceremonially changed to " the City of <unk> " for the duration of 2009 . 
 = Nobody Knows Me = 
 " Nobody Knows Me " is a song by American singer @-@ songwriter Madonna . The song was written and produced by Madonna and Mirwais Ahmadzaï for her ninth studio album American Life ( 2003 ) . It was released as a promotional single in the United States on October 15 , 2003 , with a remixed version appearing on the remix compilation Remixed & Revisited ( 2003 ) . " Nobody Knows Me " carries on the main theme of American Life , with its usage of negative tones on the songs . It is an dance and electronic song , with vocoder effects , spacey synths and a bubbly bass , and lyrically , Madonna rejects tabloid culture 's " social disease " , denouncing both TV and magazines . 
 The song received generally favorable reviews from music critics , with many of whom calling it as a highlight from American Life . Four remixes were released in club stations around the United States , with one of them peaking at number four on the US Hot Dance Club Play chart . The song , along with " Nothing Fails " , topped the US Hot Dance Singles Sales chart and also charted on the ARIA Club Tracks in Australia . Madonna did a performance of the song alone on stage on her Re @-@ Invention World Tour in 2004 . It was also used as a video interlude on The MDNA Tour in 2012 , showing Madonna 's face morphed with a number of famous figures . French far right politician Marine Le Pen sued Madonna for superimposing a swastika and Adolf Hitler 's face with hers . 
 = = Background = = 
 American Life became Madonna 's final studio album with Maverick Records , and marked the end of an eleven @-@ year recording history with the label . In an interview with VH1 , Madonna discussed her motivations behind the record discussing her 20 years in the industry and stating that " material things " were unimportant , stating " I look back at the 20 years behind me and I realized that a lot of things that I 'd valued weren 't important " , in response to the non @-@ materialistic themes of the record . The album has been deemed by some as a concept album featuring political themes based around the United States . " [ The songs ] are examining things I valued and things I found myself worrying about , caring too much about , and realizing that those things aren 't important and wanting to get out from underneath that cloud , the world of illusion " , Madonna stated . According to Lucy O 'Brien , author of Madonna : Like an Icon , the main concept of American Life was about " nothing " . This was evident in the titles of the songs like " Nobody Knows Me " , usage of " no " in " Love Profusion " , as well as " Nothing Fails " . Usage of the negative tone led Madonna to be sarcastic on people 's assumptions about her and emphasize about her knowledge of romantic love . O 'Brien described the concept of the album and the song : 
 " If Like a Prayer was her divorce album , American Life is her psychoanalysis . She even name checks Sigmund Freud and throws out countless questions . Who am I ? Where am I going ? What does it all mean ? Much of the album is suffused with sarcasm : right from the disaffected ennui of the title track to the <unk> of ' Nobody Knows Me ' , Madonna is kicking against the claustrophobic effect of celebrity worship . " 
 A remix of the song was featured in Madonna 's 2003 compilation Remixed & Revisited . Other remixes by Peter Rauhofer , Mount Sims and Above & Beyond were serviced to dance clubs . In 2004 , Madonna released a book entitled Nobody Knows Me which was available exclusively for one month only via Madonna 's official website for $ 24 each . It included 52 pages of rare and unseen shots " commented by an Icon and her angels " . 
 = = Recording and composition = = 
 " Nobody Knows Me " was written and produced by Madonna and Mirwais Ahmadzaï . The recording sessions for American Life started at late 2001 , then was put on hold as Madonna filmed Swept Away in Malta and starred in the West End play Up for Grabs . She returned to the Olympic Recording Studios in late 2002 and finished off the sessions . The mixing for the track was done by Mark " Spike " Stent at the Westlake Recording Studios in West Hollywood , California , while Tim Young did the mastering of the song at Metropolis Studios in London . Ahmadzaï played the guitars , and also did the necessary programming . Two machines were used for the vocal editing in songs like " Hollywood " and " Nobody Knows Me " . Madonna preferred the Antares Auto @-@ Tune plug in , while Ahmadzaï chose an AMS pitch shifter . Madonna chose Auto @-@ Tune because she wanted " Nobody Knows Me " to have a more dance @-@ like feel to it , although Ahmadzaï was against it . 
 " Nobody Knows Me " has vocoder effects , spacey synths , bubbly bass . IGN Music 's Spencer D. described that the song blips , <unk> , and shuffles with a Jetsons ' styled disco ebb and flow and sounds like as an outtake from Music ( 2000 ) . It begins with vocoder treated vocals over a bleeping synth , on a minor chord . Heavy drum hits stress the melody during the verse . " Nobody Knows Me " is written in common time with a moderately fast tempo of 120 beats per minute . It is composed in the key of C major with Madonna 's voice spanning from B3 to C5 . The song follows a basic sequence of C – Am – D – Am – A – E as its chord progression . Lyrically , she rejects tabloid culture 's " social disease " , denouncing both TV and magazines . The chorus features repeated echo shifts of " nobody knows me " while she ponders thoughts like , " It 's no good when you 're misunderstood , but why should I care what the world thinks of me ? " . O 'Brien described it as a trancey track with a sense of childlike defiant lyrics , dismissing critics who have no knowledge of her " jealously guarded inner self " . 
 = = Critical reception = = 
 The song received generally favorable reviews from music critics . Stephen Thomas Erlewine from Allmusic praised the song as one of the best tracks of the album , calling it " infectious " . Sean O 'Brien from The People praised " Nobody Knows Me " as " the best song of the album " and her " one of her best ever " . He also said that the song is one of the reasons why Madonna is queen of pop . Jon Pareles from The New York Times considered it as the album 's most danceable song . Lucy O 'Brien in her book Madonna : Like an Icon , called the song " dazed @-@ sounding " . Metro Times described Ahmadzai 's programming as " by far the best thing on the album " . James Hannaham from Spin compared " Nobody Knows Me " to Donna Summer 's " I Feel Love " , and deemed it as a highlight from the album . Alan Braidwood from BBC Music felt that the song was " insane " with its electronic , chaotic , fast and manic pounding synths . " There is so much going on here several it 'll take several plays to really get it , but it 's ace . " Ken Tucker from Entertainment Weekly described " Nobody Knows Me " as the " downright thrilling " and " deploys a shrewd little form @-@ versus @-@ content paradox " . 
 Spence D. from IGN Music commented that the song is the coolest song on the album up to this point . Paul Rees from Q magazine complemented the track as a " conventional rock song , filled with drama , darkness and surprises " . USA Today 's Edna Gunderson said that the " funkified " synth @-@ pop of " Nobody Knows Me " attests to Madonna 's " undiminished " skills as a shrewd pop composer . Yahoo ! Music 's Dan <unk> commented that Madonna has a personality crisis in the song . Jessica Winter from The Village Voice gave the song a mixed review , writing : " It mutes slightly the <unk> beats of Mirwais 's own club hit " Disco Science " to make vague digs at the press and defensively vow self @-@ improvement . Madonna 's voice is mixed and diced into baby gurgles , which might have been cute if it weren 't so redundant . " John Payne from LA Weekly deduced that even within the synth sounds of the song , he could see " real feeling deeply ingrained in this particular icon . ' Why should I care what the world thinks of me ? ' That is , yes , she does care what the world thinks of her . She says she ’ ll just withdraw from the public eye , ’ cause who needs this , huh ? " Conversely , Rikky Rooksby , author of The Complete Guide to the Music of Madonna , gave a negative review saying that " Nobody Knows Me " might be the silliest track that Madonna had ever recorded . 
 = = Chart performance = = 
 The song , along with " Nothing Fails " , topped the Hot Dance Singles Sales while the Peter Rauhofer remix peaked at number four on the Hot Dance Club Play chart . According to Fred Bronson , the single release of the remixes of the song debuted at number @-@ one on the Hot Singles Sales and Hot Dance Single Sales chart , on the issue dated December 27 , 2003 , the same week it also moved up to the top @-@ twenty of the Dance Club Play chart . " Me Against the Music " by Britney Spears , on which Madonna was featured , and " Nobody Knows Me " , both were also present in the top @-@ twenty , making Madonna the only artist to have three songs within the top @-@ twenty on the chart simultaneously . At the year @-@ end Hot Dance Singles Sales recap , " Nothing Fails / Nobody Knows Me " was at number two position , while " Me Against the Music " and " Love Profusion " was at numbers one and three respectively . Billboard reported that Madonna was the first artist in its chart history to have the top three Dance Sales song . In Australia , the Peter Rauhofer / Above & Beyond Remix debuted at number 80 on the ARIA Club Tracks , peaking at number 49 the next week . 
 = = Live performances = = 
 Madonna performed the song during the 2004 Re @-@ Invention World Tour , as the second song on the opening segment of the show . " Nobody Knows Me " was rehearsed with the Peter Rauhofer 's Private Life remix . According to Dirk Timmerman , author of Madonna Live ! Secret Re @-@ inventions and Confessions on Tour , Madonna lip @-@ synched the performance . During this section , the singer wore a jewel encrusted corset , created by designer Christian Lacroix . After the opening number , " Vogue " , she started an energetic version of the song , on a conveyor belt with some laser light words appearing on the backdrop screens behind her . It also features a giant catwalk lowered from the ceiling . After this performance , she performed " Frozen " alone on stage . The performance of " Nobody Knows Me " was included in the I 'm Going to Tell You a Secret live album and documentary . 
 The song was later added as a video interlude on The MDNA Tour in 2012 , as a tribute to Tyler Clementi and other teens who had committed suicide due to bullying . The film , which was created by Swedish director Johan Söderberg , morphed Madonna 's face with a number of famous figures , including then @-@ Chinese President Hu Jintao , US Republican former presidential candidate Sarah Palin and Pope Benedict XVI . The face of French far right politician Marine Le Pen appeared on the screen with a swastika superimposed on her forehead , before it morphed into the face of Adolf Hitler . Le Pen was infuriated by the video , and threatened to sue Madonna should this happen during her concert in France on July 14 , 2012 , also known as Bastille Day , the French National Day . Socialist French government spokesperson <unk> <unk> @-@ <unk> had also expressed her disappointment . However , Madonna kept the video unchanged on this date , prompting Le Pen to file a lawsuit against her . A spokesman for Le Pen said a lawsuit for " public insult " would be lodged with the Paris courts in the next few days . Madonna responded to the lawsuit saying " I know that I made a certain Marine Le Pen very angry with me . And it 's not my intention to make enemies . " She later explained in an interview with Brazilian network Rede Globo , Madonna explained that the sequence was about " intolerance that we human beings have for one another . And how much we judge people before knowing them . That 's why it 's done in the song ' Nobody Knows Me . ' " During her concert in Nice , France , the swastika was removed and was replaced by an interrogation mark . 
 = = Formats and track listings = = 
 = = Credits and personnel = = 
 Madonna – lead vocals , background vocals , songwriter , producer 
 Mirwais Ahmadzaï – songwriter , producer , guitars , programming 
 Tim Young – audio mastering 
 Mark " Spike " Stent – audio mixing 
 Credits for " Nobody Knows Me " are adapted from American Life liner notes . 
 = = Charts = = 
 = Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 = 
 Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 ( ファイナルファンタジーXIII @-@ 2 , Fainaru Fantajī Sātīn Tsū ) is a role @-@ playing video game developed and published by Square Enix for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 . Released in 2011 in Japan and 2012 in North America and PAL regions , it is a direct sequel to the 2010 role @-@ playing game , Final Fantasy XIII , and is part of the Fabula Nova Crystallis subseries . A port to Microsoft Windows was released on Steam in December 2014 followed by iOS & Android in September 2015 . XIII @-@ 2 includes modified features from the previous game , including fast @-@ paced combat and a customizable " Paradigm " system to control which abilities are used by the characters , and adds a new system that allows monsters to be captured and used in battle . It features a heavy time travel element , allowing the player to jump between different times at the same location or different places at the same time . Lightning , the protagonist of the original game , has disappeared into an unknown world . Her younger sister Serah Farron , a returning character , and a young man named Noel Kreiss , journey through time in an attempt to find Lightning . 
 Development of Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 began around March and April 2010 and lasted about one and a half years . The game was unveiled at the Square Enix 1st Production Department Premier in January 2011 . Many of the key designers remained in their roles from the previous game , and developer tri @-@ Ace was hired to help with the game 's design , art , and programming . The development team wanted to exceed Final Fantasy XIII in every aspect while making the story 's tone mysterious and darker than the previous game . The game builds upon the Paradigm Shift battle system used in Final Fantasy XIII and includes a less linear overall design . 
 Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 received highly positive reviews from Japanese critics and generally positive reviews from Western video game journalists . Though praised for its gameplay , lack of linearity , and graphics , the game 's story was criticized as weak and confusing . During the first week of sales in Japan , the game sold 524 @,@ 000 units , becoming the fifth @-@ best selling game of 2011 in Japan , and sold 3 @.@ 1 million copies worldwide by January 2013 . It was released digitally for PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 in June 2013 along with a Japan @-@ only re @-@ release including all DLC . The Windows PC version has sold over 300 @,@ 000 copies according to SteamSpy . A sequel , Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII , was released in November 2013 in Japan and February 2014 in North America and Europe . 
 Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 has been released on iOS devices , Android devices and the Amazon Appstore in Japan . It has also been released on PlayStation Now . 
 = = Gameplay = = 
 = = = General navigation = = = 
 The player directly controls the on @-@ screen character through a third @-@ person perspective to interact with people , objects , and enemies throughout the game , just as in Final Fantasy XIII . The player can also turn the camera around the characters , providing a 360 ° view . Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 , which includes normal and easy modes , has a world rendered to scale relative to the characters ; instead of a caricature of the character roaming around miniature terrain , as found in the earlier Final Fantasy games , every area is represented proportionally . The player navigates the world on foot or by chocobo , large flightless birds that appear regularly in the Final Fantasy series . The game world is divided into multiple regions and time periods ; the player can visit a region in multiple time periods and multiple regions at the same time period . For example , the region of Oerba can be reached in the years 200 and 400 AF , while the <unk> <unk> and Augusta Tower regions can be visited in the year 300 AF . Some regions , because of plot points within the game , have alternate versions of themselves ; for example , two versions of the Academia region in the same year can be accessed once the plot has made the second version available . Connecting these regions is the Historia Crux , which the player can access at will . The game 's regions are represented as a branching path instead of being accessed linearly . New regions can be unlocked via plot points or by acquiring optional special items and the player may transfer between unlocked regions at any point . 
 When accessing a previously visited region , the player appears in the location of their last visit . Upon acquiring items called seals , the player can revert regions to their previous statuses to play through them again ; regions can be unsealed again at any time . Unlike in the predecessor , the game is automatically saved when players enter the Historia Crux , as well as at key moments in the plot . The player may also manually save at any time . Instead of accessing stores at save points like in XIII , the player can purchase items from a character named Chocolina , who is found throughout the game . An in @-@ game data log provides a bestiary and incidental information about the world of Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 . When talking to characters , the game sometimes begins the Live Trigger system , in which the player chooses their response from several options ; these dialogue options are generally not repeatable . The game also occasionally features temporal rifts , in which the player must complete a puzzle to close the rift and continue the game . 
 = = = Combat system = = = 
 Combat is almost identical to the previous game 's version of the series ' Active Time Battle ( ATB ) system , called the Command Synergy Battle system . Under this system , the player selects an action from the menus , such as Attack , Abilities , or Item . Each action requires a specific number of slots on the ATB bar , which continually refills at a constant rate to a set maximum number of slots . The kinds of attack actions available are close @-@ range melee attacks or ranged magical attacks , but there are also other magical actions that evoke healing or shielding abilities . The ATB bar can be increased in size throughout the game from three slots to six . The player may select less than the maximum number of possible actions or may stop the filling of the ATB bar and perform as many actions as can be done with the current ATB amount . The player may select an <unk> command , which fills the ATB slots with actions chosen automatically . Actions cannot be performed outside of combat , and the characters ' health is fully restored after each fight . Players have the option of restarting a battle while in the middle of a fight . During some skirmishes , players are put through quick time events called Cinematic Actions that allows them to deal higher damage to foes and end certain battles . 
 Monsters do not freely roam the map like in Final Fantasy XI to XIII , but instead , they randomly appear as in the earlier Final Fantasy games . For a limited time after monsters appear , the player may attack them to gain a combat bonus ; after this window expires , the monsters attack the player to begin a regular battle , and if too much time passes before combat begins , the player cannot restart the fight during combat . When the battle begins , the screen transitions from the regular map to a separate battle screen as in XIII . Three characters are used in combat — the two main characters and a monster . Monsters must be captured from battles before they can be used , and there are around 150 different monster types available to be collected . Captured monsters act just like the main characters , but can also perform a " feral link " attack that increases the chance of capturing another monster . Either of the two main characters can be selected as the one that the player has direct control over at any point ; the other character and the monster are then controlled by the game 's artificial intelligence ( AI ) . 
 Each enemy has a meter , called a Chain Gauge , consisting of a percentage that increases from a base level of 100 when the enemy is struck by attacks or spells . Different attacks have different effects ; some raise the chain by a larger amount while others give the player longer before the Chain Gauge resets to 100 percent . The amount of damage performed by an attack is multiplied by the chain percentage before it is applied to the enemy . When the chain counter reaches a preset amount , different for each enemy , the enemy becomes Staggered . In this mode , the enemy has lowered defense and is easily interrupted , and some may even be launched into the air , preventing them from attacking and stopping their ATB gauges from replenishing . 
 The Paradigm system allows the player to program six different roles , which the characters can assume to perform certain formations in battle in response to specific conditions . The roles consist of Commando , which uses non @-@ elemental attacks to stabilize the Chain Gauge ; Ravager , which uses elemental attacks to fill the Chain Gauge ; Medic , a White Mage @-@ type role which can heal the party ; Saboteur , which can weaken enemies ; <unk> , which can strengthen allies ; and Sentinel , which has protective abilities . The two main characters can initially assume three roles , but they can learn others at the player 's choosing as the game progresses . The player can select which roles the controlled character and the AI characters use while outside or during battle , which is the only way that the player can control the AI characters during a fight . The player can only choose from specific sets of paradigms that the player has set up before the battle . Monsters only have one role ; different ones are used when the player switches paradigms . The player selects up to three monsters they wish to use in paradigms outside of battle . Unlike in Final Fantasy XIII , the player cannot summon the Eidolons , as the giant creatures were only available to the protagonists of that game . 
 = = = Crystarium = = = 
 The Crystarium is a leveling and growth system , making a return from Final Fantasy XIII in an altered form . The system consists of constellation @-@ style representations of the character 's weapons and tamed monsters , made up of small and large crystal nodes , which can be accessed from the start of the game . There is one Crystarium system available for each monster and Paradigm role . <unk> points gained in battle can be used to expand the Crystarium , unlocking bonuses to health , magic , or strength , or provide the characters with new abilities and slots for battle accessories . For the monsters , the bonuses are unlocked with items dropped by defeated enemies . 
 = = Synopsis = = 
 = = = Setting = = = 
 The story of Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 follows on from that of Final Fantasy XIII , but as is typical for the series , it is unrelated to all other previous Final Fantasy games . In XIII , one of the fal 'Cie — a god @-@ like race — transformed a team of six people , the primary characters of the game , into l 'Cie ( servants of the fal 'Cie with magical powers and a ' Focus ' — an assigned task to be completed within a time limit ) , in the hope that they would initiate the end of the world . The six were intended to cause the large , inhabited floating sphere named Cocoon to fall into the world below , named Gran Pulse , killing all of the humans of Cocoon . At the finale of the game , two of the l 'Cie transformed into a crystal pillar to support Cocoon , preventing the catastrophe . 
 XIII @-@ 2 begins three years after the end of XIII . Owing to the fall of Cocoon at the end of XIII and the collapse of its government ( the Sanctum ) , at the start of XIII @-@ 2 , most of Cocoon 's inhabitants have moved down onto Gran Pulse , and some have learned magical abilities . Over the course of the game , a scientific body called the Academy becomes a new technocratic government . While the game starts off in the year 3 AF ( ' AF ' being a new timescale set up after the fall of Cocoon ) , the story of XIII @-@ 2 jumps around several different time periods , and even parallel versions of different places , accessed via the Historia Crux . While most of the game takes place on Gran Pulse and inside Cocoon , there are two other major locations . One is the Void Beyond , a limbo between time periods . The other location is Valhalla , the capital of the goddess Etro . This place is a realm at the end of time where the goddess keeps a dark energy called Chaos from escaping and destroying the timeline . 
 = = = Characters = = = 
 As opposed to the previous game , Lightning , the main character of XIII , only appears as a supporting character and the game 's primary narrator . The two main playable characters are Serah Farron , Lightning 's sister and the second narrator , and Noel Kreiss , a young man originally from the distant future . Other characters from the previous game who appear in important roles are Hope Estheim , who becomes leader of the Academy , and Snow Villiers , Serah 's fiancé , who set off to find Lightning for Serah . The three other main characters from the previous game , Oerba Dia Vanille , Oerba Yun Fang and Sazh Katzroy , appear in cameo roles . Three new characters are introduced : Caius Ballad , the game 's primary antagonist ; Paddra Nsu @-@ Yeul , a seeress possessing the all @-@ seeing Eyes of Etro ; and Alyssa Zaidelle , a young girl who works as an assistant to Hope . A minor supporting character is Mog , a Moogle sent with Noel by Lightning as Serah 's " good luck charm " . 
 = = = Plot = = = 
 The game opens in 3 AF , as the Pulse town Serah lives in is attacked by monsters . A stranger named Noel appears to help fight the monsters and claims to be a time traveler from 700 AF . He arrived in her time via Valhalla , where he claims to have met Lightning as she guarded the throne of the weakened Etro . As part of Lightning 's transfer to Valhalla , she was erased from the fall of Cocoon onwards ( making everyone except Serah forget her being with them on Gran Pulse ) , and paradoxes have erupted throughout time , warping the timeline . Serah joins Noel in a journey to resolve these paradoxes by removing items and monsters , which are out of their original time and correct the timeline ; she in hopes of finding her sister and he in hopes of changing the bleak future he comes from . While journeying to 5 AF to resolve a paradox on Cocoon , they meet and help Alyssa , an Academy member and survivor of the Purge , a massacre by the Sanctum at the beginning of Final Fantasy XIII . 
 Traveling to the ruined city of Paddra in 10 AF , they find Hope , who has become the leader of the Academy , with Alyssa as his assistant . They also find a recording of prophecies made by one of the <unk> of Paddra , who are believed to have died out centuries prior : one fragmented prophecy shows Lightning in Valhalla . Paddra is shrouded by an eclipse , which Noel says is not supposed to happen for several centuries . While Serah and Noel resolve the paradox causing the eclipse , they encounter Caius Ballad , a man Noel knows from 700 AF who opposes their mission , and Yeul , who looks identical to a girl of the same name Noel knew in the future . After resolving the paradox , an alternative timeline appears in which there was never an eclipse . The repaired prophecy shows Caius in Valhalla fighting Lightning and the pillar supporting Cocoon collapsing . Noel claims that this takes place around 400 AF , devastating the human population as well as the world , creating a future where he is the last human in existence . Serah and Noel move on , while Hope and Alyssa work on finding a way to prevent the pillar 's collapse . 
 Moving on to 300 AF Cocoon , the pair find Snow fighting a giant paradox @-@ fueled monster that is dissolving the crystal pillar . After resolving the paradox , which delays the fall of Cocoon until 500 AF , Snow disappears again as an anomaly from another time . The pair then go to the city of Academia on Gran Pulse in 400 AF where they are attacked by the city 's AI , which claims they were killed in 200 AF . Traveling to 200 AF , they discover a paradox whereby a man @-@ made fal 'Cie meant to re @-@ levitate Cocoon was able to turn on its creators using the AI that designed it and take over the government . Resolving the paradox , Noel and Serah travel to an alternative 400 AF Academia . In this world , the pair find Hope and Alyssa again , who had put themselves in stasis . They explain their new plan to mechanically float a new Cocoon to hold humanity , which Serah and Noel help with before heading to 500 AF Academia . They are betrayed by Alyssa ( revealed to be a living paradox doomed to disappear in the corrected timeline ) and trapped by Caius in dream @-@ worlds . Before being trapped , Serah meets the spirit of Yeul , who explains that she is the seeress of Paddra , continually reincarnated throughout history , while Caius is her immortal guardian , gifted with Etro 's own heart . 
 Yeul explains that every time the timeline is changed , the resulting shock kills her ; Caius has been driven mad by watching her die repeatedly and seeks to end the process by unleashing the Chaos trapped in Valhalla to destroy all time . Serah , it is revealed , has the same power , and risks death every time she changes the future . Resolving to go on , Serah breaks free of her dream @-@ world and frees Noel from his , in which he is the last living human after his Yeul dies and Caius leaves for Valhalla . After briefly encountering Lightning , the pair fight Caius , first in 500 AF Academia and then in Valhalla . As they defeat him , he claims to have killed Lightning , then impales himself through the heart on Noel 's blade , killing the weakened Etro . When the pair return to Academia in 500 AF , where Vanille and Fang have been rescued from the collapsing pillar and the new Cocoon , named " Bhunivelze " , has risen , Serah dies in front of Noel and Hope from the shock of the future changing . Just then , a black cloud erupts from the sky as the Chaos that Etro was keeping trapped breaks free . Lightning is then shown in crystal stasis on the throne of Etro 's temple . If the player completes all optional parts of the game , they are shown an additional scene in which Caius is on the throne , declaring that the goddess is gone for good , and that Yeul and he can begin a new life freed from their ' curses ' . 
 = = Development = = 
 = = = Production = = = 
 Development of Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 began around March and April 2010 and lasted about one and a half years . It was carried out by Square Enix 's 1st Production Department , a collective name for the teams in charge of the Fabula Nova Crystallis Final Fantasy , Dissidia Final Fantasy and Kingdom Hearts series . Many of the key personnel from Final Fantasy XIII remained in their roles : Motomu Toriyama was director , Yoshinori Kitase producer , Tetsuya Nomura character designer and Isamu Kamikokuryo art director . 
 The troubled development of Final Fantasy XIII that had been caused by the simultaneous creation of the company @-@ wide engine Crystal Tools gave reason to rethink the production process for high @-@ budget games at Square Enix . For Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 , the team consulted the European subsidiary Eidos to more closely adapt a Western approach to game development . As a consequence , monthly schedules and project milestones were introduced to better monitor the staff members ' progress . Furthermore , unlike its predecessor , Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 was not entirely developed in @-@ house ; Japanese studio tri @-@ Ace was contracted to help out with aspects of the game design , art and programming . This was done to keep the number of internal staff members on the game lower . The contributions of external developers were planned and clearly divided beforehand to achieve a more structured team organization . Concept videos and frequent test playing during production helped constantly engage the staff and keep to the original vision of the game . 
 Despite its strong sales , Final Fantasy XIII had been criticized on several fronts . Complaints included that the game had been too linear , had not allowed enough interaction with non @-@ player characters , and had not featured enough minigames and puzzles . The developers intended to address these criticisms with the sequel by adding the Historia Crux system , numerous sidequests from non @-@ player characters , and the casino minigame area . Environments were made more explorable and the artists were given more freedom to include their own ideas in the game 's locations , in order to rectify the shortcomings of the more artificial seeming settings in Final Fantasy XIII . Although the developers were explicitly responding to the criticism , they saw the changes and additions as making the sequel in line with what players had hoped Final Fantasy XIII would be , rather than backing away from the changes that game had brought to the series . For the structure of side quests and some other aspects such as the abundance of chocobos and the more open environment , the team drew inspiration from Rockstar San Diego 's Red Dead Redemption . The game also included multiple endings , which Toriyama referred to as a first for the series . 
 = = = Writing = = = 
 Toriyama originally envisioned the plot not as a direct sequel to Final Fantasy XIII but instead as taking place 900 years after . However , while creating the backstory for the events in between both eras , it was decided to have the game revolve around time traveling . Toriyama expressed his wish to " create a story where [ Lightning ] ends up [ truly ] happy one day " as he considered her emotional state at the end of Final Fantasy XIII doubtful . He also wanted to " see [ Serah ] take an active part " because her crystal stasis over the course of the predecessor 's story did not allow for such a role . Scenario writer Daisuke Watanabe thought about how the narrative could be continued in a sequel . Emi Nagashima , also known by her pen name Jun Eishima , had written novellas for Final Fantasy XIII and was consulted early on in development to help come up with the plot for Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 . 
 The narrative was divided into smaller " pieces of drama " similar to a television series rather than one overarching story piece . This was reflected by the game 's working title Final Fantasy XIII : Season 2 when the project was first proposed within the company . Unlike Final Fantasy X @-@ 2 , which had a more cheerful and humorous feel than Final Fantasy X , the staff members wanted the overall tone of Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 to be serious as well as darker and more mysterious than its predecessor . The original scenario had called for Serah to travel alone with Mog . However , Kitase felt that their dialogue was " quite girly , almost camp and a bit over the top " and resulted in a tonal shift that was too similar to the one from X to X @-@ 2 . Noel was added to the story to counter this . Watanabe considered scriptwriting for the game 's two @-@ character party difficult . With the lack of varied personality traits provided by an ensemble cast , he had to ensure that conversations between Serah and Noel would not be repetitive or unrealistic . Unfamiliar concepts and terms in Final Fantasy XIII , such as " l 'Cie " and " fal 'Cie " , were deemed too difficult to understand and hence avoided in the sequel . A story link to Final Fantasy Type @-@ 0 via the location Valhalla was planned but later discarded . 
 = = = Art design = = = 
 Based on the much darker tone of Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 compared to its predecessor , Kamikokuryo decided on surrealism as the main theme for the graphics . The works of Salvador Dalí and Giorgio de Chirico were used as visual references and helped Kamikokuryo strike a balance between <unk> and fantasy @-@ like surrealism . Unlike Final Fantasy XIII , the game had a much tighter schedule allowing for little pre @-@ production . Kamikokuryo hence used photographs instead of self @-@ drawn pictures to explain his setting ideas to the other staff members . For example , a photograph of ruined buildings in the Cuban capital Havana inspired the look of Valhalla . Character design duties were split up : Nomura designed the faces of the new and returning main characters while their clothing was done by other artists . Kamikokuryo drew the final version of Lightning based on a silhouette sketch and suggestions by Nomura . Yusuke Naora took charge of Serah 's , Noel 's and Caius ' costumes , while Hideo Minaba worked on Yeul , Alyssa and the adult version of Hope in the same capacity . Mog was designed by Toshitaka Matsuda after he had received a request for a cute and mascot @-@ like Moogle character . 
 = = = Music = = = 
 The music of Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 was composed by Masashi Hamauzu , Naoshi Mizuta , and Mitsuto Suzuki . Keiji Kawamori coordinated the three artists to ensure their styles meshed well . Hamauzu , who was the sole composer for the music of Final Fantasy XIII , wrote roughly a quarter of the game 's tracks , as did Suzuki , while Mizuta wrote nearly half . Prior to this game , Mizuta had worked on the music of Final Fantasy XI , and Suzuki had been a sound director for several Square Enix games and served as an arranger for XIII . The game 's director , Motomu Toriyama , wanted the game 's soundtrack to have more variety than that of the music in Final Fantasy XIII , as well as feature more styles . As a result , the game had three composers rather than just Hamauzu . Toriyama also wished for the music to have " a more edgy sound " and more vocal pieces , so that it would sound " unlike the typical Final Fantasy title " . The music incorporates a wide variety of styles , from orchestral and electronic to rap , hip @-@ hop , jazz funk , and metal . 
 Since the release of the game , Square Enix has published the 2011 four @-@ disc soundtrack album , Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 Original Soundtrack , as well as an album of arrangements and alternate versions of tracks from the game , Final Fantasy XIII Original Soundtrack PLUS , in 2012 . The theme song for the game , " Yakusoku no Basho " ( 約束の場所 , The Promised Place ) , was released by singer Mai Fukui as a single in 2011 , and the English version of the song , sung by Charice Pempengco and included in the non @-@ Japanese versions of the game , was included on her 2012 album Infinity . Reviews of the soundtrack album were positive , with critics praising both the variety of styles and quality of the pieces . Several critics noted Mizuta 's work as possibly his finest to date . Reviewers were mixed in their opinions of the arranged album , feeling that several of the pieces were simply inferior versions of the original tracks . Both of the albums and the single sold well enough to place on the Japanese Oricon charts , with the original soundtrack album reaching a peak of # 13 and remaining on the charts for eight weeks . 
 = = Marketing = = 
 Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 was first hinted at three months after the January 2010 release of Final Fantasy XIII . Kitase said in an interview " If we could do a XIII @-@ 2 , we could direct all our attention to the story and refine what we have already built . " Toriyama stated in the October 2010 Ultimania Omega companion book that he hoped to continue the story . Two months later , Nomura released a drawing of Lightning along with the words " She must not be forgotten " . On January 11 , 2011 , Square Enix registered the domain name <unk> @-@ <unk> via a proxy company that it had used to register websites for several other unannounced games . Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 was officially announced at the Square Enix 1st Production Department Premier in Tokyo on January 18 , 2011 . The teaser trailer showed Lightning , outfitted in armor , drawing her weapon and engaging Caius , who was not yet named . To promote the game 's release in Japan , Japanese singer Yuko Oshima was appointed the leader of a group of thirteen official test players . 
 = = = Downloadable content = = = 
 The game features downloadable content ( DLC ) in the form of downloadable outfits , weapons , accessories , scenarios , recruitable monsters and minigames . Although there had been initial plans to release DLC for Final Fantasy XIII , these ideas did not come to fruition . For Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 , the team designed and planned for content , including DLC , that would expand on the game since the beginning of its development . Players who own Final Fantasy XIII save data can unlock an additional wallpaper ( PS3 ) or gamer picture ( Xbox 360 ) for the save file . DLC released after the game contained additional weapons , costumes , and monsters . Post @-@ release downloads also included " Final Fantasy XIII Lost Report " , which offers a look back at Final Fantasy XIII 's story through the perspective of non @-@ playable characters from the game , and three downloadable scenarios for other characters : " Perpetual Battlefield " , which reveals Snow 's fate ; " Heads or Tails " , which shows how Sazh came to 500 AF Academia ; and " Requiem of the Goddess " , which shows Lightning 's struggle against Caius and explains how she became crystallized in the main story 's ending . 
 = = Reception = = 
 = = = Sales = = = 
 During its first week of release in Japan , Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 sold 524 @,@ 000 copies , and the PlayStation 3 version was the highest @-@ selling game for the system . The Xbox 360 version only reached 48th . Although high , initial sales were notably lower than what they were for the game 's predecessor , which sold 1 @.@ 5 million units in its first week . By the end of the year , the game had sold over 697 @,@ 000 units , and was the fifth @-@ best selling game of 2011 in Japan . It was just below four handheld video games , making it the highest @-@ selling home console game in Japan that year . It finished 2012 with over 840 @,@ 000 copies sold in Japan . In the United States , the game placed as the second @-@ best selling game of February 2012 , just below Call of Duty : Modern Warfare 3 . In the United Kingdom , Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 was the best @-@ selling game of February 2012 . By January 2013 , Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 had sold 3 @.@ 1 million copies worldwide , almost half of the 6 @.@ 6 million copies its predecessor sold by the same date . It would ship an additional 200 @,@ 000 to 400 @,@ 000 copies according to Square Enix press releases . Its Steam release sold over 330 @,@ 000 copies by early 2016 . 
 = = = Reviews = = = 
 Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 received very favorable reviews by Japanese reviewers , getting perfect scores from the Japanese magazines Famitsu and Dengeki PlayStation . Famitsu editor <unk> Yoshida said that " it feels like a very different game from its predecessor " and that " it 's easy to lose yourself in changing and redoing areas you 've previously finished . " Assistant editor Norihiro Fujiwara added that " the setting and presentation is fantastic , and the issues people brought up with the first game — its linearity , its lack of meaty gameplay — are a thing of the past . You 're sucked into the game right from the beginning , and the story 's very easy to get into . " The game won the " Future Division " award at the 2011 Japan Game Awards and later won an " Award of Excellence " at the 2012 Japan Game Awards . 
 Outside Japan , the game received mostly positive reviews , which primarily focused on the changes in the game from its predecessor . Reviewers generally praised the graphics . The Edge review described the environments as " entirely captivating " and said that the " visual and audio design is marvellous " , and Kevin VanOrd of GameSpot praised the graphics as beautiful and visually diverse . Jeremy Parish of 1UP.com disagreed , however , saying that the art " represents a step back from the splendor of Final Fantasy XIII " . The music received mixed reviews ; Parish said that the music was great , applauding the unique styles , but Simon Parkin of Eurogamer felt that the music " suffers from a lack of coherent direction " , and tracks often failed to match their scenes . Dale North of Destructoid felt that the soundtrack was " wonderfully varied and lots of fun " and predicted that " traditionalist " fans of Final Fantasy music would not like it as much because of the varied new styles . 
 The gameplay was generally praised as well , with many reviewers noting the improvements in areas they saw as problems in the previous game . Parkin praised the game 's " smart , engaging mechanics " and the " novel structure " of the gameplay . Joe Juba of Game Informer said that the changes to Final Fantasy XIII 's battle system made it his favorite Final Fantasy battle system , and that the gameplay was " phenomenal " . Ryan Clements of IGN felt that the gameplay was an improvement over XIII 's , fixing many of its problems . Parish stated that XIII @-@ 2 was an inversion of XIII in that the gameplay took precedence over the story . He described the battle system as " a joy " and said that the game was " never not fun " . VanOrd agreed that the combat was fun , though he found it to be too easy . The Edge review , which was harsher on the game than most others , also found it to be too easy , which combined with what they saw as poor subquests and a lack of effort put in some regions made the gameplay uninteresting . 
 The story of the game received poor to mixed reviews . Parish felt that it was confusing and inessential to the game , while Juba said that it was " a disaster " which " screws up at almost every turn " , overshadowing the game 's good points . Parkin felt that the characters were weak and the story was not engaging , and Clements said that the story was insubstantial , which he found particularly disappointing as most Final Fantasy games focused heavily on their story . VanOrd was less negative towards the characters and story than most others , but still described the characters as good , but not great . He felt the game focused too much on the less interesting characters of Noel and Serah over Lightning and Caius , and said that the story was " semi @-@ coherent " and missed several emotional notes , particularly in the first half of the game . 
 = = Sequel = = 
 Hints and rumors began circulating about a sequel to Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 2 as early as December 2011 , when Square Enix registered the Final Fantasy XIII @-@ 3 web domain . At the time , the company stated that it was simply a precaution and did not mean there was such a game . After the game was released with a " To be continued " ending , Square Enix said that the ending was chosen to prompt players to explore the alternative endings and remain ready for the coming DLC levels . However , after the release of what was stated to be the final piece of DLC , officials at Square Enix announced that they would be releasing future Final Fantasy XIII @-@ related content . In late August 2012 , a teaser site was unveiled in preparation for the Final Fantasy 25th Anniversary Event , titled " A Storm Gathers " , promising a " new direction for the saga of key character Lightning " . At the event , it was announced that the title for this game would be Lightning Returns : Final Fantasy XIII , that it would be released in 2013 , and that it would serve as the ending to the story of the main Final Fantasy XIII character , Lightning . 
 = Titanic ( 1997 film ) = 
 Titanic is a 1997 American epic romance @-@ disaster film directed , written , co @-@ produced , and co @-@ edited by James Cameron . A fictionalized account of the sinking of the RMS Titanic , it stars Leonardo DiCaprio and Kate Winslet as members of different social classes who fall in love aboard the ship during its ill @-@ fated maiden voyage . 
 Cameron 's inspiration for the film came from his fascination with shipwrecks ; he felt a love story interspersed with the human loss would be essential to convey the emotional impact of the disaster . Production began in 1995 , when Cameron shot footage of the actual Titanic wreck . The modern scenes on the research vessel were shot on board the Akademik Mstislav Keldysh , which Cameron had used as a base when filming the wreck . Scale models , computer @-@ generated imagery , and a reconstruction of the Titanic built at Playas de Rosarito in Baja California were used to re @-@ create the sinking . The film was partially funded by DreamWorks Pictures and 20th Century Fox . It was the most expensive film made at that time , with an estimated budget of $ 200 million . 
 Upon its release on December 19 , 1997 , Titanic achieved critical and commercial success . Nominated for fourteen Academy Awards , it tied All About Eve ( 1950 ) for the most Oscar nominations , and won eleven , including the awards for Best Picture and Best Director , tying Ben Hur ( 1959 ) for the most Oscars won by a single film . With an initial worldwide gross of over $ 1 @.@ 84 billion , Titanic was the first film to reach the billion @-@ dollar mark . It remained the highest @-@ grossing film of all time until Cameron 's 2009 film Avatar surpassed it in 2010 . A 3D version of Titanic , released on April 4 , 2012 to commemorate the centennial of the sinking , earned it an additional $ 343 @.@ 6 million worldwide , pushing the film 's worldwide total to $ 2 @.@ 18 billion . It became the second film to gross more than $ 2 billion worldwide ( after Avatar ) . 
 = = Plot = = 
 In 1996 , treasure hunter Brock Lovett and his team aboard the research vessel Akademik Mstislav Keldysh search the wreck of RMS Titanic for a necklace with a rare diamond , the Heart of the Ocean . They recover a safe containing a drawing of a young woman wearing only the necklace dated April 14 , 1912 , the day the ship struck the iceberg . Rose Dawson Calvert , the woman in the drawing , is brought aboard Keldysh and tells Lovett of her experiences aboard Titanic . 
 In 1912 Southampton , 17 @-@ year @-@ old first @-@ class passenger Rose DeWitt Bukater , her fiancé Cal Hockley , and her mother Ruth board the luxurious Titanic . Ruth emphasizes that Rose 's marriage will resolve their family 's financial problems . Distraught over the engagement , Rose considers suicide by jumping from the stern ; Jack Dawson , a penniless artist , intervenes and discourages her . Discovered with Jack , Rose tells a concerned Cal that she was peering over the edge and Jack saved her from falling . When Cal becomes indifferent , she suggests to him that Jack deserves a reward . He invites Jack to dine with them in first class the following night . Jack and Rose develop a tentative friendship , despite Cal and Ruth being wary of him . Following dinner , Rose secretly joins Jack at a party in third class . 
 Aware of Cal and Ruth 's disapproval , Rose rebuffs Jack 's advances , but realizes she prefers him over Cal . After rendezvousing on the bow at sunset , Rose takes Jack to her state room ; at her request , Jack sketches Rose posing nude wearing Cal 's engagement present , the Heart of the Ocean necklace . They evade Cal 's bodyguard and have sex in an automobile inside the cargo hold . On the forward deck , they witness a collision with an iceberg and overhear the officers and designer discussing its seriousness . 
 Cal discovers Jack 's sketch of Rose and an insulting note from her in his safe along with the necklace . When Jack and Rose attempt to inform Cal of the collision , he has his bodyguard slip the necklace into Jack 's pocket and accuses him of theft . Jack is arrested , taken to the master @-@ at @-@ arms ' office , and handcuffed to a pipe . Cal puts the necklace in his own coat pocket . 
 With the ship sinking , Rose flees Cal and her mother , who has boarded a lifeboat , and frees Jack . On the boat deck , Cal and Jack encourage her to board a lifeboat ; Cal claims he can get himself and Jack off safely . After Rose boards one , Cal tells Jack the arrangement is only for himself . As her boat lowers , Rose decides that she cannot leave Jack and jumps back on board . Cal takes his bodyguard 's pistol and chases Rose and Jack into the flooding first @-@ class dining saloon . After using up his ammunition , Cal realizes he gave his coat and consequently the necklace to Rose . He later boards a collapsible lifeboat by carrying a lost child . 
 After braving several obstacles , Jack and Rose return to the boat deck . The lifeboats have departed and passengers are falling to their deaths as the stern rises out of the water . The ship breaks in half , lifting the stern into the air . Jack and Rose ride it into the ocean and he helps her onto a wooden panel only buoyant enough for one person . He assures her that she will die an old woman , warm in her bed . Jack dies of hypothermia but Rose is saved . 
 With Rose hiding from Cal en route , the RMS Carpathia takes the survivors to New York City where Rose gives her name as Rose Dawson . She later finds out Cal committed suicide after losing all his money in the 1929 Wall Street crash . 
 Back in the present , Lovett decides to abandon his search after hearing Rose 's story . Alone on the stern of Keldysh , Rose takes out the Heart of the Ocean — in her possession all along — and drops it into the sea over the wreck site . While she is seemingly asleep or has died in her bed , photos on her dresser depict a life of freedom and adventure inspired by the life she wanted to live with Jack . A young Rose reunites with Jack at the Titanic 's Grand Staircase , applauded by those who died . 
 = = Cast = = 
 = = = Fictional characters = = = 
 Leonardo DiCaprio as Jack Dawson : Cameron said he needed the cast to feel as though they were really on the Titanic , relive its liveliness , and " to take that energy and give it to Jack , [ ... ] an artist who is able to have his heart soar " . Jack is portrayed as a homeless , poor man from Chippewa Falls , Wisconsin who has toured numerous places in the world , primarily Paris . He wins two tickets onto the RMS Titanic in a poker game and travels as a third @-@ class passenger with his friend Fabrizio . He is attracted to Rose at first sight and meets her when she attempts to throw herself off the stern of the ship . This enables him to mix with the first @-@ class passengers for a night . When casting the role , various established actors , including Matthew McConaughey , Chris O 'Donnell , Billy Crudup and Stephen Dorff , were considered , but Cameron felt that a few of the actors were too old for the part of a 20 @-@ year @-@ old . Tom Cruise was interested in portraying the character , but the asking price was too much for the studio to consider . Cameron considered Jared Leto for the role but he refused to audition . DiCaprio , 22 years old at the time , was brought to Cameron 's attention by casting director Mali Finn . Initially , he did not want to portray the character , and refused to read his first romantic scene on the set ( see below ) . Cameron said , " He read it once , then started goofing around , and I could never get him to focus on it again . But for one split second , a shaft of light came down from the heavens and lit up the forest . " Cameron strongly believed in DiCaprio 's acting ability , and told him , " Look , I 'm not going to make this guy brooding and neurotic . I 'm not going to give him a tic and a limp and all the things you want . " Cameron rather envisioned the character as a James Stewart type . Although Jack Dawson was a fictional character , there is a grave labeled " J. Dawson " in Fairview Cemetery in Halifax , Nova Scotia where 121 victims are buried . The real J. Dawson was Joseph Dawson , who shoveled coal in the bowels of the ship . " It wasn 't until after the movie came out that we found out that there was a J. Dawson gravestone , " said the film 's producer , Jon Landau , in an interview . 
 Kate Winslet as Rose DeWitt Bukater : Cameron said Winslet " had the thing that you look for " and that there was " a quality in her face , in her eyes , " that he " just knew people would be ready to go the distance with her " . Rose is a 17 @-@ year @-@ old girl , originally from Philadelphia , who is forced into an engagement to 30 @-@ year @-@ old Cal Hockley so she and her mother , Ruth , can maintain their high @-@ class status after her father 's death had left the family debt @-@ ridden . Rose boards the RMS Titanic with Cal and Ruth , as a first @-@ class passenger , and meets Jack . Winslet said of her character , " She has got a lot to give , and she 's got a very open heart . And she wants to explore and adventure the world , but she [ feels ] that 's not going to happen . " Gwyneth Paltrow , Winona Ryder , Claire Danes , and Gabrielle Anwar had been considered for the role . When they turned it down , 22 @-@ year @-@ old Winslet campaigned heavily for the role . She sent Cameron daily notes from England , which led Cameron to invite her to Hollywood for auditions . As with DiCaprio , casting director Mali Finn originally brought her to Cameron 's attention . When looking for a Rose , Cameron described the character as " an Audrey Hepburn type " and was initially uncertain about casting Winslet even after her screen test impressed him . After she screen tested with DiCaprio , Winslet was so thoroughly impressed with him , that she whispered to Cameron , " He 's great . Even if you don 't pick me , pick him . " Winslet sent Cameron a single rose with a card signed " From Your Rose " and lobbied him by phone . " You don 't understand ! " she pleaded one day when she reached him by mobile phone in his Humvee . " I am Rose ! I don 't know why you 're even seeing anyone else ! " Her persistence , as well as her talent , eventually convinced him to cast her in the role . 
 Billy Zane as Caledon Nathan " Cal " Hockley : Cal is Rose 's 30 @-@ year @-@ old fiancé . He is arrogant and snobbish , and the heir to a Pittsburgh steel fortune . He becomes increasingly embarrassed , jealous , and cruel about Rose 's relationship with Jack . The part was originally offered to Matthew McConaughey . 
 Frances Fisher as Ruth DeWitt Bukater : Rose 's widowed mother , who arranges her daughter 's engagement to Cal to maintain her family 's high @-@ society status . She loves her daughter , but believes that social position is more important than having a loving marriage . She scorns Jack , even though he saved her daughter 's life . 
 Gloria Stuart as Rose Dawson Calvert : Rose narrates the film in a modern @-@ day framing device . Cameron stated , " In order to see the present and the past , I decided to create a fictional survivor who is [ close to ] 101 years , and she connects us in a way through history . " The 100 @-@ year @-@ old Rose gives Lovett information regarding the " Heart of the Ocean " after he discovers a nude drawing of her in the wreck . She tells the story of her time aboard the ship , mentioning Jack for the first time since the sinking . At 87 , Stuart had to be made up to look older for the role . Of casting Stuart , Cameron stated , " My casting director found her . She was sent out on a mission to find retired actresses from the Golden Age of the thirties and forties . " Cameron said that he did not know who Stuart was , and Fay Wray was also considered for the role . " But [ Stuart ] was just so into it , and so lucid , and had such a great spirit . And I saw the connection between her spirit and [ Winslet 's ] spirit , " stated Cameron . " I saw this joie de vivre in both of them , that I thought the audience would be able to make that cognitive leap that it 's the same person . " Stuart died on September 26 , 2010 , at age 100 , approximately the same age elder Rose was in the film . 
 Bill Paxton as Brock Lovett : A treasure hunter looking for the " Heart of the Ocean " in the wreck of the Titanic in the present . Time and funding for his expedition are running out . He later reflects at the film 's conclusion that , despite thinking about Titanic for three years , he has never understood it until he hears Rose 's story . 
 Suzy Amis as Lizzy Calvert : Rose 's granddaughter , who accompanies her when she visits Lovett on the ship and learns her grandmother 's true identity and romantic past with Jack Dawson . 
 Danny <unk> as Fabrizio De Rossi : Jack 's Italian best friend , who boards the RMS Titanic with him after Jack wins two tickets in a poker game . Fabrizio does not board a lifeboat when the Titanic sinks and is killed when one of the ship 's funnels breaks and crashes into the water . 
 David Warner as Spicer Lovejoy : An ex @-@ Pinkerton constable , Lovejoy is Cal 's English valet and bodyguard , who keeps an eye on Rose and is suspicious about the circumstances surrounding Jack 's rescue of her . He dies when the Titanic splits in half , causing him to fall into a massive opening . 
 Jason Barry as Thomas " Tommy " Ryan : An Irish third @-@ class passenger who befriends Jack and Fabrizio . Tommy is killed when he is accidentally pushed forward and shot by a panicked First Officer Murdoch . 
 = = = Historical characters = = = 
 Although not — and not intended to be — an entirely historically accurate depiction of events , the film includes portrayals of several historical figures : 
 Kathy Bates as Margaret " Molly " Brown : Brown is looked down upon by other first @-@ class women , including Ruth , as " vulgar " and " new money " due to her sudden wealth . She is friendly to Jack and lends him a dinner jacket ( bought for her son ) when he is invited to dinner in the first @-@ class dining saloon . Although Brown was a real person , Cameron chose not to portray her real @-@ life actions . Molly Brown was dubbed " The <unk> Molly Brown " by historians because she , with the support of other women , commandeered Lifeboat 6 from Quartermaster Robert Hichens . Some aspects of this altercation are portrayed in Cameron 's film . 
 Victor Garber as Thomas Andrews : The ship 's builder , Andrews is portrayed as a very kind and pleasant man who is modest about his grand achievement . After the collision , he tries to convince the others , particularly Ismay , that it is a " mathematical certainty " that the ship will sink . He is depicted during the sinking of the ship as standing next to the clock in the first @-@ class smoking room , lamenting his failure to build a strong and safe ship . Although this has become one of the most famous legends of the sinking of the Titanic , this story , which was published in a 1912 book ( Thomas Andrews : <unk> ) and therefore perpetuated , came from John Stewart , a steward on the ship who in fact left the ship in boat n . 15 at approximately 1 : 40 a.m. There were testimonies of sightings of Andrews after that moment . It appears that Andrews stayed in the smoking room for some time to gather his thoughts , then he continued assisting with the evacuation . Another reported sighting was of Andrews frantically throwing deck chairs into the ocean for passengers to use as floating devices . Andrews was last seen leaving the ship at the last moment . 
 Bernard Hill as Captain Edward John Smith : Smith planned to make the Titanic his final voyage before retiring . He retreats into the wheelhouse on the bridge as the ship sinks , dying when the windows implode from the water whilst he clings to the ship 's wheel . There are conflicting accounts as to whether he died in this manner or later froze to death in the water near the capsized collapsible lifeboat " B " . 
 Jonathan Hyde as J. Bruce Ismay : Ismay is portrayed as a rich , ignorant upper @-@ class man . In the film , he uses his position as White Star Line managing director to influence Captain Smith to go faster with the prospect of an earlier arrival in New York and favorable press attention ; while this action appears in popular portrayals of the disaster , it is unsupported by evidence . After the collision , he struggles to comprehend that his " unsinkable " ship is doomed . Ismay later boards Collapsible C ( one of the last lifeboats to leave the ship ) just before it is lowered . He was branded a coward by the press and public for surviving the disaster while many women and children had drowned . 
 Eric Braeden as John Jacob Astor IV : A first @-@ class passenger whom Rose ( correctly ) calls the richest man on the ship . The film depicts Astor and his 18 @-@ year @-@ old wife Madeleine ( Charlotte <unk> ) as being introduced to Jack by Rose in the first @-@ class dining saloon . During the introduction , Astor asks if Jack is connected to the " Boston <unk> " , a question Jack neatly deflects by saying that he is instead affiliated with the Chippewa Falls <unk> . Astor is last seen as the Grand Staircase glass dome implodes and water surges in . 
 Bernard Fox as Colonel Archibald Gracie IV : The film depicts Gracie making a comment to Cal that " women and machinery don 't mix " , and congratulating Jack for saving Rose from falling off the ship , though he is unaware that it was a suicide attempt . Fox had portrayed Frederick Fleet in the 1958 film A Night to Remember . 
 Michael Ensign as Benjamin Guggenheim : A mining magnate traveling in first @-@ class . He shows off his French mistress Madame Aubert ( Fannie Brett ) to his fellow passengers while his wife and three daughters wait for him at home . When Jack joins the other first @-@ class passengers for dinner after his rescue of Rose , Guggenheim refers to him as a " bohemian " . He is seen in the flooding Grand Staircase during the sinking , saying he is prepared to go down as a gentleman . 
 Jonathan Evans @-@ Jones as Wallace Hartley : The ship 's bandmaster and violinist who plays uplifting music with his colleagues on the boat deck as the ship sinks . As the final plunge begins , he leads the band in a final performance of Nearer , My God , to Thee , to the tune of Bethany , and dies in the sinking . 
 Mark Lindsay Chapman as Chief Officer Henry Wilde : The ship 's chief officer , who lets Cal on board a lifeboat because he has a child in his arms . Before he dies , he tries to get the boats to return to the sinking site to rescue passengers by blowing his whistle . After he freezes to death , Rose uses his whistle to attract the attention of Fifth Officer Lowe , which leads to her rescue . 
 Ewan Stewart as First Officer William Murdoch : The officer who is put in charge of the bridge on the night the ship struck the iceberg . During a rush for the lifeboats , Murdoch shoots Tommy Ryan as well as another passenger in a momentary panic , then commits suicide out of guilt . When Murdoch 's nephew Scott saw the film , he objected to his uncle 's portrayal as damaging to Murdoch 's heroic reputation . A few months later , Fox vice @-@ president Scott Neeson went to <unk> , Scotland , where Murdoch lived , to deliver a personal apology , and also presented a £ 5000 donation to <unk> High School to boost the school 's William Murdoch Memorial Prize . Cameron apologized on the DVD commentary , but stated that there were officers who fired gunshots to enforce the " women and children first " policy . According to Cameron , his depiction of Murdoch is that of an " honorable man , " not of a man " gone bad " or of a " cowardly murderer . " He added , " I 'm not sure you 'd find that same sense of responsibility and total devotion to duty today . This guy had half of his lifeboats launched before his counterpart on the port side had even launched one . That says something about character and heroism . " 
 Jonathan Phillips as Second Officer Charles Lightoller . The film depicts Lightoller informing Captain Smith that it will be difficult to see icebergs without breaking water . He is seen brandishing a gun and threatening to use it to keep order . He can be seen on top of Collapsible B when the first funnel collapses . Lightoller was the most senior officer to have survived the disaster . 
 Kevin De La Noy as Third Officer Herbert Pitman : In charge of Lifeboat 5 . 
 Simon Crane as Fourth Officer Joseph Boxhall : The officer in charge of firing flares and manning Lifeboat 2 during the sinking . He is shown on the bridge wings helping the seamen firing the flares . 
 Ioan Gruffudd as Fifth Officer Harold Lowe : The ship 's only officer to lead a lifeboat to retrieve survivors of the sinking from the icy waters . The film depicts Lowe rescuing Rose . 
 Edward Fletcher as Sixth Officer James Moody : The ship 's only junior officer to have died in the sinking . The film depicts Moody admitting Jack and Fabrizio onto the ship only moments before it departs from Southampton . Moody is later shown following Mr. Murdoch 's orders to put the ship to full speed ahead , and informs First Officer Murdoch about the iceberg . He is last seen clinging to one of the davits on the starboard side after having unsuccessfully attempted to launch collapsible A. 
 James Lancaster as Father Thomas Byles : Father Byles , a Catholic priest from England , is portrayed praying and consoling passengers during the ship 's final moments . 
 Lew <unk> and Elsa Raven as Isidor Straus and Ida Straus : Isidor is a former owner of R.H. Macy and Company , a former congressman from New York , and a member of the New York and New Jersey Bridge Commission . During the sinking , his wife Ida is offered a place in a lifeboat , but refuses , saying that she will honor her wedding pledge by staying with Isidor . They are last seen lying on their bed embracing each other as water fills their stateroom . 
 Martin Jarvis as Sir Cosmo Duff @-@ Gordon : A Scottish baronet who is rescued in Lifeboat 1 . Lifeboats 1 and 2 were emergency boats with a capacity of 40 . Situated at the forward end of the boat deck , these were kept ready to launch in case of a person falling overboard . On the night of the disaster , Lifeboat 1 was the fourth to be launched , with 12 people aboard , including Duff @-@ Gordon , his wife and her secretary . The baronet was much criticized for his conduct during the incident . It was suggested that he had boarded the emergency boat in violation of the " women and children first " policy and that the boat had failed to return to rescue those struggling in the water . He offered five pounds to each of the lifeboat 's crew , which those critical of his conduct viewed as a bribe . The Duff @-@ Gordons at the time ( and his wife 's secretary in a letter written at the time and rediscovered in 2007 ) stated that there had been no women or children waiting to board in the vicinity of the launching of their boat , and there is confirmation that lifeboat 1 of the Titanic was almost empty and that First Officer William Murdoch was apparently glad to offer Duff @-@ Gordon and his wife and her secretary a place ( simply to fill it ) after they had asked if they could get on . Duff @-@ Gordon denied that his offer of money to the lifeboat crew represented a bribe . The British Board of Trade 's inquiry into the disaster accepted Duff @-@ Gordon 's denial of bribing the crew , but maintained that , if the emergency boat had rowed towards the people who were in the water , it might very well have been able to rescue some of them . 
 Rosalind Ayres as Lady Duff @-@ Gordon : A world @-@ famous fashion designer and Sir Cosmo 's wife . She is rescued in Lifeboat 1 with her husband . She and her husband never lived down rumors that they had forbidden the lifeboat 's crew to return to the wreck site in case they would be swamped . 
 Rochelle Rose as <unk> , Countess of Rothes : The Countess is shown to be friendly with Cal and the DeWitt <unk> . Despite being of a higher status in society than Sir Cosmo and Lady Duff @-@ Gordon , she is kind , and helps row the boat and even looks after the steerage passengers . 
 Scott G. Anderson as Frederick Fleet : The lookout who saw the iceberg . Fleet escapes the sinking ship aboard Lifeboat 6 . 
 Paul Brightwell as Quartermaster Robert Hichens : One of the ship 's six quartermasters and at the ship 's wheel at the time of collision . He is in charge of lifeboat 6 . He refuses to go back and pick up survivors after the sinking and eventually the boat is commandeered by Molly Brown . 
 Martin East as Reginald Lee : The other lookout in the crow 's nest . He survives the sinking . 
 Gregory Cooke as Jack Phillips : Senior wireless operator on board the Titanic whom Captain Smith ordered to send the distress signal . 
 Craig Kelly as Harold Bride : Junior wireless operator on board the Titanic . 
 Liam Tuohy as Chief Baker Charles Joughin : The baker appears in the film on top of the railing with Jack and Rose as the ship sinks , drinking brandy from a flask . According to the real Joughin 's testimony , he rode the ship down and stepped into the water without getting his hair wet . He also admitted to hardly feeling the cold , most likely thanks to alcohol . 
 Terry Forrestal as Chief Engineer Joseph G. Bell : Bell and his men worked until the last minute to keep the lights and the power on in order for distress signals to get out . Bell and all of the engineers died in the bowels of the Titanic . 
 = = = Cameos = = = 
 Several crew members of the Akademik Mstislav Keldysh appear in the film , including Anatoly <unk> , creator and pilot of the MIR self @-@ propelled Deep <unk> Vehicle . Anders Falk , who filmed a documentary about the film 's sets for the Titanic Historical Society , makes a cameo appearance in the film as a Swedish immigrant whom Jack Dawson meets when he enters his cabin ; Edward <unk> and Karen <unk> , then President and Vice President of the Society who served as film consultants , were cast as extras in the film . 
 = = Pre @-@ production = = 
 = = = Writing and inspiration = = = 
 James Cameron had a fascination with shipwrecks , and , for him , the RMS Titanic was " the Mount Everest of shipwrecks . " He was almost past the point in his life when he felt he could consider an undersea expedition , but said he still had " a mental restlessness " to live the life he had turned away from when he switched from the sciences to the arts in college . So when an IMAX film was made from footage shot of the wreck itself , he decided to seek Hollywood funding to " pay for an expedition and do the same thing . " It was " not because I particularly wanted to make the movie , " Cameron said . " I wanted to dive to the shipwreck . " 
 Cameron wrote a scriptment for a Titanic film , met with 20th Century Fox executives including Peter Chernin , and pitched it as " Romeo and Juliet on the Titanic " . Cameron stated , " They were like , ' <unk> – a three @-@ hour romantic epic ? Sure , that 's just what we want . Is there a little bit of Terminator in that ? Any Harrier jets , shoot @-@ outs , or car chases ? ' I said , ' No , no , no . It 's not like that . ' " The studio was dubious about the idea 's commercial prospects , but , hoping for a long @-@ term relationship with Cameron , they gave him a greenlight . 
 Cameron convinced Fox to promote the film based on the publicity afforded by shooting the Titanic wreck itself , and organized several dives to the site over a period of two years . " My pitch on that had to be a little more detailed , " said Cameron . " So I said , ' Look , we 've got to do this whole opening where they 're exploring the Titanic and they find the diamond , so we 're going to have all these shots of the ship . " Cameron stated , " Now , we can either do them with elaborate models and motion control shots and CG and all that , which will cost X amount of money – or we can spend X plus 30 per cent and actually go shoot it at the real wreck . " The crew shot at the real wreck in the Atlantic Ocean twelve times in 1995 and actually spent more time with the ship than its passengers . At that depth , with a water pressure of 6 @,@ 000 pounds per square inch , " one small flaw in the vessel 's superstructure would mean instant death for all on board . " Not only were the dives high @-@ risk , but adverse conditions prevented Cameron from getting the high quality footage that he wanted . During one dive , one of the submersibles collided with Titanic 's hull , damaging both sub and ship and leaving fragments of the submersible 's propeller shroud scattered around the superstructure . The external bulkhead of Captain Smith 's quarters collapsed , exposing the interior . The area around the entrance to the Grand Staircase was also damaged . 
 Descending to the actual site made both Cameron and crew want " to live up to that level of reality .... But there was another level of reaction coming away from the real wreck , which was that it wasn 't just a story , it wasn 't just a drama , " he said . " It was an event that happened to real people who really died . Working around the wreck for so much time , you get such a strong sense of the profound sadness and injustice of it , and the message of it . " Cameron stated , " You think , ' There probably aren 't going to be many filmmakers who go to Titanic . There may never be another one – maybe a documentarian . " Due to this , he felt " a great mantle of responsibility to convey the emotional message of it – to do that part of it right , too " . 
 After filming the underwater shots , Cameron began writing the screenplay . He wanted to honor the people who died during the sinking , so he spent six months researching all of the Titanic 's crew and passengers . " I read everything I could . I created an extremely detailed timeline of the ship 's few days and a very detailed timeline of the last night of its life , " he said . " And I worked within that to write the script , and I got some historical experts to analyze what I 'd written and comment on it , and I adjusted it . " He paid meticulous attention to detail , even including a scene depicting the Californian 's role in Titanic 's demise , though this was later cut ( see below ) . From the beginning of the shoot , they had " a very clear picture " of what happened on the ship that night . " I had a library that filled one whole wall of my writing office with Titanic stuff , because I wanted it to be right , especially if we were going to dive to the ship , " he said . " That set the bar higher in a way – it elevated the movie in a sense . We wanted this to be a definitive visualization of this moment in history as if you 'd gone back in a time machine and shot it . " 
 Cameron felt the Titanic sinking was " like a great novel that really happened " , but that the event had become a mere morality tale ; the film would give audiences the experience of living the history . The treasure hunter Brock Lovett represented those who never connected with the human element of the tragedy , while the blossoming romance of Jack and Rose , Cameron believed , would be the most engaging part of the story : when their love is finally destroyed , the audience would mourn the loss . He said : " All my films are love stories , but in Titanic I finally got the balance right . It 's not a disaster film . It 's a love story with a fastidious overlay of real history . " 
 Cameron framed the romance with the elderly Rose to make the intervening years palpable and poignant . While Winslet and Stuart stated their belief that , instead of being asleep in her bed , the character dies at the end of the film , Cameron stated that , although he knows what he intended with the ending , he will not reveal its intention , adding , " The answer has to be something you supply personally ; individually . " 
 = = = Scale modeling = = = 
 Harland and Wolff , the RMS Titanic 's builders , opened their private archives to the crew , sharing blueprints that were thought lost . For the ship 's interiors , production designer Peter Lamont 's team looked for artifacts from the era . The newness of the ship meant every prop had to be made from scratch . Fox acquired 40 acres of waterfront south of Playas de Rosarito in Mexico , and began building a new studio on May 31 , 1996 . A horizon tank of seventeen million gallons was built for the exterior of the reconstructed ship , providing 270 degrees of ocean view . The ship was built to full scale , but Lamont removed redundant sections on the superstructure and forward well deck for the ship to fit in the tank , with the remaining sections filled with digital models . The lifeboats and funnels were shrunk by ten percent . The boat deck and A @-@ deck were working sets , but the rest of the ship was just steel plating . Within was a fifty @-@ foot lifting platform for the ship to tilt during the sinking sequences . Towering above was a 162 @-@ foot @-@ tall ( 49 m ) tower crane on 600 feet ( 180 m ) of rail track , acting as a combined construction , lighting , and camera platform . 
 The sets representing the interior rooms of the Titanic were reproduced exactly as originally built , using photographs and plans from the Titanic 's builders . " The liner 's first @-@ class staircase , which figures prominently in the script was constructed out of real wood and actually destroyed in the filming of the sinking . " The rooms , the carpeting , design and colors , individual pieces of furniture , decorations , chairs , wall paneling , cutlery and crockery with the White Star Line crest on each piece , completed ceilings , and costumes were among the designs true to the originals . Cameron additionally hired two Titanic historians , Don Lynch and Ken Marschall , to authenticate the historical detail in the film . 
 = = Production = = 
 Principal photography of Titanic began in July 1996 at Dartmouth , Nova Scotia with the filming of the modern day expedition scenes aboard the Akademik Mstislav Keldysh . In September 1996 , the production moved to the newly built Fox Baja Studios at Rosarito , Mexico where a full scale RMS Titanic had been constructed . The poop deck was built on a hinge which could rise from zero to ninety degrees in a few seconds as the ship 's stern rose during the sinking . For the safety of the stuntmen , many props were made of foam rubber . By November 15 , the boarding scenes were being shot . Cameron chose to build his RMS Titanic on the starboard side as a study of weather data showed prevailing north @-@ to @-@ south wind which blew the funnel smoke aft . This posed a problem for shooting the ship 's departure from Southampton , as it was docked on its port side . Any writing on props and costumes had to be reversed , and if someone walked to their right in the script , they had to walk left during shooting . In post @-@ production , the film was flipped to the correct direction . 
 A full @-@ time etiquette coach was hired to instruct the cast on the manners of the upper class gentility in 1912 . Despite this , several critics picked up on anachronisms in the film , not least involving the two main stars . 
 Cameron sketched Jack 's nude portrait of Rose for a scene which he feels has the backdrop of repression . " You know what it means for her , the freedom she must be feeling . It 's kind of exhilarating for that reason , " he said . The nude scene was DiCaprio and Winslet 's first scene together . " It wasn 't by any kind of design , although I couldn 't have designed it better . There 's a nervousness and an energy and a hesitance in them , " Cameron stated . " They had rehearsed together , but they hadn 't shot anything together . If I 'd had a choice , I probably would have preferred to put it deeper into the body of the shoot . " He said he and his crew " were just trying to find things to shoot " because the big set was not yet ready . " It wasn 't ready for months , so we were scrambling around trying to fill in anything we could get to shoot . " After seeing the scene on film , Cameron felt it worked out considerably well . 
 Other times on the set were not as smooth . The shoot was an arduous experience that " cemented Cameron 's formidable reputation as ' the scariest man in Hollywood ' . He became known as an uncompromising , hard @-@ charging perfectionist " and a " 300 @-@ decibel screamer , a modern @-@ day Captain Bligh with a megaphone and walkie @-@ talkie , swooping down into people 's faces on a <unk> crane " . Winslet chipped a bone in her elbow during filming , and had been worried that she would drown in the 17m @-@ gallon water tank the ship was to be sunk in . " There were times when I was genuinely frightened of him . Jim has a temper like you wouldn 't believe , " she said . " ' God damn it ! ' he would yell at some poor crew member , ' that 's exactly what I didn 't want ! ' " Her co @-@ star , Bill Paxton , was familiar with Cameron 's work ethic from his earlier experience with him . " There were a lot of people on the set . Jim is not one of those guys who has the time to win hearts and minds , " he said . The crew felt that Cameron had an evil alter ego , and nicknamed him " <unk> " ( Jim spelt backwards ) . In response to the criticism , Cameron stated , " Film @-@ making is war . A great battle between business and aesthetics . " 
 During the Akademik Mstislav Keldysh shoot in Canada , an angry crew member put the dissociative drug PCP into the soup that Cameron and various others ate one night in Dartmouth , Nova Scotia . It sent more than 50 people to the hospital including actor Bill Paxton . " There were people just rolling around , completely out of it . Some of them said they were seeing streaks and psychedelics , " said actor Lewis Abernathy . Cameron managed to vomit before the drug took a full hold . Abernathy was shocked at the way he looked . " One eye was completely red , like the Terminator eye . A pupil , no iris , beet red . The other eye looked like he 'd been sniffing glue since he was four . " The person behind the poisoning was never caught . 
 The filming schedule was intended to last 138 days but grew to 160 . Many cast members came down with colds , flu , or kidney infections after spending hours in cold water , including Winslet . In the end , she decided she would not work with Cameron again unless she earned " a lot of money " . Several others left and three stuntmen broke their bones , but the Screen Actors Guild decided , following an investigation , that nothing was inherently unsafe about the set . Additionally , DiCaprio said there was no point when he felt he was in danger during filming . Cameron believed in a passionate work ethic and never apologized for the way he ran his sets , although he acknowledged : 
 I 'm demanding , and I 'm demanding on my crew . In terms of being kind of <unk> , I think there 's an element of that in dealing with thousands of extras and big logistics and keeping people safe . I think you have to have a fairly strict methodology in dealing with a large number of people . 
 The costs of filming Titanic eventually began to mount , and finally reached $ 200 million . Fox executives panicked , and suggested an hour of specific cuts from the three @-@ hour film . They argued the extended length would mean fewer showings , thus less money even though long epics are more likely to help directors win Oscars . Cameron refused , telling Fox , " You want to cut my movie ? You 're going to have to fire me ! You want to fire me ? You 're going to have to kill me ! " The executives did not want to start over , because it would mean the loss of their entire investment , but they also initially rejected Cameron 's offer of forfeiting his share of the profits as an empty gesture ; they felt that profits would be unlikely . Cameron explained forfeiting his share as complex . " ... the short version is that the film cost proportionally much more than T2 and True Lies . Those films went up seven or eight percent from the initial budget . Titanic also had a large budget to begin with , but it went up a lot more , " said Cameron . " As the producer and director , I take responsibility for the studio that 's writing the checks , so I made it less painful for them . I did that on two different occasions . They didn 't force me to do it ; they were glad that I did . " 
 = = Post @-@ production = = 
 = = = Effects = = = 
 Cameron wanted to push the boundary of special effects with his film , and enlisted Digital Domain to continue the developments in digital technology which the director pioneered while working on The Abyss and Terminator 2 : Judgment Day . Many previous films about the RMS Titanic shot water in slow motion , which did not look wholly convincing . He encouraged them to shoot their 45 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 14 m ) miniature of the ship as if " we 're making a commercial for the White Star Line " . Afterwards , digital water and smoke were added , as were extras captured on a motion capture stage . Visual effects supervisor Rob Legato scanned the faces of many actors , including himself and his children , for the digital extras and stuntmen . There was also a 65 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 20 m ) model of the ship 's stern that could break in two repeatedly , the only miniature to be used in water . For scenes set in the ship 's engines , footage of the SS Jeremiah O 'Brien 's engines were composited with miniature support frames and actors shot against a greenscreen . In order to save money , the first @-@ class lounge was a miniature set incorporated into a greenscreen backdrop . 
 An enclosed 5 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 @-@ US @-@ gallon ( 19 @,@ 000 @,@ 000 L ) tank was used for sinking interiors , in which the entire set could be tilted into the water . In order to sink the Grand Staircase , 90 @,@ 000 US gallons ( 340 @,@ 000 L ) of water were dumped into the set as it was lowered into the tank . Unexpectedly , the waterfall ripped the staircase from its steel @-@ reinforced foundations , although no one was hurt . The 744 @-@ foot @-@ long ( 227 m ) exterior of the RMS Titanic had its first half lowered into the tank , but being the heaviest part of the ship meant it acted as a shock absorber against the water ; to get the set into the water , Cameron had much of the set emptied and even smashed some of the promenade windows himself . After submerging the dining saloon , three days were spent shooting Lovett 's ROV traversing the wreck in the present . The post @-@ sinking scenes in the freezing Atlantic were shot in a 350 @,@ 000 @-@ US @-@ gallon ( 1 @,@ 300 @,@ 000 L ) tank , where the frozen corpses were created by applying a powder on actors that crystallized when exposed to water , and wax was coated on hair and clothes . 
 The climactic scene , which features the breakup of the ship directly before it sinks , as well as its final plunge to the bottom of the Atlantic , involved a tilting full @-@ sized set , 150 extras and 100 stunt performers . Cameron criticized previous Titanic films for depicting the final plunge of the liner as sliding gracefully underwater . He " wanted to depict it as the terrifyingly chaotic event that it really was " . When carrying out the sequence , people needed to fall off the increasingly tilting deck , plunging hundreds of feet below and bouncing off of railings and propellers on the way down . A few attempts to film this sequence with stunt people resulted in some minor injuries and Cameron halted the more dangerous stunts . The risks were eventually minimized " by using computer generated people for the dangerous falls " . 
 = = = Editing = = = 
 There was one " crucial historical fact " Cameron chose to omit from the film – the ship that was close to the Titanic , but had turned off its radio for the night and did not hear their SOS calls . " Yes , the [ SS ] Californian . That wasn 't a compromise to mainstream filmmaking . That was really more about emphasis , creating an emotional truth to the film , " stated Cameron . He said there were aspects of retelling the sinking that seemed important in pre and post @-@ production , but turned out to be less important as the film evolved . " The story of the Californian was in there ; we even shot a scene of them switching off their Marconi radio set , " said Cameron . " But I took it out . It was a clean cut , because it focuses you back onto that world . If Titanic is powerful as a metaphor , as a microcosm , for the end of the world in a sense , then that world must be self @-@ contained . " 
 During the first assembly cut , Cameron altered the planned ending , which had given resolution to Brock Lovett 's story . In the original version of the ending , Brock and Lizzy see the elderly Rose at the stern of the boat , and fear she is going to commit suicide . Rose then reveals that she had the " Heart of the Ocean " diamond all along , but never sold it , in order to live on her own without Cal 's money . She tells Brock that life is priceless and throws the diamond into the ocean , after allowing him to hold it . After accepting that treasure is worthless , Brock laughs at his stupidity . Rose then goes back to her cabin to sleep , whereupon the film ends in the same way as the final version . In the editing room , Cameron decided that by this point , the audience would no longer be interested in Brock Lovett and cut the resolution to his story , so that Rose is alone when she drops the diamond . He also did not want to disrupt the audience 's melancholy after the Titanic 's sinking . 
 The version used for the first test screening featured a fight between Jack and Lovejoy which takes place after Jack and Rose escape into the flooded dining saloon , but the test audiences disliked it . The scene was written to give the film more suspense , and featured Cal ( falsely ) offering to give Lovejoy , his valet , the " Heart of the Ocean " if he can get it from Jack and Rose . Lovejoy goes after the pair in the sinking first @-@ class dining room . Just as they are about to escape him , Lovejoy notices Rose 's hand slap the water as it slips off the table behind which she is hiding . In revenge for framing him for the " theft " of the necklace , Jack attacks him and smashes his head against a glass window , which explains the gash on Lovejoy 's head that can be seen when he dies in the completed version of the film . In their reactions to the scene , test audiences said it would be unrealistic to risk one 's life for wealth , and Cameron cut it for this reason , as well as for timing and pacing reasons . Many other scenes were cut for similar reasons . 
 = = = Music and soundtrack = = = 
 The soundtrack album for Titanic was composed by James Horner . For the vocals heard throughout the film , subsequently described by Earle <unk> of The Wall Street Journal as " evocative " , Horner chose Norwegian singer Sissel <unk> , commonly known as " Sissel " . Horner knew Sissel from her album <unk> i <unk> , and he particularly liked how she sang " Eg <unk> i <unk> ei borg " ( " I Know in Heaven There Is a Castle " ) . He had tried twenty @-@ five or thirty singers before he finally chose Sissel as the voice to create specific moods within the film . 
 Horner additionally wrote the song " My Heart Will Go On " in secret with Will Jennings because Cameron did not want any songs with singing in the film . Céline Dion agreed to record a demo with the persuasion of her husband René Angélil . Horner waited until Cameron was in an appropriate mood before presenting him with the song . After playing it several times , Cameron declared his approval , although worried that he would have been criticized for " going commercial at the end of the movie " . Cameron also wanted to appease anxious studio executives and " saw that a hit song from his movie could only be a positive factor in guaranteeing its completion " . 
 = = Release = = 
 = = = Initial screening = = = 
 20th Century Fox and Paramount Pictures co @-@ financed Titanic , with Paramount handling the North American distribution and Fox handling the international release . They expected Cameron to complete the film for a release on July 2 , 1997 . The film was to be released on this date " in order to exploit the lucrative summer season ticket sales when blockbuster films usually do better " . In April , Cameron said the film 's special effects were too complicated and that releasing the film for summer would not be possible . With production delays , Paramount pushed back the release date to December 19 , 1997 . " This fueled speculation that the film itself was a disaster . " A preview screening in Minneapolis on July 14 " generated positive reviews " and " [ c ] hatter on the internet was responsible for more favorable word of mouth about the [ film ] " . This eventually led to more positive media coverage . 
 The film premiered on November 1 , 1997 , at the Tokyo International Film Festival , where reaction was described as " tepid " by The New York Times . Positive reviews started to appear back in the United States ; the official Hollywood premiere occurred on December 14 , 1997 , where " the big movie stars who attended the opening were enthusiastically gushing about the film to the world media " . 
 = = = Box office = = = 
 Including revenue from the 2012 reissue , Titanic earned $ 658 @,@ 672 @,@ 302 in North America and $ 1 @,@ 526 @,@ 700 @,@ 000 in other countries , for a worldwide total of $ 2 @,@ 185 @,@ 372 @,@ 302 . It became the highest @-@ grossing film of all time worldwide in 1998 , and remained so for twelve years , until Avatar ( 2009 ) , also written and directed by Cameron , surpassed it in 2010 . On March 1 , 1998 , it became the first film to earn more than $ 1 billion worldwide and on the weekend April 13 – 15 , 2012 — a century after the original vessel 's foundering , Titanic became the second film to cross the $ 2 billion threshold during its 3D re @-@ release . Box Office Mojo estimates that Titanic is the fifth highest @-@ grossing film of all time in North America when adjusting for ticket price inflation . The site also estimates that the film sold over 128 million tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run . 
 = = = = Initial theatrical run = = = = 
 The film received steady attendance after opening in North America on Friday , December 19 , 1997 . By the end of that same weekend , theaters were beginning to sell out . The film earned $ 8 @,@ 658 @,@ 814 on its opening day and $ 28 @,@ 638 @,@ 131 over the opening weekend from 2 @,@ 674 theaters , averaging to about $ 10 @,@ 710 per venue , and ranking number one at the box office , ahead of the eighteenth James Bond film , Tomorrow Never Dies . By New Year 's Day , Titanic had made over $ 120 million , had increased in popularity and theaters continued to sell out . Its highest grossing single day was Saturday , February 14 , 1998 , on which it earned $ 13 @,@ 048 @,@ 711 , more than eight weeks after its North American debut . It stayed at number one for 15 consecutive weeks in North America , a record for any film . The film stayed in theaters in North America for almost 10 months before finally closing on Thursday , October 1 , 1998 with a final domestic gross of $ 600 @,@ 788 @,@ 188 . Outside North America , the film made double its North American gross , generating $ 1 @,@ 242 @,@ 413 @,@ 080 and accumulating a grand total of $ 1 @,@ 843 @,@ 201 @,@ 268 worldwide from its initial theatrical run . 
 = = = = Commercial analysis = = = = 
 Before Titanic 's release , various film critics predicted the film would be a significant disappointment at the box office , especially due to it being the most expensive film ever made at the time . When it was shown to the press in autumn of 1997 , " it was with massive forebodings " since the " people in charge of the screenings believed they were on the verge of losing their jobs – because of this great albatross of a picture on which , finally , two studios had to combine to share the great load of its making " . Cameron also thought he was " headed for disaster " at one point during filming . " We labored the last six months on Titanic in the absolute knowledge that the studio would lose $ 100 million . It was a certainty , " he stated . As the film neared release , " particular venom was spat at Cameron for what was seen as his hubris and monumental extravagance " . A film critic for the Los Angeles Times wrote that " Cameron 's overweening pride has come close to capsizing this project " and that the film was " a hackneyed , completely derivative copy of old Hollywood romances " . 
 When the film became a success , with an unprecedented box office performance , it was credited for being a love story that captured its viewers emotions . The film was playing on 3 @,@ 200 screens ten weeks after it opened , and out of its fifteen straight weeks on top of the charts , jumped 43 % in total sales in its ninth week of release . It earned over $ 20 million a week for ten weeks , and after 14 weeks was still bringing in more than $ 1 million a week . 20th Century Fox estimated that seven percent of American teenage girls had seen Titanic twice by its fifth week . Although young women who saw the film several times , and subsequently caused " Leo @-@ Mania " , were often credited with having primarily propelled the film to its all @-@ time box office record , other reports have attributed the film 's success to positive word of mouth and repeat viewership due to the love story combined with the ground @-@ breaking special effects . 
 The film 's impact on men has also been especially credited . Now considered one of the films that " make men cry " , MSNBC 's Ian Hodder stated that men admire Jack 's sense of adventure , stowing away on a steamship bound for America . " We cheer as he courts a girl who was out of his league . We admire how he suggests nude modeling as an excuse to get naked . So when [ the tragic ending happens ] , an uncontrollable flood of tears sinks our composure , " he said . Titanic 's ability to make men cry was briefly parodied in the 2009 film Zombieland , where character Tallahassee ( Woody Harrelson ) , when recalling the death of his young son , states : " I haven 't cried like that since Titanic . " 
 In 2010 , the BBC analyzed the stigma over men crying during Titanic and films in general . " Middle @-@ aged men are not ' supposed ' to cry during movies , " stated <unk> Rohrer of the website , citing the ending of Titanic as having generated such tears , adding that " men , if they have felt weepy during [ this film ] , have often tried to be surreptitious about it . " Professor Mary Beth Oliver , of Penn State University , stated , " For many men , there is a great deal of pressure to avoid expression of ' female ' emotions like sadness and fear . From a very young age , males are taught that it is inappropriate to cry , and these lessons are often accompanied by a great deal of ridicule when the lessons aren 't followed . " Rohrer said , " Indeed , some men who might sneer at the idea of crying during Titanic will readily admit to becoming choked up during Saving Private Ryan or Platoon . " For men in general , " the idea of sacrifice for a ' brother ' is a more suitable source of emotion " . 
 Scott Meslow of The Atlantic stated while Titanic initially seems to need no defense , given its success , it is considered a film " for 15 @-@ year @-@ old girls " by its main detractors . He argued that dismissing Titanic as fodder for 15 @-@ year @-@ old girls fails to consider the film 's accomplishment : " that [ this ] grandiose , 3 + hour historical romantic drama is a film for everyone — including teenage boys . " Meslow stated that the despite the film being ranked high by males under the age of 18 , matching the ratings for teenage boy @-@ targeted films like Iron Man , it is common for boys and men to deny liking Titanic . He acknowledged his own rejection of the film as a child while secretly loving it . " It 's this collection of elements — the history , the romance , the action — that made ( and continues to make ) Titanic an irresistible proposition for audiences of all ages across the globe , " he stated . " Titanic has flaws , but for all its legacy , it 's better than its middlebrow reputation would have you believe . It 's a great movie for 15 @-@ year @-@ old girls , but that doesn 't mean it 's not a great movie for everyone else too . " 
 Quotes in the film aided its popularity . Titanic 's catchphrase " I 'm the king of the world ! " became one of the film industry 's more popular quotations . According to Richard Harris , a psychology professor at Kansas State University , who studied why people like to cite films in social situations , using film quotations in everyday conversation is similar to telling a joke and a way to form solidarity with others . " People are doing it to feel good about themselves , to make others laugh , to make themselves laugh " , he said . 
 Cameron explained the film 's success as having significantly benefited from the experience of sharing . " When people have an experience that 's very powerful in the movie theatre , they want to go share it . They want to grab their friend and bring them , so that they can enjoy it , " he said . " They want to be the person to bring them the news that this is something worth having in their life . That 's how Titanic worked . " Media Awareness Network stated , " The normal repeat viewing rate for a blockbuster theatrical film is about 5 % . The repeat rate for Titanic was over 20 % . " The box office receipts " were even more impressive " when factoring in " the film 's 3 @-@ hour @-@ and @-@ 14 @-@ minute length meant that it could only be shown three times a day compared to a normal movie 's four showings " . In response to this , " [ m ] any theatres started midnight showings and were rewarded with full houses until almost 3 : 30 am " . 
 Titanic held the record for box office gross for twelve years . Cameron 's follow @-@ up film , Avatar , was considered the first film with a genuine chance at surpassing its worldwide gross , and did so in 2010 . Various explanations for why the film was able to successfully challenge Titanic were given . For one , " Two @-@ thirds of Titanic 's haul was earned overseas , and Avatar [ tracked ] similarly ... Avatar opened in 106 markets globally and was no . 1 in all of them " and the markets " such as Russia , where Titanic saw modest receipts in 1997 and 1998 , are white @-@ hot today " with " more screens and moviegoers " than ever before . Brandon Gray , president of Box Office Mojo , said that while Avatar may beat Titanic 's revenue record , the film is unlikely to surpass Titanic in attendance . " Ticket prices were about $ 3 cheaper in the late 1990s . " In December 2009 , Cameron had stated , " I don 't think it 's realistic to try to topple Titanic off its perch . Some pretty good movies have come out in the last few years . Titanic just struck some kind of chord . " In a January 2010 interview , he gave a different take on the matter once Avatar 's performance was easier to predict . " It 's gonna happen . It 's just a matter of time , " he said . 
 Author Alexandra Keller , when analyzing Titanic 's success , stated that scholars could agree that the film 's popularity " appears dependent on contemporary culture , on perceptions of history , on patterns of consumerism and globalization , as well as on those elements experienced filmgoers conventionally expect of juggernaut film events in the 1990s – awesome screen spectacle , expansive action , and , more rarely seen , engaging characters and epic drama . " 
 = = = Critical reception = = = 
 Titanic garnered mainly positive reviews from film critics , and was positively reviewed by audiences and scholars , who commented on the film 's cultural , historical and political impacts . It holds an overall 88 % approval rating on review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes , based on 178 reviews , with a rating average of 8 out of 10 . The site 's consensus reads : " A mostly unqualified triumph for Cameron , who offers a dizzying blend of spectacular visuals and old @-@ fashioned melodrama . " At Metacritic , which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 0 – 100 reviews from film critics , the film has a rating score of 74 based on 34 reviews , classified as a generally favorably reviewed film . 
 With regard to the film 's overall design , Roger Ebert stated , " It is flawlessly crafted , intelligently constructed , strongly acted , and spellbinding ... Movies like this are not merely difficult to make at all , but almost impossible to make well . " He credited the " technical difficulties " with being " so daunting that it 's a wonder when the filmmakers are also able to bring the drama and history into proportion " and " found [ himself ] convinced by both the story and the sad saga " . He named it his ninth best film of 1997 . On the television program Siskel & Ebert , the film received " two thumbs up " and was praised for its accuracy in recreating the ship 's sinking ; Ebert described the film as " a glorious Hollywood epic " and " well worth the wait , " and Gene Siskel found Leonardo DiCaprio " captivating " . James Berardinelli stated , " Meticulous in detail , yet vast in scope and intent , Titanic is the kind of epic motion picture event that has become a rarity . You don 't just watch Titanic , you experience it . " It was named his second best film of 1997 . Almar Haflidason of the BBC wrote that " the sinking of the great ship is no secret , yet for many exceeded expectations in sheer scale and tragedy " and that " when you consider that [ the film ] tops a bum @-@ numbing three @-@ hour running time , then you have a truly impressive feat of entertainment achieved by Cameron " . Joseph McBride of Boxoffice Magazine concluded , " To describe Titanic as the greatest disaster movie ever made is to sell it short . James Cameron 's recreation of the 1912 sinking of the ' unsinkable ' liner is one of the most magnificent pieces of serious popular entertainment ever to emanate from Hollywood . " 
 The romantic and emotionally charged aspects of the film were equally praised . Andrew L. Urban of Urban Cinefile said , " You will walk out of Titanic not talking about budget or running time , but of its enormous emotive power , big as the engines of the ship itself , determined as its giant propellers to gouge into your heart , and as lasting as the love story that propels it . " Owen Gleiberman of Entertainment Weekly described the film as , " A lush and terrifying spectacle of romantic doom . Writer @-@ director James Cameron has restaged the defining catastrophe of the early 20th century on a human scale of such purified yearning and dread that he touches the deepest levels of popular moviemaking . " Janet Maslin of The New York Times commented that " Cameron 's magnificent Titanic is the first spectacle in decades that honestly invites comparison to Gone With the Wind . " Richard Corliss of Time magazine , on the other hand , wrote a mostly negative review , criticizing the lack of interesting emotional elements . 
 Some reviewers felt that the story and dialogue were weak , while the visuals were spectacular . Kenneth Turan 's review in the Los Angeles Times was particularly scathing . Dismissing the emotive elements , he stated , " What really brings on the tears is Cameron 's insistence that writing this kind of movie is within his abilities . Not only is it not , it is not even close . " , and later claimed that the only reason that the film won Oscars was because of its box office total . Barbara <unk> of The San Francisco Examiner gave Titanic one star out of four , citing a friend as saying , " The number of times in this unbelievably badly written script that the two [ lead characters ] refer to each other by name was an indication of just how dramatically the script lacked anything more interesting for the actors to say . " Also , filmmaker Robert Altman called it " the most dreadful piece of work I 've ever seen in my entire life " . In his 2012 study of the lives of the passengers on the Titanic , historian Richard Davenport @-@ Hines said , " Cameron 's film <unk> rich Americans and educated English , <unk> their emotional restraint , good tailoring , punctilious manners and grammatical training , while it made romantic heroes of the poor Irish and the unlettered " . 
 Titanic suffered backlash in addition to its success . In 2003 , the film topped a poll of " Best Film Endings " , and yet it also topped a poll by Film 2003 as " the worst movie of all time " . The British film magazine Empire reduced their rating of the film from the maximum five stars and an enthusiastic review , to four stars with a less positive review in a later edition , to accommodate its readers ' tastes , who wanted to disassociate themselves from the hype surrounding the film , and the reported activities of its fans , such as those attending multiple screenings . In addition to this , positive and negative parodies and other such spoofs of the film abounded and were circulated on the internet , often inspiring passionate responses from fans of various opinions of the film . Benjamin <unk> of <unk> did not understand the backlash or the passionate hatred for the film . " What really irks me ... , " he said , " are those who make nasty stabs at those who do love it . " <unk> stated , " I obviously don 't have anything against those who dislike Titanic , but those few who make you feel small and pathetic for doing so ( and they do exist , trust me ) are way beyond my understanding and sympathy . " 
 Cameron responded to the backlash , and Kenneth Turan 's review in particular . " Titanic is not a film that is sucking people in with flashy hype and spitting them out onto the street feeling let down and ripped off , " he stated . " They are returning again and again to repeat an experience that is taking a 3 @-@ hour and 14 @-@ minute chunk out of their lives , and dragging others with them , so they can share the emotion . " Cameron emphasized people from all ages ( ranging from 8 to 80 ) and from all backgrounds were " celebrating their own essential humanity " by seeing it . He described the script as earnest and straightforward , and said it intentionally " incorporates universals of human experience and emotion that are timeless – and familiar because they reflect our basic emotional fabric " and that the film was able to succeed in this way by dealing with archetypes . He did not see it as pandering . " Turan mistakes archetype for cliche , " he said . " I don 't share his view that the best scripts are only the ones that explore the perimeter of human experience , or flashily pirouette their witty and cynical dialogue for our admiration . " 
 Empire eventually reinstated its original five star rating of the film , commenting , " It should be no surprise then that it became fashionable to bash James Cameron 's Titanic at approximately the same time it became clear that this was the planet 's favourite film . Ever . " 
 = = = Accolades = = = 
 Titanic began its awards sweep starting with the Golden Globes , winning four , namely Best Motion Picture – Drama , Best Director , Best Original Score , and Best Original Song . Kate Winslet and Gloria Stuart were also nominees . It won the ACE " Eddie " Award , ASC Award , Art Directors Guild Award , Cinema Audio Society Awards , Screen Actors Guild Award ( Best Supporting Actress for Gloria Stuart ) , The Directors Guild of America Award , and Broadcast Film Critics Association Award ( Best Director for James Cameron ) , and The Producer Guild of America Award . It was also nominated for ten BAFTA awards , including Best Film and Best Director ; it failed to win any . 
 The film garnered fourteen Academy Awards nominations , tying the record set in 1950 by Joseph L. Mankiewicz 's All About Eve and won eleven : Best Picture ( the second film about the Titanic to win that award , after 1933 's Cavalcade ) , Best Director , Best Art Direction , Best Cinematography , Best Visual Effects , Best Film Editing , Best Costume Design , Best Sound ( Gary Rydstrom , Tom Johnson , Gary Summers , Mark <unk> ) , Best Sound Effects Editing , Best Original Dramatic Score , Best Original Song . Kate Winslet , Gloria Stuart and the make @-@ up artists were the three nominees that did not win . James Cameron 's original screenplay and Leonardo DiCaprio were not nominees . It was the second film to win eleven Academy Awards , after Ben @-@ Hur . The Lord of the Rings : The Return of the King would also match this record in 2004 . 
 Titanic won the 1997 Academy Award for Best Original Song , as well as three Grammy Awards for Record of the Year , Song of the Year , and Best Song Written Specifically for a Motion Picture or Television . The film 's soundtrack became the best @-@ selling primarily orchestral soundtrack of all time , and became a worldwide success , spending sixteen weeks at number @-@ one in the United States , and was certified diamond for over eleven million copies sold in the United States alone . The soundtrack also became the best @-@ selling album of 1998 in the U.S. " My Heart Will Go On " won the Grammy Awards for Best Song Written Specifically for a Motion Picture or for Television . The film also won Best Male Performance for Leonardo DiCaprio and Best Movie at the MTV Movie Awards , Best Film at the People 's Choice Awards , and Favorite Movie at the 1998 Kids ' Choice Awards . It won various awards outside the United States , including the Awards of the Japanese Academy as the Best Foreign Film of the Year . Titanic eventually won nearly ninety awards and had an additional forty @-@ seven nominations from various award @-@ giving bodies around the world . Additionally , the book about the making of the film was at the top of The New York Times ' bestseller list for several weeks , " the first time that such a tie @-@ in book had achieved this status " . 
 Since its release , Titanic has appeared on the American Film Institute 's award @-@ winning 100 Years … series . So far , it has ranked on the following six lists : 
 = = = Home media = = = 
 Titanic was released worldwide in widescreen and pan and scan formats on VHS and laserdisc on September 1 , 1998 . The VHS was also made available in a deluxe boxed gift set with a mounted filmstrip and six lithograph prints from the movie . A DVD version was released on August 31 , 1999 in a widescreen @-@ only ( non @-@ anamorphic ) single @-@ disc edition with no special features other than a theatrical trailer . Cameron stated at the time that he intended to release a special edition with extra features later . This release became the best @-@ selling DVD of 1999 and early 2000 , becoming the first DVD ever to sell one million copies . At the time , fewer than 5 % of all U.S. homes had a DVD player . " When we released the original Titanic DVD , the industry was much smaller , and bonus features were not the standard they are now , " said Meagan Burrows , Paramount 's president of domestic home entertainment , which made the film 's DVD performance even more impressive . 
 Titanic was re @-@ released to DVD on October 25 , 2005 when a three @-@ disc Special Collector 's Edition was made available in the United States and Canada . This edition contained a newly restored transfer of the film , as well as various special features . An international two and four @-@ disc set followed on November 7 , 2005 . The two @-@ disc edition was marketed as the Special Edition , and featured the first two discs of the three @-@ disc set , only PAL @-@ enabled . A four @-@ disc edition , marketed as the Deluxe Collector 's Edition , was also released on November 7 , 2005 . 
 Also , available only in the United Kingdom , a limited 5 @-@ disc set of the film , under the title Deluxe Limited Edition , was released with only 10 @,@ 000 copies manufactured . The fifth disc contains Cameron 's documentary Ghosts of the Abyss , which was distributed by Walt Disney Pictures . Unlike the individual release of Ghosts of the Abyss , which contained two discs , only the first disc was included in the set . 
 As regards to television broadcasts , the film airs occasionally across the United States on networks such as TNT . To permit the scene where Jack draws the nude portrait of Rose to be shown on network and specialty cable channels , in addition to minor cuts , the sheer , see @-@ through robe worn by Winslet was digitally painted black . Turner Classic Movies also began to show the film , specifically during the days leading up to the 82nd Academy Awards . 
 = = = 3D conversion = = = 
 A 2012 re @-@ release , also known as Titanic in 3D , was created by re @-@ mastering the original to 4K resolution and post @-@ converting to stereoscopic 3D format . The Titanic 3D version took 60 weeks and $ 18 million to produce , including the 4K restoration . The 3D conversion was performed by Stereo D and Sony with Slam Content 's Panther Records remastering the soundtrack . Digital 2D and in 2D IMAX versions were also struck from the new 4K master created in the process . For the 3D release , Cameron opened up the Super 35 film and expanded the image of the film into a new aspect ratio , from 2 : 35 : 1 to 1 : 78 : 1 , allowing the viewer to see more image on the top and bottom of the screen . The only scene entirely redone for the re @-@ release was Rose 's view of the night sky at sea , on the morning of April 15 , 1912 . The scene was replaced with an accurate view of the night @-@ sky star pattern , including the Milky Way , adjusted for the location in the North Atlantic Ocean in April 1912 . The change was prompted by astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson , who had criticized the scene for showing an unrealistic star pattern . He agreed to send film director Cameron a corrected view of the sky , which was the basis of the new scene . 
 The 3D version of Titanic premiered at the Royal Albert Hall in London on March 27 , 2012 , with James Cameron and Kate Winslet in attendance , and entered general release on April 4 , 2012 , six days shy of the centenary of RMS Titanic embarking on her maiden voyage . 
 Rolling Stone film critic Peter Travers rated the reissue 3 @.@ 5 stars out of 4 , explaining he found it " pretty damn dazzling " . He said , " The 3D intensifies Titanic . You are there . Caught up like never before in an intimate epic that earns its place in the movie time capsule . " Writing for Entertainment Weekly , Owen Gleiberman gave the film an A grade . He wrote , " For once , the visuals in a 3 @-@ D movie don 't look darkened or distracting . They look sensationally crisp and alive . " Richard Corliss of Time who was very critical in 1997 remained in the same mood , " I had pretty much the same reaction : fitfully awed , mostly water @-@ logged . " In regards to the 3D effects , he noted the " careful conversion to 3D lends volume and impact to certain moments ... [ but ] in separating the foreground and background of each scene , the converters have carved the visual field into discrete , not organic , levels . " Ann Hornaday for The Washington Post found herself asking " whether the film 's twin values of humanism and spectacle are enhanced by Cameron 's 3 @-@ D conversion , and the answer to that is : They aren 't . " She further added that the " 3 @-@ D conversion creates distance where there should be intimacy , not to mention odd moments in framing and composition . " 
 The film grossed an estimated $ 4 @.@ 7 million on the first day of its re @-@ release in North America ( including midnight preview showings ) and went on to make $ 17 @.@ 3 million over the weekend , finishing in third place . Outside North America it earned $ 35 @.@ 2 million finishing second , and improved on its performance the following weekend by topping the box office with $ 98 @.@ 9 million . China has proven to be its most successful territory where it earned $ 11 @.@ 6 million on its opening day , going on to earn a record @-@ breaking $ 67 million in its opening week and taking more money in the process than it did in the entirety of its original theatrical run . The reissue ultimately earned $ 343 @.@ 4 million worldwide , with $ 145 million coming from China and $ 57 @.@ 8 million from Canada and United States . 
 The 3D conversion of the film was also released in the 4DX format in selected international territories , which allows the audience to experience the film 's environment using motion , wind , fog , lighting and scent @-@ based special effects . 
 = Interstate 296 = 
 Interstate 296 ( I @-@ 296 ) is a part of the Interstate Highway System in the US state of Michigan . It is a state trunkline highway that runs for 3 @.@ 43 miles ( 5 @.@ 52 km ) entirely within the Grand Rapids area . Its termini are I @-@ 96 on the north side of Grand Rapids in Walker and I @-@ 196 near downtown Grand Rapids . For most of its length , the Interstate is concurrent with U.S. Highway 131 ( US 131 ) , which continues as a freeway built to Interstate Highway standards north and south of the shorter I @-@ 296 . The highway was first proposed in the late 1950s and opened in December 1962 , but the Michigan Department of Transportation ( MDOT ) has since eliminated all signage for I @-@ 296 and removed the designation from their official state map . The designation is therefore unsigned , but still listed on the Interstate Highway System route log maintained by the Federal Highway Administration ( FHWA ) . 
 = = Route description = = 
 I @-@ 296 begins at the I @-@ 196 interchange west of the Grand River and downtown Grand Rapids . For a short distance , the three northbound lanes are on the left and the three southbound lanes are on the right , contrary to the normal traffic arrangement in the US . This anomaly is reversed north of the ramps for I @-@ 196 as the southbound lanes go over the northbound lanes . Running parallel to the Grand River on the west bank , the freeway designation begins across the river from the 6th Street Bridge Park and Belknap Hill north of the Gerald R. Ford Presidential Museum and the DeVos Place Convention Center . The west side of the freeway faces residential neighborhoods and the east side borders commercial businesses and the river . South of the Ann Street interchange , the highway crosses a line of the Grand Rapids Eastern Railroad . After crossing both the railroad and Ann Street , the highway widens to allow for a grassy median . The freeway leaves Grand Rapids and enters Walker north of Ann Street . 
 Approaching I @-@ 96 from the south , the freeway passes east of the <unk> Arena , and it median widens further across the river from Comstock Riverside Park in Walker . An extra lane is added on the left , widening the freeway to four lanes . Unsigned I @-@ 296 occupies the left two lanes that form the left exit for I @-@ 96 from US 131 . At the split between I @-@ 296 and US 131 , I @-@ 296 curves northwest , and US 131 curves northeast to follow a bend in the Grand River . Once I @-@ 296 diverges from US 131 , the highway crosses a rail line owned by CSX Transportation and passes over West River Drive . To the northwest of these crossings , exits emerge on the right for eastbound I @-@ 96 and the left for northbound M @-@ 37 ( Alpine Avenue ) . Past these exits , I @-@ 296 merges into westbound I @-@ 96 and terminates . Southbound unsigned I @-@ 296 begins where the ramps to US 131 southbound split from eastbound I @-@ 96 at the Alpine Avenue overpass , merging with southbound US 131 north of Ann Street . 
 = = History = = 
 The development of a freeway along the modern @-@ day I @-@ 296 / US 131 corridor was proposed in the 1950s . The 1955 General Location of National System of Interstate Highways , an early platform for what would become the Interstate Highway System , contained an inset of the proposed freeways in and around the Grand Rapids area including a north – south freeway near the downtown area . Designated as part of the Interstate Highway System in 1957 , I @-@ 296 's construction was funded by the federal government . 
 The US 131 freeway was officially opened at 10 a.m. on December 17 , 1962 , between Pearl Street and ( at the time ) the I @-@ 196 / US 16 freeway north of downtown . This freeway section encompassed all of I @-@ 296 , which would connect I @-@ 196 north of town with I @-@ 96 downtown . ( The I @-@ 96 and I @-@ 196 designations were later flipped west of Grand Rapids . ) M @-@ 37 was relocated in Grand Rapids to utilize I @-@ 96 around the northeast side of town instead of I @-@ 296 / US 131 in 1969 . 
 At the end of the 1970s , MDOT took part in a FHWA @-@ backed initiative called the Positive Guidance Demonstration Project , and the two agencies audited signage practices in the vicinity of the I @-@ 96 / M @-@ 37 and I @-@ 296 / US 131 interchange in Walker . MDOT determined that usage of the I @-@ 296 designation was " a potential source of confusion for motorists . " FHWA agreed with the department 's proposal to eliminate all signage and public map references to the designation in April 1979 . MDOT then petitioned the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials ( AASHTO ) on June 22 , 1979 , for their permission to make the change , saying " it is felt that the I @-@ 296 designation serves no useful purpose other than to designate an Interstate routing . " AASHTO approved the request on October 13 . On October 24 that year , MDOT also requested formal permission from the FHWA to remove all signage and map references to I @-@ 296 . The FHWA granted permission on December 3 , 1979 , on the condition that MDOT would continue to use the designation on official documents . The approval explicitly retained the highway in the Interstate system for funding and other purposes . The last state map to show the I @-@ 296 designation was published in 1979 , as the 1980 map lacks any reference to the designation . Other maps , like the one published by the Kent County Road Commission , occasionally show I @-@ 296 , and FHWA includes the designation in their Route Log and Finder List for the Interstate Highway System . 
 = = Exit list = = 
 The entire highway is in Kent County . 
 = Stewie Kills Lois and Lois Kills Stewie = 
 " Stewie Kills Lois " and " Lois Kills Stewie " is a two @-@ part episode of the sixth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy , which was originally produced for the end of Season 5 . Respectively , both are the fourth and fifth episode of their season , and they premiered in the United States on Fox on November 4 and 11 , 2007 . In the former , housewife Lois receives cruise tickets from anthropomorphic dog Brian , and invites Peter on the cruise with her . This upsets Stewie , and he ultimately appears to murder Lois while she is on the cruise , only to find out that she had survived the attack as the year passes . In the latter , Lois is able to expose Stewie as the villain that he is , but he soon accomplishes his dream of world domination . 
 " Stewie Kills Lois " was written by David A. Goodman and directed by John Holmquist , while " Lois Kills Stewie " was written by Steve Callaghan and directed by Greg Colton . Both episodes received relatively positive reviews for their combined story arc and cultural references . " Lois Kills Stewie " featured appearances by Patrick Stewart , Paula Abdul , Randy Jackson , Simon Cowell , and Willem Dafoe ( although Dafoe did not provide his voice ) and both episodes featured cameos by various recurring voice actors for the series . 
 = = Plot = = 
 = = = " Stewie Kills Lois " = = = 
 It is Lois ' birthday , and Brian gives her a pair of cruise tickets with the intention of traveling with her , but she invites Peter instead . Stewie is upset at not being invited on the cruise , and concocts a plan to embarrass Lois . Brian makes Stewie realize that he has never followed through with any of his plans , and he resolves to change this . Meanwhile , Peter proves to be a frequent embarrassment to Lois . A mortified Lois walks onto the promenade to be away from Peter , but is confronted by Stewie , who has traveled to the ship by speedboat , and shoots at her , sending her overboard . 
 Six days pass since Stewie has killed Lois and Joe informs Peter that he has called off the search for Lois since he and his police squad cannot find her . A year passes since then , with Peter not only trying to find someone new , but also talking Joe into posing as Lois so that her death doesn 't leave Chris emotionally scarred and Meg gaining more self @-@ esteem , while Stewie indirectly reveals to Brian what he had done . Disturbed by the revelation , Brian vows to bring him to justice . Stewie realizes that keeping the evidence of his crime as souvenirs is too risky , and disposes of his gun and his drawings depicting Lois being killed . After Peter reveals that Lois ' life insurance policy has recently been cashed , Joe , Quagmire , and Cleveland search the Griffins ' garbage and find Stewie 's souvenirs . Joe is convinced that Peter is the one who killed Lois , given that Stewie inherited Peter 's handwriting . At his trial in the murder , Peter is close to receiving life in prison , but Lois suddenly appears in the courtroom , and reveals that Stewie tried to kill her . 
 = = = " Lois Kills Stewie " = = = 
 Everyone is shocked that Stewie would try to murder Lois , but she insists that he is evil , and explains what happened ; after being shot at and falling overboard , she was rescued by a reverse merman , and became employed at a fat camp and later a diner , where she found a new boyfriend in a white supremacist also visiting the diner , as she had developed amnesia . She eventually regains her memory after a blow to the head at a supremacist rally , and returns to Quahog . While Lois explains her situation , Stewie escapes , captures and restrains his family when they return home , and shoots Cleveland dead when he visits . Stewie kidnaps Brian and forces him into driving him to the CIA , where he gains access to a supercomputer and takes control of the planet 's power grid , thus dominating the world . 
 After Stewie implements numerous draconian laws , Lois becomes angered and prepares to assassinate him in order to save the world . After taking several weapons from Stewie 's secret weapons vault , she engages Stewie in a destructive battle in the Oval Office . Lois eventually gains the upper hand and prepares to shoot Stewie , but she cannot bring herself to do so , since he is her own child . Stewie takes the opportunity to disarm her and prepare to kill , but is shot dead by Peter before he can do so . They start to mourn over Stewie 's dead body , but it is then revealed that much of what has happened was actually a computer simulation . Brian wonders if a hypothetical external viewer of the simulation would feel cheated by what was ultimately a " dream sequence , " but Stewie argues that a computer simulation is totally different . Stewie then claims that he is not ready to kill Lois or take over the world , until the right time . As Brian and Stewie argue over the differences between " dream sequence " and " computer simulation , " Brian says Stewie ticks a lot of people off . Stewie claims that the computer simulation didn 't end like the final episode of The Sopranos where it just cut to black in mid @-@ sentence , but , just like in Made in America , the final episode of The Sopranos , the final scene cuts to black in mid @-@ sentence , followed by the end credits . 
 = = Production = = 
 " Stewie Kills Lois " and " Lois Kills Stewie " are the 102nd and 103rd episodes of Family Guy respectively . They are the fourth and fifth episodes of the sixth season of the show . " Stewie Kills Lois " was written by executive producer and former Futurama and South Park writer David A. Goodman . The episode was directed by John Holmquist . " Lois Kills Stewie " was written by recurring voice actor and future showrunner Steve Callaghan , and directed by Greg Colton . Colton and Callaghan previously worked on the season 5 episode " Whistle While Your Wife Works " . 
 Before the airing of the episode , a 100th episode tribute special , hosted by MacFarlane , aired on Fox . The special showcases various clips of MacFarlane 's favorite moments from the last 99 episodes of the show . It also included MacFarlane asking people questions related to Family Guy . 
 " Stewie Kills Lois " and " Lois Kills Stewie " , along with the final five episodes of the fifth season and the first seven episodes of the sixth season , were also released on DVD under the title " Volume 6 " by 20th Century Fox in the United States and Canada on October 21 , 2008 , five months after they had completed broadcast on television . The DVD release also features bonus material including deleted scenes , commentaries , and a ' making of ' feature . 
 Both episodes aired before the 2007 – 2008 Writers Guild of America strike , and were the last episodes to air before it . In November 2007 , Variety reported that MacFarlane had joined the strike and refused to complete more Family Guy episodes . A spokesperson for Fox said : " Our hope is that he returns to work and completes his non @-@ writing obligations on those episodes " . Fox aired two new episodes during November 2007 . The following episode , " Padre de Familia " , was the first of these two episodes to air . The strike ended on February 12 , 2008 and the series resumed airing regularly . 
 In addition to the main cast , actors Patrick Stewart and Phil LaMarr , and American Idol judges Simon Cowell , Randy Jackson and Paula Abdul guest starred in the episode . The episode also featured the recurring voices of actress Jennifer Tilly and Patrick Warburton , and writers Danny Smith and John Viener in minor appearances . Future showrunner Mark Hentemann also made some appearances . 
 = = Cultural references = = 
 When Stewie becomes disappointed that Lois did not take him on the cruise , he relates that he has not expressed it much since he saw The Lake House . Peter and Lois watch the sunset ; Lois noting that she feels like Kate Winslet 's character in Titanic , but Peter believes that she was portrayed by Philip Seymour Hoffman . Leonardo DiCaprio is also referenced in the scene . 
 The cliffhanger ending where Lois returns to reveal Stewie as her attempted killer is a tribute to part one of the Star Trek : The Next Generation two @-@ parter " The Best of Both Worlds " with similar cliffhanger music and " To Be Continued ... " title cards . Since they 're both Trekkies , Seth MacFarlane and David A. Goodman had wanted to use the cliffhanger music from " The Best of Both Worlds " if they ever got up to 100 episodes of Family Guy . Paramount wouldn 't give them the rights , however , so composer Ron Jones , who wrote the music for " The Best of Both Worlds " and several other episodes of Star Trek : The Next Generation , wrote and recorded the music heard in the episode . 
 While looking for Stewie , Joe and other police officers travel to the Fortress of Solitude , where the maid Consuela works for Superman . Stewie is seen participating on American Idol in a cutaway , singing " Lost in Your Eyes " before judges Simon Cowell , Randy Jackson and Paula Abdul . 
 American Dad ! characters Stan Smith and Avery Bullock make a crossover appearance in " Lois Kills Stewie " when Stewie hacks into the supercomputer . This crossover is extended on the Volume 6 DVD when , before the confrontation , Brian and Stewie first bump into Stan and Bullock in the restroom . The episode concludes with a reference to The Sopranos as the screen blacks out on Stewie criticizing the series ' finale . 
 The news anchor , Tom Tucker , copies Dennis Miller 's signature phrase from Weekend Update on Saturday Night Live , saying , " Well , folks , that 's the news , and I am outta here ! " while drawing a circle on a paper . 
 " Stewie Kills Lois " features the recurring gag of the Kool @-@ Aid Man bursting through the courtroom wall at an inopportune time , exclaiming " OH <unk> ! ! " after a series of people in the courtroom say " Oh no ! ! " in turn . The Kool @-@ Aid Man then slowly backs out of the hole in the wall in embarrassment . This time , the judge implores the people of the court to please stop saying " Oh no ! , " because , as he puts it , " The f * * kin ' Kool @-@ Aid guy 's gonna keep showing up ! ! " 
 " Lois Kills Stewie " also mocks the varying quality of direct @-@ to @-@ video Disney films in general , in which a cutaway shows Jafar , the main antagonist in Aladdin , undergoing an eye exam . In addition , Lois is seen wearing John Rambo 's combat outfit from Rambo III in her final battle against Stewie . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Ahsan Haque of IGN rated " Stewie Kills Lois " a 9 / 10 , while rating " Lois Kills Stewie " a 9 @.@ 4 / 10 , saying " For the hundredth episode of Family Guy , Seth McFarlane and friends tackle the subject of one of Stewie Griffin 's greatest ambitions — his not @-@ so @-@ secret desire to kill his mother . For the disturbed fans waiting for some form of a <unk> manifestation , you can feel comfort knowing , without spoiling too much , that the youngest Griffin absolutely means business and ensures that he doesn 't fail this time around . [ ... ] There are some tense courtroom moments , a birthday celebration with the gift of Lionel Richie , a cruise ship , machine guns , and the reappearance of the Kool Aid Man that help round out this carefully crafted and well @-@ told cohesive storyline . With the amount of cheap manatee jokes kept to a reasonable level , this episode also manages to find an excellent balance between comedy and storytelling . It 's a fantastic way to celebrate the Family Guy one @-@ hundredth episode milestone . [ ... ] With the writers ' strike in full effect , it seems that this might be the last new episode of Family Guy we 'll be seeing for a while . It 's a bittersweet way to end the abruptly short season as the quality is reminiscent of the series ' brilliance from the early years and it seems like the show was really starting to hit its stride for the season . Hopefully the series will be able to live up to the high bar set by this two @-@ part classic upon its eventual return . " 
 Richard Keller of TV Squad gave " Stewie Kills Lois " a much more negative review . He pointed out that the episode was hyped because before the episode aired a retrospective premiered featuring clips from the last 99 episodes , he stated that the episode was a huge disappointment . He stated that he did not find the episode funny , but rather disjointed , with little story and too many cutaway gags and flashbacks . In his review of " Lois Kills Stewie " , Keller gave a much more positive review . He did mention that the end of the episode was somewhat predictable , as they had killed Cleveland and Stewie . He commented positively to some of the jokes of the episode , and in the overall he mentioned he liked the two episodes , but he was not so keen of the ending of the episode . 
 On her review of " Stewie Kills Lois " , Genevieve Koski of the The A.V. Club rated the episode a B + . She commented that it was " a bit weird " that the show was focusing on Stewie 's desire to kill Lois , since in the last couple of seasons the Stewie and Brian dynamic had taken precedence , while Lois was being more foil to Peter than Stewie . She felt that most of the cutaway humor felt familiar and that there was no real moment that would deserve any callback status in future episodes . She did praise the cliffhanger , stating that she was intrigued about how the storyline would turn out . She also praised the storyline and liked how it was able to create drama . In her review of " Lois Kills Stewie " , Koski rated the episode a B , calling the end of the story a bit predictable as she thought that the deaths of Lois , Cleveland and Stewie were a one time joke . She praised and disliked some jokes and gags in the episode , including Stewie demanding praise for his macaroni picture of an owl and Lois ' salvation via merman , respectively . She commented that the fight sequence was extended and highly choreographed . 
 " Lois Kills Stewie " was voted # 9 , and " Stewie Kills Lois " was voted # 8 on BBC Three 's list of Top Ten Family Guy Episodes . 
 = Mary : A Fiction = 
 Mary : A Fiction is the only complete novel by the 18th @-@ century British feminist Mary Wollstonecraft . It tells the tragic story of a heroine 's successive " romantic friendships " with a woman and a man . Composed while Wollstonecraft was a governess in Ireland , the novel was published in 1788 shortly after her summary dismissal and her momentous decision to embark on a writing career , a precarious and disreputable profession for women in 18th @-@ century Britain . 
 Inspired by Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau 's idea that geniuses are self @-@ taught , Wollstonecraft chose a rational , self @-@ taught heroine , Mary , as the central character of her novel . Helping to redefine genius ( a word which at the end of the 18th century was only beginning to take on its modern meaning of exceptional or brilliant ) , Wollstonecraft describes Mary as independent and capable of defining femininity and marriage for herself . It is Mary 's " strong , original opinions " and her resistance to " conventional wisdom " that mark her as a genius . Making her heroine a genius allowed Wollstonecraft to criticize marriage as well : geniuses were " enchained " rather than enriched by marriage . 
 Through this heroine Wollstonecraft also critiques 18th @-@ century sensibility and its damaging effects on women . Mary rewrites the traditional romance plot through its <unk> of gender relations and female sexuality . Yet , because Wollstonecraft employs the genre of sentimentalism to critique sentimentalism itself , her " fiction " , as she labels it , sometimes reflects the same flaws of sentimentalism that she is attempting to expose . 
 Wollstonecraft later repudiated Mary , writing that it was laughable . However , scholars have argued that , despite its faults , the novel 's representation of an energetic , unconventional , opinionated , rational , female genius ( the first of its kind in English literature ) within a new kind of romance is an important development in the history of the novel because it helped shape an emerging feminist discourse . 
 = = Plot summary = = 
 Mary begins with a description of the conventional and loveless marriage between the heroine 's mother and father . Eliza , Mary 's mother , is obsessed with novels , rarely considers anyone but herself , and favours Mary 's brother . She neglects her daughter , who educates herself using only books and the natural world . Ignored by her family , Mary devotes much of her time to charity . When her brother suddenly dies , leaving Mary heir to the family 's fortune , her mother finally takes an interest in her ; she is taught " accomplishments " , such as dancing , that will attract suitors . However , Mary 's mother soon sickens and requests on her deathbed that Mary wed Charles , a wealthy man she has never met . Stunned and unable to refuse , Mary agrees . Immediately after the ceremony , Charles departs for the Continent . 
 To escape a family who does not share her values , Mary befriends Ann , a local girl who educates her still further . Mary becomes quite attached to Ann who is in the grip of an unrequited love and does not reciprocate Mary 's feelings . Ann 's family falls into poverty and is on the brink of losing their home , but Mary is able to pay off their debts after her marriage to Charles gives her limited control over her money . 
 Ann becomes consumptive and Mary travels with her to Lisbon in hopes of nursing her back to health . There they are introduced to Henry , who is also trying to regain his health . Ann dies and Mary is grief @-@ stricken . Henry and Mary subsequently fall in love but are forced to return to England separately . Mary , depressed by her marriage to Charles and bereft of both Ann and Henry , remains unsettled , until she hears that Henry 's consumption has worsened . She rushes to his side and cares for him until he dies . 
 At the end of the novel , Charles returns from Europe ; he and Mary establish something of a life together , but Mary is unhealthy and can barely stand to be in the same room with her husband ; the last few lines of the novel imply that she will die young . 
 = = Biographical and literary influences = = 
 Wollstonecraft wrote Mary at the town of Hotwells in Bristol while a governess for the Anglo @-@ Irish Kingsborough family . Her relationships with the family provided fodder for the novel , a work that Wollstonecraft herself admitted was " drawn from Nature " . Eliza , for example , is partially based on Lady Kingsborough , who Wollstonecraft believed cared more for her dogs than for her children . More importantly , the friendship between Mary and Ann closely resembles the relationship between Wollstonecraft and her intimate companion Fanny Blood , who meant " all the world " to her and , as Wollstonecraft 's husband William Godwin later put it , " for whom she contracted a friendship so fervent , as for years to have constituted the ruling passion of her mind " . Wollstonecraft 's representation of Fanny as Ann has been called " condescending " ; critics have speculated that because Wollstonecraft felt betrayed by Fanny 's decision to marry , she depicted Ann as a friend who could never satisfy the heroine . 
 Jean @-@ Jacques Rousseau 's philosophical treatise on education , Emile ( 1762 ) , is one of the major literary influences on Mary . A few months before starting the work , Wollstonecraft wrote to her sister Everina : " I am now reading Rousseau 's Emile , and love his paradoxes ... however he rambles into that chimerical world in which I have too often wandered ... He was a strange inconsistent unhappy clever creature — yet he possessed an uncommon portion of sensibility and penetration " ( emphasis Wollstonecraft 's ) . Rousseau , she notes , " <unk> [ sic ] a common capacity to educate — and gives as a reason , that a genius will educate itself " ( emphasis Wollstonecraft 's ) . When Mary was published , the title page included a quotation from Rousseau : " L <unk> des plus sublimes <unk> <unk> et <unk> le <unk> " ( " the exercise of the most sublime virtues raises and nourishes genius " ) . The novel is therefore , in many ways , an early bildungsroman , or novel of education . 
 Wollstonecraft 's epigrammatic allusion to Rousseau 's Julie ( 1761 ) signifies her debt to the novel of sensibility , one of the most popular genres during the last half of the 18th century . Along with other female writers , such as Mary Hays , Helen Maria Williams , Charlotte Turner Smith , Mary Robinson , Maria Edgeworth , and Hannah More , Wollstonecraft felt compelled to respond to the <unk> ideological aesthetic that had come to dominate British fiction . Romantic heroines , Wollstonecraft scholar Gary Kelly writes , " represent woman constructed for man : the heroic feminine victim of the courtly rake and gallant , the virtuous feminine companion of the ideal professionalized gentleman , and the intellectually and erotically subservient companion of the ideal bourgeois man " . Wollstonecraft would also attack Rousseau in her best @-@ known work , A Vindication of the Rights of Woman , because of his sexism in the second part of Emile . She announces in the " Advertisement " ( a section similar to a preface ) of Mary that she is offering her heroine , who is a " genius " , as a contrast to characters such as Samuel Richardson 's Clarissa and Rousseau 's Sophie . In addition the text is peppered with allusions to popular sentimental novels such as The History of Eliza Warwick ( 1778 ) and The Platonic Marriage ( 1787 ) , which critique their presentation of the heroine of feminine sensibility . Mary is more akin to the charitable and industrious heroines of Bluestocking Sarah Scott 's Millenium Hall ( 1762 ) than to the passive , weepy heroines found in most sentimental novels . Debate concerning the relationship between gender and sensibility continued into the early 19th century ; Jane Austen , for example , made it the explicit focus of her novel Sense and Sensibility ( 1811 ) . 
 = = Themes = = 
 As Wollstonecraft scholar Virginia Sapiro points out in her description of Mary , the novel anticipates many of the themes that would come to dominate Wollstonecraft 's later writings , such as her concern with the " slavery of marriage " and the absence of any respectable occupations for women . From the beginning of her career , Wollstonecraft was concerned with how sensibility affected women as well as the perception of women in society . All of her works address these topics from one vantage point or another . Connected to this is her analysis of the legitimate and illegitimate foundations for relationships between men and women . Wollstonecraft 's oeuvre is filled with continual reassessments of the definition of femininity and masculinity and the role that sensibility should fill in those definitions . In order to explore these ideas , Wollstonecraft continually turns to herself as an example ( all of her works are highly autobiographical , particularly her two novels and the Letters Written in Sweden , Norway , and Denmark ( 1796 ) ) . As one of Wollstonecraft 's first attempts to explore these questions , Mary is at times awkward and it occasionally falls short of what Gary Kelly calls the " Revolutionary feminism " of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman ( 1792 ) and Maria : or , The Wrongs of Woman ( 1798 ) . 
 = = = Sensibility and the sentimental heroine = = = 
 Claudia Johnson argues that Mary is " a bold and dangerous novel " , because it presents a new kind of heroine , a " woman who has thinking powers " ( in Wollstonecraft 's words ) who is also capable of having intimate relationships with both men and women . Wollstonecraft attempts to show how a gifted woman can learn to think for herself : through solitary nature walks ; by reading philosophical and medical texts ; by travelling ; and through close friendships . <unk> her new heroine with the traditional sentimental heroine , Wollstonecraft criticizes the " fatuous " and " insipid " romantic heroine . Eliza , Mary 's mother , with her fondness for vacuous novels and lapdogs , embodies this type . Wollstonecraft even pokes fun at readers who expect the book to conform to their romantic expectations and desires : 
 If my readers would excuse the <unk> of fancy , and give me credit for genius , I would go on and tell them such tales as would force sweet tears of sensibility to flow in copious showers down beautiful cheeks , to the <unk> of rouge , & c . & c . Nay , I would make it so interesting , that the fair <unk> should beg the hair @-@ dresser to settle the curls himself , and not interrupt her . 
 Mary , however , is depicted as authentic rather than artificial , <unk> fashionable life rather than yearning after it . Mary 's charitable works , for example , are not a passing fad : they are a heartfelt reaction to social injustice . Even though she is older and intellectual instead of young and pretty , Mary asserts her right to sexual desire rather than sublimating it . 
 Mary 's erotic relationships with both Ann and Henry challenge traditional conceptions of the marriage plot . Most of Mary 's positive attributes , such as her rationality , her ability to reject convention , and her sexuality would have been read in the 18th century as masculine traits . Eliza , Ann , and Henry embody the feminine weakness and passivity , often associated with sentimentality , that Wollstonecraft was criticizing . Although the novel critiques sentimentality , the text appears , in the end , to be unable to resist those very conventions as Mary begins to pine for Henry . Furthermore , the book does not present an alternative way of life for women — it offers only death . Yet , at the same time , the last few lines of the novel hold out the promise of a better world " where there is neither marrying , nor giving in marriage " ( emphasis Wollstonecraft 's ) . 
 As literary scholar Diane Long Hoeveler has demonstrated , Mary is not only a sentimental novel , but , with its emphasis on death , hyperbolic emotion , and persecution , also a gothic novel . Hoeveler identifies in the text what she calls " Gothic feminism " , an ideology that values the persecuted heroine above all : it " is not about being equal to men " but rather " about being morally superior to men . It is about being a victim " . In other words , Hoeveler argues that the position of victim grants women moral authority . In a Freudian reading , she focuses on how Mary " displaces and projects her own anger and disappointment " onto other characters , such as Ann and Henry . In this interpretation , Ann and Henry become surrogate parents to Mary ; she is " unable to move out of her childish identifications with parental figures , and so she just keeps constructing one parent @-@ substitute after another , never being able to accept the demands and realities required for marriage " . 
 = = = = Genre : " A Fiction " = = = = 
 Wollstonecraft 's subtitle — A Fiction — explicitly rejects a number of popular 18th @-@ century genres , such as the longer " history " or novel ( Mary is substantially shorter than Richardson 's Clarissa , for example ) . In the advertisement , she defends writing a reality @-@ based " fiction " about a female genius : 
 Without arguing physically about possibilities — in a fiction , such a being may be allowed to exist ; whose grandeur is drawn from the operations of its own faculties , not subjugated to opinion ; but drawn by the individual from the original source . ( emphasis Wollstonecraft 's ) 
 Through her choice of the subtitle " fiction " , Wollstonecraft implies that other genres , such as the novel , restrict the plots available for women ; she therefore attempts to invent a new genre , one that offers choice and self @-@ confidence to female characters . 
 = = = Love and friendship = = = 
 One of the key differences between Wollstonecraft 's novels and her philosophical treatises , as feminist critic Cora Kaplan has argued , is that her fiction celebrates female emotion and argues for its value while her treatises present emotion as " reactionary and regressive , almost counter @-@ revolutionary " . Johnson has extended this argument and contends that Wollstonecraft is interested in presenting the benefits of romantic friendship over marriage : " whereas Wollstonecraft shrinks from homosocial ' familiarity ' and advocates the ennobling properties of domestic heterosexuality in Rights of Woman , her novels not only resist the heterosexual plot , but displace it with <unk> narratives wrested from sentimentality itself . " While many critics have argued that Mary " <unk> to " or " matures into " both sentimentality and heterosexuality , Johnson 's interpretation has become the standard . 
 Mary 's relationship with Ann challenges the definition of friendship ; as Johnson explains , it " is no ordinary friendship " . Mary looks to Ann , in Wollstonecraft 's words , " to experience the pleasure of being beloved " . Mary is " coded as masculine ( <unk> , sublime ) while Ann is stereotypically feminine in [ her ] ' die @-@ away ' delicacy " . This gendered divide is even reflected in Mary 's choice of reading material ; she reads books associated with the masculine sublime such as Edward Young 's Night Thoughts ( 1742 – 45 ) and John Milton 's Paradise Lost ( 1667 ) . Although Ann does not feel the love for Mary that Mary does for her , Mary devotedly nurses Ann and is distraught by her death . The unusual intensity of this relationship is revealed in Wollstonecraft 's description of Mary 's sorrow : 
 The ladies . . . began to administer some common – place comfort , as , that it was our duty to submit to the will of Heaven , and the like trite consolations , which Mary did not answer ; but waving her hand , with an air of impatience , she exclaimed , " I cannot live without her ! — I have no other friend ; if I lose her , what a <unk> [ sic ] will the world be to me . " " No other friend , " re – echoed they , " have you not a husband ? " 
 Mary shrunk back , and was alternately pale and red . A delicate sense of propriety prevented her from replying ; and recalled her bewildered reason . 
 Johnson cautions against labelling Mary and Ann 's relationship lesbian , since the identity @-@ defining concepts of heterosexuality and homosexuality did not exist during the 18th century ; she maintains , rather , that their relationship is a bond which cannot be articulated through language . This bond is perhaps best described as erotic rather than overtly sexual . Further evidence to support such an interpretation comes from Wollstonecraft 's life . Wollstonecraft based her portrait of Ann on her close friend , Fanny Blood , and when her husband , William Godwin , came to write his Memoirs of the Author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman ( 1798 ) , he described Fanny and Wollstonecraft 's first meeting as similar to the one between the tortured lovers Charlotte and Werther in Goethe 's sentimental novel The Sorrows of Young Werther ( 1774 ) . One biographer of Wollstonecraft notes that Hester Chapone 's Letters on the Improvement of the Mind , which influenced Wollstonecraft 's earlier Thoughts on the Education of Daughters ( 1787 ) , dedicates several chapters to these " friends of the heart " ; such friendships would not have seemed unusual to 18th @-@ century readers . 
 After Ann 's death , Mary replaces her with Henry ; as Johnson writes , " this tale of forbidden and <unk> passionate friendship becomes a tale of forbidden but <unk> adulterous love " . Like Ann , Henry is a feminine counterpart to Mary 's masculine persona . Mary 's relationship with Henry is both erotic and paternal : 
 [ S ] he thought of him till she began to chide herself for defrauding the dead , and , determining to grieve for Ann , she dwelt on Henry 's misfortune and ill health . . . she thought with rapture that there was one person in the world who had an affection for her , and that person she admired — had a friendship for . He had called her his dear girl . . . My child ! His child , what an association of ideas ! If I had a father , such a father ! — She could not dwell on the thoughts , the wishes which <unk> themselves . Her mind was unhinged , and passion <unk> filled her whole soul . 
 In Johnson 's interpretation , Mary does not replace Ann with a masculine lover as one might expect in a sentimental novel but rather with a " feminine " , yet still acceptably male , lover . 
 = = = Genius and the autobiographical self = = = 
 In describing her heroine , Wollstonecraft drew on the emerging 18th @-@ century conception of the genius , a word that was slowly changing meaning from " a peculiar , distinctive , or identifying character or spirit " to " extraordinary intellectual power especially as manifested in creative activity " . She offered readers the first representation of a female genius . The masculinity , particularly the " energy and decisiveness " , that characterizes Mary is therefore portrayed positively and contrasted with the " passivity and <unk> " of the feminized Ann and Henry . It is Mary 's " strong , original opinions " and her resistance to " conventional wisdom " that mark her as a genius . Making her heroine a genius allowed Wollstonecraft to criticize marriage as well : geniuses were " enchained " rather than enriched by marriage . 
 Strength of mind , by which Wollstonecraft meant " the degree to which [ the mind ] can independently reach its own conclusions " ( emphasis in original ) , is central to her idea of the female genius . Merely imitating others is not enough , even if one imitates the " correct " actions and thoughts . Reason , for Wollstonecraft , is what controls the emotions ; without reason , she contends , people would fail to understand their own feelings . Moreover , reason allows for the distinction between a useful sensibility and a harmful sensualism . She writes : " sensibility is indeed the foundation of all our happiness ; but these raptures are unknown to the depraved sensualist , who is only moved by what strikes his gross senses . " Useful sensibility allows Mary to embark upon charity projects . Yet , this highly attuned sensibility separates the classes along emotional lines : only the middle @-@ class Mary is able to understand what the poor around her require . 
 Wollstonecraft modelled Mary after herself , even to the point of giving the heroine her own name . Using free indirect discourse , which blurs the line between the third @-@ person narrator and the first @-@ person dialogue of a text , she ties the narrator 's voice , which resembles the " Wollstonecraft " of the advertisement , to the heroine . This rhetorical device highlights the autobiographical elements in the story and emphasizes the reality of " the fiction " . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Although Wollstonecraft initially felt proud of Mary , a decade after its publication she no longer believed that the work aptly demonstrated her talents as an author ; she wrote to Everina in 1797 : " as for my Mary , I consider it as a crude production , and do not very willingly put it in the way of people whose good opinion , as a writer , I wish for ; but you may have it to make up the sum of laughter " . Wollstonecraft 's husband , William Godwin , disagreed , however , in his Memoirs of the Author of A Vindication of the Rights of Woman : 
 This little work , if Mary had never produced any thing else , would serve , with persons of true taste and sensibility , to establish the eminence of her genius . The story is nothing . He that looks into the book only for incident , will probably lay it down with disgust . But the feelings are of the truest and most exquisite class ; every circumstance is adorned with that species of imagination , which enlists itself under the banners of delicacy and sentiment . 
 Most scholars agree with Wollstonecraft 's assessment of her writing . Nevertheless , they still believe that the novel is important because it attempts to depict a liberated and reasoning female genius . As feminist scholar Mitzi Myers argues , " in her focus on the subjective vision and internal life of her heroine , in her reliance on emotional nuance rather than plot , Wollstonecraft both transforms the traditions of late eighteenth @-@ century sentimental fiction for feminist purposes and anticipates twentieth @-@ century trends in the novel of feminine consciousness . " Mary helped initiate a tradition that would blossom in novels such as Charlotte Brontë 's Jane Eyre ( 1847 ) and Villette ( 1853 ) . 
 Published by Joseph Johnson , Mary itself was moderately successful , and sections of it were included in several collections of sentimental extracts that were popular at the time , such as The Young Gentleman and Lady 's Instructor ( 1809 ) . However , Johnson was still trying to sell copies of it in the 1790s and consistently listed it in the advertisements for her other works . It was not reprinted until the 1970s , when scholars became interested in Wollstonecraft and women 's writing more generally . 
 = = Modern reprints = = 
 Wollstonecraft , Mary . The Complete Works of Mary Wollstonecraft . Ed . Janet Todd and Marilyn Butler . 7 vols . London : William Pickering , 1989 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8147 @-@ 9225 @-@ 1 . 
 Wollstonecraft , Mary . Mary and The Wrongs of Woman . Ed . Gary Kelly . Oxford : Oxford University Press . ISBN 0 @-@ 19 @-@ <unk> @-@ X. 
 Wollstonecraft , Mary . Mary : A Fiction . Ed . Gina Luria . New York : Garland , 1974 . 
 Wollstonecraft , Mary . Mary ; Maria ; Matilda . Ed . Janet Todd . New York : New York University Press , 1992 . ISBN 0 @-@ 8147 @-@ <unk> @-@ 9 
 = Mind Meld = 
 Mind Meld : Secrets Behind the Voyage of a Lifetime is a 2001 American documentary film in which actors William Shatner and Leonard Nimoy discuss the Star Trek science fiction franchise and its effects on their lives . Shatner and Nimoy portrayed the characters James T. Kirk and Spock respectively in the 1960s Star Trek television series , the 1970s animated television series , and their film sequels . They talk about differences they had with Gene Roddenberry , the creator of Star Trek , and about the strained relationships between Shatner and some of the other cast members . It was in this film that Nimoy first publicly revealed that he had struggled with alcoholism while he was acting in the original television series . Shatner talks about the death of his third wife , Nerine Kidd , who accidentally drowned in a pool in 1999 after suffering from alcoholism . 
 Mind Meld was produced to advertise Shatner 's personal website . Filming took place at Nimoy 's home on September 5 , 2001 , and Billy West narrated the title sequence . The film 's title refers to a fictional practice in Star Trek — a mind meld is a telepathic link that Vulcans are able to create with other organisms . Mind Meld was released for sale on Shatner 's website on November 6 , 2001 , coinciding with the release of the director 's cut of Star Trek : The Motion Picture . Mind Meld attracted some notoriety because of an unintended sound in one scene that became a popular subject of flatulence humor among Star Trek fans and on morning zoo radio programs . Shatner denied being the source of this sound in multiple interviews ; he and Mind Meld 's director , Peter Jaysen , attributed it to equipment on set . 
 The film received mixed reviews from critics . Scott Brown of Entertainment Weekly gave the film an " F " , and said that the only people likely to watch the film were extreme Star Trek fans and people interested in hearing Shatner 's supposed flatulence . Laurence Lerman of Video Business praised the film for not " rehash [ ing ] anecdotes that have long been staples of Star Trek conventions and behind @-@ the @-@ scenes memoirs " , and instead for dealing with such topics as alcoholism , career difficulties , and conflicts on the set of Star Trek . 
 = = Contents = = 
 William Shatner and Leonard Nimoy respectively portrayed James T. Kirk and Spock in Star Trek , first in the 1960s television series ( later retitled Star Trek : The Original Series ) , then in the 1970s television series Star Trek : The Animated Series , and subsequently in several Star Trek films between 1979 and 1994 . In Mind Meld , they discuss the Star Trek media franchise and its enduring success . The film is , except for the title sequence , composed entirely of Shatner and Nimoy in conversation . Many of the topics they discuss were inspired by online questions from fans . The film starts in Nimoy 's backyard , where the two sit on patio chairs , and then moves into Nimoy 's library , which is filled with souvenirs . 
 The film focuses on the effects Star Trek had on the lives of Shatner and Nimoy , with each actor interviewing the other about his fame . They talk about Star Trek 's origins and the death of DeForest Kelley , who had portrayed Leonard McCoy in both The Original Series and The Animated Series . Shatner and Nimoy also discuss interactions between themselves and others on the set of Star Trek , including conflicts . Both Shatner and Nimoy describe having had strained relationships with Gene Roddenberry , the creator of Star Trek , and attest to other members of the Original Series cast disliking Shatner . Only one of these cast members is referred to by name : Nichelle Nichols , who portrayed Nyota Uhura . " I never fully comprehended what it was that was bothering them " , says Shatner . 
 Both men describe Star Trek as having put personal pressures on them that negatively affected their family lives . The conversation is mostly guided by Shatner , who prompts Nimoy to discuss issues he had regarding the legitimacy of consistently portraying an extraterrestrial , and other struggles with his acting career at the time . " It took me a while , " Nimoy says , " but I got rid of all that anger when I realized that I never had to worry about work ever since Star Trek went on the air . " Nimoy reveals that he was an alcoholic at the time of the original Star Trek series — something that was not publicly known before Mind Meld . He developed " a major drinking habit , probably during the second or third year " of the series , he says , and had his secretary bring him alcohol in paper cups at the end of each day of filming . Nimoy suggests that he became dependent on alcohol because of the deterioration of his marriage to Sandra Zober , his first wife . He says that , since divorcing Zober in 1987 and marrying actress Susan Bay in 1988 , he has been a teetotaler . 
 Shatner says that acting in Star Trek was " life @-@ consuming " and left him " barely any time for family " , and that this was the reason for his divorce from Gloria Rand , his first wife . He describes a subsequent succession of sexual partners , including , he says , Star Trek actresses . He also talks about the death of his father , Joseph Shatner , and of his third wife , Nerine Kidd , who accidentally drowned in a pool in 1999 , losing a battle with alcoholism . Shatner recalls that Nimoy had expressed concern about Kidd 's alcoholism and warned him about marrying her . Another topic is Nimoy 's fine @-@ art photography , which deals with spirituality and sensuality . Both Shatner and Nimoy say that , while they are glad that Star Trek became successful , they wish their subsequent fame had encroached less on their privacy . They also describe having been typecast as a result of their roles in Star Trek , and say that this has had repercussions on their respective acting careers . Shatner recounts his initial surprise that , at science fiction conventions , the fans seem to like each other more than they like the science fiction actors . The film concludes with Nimoy putting his arm around Shatner 's shoulder and saying , " You 're my best friend . " 
 = = Production = = 
 Mind Meld was produced as a way of advertising Shatner 's personal website , <unk> , which offered features including the Shatner and Friends fan club 's quarterly newsletter , semi @-@ regular updates on Shatner 's life , and a photograph of Shatner with the gorilla Koko . Shatner said that another reason they decided to make the film was because Nimoy was visibly getting old . Shatner asked Nimoy if he would be willing to discuss his experiences with alcoholism in the film , and Nimoy agreed . Nimoy later said that no one had ever asked him about this part of his past , and that discussing it in Mind Meld " was an opportunity to put out some information that might be helpful to some people . " 
 Filming took place on September 5 , 2001 , in high @-@ definition video at Nimoy 's home , under the direction of Peter Jaysen . There was no script ; the conversation between Shatner and Nimoy was ad lib . The title sequence of Mind Meld is narrated by veteran voice actor Billy West , who had previously voiced such characters as Zim in the television series Invader Zim , Ralph in Joe 's Apartment , and Elmer Fudd in Looney Tunes : Back in Action . While the filming session resulted in approximately two hours of footage , a significant portion of this was not used , resulting in a final runtime of 75 minutes . In an interview with science fiction magazine Starlog , Shatner said , " I don 't think ... that anything was cut because it was too personal or inflammatory . Edits were only made for time . " The title of the film refers to a fictional practice in Star Trek ; a mind meld is a telepathic link that Spock is able to create with other organisms because he is half @-@ Vulcan . Shatner summarized the film as being " two friends talking one @-@ on @-@ one " . 
 = = Release = = 
 Mind Meld was released on VHS and DVD for sale on Shatner 's website on November 6 , 2001 , coinciding with the release of the director 's cut of Star Trek : The Motion Picture , a film that Shatner and Nimoy agreed was not as good as they had hoped it would be . Mind Meld was produced by Creative Light Entertainment , a company that produced another filmed interview the following year — Stan Lee 's Mutants , Monsters & Marvels , an interview of Marvel Comics publisher Stan Lee by film director Kevin Smith . The Mind Meld DVD offers widescreen and fullscreen options , Dolby Digital surround sound , and a five @-@ minute " making of " featurette . Mind Meld T @-@ shirts were available on Shatner 's website . The film 's release prompted Wil Wheaton , who had portrayed Wesley Crusher in Star Trek : The Next Generation , to change the name of his comic science fiction improvisational theatre company from " Mind Meld " to " <unk> " . 
 Shatner referred to The Original Series as " cartoonish " in Mind Meld , but later , upon questioning by a reporter , said , " I never thought it was a cartoon ... I never thought it was beneath me . " In a February 2002 interview on Larry King Live , Shatner said Mind Meld was similar to My Dinner with Andre , and indicated that he and Nimoy were hoping to produce more films of a similar nature . Nimoy said of the film , " This is the most personal insight the fans will get into our relationship and into aspects of Bill and myself they 've never heard before . " In April 2002 , Mind Meld was screened at the Newport Beach Film Festival . Two years later , Mind Meld was included in the bonus material when the first six Star Trek films were re @-@ released as a special edition box set . 
 = = = Alleged flatulence = = = 
 Around 52 minutes and 47 seconds into the film , when Shatner is talking about the other Original Series actors disliking him , he shifts in his chair and a sound evocative of flatulence is audible . This sound , apparently unnoticed by the filmmakers , was first mentioned in the media by Adam Buckman in the New York Post on October 10 , 2001 . Buckman wrote that he played the sound for more than six colleagues who all agreed that it came from Shatner . This scene became a popular subject of flatulence humor among Star Trek fans and on morning zoo radio programs . Reviewers identified as many as six other similar noises in Mind Meld , between the 52 @-@ minute mark and the end . 
 Howard Stern played the sound on his radio show several times , including when Shatner appeared on the show to promote his upcoming television series Iron Chef USA on November 13 , 2001 . When Stern asked about the sound , Shatner said it had been produced by the boom operator . A similar claim was made on Shatner 's website , where the noise was attributed to a squeaky jib . On Conan O 'Brien 's Late Night program on November 14 , Shatner called it " outrageous " that Buckman should assume him to be the source of the sound rather than Nimoy . O 'Brien responded , " You 're the captain ! You outrank him ! It 's your responsibility ! " Pressed further by O 'Brien on the sound 's provenance , Shatner suggested that it may have been a dog bark or a bird call . According to Jaysen , the sound did not emanate from Shatner , and was most likely caused by cables rubbing against each other while a camera moved . " It was probably some machine that nobody heard " , Shatner said in a September 2002 interview . " The controversy is over . " 
 Jim Dawson devoted an entire chapter of his 2006 Modern History of the Fart to Shatner 's alleged flatulence in Mind Meld , which he compares to the sound of someone stepping on a tribble . G. Noel Gross of DVD Talk compared the excitement over this sound to that evinced by adolescent boys watching pornography , and compared the level of scrutiny devoted to the scene to that received by the Zapruder film of the Kennedy assassination . 
 = = Reception = = 
 Sarah <unk> of The New York Times wrote that Mind Meld " provides a genuine glimpse of the lives of the stars shadowed by the roles that defined their public personas , and the mutual experience that binds them as friends " . Gross praised the video quality , but criticized the DVD functionality and features . He also wrote that " even in the heavier parts of this conversation , there 's a warmth and <unk> there that 's rife with good humor " . Scott Brown of Entertainment Weekly gave the film an F , saying that the only people likely to watch the film other than extreme Star Trek fans are people interested in hearing the sound alleged to be Shatner 's flatulence , which Brown said can be clearly heard . He called the film " seemingly interminable " and said the discussion between Shatner and Nimoy shows that they " rival black holes in sheer self @-@ absorption " . According to John <unk> , writing for The Press of New Zealand , Mind Meld 's trailer took its subject matter so seriously that it became comical . 
 Vern Perry of the Orange County Register called the film fascinating , writing that it skilfully combined humor and earnestness . He wrote that it was moving to see the two actors talk about their personal lives with such vulnerability — particularly when Nimoy discusses his experiences with alcoholism . Greg Stacy of OC Weekly reported being " thoroughly charmed " by the film , and called " the affection between [ Shatner and Nimoy ] obvious and touching . " 
 Laurence Lerman of Video Business praised Mind Meld for not " rehash [ ing ] anecdotes that have long been staples of Star Trek conventions and behind @-@ the @-@ scenes memoirs " , but instead dealing with such topics as alcoholism , career difficulties , and conflicts on the set of Star Trek . Mike Clark of USA Today praised Shatner 's interviewing abilities and wrote that the film was engaging . Clark called Shatner 's and Nimoy 's conversation " surprisingly frank " , but added that Shatner was " full of himself " . A review in British newspaper The Guardian summarized Mind Meld as " a couple of <unk> sitting around talking " . 
 = French battleship Provence = 
 Provence was a battleship of the French Navy built in the 1910s , named in honor of the French region of Provence . She was a member of the Bretagne class , alongside her two sister ships , Bretagne and Lorraine . Provence was laid down in May 1912 at the Arsenal de Lorient , launched in April 1913 , and commissioned into the fleet in March 1916 , after the outbreak of World War I. She was armed with a main battery of ten 340 mm ( 13 @.@ 4 in ) guns and had a top speed of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . 
 Provence spent the bulk of her career in the French Mediterranean Squadron , where she served as the fleet flagship . During World War I , she was stationed at Corfu to prevent the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet from leaving the Adriatic Sea , but she saw no action . She was modernized significantly in the 1920s and 1930s , and conducted normal peace @-@ time cruises and training maneuvers in the Mediterranean and Atlantic Ocean . She participated in non @-@ intervention patrols during the Spanish Civil War . 
 In the early days of World War II , Provence conducted patrols and sweeps into the Atlantic to search for German surface raiders . She was stationed in Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir when France surrendered on 22 June 1940 . Fearful that the Germans would seize the French Navy , the British Royal Navy attacked the ships at Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir . Provence was damaged and sank in the harbor , though she was refloated and moved to Toulon , where she became the flagship of the training fleet there . In late November 1942 , the Germans occupied Toulon and , to prevent them from seizing the fleet , the French scuttled their ships , including Provence . She was raised in July 1943 , and some of her guns were used for coastal defense in the area ; the Germans scuttled her a second time in Toulon as a blockship in 1944 . Provence was ultimately raised in April 1949 and sold to ship breakers . 
 = = Design = = 
 Provence was laid down at the Arsenal de Lorient on 1 May 1912 , launched on 20 April 1913 , and completed in June 1915 . She was commissioned into the French Navy on 1 March 1916 . The ship was 166 meters ( 544 ft 7 in ) long overall and had a beam of 26 @.@ 9 m ( 88 ft 3 in ) and a full @-@ load draft of 9 @.@ 8 m ( 32 ft 2 in ) . She displaced around 25 @,@ 000 metric tons ( 25 @,@ 000 long tons ) at full load and had a crew of between 1124 and 1133 officers and enlisted men . She was powered by four Parsons steam turbines with eighteen Belleville boilers . They were rated at 29 @,@ 000 shaft horsepower ( 22 @,@ 000 kW ) and provided a top speed of 20 knots ( 37 km / h ; 23 mph ) . Coal storage amounted to 2 @,@ 680 t ( 2 @,@ 640 long tons ; 2 @,@ 950 short tons ) . 
 Provence 's main battery consisted of ten Canon de 340 mm Modéle 1912 guns mounted in five twin gun turrets , numbered from front to rear . They were placed all on the centerline ; two were in a superfiring pair forward , one amidships , and the last two in a superfiring arrangement aft . The secondary battery consisted of twenty @-@ two Canon de 138 mm Modèle 1910 guns in casemates along the length of the hull . She also carried seven 47 mm ( 1 @.@ 9 in ) Hotchkiss guns for defense against aircraft , two on the conning tower and one on the roof of each turret . The ship was also armed with four submerged 450 mm ( 17 @.@ 7 in ) torpedo tubes . The ship 's main belt was 270 mm ( 10 @.@ 6 in ) thick and the main battery was protected by up to 300 mm ( 11 @.@ 8 in ) of armor . The conning tower had 314 mm ( 12 @.@ 4 in ) thick sides . 
 = = Service = = 
 After entering service in 1916 , Provence and her sisters were assigned to the 1st Division of the 1st Battle Squadron , with Provence as the fleet flagship . The three ships remained in the unit for the remainder of the war . They spent the majority of their time at Corfu to prevent the Austro @-@ Hungarian fleet from attempting to break out of the Adriatic . The fleet 's presence was also intended to intimidate Greece , which had become increasingly hostile to the Triple Entente . Later in the war , men were drawn from their crews for anti @-@ submarine warfare vessels . As the Austro @-@ Hungarians largely remained in port for the duration of the war , Provence saw no action during the conflict . Indeed , she did not leave port at all for the entirety of 1917 . In April 1919 , she returned to Toulon . The French Navy intended to send the ship to the Black Sea to join operations against the Bolsheviks , but a major mutiny prevented the operation . She and Lorraine went to Constantinople in October 1919 , where they formed the core of the Eastern Mediterranean Squadron . 
 In June 1921 , Provence and Bretagne went to Le Havre for a naval review , and were back in Toulon in September . In 1922 , Provence and Lorraine were placed in reserve , leaving Bretagne the only member of her class in service ; while out of service , Provence underwent a significant refit . The work lasted from 1 February 1922 to 4 July 1923 , and was carried out in Toulon . The ship had her armament improved ; her main guns were given greater elevation to increase their range , and four 75 mm <unk> guns were installed on the forward superstructure . A heavy tripod mast with a fire control station and a rangefinder for the ship 's anti @-@ aircraft guns were also added . 
 Another refit followed on 12 December 1925 – 11 July 1927 . The elevation of the main battery guns was again increased , the bow section of the belt armor was removed , and half of her boilers were converted to oil @-@ firing models . A third and final modernization began on 20 September 1931 and lasted until 20 August 1934 . The rest of the coal @-@ fired boilers were replaced with six Indret oil @-@ fired boilers , new turbines and main battery guns were installed , along with eight new 75 mm anti @-@ aircraft guns . After emerging from the refit , Provence and Bretagne were assigned to the 2nd Squadron in the Atlantic . There , they joined fleet exercises off the Azores , Madeira , and Morocco . The two ships took part in a cruise to Africa in 1936 . In August , they were involved in non @-@ intervention patrols after the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War ; these patrols lasted until April 1937 . 
 = = = World War II = = = 
 At the outbreak of World War II in September 1939 , Provence was in Toulon along with Bretagne in the 2nd Squadron , with Provence serving as the flagship of Vice Admiral <unk> . On 21 October , she went into drydock for periodic maintenance , which lasted until 2 December . Two days later , Provence and Bretagne , along with numerous cruisers and destroyers , sortied from Dakar to cover French merchant shipping off West Africa and the Azores . Around the middle of the month , the French warships returned to port . 
 Provence was then sent to Casablanca , where she joined Force Y. The unit conducted several fruitless sweeps into the Atlantic . While in Gibraltar , she was damaged and forced to return to Toulon for repairs . While en route , she intercepted the Italian passenger ship Oceania ; Provence dispatched her to Marseilles so she could be inspected for contraband . Provence sailed for Oran on 24 January 1940 , and then returned to Force Y in Dakar . Force Y was transferred to Oran on 11 April ; they arrived five days later . On 27 April , Provence , her two sisters , and several cruisers were moved to Alexandria . On 18 May , Provence and Bretagne returned to Mers El Kébir . 
 Following the French surrender on 22 June , the French fleet was to be disarmed under German and Italian supervision , under the terms of the Armistice . The British high command , however , was concerned that the French ships would be seized by the Axis powers and placed in service . The Axis navies would then outnumber the British Royal Navy . Prime Minister Winston Churchill therefore ordered Vice Admiral James Somerville , the commander of Force H , to neutralize the French fleet at Mers @-@ el @-@ Kébir . He was instructed to order the French vessels to join the British with the Free French , to move them to French possessions like Martinique where they would be outside the reach of the Axis powers , to move them to the USA where they would be interned , to scuttle themselves , or be sunk . On 3 July , Somerville arrived and delivered the ultimatum . After 10 hours of discussions and the French rejection of any part of the ultimatum , the British ships opened fire . 
 Provence returned fire about 90 seconds after the British attacked , though she had no success against her assailants . Bretagne was hit by several 15 @-@ inch ( 380 mm ) shells and exploded , killing most of her crew . Provence was also hit several times and badly damaged ; the shells set her on fire and caused her to settle to the bottom of the harbor , but she did not explode like her sister ship . The ship was subsequently refloated and temporarily repaired , and on 5 November , she was transferred to Toulon , arriving on the 8th . Provence was escorted by the destroyers <unk> , <unk> , Le Hardi , <unk> , and <unk> . Beginning on 1 January 1942 , Provence became the flagship of the Flag Officer , Training Division . On 27 November , the German Army occupied Toulon , and to prevent them from seizing the fleet there , including Provence , the French scuttled their ships . At the time , Provence was moored next to the old pre @-@ dreadnought Condorcet and the seaplane carrier Commandant Teste . The Italians moved into Toulon and raised Provence on 11 July 1943 . Two of her 340 mm guns were removed from the ship and emplaced in a coastal battery at Saint @-@ <unk> @-@ sur @-@ Mer outside Toulon . The Axis then scuttled the ship a second time , as a blockship in the harbor . Provence was ultimately raised in April 1949 and was broken up for scrap . 
 = U.S. Route 491 = 
 U.S. Route 491 ( US 491 ) is a north – south U.S. Highway serving the Four Corners region of the United States . One of the newest designations in the U.S. Highway System , it was created in 2003 as a renumbering of U.S. Route 666 ( US 666 ) . With the 666 designation , this road was nicknamed the " Devil 's Highway " because of the significance of number 666 to many Christian denominations , which is believed by some that 666 is the Number of the Beast . This Satanic connotation , combined with a high fatality rate along the New Mexico portion , convinced some people the highway was cursed . The problem was compounded by persistent sign theft . These factors led to two efforts to renumber the highway , first by officials in Arizona , later in New Mexico . There have been safety improvement projects in recent years , and fatality rates have subsequently decreased . 
 The highway , now a spur route of US 91 via its connection to US 191 , runs through Colorado , New Mexico , and Utah , as well as the tribal nations of the Navajo Nation and Ute Mountain Ute Tribe . The highway passes by two mountains considered sacred by Native Americans : Ute Mountain and an extinct volcanic core named Shiprock . Other features along the route include Mesa Verde National Park and Dove Creek , Colorado , the self @-@ proclaimed pinto @-@ bean capital of the world . 
 = = Route description = = 
 US 491 serves the states of New Mexico , Colorado and Utah . Before 1992 , US 666 also served Arizona . The Arizona portion was renumbered separately and is now part of US 191 . The former US 666 was the only highway to have passed through each of the Four Corners states , even though it never came near the Four Corners Monument , which is accessed via US 160 . At several points along US 491 , mountain ranges in all of the Four Corners states are visible from a single location . The alignment of the highway is mostly north – south , however the Utah portion is signed east – west . 
 = = = New Mexico = = = 
 US 491 begins at Gallup , at a junction with Interstate 40 ( I @-@ 40 ) , and currently runs north along Muñoz Drive . The routing has changed to bypass the downtown area . The original route used 9th Street , starting at US 66 . US 491 leaves Gallup and passes north through the eastern half of the Navajo Nation . Along the way , the road passes through the small tribal communities and trading posts of <unk> , Buffalo Springs , <unk> , Sheep Springs and Newcomb . The Navajo tribal capital at Window Rock , Arizona , is just west of the highway corridor , accessed by State Road 264 ( NM 264 ) . The largest city served by US 491 in the Navajo Nation is Shiprock , which takes its name from one of several extinct volcano cores in the area . Shiprock is known as " the winged rock " in the Navajo language , and the mountain is considered sacred by the Navajo people . Shiprock is where the US 491 crosses the San Juan River and is briefly concurrent with US 64 . After passing Shiprock , the route continues north to the Colorado state line . The New Mexico portion has been designated the " John Pinto Highway " by the New Mexico state legislature . 
 It is on the Trails of the Ancients Byway , one of the designated New Mexico Scenic Byways . 
 = = = Colorado = = = 
 The New Mexico – Colorado state line is where the highway passes from the Navajo Nation to Ute Mountain Ute tribal lands . The highway passes to the east of the tribe 's namesake , Ute Mountain , believed to belong to a great warrior god of the Ute People . US 491 proceeds diagonally to the northwest in the extreme southwestern corner of the state . The highway exits tribal lands near Cortez and Mesa Verde National Park . After leaving Cortez , the road gradually rises in elevation while proceeding towards Utah . Here , the route features large pinto bean farming regions including Dove Creek , which bills itself as the " pinto bean capital of the world " . Canyons of the Ancients National Monument is located along the ascent , just west of the highway . Along this ascent is an access road for <unk> National Monument at the state line . A portion of the road in Colorado has been designated the Trail of the Ancients , a National Scenic Byway , which uses US 491 as an access for these parks and monuments in southwest Colorado . 
